A CONSPIRACY OF THE SPANIARDS Against the State of VENICE.

Out of French.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1675.

A Conspiracy of the Spaniards against the State of Venice, etc.
AMongst all Humane Enterprises Conspiracies are certainly of greatest
consequence; for Courage, Prudence and Fidelity, being equally requisite to
every Member are Qualities rare in themselves, therefore much more rarely found
to concur in single persons. We are inclined for the most part to flatter our
selves with an opinion of being better beloved than we are, especially when our
Merit seconds our Belief, and we have been studious in the Art of obliging.
Hence some Principal Conspirators are drawn to rely entirely upon the Affection
of their Party; but there is scarce any Friendship so powerful as the fear of
Death, for Affection if it prove violent, perverts the Judgment in all
occurrences of surprise; the aids of Discretion being seldom at hand: and
whosoever give violent instances of their Love toward any one thing, betray
Infirmity and too much Subjection to their Passions.

If a Conspirator on the other hand be a man of Judgment, and that there is no
reason to suspect his Prudence, then the same Virtue tempers his ardour, and
renders his Zeal less active than the others: he is apter to fall into the
contemplation of the great hazard to which he is exposed, and of the Methods
wisely to disengage him; to weigh that the profits accrewing by the Conspiracy
are uncertain, and that to reveal it to such against whom it is contrived, his
Reward is sure. Moreover the general Talents and Abilities of Men are the
product for the most part of their Experience, and their reasonings seldom
prove solid in affairs unpractised; Wisdom being a profiting from Errors
committed, and collecting thence Rules for our safer Government in the future.

But since there is no comparison, either for the danger, or the difficulty,
between a Conspiracy, and any other kind of Enterprise; (no Experience
whatsoever in other affairs being able in any measure to enlighten Us in the
conduct and managements of this) to be safe therefore against the commission of
any considerable Error, imployes our acquaintance in the Profession, and it is
very rare to find a person that has been twice Engaged in Affairs of this kind:
for if he succeed in his first Attempt, the profits that accrue thereupon
secure him against the need of exposing himself to a second danger; and if he
miscarry, he is either crushed in the ruins, or will hardly be drawn to run a
second risque, if he escape. To these hazards we must add, that how detested
soever a Tyrant may be, yet Self-Love proves ever more powerful than our Hate
toward others: For it is not enough that Conspirators be really men of
Fidelity, if every Member be not so possessed of all his Companions; and a Leader
ought to have as serious and equal regard even to the Panick Fears, and the
most airy Imaginations that may occur, as to the solider and more important
difficulties of his Enterprise, as being equally capable of mischief: For a
single Word spoken upon a Foreign Subject; a Gesture, without any design, may
beget a suspicion of Treachery, and cause a precipitate Execution: also a
Circumstance of time, or place, being in it self of no consideration, may yet
occasion much Surprise and Apprehension: and all this, from the difficulty of
providing against such variety of Chances. For such is the nature of man, that
he fancies every body discyphers his heart, and studies to suspect he is
discovered from all that is said or done in his presence; and the Conscience of
guilt corrupting our Reason attaqu's us by every object. And now if the
difficulties are insuperable in Conspiracies against single Persons, What
judgment can be made upon the invading of Multitudes, and when we aspire to to
the Usurpation of whole Cities or States, wherein will be required more time to
contrive and digest, and greater numbers to execute the Design? These
Reflections have taught me to consider such Enterprises as points of History,
of all others the most moral and instructive, and are my Motive to the making
public a Conspiracy of an Ambassador from the Court of Spain to the State of
Venice against that Commonwealth, about fifty six years since.

I know not whether or no my Judgment may have been seduced by my affection to
the Subject I have undertaken; though I must ingenuously avow, I know none that
affords greater instance of the effects of Prudence in the Transactions of the
World, or of Chance; of the vast extent of Humane Wit, and its various
confines, of its Elevations the most aspiring, and its most secret Failings,
the infinite circumspection necessary to Government; the difference between
Good and Evil Arts, and between Wisdom and Subtilty: and if Malice be most
hateful in the abuse of things the most excellent, then may this History be an
argument of our greater Horror, where we find the most excellent Qualities
employed to an End the most detestable. And hence a wise Greek, as we read,
observing a Criminal persist in an untruth amidst his torments with a marvelous
Constancy, could not forbear exclaiming; Oh unfortunate wretch, that could use
so excellent a Virtue to so base a purpose!

The difference between Paul the fifth, and the Republic of Venice being
composed by the power of France with the Honor due to the Holy See, and the
deserved Glory of the Venetians, Spain alone found thence subject of Complaint;
for having espoused the Papal Interest, and proposing to reduce the Venetians
by force of Arms, they were offended that a Treaty should be entered upon with
so little regard to them; but having more narrowly studied the secret of that
Accommodation, they found no just occasion of Complaint against his Holiness,
and that the Contempt which appeared to have been done to them in that Affair,
proceeded wholly from the Venetians: for it was the Senate that endeavored to
exclude them (in some sort) the Mediation, pretending they could not well be
Judges that had showed so much partiality. How distasteful soever this Injury
might be, yet they gave no hint of their resentment during the reign of Henry
the fourth; the Obligations which that Prince stood in toward the Venetians
were too public, and the Care he expressed of their Interest during their
difference with the Court of Rome was no less; but his Death setting the
Spaniard at Liberty, there wanted then nothing but a Pretext.

There inhabited in the Territory of the house of Austria, in the quarter
coasting upon the Adriatic and contiguous to that of the Venetians, a nest of
Pirates known by the name of Vscocks: these Pilferers having committed
innumerable violences upon the Subjects of the Republic, were protected by the
Archduke Ferdinand de Gratz then Sovereign of that Country and afterward
Emperor; himself was a very Pious Prince, but his Ministers were sharers in the
booty with the Vscocks, and being avowed Friends to the Spaniard made use of
this occasion to revenge them on the Venetians.

The Emperor Matthias moved by the just instances of the Republic composed
this difference at Vienna in February Anno Dom. 1612. but the Accommodation was
so ill observed on the part of the Archduke that they came at length to an
open War, wherein he was not so clear a Gainer as the Spaniards had proposed to
themselves.

The Venetians by their good conduct easily repaired the slight Damages they
sustained in some little Encounters, and being at that time secure against the
least apprehension of the Turks, they were better able to support the War, than
the Archduke. That Prince was at length pressed by the Emperor to make a Peace
in contemplation of the Grand Seignor's menacing of Hungary; himself also
became engaged in a very considerable expense in favor of his Election to the
Kingdom of Bohemia, which happened soon after: The Spaniard would gladly have
contributed toward the continuation of this War, had not that also in which
they were then engaged with Charles Emmanuel Duke of Savoy forbid the separation
of their Forces, and that Duke being supplied with large Sums from the
Republic could by no means be wrought to violate his Amity with them. The
Spanish Council laid deeply to heart the exceeding prosperity of the Affairs of
Venice, and the soft and peaceable Temper of King Philip, and that of his
Favorite the Duke of Lerma, suggested little or no prospect of a redress: But
a Minister of theirs, resident at that time in Italy, not guilty of the same
Moderation, undertook the business; and this was Don Alphonso de la Cueva
Marquis of Bedamar, Ordinary Ambassador at Venice, a Man of the most exalted
Understanding and dangerous Spirit that Spain has ever produced: his own
Writings, that are yet extant speak him qualified with all the requisits that
Historians ancient and modern have set down to compose an extraordinary Man; he
compared past Transactions with the Occurrences of his own time, he observed
exactly the differences and resemblances of Affairs, and how much those which
seem to be alike are changed by what is different; he was able to give his
judgment of the Issue from the first draught and project of any Enterprise: If
he found he had prophesied amiss, he would trace his Error back to the source,
and learn the true cause of his mistake; by this study he became thoroughly
acquainted with the surest Mothods, the truest Means, and the most material
Circumstances that presage success to any great Adventure, and render them for
the most part prosperous; his practice of perpetual reading, meditation, and
observance of Transactions of the world, had raised him to that high pitch of
Wisdom, that his conjectures as to the result of any Affair were esteemed in
the Court of Spain as so many Prophesies. To this profound Learning in the
nature of great Affairs was joined a singular Dexterity in the conductive part,
a Facility in speaking and writing with a most charming elegance, a marvelous
Felicity in the knowledge of men, a Behavior ever gay and open, wherein one
read more heat than gravity, so remote from Dissimulation as to look like
Simplicity, a Humor free and complisant, and so much the more impenetrable by
how much every body thought they understood him; of Manners, soft, insinuating
and indearing, whereby he serewed himself into the most dark and difficult
Secrets, always preserving a perfect calm and serenity of Countenance amidst
the most violent and cruel agitatations of Spirit. The Spanish Ministers had at
that time a great ascendent on the Governments wherein they resided, and the
Marquis of Bedamar was chosen for Venice in the year 1607. as to the most
difficult of all Foreign Employments, wherein he could hope no affistance from
either Women, Priest, or Favorite; the Council of Spain was so well pleased
with his Ministry, that how needful soever his service was to them at home,
yet in the space of six years they could not resolve to recall him. So long a
Residence gave him leisure to study the principles of that Government, to
penetrate their most retired Cabinets, to discover their strengths and
weaknesses, their advantages and defects; He foreseeing that the Archduke
would be necessitated to make a Peace, and that it would reflect shamefully
upon them, the Injury being wholly on their part, he resolves to embarque in
some Design that might prevent it: he considered that the present state of
Affairs in Venice did not render the Design of mastering it impracticable, by
the Intelligence he had acquired and the Forces he was able to provide. Their
Armies had dreined their Magazines of Arms, and had in a greater measure
diminished their People capable of bearing them; and as their Navy had never
been in a more flourishing condition, so their Senate had never been considered
so formidable, or held a better opinion of their own Security: howbeit, this
invincible Fleet was obliged to be still hovering upon the Coast of Istria, the
then seat of the War; the Army too was as remote; so that in Venice there was
scarce any thing that could suggest a reason against the descent of the Spanish
Naval Army: To render this descent more secure, the Marquis of Bedamar resolved
to possess himself of two principal posts, and those were the place of St. Mark
and the Arsenal; but he considered the difficulty would be great, without some
accident to disturb the repose the City at present enjoyed; he proposed
therefore the applying fire in several places the most combustible and the
mostneedful of relief about the City. He was not overhasty in rendering an
account hereof to his Master, knowing how tender most Princes are of explaining
themselves upon Affairs of this nature until they are ripened to a degree of
affording nothing more to execute, but an assurance of possession, in case it
take effect; he contented himself barely to remark to the Duke of Vseda
principal Secretary of State, that upon considering the dishonor the House of
Austria had sustained by the insolent behavior of the Venetians during the War
of Friol, and that all the means that had been proposed for an accord, both at
Vienna and elsewhere, resulted in Ignominy and Contempt; he considered himself
in a Station wherein Nature, as well as Policy, did oblige a faithful Subject
to have recourse to all imaginable Arts, to preserve his Prince and Country,
from an Infamy otherwise inevitable; and that Care became especially incumbent
on him in regard of the Employment he exercised, wherein having continually
before his eyes the very Sources and Spring-heads of those evils so important
of Redress, no man was a better Judge than himself what sort of Remedy to apply,
and that he would attempt to acquit himself of that Duty in such manner as
should be worthy the Zeal he professed for the Glory of his Master.

The Duke of Vseda, who was thoroughly acquainted with his Worth, soon
comprehended that his discourse was the disguise of some Project equally
important and dangerous; but as wise men seldom pry deeper into Secrets of this
nature than they are compelled, he forbore to communicate his thoughts
thereupon to the chief Minister, and only replied to the Marquis of Bedamar, in
general terms, extolling his Zeal, and committing the rest to his accustomed
Prudence.

The Marquis that looked for no other, was not at all surprised at so cold an
answer, and now studied nothing more than to dispose his Design that he might
have perfect Assurance of the wished Event.

The World never had Monarchy so absolute as is the Empire by which the Senate
of Venice governs that Republic; they observe a wonderful difference betwixt
their Nobility and those that are not so, weighing even the most scrupulous and
minute circumstance. Their Nobles only are qualified to govern in the
respective Countries of their Obedience; The most eminent Gentry and Principal
Magistrates of the Country living among them with the distinction rather of
Sovereigns than Governors: and in case the Republic confers at any time
Offices of trust in their Militia upon Strangers, it is always on strict
conditions of their perfect Obedience to the Sentiments of their Generalissimo,
which is ever a Venetian, who in effect never affords them other latitude than
the executive part.

As there is no Pretension so plausible as a War, for taxation of the People,
that of the Vscocks gave a fair occasion for enriching the Nobility of Venice,
by whose conduct it was managed: this alone was an extraordinary Expense, and
over and above the Treasure remitted to Piedmont, they were constrained to
maintain also a third Army in Lombardy to attend the motions of the Governor
of Milan, who daily threatened them with a diversion in favor of the Archduke.
The Justice of the Republick's cause rendered their Ministers yet more hardy in
contriving new vexations, but not the People more patient in suffering them;
herein they proceeded to such a degree as gave the Marquis of Bedamar
reasonable Assurance to believe that the Revolution he had meditated, would be
almost as welcome to the Commonality, as fatal to the People of Quality. Among
them also there were many that were grown out of love with the Government, and
these were the Partisans of the Court of Rome; and indeed were the greatest
number, ambitious and revengeful, resenting the Republick's having governed
against their Councils during their contest with that Court: These seemed
prepared to do or suffer any thing, to wrench the Authority out of their hands
that then had i^ and would joyfully have beheld the Government unfortunate, as
being the fruits of a Conduct they had disapproved. There was another shallow
sort of Fools that would be more Catholic than the Pope, who upon his Holiness
relinquishing his Pretensions in the Accommodation, conceived he had been
obliged thereunto by the Rules of Policy, and consequently that if there was
any mental Reservation in that proceeding, that it was to be feared the
sentence of Excommunication still rested in force in the Intentions of his
Holiness: Of this number some were Senators, men as Indigent in their fortunes
as their minds; these were of great use in the pursuit of the Marquis of
Bedamar's Design, who, converted by expensive Gifts, became persuaded, that
since that Negotiation none could be longer a Venetian with a safe Conscience.
Notwithstanding the rigorous Injunctions against the Nobilities holding
correspondence with strangers, yet the Marquis found means to contract a very
intimate understanding with the necessitous and malcontent Party; and in case
any of these had either near Kinsman in Religious Orders, a Mistress, or any
familiar Ecclesiastic, these he would compass at any rate; buying them with
Presents of considerable value, making use of nothing ordinary, but curiosities
from Foreign parts: such Liberalities, on so slender Motives, gave
encouragement to the Receivers to hope for something yet more considerable: In
which prospect they informed him with all simplicity to the full of his
Curiosity, and labored also to furnish themselves in many doubtful points the
better to enable them to comply with his Demands; and his acknowledgments still
transcending their assiduity gave at length incitement to their Engaging their
Patrons also in this Commerce.

It is still to be concluded that Poverty was the principal wheel of this
Engine, and that these Noble men could not regard but with an eye of envy,
People entirely their dependents should on their consideration become more rich
than themselves: But however it came to pass, from thence forth there was
nothing debated by the Senate that was a Secret to the Spanish Ambassador: His
advertisements were so punctual of all their resolutions, that the Generals of
the Archduke became still instructed in whatsoever had relation to the War
before those of the Republic could receive Orders for their execution:
Together with this Intelligence it imported the Ambassador to have a
considerable number of Soldiers to give life to his Enterprise; but the
Spaniard having a strong Army in Lombardy, he saw no difficulty in that point,
provided there might be a Governor of Milan qualified to join with him in the
Design. The Marquis de Inojosa, that then held that place, had contracted too
near an Alliance with the Duke of Savoy, to be thought fit; he was newly
returned from signing the Treaty at Ast, where the French and Venetians had
been Mediators between that Duke and him. The Ambassador knowing that the
negotiation would not be well relished in Spain, writ that he might be
recalled; and at the same time solicited Don Pedro de Toledo Marquis de Villa
Franca, his intimate Friend, to make his Interest to succeed him in the
Government of Milan. Don Pedro had hereupon Orders for his departure to fill
Inajosa's place about the end of the Year 1615. and before he was quite arrived
he dispatched advice to Venice by the Marquis de Lara. The Ambassador
communicates his Project to the Marquis in terms the most agreeable, charging
him principally to inform himself if the new Governor could be able to provide
him of 1500 choice Men, when he should see occasion. Don Pedro charmed with the
Grandeur of the Enterprise resolved to second him in what he was able, not
exposing himself to a certain ruin in case of a defeat; He therefore
dispatches the Marquis de Lara a second time to confirm the Ambassador, and
also to request him to consider that the Soldiers he demanded were to be the
choicest picked Men, and in case they perished, he should remain without excuse
to have exposed to so manifest a hazard the whole Flower of his Army; howbeit
he would not fail to provide him as many as possibly he could, and that they
should be such as he would answer for as for himself. Nothing was so important
to this Design of the Ambassador as to obstruct all means tending to an
Accommodation; on which consideration he obliged the Marquis de Lara to make
Propositions of Peace to the Senate very unreasonable on the behalf of the
Governor of Milan: The Senates reply was as they expected, full of
Indignation, and refusing to enter into a Treaty with them: Don Pedro also was
wanting in nothing on his part to perplex matters; The Duke of Mantua was cold
in his disposition of pardoning his Rebel Subjects, according to his Promise at
the Treaty at Ast, and was encouraged in his obstinacy touching that Article,
and to persevere in his Executions he had already begun amongst them:
Propositions were also made to the Duke of Savoy in relation to the fulfilling
of that Treaty, forseeing that he would not accept it; they likewise excused
disbanding their Army, as he had done, and as they ought, with pretext grounded
on the War of Friol, wherein the Spaniard could no longer with honor refuse to
take a Share. The Venetian Army had passed the Lyzonz^, and besieged Gradisque
the Capital City in the Archdukes Territories; Whereupon The Council of Spain,
who hitherto had observed a Neutrality, foreseeing the damages were like to
ensue to that Prince, threatened to declare; About the same time expired the
misunderstanding that had been in the House of Austria between the two branches
of Spain and Germany, after the contest between the Son and Brother of Charles
the fifth touching the succession of the Empire: The Interest the Spaniard took
in that War was the first instance of that Reconcilement. Don Pedro ordered the
Camp-master Gambeletta to advance toward Crema with his troops, and commanded
the mounting of 24 pieces of Battery at Pravia, which as he published to the
World, were to be the train to a Body of 8000 men, to march under the conduct
of Don Sancto de Luna. On the other hand the Vice-King of Naples, that was then
cruizing in the Mediterranean with the Spanish Fleet, threatened to attack the
Duke of Savoy at Villa Franca; he blockt up all the passages of relief by Sea
to the Republic, and appeared always in a posture of Sailing into the Gulf, to
be a check there upon the Venetian Fleet. The Ministers of that State made loud
Complaints in all Courts touching this violent proceeding, which the Marquis of
Bedamar undertook to justify; he also foresaw that it would be of great use in
his Design to undermine, if it were possible, the very Foundation of their
repute, famed throughout Europe for so many ages for the most Ancient and Free
of all States: their Freedom had been newly proved to the World, and magnified
more than ever (upon occasion of their late Difference with the Pope) by
several Discourses that were supposed unanswerable; albeit the adverse Party
wanted not able Instruments in the management of that Contest. This the
Ambassador fell to examine anew, and in a few Chapters refuted all that the
numerous Volumes of Venetian Authors had said on that Subject, without so much
as doing any one of them the honor of making mention of his Name: And as there
is no Proposition relating to matters of that sort which an able man may not
render very problematick, upon pretext of establishing the Emperial Right in
Venice, he obviated that the Independence of that Republic was as Chimerical
as their Empire of the Ocean; it was not convenient for his purpose that he
should be known the Author of this Libel, he therefore Publishes it with so
cautious a Secrecy that it came not to Light during his Life, howbeit it seems
strange he should not be suspected; but it is also to be believed that the
Venetians at that time scarce understood him; his behavior airy and so full of
emportment, (for so he studied to appear) would not permit them to conceive
that a man of a Character so impetuous, could be author of so refined and
studied a Satyr of State. Justice and Honesty seemed ^qually to inspire him,
and his declamations against the Enterprises of the Venetiaus, that went also
mixed, were handled with a Moderation very apparent which alone was sufficient
to gain applause. This Work entitled Squittinio della Liberta Veneta, made
much noise, and by reason of the obscurity of the Author, the suspicion fell of
course upon the Court of Rome, from the occasion of their former Writings; and
the ablest Senators fancied all the World made their Judgment of the weight
thereof, and were more affrighted than at the loss of a Battle.

Francis Paoblo had ordered to examine it; but he, who could trifle with the
other Writers of the contrary Party, declared this last was by no means to be
answered; it being impossible without Inlightning the World in Matters that
imported more should still remain concealed in the dark bosom of Antiquity;
however he replied that in case the Senate judged it consistent with the
Dignity of the Republic to resent the outrage, he engaged himself so to
perplex the Court of Rome in their Defense, that they would hardly ever think
of a second attack: this Intimation was approved in the heat of their
displeasure, and gave Fra. Paoblo the satisfaction of publishing his beloved
History of the Council of Trent, which under less motive had not appear during
his Life. In the ^interim the Campaign in the year 1616 passed without any
considerable action on either side; the Duke of Savoy, and the State of Venice,
being tender of exposing to a second Risque the glory they had already
purchased, empowered Gritty the Venetian Ambassador at Madrid to renew the
negotiation; but the Spaniard, irritated by the Difficulties they had
encountered, contrived Propositions so unreasonable that it took no effect.
Gradisque continued, blockt up the enemy, maintaining their Battery during the
Winter, and the Armies were in the field betimes with an ardour that promised
more success than the preceding year.

The Dutch Truce had rendered the greatest part of the Soldiery of that State
useless, and many Soldiers of Fortune both French and Germans sought employment
elsewhere; The Count of Nassaw and Leivesteine marched with 8000 men, Dutch and
Walloons, to the Venetians Service; Whereupon the Spaniards zealously
complained to the Pope, that the Venetians did expose Italy to the infection of
Heresy by their entertaining that Militia: but the Ambassador of Venice
remonstrated, that it was not so much the Spaniards concern for Religion that
produced that Complaint, as their apprehension to see two great Republics in
conjunction against them. The Marquis of Bedamar would have been much perplexed
had the Pope obliged the Venetians to dismiss those Troops; for as the major
part of Military people regard nothing so much as their profit, when they are
in service under a Foreign Prince, he hoped to draw the chief of Mercenaries
into his Design, convincing them by largesses and the hopes of pillaging
Venice. In this contemplation he fixed upon an ancient French Gentleman, by name
Nico Renault, a person of experience and understanding, who had taken refuge at
Venice for some cause that was unknown; The Marquis of Bedamar observed him to
have been a long time resident at the French Ambassadors, and from some
accidental Discourses had been between them Renault discovered him to be no
less an able Man than fame had rendered him: and the Marquis who was glad to
purchase a friend of his Character near the Ambassador of France, had
contracted a strait Intimacy with Renault, who though a man extremely indigent,
yet preferred Virtue to Riches; howbeit could sacrifice his Virtue to his
Ambition, and whenever innocent methods should fail him in the pursuit of
Glory, there were none too ill for his purpose: he had learnt out of ancient
Authors that most excellent Indifference relating to life and death, which is
the sure Foundation of an extraordinary Design, and ever regretting those
celebrated times wherein the mer^ of particular men composed the destiny of
States, and where such as were possessors thereof never wanted occasions to
make out their Title. The Marquis of Bedamar that had thoroughly studied him,
and that was in great want of a Man on whom entirely to confide in the conduct
of his Enterprise reveals it at length to him, declaring withal he had his eye
fixed on him from the very beginning. Renault held himself obliged more by that
Assurance than from all the praises he could have heaped upon him; his years,
wherein he was advanced, kept him steedy to his Engagements; the less Time he
had to live the less was his Adventure; he conceived he could not better employ
the few uneasy years he had yet to pass than to hazard them to the making his
name Immortal. The Marquis of Bedamar gave him Credentials and Bills of
Exchange necessary to negotiate with the Hollands Officers; and charged him by
no means to communicate the Design to them, and only to intimate that Affairs
being embittered to that degree between the Republic and the House of Austria,
and the Spanish Ambassador resident at Venice, foreseeing a conjuncture that
might expose his Person to the rage of the People of that City, to secure
himself against which he endeavored to provide himself of a considerable
number of trusty resolute Friends. This p^^text was thin enough, but the least
disguize in Affairs of this nature is of great use; it imported but little
though People suspected Mystery, provided the Truth remained still in the dark:
by this means he hoped to debauch the Flower of the Venetian Land-Army, and for
the remainder it would be so infeebled, that it would be a very easy task for
Don Pedro to defeat them in their March, in case they should advance in
opposition, to his design. Their Naval Army was indeed what gave greater reason
of apprehension; they were at all times flesht with the opinion of Conquerors,
and were easily transported; the greatest part of the Soldiery natural Subjects
of the State, and it was to not be doubted but that upon the first rumor of the
Conspiracy, they would fly with swiftest diligence toward Venice. To expect
their defeat from the Spanish Navy was a doubtful point, and it had not been
Prudent to put to the hazard of a Battle the success of an Enterprise that was
otherwise so full of danger: It was therefore judged most to the purpose to
contrive how to render their fleet incapable of Service; The Ambassador, who
was not so great a Master in Maritine Affairs as the Vice-King of Naples, who
at that time commanded the Spanish Armada, found it therefore needful to
consult him upon that Subject: The Vi^^-King, who was to be a principal Actor
in this Tragedy of the Ambassador's, was that Duke of Ossuna, so famous for his
Gallantries; a man as enterprizing as either Don Pedro or the Marquis of
Bedamar: this Conformity of mind had begotten a very strait Intelligence
between these three Ministers: but neither Don Pedro, nor the Duke, were the
ablest Counselors: the Duke would be sometimes guilty of excursions
approaching to extravagance; howbeit the high opinion they held of the Marquis
de Bedamar contained them within stricter bounds of Prudence than they professed.
The profits accrewing to those that follow the Trade of Piracy under some fort
of powerful Protection had drawn to the Court of the Vice-King of Naples all
the renowned Pirates of the Mediterranean: This Vice-King that was fruitful in
extraordinary Adventures, and in his practice rather profuse than covetous, did
not protect them so much with regard to the advantages he shared in their
Booty, as to retain always about him a considerable number of People fit for
any Enterprise: and not content barely to receive them, but whenever he found
a man above the common Level, would covet and cherish him by such favors and
presents as bound him fast to himself: he had treated after this sort a certain
Captain by (...) Norman, and named Jacques Pierre, and so excellent in his
profession, that all others held it their Glory to proceed by his Rules and
Example; a man whose manners had taken no impression from the barbarity of that
course of life, who having purchased wherewithal to subsist, had resolved to
quit it, albeit in the Flower of his age, and had made choice of the Duke of
Savoy's Territory for his retreat, who being a Prince taken with every
extraordinary Talent, and so much an abler Judge from what himself possessed of
Natures bounty, knowing this Corsair to have the repate of one of the bravest
Men living, vouchsaft him leave to settle himself in Nisa. All sorts of
Maritine People, from Soldiers and Officers to the Seamen, that frequented that
Coast, made their ordinary Court to the Captain, his Counsils were their
Oracles, and he was Sovereign Arbiter of all their Differences, and was yet
agreater Subject of their Wonder that he could be able to relinquish a
profession wherein he was so great a Master, and which of all others was so
hard to quit: of this number was one Vincent Robert de Marseilles who happened
to touch in Sicily, where the Duke of Ossuna Governed as Viceroy, was by the
kind treatment he received, induced to put himself into his Service; The Duke
having heard that this Robert had been a Comrade of the said Captains, would
familiarly complain to him that his Friend should prefer the Country of the
Duke of Savoy to his Government for his retreat; to his complaint he added the
highest testimonies of his esteem of the Courage and Experience of that Captain
in Sea-matters, and finished his discourse with assurance to spare nothing that
in him lay to invite to his Court a Person of so singular merit. Robert with
great Joy embarkt in this Affair which being managed with so generous advances
on the Dukes part, the Captain was in the end vanquished, and transported
himself with his Wife and Family into Sicily, where living constantly
entertained with a prospect of the Sea he became daily less Master of his
Inclinations to that Element. The Viceroy had newly built several beautiful
Gallions, and it happened that a party of Turkish Vessels of great Value being
on their Voyage with a very slender convoy, this temptation the Captain had not
power to withstand; and he found no cause to repent him, for that he took in
that attempt an incredible booty, the major part whereof the Duke (who from
thence forwards entertained him with the Indearments of a Brother) bestowed on
him, on condition he would accompany him to Naples to which Government the
Kings Instructions had ordained him, and that he would make a Voyage to
Prevence, and labor to draw into his Stoice all the able Mariners of his
acquaintance upon that Coast: The Captain obeys him, and returns with a number
sufficient to man five large Vessels that appertained immediately to the
Viceroy; of this Squadron he was made Commander in chief, with which he
Pillaged uncontrouled all the Islands and Coasts of the Levant, and finished his
first expedition with a Famous Battle wherein he took and sank a considerable
Squadron of Turks Galleys. 'Twas about that time that the Marquis of Bedamar
communicated his purpose to the Duke of Ossuna, with full assurance of his
readiness to Embark with him: The Duke, that aspired to the Dominion of those
Seas, wished nothing with so much ardour as the ruin of the Venetians, who
were his only powerful Rivals, and could dispute their Title with more
obstinacy than the Turks; He therefore confers with the Captain touching the
Affair, obviating also the difficulties which the Captain believed were not
Invincible, and after several days of secret Conference he leaves Naples
abruptly, and in an Fquipage that betrayed both great haste and fear, the
Vice-King dispatches People in his pursuit to all Quarters, but the way he had
taken, with Order to take him dead or alive; his Wife and Children were from
that day taken into Custody and treated with all appearing Cruelty, his estate
beca^e confiscate, and the Dukes displeasure thundered with so much fury that
the whole City of Naples was surprised notwithstanding their long acquaintance
with his violent temper: and now the Captain appearing also no less enraged
than the Duke, gave an easy Argument for the Peoples belief of the
Misunderstanding, who believed he had practiced something against the Spanish
Interest; or that of the Dukes Designs in particular. In the mean time he
returns to his first retreat; the Duke of Savoy was at that time in a declared
War with Spain, and was famed for one of the most generous men of that age: and
albeit he had published his displeasure at the Captains leaving his protection
for a retreat in Sicily; yet that did not discourage his presenting himself at
the Dukes feet, to whom he made many false reports of Designs of the Vice-King
against the Republic of Venice, full of imaginary Horror, but without any
manner of agreement with the true purpose, and that believing he could not with
honor engage therein, he had meditated his and his families escape from Naples:
But having notice that the Viceroy had received Intelligence of his purpose,
he had been constrained to fly in that miserable Equipage to escape his fury,
and to abandon all that was dear to him in the world to the disposition of the
most cruel man living; the Duke of Savoy was touched with pity at the
Melancholy recital, and received him with open arms; He told the Corsair that
his Interests being straightly twisted with those of the R^publick, he thought
himself accomptable for the Service he had rendered to their common Interest, in
case the Venetians should be cold in their Acknowledgements; He also added,
that it imported that the Senate should be instructed from his own Mouth of the
Designs of the Duke of Ossuna, and after having exhorted him in a courageous
supporting his affliction, having equipt him with all necessaries, and made him
a noble present, dispatched him toward Venice with his Letters of Credence and
Recommendation. The Venetians were not less affected than the Duke of Savoy,
the flight, the tears, the poverty, the despair, the abilities, the exploits,
the hopes that he would draw to them that great number of brave men that he had
conducted to the Duke of Ossuna's Service; but above all the Designs he
revealed of that Dukes which he had invented as plausible as was necessary, all
these circumstances spoke so Eloquently in his favor, that they immediately
gave him the Command of a Ship. Howbeit Contarine the Ambassador at Rome did
remonstrate, that in consideration of his coming from the Viceroy, he was by
no means to be trusted; but fear having wrought in the Spirits of the
Venetians, the usual effect of Belief, stopped their Ears to that prudent Advice.
'Twas not long er'e the Fleet put out to Sea, and the Captain, who considered
of what Importance it was to signalize himself, took so many Prizes upon
several Commissions he had received to pursue them; that upon his return from
that Expedition they added eleven Sail of Ships to that he had. Of these happy
successes he gave an Account to the Duke of Ossuna, finishing his Discourse in
these words. If these Pantaleons proved in their easy Faith, as they have
begun; I dare assure your Excellency, my Lord, that I shall lose no Time in
this Country. He writ also at the same time to his several Comrades he had left
at Naples, to draw them to that Service; which he found no difficulty to
debauch; the Vice-King, upon his Flight, feigning to hold them all in
suspicion, Treating them now as ill as before he had been kind: He made also
great complaint of the Republiques protecting the Captain, and in Revenge, gave
Sanctuary to several of the Vscocks that the Venetians had chased from their
Habitations. By Virtue of his Protection, they began a Trade of Privateering;
took a great Vessel bound from Corfu to Venice, and sold their Booty publicly
under his Standard; He violated the freedom of Ports, and made very
considerable Reprizals upon very slender Motives, and disputed the Orders he
received from Spain for Restitution of what he had Seized; and published a
Manifest to justify his Disobedience. He sent also a great Fleet to Cruize in
the Adriatique, and caused to enter in Triumph into Naples the Prizes that were
made upon the Venetians. In brief, he ruined their Commerce at the cost of the
Neapolitans themselves, who were interessed, and the Farmers of the Revenue of
that Kingdom; offering to make complaint thereof, he forbade them on pain of
Death. There being no declared War between Spain and the Republique, the
Venetians became justly astonished at a proceeding so irregular: the Major part
imputed it only to the bare extravagance of the Duke of Ossuna; but the Wiser
sort, who knew there was nothing of so important Use as the dexterous and
politic management of such People, had deeper conjectures, and that the
Spaniard served himself of the Capricio's of the Duke, in order to such
proceedings, as they would neither avow or maintain.

His Familiar discourses were, Surprising of the Ports in Istria belonging to
the Republique, Pillaging their Islands, and also, if it were Practicable, to
make a descant even upon the City of Venice^^ the Design whereof he discoursed
among his Courtiers, he caused exact Draughts to be made of the Works about it;
also the Building of several Barks, Brigantines, and other small Vessels,
proper for all sorts of Channels: variety of Experiments were also made, to
discover what weight each depth of Water could sustain, and he invented every
day new Engines to diminish the weight and facilitate the motion. The Venetian
Resident at Naples punctually accounted hereof to the great despair of the
Marquess of Bedamar, who began to repent him of having joined himself with so
weak a Man: But the issue undeceived him. The Viceroy proceeding with all this
Pomp and Noise, gave the Venetians cause to consider him in ridicule; even
their Wisest Senators could by no means imagine, that any solid secret could be
masked under the disguize of so much Appearance and Publicity. The Duke
continued his preparations with the same Vigor, whilst no body took the least
notice or suspicion; and the same Indiscretion that was held ruinous to the
Enterprise, did more advance it than all the caution and circumspection of the
Marquis of Bedamar. Howbeit, the Marquis judged it necessary to hasten the
Execution, either from a reason of not giving the Venetians leisure to make
Reflections, or from the hazard to which his person was daily exposed. The
Venetian Fleet having upon an Expedition offered Battle to the Spaniards, which
refusing, they plundered the Coast of Apulia; this success begat so insolent a
Joy among the baser people, That, but for the Protection of the Guards that
were sent in his favor, they had assassined the Ambassador with his whole
Family. About the same time he received News from the Camp before Gradisque,
which Relieved him upon that accident; Renault advising him that he found their
Spirits so happily disposed, that the Negotiation was speedily effected. The
Ambassador had ordered him to visit Milan before his return, where Don Pedro
received him with all the Caresses great Men practice for the amusement of such
as Sacrifice themselves in their Service: They concluded together, That it
would much Import them to take possession of some Town in the Continent at the
same time they should surprise Venice, which should be a Bridle on the other
Towns, serve as a place of Arms to the Spanish Army that should March against
them; and be a checque to that of the Venetians, in Case they should appear for
their Relief. Renault Traveled through their Towns of chief importance, and
sojourned some time at Crema, in Order to the forming a Faction in that
Garrison; which he effected, and by means of a French Lieutenant, named Jean
Berard, an Italian Captain, and an Ensign that was a Provencal, one that Don
Pedro had already gained: These three engaged to receive 500 Spaniards into the
Town, and without giving the least Jealousy to the Governor, who was a
Venetian; and to conceal them for the space of eight days.

Renault, on serious debate upon the place, concluded, That with that number of
Men, the Design was infallible; there being nothing to do, but to cut the
Throats of a miserable Garrison, that had been drawn out of the
Country-Militia: all the Regular Troops of the Republique, being either in the
Towns in Fryol, or upon Service in their Armies.

The Duke of Ossuna had made the Marquess de Bedamar of Opinion, That it would
be necessary also, to make themselves Masters of some Venetian Port upon the
Gulf, whereby to render the Vscocks and the Archduke, more Serviceable; and
to be a retreat to the Spanish-Fleet, in Case any adverse accident should
necessitate them to seek a Port in those Seas, after they should be engaged. To
this purpose they made choice of Maran, a strong Town upon an Island confining
upon Istria, and that had a Port capable to receive a great Fleet. An Italian,
by name Mazza, that had be (...) Serjeant-Major there, for the space of 40
years, and had authority almost equal to the Governors, promised the Dukes
Emissary in Consideration of a considerable sum of money and the Command of the
Place, to kill the Governor upon his first Order, and make himself Master of
the Place for the Service of the Spaniards.

This Design was as feasible, as to engage in it: The Governor, who was the
Commissary Lorenzo Theophilo, lived with him in great familiarity; and, whereas
the charge of Commissary gave him much business upon that Frontier in time of
War, he confided entirely on the Serjeant-Major, touching whatsoever had
relation to matters within the Garrison, as being the most experienced and able
Officer upon the place. Affairs being ripened to this Pitch, the Ambassador
thought it now high time, to fall upon finishing his piece; not but that more
time might give him leisure to add still maturer degrees to the measures he had
taken, but he also knew, That there was nothing so fatal as delay, in Affairs
of that nature.

It Is impossible that all the different means that conspire to the prosperity
of an Enterprise should be ascendent in one and the same moment; some change
their Positions, whilst others are preparing; and whosoever is once so happy as
to be able to unite a sufficient number, it is a most capital error not to
improve the critical minute of so precious a conjuncture. It highly concerned
the honor of the Crown of Spain, that the Ambassador might not be convicted of
having had the least hand in the Enterprise, in case it should miscarry; in
contemplation whereof he resolved to discover himself to none of the
Conspirators but Renault and the Captain: Nor had these two any Knowledge of
each other; they never waited on the Ambassador but by his own Order, and he
was always careful to appoint their Attendance, so as to avoid encountering; by
which, had they chanced to be detected, it would have been much to his
advantage that they had no understanding together.

Upon this Consideration, he could have been well content that they should
manage their business apart, without the least cognizance each of other, as
they had hitherto proceeded; but upon more deliberate thoughts he became
convinced, that it was impossible; and despairing utterly of success in his
Enterprise, but by a perfect Union and Friendship between them, he resolved to
overcome that difficulty, how hard soever it appeared. Albeit they were both
men of Courage and Discretion; Renault valued himself principally upon the
Conductive part, and to have so methodized his business, that the Execution was
most practicable, and the success Infallible.

The Captain on the other hand, being a person of more Youth and Vigor,
studied especially to appear a Man of great Execution, and capable of
acquitting him of the highest Resolutions. To him the Marquess revealed the
several Negotiations of Renault; his Experience, that furnished him with
Expedients against all accidents; his Eloquence and Address, in Order to the
acquiring new Partisans; his skill in Corresp ondence, so very useful in such
Negotiations, wherein it was of so great importance to be continually
instructed in the State of their Fleet, Provinces, and Armies; and That he
concluded such a Person would prove of very great satisfaction to the Captain,
he being a Man of years and great Experience, who wanted neither Courage nor
Constancy; howbeit, his Age and Profession claiming more of the Councellor than
the Soldier, rendered him incapable of sharing with the Captain any part of the
Glory of the Execution. As to Renault, he told him only, That the Captain was a
Creature of the Duke of Ossuna's which Duke being to be the Principal Sharer in
the Design, there could be no reasonable pretense to conceal any thing from his
Confiden^; he conjured him therefore to condescend to the behavior of the
Corsair, as far forth as might be consistent with their purpose, and to treat
him with all the Respect and Artifice as was necessary to acquire the love of a
Man of Action, fierce and presumptuous to the highest degree.

The Marquis of Bedamar having thus labored to dispose these two Men to a
friendly understanding, was much astonished when he saw them embrace each other
with Testimonies of extreme Affection, upon the very instant of their Interview.

There is no Constancy or Presence of mind so entire, that yields not to some
imperfect reasonings upon Objects extremely surpr^sing. The first judgment the
Ambassador made, was, that he had been betrayed; for it having been his great
care to hinder the Conference of these two Men, he could not comprehend upon
what Motive they should conceal from him their acquaintance together: But this
Mystery was soon revealed when he came to understand, That their acquaintance
arose from their having often encountered at a famous Greek Courtizan's House, a
Woman of extraordinary merit for one of her profession, whereof there could not
be a greater Instance, than by her so religiously concealing the secret they
had enjoined her to make of each others Name.

This exactness of hers appeared also so much the more extraordinary by how
much she was not ignorant that they had conceived a reciprocal esteem one of
the other. The Ambassador perfectly recovered of his Surprise, was ravished to
find so strict a Union, where he so much wished it: they avowed upon entering
into conversation, That they had respectively designed to engage each other in
the Enterprise.

Having their thoughts continually agitated about this their Project, they
happened some times amidst their entertainments at this Greeks to fall upon
Discourses of matters of that nature, talking of the Affairs of the Times, of
State, and War, which they did without making any discovery, or indeed without
the least purpose thereof; howbeit, they both confessed ingeniously, in the
presence of the Ambassador, That the warmth of their Debates had often
transported them too far, and given too much Testimony of their Sentiments. The
Ambassador entreated them thereupon, to make good use of that Reflection, for
their greater Circumspection in the future, and collect from that Experiment,
That to keep a great Affair truly secret, it is not sufficient either not to
say, or do any thing that may have the least relation thereto, but even to
endeavor to forget our own Impressions thereof. Renault proceeded to observe,
That, since the rumors of Peace, that revived again about the Month of June,
the Venetian Officers had very ill treated the Foreign Troops; who, had they
not been restrained by the Authority of Count Nassaw, which dyed about that
time, they had rendered but an ill Account of their Service before Gradisque;
That the Venetian General, who had a yet worse Opinion of them than they
deserved, had separated them upon Posts, the most distant he could choose; That
this Precaution had published the diffidence they had of their Fidelity, and put
them into mutiny; and having insolently refused to execute certain Orders of
the Senate, the General had thought it his Duty to put to Death the principal
Mutineers; That he had confined their Officers at Padua, and distributed the
rest into diverse places of Lombardy, until they should be able to pay them, and
the Ratification of the Treaties should permit their dismission. Renault added,
That the Lieutenant of the Count de Nassaw, who was one of the principal of
those with whom he had dealt, had been confined at Brescia, and that he had
laid a Design, by virtue whereof he would be able to deliver that Town into Don
Pedro's possession: And that it was necessary to res^^lve first upon this
particular Affair; for that the Lieutenants Letters pressed for a decisive
Answer. The Ambassador replied, That it would not be necessary to give any
Alarm on that side, before they were Masters of Venice: Moreover, they should
not have occasion for more than one place in Lombardy; That they were sure of
Crema, and that any other Enterprise would but divide their Forces; That
hitherto they had entertained those they had gained at their own Devotion, but
that they respited the Execution upon various pretexts, and rather than expose
themselves by the least noise, 'twould be better wholly to decline that
Proposition.

Renault replied, That beside that Lieutenant, he had dealt with three French
Gentlemen, by Name, Durand, Serjeant-Major of Lievestines Regiment, Brainville
and Brabe; also with a Savoyard, named Ternon, that had been at the Escalade of
Geneva, a Hollander named Theodore, one Revillido, an Italian Engineer; two
other Italians that had formerly had employment in the Arsenal, named Lewis de
Villa Mezzana, Captain of Light Horse, and William Retrosi, Lieutenant and
Captain Honorat in Patma: That he had judged it necessary to open himself
without reserve to these nine Persons, who he had chosen, with such Caution,
that he would pawn himself for their F^lelity; That during his abode in the
Camp they had gained above two hundred Officers; That to these Officers he only
intimated, that the Ambassador had ordered him to endeavor to be ready in
Venice to rescue his Excellency from the fury of the People, whenever he
should have occasion: That since his return, he had received advice of the just
number of Men, they might rely upon; and that they did not proceed, but upon
methods very certain: That they depend on two thousand at the least of the
Troops of Leivestein, besides three hundred of those of Nassaw; and that their
Officers were all ready to deposite their Persons as Hostages for their
Fidelity: That at the beginning of the Negotiation, they had flattered their
Soldiers with the hopes of leading them upon some Expedition, when they should
be dismissed the Service of the Republic, which should abundantly recompense the
miseries they had sustained: That it was not to be suspected that the
singularity of the Enterprise would discourage them, whenever it should be
necessary to publish it; That they were incenst to that degree against the
Senate, upon the score of the ignominious Treatment they had received, that he
did avow, that single reason was sufficient to incite them to any seasible
Design for their Revenge: But that however, for better concealment, they would
not declare, if they thought it fit, until matters were so advanced that there
would be scarce any doubt of the success; and that, upon the Resolution they
had taken of exposing the City to be Plundered, there would not be found one
single Person scrupulous of enriching himself, by a way so sure and ready, and
of spending the rest of his Life in ease and plenty.

The Marquis of Bedamar, from the first thoughts he had conceived of this
Enterprise, resolved by no means to engage but upon a sure prospect of much
more means than would be necessary to the effecting it; and that these also
should be so independent and disingaged, that the failure of either should in
no sort influence the remaining Expedients: hereupon he omitted not to take his
measures with the Duke of Ossuna, for a supply of Men, albeit he was in no
doubt of Don Pedro's complement, or of Renaults success, in his understanding
with the Hollanders Officers. He having treated upon each of these three Points
with such prospect of security, as employed not the least Assurance from either
two, and as though they were to result in three different Enterprises.

It now imported to know precisely in what time the Duke of Ossuna would be
able to put into Venice the Men he demanded; but that Duke not always taking so
certain measures as to beget an implicit relyance on a naked Promise in a
matter of so great importance as well as difficulty, it became needful to
dispatch a Person that should be capable to Judge upon the place, how far he
was able to comply with his word. The Captain could not be absent from Venice
unremarkt, and Renaults presence was indispensably necessary; they therefore
resolved Bribe should be their Envoy, one of the French Gentlemen, with whom
Renault had negotiated at Friol: But this Gentleman having received Commission
from the Republic to raise Soldiers during his preparation for his Journey,
they concluded it of more use that he should prosecute that Employment, and
resolved upon one Laurence Nolot, a French Comptoi's, the said Captains
Comrade, who departed upon Newyears day 1618. The Marquis of Bedamar thought it
also now high time to explain himself with the Spanish Council; To anticipate
therefore their own demand of being enlightened in the Affair, he sends them his
Project the most intelligible and circumstantiat he was able: And whereas he
was well acquainted with the slow deliberations of that Court, he protested, by
a special dispatch to the Duke of Lerma, that he would have an Answer speedy
and decisive; and that the danger in which he was, made it just to explain
himself in those absolute terms; and that in case they detained his Courier
above eight days, he would interpret the retardment as an Order wholly to
desist. He received an Answer within the time he demanded, howbeit not so full
and determinate as he hoped: They signified that in case he should incur danger
by delay, that then he might proceed; but, if it were possible, they
passionately desired to have first before them a faithful and ample State of
the Republic. The Ambassador being prepared for that Subject, was not long in
providing a Relation so exquisite, that the the Spaniards called it the
Masterpiece of their Politics. It was not known upon what Design he framed
it; howbeit, such as have seen it find nothing therein that is not adjusted to
the Design. It begins with an Eloquent complaint of the difficulty of that Work
by reason of the profound secrecy of the Government he was to describe; he then
falls upon encomiums of that Government; but the Elogy he made, regarded more
the first Age of the Republic, than the present State. From their praises he
falls upon a general Discourse, equally sad and elegant, of the deplorable
Condition of humane things, whereof the most excellent are most incident to
Corruption; so the wisest Laws of that State by the abuse they had suffered,
had been the Original Causes of its present Deformity: That, that of her Laws,
which entirely excludes the people from ^^gnizance in Affairs, had introduced a
Tyranny of the Nobles; and that which subjected the Ecclesiastical Power to the
Censure of the Sovereign Magistrate, was the foundation of that looseness of the
People of Venice in relation to the Court of Rome, since the contest of the
Republic with that Court: He Illustrates that looseness by the Impiety it was
reported the Hollanders committed with impunity in Fryol; and particularly
declaims against their having buried a Person of Quality of their Nation, named
Reynold Brederode, in the Church of the Servites of Venice, notwithstanding he
was a Calvinist. In that Article he takes occasion gravely to tax Fra. Paoblo,
without mention of his Name, for that it was he that inspired the Senate with
that Resolution. He wondered how the People, being no longer tied to their
Obedience to their Prince by the Obligations of Religion, violated so many ways
to their Faces, could yet support the dreadful Vexations they lay under. He
minutely represented their Grievances, and without exaggeration made them
appear intolerable. He proceeded to discover to them, That neither the Honor
nor the Lives of the People were less at the discretion of their Masters than
their Estates; and that the Genious of the Nation being led as it was to Lust,
Avarice, and Revenge, it is no wonder if those that live under a Government of
that nature should be oppressed by their Masters. In fine, he examined the State
of their Senate, of their Provinces, and Armies. In their Senate he remarkt
Faction, and Division; he scrupled not to observe to them the discontents of
many of their Nobles; he represented the desolation of some of their Provinces
by the Cruel War with the Vscocks, and the poverty of others by contributing to
their Succor: That they had not three Officers paid in any of their Garrisons
of Lombardy, and that the Republic preserved her Authority from the only
reason of no bodies moving to usurp it. As to their Army, he made a faithful
Relation of the several Mutinies in that by Land; and how they had dispersed
the Factious in so great numbers, that the remainder was not to be considered
but as a Rabble of an useless miserable Militia, without either Courage,
Experience or Discipline. As to their Naval Forces, they were become of late
the Sanctuary of all the most infamous Pirates of the Mediterranean; People
unworthy the Name of Soldiers, and of whose Service the Republic could no
longer make any account, than whilst they wanted power to be able to turn their
Arms against her self.

After having made this description with such Beauty of Language, and with so
marvelous a vigor of Expression, he examined what judgment ought to be made
thereupon of the future State of that Republic, her Fortune, and Duration; and
made it evident, and deducible from the principles he had laid down, that it
was now languishing; and that the Disease was such as admitted no Crisis or
amendment of the present Constitution, but by an entire reformation.

Upon this Relation, the Council of Spain set the Marquis of Bedamar at entire
Liberty to proceed, without tying him up to any Instructions: And now Nolots
delay, who was not yet returned, was the only clog to the business; and the
Ambassador could not forgive himself the error he had committed in exposing an
Affair of that Nature to the Capricio of the Duke of Ossuna, in whose temper so
ancient an Experience ought to have instructed him: delay being mortal in the
present conjuncture.

After the Spaniards had taken Versel, Gradisque became extremely straightened by
the Venetians; and the Council of Spain found no expedient for its Safety but
the renewing propositions of Peace: There was therefore published by Agreement
at Madrid, a Writing containing the principal Articles; but the continual
disorders of the Duke of Ossuna obliged the Venetians to revoke the Powers they
had given their Ambassador, and to transfer the Negotiation to France, where
the Death of the Mareshal d'Ancre, had given them greater Hopes of Favor.

The Peace was at length concluded the 6th of September, and the Governor of
Milan held Conference some time after with Count Bethune at Pavia, in Order to
the Execution thereof, in Relation to the Duke of Savoy: But at the same time
the Governor omittednot to molest the Venetians, taking several places of
theirs in Lombardy; whereof they made general complaint, and were making
greater preparations for War than ever, until the Marquis of Bedamar
complemented them upon the Peace in full Senate, and promised punctual
Execution of the respective Articles: which he did, not so much in Obedience to
his Orders from Spain, as from a willingness to wipe out those Ill Impressions
the Senate had taken of him in Relation to things past: Upon which
consideration he acquitted himself of that Duty with all the Ardour and
Demonstrations of Joy and Friendship imaginable; and the Venetians, that but
too much wished what he had promised, blindly acquiesce and accord to a
Suspension of Arms; which suspension was a cutting blow of the Spaniarsd, and
the Master-pi^ce of their Ambassad or. Cradisque was at that time straightened to
a degree of not being able to hold out fifteen days, and in the mean time
Hostilities were yet to continue for the space of two Months; which time was
Judged sufficient to perfect all Ratifications, and to dispose things for
Execution of the Treaty. It was a point of great Importance that the Town
should not yield within that space; The Suspension therefore put it out of
danger. And now the Spaniards, whose Motive not being so strong to press the
Execution of the Treaty, were at Liberty to protract and spin out the time as
should best suit with their Designs: Howbeit, the Duke of Ossuna, compelled by
Orders from Madrid, and at the Popes Instance, offered some short time after,
to make Restitution of the Vessels he had taken; but for their Merchandise, he
knew not how it had been disposed of; notwithstanding at the same time they
were exposed to Sale before the Face of the Venetian Resident, and a powerful
New Fleet was at the same time fitted out to Cruize in the Adriatic. The
Senate hereupon would have made complaint to the Marquis of Bedamar, which he
anticipated by much greater of his own; declaring that he could not be
accountable for the Actions of the Duke of Ossuna, and That the King himself,
their Master, would not avow them; That amidst so many Favou^ and kind
Treatments, he received during his Ministry at Venice, The only displeasure he
had conceived, was to find that they imputed the Conduct and Behavior of that
Duke wholly to his Counsels; wherein he never had the least Share: That from
the slenderest remarks upon the Duke of Ossuna might be easily collected, That
he had no other Guide than his own Capricio; And as for his own part, they
might also make a Judgment of his Temper and Disposition, from the Peaceable
proceedings of the Governor of Milan, of whose preferment he gloried to have
been the Author.

It is true, That Governor exactly observed the Suspension; howbeit, he
continued still in Arms, which to render the more plausible, he judged it
needful to contrive new Disputes with the Duke of Savoy on pretext that the
Troops dismissed by that Prince, were still detained in the Country of Vaux, to
attend there the complete Execution of the Treaty; Don Pedro therefore refused
to the Count de Bethune to disarm, as had been accorded at Pavia; He also
obliged the Duke of Mantua to the same Resolution, as far as it depended on
him. The Count de Bethune published a Protest against them, and upon their
refusal retired: Which Protest was Answered by the Marquis of Bedamar, in the
most colorable Terms he could invent.

It may easily be judged by these Occurrences of how much importance it was to
hasten toward Execution, it being so difficult to preserve Affairs in a
posture which gave so fair a promise of success.

In the mean time, the Duke of Ossuna had not dispatched Nolot; and the
Ambassador on the point of despair, sent him Instructions to discover by all
means possible, what should be the Cause; which in the End came to be
understood.

Some time after the Captain had been entertained in the Venetian Service, the
Duke, who would be instructed in the Affairs of Venice by variety of Methods,
dispatched after him an Italian, by Name Alexander Spinosa, who was to be a Spy
on all Occurrences, and being a Stranger, was soon taken into Employment
amongst the Crowd of other Soldiers of Fortune that demanded it. He had a
strong belief, that the Duke had some great Enterprise in Design, but did not
suspect that the Corsair had been the Conductor of the Project: Howbeit, he
doubted whether the Dukes displeasure lay so heavy on him as the World
believed. Upon Spinosa's Arrival at Venice, he had offered to the Vice-King to
Poniard the Captain, which the Vice-King refused, from the danger he would run
in the Execution. Spinosa was a Man of Wit, and being acquainted with the Duke,
Judged, That in Case he had no stronger Motive of refusal, the hazard of one
Man's Life could be no retardment to his Revenge: Nevertheless the Duke gave him
in Charge to observe the Actions of the Corsair; which he did either to amuse
Spinosa, or that the Vice-King was of those that entirely confided in no body,
and was willing to mark, how far Spinosa's Account of the Captain, agreed with
the Captains own Letters.

Spinosa the better to acquit him of his Commission, mixes himself with several
French Men he had formerly known at Naples, and much frequented the Captain at
Venice: These being of the Conspiracy, rendered an exact Account to the Captain
of Spinosa's Disquisitions upon his Conduct; They also discovered, that this
Spy traced some Design of his own, and was debauching People into the Service
of the Duke of Ossuna.

The Captain was in great Indignation, that the Duke scrupled to have an entire
confidence in him; howbeit, was not at all surprised: He only considered that
in case Spinosa should continue to Cabal, unless they had an understanding
together, he could infeeble their Party by dividing it, and there would be no
prudent declaring himself to one that had Commission to be a Spy upon him.

The Marquis of Bedamar, and Renault, Judged also that they could not spare
much time in providing a remedy to this Inconvenience, and after mature
Conference upon the point, concluded there could be no security for them, but
in Spinosa's Death: He was one that would sell his Life dear, in Case of an
Attempt to assassin him; his Profession keeping him in a continual Posture of
defense; And the Captain was at last reduced to impeach him to the Council of
Ten, as a Spy of the Duke of Ossuna's, after having essayed in vain all other
means for his destruction.

The French Men with whom he had had Conversation, framed their Depositions so
Judiciously, and Circumstantially, that he was apprehended, and privately
Strangled the same day; all that he could exhibit to the Judges, in prejudice
of the Captain, being invalid, as proceeding from his Accuser, and not being
able to prove any thing he deposed.

This Affair exceedingly augmented the Captains Reputation with the Venetians,
but was a sensible Affliction to the Marquis of Bedamar, as being a useful
intimation to them to observe more strictly the Conduct of the Strangers
entertained in their Service.

The Duke of Ossuna learnt Spinosa's Death upon Nolot's Arrival^^t Naples, and
was not long in guessing at the Author. The displeasure he conceived thereat,
was expressed in his resentment to the Marquis of Bedamar, that he had not given
him some advice thereupon; and the diverse Reflections this accident created in
his Spirit, reduced him to Terms of the greatest uncertainty what to resolve
on. In the mean time the Troops of Leivestein having mutined anew, were by
Order of the Senate, led to the Lazaretto about two Miles from Venice in the
beginning of February. The Marquis of Bedamar, fearing they might come to an
accord with the Republic touching their Pay, and that thereupon they should be
compelled to depart, wrought with some of their Officers, that they should
refuse the Terms were then offered them, to improve the favorable occasion of
the vicinity of these Troops.

Nolot was charged by an Express, to represent to the Vice-King, that within
the Term of that Month, they should have near 5000 Men at their Devotion.

Nolot forgot nothing of his Duty, but the Vice-King, who had not yet perfectly
digested his Choler, amused him so long, that after six weeks expectation, the
Officers fearing lest the Soldiers should be reduced by their ill
Accommodation, to Treat without them; came themselves to an Agreement by
consent of the Conspirators, who could find no Expedient to prevent it. Ten
days after Nolot arrived with the Dukes Resolution, such as they could wish,
but addressed to Robert Brulard, one of the Captain's Comrades; but the
Ambassador and the Captain being vigorously intent upon the Issue of their
Intrigue, expressed not the least Concern at the Affront the Duke did them in
that Address. He advised, That he was now able whenever they should desire
it, to supply them with Barks, Brigantines and other small Vessels, adjusted to
the Ports and Channels of Venice, and in number capable to receive 6000 Men if
it were needful: Nolot had viewed the Troops and Vessels, which were all in a
ready Posture, and the Captain Ordered the Sounding of the several Depths of
Water in the Ports and Channels that were to Conduct them to the Place of St.
Mark, where they were to Land: for he having store of Seamen at his Devotion,
by reason of his Command, they without suspicion, had free Passage to and fro
through the several Channels as often as they pleased; by which means it was
very easy to take all necessary Measures most exactly. There only now rested
how to prevent the departure of Lievesteins Troops, which to effect, there was
no want of Money; the rigor also of the Season, was a re^sonable color for
their delay; the greatest p^^^ remained still at the Lazaretto, and such as had
embarkt before Nolot's Arrival, were entertained in several places at hand.

To relieve Renault and the Captain, amidst the Cares of this business (which
now grew too heavy for them to support) it was concluded necessary, to take in
eighteen more at least, Men of Courage and Understanding, and such on whom they
might entirely rely: They composed this number, of nine of those with whom
Renault had dealt at Friol, and of the principal of those that the Captain had
invited from Naples; they were five Captains of Vessels like himself, viz.
Vincent Robert of Marseilles, Laurence Nolot, and Robert Brulard (of whom
mention has been made already) the two last French Comptoi's, also one
Laurence Brulard, and a Provincal, named Authony Jaffier: there were also two
Brothers Lorrainers, Charles and John Boleau, and an Italian named John
Rizzardo; (these three were excellent Petardiers) together with a French Man
called Anglade, who had the Repute of one of the ablest Fire-Masters of his
time.

The capacity of this last was so remarkable, that he had quickly obtained
Liberty to practice in his Profession in the Arsenal, and by that means the two
P^tardiers his Comrades had free Entry: Besid^ these already mentioned, there
was one Villa Mezzana, and Retrosi, who were of those that Renault had gained,
and that had had employment in time past: These six drew so exact a Plot of the
Design, that those that had never been upon the place, might have discoursed
thereupon as Judiciously, as those that Framed it. These received also much
Assistance in their Business, from two Officers of the Arsenal, that the
Captain had drawn in; they had appeared to him dissatisfyed with their
Employment; were furnished with Qualities proper for his Design, capable of
engaging, if convinced of their Interest, and of complying faithfully, with
whatsoever they should Promise: The Issue applauded the Judgment he had made,
and he so seasoned his Complements to them (which he expressed on all occasions
with a considerable number of Spanish Pistols, which he had by him to
distribute) that they became charmed in a perfect Obedience to all he could
command them.

L'Anglade, and these two, had their Quarters in the Arsenal; Renault had taken
with himself to the Ambassadors of France, three of his Friends, Bribe,
Brainville, and Laurence Brulard; the three Petardiers remained at the Marquis
of Bedamars, who furnished them with Powder and other Materials and Instruments
necessary to employ them in their Profession, but without ever having any
Communication with them: they had already made more Petards and Fireworks,
than they should want; and the Ambassadors Palace was so filled, that it was
not capable of Lodging more: The Captain remained at his Ordinary Quarters, but
alone, to prevent suspicion in case he should be observed: And for the rest, he
had lodged them at the Curtizans, where he and Renault had their first
Encounter. The Esteem and Friendship that succeeded the Love they had had for
that Woman, but especially the Knowledge they had of her Adventure, gave them
assurance they could not make a better Choice: She was of an Island of the
Greeks, in the Archipelago; and of Condition as Noble as was possible in a
Country under the Government of Venice. He that Commanded there for the
Republic, had it seems Debaucht her upon some great Promises, and afterward
caused her Father to be assassined, for endeavoring to oblige him to comply
with his Promise: The Woman thereupon, transported her self to Venice, to
demand Justice of the Murder; but to no purpose, and having in the pursuit
spent the little she had, her Beauty repaired now the misery it had occasioned.

People of Noble extraction still form their resentments proportioned to their
Quality, when reduced to Professions unworthy their Birth; She therefore became
Ravished upon her first notice of the Project of those two Friends, and without
reluctance hazarded all in their Favor, and thereupon she hires one of the
largest Houses of the Town, and under color of some Work was first to be done,
removes but part of her Goods, to the end she might have a reasonable Pretext
of still keeping possession of both, being not far asunder.

It was in these two Houses, that eleven of the Principal Conspirators had
their Residence near six Months, and as she had freely received Visits before
from whatsoever Pleasant People, Strangers or Venetians occasionally frequented
her House; Yet now, lest so great a concourse should expose her Guests to too
much Observation, for more security, she feigned her self Indisposed.

Whosoever has observed with what respect Women of that Profession are Treated
in Italy, will easily conclude, That her House by this means became most
obscure and solitary to all that had not business thither: The Conspirators
never went abroad but by Night, and to the end they might have that at liberty,
they held their Assemblies by day, in which Assemblies Renault and the Captain
proposed such matters as had been debated with the Marquis de Bedamar, wherein
the Opinion of the Company was consulted together with their Resolutions upon
the Methods of Executing them.

Whenever it imported them to visit the Ambassador, they performed it with
all requisite Circumspection in a Country and a Conjuncture where Ambassadors
Houses were watched and observed, as if they had been so many Enemies; and this
more especially. It had been a standing Resolution among them, that it would be
necessary to receive and conceal about a thousand Men in the City, before they
came to Execution; But because it would be dangerous to introduce them with
their Arms; The Marquis of Bedamar had made Provision of Arms for more than 500
Men, nor was there much difficulty in doing this with a perfect security, in
regard Ambassadors Gondola's were exempt from Visits of Officers, from
wheresoever they should come; and therefore nothing now remained, but a fit
occasion to introduce the 1000 Men into the City without exposing them to
observation.

The Doge Donato died, and they had chosen in his stead, Anthony Priuli, whose
Residence was at that time at Friol, in Order to the due Execution of the
Treaty. The General by Sea had Order to wait upon him with the Naval Army; the
Grand Chancellor and Secretaries of State were to be more early than the rest
in their Addresses to present him with the Ducal Bonnet; Twelve of the
Principal Secretaries were to follow as Ambassadors of the Republic, every one
by himself, in a Brigantine Armed and magnificently equipt with a Noble
Attendance; The Senate it self was to go in a Body, and receive him far at Sea
upon the Bucentaur, and Conduct him to the City with all that Pomp: Now because
it rarely happens that their Dukes upon their Election are absent from the
City, that Ceremony had drawn together an infinite number of curious People.

The Marquis of Bedamar, that soresaw all this, upon the first notice of the
Election of Priuli, sent Nolot a second time to Naples, with Order to get
dispatched in his presence, and with all possible diligence, the Brigantines,
etc. of the Duke of Ossuna; and to prevent all Color for delay, The Captain
had in Charge to present the Duke with an exact Plot or Project of the
Execution, and above all, to account to him what had happened at Venice, during
Nolots first Voyage.

The Captain therefore refines upon that Precaution, and being willing to deal
with the Vice-kings humor, by variety of Methods, represented That they had
not conceived the least reason of Complaint against his Excellency, finishing
his Address with these words:

I accuse the negligence of Nolot, for so tedious a delay at Naples; for I
cannot doubt, but if he had made just Representation of Affairs, your
Excellency had quickened his dispatch; He must needs therefore, have made demand
of money, or something equivalent; howbeit, he had express Orders to the
Contrary: And I do engage to hold Venice yet six Months in my Power, if it be
necessary, to attend your Excellencies great effect; provided, you dispatch
away the Brigantines, upon Nolots Arrival, with the 6000 Men you have offered.

This Letter is of the 7th. of April being the day of Nolots departure.

In the mean time, Renault brought into Venice all the Officers of the Troops
they had gained, that they might Survey the City, and acquaint themselves with
their respective Posts, to the end there might be no disorder, when they should
come to Execution. Before they departed, they had made choice of 1000 Men out
of the Hollands Troops, to be ready to March at daybreak; and that the absence
of this 1000 Men might be less remarkable, they cautiously pick them out here
and there, as they lay dispersed about the Country: And the better to
accommodate this number every single Officer hired what Lodgings he could,
without giving occasion of suspicion, telling their Hosts they were for
Strangers that came to see the Solemnity; and as to the Officers, they
concealed themselves among the Curtizans, where, upon Terms of good payment,
they were more secure than they could be elsewhere.

There remained nothing now, but to frame a Scheme of the Execution, which the
Marquis of Bedamar, Renault, and the Captain, concluded together should be as
follows.

Upon the close of the Evening, those of the 1000 Soldiers, that were come
un-Armed, should repair and furnish themselves at the Ambassadors, 500 of them
should draw up in the place of St. Mark, to be headed by the Captain: The best
part of the remaining five hundred should join with Renault, near the Arsenal;
and the rest should possess themselves of all the Barks, Gondolas, and other
like Vessels at the Rialto; with these they should hasten with all diligence to
transport near 1000 Soldiers more of the Troops of Leivestein, that were still
at the Lazarerto: during which Passage they should Govern themselves with all
the silence imaginable; to the end they might not give the Alarm till that
Party should be joyn^^^ Howbeit, in case of necessity, and that they should
perceive themselves to be discovered, then the Captain should Retrench himself
in the place of St. Mark; Renault should make himself Master of the Arsenal, as
shall be described: and upon firing two pieces of Canon, (which shall be for a
Signal to the Brigantines of the Duke of Ossuna, that were to be in readiness
to enter the Port;) The Spaniards then should supply the want of the Troops
that were to be transported.

In case they should not be obliged to declare during their Passage, then, upon
the Landing of the Hollands Soldiers, at the place of St. Mark, the Captain
should join 500 of those to the 500 he had with him, which the Serjeant-Major
Durand should command; which 1000 Men should be ranged in Battalia in the
place, whilst the Captain with 200 should possess himself of the Ducal Palace,
and especially of the Armory that was there; as well to furnish their own
Wants, as to prevent the Enemies supply. 100 others, under the Conduct of
Bribe, should make themselves Masters of the Secque; and another 100 under
Brainville, of the Procuratie, by the Assistance of a Party they should warily
introduce into the Bell-Tower the same day: These last should remain as a Corpse
of Guard in the Tower, during the Progress of the Enterprise, to the End they
might not toll the Alarm. The Entries of all the Streets should also be
defended by Corpse of Guard, where they should also have Artillery planted to
Command the Streets; and till they could be supplied out of the Arsenal, they
should take some out of the Gallyfoist of the Council of Ten, which was near at
hand, and would require no difficulty to seize.

In all the places they surpised, and wherein they placed Corpse of Guard, they
should put every Man to the Sword; and during these diverse Methods of
Execution, round about St. Marks Place, the Serjeant-Major should continue in
Battalia in the midst, with the rest of the Troops. All this Progress shall be
made with the least noise possible. Then they may begin to give the Alarm, by
applying the Petards to the Gates of the Arsenal: upon which noise, the eight
Conspirators, that had laid down the Draught, and that shall be within, shall
apply fire in several places thereof, by the help of the Artificial Fireworks
they had prepared for that purpose at the Ambassadors, as they had the Petards:
and then they shall Poniard the Principal Officers.

Herein there will be no difficulty, in the Confusion which the Fire and the
Noise of the Petards will bring amongst them; especially they not being
suspected by their Officers. They shall afterward join with Renault, upon
whose Entry, they shall put all to the Sword; and the Soldiers then shall
transport the Artillery to the several places of Importance about the Town.
viz. at Arena de Mari, to the Fontego de Redeschi, to the Magazins, to the
Clock-Tower of the Procuratie, to the Ryalto, and other Eminencies, from whence
they might be able to batter the Town to Ruins, in case of Resistance. Whilst
Renault is attempting the Arsenol, the Captain shall force the Prison of St.
Mark, giving Arms to the Prisoners, killing also the Principal Senators: and
such as are appointed shall set the Town on Fire in above forty several Places,
the most remote one from another that might be, to beget the greater
Consternation.

In the mean time, the Duke of Ossuna's Party of Spaniards, having understood
the Signal which shall be given upon Mastering the Arsenal, will Arrive, and
Land also at the Place of St. Mark, dispersing themselves immediately into all
the Principal Quarters of the City, viz. St. Georges, the Jews Quarter, and
others under the Conduct of the nine other head-Conspirators; whilst nothing
shall be Proclaimed but Liberty.

And after Execution of these Orders, the Pillage shall be free; ^^empting only
Strangers, from whom nothing shall be Plundered, on pain of Death; refusing
Mercy to none but to such as shall resist.

Nolot found things in so prosperous condition upon his Arrival at Naples, That
the 6000 Men Embarkt the next day, under Conduct of one Elliot an English Man.
To prevent all occasion of Suspicion, the Duke of Ossuna Ordered his great
Fleet to fetch a very large Compass before they stood their true Course; but he
dispatched Elliot and the Brigantines by a shorter Cut.

Upon the second day of their departure this little Fleet meets with a Squadron
of Pirates of Barbary, which attacque them; and they being rather equipt for the
convenient Carriage and Accommodation of their Soldiers, than for a Battle,
were extremely pressed by the Moors Artillery, whose Vessels were Yarer and
better Armed: And notwithstanding the great numbers of People that were crowded
on Board those of Naples, much incommoded them in their defense: yet, being all
choice Spaniards, they would have given the Enemy so brisk an Attacque with
their Swords, whenever they had Boarded, that the Pirates would possibly have
repented their having obstructed their Voyage, but a violent Storm came up and
separated them in the heat of their Engagement.

The little Fleet was so Shattered, that they would not be in Condition to put
to Sea again in some time; And the Marquis of Bedamar, upon advice hereof,
finding he could not prevent the Solemnity they were preparing at Venice,
assisted there in Person, in a more Splendid manner than any body: He protested
in a full Assembly of the Senate, making his Complement to the New Duke, That
the particular Joy he had expressed at his Exaltation, sprung from an assurance
that his Serenity would retain upon the Throne, the same favorable
inclinations toward the accomplishment of the Peace he had so lately expressed
at Friol.

After this Audience, he sent to Renault and the Captain, of whom he
immediately demanded if they judged it necessary wholly to decline the
Enterprise? To which, they replied, That they were not only on the contrary
Opinion, but that none of their Companions had discovered less Constancy upon
the disgrace of the Fleet, than if they had Arrived in safety; and that they
were generally disposed to take all necessary measures to preserve their Party
in the best Posture, in expectation of some more favorable Conjuncture.

The Ambassador, who had made this Proposition with much Reluctance, upon their
Answer embraced them with Tears of Joy in his Eyes; and told them (with a
freedom so Emphatical as would have fortified the weakest heart, and inspired
with Courage and Bravery the most affrighted Spirit) That great Revolutions,
which in Vulgar Affairs are Subjects of Surprise, are the Natural and Common
Contingencies of extraordinary Enterprises: That these are the only Trials of
our Fortitude; and We are then only capable to conclude our selves qualified
for great Designs, when we have once stood the Shock of a Defeat with Constancy
and Tranquillity. Hereupon, it was resolved between the Marquis and his two
Confidents, That the Execution should be Respited until the Feast of Ascension,
which was not far off, and was the greatest Solemnity of Venice: That in the
mean time, they should continue the Troops in their respective Quarters, by
furnishing them with all the Conveniences they could desire; and That there
should be no want of money to be distributed amongst the Officers for that
purpose: That of 300 of them, which were received into Venice, they should
detain the Principal among them as Hostages for the Fidelity of the rest, and
return the inferior Officers to their respective Commands; as well to preserve
the Soldiers in their Obedience, as to lessen the number in the Town; lest so
many Officers should minister occasion of Suspicion. That they should provide
the the most agreeable Entertainments and Diversions they could for those that
remained, for their amusement: and to the end they might not be at leisure if
it were possible to make reflection upon the present Posture of Affairs; That
the twenty principal Conspirators should have a watchful Eye upon their Motions
and Behavior, and to oblige the Republic to consent to the retardment of the
Troops of Leivestein, and not yet to dismiss those of Nassaw. The Governor of
Milan, and Vice-King of Naples forbore to put in Execution the late Treaty of
Peace. All that humane Wit could contrive of pretext and apology to oppose
against Reason, was suggested by the Marquis of Bedamar, and put in Execution
by Don Pedro, and the Duke of Ossuna: howbeit, they were constrained to make
daily some advance toward the Peace, in spite of their Aversion.

The Council of Spain durst not hazard any thing upon their hopes of success in
a Transaction so doubtful, as that of the Conspiracy. And France being resolved
to avow the Treaty of Paris, obliged the Venetians to agree that the Duke of
Savoy should dismiss the Troops he had detained in the Country of Vaux, and
that served (...) a Pretext to Don Pedro's slow motions. This difficulty being
removed, the Marquis of Bedamar thinking to make that Prince to decline
Restitution of the Places he had taken in Mountferrat, caused a Rumor to be
spread, That as soon as the Duke of Mantua should be reestablisht, he would
dispose of that State to the Spaniards. At the same time Don Pedro studies an
unreasonable Quarrel, with a Minister of the Duke of Savoy's that had
accompanied the French Ambassador to Milan, Ordering his departure thence. The
Duke, incensed at this Injury, recals them to his own Court, and thereupon put
a stop to the restoring of the places he possessed: But the Ambassadors obviating
to him, how he was hastening into the Snare Don Pedro had laid for him,
prevailed upon him to deliver up at once all the Places he had taken. Don Pedro
was so astonished at this News, that he was not able to conceal his Surprise,
even in his public Discourses. And hereupon it became necessary that he should
release his Prisoners, and deliver up the lesser places; but as touching
Verseil, which was the Essential Point, he made so strange difficulties therein
that they threatened him from Spain to recall him before the ordinary time. To
which he replied, That it would be a dishonor for him to restore that Place
during the French Ambassado^^ abode at Milan, whose presence would seem to Awe
him to that Complement; they therefore retire: and he then declares, That the
Duke of Savoy ought first to make Restitution for certain Lands that
appertained to some of the Duke of Mantua's Subjects; those Lands were
therefore relinquisht; but Verseil was not yet restored. In Conclusion, France
being willing to make a Match between Madam Christina the Kings Sister, and the
Prince of Piedmont (whereupon it was accorded decisively, touching that Place)
Don Pedro began now by withdrawing his Ammunition and Artillery he had there,
but with most incredible protraction.

The Marquis of Bedamar, injoyning him to a yet greater delay, insinuated he
should exact new Assurances of the Duke of Savoy, in favor of the Duke of
Mantua. But the Ministers themselves of Mantua declared by a Manifesto made
public in writing, That they did not demand those Assurances: How ill soever
the Marquis Bedamar relisht this Declaration, the Conduct of the Duke of Ossuna
was much more distastful to him: for the Duke tired with the clamorous
Complaints of the Venetians from all Parts, upon his continuing to molest the
Navigation of the Gulf, and having no other reply to make, Answered; That he
would not be drawn to desist, whilst the Venetians entertained in their
Service, the most implacable Enemies of the King his Master. It Is not hard to
make a Judgment by the endeavors of the Ambassador, to detain the Hollands
Troops (the subject of the Dukes Complaint) with what despair he learnt this
Answer of the Duke: He did not doubt but the Senate that courted Peace at any
Rate, would dismiss them, to leave the Duke without excuse. But the Issue once
more deceived the Prudence of the Marquis of Bedamar: Some Spirit, indulgent to
the extravagancies of the Duke of Ossuna, compelled the Venetians to a
Resolution thereupon directly contrary both to their Interest and Inclination.
It was remonstrated to the Senate, That the Republic had but too much already
betrayed their Inclinations for Peace, in all their proceedings, and which had
indeed been the ground of so much Phlegm in the Spanish Ministers: and if they
should be led to accord also to this last instance of the Vice-King, he would
be thought to give Laws to Venice, and that, instead of dismissing the Hollands
Troops, it imported rather to detain the Troops of Leivestein, that were upon
departure, in Order to the entire Execution of the Articles of Peace.

The Joy the Marquis of Bedamar conceived at this Resolution, was somewhat
allayed upon the discovery of the Complot at Crema: The Ensign, Provencal, and
the Italian Captain, that had been gained, falling out at Play; the Quarrel
came to a Duel, wherein the Captain was mortally wounded; who, to disburthen
his Conscience, made confession of all at his Death to the Venetian Officer who
commanded.

The Ensign mistrusting the Issue, upon his wounding the Captain, betook him to
Flight, together with such others of the Accomplices as he had leisure to
advertize: the rest were surprised; amongst which the French Lieutenant, who
was the head of that Design. But whereas Renault had no correspondence with
them but by an Agent who was a Millanese, and happened to be out of the way,
this whole Design was imputed to Don Pedro. Eight days after this, the Sergeant
Major, who had undertaken to deliver Maraw, having withheld for his own use
some Profits accruing to a Servant of the Commissaries, as also of a Pensioner
of the Republic, these, enraged at their Loss, took occasion upon his absence,
to enter into his House, break open his Coffers, and take away his Money and
Papers; among which were found Letters which made mention of the Design: How
beit, he having no other light but from the Dukes Age^^, with whom he had
Treated, he could accuse no body but the Duke; but he takes a nobler
Resolution; he therefore in the midst of his Torments replied, That he was
assured they would never save him though he should confess the naked Truth, and
that he thought it better to leave to his Companions, if he had any, to revenge
his Death, than to betray them by a fruitless Confession. Public thanksgivings
were now performed in Venice for these two Discoveries, whilst the main
Enterprise became by these accidents more prosperous than before

The Senate at length concluding they had discovered the secret Cause of the
Spaniards so irregular proceedings, and these two Plots being detected, they
proposed to themselves a State of perfect Repose and Tranquillity, and an
assurance of an entire consummation of the Treaty.

In the mean Season, the time of Execution draws near: After the Sunday that
precedes the Ascension day until Pentecost, there is held in Venice one of the
most famous Fairs in the World; the great concourse of Trading people could
give no impediment to the surprise of the Town, and would yield a fair
opportunity of introducing the 1000 Soldiers, who mixing themselves with the
Merchants, could enter and lodge themselves without being remarked: and it was
easy to remove from the Venetian Towns wherein they were dispersed, in regard
that some time before such as had been most pressed to retire home had disbanded
themselves; and the Officers of the Town took now no further care, in
consideration they were so many people that lived free of all Charge to the
Republic. But, lest it should occasion any Surprise, that so great a number
should now Disband in so short a time, the greatest part pretended at their
departure they went to the Fair at Venice, disguising themselves under the
Characters of all sorts of Professions: they observed to lodge themselves in
Parties that spoke different Languages, to the end the better to remove all
suspicion of Intelligence; observing a strangeness and unacquaintance among
themselves.

The 500 Spaniards, destined to the Plot at Crema that was discovered, were
sent at the same time into the Neighborhood of Brescia, to possess themselves
of that City upon the first intimation of success in the Conspiracy, and by
favor of the Faction, that the Lieutenant of the Count de Nassaw had formed
there, and still held out. As to the Venetian Fleet, that was Harbored in
Dalmatia, butin Condition to be able to put to Sea upon the first Summons, by
reason of the Duke of Ossuna's uncertain Motions. The Captain sent to the
Commanders of the 12 Ships in his absence a sort of Fireworks, very fierce, to
distribute secretly throughout the whole Fleet the Eve of the Execution. As no
body had any cause to suspect those Officers, it was very easy to effect this,
without the least observation: they were Ordered to adjust the measures of
their Match, that their Fireworks might take effect, if possible, in one and
the same Moment; and that, in case any should escape, they should possess them
by force of Arms, or sink them with their great Guns: That they should then
make the best of their way toward Venice, and there dispose themselves for a
ready Execution of whatsoever Orders they should receive: Howbeit, they were to
attend new Instructions.

For the time of Execution, the day was appointed to be the Sunday before
Ascension-day, which is the first of the Fair. The Duke of Ossuna had now so
Ordered the Conduct of his little Fleet, that they Arrived, without any
memorable Accident, within six Miles of Venice; It was ranged in two Squadrons,
which were Ordered to keep some distance in their Sailing, the better to
prevent Observation: The principal was composed of Barks of the Built of
Fisher-Boats, to render them less suspicious; the rest consisted of
Brigantines, after the manner of Privateers.

Upon the Satturday Morning Elliot received Orders to depart the next day, that
he might arrive within View of the City upon the close of the Evening; That he
should spread the Flag of Saint Mark; That he should possess himself of some
small Islands, by which he must necessarily pass, being of no defense, and from
whence possibly might be conveyed Intelligence of his Motions; That he should
then boldly present himself before the two Castles of Lyde and Malamocco, for
that they had no Garrison within; and that he should make the best of his way
between them; That he should advance to within Cannon-shot of the City, and
should immediately advertise of his Arrival; and, upon the return of the Bark
that should carry the Intelligence, the Captain would send them Pilots to
Conduct them safe from the Shoals and Rocks, wherewith Venice is surrounded,
and which render the Entry of the Ports impossible to those that are not well
acquainted.

Whereas the following day would be necessary to dispose things for Execution
at Night, Renault and the Captain judged it necessary to hold a final
Consultation the Evening before with the rest of the Accomplices; The Captain
leaving to Renault to represent the true State of Affairs, and to give the
necessary Advices thereupon: but with all their diligence they could not have a
full Meeting till it was almost Night.

The Assembly consisted of the three Frenchmen that Quartered with Renault,
the Lieutenant of the Count de Nassaw, the three Petardiers, L' Anglade, the
two Officers of the Arsenal; The Captain and Lieutenant that had been employed
before Nolot, the two Brulards, Jaffier, Robert Theodore the Hollander, The
Savoyard that had been at the Escalade of Geneva, and the Engineer Revillido.

These 20 Persons being met at the Greeks with Renault and the Captain; and
having retired to the most secret Quarter of the House, after the necessary
Cautions customary in these Meetings; Renault brake Silence: He began with a
Narrative plain and particular of the present posture of Affairs, of the Forces
of the Republic, and of their own; of the Dispositions of the City, and of the
Fleet; of the preparations of Don Pedro and the Duke of Ossuna; of the Arms and
other Provisions of War lodged at the Spanish Ambassadors; of the Intelligence
they had in the Senate, and amongst the Nobles; in Conclusion, of the exact
Measures they had taken touching all things that imported their enquiry.

After having gained the approbation of his Auditory by this Recital, in the
truth whereof they were all thoroughly informed, and wherein they had been
equally concerned with himself, he continued his Discourse in the following
Terms.

Thus my Companions, You have before you the means destined for your Conduct to
the Glory you pursue; There is none of you but can judge if they are sufficient,
and assured: We are secure of infallible Methods for introducing of 10000 Armed
Men, into a City that cannot make 200 to Oppose us; and where the Plunder will
invite to our Party all the Strangers that either Curiosity or Commerce has
brought amongst them; and where their very Subjects themselves will Assist us
in dispoiling their Masters (who have often spoiled them) upon the least
Prospect of Impunity.

The principal Ships of their Fleet are at our Devotion, and the rest carry in
their Bosoms what will quickly reduce them to Ashes: The Arsenal, that famous
Arsenal, the wonder of Europe and terror of Asia! is as it were already in our
Possession: The nine Brave Persons here present, and that for the space of six
months have had it in their Power to seiz it, have so well taken their
Measures, during this retardment, that they conceive there will be no hazard in
Answering on Peril of their Heads, to render themselves Masters thereof; and
though we should sail both of the Troops of the Lazaretto, and those of the
Continent, of Elliots little Fleet, and the 500 Men from Don Pedro, of the 20
Venetian Ships, of our Companion, the great Ships of the Duke of Ossuna, and
the Spanish Army in Lombardy, We should yet be strong enough with the
Intelligence we have, and the 1000 Men that are Introduced: howbeit all these
different supplies that have been recited are so contrived, that either may
fail without bringing the least damage to the rest; they may exceedingly
fortify each other by their help, but can never annoy. It is almost impossible
that they should not all take effect, and one alone is sufficient. That after
having practiced all the Caution humane prudence can suggest, Judgment may be
made of the success Fortune has destined us. What Testimony now can we hope of
her Favor, that would not fall short of those we have? Yes my Friends! They
contain manifestly something of Prodigy: History has no Precedent of an
Enterprise of this nature, where the discovery of a part has not detected the
whole; and ours has stood the Trial of five Accidents, wherein the least in
all humane appearance, endangered Ruin: who would not have believed but the
loss of Spinosa, who traced our steps, would have been our perdition? That the
dismisssion of the Troops of Leiveistein that had all avowed our Service, had
not disclosed what we held concealed? That the defeat of the little Fleet, had
not broken all our Measures, and been a plentiful Spring of new Mischiefs? That
the discovery of Crema, and that of Maran, should not of necessity have
discovered the whole Party? All these Accidents have occurred without effect*
They have not pursued the Track that would have conducted them to us, nor have
improved the hints they might have collected thence. Never did Repose so
profound precede a Calamity so great: The Senate we are thoroughly instructed in;
The Senate is in perfect Security: Our good Fortune has blinded the most
quick-sighted of all Mankind, fortified the most fearful, charmed the most
suspectful, and confounded the most subtle.

We are yet alive, my dear Friends, and more powerful than before these
Disasters, which have been the proofs only of our Constancy.

We yet live, and our Life shall quickly prove fatal to these Tyrants: can a
felicity so extraordinary, so persevering, be natural? Have we not some ground
of presumption, that it is the Work of some Power exalted above the Common
Level of humane thought? and indeed, my Friends, what can there be upon Earth,
worthy Divine Protection, if what we undertake does not challenge it? We
destroy the most detestable of all Governments, and restore so many poor
Subjects of the State that groan eternally under the Oppression of an
Avaritious Nobility. We secure the Honor of so many Women as would one day be
born under their Dominion, qualified for their Pleasure and Luxury. We redeem
an infinite number of miserable Wretches, which their Cruelty exposes a
Sacrifice to their least resentments upon the slendercst Motive: In a word, We
punish the most Criminal of all Mankind, equally nursed up with Vices which
Nature abhors, and with those she cannot suffer without Shame.

Let us then without Reluctance with Fire and Sword endeavor to exterminate
those Tyrants; and when we shall behold the Palace where Impicty sitson the
Throne, flaming with a Fire, rather from Heaven than Ours, those Tribunals
stained by the Tears and Sufferings of the Innocent consumed by devouring
Flames, The furious Soldier unsheathing his reaking Dagger from the Bosom of
the Wretched, Death dispersed through all Quarters, and all that the Night and
a Soldiers fury can produce to complete a spectacle of horror, let us then call
to mind, my dear Friends, that there is nothing pure amongst Men, that the most
eligible things have the greatest allays; and to conclude, in exchange of the
many Enormities under which this unfortunate Country labors, the Disorders of
the approaching Night are the only means to Crown them with Peace, Justice, and
Liberty for ever.

This Discourse was received by the rest, with that approbation which we
usually bestow on opinions suitable to our own; Howbeit Renault that studied
their Faces, remarkt in Jaffier, one of the Captains most intimate Friends, a
sudden transportment; from a most profound attention, to a disorder, which he
endeavored in vain to cover, something still remaining in his Looks of Sadness
and Surprise; which betrayed a Spirit laboring under the most violent
Reluctance. This Renault observed to the Captain, who at first laughed at his
suspicion, but observing Jaffier with some diligence, became at length almost
of the same Belief.

Renault, that was a good Interpreter of the Faculties, and know how to value
the secret movements of the Soul from the least exterior hi^t that escapes upon
any violent agitation of the Mind, having maturely considered what he had read
in Jaffiers Countenance, thought it his Duty to declare to the Captain his
Opinion that he was not to be trusted. The Captain, who knew Jaffier to be one
of the bravest Men living, accused his Judgment of Violence and precipitation,
but Renault obstinate in the Justification of his suspicion, explained himself
with so Judicious Reason and Argument, that though the Captain was not so
nearly touched as he, yet he was at least convinced that Jaffier was a Man to
be observed; but withal he replied to Renault that though Jaffier should be a
little shaken, (which he could not tell how to believe) he would not have
leisure enough by the Morrow to deliberate upon his resolution of betraying
them; But on the whole, that considering the posture into which their affairs
were ripened, there was no room to resolve upon new Methods; and that they
could not avoid embarking upon the Execution with all the hazard.

Renault replied, there was yet one certain way to secure them, and that was to
Ponvard him themselves that Night; upon which Proposition the Captain remained
some time in suspense, but in the end replied, That he could not resolve on the
death of one of his best friends, upon the bare motive of suspicion; that a
kind of Resolution might have very many evil Consequences; that he was tender
of discomposing the minds of the rest, and becoming odious to them; and
considered as one that challenged an Empire over them; and pretended a
sovereign jurisdiction of life and death: That it was not to be hoped that they
could comprehend so clearly the necessity of killing Jaffier as themselves did,
and that not being so possessed, each Conspirator could not but consider with
regret, his Life exposed upon the least hint, or imagination that should occur;
And that since every Man was now under the most Violent agitations of Spirit,
the slenderest Accident might occasion a Revolution, and that in such a posture
of Affairs the least Change was of infinite importance, for that they had but
the two extreme Paths now to tread, that in case they should endeavor to
conceal the Reason of Jaffier's absence, that would beget a worse suspicion,
that he is discovered, and either a Prisoner, or their Enemy; and what reason
or pretext soever they could forge for his absence upon the Evening of the
Execution, being appointed to so principal a Charge, it would not choose but
much intimidate the rest, and suggest melancholy and doubtful apprehensions.
Renault was attentively harkning to the Captain's Discourse, when one of their
people entered the Room with an Order of the Senate which they had just received
for the Embarking on the Morrow, all the Officers of the Fleet; bringing also
with him a Note from the Spanish Ambassador, which explained to them the Reason
of their Embarking.

The Duke of Ossuna could not Conceal his Departure so secretly from Naples to
join with his great Fleet, but the Spies of the Republic got the Wind of it:
But he having left Order that no correspondence by Letter, or Courier, should
be permitted with Venice till such a space of time; The Venetians had not till
then got any Advice of his Departure.

The Archduke being newly elected King of Bohemia, had demanded Aids of the
Duke against the Rebels of that Kingdom, which were drawing together about that
time, and the Vice-King having Proclaimed that he would conduct these Succors
by way of the Gulf, to some Port of the Archdukes on the Coast of Istria, The
Venetians had besought him by Mediation of the Prince himself, to take some
other Course. But he who never governed himself by the current Sentiments of
the rest of Mankind, so soon as they had Intimation of his Departure, did not
at all doubt but it had been an Order to the Conducting those Succors in Person
by the way he had resolved: they were determined not to Dispute his Passage,
which they might have done, because they would avoid all Occasions of a Breach:
they concluded therefore only to dispatch their Fleet, with Order to he upon
the Coast of Istria, where he was to disembark his Troops, to have an Eye upon
his Motions, and to prevent the Temptation the Prospect of their Maritime Towns
in his Passage might suggest. The firmest Resolution Man's Nature is capable
of, springs for the most part from the strongest Imagination of the Danger he
is to Incur, by Virtue of which Imagination, the Soul in the end becomes
familiar with the Circumstances of that Danger, how srightful soever it might
seem at first sight, after Duty considered; but also this steadiness of
Resolution is so united to these Circumstances, that in Case any of them should
chance to change upon the point of Execution, it is odds but it begets a
wavering in our Resolutions also: This was what gave Renault and the Captain
some apprehensions touching their Companions upon the occasion of their
Embarking so unexpectedly, upon the Venetian Fleet; Which News was very
unwelcome, in that they conjectured thereupon they should be constrained to
alter something of the Method of proceeding as they had adjusted preparatory to
the Execution of their Enterprise; nor could they prevent it, by instantly
Engaging, The Night being too far advanced, and it would be day ere they could
give Advice to the little-Fleet, to Order their approach to be within
Cannon-Shot of the Town, in Order to the first Scene of the Tragedy, and before
they could give Intimation to the Troops at the Lazaretto. On the morrow the
Venetian. Fleet was to Sail, and in Case they should Order Elliot to Advance,
he would certainly be discovered by the Boats that would be all that day
holding Correspondence between the Fleet and the Town. The Course they were to
steer proved the most favorable to the Conspirators they could wish, being
directly contrary to Elliot's Station; and upon mature debate, it was concluded
best to give them leisure till they were got a convenient distance. The
difficulty was, to Resolve whether the Captain L' Anglade, the three
Petardiers, and the others that had Charge in the Fleet, should obey the
Instructions of the Senate; Their Assistance was indispensably necessary at
Venice, in Order to the Execution, and above all the Captains, howbeit, his
absence from the Fleet appeared the greatest difficulty; The Character he had
there, rendering him more conspicuous than all the other party, who having for
the most part employment in the Vessels in his own Squadron, he would be able
to supply the want of the rest by his single Authority, and prevent even the
notice of their Absence. The Result of this Conference was, That the Captain
should Embarque with only L' Anglade, whose business together with that of the
three Petardiers, depended immediately on the General, howbeit they were
resolved to run any hazard rather than permit their departure: the General upon
the Captains coming aboard, demanded where they were? who replied he believed
they had concealed themselves in Venice among the Curtizans, together with
other Officers of his Vessels which he could not find, and was so pressed to his
departure that he had not leisure to seek them. The Orders of the Senate were
so peremptory for the Sailing of the Fleet, that the General had not leisure at
first to consider upon sending to find them out, and now could less attend
their fearch. Upon the Captains Embarking, he took Jaffier aside, particularly
to Conjure him to fill his place near Renault upon the Night of Execution; he
superadded the assurance they had in his Conduct and Courage, without which
confidence he had never been drawn to absent himself, and that he concluded his
second-self remained with his Companions, whilst Jaffier was among them: during
this Discourse the Captain observed him diligently, but he charmed with so many
Testimonies of Esteem and Respect they had for him, replied with so much
appearance of Zeal, Fidelity, and Acknowledgment, that would have confirmed the
most suspicious Man living. But this was the last fit of his dying Resolution,
which expired upon his Friends departure: and his absence, whose consideration
alone could support him, now abandoned him wholly to his incertitude. The
description Renault had made of the Night of Execution toward the end of his
harangue, had so affected him, that he could no longer subdue his compassion,
his Imagination added an Elegancy to the Picture, and described in the
liveliest Colors all the Cruelties, and certain Violences, incident to such
occasions; from that moment, his Ears were ever Assaulted with the Cries of
Infants trampled under Foot, the Groans of old. Men expiring with their Wounds,
the Shrieks of Ravished Women; his Eyes behold nothing but Palaces in Ruins,
Temples in Flames, Holy places profaned, and Violated; Venice the sad, the
deplorable Venice, was still in his View; no more the Triumphant as in time
past, over the Ottaman Fortune, and the Spanish Insolence, but in Cinders, or
in Ruins; immerst more in the Blood of her Inhabitants, than in the Waters
that surround her. This funest Image haunted him night and Day, solicited him,
pressed, and at length shook him: In vain he calls up his Courage to banish it,
more obstinate than all the Poets furies; interrupting his Repast, troubling
his Repose, and stealing into even his very Dreams. But to betray all his
Friends, and such friends! so brave! so prudent! so singular in the respective
Talents wherein they excelled! 'Twould be the work of many ages to unite again
such a number of extraordinary Men, at a conjuncture wherein they were upon
rendering themselves memorable to the last posterity: Shall he eclipse the Glory
of reaping the maturest Fruit, of the most exalted Resolution that has been
ever conceived by the Spirit of Man? And how shall they perish? by Torments
more singular and exquisite than what all the Tyrants of of past Ages had ever
invented? Who is ignorant that in Venice there is a sort of Prison more capable
of shaking the strongest Resolution, than all the Pomp of the most frightful
Executions of other Countries. These last reflections, which assaulted Jaffier
upon his weak Side, reduced him to some reassurance. The concern he had
entertained for his Companions, had a little prevailed upon his pity for the
Desolation of Venice, and under these terms of irresolution he continued until
the Feast of Ascension; to which time they had respited the Execution. On the
Morning they received advice from the Captain, who assured them he would answer
for the Fleet; That they were bound toward Maran; and that at the same time
they sent to the Lazaretto for the Troops of Lovestein, they should dispatch a
Boat of Advice to him, which he would await in order to his attempting what was
to be done on his part. They had now dispatched to Elliot the Pilots they had
promised: they had introduced into the Bell-Tower of the Procuratie of St. Mark
the People that had been appointed to that Post, who being acquainted with
those that held the Guard, should stupefy them with certain preparations they
had made, to mingle with their Meat and Drink, whereof by reason of the
solemnity of the Feast they might oblige them to eat and drink plentifully.
Orders were distributed to the respective Officers, they had chosen to attaque
such of the Senators in their Houses as were most to be suspected, and kill
them. To these each had his House assigned him, also every principal
Conspirator and Officer, had his Post appointed him, the number of Men he was
to Command, and the Watchword accustomary: They had also sent orders to the
Troops in the Lazaretto, and to the Spaniards in the little Fleet, explaining
by what methods they should disperse themselves upon their Landing at the place
of St. Mark, which was the general Rendezvous: The Places they were to possess,
the Leaders they were to follow, and the Word also for their conduct. They also
caused the Galley-foist of the Council of Ten to be Surveyed by people
unsuspected, and found the Artillery she had aboard for their purpose. Jaffier
had the curiosity of seeing the solemnity of the Dukes Espousal of the Sea, it
being likely to be the last; and there his compassion is reiuforced upon the
prospect of those public rejoycings. The tranquillity wherein he beheld the
unfortunate Venetians, excited anew his concern for their hastening perdition,
till at length he became more wavering than ever. But to conclude, Heaven would
not abandon the work of twelve Ages, and of so many able Masters to the fury of
a Courtezan, and a Troop of desperate Men.

The good Genius of the Republic suggested to Jaffier an expedient whereby he
concluded he might save altogether, both Venice and his Companions: He
therefore finds out Bartholomew Comino, Secretary to the Council of Ten;
telling him he had a matter of State, of extraordinary importance to
communicate, but that he would first have the Dukes and Councils assurance of
Grace and Pardon, wherein they should tie themselves with all the Religious and
Holy Circumstances possible, to ratify by the Senate what they should promise;
which Grace was the Life of twenty two Persons which he should nominate, let
the Crimes be never so monstrous; That otherwise all the Toiments they could
inflict, should never be able to draw a word from his Mouth. The Ten were
thereupon immediately assembled, and Ordered a Committee to wait upon the Duke
to receive from him the Parole Jaffier had demanded, wherein he complied with
the same readiness they had done before; and then Jaffier, fully satisfied in
what he went about, discovered to them the whole Conspiracy. The Story was so
full of horror and wonder, that it was too big for their Belief; howbeit it
being easy to verify some of the Particulars, Comino was in mediately
dispatched to the Bell-Tower of the Procuratie, and reports that he found the
Guards wholly drunk or asleep; then they sent to the Arsenal, where it was long
ere they could find the Officers that were concerned: but in the end, one of
the Servants afrightned with the Threatenings wherewith they menaced him,
discovered to them a small Wicket which they forced open, after they had long
knocked in vain; there they found them with the three Petardiers, employed upon
finishing the five Fireworks that were destined for the Execution: they were
asked what made them work upon so eminent a Feast Day, and why they made no
answer upon their knocking so long at the door? To which they replied with much
presence of Wit; That the Petardiers being to depart on the morrow toward the
Fleet, and that the General had commanded them to prepare a quantity of
Fireworks just ready to be put in use, and that not having a sufficient
quantity ready made, they had entreated the others to assist them to complete
that Quantity: That the Affair seeming to them of some importance, they
conceived it their duty for once to dispense with the Solemnity of the Day; and
the better to follow their Work without scandal, they had shut themselves up as
they found them into the most retired place of the Arsenal, which they had
chosen for that purpose. Although Comino could find nothing to Reply to this
Confession, yet he was careful to confine them all Prisoners: The Ten more and
more amazed, dispatched them to the Greek Courtezans, but there they found no
body; those that were appointed to debauch the Guards in the Bell Tower, having
fained themselves asleep amongst the rest, upon Comino's appearing among them,
did upon his departure immediately hasten to the Greeks, where they gave the
Alarm so warmly, that upon the very moment Nolot, Robert, Revillido, Retrosi,
Villa Mezzana, Durand, Ternon, and Robert Brulard that by accident were there,
fled, and embarkt themselves in a Boat they had retained at the Rialto Bridge,
for the Transportation of the Troops at the Lazaretto, and happily made their
escape out of Town. The displeasure the Venetians took at their missing them,
put them upon resolutions of visiting the Ambassadors Houses of France and
Spain, without further delay; they therefore made civil demand of Admission,
upon business that imported the Service of the Republic: The French Ambassador
made no scruple to admit them, and Renault was apprehended, and led away
together with Laurence Brulard and Bribe. But the Ambassador of Spain, very
sharply alleged the privilege of his Character, and with much importment
protested against the violence they offered, when he perceived they would force
their Passage: Upon their entry they found Arms for above 500 Men, 60 Petards,
together with a very great quantity of Powder and Fireworks, and suchlike
Preparations; whereof they drew up an exact Inventory, himself being present
mocking at their Curiosity. Upon their carrying this Inventory to the Council
of Ten; a Nobleman of the House of Valiera a rrived, bringing with him
Brainvill and Theodore, two of the Principal Conspirators: These upon
intimation the Plot was discovered, and despairing to save themselves by
flight, the Gates being all guarded upon their escaping from the Greeks,
resolved upon another course, and feigning to discover the Conspiracy, sought
out this Nobleman, whom they had known in Flanders, that he might carry them
before the Council of Ten where they were secured. In the mean time a general
Search was made through all the Taverns, Inns, Lodgings of hire,
Brothel-houses, and wheresoever Strangers might be supposed to conceal
themselves; seizing on all the Officers they found, of Hollands, French,
Spaniards, Walloons, Neopolitans, or Millanois, to the number of near 400.
Amidst these Transactions, two Dauphinois arrived from Orange, Booted and
Spurred, just as they had cast themselves from their Posthorses into the Boat
that conducted them thither; these declared to the Council of Ten, that some
Frenchmen of their acquaintance had written them from Venice, That if they had
an inclination to enrich themselves, they need but hasten to Venice, where
there was a Conspiracy just upon execution to surprise the whole City, and
expose it to Pillage, and that they were come with all possible diligence, to
make discovery of this Treason, instead of being sharers therein: they were
received with thanks, and honorably entertained, and entreated to take their
repose whilst the Senate should consider upon a fitting reward for their
Service.

By this time it was day, and the Senate assembled, and the Marquis of Bedamar
demanded Audience, which in curiosity only was granted him. The noise of the
Conspiracy was by this time dispersed throughout the City, and begat a general
consternation among the Inhabitants; who having attained only an imperfect
account that the Spaniards were the Authors, they immediately beset the
Ambassadors Palace to force it, and were just upon putting fire to it, when the
Guard that was to conduct him to his Audience arrived; who making their
Commission known, the People flattered with hopes the Senate would make him a
public example, permitted him to come out alone, conducting him with all the
Imprecations and Indignities imaginable.

The Ambassador being admitted into the Senate, began his Speech, with a most
angry complaint against the violence had been committed upon his House against
the common right of Nations; he accompanied his Complaints with menaces of
Revenge, so fierce and violent, that the Major part of the Senators were struck
with Consternation, and apprehended he had yet recourse to means whereof they
were yet ignorant, to put his Enterprise in execution. The Duke replied, That
some excuse might be contrived for the Outrage, if any reason could be given
for those Preparations of War that had been found in his House, who being an
Ambassador, ought to be a Minister of Peace: To which he replied, That he
wondered people reputed so wise, should be yet so disingenuous, to insult to
his Face upon a pretext so frivolous; That they knew as well as himself, that
all those Provisions were but deposited in his House, as at other times he had
practiced, to be sent to Naples and Tyrole; as to the Arms, 'twas the general
Opinion that the best in the World were made by the Subjects of the Republic;
and for the Fireworks, etc. the occasion of some excellent Workmen in that
Art, that had been presented him, had engaged him to employ them out of
curiosity: The Duke interrupting him, said, those Workmen were Villains, or
rather Monsters, born to the eternal shame of humane race; and, upon these
words, presented the Ambassador with a Letter of Credence for the Governor of
Milan, which they had found among Renault's Papers, with other Letters of the
Duke of Ossuna. The Ambassador replied, that for the Duke of Ossuna he had
always declared that he would never be accomptable for any proceedings of his:
As to the Letter of Credence, it was true the Ambassador of France had some
time since recommended a Gentleman to him, that stood in need of his Favor,
upon some pretension he had in Milan, and that upon that motive he had given
him his Letter, which was the same they presented to him, but was utterly
ignorant the Republic was at all interested in the affair. The Duke perceiving
by his Replies, that the Ambassador would never want fair Apologies, contented
himself to represent to him with much gravity the foulness of his Enterprise;
and concluded, protesting that they were all far from suspecting the King his
Master had the least part therein: The Ambassador upon that Remonstrance,
answered with all the Emportment of an honest Man, whose Honor is unjustly
attacqu'd; That he was of a Nation to which Valor and Prudence were so
natural, that there could be no need of recourse to Secret Practices, to
destroy their Enemies; That the King his Master was a Prince of Power,
sufficient to subdue them by open force, without the Assistance of Treasons and
Conspiracies, which possibly they might soon find to their Cost; upon these
words he briskly withdraws without observing the least Ceremony; those that
conducted him, conjured him to retire for some space into a Neighboring
Apartment, until the Senate should take necessary care for his Preservation: he
without any reply consented to the Proposition, and boiling with rage retired
whithersoever they pleased to conduct him.

In the mean time the People had drawn together in the Marketplace, to
assassine him, in case the Senate should acquit him: But a Guard being sent to
secure the embarking of his Servants, and the most valuable of his Movables,
he was himself thereupon conducted by some obscure way through the Palace, on
board a Brigantine; by which, under the protection of a good Convoy, he got
away. The People enraged at his Escape, made Effigies both of him and the Duke
of Ossuna, treating them with the same Indignities they would have done to
their Persons, had they been in their power. Upon the same instant was
dispatched Orders to the General of their Fleet, to cause l'Anglade, the Captain
Jaques Pierre, and all the Officers of the Conspiracy, which the Captain had on
board his Ships, to be immediately drowned: but upon expectation that they
would be upon their Guard, they made choice of a Vessel for this message the
most improper they could light on, and equipt her so, as to hinder all manner
of suspicion that she came from thence; Ordering her also to steer a Course
with so great compass about, that she should seem of all others, least bound
from the Place out of which she sailed. Information was afterward made that
the Captain had been in a readiness all the night, and that having observed the
arrival of that Vessel, he retired into the midst of his Squadron, as if he had
been in some suspicion of the truth, and was willing to be in a posture of
defense in case he should be betrayed: But it is to be thought that he unwilling
to hazard the danger of discovery upon what might prove only a bare panick
fear, took some time to deliberate if it were fit to declare, whilst the
General who lost not one moment of time, dispatched two persons on board him,
the least suspicious he could; who appearing without any Arms, were admitted to
his Cabin, where finding him alone accosted him with an air of much
indifference, and stabbing him, threw him into the Sea, without the least
noise: L'Anglade, and 40 of his Officers were served in the same sort, with all
the expedition imaginable, and the like secrecy.

In the mean time Renault is examined at Venice, who replied he understood not
what they demanded; they show him the Letter of Credence to Don Pedro, a
Pasport in Spanish, Bills of Exchange for considerable Sums of Money, and 1000
Pistols in ready Gold: Upon which he replied, That he neither knew the
Ambassador of Spain, nor the Governor of Milan; so that in case any could be
found among his Papers, that led them to those Inquiries, it must needs be that
some body had maliciously put them there. They brought him to the Rack, and
gave him the question ordinary and extraordinary, to which he answered nothing
that was new, only that he was a Poor, Honest Gentleman of Quality and Honor,
and that God would be his Revenge: The Rack was several days together presented
him, with promise of his Life in case he would but confess what he knew, but
all to no purpose; and after having suffered all their ways of torment, he was
in the end strangled in the Prison, and after exposed in public for a Traitor,
hanging by one Leg. The Lieutenant of the Count de Nassaw, the three
Petardiers, Bribe, Laurence, Brulard, and the two Officers of the Arsenal, were
all so strangled, after having suffered the question with the same constancy:
But Brainvil and above 300 Officers were only strangled, or secretly drowned.

In the mean time Jaffier in desperation upon the dismal success of his
Compassion, loudly complained of the breach of promise of the Duke and Council,
touching the Preservation of his Companions: They had not indeed failed but
upon deliberate advice; many were of opinion it should be religiously observed;
others concluded it doubtful in case they had not received any intimation but
by Jaffier: But the two Dauphinois that also discovered it, put the Senate upon
the same resolution, as if Jaffier had not done any thing therein; to which
resolution they were the rather led, for the greater horror, and example to the
Public, albeit much might have been urged to the contrary; they endeavored
therefore to appease Jaffier, by all means possible; tendering him both Money
and Employment, which he refused, obstinately persisting in his fruitless
demand of the Lives of his Companions, and in the end left the City
inconsolable for their Sufferings, which the Senate coming to understand,
ordered him to desert their State within the space of three days, on pain of
death, and 4000 Chiquins for whosoever should take him. The resentments of his
Pity for his Companions redoubled upon every Reflection that himself was the
Author of their Death; he considered by the way that the Enterprise of Bressia
was yet in a condition of taking effect, and the desire of Revenge upon the
Senate, carried him to that Town, where he was hardly arrived when the Ten
having discovered by some Papers of the Conspirators; Troops were immediately
dispatched to possess the Principal Posts, and to put to the Sword such
Spaniards as had been Introduced: Jaffier was taken Prisoner fighting at the
Head of the Party, as a Man that sought nothing more than to sell his Life at a
greater rate than ordinary, who being some few days after sent to Venice, was
there drowned the day after his Arrival.

The Death of this unfortunate Wretch perfected the establishment of
tranquillity in that great City.

The first care of the Senate was to demand another Ambassador from Madrid; Don
Lewis Bravo was soon nominated for that Employment, with Order to depart
immediately, the Marquis of Bedamar giving him (according to custom)
Instructions which were reducible almost to two Heads: The first was, That the
new Ambassador should lowly and publicly blame the Conduct of his Predecessor,
and should affect a Method quite different in his own, even in matters of the
greatest Indifference. The other was, That in all Affairs that should occur,
touching the Rights and Preheminences of the Republic, he should consult above
all things, Squittinio della liberta Veneta, to which the Marquis of Bedamar
refers him upon several Points mentioned in those Instructions, and in terms
howbeit obscure, yet evidencing the Paternal Kindness he had for that Libel.
And now it was decreed by Proclamation, and sound of Trumpet, through the whole
Venetian State, that none should presume on pain of death, to impute the least
share of the Conspiracy, either to his Catholic Majesty or his Subjects.
Thirty Thousand Ducats were given to the two Dauphinois, that had come express
from their own Country to discover the Conspiracy.

Don Pedro finding matters now past all hopes, dismissed quite his Troops and
surrendered Verseil; the Duke of Ossuna generously provided for the Wife and
Children of the Captain, setting them at liberty; and the Marquis of Bedamar
received Orders from Spain to depart and serve as Principal Minister in
Flanders, and some years after from Rome a Cardinals Hat.

FINIS.

