CAESARION, OR Historical, Political, and Moral DISCOURSES. IN Four Days
ENTERTAINMENT between two Gentlemen, very Pleasant and Useful for all ORDERS of
Men whatsoever.

Englished by J. W.

LONDON, Printed by J. Streater, and are to be sold by John Weld, at the Crown
near Temple Bar. MDCLXXXV.

IMPRIMATUR.

R.L.S.

TO The HONORABLE Sir Edward Windham, Baronet.
Honored Sir,
ONe of the chiefest Ingredients, that serves to complete a Man's happyness in
this World, is the right adapting of things, and the fit applying them to Time,
Place, and Persons, as occasion requires. The Sun has not yet finished his
Course through the Zodiac, The History of the Eucharist.
since I had the Happiness of showing my Obsequiousness to a venerable Judge of
your Name and Family, upon another Argument: It happened to be his Viaticum, he
soon after disappeared, and entered into his Master's Joy.

You are now, Sir, mounting the Horizon, beginning to run your Course, my
inclination, as well as the florid Season of the Year, excites me to
congratulate your coming to London: Were my Abilities answerable to my Mind,
there should not a Year nor a Day pass, but I would express my Gratitude to the
Ancient, Loyal, and Flourishing Familys of the Wyndhams and Hungerfords in
general, (from whence you are Linealy descended) and to Your Self (the Top and
Chief Branch) in particular, for the many Favors I stand obliged unto you.

A Person of Quality, and great Merit, was pleased not long ago to recommend
this little Book to me, as a thing well enough approved of by the Curious: I
looked upon it again and again, and found, that though it be little in Bulk, yet
it is very Great in Worth and Value: What would we have but Flowers and Marrow,
Strength and Beauty; it treats of the greatest Persons of Antiquity, and
discovers their spots and perfections; it extends to the greatest Persons of
the times past and present: It universally regards all Mankind: The Famous
Author of it is deservedly reputed one of the greatest Men of this Age. I
freely confess, I find in it so many Notions applicable to myself, and every
body else that has seen anything of the World, and so many Moral as well as
Political Remarks and Maxims, worthy of your Knowledge, Practice, and
Observation, that rather than it should any longer lie incognito, I could not
forbear Communicating it to the World, under the auspicious Protection of your
Great Name; and to confirm my Hypothesis, I find a Conformity betwixt the
Interlocutor and your Circumstances, and therefore do make it Yours rather than
any body's else.

Proceed therefore, Noble Sir, to the Court, and to the Senat-House, Imitate
the worthy Example of the Famous Curtius, and prove a true English Manlius, in
encouraging true Religion and Virtue, and distributing Justice Impartially, in
the Sphaere God has placed you. I have seen several of your Friends treat you
with their fine Coaches, Houses, Gardens, etc. I thought a Book, amongst your
other Recreations, might sometimes serve for a Diversion, Quel ch'io ho jo u'el
dono. Beseeching Almighty God to preserve you from all temporal Dangers, and
finally to reward you with everlasting Happyness, I ever remain;

Honored Sir Your most obedient Humble Servant, Jos. Walker.

CAESARION. The first Day.
Sir,
NOthing can be truer than your Opinion, for Art and Education only cannot make
a Man, of extraordinary Merit, neither can Nature alone do it much better, and
were I to choose, I should prefer a good Education, with a moderate Talent,
rather than the greatest Natural Parts with a Mean Education. I have particular
reasons to be of this Opinion. You know, I had the Fortune to fall into good
hands in my younger Years, and though I signify not much, I verily believe it
had been worse with me, if I had not had that happyness; and I will tell you
what befell me, since you know it already. I had indifferently well performed my
Studys and Exercises at the University etc. and was as well pleased at it my
self, as those that had the Inspection over me. When it was my Chance to be
present with some Gentlemen of my acquaintance, who agreed to make your Friend
a Visit in the Country, where he usually passed the Summer, his Name, which was
not unknown to me, gave me the Curiosity to be one of the number: I cannot tell
what he discovered in me that pleased him, but when my Company were returning,
he so courteously desired me to stay, that I could not refuse him; having spent
some Days in common Discourse, the wearyness of the Country, to which young
People are often subject, so prevailed, that I began to have a desire to see
the Town again, however I had so much Complaisance not to be gone so soon as I
could have wished, but I was not discreet enough to conceal my uneasyness,
which Caesarion observed, and seeking only to divert me, took occasion to
entertain me upon the very Subject. Do not think, said he one day, (having
almost made me own it) that I blame you, it is a thing Natural to Persons of
your Age, who being like you endowed with the Qualities that make them succeed
in the World, are most desirous to communicate them to others, and to make
trial whether their Sufficiency be such, as they believe it. I am only troubled
(said he) you should enter into the World without knowing it, and which is
worse in beleiving it to be other than it is. I shall know it as others do,
said I, when I lanch into it: You think then, said he, that all those, who are
in it understand it, and how, said I, could they guide themselves in it, all
their Life if they did not know it, like blind Men, said he, in an irregular
great House, the forward Fools go by chance, and the wisest grope to find the
way, almost all the World may be considered one of these ways, and there is
nothing more difficult, than to penetrate into Men and Business.

Those who are capable of Reflection have a confused knowledge, that they see
not clearly, and despairing of ever surmounting the obscurity, wherewith they
are encompassed, they lay aside their Circumspection, they rather desist than
proceed for fear of missing their Aim; they Essay and try the best they can
every thing they find in their way, before they trust or rely upon it, and
flatter themselves that in Time, and with Patience in turning round and trying
every way, at last they shall find something, and (if I may so speak) they think
they are fallen into the lap of Fortune: You shall often see great Places
occupied by Men of this Mould, it is such are cried up by the Vulgar sort for
Wise and able Men; nevertheless it is neither Greatness of Spirit, nor
Nobleness of Mind that has placed them in the Station they are in, it is only
because they were afraid of every thing, and began betimes, and from the
opposite to what they are, from the lowest attain to the highest Degree, they
intended not to stay for what they knew they did not deserve, and whereunto
probably they had some inward shame to aspire; these kind of Men are commonly
seen in Italy, and this kind of circumspect close Carriage, without any other
Talent, has more than once mounted Persons unto the highest and greatest
Preferments.

There be others, I told you, that govern themselves quite another way, but
also with as little knowledge. These are persons naturally bold and resolute,
but wanting Judgment; obstinate, indefatigable, violent in all their Motion,
are always extravagant in their carriage, who never alter the course they have
taken, be it never so difficult, they are startled nor restrained by nothing,
and resolve to surmount all Obstacles whatsoever. This kind of Men, having no
Solid Judgment, and going still onwards do of course find many things which
rather impede than forward them, and stopping to remove that they should shun,
they many times afflict themselves in vain and to no purpose, and seldom find
any good Success, unless it be by some unlooked for Accidents, wherein Violence
and Inadvertence are the chief Ingredients. It being Chance which produces
these Conjunctures they succeed sometimes sooner; whereas those, who are
circumspect, never arrive thereunto unless it be in a long Process of Time. At
first they be laughed at, because all imprudent ways are to be despised, and
that nothing is more ridiculous than to strive without any likelihood of
attaining, but however they succeed soon or late. Fortune is a Woman, she loves
to be importuned, not to say forced, and it is almost the same of the Honors
of this World as of those of the next, that the Violent take them by Force.

I sufficiently believe, answered I, (seeing Caesarion stop) what you have
said; but are there only these two sorts of Men in the World, and can it be,
that there are none truly wise amongst such Multitudes of Men? Yes doubtless
said he, there are, but many by one Accident or other are flung out of Fortuns
Chariot before they come unto the end of the Race, or come out themselves,
having found by Experience that they are not fit to run the Course.

What, answered I, then it should seem by your Discourse, that persons of Merit
are more unfit for the World than those others which you have described, Yes,
without doubt. And how can that be, replied I, much concerned at his Words: Is
it not much better for all to have Wisdom than not, the danger is not in having
Wisdom, said he instantly, nothing is more Desirable, whatever men think, nor
so Useful and Universal. Whatever Fortune men attain unto who are destitute of
it, they have only an imperfect sense of their Happiness, and always live
deprived of the most solid satisfactions, which it might afford.

But the Evil is, that those, which have too much Wisdom, have some secret
Inclinations of complying with the Maxims of the World. They do enough to show
the way they should go in, but they do not continue long in it. Can there be
seen a greater piece of Flattery, than that of Aristippus kissing old Dennis
the Tyrants feet, in asking him a Boon: It was all a wise Man could do that
desired to live peaceably in a Tyrants Court, but he should have stopped there,
and not have answered those that wondered at it, that Dennis had Ears in his
Feet. This Action spoke of it self, and needed no Explanation: And so it is,
that many Men, of great parts, lose the fruit of much pains which they take to
attain their Ends with great Men, through their weakness in not keeping their
own Counsel.

Not that this Expression had any harm in it, it seems to me the least of those
which we have remaining of this Excellent Person, and I much more esteem the
Answer of the Philosopher Favorinus unto those, who blamed him, for submitting
without reason to the Emperor Adrian, in a Dispute which he had with this
Prince: And how could he choose but be in the right, that had the Command of
Thirty Legions. Yet you see this Expression, how wise soever it is, might have
been taken very ill of the Emperor, if it had been applied unto him, or at
least it might have made Favorinus have forfeited the Merit of his Discretion.

In this manner it is, that the ablest Persons discover themselves when they
are overcome with Weakness and Pride, and that they cannot strike Sail unto
greater Powers: The inconsiderate freedom of Philoxenes appears much more
pardonable; you know that the above mentioned Dennis having condemned him to
the Mines for not approving some Verses this Tyrant had made, being set at
liberty, Dennis, thinking he had made him more Compliable, showed him other
Verses; but Philoxenes could not prevail with himself to find them any better
than the former, not doubting but his Sincerity should receive the like
Punishment; instead of the Praises which the Tyrant expected, he gave no other
answer than this, to the Mines, to the Mines, directing his words unto the same
Satellites, which had lately freed him. I much better approve the equal
Resolution of this unfortunate Poet, than the Timorousness of Aristippus and
Favorinus, who having prevailed with themselves to do what they ought, yet
could not forbear saying what they should not have spoke. I should rather
pardon the inconsiderate answer of Gondamor, the Spanish Ambassador, unto James
the first King of England, with whom making his Court and discoursing in Latin,
the King, speaking it correct and perfectly well, fell into a laughter at some
slips the Count made, at which the Ambassador said of a sudden, that his Latin
was the Latin of a King, but the King's was that of a Pedant. It is probable,
it was a sudden Motion which this able Statesman could not Control, wherein
I find him more excusable than Favorinus and Aristippus, who made the Replies,
for which I blame them, in cold Blood.

Moreover, I suppose that it might be farther said in the Ambassadors
Justification, that how free soever his Answer was, it was of a good Courtier,
inasmuch as it ascribed unto the King the glory of speaking good Latin, whereof
he was so Ambitious; Yes, answered Caesarion, but it was turning this Glory
into ridicule, and nothing more frets great Persons than to slight things,
wherein they think they excel, how unbeseeming soever they be unto them. And it
is, whereof, the Grammarian with whom Philip of Macedon disputed about a
Question, was unmindful as well as you, when he answered this Prince, God
forbid, Sir, that you should know this matter as well as I.

This Answer, replied I, seems very polite for a Grammarian, and one could not
more cleverly have intimated unto a great King, that he was in an error. But
what resemblance is there betwixt That and our Practice: The Grammarians of our
times are seldom guilty of such faults, and seldom dispute with Kings. Every
Age and Country have their Customs, replied Caesarion, nevertheless, you see by
these Instances, that Pride, being inseparable from those that have much Wit,
is but a very ill way of making their Court. The greatest Part cannot comply in
seeing preferred, before them, Persons not worthy to be compared unto them, and
hide many times part of their Merit to prevent Jealousy in others, and by
seeing Superiors assume unto themselves the Labor and Desert of those which
serve under them. To conclude, to behold Favor with the same respect which is
only due to Merit: But if there be any found, that have the Command over
themselves wholly to Sacrifice their Pride, when it does not accord with their
Interest, those have most commonly some other Failing no less hurtful, and that
is, to be subject to their Pleasures.

This Defect, answered I, seems not unto me so dangerous as the other, there is
Time for all things, and Men would be miserable, if there was not a time for
Recreations. Pleasures, replied Caesarion, are a greater hindrance than you
Imagine, and a Man, that enters into the World with high Designs, has but few
hours to spare, if he intends to setle himself in any Creditable way, and to
appear Expert betimes. Moreover, nothing does so insensibly engage in
troublesome Affairs as Love, for the most beautiful Women are not always the
most reasonable, nor the least wicked, and when once they take up the trade of
Gallanting, they expose every thing else.

These be the Baits, which Pride and Pleasures lay before Persons of Merit, and
wherein most do suffer themselves to be ensnared; it is, what makes them go
astray, or at least stops them in their course, whilst others, not being
detained by these things, go forwards, and fill the Places, which Persons of
Merit might justly have pretended unto. If it be so, they do ill, said I, and I
do not pity them in the least; nevertheless they are to be pitied, said he, and
if ever you fall into any inconvenience of this Nature, you will find it is
harder to resist than you imagine. I mean of Persons well descended, as for
those which endeavor to raise themselves only by the Evil which they do,
having no other means to become Great, to satisfy their Revenge or their Malice,
or any of those Passions wherein their Delight does consist, in vexing others,
and never affording any Rest or Contentment to themselves, such Persons never
find any thing unworthy which may tend unto their Ends, nor nothing pleasing as
may any way hinder them from attaining their Desires.

I understand your Meaning, answered I, at these words, but I cannot believe
that the greatest number of Persons of Merit are Guilty of these two Faults you
have mentioned; on the contrary, said he, these defects are almost inseparable,
those which are extremely vain are not Amorous, or are not so very long. To
Love, one must think there is want of something which one has not, and not be
overwell content with ones self, so that Persons, that are very Amorous, cannot
well be very Proud. Love is such an overflowing Spring of gross Defects, that
make but ever so little Reflection in this State, one shall scarce keep any
good Opinion at all of himself: So that it is very seldom, that any Man is
affected with these two different Extremes at once, either of them is
sufficient to ruin him that entertains it; and it often happens, that Men pass
from one of them to the other. Being recovered from the Love of Glory, Men fall
into Voluptuousness, as Lucullus did, and sometimes also from Pleasures Men
entertain thoughts of Glory, but that is but seldom.

It is pity, said I, that these two Passions, so incident unto Persons of good
Extraction, should be so hurtful unto their Fortunes; for I suppose, that when
they are settled in us, it is very difficult to moderate them; a thousand
times, said he, more difficult than you can imagine, and it is wherein Caesar
showed himself the Greatest Man that ever was; Pint. in his Life, and Suet. c.
74, etc.
one of his Friends is accused of the most Criminal Correspondence in the World
with his Wife, no less than Adultery and Sacriledg both at once, and in so
public a Manner, that he is arraigned for it before the severest Tribunal in
Rome; it was a Person absolutely necessary for his Designs; it was necessary to
repair this Injury, but it was no less convenient not to differ with him that
did it, there needed an excellent temper of Mind, to find an Expedient to
reconcile two such opposite Inclinations, and any body, besides Caesar, would
have been swayed by the Consideration of his Honor rather than Interest, or
rather would have taken care of his Glory, which was his Interest to have don.
He put away his Wife, saying, it was only because she was suspected; and to
show at the same time she was Innocent, he refused to produce any Evidence
against him, that had Debauched her.

If you inquire into his Pleasures, you will therein find the same Precaution;
his Frolicks at Bithinia were only Youthful Extravagancies, which were of no
great Consequence, and could only serve as matter of sport unto some Soldiers
in a day of Triumph. Suet. c. 49.
His Gallantrys at Rome served only to Amuse him no longer than that they were
no hindrance to his other Designs, but when his discretion became suspected of
Treason, and that they would Accuse him of a Crime of State for a Paper he
received in the Senat-House because he went about to conceal it, Plut. in Cato
of Vtic.
having don the part of a Gallant in concealing a Ladies Favors, he made no
difficulty of sacrificing his Mistresses Letter unto the severe Cato, who had
defied him to do it; who no sooner looked on it, but he saw it was his Sisters
hand. Cleopatra her self, whatever is said of it, stayed him no longer than was
necessary to assure the Conquest of Egypt, the great Importance whereof at that
time is sufficiently known; neither did she hinder him (as she did his
Leivtenant afterward) to prosecute the Course of his Victories; yet, said I,
she must needs be more Beautiful then; she was so, said he, for she was but
19 Years Old, but she had not so much Experience as afterward, and besides,
she had a particular Kindness for Antonius, she was the Mistress of his Master,
and what Master?

What you have said of Caesar, answered I, in that he would not prosecute his
Wives Gallant, puts me in mind of another Husband that I was told of a while
ago, which was not altogether so Scrupulous: It was the Beautiful Duchess-
D'Estampes Husband, Mistress unto Francis the first, after the Death of this
Prince, the good Man would needs begin a Law-sute against his Wife, which he
durst not do any sooner, by reason of the great Kindness the King had for the
Lady as long as he lived; and having occasion to prove this nice Point in open
Court, These Informations are to be seen in the King 's Library.
he caused Informations to be made, wherein Henry the 2. and other chief Lords
of the Court at his request testified, in the handsomest terms they could, the
great influence his Wife had on the King, and the strict Amity was betwixt that
Prince and her. But to return to our business, be pleased to let me tell you,
that I don't see but there be as many good men as others that attain to good
Fortune: For if Pride and Voluptuousness hinder them on one hand, their
extraordinary Gifts, whereby they understand the World better than others,
should advance them to better Success: It is true, replied he, for such as have
great Endowments of Mind without any Love of Virtue, which is more frequent
than one imagins; for the most part of those which are esteemed cunning able
Oppressors, are only unjust but not wise, and the Vulgar only think them to be
so, because they attain their Ends, without examining how or by what means they
do it. But as for truly Virtuous Men how wise soever they be, they have in
their Soul a Natural Incapacity of knowing the World, which hinders them more
from making any Fortune in it, than all their other Passions besides; and the
reason is, to remove all our Admirations, continues he without giving me leave
to interrupt him; that the World being composed of Injustice, Oppression,
Fraud; when one is born honest, just, and sincere; one cannot conceive but
after a long and sad Experience, and when it is too late; I say, one cannot
believe, that Men can be so divided amongst themselves, and that the same
things, which appear so fair or deformed unto some, should appear the quite
contrary unto others. Whereas Vicious persons, findgin nothing in themselves
that contradicts what is practiced in the World, have no difficulty to know what
it is, and to accommodate themselves to its Maxims. Nevertheless, answered I,
if some ingenious Person, that I looked upon as my Friend, did represent it unto
me Naturally and to the Life; how strange soever it appeared, I should have no
difficulty to understand it. For to conclude, it is no such new or strange
thing, to hear that the World is corrupt, and that Men are unjust and wicked,
it is what is heard daily in every body's Mouth. It is true, replied he,
smiling, it is daily spoken: Nevertheless it is only such as have made long and
deep Reflections in trial of it, that can imagine unto what degree the thing is
true; and you your self that speak, should the wisest Man, that ever was, tell
you exactly what it is, you would not believe him. But I tell you, I would
believe him: But I tell you, you would not believe him: You are a strange Man,
replied I, (with a kind of concernedness, as made him smile) to imagine that
you know better than I, what I should believe, or what not: without doubt, I
know better than you do your own self. And for what reason, I pray? the reason
is, that knowing the things this able Person would tell you, I can tell better
than you, that did not know them, if you would believe them, or if you would
not believe them: You may say what you list, answered I, you shall never make
me agree unto all your Subtilties, that I should not believe what was told me,
when what is told me should be true. And for trial, endeavor to tell me
something, that you know to be most incredible, and you shall perceive by the
course I shall take, whether I shall believe it, or not. Some other time,
replied he, we will make this Essay, if you think fit; for we have discoursed a
good while, what diverted you at first may in continuance be troublesome to you,
and you may well imagine, that is not my Intention.

The End of the First Day.
CAESARION. The Second Day.
NExt day I rose much sooner than I was accustomed, the new Idea's, which your
Friends discourse wrought in me, would not let me rest, and I was impatient to
have them more fully explained: You must needs grant, that less matters might
justly cause Admiration; no Person ever had a clearer apprehension, nor judged
all things more accurately than he did, he had a peculiar way of expressing
himself as seemed to Charm his hearers; that is no strange thing in common
Conversation. Many do speak very well and smoothly of matters daily discoursed
of, but to express ones self so well in such sublime matters, as those he
communicated to me, nothing seems more admirable in my Opinion. This
incomparable and so rare a Gift was particularly his Talent. I have conversed
with other Persons, that were little inferior to him in Parts, but you must as
'twere guess at their Meaning, and their Gifts were a Treasure, that none but
themselves could reap any benefit by; him that most of all resembled him, and
that came nearest him in handling matters, and for whom he had the greatest
kindness, was so obscure, that Caesarion, who only understood him, was wont to
say of him, that he spoke by figures darkly; and I have observed, that the
greatest and most profound Wits have the greatest difficulty, in making
themselves be understood.

I entertained my self with these thoughts, walking in a Gallery that joined
unto his Closet, not thinking that he was yet stirring, when of a sudden, I
saw him coming toward me: I perceive, said he, that serious discourses are
something contrary to your Humor, I can only impute the cause of your so early
rising unto those we had together Yesterday; a little thing serves to stir up
Admiration in a person of your Age and Temper, but that shall be avoided
hereafter: Come let us go to Breakfast, and let us lay aside our Discourse of
Morals; to say the truth, a good nap of sleep is better than all we can say; I
made a sudden Pause at these words, looking steadily upon him, to look if he
really believed what he said, and if he judged a privation of Sense and Motion
better than the Discourse we had the precedent Day: I may, said he, reply in
the words of one of the Ancients, unto whom one said, that for a Philosopher,
he made but little account of Philosophy. Why, it is even that, replied he,
which is to be a Philosopher, but I will not use so proud an Evasion; It is
neither Contempt, nor Pride, which inspire me with the thoughts, whereat you
are so much surprised, it is a kind of Stupidity of Soul, in fine, a kind of
Contempt of Life, which would appear very reasonable unto you, did you but
know, how I have hitherto spent it.

Our Breakfast held not long, and the Sun was already too high to go abroad,
therefore we returned to the Closet from whence he came; there were several
Books lying open upon the Table, and Notes and Memorials which seemed to be
newly Written: I was not so much Master of my Self, but that I cast an Eye upon
them, and being about to excuse my self, he prevented me, saying, that they
were no Secrets, and if they were, that nothing should be a Secret to me in his
House: Then, I replied, that if I should believe all his Kindnesses were real,
he should tell me if they were Secrets or not: Seeing you are desirous to know
the truth, they are only Abstracts, I have drawn this morning out of the Books
you see, for my own private Diversion, to clear up one of the most curious
matters of Antiquity, wherein I resolved fully to satisfy my self; whereupon,
desiring him to impart it to me, he soon yielded, and being sat down, he began
in this manner.

Yesterday we spoke amongst other things of Cleopatra, but it may be, you don't
know what kind of Man her Father was, besides the name of Ptolomy, which was
common unto all the Kings of Egypt, he was Surnamed Flute-Player, Auletes.
Strab. and Porphyr in Eusebius.
for he so much admired that Instrument, that he assembled into his Palace,
those which professed to be the most skilful at it, and vyed with them, which
Played best, him or they; his Predecessor, named Alexander, being exiled from
his Kingdom by his Subjects, fled unto Tire, where he Dyed not long after, De
lege Agraria 1 and 2.
and having no Issue, nor no other lawful Prince of the blood Royal to succeed,
he made the people of Rome his Heirs, thinking he could not commit his Kingdom
into safer hands; accordingly the Senate, intending to reap the benefit of so
fair a Succession, dispatched also Deputies unto Tire, to recover certain sums
of Money, left there by this King at his Decease, but all these Projects fell
to the ground. Some Tribunes urged amongst other Reasons, that it was of
dangerous Consequence, that the Pleasantness and Fertility of Egypt might
allure too many of the People of Rome to go thither, if once they were Masters
of it; therefore the Father of Cleopatra possessed himself of it, as Uncle or
half-Brother to the late King, which had been formerly practiced in that
Illustrious Family.

There was no Prescription unto the Pretensions of the People of Rome, and it
was but an uncertain Title of holding a Country that had been so well settled
before, unless some Means could be found to make them quit their Claim. All the
former Kings of Egypt had been Friends, or Allies unto the Romans, and upon
several Occasions, improved the benefits which accru'd thereby. It regarded the
present King more immediately than any other: He could not be received more
Authentically for a Lawful King, than by admitting him, their Allie; and
because the Ceremony was usually performed in the Capitol; the Alliance, Pro
Rabirio Postumo.
by this means, became a Matter of Religion, than which nothing could be more
Sacred and Inviolable.

But the more necessary all this was, for him to attain to, so much the more
difficult it was, how to accomplish it? The Memory of his Predecessors
Testament was still fresh in Mind, and as the Faults of Princes, which are not
suitable to their Quality, are not easily forgiven, although many times greater
Failures are past by; the Sur-Name of Flute-Player, which this King had got,
gained him as much Discredit at Rome, as it had done at Egypt: Nevertheless he
despaired not of good Success, but all the Means he used to attain his Ends
proved fruitless for a long time, and in all likelihood would never have
succeeded, had not Caesar been Consul. This ambitious Spirit, who embraced
every thing that favored his Designs; being cumber'd with excessive Debts,
finding this King disposed to purchase by Money, what he could not attain by
Right, sold him the Alliance of Rome, as dear as he would purchase it, and
received for himself and Pompey (whose Interest was necessary to procure the
Peoples consent) near Six Thousand Talents, which amounts unto Ten or Eleven
Millions of our Money.

Although this King did every year raise twice as great a Sum in his Country,
he could not on a sudden raise this, without very much burdening his Subjects;
they were already dissatisfied with him, for suffering the Romans to invade
Cyprus, which anciently belonged unto Egypt. In this Conjuncture, the
extraordinary Impositions he was forced to make so displeased his Subjects,
that they openly rebelled; whereupon he resolved to make his escape privately,
to preserve his Life. He conveyed himself so secretly away, that it was
reported in Egypt he was slain, or they seemed to believe so. The Eldest of his
three Daughters called Bernice was Proclaimed Queen in his stead, although he
had two Sons, but much Younger than the Daughters, and she soon after married
a Neighbor Prince, which pretended to be Issued from the Ancient Kings of
Syria.

Soon after her Father arriving at the Isle of Rhodes, which was in his way to
Rome, understanding that Marcus Cato (afterward surnamed Vtica) was also
arrived there; this Prince, desirous to entertain him of his Affairs, caused
notice to be given him of his being there, supposing this wise Roman would not
have failed, presently to visit him. But Cato sent him word, that he should
come to him, if he had a mind to speak with him; when Ptolomy entered his
Chamber, he did not so much as rise off his Seat, but saluting him only as an
ordinary Person, bid him sit down. The King, although surprised at such a
Reception, could not but admire, how so much Height and Greatness could meet
together in the same Man, with so much modesty and plainness, as appeared in
his Habit and Equipage: But he was much more astonished, when having discoursed
of his Affairs, Cato blamed him openly, for quitting the finest Kingdom in the
World, to go expose himself to the Pride and Covetousness of the great Men of
Rome, and to suffer a thousand Indignities by them. That it would be much his
wisest way, to return aboard his Ships, and sail back for Egypt, to agree
with his Subjects, and that he was ready to accompany him thither, if he
pleased, and would employ himself in their Reconciliation.

Ptolomy, awakn'd by this Discourse as from a Dream, having seriously
considered his precipitate Wrath against his Subjects in Egypt, confessed his
ill Conduct in forsaking his Country. But his Followers, that attended him,
being prevailed with by Pompey, to have him go to Rome, in the hopes, which
all the World perceived afterward, having diverted him from the good Counsel
given him by Cato, he proceeded on his voyage, and repented at leisure for
having harkned unto them, finding himself constrained afterward, to go from
Door to Door, and from one Magistrate to another in this proud City, soliciting
his Business like a common ordinary Person.

Caesar, on whose help he built his greatest Hopes was not in Rome, he was
making War in Gaul. But Pompey, being there, entertained him in his House, and
did him all friendly Offices. Besides the Money I told you he received of this
Prince conjointly with Caesar, Plin. Hist. l. 33. c. 10.
Ptolomy had deserved Pompey's favor by diverse services he had rendr'd him in
his Wars against Mithridates, and had defrayed the Charge of 8000 Horse in the
Wars of Judea. Having therefore represented unto the Senate, the Rebellion of
his Subjects, he desired they might be reduced under his Obedience, as their
Alliance obliged the Romans to do; Dion. 39 ad Fam. l. 1, Ep. 1. in Pisonem,
pro Rabirio.
in which affair Pompey's Faction prevailed, and it was resolved accordingly.
Upon the Proposition made by the Consul Publius Cornelius Lentulus, it was
agre'd, that he should draw Lots with his Colleague, in what Provinces they
should go to command as Proconsuls, when they had finished their Year; and
because Cilicia was one of those nominated for them, and that it was only
separated from Egypt by the Coast of Syria, it was agre'd, that unto either of
them, to whose Lot it should fall, he should be charged with the Kings
Re-establishment.

It fell to Lentulus his Lot to undertake this Business, but before his
Consul-ship was ended, the Egyptians, hearing their King was not dead as they
supposed, and that he was at Rome, dispatched away a Solemn Embassy, to
represent and justify their Revolt and Proceedings to the Senate; this Embassy
was composed of a hundred Persons of good Note, the chief of which was a famous
Philosopher, Pro Caelio de Harusp. resp. Strabo, and Dion. ibid.
called Dion, who had many and great Friends: Ptolomy, having notice hereof,
used Means, by Murder and Poison, to destroy the greatest Part of these
Ambassadors, and so terrified those, whom he could not corrupt, nor make away,
that they dared not execute their Commission, nor demand Justice for so many
Murders and Violences. But the heynousness of his Crimes being known by every
body, it was no less hurtful unto him, than if they had been prosecuted in the
due course of Justice; it in the end rendr'd the King as odious as he was
despicable, and the vast Sums of Money, which he employed in gaining and
corrupting the meanest and most covetous Persons in the Senate, became so
publicly known, that it was the general and common Town-talk. There had not to
that time been seen so much Corruption and Violence used at once about any
business whatsoever; and when there was occasion offered to speak in public of
this Kings Affairs, his coming to Rome was always esteemed one of the greatest
Mischiefs, that ever hapn'd to the Commonwealth; having absolutely completed
the Debauchery and Corruption of good Manners, by his ill Practices and Example.

Several other Ambassadors of Allies being sent to Rome, Pro Caelio de Harusp.
reso
to complain of their Magistrates, were abused after the same manner as those
of Egypt were, but these last having, filled up the Measure, all honest Men in
the Senate showed themselves on this occasion. Marcus Favorinus, amongst
others, a Philosopher of the Sect of the Stoics, was the first that declared
himself against Ptolomy, he caused to be resolved, that the Academist Dion,
Chief of the Embassy, should be sent to the Senate House to declare the Truth
of things, but 'twas to little effect; the Faction of the King joined with that
of Pompey and Lentulus, of those whom he had gained with Money, and of those
that had supplied him Money to corrupt others, acted so publicly in his
favor, that Dion dared not appear, and Ptolomy causing him to be slain soon
after, although the Homicide was lawfully accused, Pro Caelio.
yet he was acquitted for saying he had just reason for what he had done.

Whether this Prince thought he had no more to do at Rome that required his
Presence there; or that being generally hated, as he was, he might receive some
Affront should he stay there any longer, he soon after withdrew himself to
Ephesus, into the Temple of Diana, until he saw what Course his Destiny would
take.

Things were in this state, toward the end of the Year, DCXCVI. of the Cities
Foundation, at which time the new Tribunes of the People entered their Office,
according to Custom the 13 of December; one of which called Cajus Cato, a bold
resolute Young Man, who wanted no Eloquence, declared himself in frequent
Speeches against Lentulus and Ptolomy, with a general Approbation.

In the beginning of the following Year, DCXCVII. an Image of Jupiter, being
overthrown by Lightning in Mount Alban, according to the ancient Custom, the
Books of the Sybils were consulted to know what this Prodigy portended, and in
them these Words were found. If a King of Egypt has need of help, and addresses
himself unto you, do not refuse him your Friendship, nevertheless grant him not
Succors, for by so doing you will suffer much Damage.

The usual Manner was, to communicate these kind of Oracles, first to the
Senate, to examine if it were lawful to divulge them. But Cajus Cato, fearing
the Kings Faction might resolve to suppress this, it being so much to this
Prince's prejudice, without farther Ceremony, presented the Priests, which kept
these sacred Records unto the People, and by Virtue of the Power his
Tribune-ship gave him, obliged them to expose unto the Public, what they had
therein found without consulting the Senate in the matter.

This unexpected proceeding was as 'twere another Thunderclap to Ptolomy and
Lentulus. The words of the Sybil were too precise and exactly calculated to the
present Conjuncture, not to imprint in the People the Impressions, the Kings
Enemies desired, and Lentulus, whose Consulship was expired, not willing to
receive in Person the disgrace of revoking the Senat's Decree, which had
appointed him to restore Ptolomy, went away immediately into his Province. In
fine, a few days after, one of the new Consuls, called Marcellinus, an open
Enemy unto Pompey, having represented the Sense of the Oracle to the Senate; it
was resolved, Obedience should be given unto it, and that it was not safe for
the Commonwealth, Ad Fam. l. 1. Ep. 1. ad Q. F. l. 2. Ep. 2. Ap. in Sir. and
Parth. etc.
to re-establish the King of Egypt by force of Arms.

Caesarion stopping at these words, as 'twere to recollect what he had else to
say; I could not hide my admiration from him, that in so learned an Age, the
most Illustrious Assembly in the World, should give credit to so unlikely a
Superstition. You must not wonder at it, says he, unto me: A whole Assembly
may have some difference upon a Religious score, which it may be not one of
those Persons would do whereof it is composed, were they alone, and Men are
very different when they are together, Ad Fam. l. 1. Ep. 1.
of what they be when they are single and apart. No body doubts, but this
supposed Oracle was contrived on purpose in hatred of Pompey, Ad Fam. l. 1. Ep.
1.
who espoused the Kings Interests, and whose ambitious dealings were alike
suspected and known. Besides, it is most certain that the generality of good
Men, at that time made no esteem of the Books of the Sybils. They were much
admired indeed at the first beginning of the Commonwealth, when the Roman
Ignorance was as great as their Virtue; but since Learning had passed out of
Greece into Italy, those kind of Prophesies were not regarded, and the three
Books sold by the Sybil of Cuma at so great a price unto the first of the
Tarquin's, having been burnt in the Capitol in the days of Sylla, it not being
permitted to have Copies of them, other nice kind of Books, that had been
gathered throughout the Empire, to supply their place when the Capitol was
rebuilt, not being of the same Authority, little heed was given to them; but
let us reassume the Course of our History.

Ptolomy having observed during his stay at Rome, that the Correspondence
betwixt him and Lentulus tended but little to his advantage, because this
Proconsul had many Enemies; at his departure from thence he left one Ammonius,
an Egyptian, his Ambassador there in his stead, and charged him not to insist
upon the order of Senate, that had appointed Lentulus to act in his
Re-establishment; moreover judging it necessary, this Commission should be put
in the hands of some Person of Authority, and extraordinary Interest and
Reputation, seeing it could not be executed by Force, by reason of the Oracles
Prohibition; he Ordered his Ambassadors to demand, it should be committed into
the hands of Pompey, attended only with two Bailiffs.

Two Bailiffs, said I, to reduce a whole Kingdom to Obedience; replied
Caesarion, the Majesty and Respect at that time born unto the Roman Name
throughout the World, may be demonstrated from as improbable things as that;
did you never hear, said he, of that great Ambassador sent by the Senate, the
Age before that we speak of, unto Antiochus the famous King of Syria? This
Prince, having almost subdued the whole Kingdom of Egypt, was going to beseige
Alexandria, in which place the Royal Family had taken Sanctuary, being
destitute of any other help, but the protection of the Romans.

Cajus Popilius was the Name of this Ambassador, who meeting this proud King,
being an Ally of Rome, four miles from this flourishing City, having saluted
him, presented him his Hand in token of Friendship; Popilius made no other
answer to his Civility, but presenting him the Senates Letters bid him read
them. Antiochus, having read them, said, he would advise with his Friends in
the Case; but Popilius drawing a Circle about the King with a Rod he had in his
Hand; before, said he, you pass the Limits of this Circle, give the Senate your
Answer.

The King, being surprised with so resolute a demand, paused a little, and then
promised to do what the Senate commanded; whereupon Popilius stretched out his
hand, and declared the King, a Friend and Ally of Rome; and Antiochus, quitting
all he had conquered, soon after departed out of Egypt by the time prefixed.

I confess, said I, the two Bailiffs are not so strange as this Adventure, and
it had been necessary in this juncture, that this King had resembled one of our
Kings, that boasted his Horse carried all his Council, but if you please, let
us return unto Pompey.

The Hopes, replied Caesarion, which Ptolomy had in him, was the more just,
because this Illustrious Roman was at that time in the highest pitch of his
Glory, by reason of the good success in conquering Mithridates, Rex post. Alex.
Max. Cic. Luc.
the greatest King that Asia enjoyed, ever since the days of Alexander. Two
Tribunes of the People, one called Lupus, the other Caninius, being both
devoted unto Pompey, having in public read Letters from Ptolomy, whereby this
Prince desired of the Senate, Plut. in Pomp.
that Pompey might be entrusted with the power of restoring him to his Kingdom;
thereupon grew up amongst the Senators sundry different Opinions.

Publius Servilius Isauricus was of opinion not to give him any Assistance at
all, and it had been so carried by Plurality of Voices, had not Caninius
opposed himself thereto, as his Office of Tribune qualified him.

Hortensius, Marcus Lucullus, and Cicero maintained, that the former Decree of
the Senate ought to be observed in behalf of Lentulus, and that seeing the
Oracle permitted him not to re-establish the King by force of Arms, it behoved
him to find out some other convenient way of restoring him. Crassus was of
opinion, that Commission should be given to three Ambassadors, which should be
indifferently chose out of the Senate. Bibulus, a declared Enemy of Caesar, and
by consequence of Pompey his Son in Law, concurred also in the same Opinion, of
sending three Ambassadors with Crassus, but excepting all such of the Senate,
which bore any other Office, as Pompey and Lentulus did. This Opinion was liked
by the new Consuls Marcellus and Philip, and generally by all those that had
been Consuls, except Volcatius an intimate friend of Pompey's and Afranius, who
had been his Lieutenant against Sertorius, and against Mithridates.

About this time, his Geatness became suspected unto most of the Senate,
especially by reason of his Alliance and Intimacy with Caesar. It was observed
a good while, that he always ambition'd the greatest Commands, and that, as
soon as ever one Office was expired, he presently grasped after some other, at
any rate; so that having put an end to the Civil Wars in Italy, which took
beginning presently after the death of Sylla, he procured to be sent into Spain
against Sertorius, then soon after against the Pirates; afterward by his
Factions, he caused Lucius Lucullus to be recalled in the midst of his
successes against Mithridates, and to be sent himself in his stead, to command
the Legions in the East: To conclude, after the Death of this Prince, there
being no considerable Wars stirring, he obtein'd a new Commission, to provide
Corn for the speedy releif of the necessities, that Italy was then reduced
unto. The Romans thought it no less glorious, to supply the wants of their
Country, than it was to expel their Enemies; wherefore, this latter Commission
stirred up all the Envy imaginable against him, even those that seemed to be
his Friends before, upon this occasion, refused to favor his Design, in
re-establishing the King of Egypt, Plut. in Pom.
because he had the Commission of providing Corn for five Years, whereas it was
against the Laws, that any should Execute two Offices at once.

Notwithstanding all these oppositions, Ad Fam. l. 1. Ep. 1.
Lucius Libo, whose Daughter afterward Married Pompey's youngest Son, a
Tribune named Plautius Hipsaeus, who had been his Quaestor against Mithridates,
and generally all his Friends so highly declared for him in this Matter, that
no body made any doubt, but that he earnestly desired this Employment, although
he declared it not openly himself.

He had received too many and public favors from Lentulus, to have dared to
oppose him openly. It was Lentulus, that procured for him the Power of the Corn
business, but this important Service, which had incurred to this Pro-consul the
hatred of all those which pretended to this Office, did never a whit the more
assure him of the Friendship of Pompey, for no thing indeed could assure it.
Cicero who knew him better than any Man, and who had the greatest Obligation
unto the same Proconsul, for his being released from Banishment, ceased not to
importune Pompey, in favor of their common Benefactor; and as this Oraror in
this Rancounter, performed the part of a grateful friend; Pompey on his part,
thought best to dissemble his Ingratitude, so far as to make a Speech in the
Senat-House, Pompeius fremit queritur, sed utrum front an mente dubitatur, l.
1. Ep. 14. Ad At.
with all the Vigor and seeming Kindness could be, in behalf of Lentulus: But
there was very little credit given to it, he was observed to compass his Ends
by such oblique Courses, that there was no trust given * to any thing he either
did, or said.

You give there, said I, interrupting him at these words, a strange Character
of the great Pompey, and I could never have thought it, by his Surname and
great Reputation. You mean, answered Caesarion, the Pharsalia; but you shall
find afterward, that Lucan has represented him quite different from what he
was, and that many times there is no good ground for the greatest Reputations.
I confess, answered I, at my turn, if things were as you say, Lentulus deserves
to be pitied; for there can nothing be more cruel, than to be abused by a
Person, that one has served, and to be exposed to the Malice of Enemies, that
one has got by serving his Friend. But I expected however, that Pompey's
Enemies would forbear persecuting Lentulus, when they saw he was betrayed by
him: You are much deceived, answered Caesarion, this Treason repaired not the
micheif don them by Lentulus, in preferring Pompey before them, and their
hatred was no way mitigated, on the contrary they used all means possible in
protracting the business, because it could not be terminated, but in favor of
the Pro-Consul; for not agreeing to employ Pompey in the business, nor any one
else to his prejudice, should a final resolution be taken, they could not avoid
confirming the former Act of the Senate, which had nominated Lentulus on the
terms the Oracle had prescribed, of settling the King of Egypt otherwise, than
by force of Arms.

In effect, the Opinion of Bibulus of granting a Commission about the the
matter in agitation to three Ambassadors, excluding amongst others, Pompey and
Lentulus, out of the number, because they were possessed of other Offices, was
not insisted upon next day, as it had been till then, and there was only
deliberated about those which confirmed Lentulus, and those which proposed
Pompey.

The usual form was that they should first confider that which confirmed
Lentulus, because it had been proposed by Consulary Persons; whereas the other
had only been proposed by the Tribunes: But Lupus, one of those Tribunes,
seeing which way the Senate was inclined, feared, that if they should begin to
deliberate upon Lentulus, that he he would be confirmed in spite of his
Enemies; to prevent this Danger, and to use his last endeavor in in his
friends behalf, it came into his mind to propose, that it was most expedient,
to deliberate of Pompey first.

Most of the Senators highly rejected this Innovation, but the Consuls did not
so, they were ever of the Judgment of Bibulus, equally contrary both unto
Lentulus and Pompey. But seeing the cause almost deserted, they sided with
those that favored Pompey, not with intent to confirm him, but with a Design,
to hinder Lentulus's friends from confirming him, in spending all the Session
as the former had been, in frivolous Disputes. To this purpose they declared,
not as the others did, against the Tribunes unaccustomed proceeding, neither
did they much regard it; and keeping up the Feud amongst the several Factions,
by this dubious proceedings instead of composing differences, which they might
easily have don by their Authority, they did what they desired, which was, that
nothing at all should be don, and so they parted the third time, without coming
to any Conclusion.

The Enemies of Lentulus, for to frustrate his Pretensions, only needed to
stave it off to the Sitting following, which was to be the Ad. Fam. l. 1. Ep. 4.
15 of January, because the Senate could not meet all the rest of the Month,
for sundry reasons, that time being appointed for giving Audience to
Ambassadors, so that no other business was to be heard, until they were
dispatched. The last day therefore of this Session, Curion the Father, who had
not hitherto appeared in the Matter, spoke smartly, both against Pompey, and
against Lentulus. And although Bibulus had almost declined the Opinion, which
he at first gave, of joining with the friends of Lentulus against Pompey,
Pompey's party grew so insolent, and took such Liberty in speaking, that every
one spoke and concluded what they listed; so that this Sitting also was as
fruitlesly spent, as the others had been before.

Yet although the pretensions of Lentulus were still delayed by these
Artifices; the Tribune Cato, fearing yet that it might succeed, proposed to the
People about the beginning of February, to discharge him of his Government of
Cilicia. His Son, as the manner was in the like cases, went into mourning to
solicit for his Father, and his friends used all manner of Endeavors in his
behalf. It was strictly prohibited, to treat with the People about any business
whatsoever, on the Days wherein the flight of Birds was observed; and all
Magistrates having the privilege to observe them when they pleased, Lentulus's
friends made use of this Artifice, to hinder the People from deliberating of
Cato's Proposition against him. A little while after, another Tribune, called
Lucius Racilius, who was his Friend, removed this obstacle by interposing his
Authority, after the usual form, according to the privilege of his Office. For
when a Tribune opposed himself unto what the rest had proposed, they could not
proceed any farther without the concurrence of the People, which was difficult
and rare to be seen.

During these Transactions, Pompey making a Speech to the People about another
business, instead of receaving thanks and commendations, he was scoffed and
reviled; amongst other things he was taxed, for starving the People for want of
Corn, their indignation proceeded so far, that they accused him of the most
horrible Crimes, but especially, they jeered him publicly, at his design of
restoring the King of Egypt.

The Tribune Cato some time after, in the Senate, pressed him so hard, and was
so favorably heard by the whole Assembly, that Pompey, how close soever he
carried it, could not at least conceal his trouble and grief. These two
misfortunes, having plainly discovered unto him, the Envy which all the World
bore him, made him wholly lay aside all farther thoughts of the business of
Egypt: And some time after, Lentulus writing to him in such a way, as if he
believed, he never had thoughts of seeking after it; he was so pleased with the
Letter, that he forthwith embraced Cicero's opinion of the thing, in wishing it
to their Common friend.

I perceive then, said I, it was not Pompey alone, that knew how to dissemble
in those days, and Lentulus knew how to do it as well as him. It is not a
thing to be blamed, replied Caesarion, to wink at the failing of our friends,
when this Connivance may recall them to their Duty; on the contrary there is
nothing more manly and generous, and that was the case, as you see, of
Lentulus. But to dissemble as Pompey did, by his evil designs against his
friend, and to leave no means unattempted to effect them, is the basest of all
treacheries.

But what expectation, replied I, could Cicero have for Lentulus, and what
could this Proconsul do, without employing open Force against a great Kingdom,
where the fame of the Oracle had been spread, which enjoined, that it should
not be attaqu'd by open Force: You are not very deep sighted, answered
Caesarion. The Oracle only prohibited furnishing the King with an Army to
reestablish him: Could not Lentulus have left the King, as 'twere incognito, in
some place near the Borders, and in the mean time with a good Army, go beseige
Alexandria? then when he had taken it, leaving good Garrisons behind him, come
back and send the King into his Kingdom, who should find all places ready to
receive him? and were not this, said I, to re-establish him by force of Arms,
against the Prohibition made by the Sybil; not at all, replied Caesarion, for
in the time Lentulus subdued the Egyptians, the King was not with him; and when
the King was returned, there was no Army, and so it could not be said that he
had an Army given him, to restore him to his Country. You jeere, said I, to
reason after this manner, as if it were not all one, that Ptolomy had been with
Lentulus, or had not been with him, seeing the Proconsul subdued Egypt by
force. You are dull of Apprehension, replied Caesarion, but if you will not
believe me, it may be you will give more credit to Pompey and Cicero. Harken
then to the very words of this Orator, writing to Lentulus, as well in his own
Name, as in Pompey's: It is for you to judge what you can undertake, being
Master of Cilicia and Cyprus, and if you conceive it feasible, to take
Alexandria and the rest of Egypt, doubtless it is for your Credit and for the
Republics, that you should hasten thither, with your Fleet and Army, leaving
the King at Ptolomais, or some other adjacent place, to the end, that when you
have appeased the Rebellion, and placed good Garrisons every where, the King
might return thither. In this manner you will re-establish him, as the Senate
at first appointed you, and he will be restored without Force, as our Zealots
affirm, the Sybil appointed it should be done.

Sic have to, me, cum illo re saepe communicata, de illius ad te sententia, and
autoritate scribere; Te posse perscribere, qui Ciliciam Cyprumque tenes, quid
officere, and quid consequi possis, and si res facultatem habitura videatur, ut
Alexandriam atque Aegyptum tenere possis, esse and tui, and nostri Imperii
dignitatis, Ptolemaide, aut aliquo propinquo loco, Rege collocato, te cum
class atque exercitu proficisci Alexandriam, ut cum illam pace praesidiisque
firmaris, Ptolomaeus redeat in regnum. Ita fore ut per te restituatur,
quemadmodum initio Senatus censuit, and sine multitudine reducatur, quemadmodum
homines religiosi Sibyllae placere dixerunt. Ad Famil, l. 1. Ep. 7.

You see by this, continued Caesarion, making a little pause, the truth of what
I told you at first, that in the main, the Sybil's Books were not much valued:
For Cicero adds in plain Terms, that how strange soever, the advice, he gives
to Lentulus, does appear, all the World should judge of it by the Success; so
that he should only be careful to take his measures so well as to be sure not
to fail in his Design; and if he did not, he had as good do nothing at all.

I freely confess, that I should never have thought of such a cunning piece of
Policy, replied I, being able not to contain any longer, and I see thereby,
Heaven may be compounded with at any time.

But pray, let me know if this Project succeeded. Lentulus, replied Caesarion,
did not think himself strong enough to follow this Counsel, and the Troops,
which he could privately have furnished Ptolomy withal, appeared not sufficient
unto this Prince, to restore him without the Presence of the Pro-Consul.

But there was another which commanded at the same time in Syria, who was not
altogether so scrupulous. It was Aulus Gabinius, one tutour'd by Catiline, of
whom he had been tenderly beloved in his Youth, and his Actions did not
derogate from his Education. He was esteemed a great Dancer, Dion. l. 39.
Strab. l. P7. ad Catilinam amatorem suum Ejus vir Catilina, l. 3. c. 14.
as Ptolomy was a Player upon the Flute; he rifled his own Province worse than
the Banditty or wild Arabians would have done, had they had their Will. But
especially he exercised his Cruelty against all sorts of Publicans, out of Envy
against the Order of Knights they were of, who had in an eminent manner
defended Cicero against him; for it was under his Consulship, and especially by
his Authority that this Orator was condemned to to Banishment.

Ex eventu homines de tuo consilio existimaturos; si exploratum tibi sit, non
cunctandum; sin dubium, non conandum, ibid.

His proceedings had rendr'd him so odious at Rome, that having according to
Custom given the Senate advice of a War, De Provin. Consular in Pisonem ad. Q.F.
l, 2. Ep. 7.
that he had began and brought to a happy Conclusion against the Kings of
Judea, his Letters were slighted, and little or no notice taken of them, which
had never been done before unto any else besides, neither would the Senate
vouchsafe to thank the Gods in his Name. But he grew never the wiser nor better
for this disgrace. There being no more to be got in Syria, which he had utterly
ruined by his Oppressions, he designed a War against the Arabians, when
Mithridates Prince of the Parthians came to crave his assistance, who was
expelled by the King his Brother out of Media, which had been assigned unto him
for his Portion. Although it was strictly prohibited by Law, that no Pro-consul
should go out of his Province, nor undertake, or declare any War whatsoever,
without the Senate's express Order, yet Gabinius made no Scruple of engaging in
this Quarrel, in hope of making advantage of the great Riches of these two
Princes, by their mutual animosities. He had already passed Euphrates with his
Army, to this purpose, when Ptolomy met him with Letters from Pompey, the
Friend and Protector of them both, who was then newly declared Consul for the
ensuing Year, by which Letters, he conjured Gabinius to hearken to the
Proposals this Prince should make him, concerning his re-establishment in his
Kingdom.

Whether it was out of regard to the Sybils Oracle, or that the Parthian War
seemed less difficult and more profitable, than that of Egypt, most of the
chiefest Men about Gabinius declared themselves against Ptolomy, Antonius only
excepted, who though very Young, Ap. l. 5. and Plut. in Ant.
commanded the Cavalry, and was afterward one of the Triumvirs, and an
intimate friend of this Prince.

But the more the business was disliked, the more Gabinius resolved to be
courted, and to make his advantage by it. Ptolomy, who resolved to spare no
cost, to procure his consent, offered for the General and the Army, Ten
Thousand Talents, which amounts, in our Money, to about Seventeen Millions, the
greatest part to be paid in advance, and the rest as soon as he was restored.
It was no hard matter for Antonius, to prevail with Gabinius to accept this
offer, who thirsted more after it than he himself.

Egypt was governed by the King's Eldest Daughter, who I told you was
Proclaimed Queen, when the King sled away. The Syrian Prince that Married her,
proved a very mean and brutish Person. Whether it was his Natural Love to
Riches, or that he thought not himself well Established, he resolved to make
use of his Time. His first care was, to take the Body of Alexander the Great,
out of the Coffin of Massy Gold, which he converted to his own use, having,
till then lain quietly therein, and caused it to be put into one of Glass. But
this, and several other the like Actions by him done, rendered him equally
odious unto the Queen and her Subjects, so that she caused him to be strangled
not long after. And the friends of this Princess, seeing the need she had of
the Support and Counsel of some Person of eminent Fortune and Merit, against
her Fathers designs, they made choice of one of the Princes of the greatest
Fame in all the East, for her second Husband.

He was named Archelaus, Son of the great Mithridates, though he was not
really, but the Son of his Leivtenant. This Leivtenant, being suspected by his
Prince, about his managment of a Treaty with Sylla, thought it his wisest way,
in time to change his Party to preserve his life, and joining himself to the
Romans, he much enriched himself thereby; and also received the titles of
Friend and Allye of Rome. His Son, following his Example, engaged also in the
same party, and was made Prince of Comagene by Pompey, in recompense of
Service, performed by him. Having contracted an intimate Friendship with
Gabinius, in a time when this Proconsul made War in those Provinces, under
other Generals, as soon as he came to command in chief in Syria,; this Prince
went to him, with a design of attending him in the Parthian War, there to
Merit, by his Service, new Favors and Commands under the Romans. But the
Senate not approving this design, and the Queen of Egypt soliciting him at the
same time, he withdrew himself privately from Gabinius to consummate his
Marriage, Strab. l. 17.
judging the Romans would hinder it, should they have knowledge of it.

About six Months after this Marriage, and in the Spring of the year D CX CV
III under the Consulship of Pompey and Crassus, Gabinius left his Province to
the care of his Son, Dion. l. 39. T. live. 105. Egesip. l. 1. c. 21. Jose. Plut.
in Anto.
who was but young and weakly guarded; and with his Army marched through
Palestine toward Egypt. He received all the assistance could be desired, from
Antipater the Father of Herod the Great, into whose hands he committed the
chief Power of those Countries after the Wars, I told you he had in those
parts. The greatest difficulty at present was, what course was best to take
from thence to the fronteers of Egypt, over great and deep sands, full of
Serpents, or by the Fens and Marshes of the Lake Sirbonides, in either of which
there was no fresh water to be had: But Antonius marching before with the
Cavalry, had so well prepared the way for the rest of the Army, that it all
arrived safely at Pelusium.

It was a large, strong and populous Seaport Town, which was, as may be said,
the Key of the whole Kingdom, and the only convenient Haven near the Sea: But
it being chiefly inhabited and defended by Jews, whose neighborhood, together
with the convenience of Traffic, invited them thither; it was no difficult
matter for Antipater, by the familiarity and commerce he had with them, to
persuade them, to deliver the City to the Romans: Ptolomy being transported
with Joy at so happy a beginning, also with rage against the Egyptians, would
have put all that were in the City to the Sword, but that Antonius dissuaded
him from it: The Army, being divided into two Battalions, soon after marched
forwards, and meeting that of Egypt commanded by Archelaus, fought and took
Archelaus prisoner, and defeated his Army. Gabinius might soon have put an end
to this War, in carefully keeping this Prince, in whom the Queen and the
Egyptians put their whole confidence. But he thought, that if he should so soon
settle Ptolomy and with so little labor, this Prince would use some pretext of
breaking his word, and not pay the Money according to his promise: He therefore
thought it better, to get as great a Ransom as he could by his Prisoner, and to
give him opportunitys of making his escape, in consideration of their former
friendship.

Afterward he caused his Fleet to sail up the River, where they met the
Egyptian Fleet, which was also worsted, and then he marched directly to
Alexandria, with his Landforces. Archelaus, being retired thither, marched
forth with his Army to give him Battle. Valor, Max. l. 8. c. 1.
When he encamped and would entrench himself, the Egyptians cried out, that he
should get Mercenaries to work at the public charge, if he would; you may
easily guess what resistance such Soldiers would make. Archelaus, who in all
likelihood acquitted himself better than his Soldiers, Dio. l. 1. P. 58.
Caesar. l. 3. of Sivil War. T. lib. 6. 150. Strab. l. 12, 17, in Pison. Dion.
l. 39. ad. At. l. 4. Ep. 9. Por. in Easub. Ege. l. 1. c. 2.
caused himself [seeing all was lost) to be killed: Antonius having contracted
friendship with this Unfortunate Prince, whilst he was with Gabinius, caused
his Body to be found out amongst the Slain, and to be Royally Interred.

Gabinius placed very strong Garrisons of Gauls and Germans in Alexandria,
under Roman Commanders. Ptolomy being thus restor,d to his Kingdom, caused the
Queen, his daughter to be Slain, and also the chiefest Men of the Kingdom,
under pretext that they favored the Revolt, but it was truly to seiz their
Goods to satisfy Gabinius: The Egyptians suffered all these Oppressions without
Murmuring. But a few days after, a Roman Soldier, for killing a Cat by
accident, was by the common People cut in pieces on the place, for the
violation done to the Country Gods, the authority of Ptolomy nor Gabinius not
being able to restrain them.

Behold, said I, at these words, seeing Caesarion make a pause, a very strange
story from first to last, and a strangely various destiny, of this Unfortunate
King.

But pray let me know, if you please, if any thing else of Remarque befell him
afterward; there is nothing else known, replied Caesarion, but that a decayed
Knight of Rome, called * caius Rabirius Posthumus, Pro Rabirio, Postumo.
who had furnished or procured for him, several great sums of Money at Rome,
when he was fully restored to his Kingdom, went to demand payment. This Prince
told him, he feared he should never be able to satisfy him, unless he would
take the care and charge of his Revenues, by which means, he might by degrees
reimburse himself. But this Unfortunate Creditour, having accepted the offer
for fear of losing his Debt: The King soon after found a pretext to commit him
Prisoner, although he was one of the Antientest, and best of Caesar's friends;
and that Pompey was also in a manner Caution for the Debt; the Money being lent
in his presence, and the Obligations past by his request, at a Country House of
his Near Alba.

But Rabirius had the good Fortune, not long after of escaping out of Prison,
recovering out of Egypt more miserable than he went thither; and to complete
this Misery, at his return to Rome, Suet. in Claud. c. 16.
* he was judicially accused, to have assisted Ptolomy, to corrupt the Senate,
by the Sums of Money which he had lent him to this purpose, that he had
forfeited his Honor of Knighthood, by the Employment he had taken upon him in
Egypt, and that he had corresponded and shared with Gabinius, in the Money that
had been given him. The admirable discourse Cicero made in his defense, and
which we have yet remaining, is an Eternal Monument, of the ingratitude and
perfidiousness of this unworthy King; he dyed in the peaceable possession of
Egypt, soon after this wicked Action, and about four Years after his
Restoration: An Authentical Copy of his last Will was brought to Rome, to be
deposited in the public Treasury, having made the People of Rome his
Executors, he conjru'd the Senate, in the name of all their Gods. (Caution of
their Alliance) to favor the disposal, which he made of his Kingdom to Ptolomy
his eldest Son, who was afterward surnamed Dennis, and to Cleopatra his eldest
Daughter, whom he also enjoined to Marry together, according to the custom o^
that Country. It is also found, that Pompey was appointed Guardian to the young
King by the People, who caused him to be so basely Murdered four Years after.
This is in few words, said Caesarion, what we find upon Record, of the Life and
Actions of this King, Player on Flutes.

For a Fiddler, said I, I think he was no fool. It seems to me, all things
confider'd, that he could not do better in his ill Fortune, and that he knew
to be Cruel, Prodigal, and Patient, for his own ends, as occasion required. But
especially I commend him, for engaging Gabinius in his Restoration, and were I
not loath to be too troublesome to you, I would desire to be informed, what
hapn'd to Gabinius afterward: There hapn'd, replied Caesarion, nothing but
what must needs come to pass. Dion. l. 39. Ad At l. 4. Ep. 16.
The Pirates taking occasion of his absence, overrun and wasted all his
Government, without any resistance; and the Publicans of the Neighbor
Provinces, being able no better than those of Syria, by reason of the multitude
of Robbers, not to convey the Money by land-carriage, which they were obliged
to pay to the public Treasury at the time prefixed, they were forced to take up
Money at Rome, at excessive Interest, to do it, to their great Damage.

The first News that was in Italy of Ptolomy's Restoration, being brought to
the Waters at Pouzzol, whither Recreation as well as Health invited much good
company to refort, it passed no sooner from thence to Rome, but all the several
sorts of complaints and greivances, which were to be preferred against
Gabinius, were, by the parties interested, dispersed about amongst the People;
so that it was resolved, to inflict severe Punishments upon this Proconsul, at
his return to Rome. The Fathers of the Senate were the forwardest in moving the
Magistrates, to be informed of his Crimes, and there was nothing less than Death
intended for him. He had not given the Senate advice of his expedition into
Egypt, concluding it would be worse censured, than was that of Judea; and the
Consul Crassus, who was to succeed him in Syria, having sent one of his
Leivtenants, to take possession of the Government in his name, Gabinius, to
complete his insolency, refused to resign although his time was expired.

But how great soever this affront was to Crassus, having a greater love for
Money than Honor, Gabinius would have soon appeased him; in so much that
Cicero sometime after made a motion in the Senate, to publish again the Oracle
of the Sybils, the more to exasperate Men's minds; but Crassus opposed himself
thereunto, as much as Pompey, and both of them were so displeased at Cicero,
that they reviled him with his Bannishment. You may imagine how this Orator
answered them, seeing he desired no better Subject to insist upon, and that his
reproach rather animated than discouraged him. To conclude, their Consul-ship
ending soon after, he caused the business to be brought under deliberation.

The new Consuls, Domitius and Appius, were not devoted unto Gabinus, as were
the former; Domitius being promoted unto the Dignity in spite of Pompey, was
upon this score his Enemy. Appius was his Ally, but he affected Popularity; and
being moreover very Covetous, he was for compelling Gabinius to purchase his
Protection: So it was agre'd by common Consent, that the Oracle should be again
published.

Although Gabinius had been removed from his Government, from the beginning of
the Year DCXCIX. by Crassus himself, who went the end of the precedent Year to
take possession of it, yet he made no have in coming to Rome, he would let the
Peoples anger toward him to abate, and give time to his Friends to gain and
corrupt his Judges and Accusers, by the vast Sums of Money he had sent before
him to that purpose; but hearing that his delay rather exasperated Men's minds
against him than not, and that the Tribunes, displeased with his Stratagems,
resolved to proceed to his Condemnation in his absence; at last he set
forwards, and on the way gave out that he was going to Rome, to demand a
public Triumph of the Senate for his two Expeditions into Judea and Egypt.

And in effect, being arrived near Rome the 19 of September, he entered not
into the City to rights, but stayed some Miles off, as the Generals were wont
to do, that pretended unto the Triumph, which was no sooner known, but he was
accused of three several Crimes, in the usual form of Justice. First against
the State, for restoring the King of Egypt. As. in Pison ad Q. F. l. 3. Ep.
1.2. and 3.
Next of Interest, for the great Oppressions committed by him in Syria. And
Lastly, For buying of voices, when he was made Consul 5 Years before.

These Accusations, having soon made him relinquish the pretension of a
Triumph, he came to Rome to defend himself the 27 of September, privately in the
night time; and in the poorest Equipage, that ever Proconsul did. Next day he
appeared, as he was assigned before the Praetor, who was to be the Chief Judge
as to the Crime of State, he was a Person of known Worth and Integrity. Ten
days after, he appeared before the Senate, to give an account of his Government;
but intending to go out after he had done it in a slight manner, he was stayed
by the Consuls, and at the same time the Publicans of Syria were called into
the Senate, that he might answer their Complaints. Cicero speaking in their
behalf, Gabinius defended himself by calling him Exile, with a low voice. But
the whole Senate at this word rising up as 'twere with one accord, imposed
silence on him, the Publicans testified no less displeasure, and the Consul
Appius, having also declared himself an Accuser, named the Witnesses and
Accessorys of Gabinius's Crimes, so that he could not answer a word.

Four days after he presented himself before the People, the concourse was so
great, and the first resentment of his horrible Crimes so odious, that he had
like to be stifled or torn to pieces. Especially a Tribune of the People, Cajus
Memmius accused him with so much vehemence, and to so general a liking, that he
could not avoid being condemned to Death, or atl east to perpetual
Imprisonment, but that his Son, whom I mentioned to you before, being there
present, supplicated Memmius to have compassion of him: But this Tribune
transported with Pride, at the good success of his enterprise, let the
unfortunate Son lie at his feet, Valor. Max. l. 8. c. 1.
without taking the least notice of him: The People being moved with some
tenderness at such a dutiful Object, the favourableness of the conjuncture gave
courage to another Tribune, which he dared not do before, also being gained by
Gabinius, to spoke in his behalf, and made the Officer free him, that had
already seized on his Body.

The People not desiring to prevent the ordinary Judges in this Cause, as they
were wont sometimes to do; it was sometime after debated before them, and the
Assembly was no less before the Praetors Tribunal, than it had been in the
public place: They were to the number of Seventy, chosen partly out of the
Senate, partly out of the order of Knights, and of the Tribunes of the Treasury.
There were several accusers; but he that spoke in the behalf of the rest,
performed it so coldly, that every body suspected he was corrupted by Gabinius,
as also the Judges that favored him. Pompey neglected no opportunity of
serving him; he used all his endeavors to reconcile him to Cicero, and even to
oblidge this Orator, to plead his cause, but to no purpose, and Cicero could
not dispense himself, from Witnessing against him.

It was urged in his behalf, that it was the interest of the Commonwealth, to
expel Archelaus out of Egypt; whose Fleet hindered the Navigation and Commerce
of Rome, and the adjacent Seas, and gave all sorts of assistance to Pirates, who
exercised all manner of Cruelties upon the Subjects of the Republic. It was
also alleged, this expedition was permitted unto Gabinius, by a Law whereof
we have no Record; that at the worst, the Oracle did not relate the present
business, and that the matter happened long before, in the Person of a former
King of Egypt, whereof I made mention, who had also been expelled out of his
Kingdom, and prayed assistance of the Senate. But if the Oracle meant his
Successor, Dion. l. 39. Ad At. l. 4. Ep. 16. l. 3. Ep. 4.
the Sybil not having expressed what Punishment they deserved, that should
restore this Prince, by force of Arms against its Prohibition, no body has
right to determine it.

But with all these Evasions Gabinius durst not have contested, were it not for
a rumor spread abroad, that Pompey was to be made Dictator: This Report was not
without some color. The Election of Consuls being usual about the beginning
of August, was deferred until toward the end of October, by several slights
and interests, that nothing regarded the affairs of Gabinius; and these
hindrances not being likely to remove of themselves, it was believed recourse
must be had to the means used at all times formerly in the like occasions,
which was to create a Dictator, whose unlimited power, was only able to reduce
all persons to their Duty.

You may easily believe on this occasion, no body could more justly pretend to
it than Pompey, although it is true, the Tribunes did not propose it in due
form, but several Months after. Dion. l. 40.
The Rumor that was spread abroad of it before hand, served to intimidate the
Judges, the greater part whereof were Persons much inferior to him; and it was
something strange, that there were found, in this Conjuncture thirty-two, that
had the honesty and courage to condemn Gabinius, against Thirty-eight that
declared him Innocent. Ad At. l. 4. Ep. 16. l. 8. Ep. 14.
Domitius Calvinius amongst others, (through a partial Ostentation, the like
whereof was never seen,) acquitted the Criminal by open voice, whereas he
should have given his Judgment by Scrutiny, as others did. Another rose off the
Bench, in sight of all the People, before the Session was ended, as soon as
ever the Voices were taken, to be the first carrier of the News to Pompey.

See here, said I, at these words, a happy Villian. Don't make too much have,
said Caesarion, and stay till the end, seeing you desire to know all. It wanted
not much, but that the People had tore all the Judges to pieces, at the first
motion of their Rage. One of Gabinius's freemen, that bore some command under
him in Syria, being accused as one of his Accessaries, bore also the
Punishment: This Wretches business was heard an hour after, before other
Judges, he was condemned with the greater severity, for Rage, that his Master
had been accquitted and discharged.

Dureing these Transactions the River Tyber overflowed its banks on a sudden,
with so great violence, Dion. l. 39.
that it overthrew many Houses and swept away many Persons, as well at Rome, as
in the adjacent parts. The People supposed there was something extraordinary in
this Accident, and looked upon it, as a Judgment from Heaven upon them, for
Gabinius and his Judges, having slighted the Orracle of the Sibyls. I told you,
he stood accused, for three several Crimes: Being therefore accquitted for that
against the State, he was prosecuted for his Extortions, by the same Tribune
Memmius, which had so sharply prosecuted him before the People; by Tiberius
Nero, Father of the Emperor of that name; and by Cajus and Lucius, Brothers to
the same Antonius, that was afterward Tryumvir, and that commanded his
Cavalry. The great Cato (who, I told you had the intervew with Ptolomey at
Rhodes) presided in this Judgment in quallity of Praetor. He had been
indisposed, and for that reason Judgment was deferred, the Judges were also
changed, but Gabinius thought himself so fully accquitted, that he took not the
pains nor trouble, to gain them.

Pompey having still the charge of the Corn business, was absent from Rome,
repairing the damages made by the Inundation of the River, which had ravadged,
destroyed, and spoiled, vast quanteties of Grain, and the most fertile Feilds
of all Italy. But receiving advice of the danger Gabinius was in, he came as
near the City as he could, to try to save him once more, and his Office not
permitting him to enter into the City, he assembled the People without the
Walls, and harrangu'd them to that effect. He publicly read Letters from
Caesar, wherein he recommended Gabinius unto him, with all the affection that
could be, and for the last Remedy, he prevailed with Cicero, Dion. 39 Valor.
Max. l. 4. c. 2.
to plead for him; for which this Orator was surnamed Turn-coate to reproach
either his weakness, or inconstancy.

I perceive then, said I, at these words, Pompey was as zealous a Friend, as
Cisero was a weak Enemy. Pompey, replied Cesarion, had, as all ambitious Men
have, the vulgar Maxim, which almost comprehends the skill of the Pollititians
of these times; to be a good Friend and a cruel Enemy, without any Judgment in
choosing, Friends or Enemies. But neither he nor they, need be obliged, to
venture so far for their Friends, if there were none but good Men. It Is only
for bad Men, that these extraordinary endeavors of Credit and Authority need
be used; and how bad a business soever befalls an honest Man, the regular forms
are always sufficient, to bring him off. So that this resolvedness, and great
zeal, which is shown for defending and protecting vicious Persons, is so far
from being Praiseworthy, that nothing is more odious, and detestable; seeing
that in effect, it has only selfinterest or Vanity for its Motive; and
Injustice for its Scope.

Beware of Digression, answered I, and pray let me know, if Gabinius was
condemned or accquitted, this second time. He was condemned, said Caesarion, to
perpetual Bannishment, and his goods confiscated, notwithstanding the power of
Pompey, and Eloquence of Cicero. But Caesar esteeming him one of the best
Commanders in Rome, making himself Master of the Republic six Years after, he
recal'd him out of Bannishment, and gave him the Command of a little Army in
Illyria, Caesar de Bell. Allex. App. in Illiric.
where he was routed by the Barbarians of the Country, and being forced to fly
to Salonia, he there ended his days, not long after.

The End of the Second Day.
CAESARION. The Third Day.
IF you did not know as well as I, that Nature had endowed your Friend, with
two of the most incomparable Talents in the World, I mean, a prodigious Memory,
and an excellent Judgment; you would scarce believe, that he recited to me
extempore, the Histories that I have related to you. Although I had heard much
of his great Accomplishments, yet I was not a little surprised, for he looked
not past three or four times, on his Books and Papers, to make so long a
Narration, and he had all he said, as ready in his mind, as if he related to me
his own particular concerns. I was only desirous to be satisfied, where 'twas,
that he read and found so many considerable things, as he mentioned to me, and
which I do not remember, to have Read in the Greek nor Roman Historians, which
wrote of those Times. His demeanor in all things, were very modest and
obliging: meeting him the next day, as I walked upon a Terrass that fronted his
House toward the Valley, I could not forbear asking him, and he soon answered
me, putting a Book into my hand, that he was Reading, as if he should say, that
'twas from thence he collected all, that I thought he had invented in his own
Brain. I opened the Book very hastily, but my curiosity was not much satisfied,
when I saw it was nothing but Cicero's Epistles.

As the Reading of those Epistles at the University, made no great impression
on my mind, so I was the more surprised at what I saw; he began to laugh at my
astonishment, and said unto me, that I should not be troubled, that it was not
me he blamed but my Tutors, because it was their fault more than mine, if I had
not rellish'd the sweetness of the most precious remains of Antiquity. That he
had often admired in himself, how those Docters could pretend to know, the nice
and finest things in the World, when they did not understand them, and that I
should be no less surprised, if I would but Read over those Letters with him,
that had been so irksom to me heretofore. You may well believe, I took him at
his word. Having therefore opened the first Book of those to Atticus, he Read
out two or three of them, which treated of the same Matter, and as I intimated
to him, the great desire I had to hear him on this Subject, he delayed
sattisfying me no longer, but till such time, as we retired into the Closet,
where he so pleasantly entertained me, the Day before.

What delights me most of all, said he, of the practice of the Ancients, is the
regularity of their Friendship, it is the only thing wherein they most of all
Excel us, and wherein we least strive to equal them. On the contrary, should
any one at this time practice this regularity, he would be esteemed Ridiculous;
the best of his friends would admire him, for the infinite advantages, of being
beloved after this manner, whilst others would impudently deride it. But all
in general would look upon him as a friendly Tyrant, if he expected they should
be as regular toward him, as he is punctual to them.

It was not so that Men lived in Greece, in the days of Zenophon, this
Regularity so little practiced amongst us, was then looked upon as an
indispensable Duty: All aspired unto it, as a quality absolutely necessary for
every body to have; they boasted of it, as of the most shining Virtues. They
Dyed, said this Illustrious Athenian, making the Elogy of the Greek Captains
his companions, that had been perfidiously Massacred by the Treacherous
Persians. Zen. Ret. of 10. m. l. 2.
They dyed, having lived without reproach, either in War or Friendship. Who in
our times, dare use the like comendations, in the Funeral Solemnities of our
Generals?

There seems to be as much Heat and Vigor in Friendship now a days, as there
was formerly, but there is not so much Tenderness. It has produced in our
days, Actions of as great Fidelity, Liberality, and Courage as ever; but I
question, if there can be found, so many instances of Gentleness and Patience,
so frequently seen amongst the Ancients, for the sorrows, and even the unjust
reproaches of their Friends? for the modest complacency, which they showed for
the boundless Passions, of them whom they loved, and to conclude, the same
punctuality, the same regard, and the same concernedness, for all that regards
our Friends, as we would, that they should have for Us.

It may be, replied I, it is not because we Love less than they did formerly,
but only we have less Knowledge and Judgment. You need only, said Caesarion, but
compare the Lovers of our times, with the Friends, to discern the Invalidness
of your Answer. Lovers, do they not daily do for their Mistresses, that which
true Friendship should do for his Friend? Have they not for them all the Care,
Diligence, and Respect that can be desired? A Soul truly touched with a lively
Simpathy, never wants Motives to follow its Inclinations; there is common
Effects of this seen in vulgar Persons. They seem to be inspired with some new
Genius, when they begin to be in Love, they appear Witty beyond their Natural
Endowments, especially in what regards their Passion. What Love Operates in
mean Souls, not Friendship do much more, in Persons of a Nobler make, if it be
Sincere? If it does not at all times discharge its Function, may it not well be
concluded that it is not Sincere, and that it is kept up in the occasions wherein
it Opperates, by some other Motive, to which it only lends it is Name.

But now it is high time to tell you, wherefore I took occasion to make those
reflections; Atticus having been Arbitrat in a certain Business, of a Friend
both of his and Cicero's, this Friend was not very well pleased with the
Judgment made by Atticus, in the matter. And by what follows, it seems he had
no great cause to be sattisfy'd. For Atticus going into Greece a little after,
he wrote to Cicero upon this Subject in these Terms, as soon as he was arrived
at Athens. If any body be displeased with me, it is your part to appease them.
It was needless, answered Cicero, that you should bid me do it, for I
endeavored it before; this party is very much offended at you, I omitted
nothing that could be said on this subject, but I did not think it convenient
to press him any farther, until I knew your mind, whether you desire it or not?

Quod scribis, etiam si cujus animus in te esset offensior, a me recolligi
oportere. Quid dicas? Neque id neglexi. Sed est miro quodam modo affectus Ego
autem quae dicenda fuerunt de te non preterii. Quid autem contendendem esset,
ex tua putabam voluntate statuere oportere Ad Atticum. l. 1. Fp. 5.

You will grant that any body elce besides Gicero, would not have stayed for a
new Order, and would have thought themselves sufficiently empowered, by what
Atticus had writ, to deal with their common Friend, perhaps more than Atticus
would have desired. This daily falls out, because most Men rather aspire after
Commendation, than to serve those well that do Employ them, in concerning
themselves only so far as they have a mind; nothing is more dangerous, than to
seek this kind of of Servise of ones Friend, for most do more than they are
desired, and which is worst of all, one dares not complain, for fear of being
blamed by the World, because of their pretended good meaning, which in my
Judgment, is the most frivolous excuse in the World. For every body easily
perceives, when they pass the bounds of their commission, and one questions in
passing it, if what we do, will be well resented or not? and in this respect,
it is a kind of perfidiousness to do it. Because one runs a Risque of
disobliging a Friend, in seeming to go about to serve him. Quam si ad me per
scripseris intelliges, me neque diligentiorem esses, voluisse quam tu esses
neque negligentiorem fore quam tu velis. Ille noster amicus sane tibi iratus
est. Hoc si quanti tu estimes, sciam tum quid mihi elaborarndum sit scire
possim. 7.


Cicero was too brave a Person, to fall into such an Error. If you write unto
me, continues he, how far I shall proceed you, shall find, that I will not be
more hasty in accommodating you than you desire, nor more backward than you
would have me be. And in another Letter writ a little after, not having
received answer unto the former. * Our Friend, says he, again, is very angry
with with you; if you let me know how much you care for it, I can tell what
means to use to appease him.

He knew very well, that how specious soever the pretext of Reconciling Friends
is, yet he ought not to pass the intention of him, that Engadg'd him in the
business, and desired the accommodation, on such and such Terms, but not on any
Terms whatsoever. He had not the Ambition so common amongst us, to pretend to
impose upon his Friends, in what they liked or liked not, but rested satisfied
to reconcile them. Most Men do now a days advance themselves into Pedagogues,
and affect a higher degree of Wisdom and Knowledge, which is the greatest Bane
of true Friendship.

How many be there, that Act in a Business according to the mind of him that
Employ them, when nevertheless, they think they ought to Act quite contrary? It
were something, if in this Consideration they would desire wholly to be excused,
but there is very few, that Act with such freedom. On the contrary, either to be
thought not to forsake their Friends in their necessity, or that they fear the
business being done by others, it may have success contrary to their advice,
the most part continue to interpose, even when they are not desired, and
pretending to govern themselves as they were entrusted, which yet they approve
not off, they endeavor what they can under hand, to let the business fall,
thereby the better to Justify their own Sentiments. And if it be discovered
that they have Acted contrary to directions, and to what they promised, they
never want Reasons to show, that one should approve of their Conduct; but this
is not much to the purpose: Or if they do not the quite contrary, of what they
were desired, they satisfy themselves barely, with acting only so far, as that
it might be said, that they employed themselves in the business, and how ill
soever they acted, they think themselves discharged in saying, that one can
never mind every thing, or that they thought they did all for the better.

True Friendship is never reduced to such a nonplus, it is a continual Spring
of Industry, it can do nothing by halves, and it holds that for ill done, which
might be better done, but more especially it appears admirable in business,
wherein Honor and Interest are concerned, not to explain it any farther.
Nothing is easier, then to make him pass by what one has no Mind to discover,
and although one expose not themselves by declaring ones Mind, he is not at all
displeased at it, and he acts no less Diligence, than if one had fully and
freely committed ones self to his discretion. Besides, he is not satisfied with
himself, no farther than he satisfy's those for whom he acts: he cannot admit
of any other Interest in what he does, but that of his Friend; he neglects
himself the better and more perfectly to understand his Friends Design and
Passion. Therefore it falls out, that many times he knows better than they,
what they would, and what they would not have done, he unridles their opposite
thoughts wherewith they are most agitated, and discerns sometimes better than
they do, what they most desire, and what at last shall be most predominant.

False Friendship, on the contrary, is always dissatisfied with the manner that
it is employed, it is always self-conceited; it never fails of making some
private Interest in the business wherein it is employed, how little soever it
regards him; it has always some private End, that it dares not own; It holds
with the Letter when it should with the Sense, and commonly seeks some contrary
meaning, when it is necessary to keep to the Literal Sense. Besides it has ever
either ill Read or ill Heard, and things are never plainly enough expressed.

One cannot, said I, ramble more pleasantly than you do, for we have almost
lost sight of Atticus; and to say the truth, I would willingly hear farther of
him. Cicero, repy'd Caesarion, received Letters from him, soon after the Letter
I formerly mentioned, and he replied to him in these Terms. I promise you to
pacify our Friend, and it may be engage him also, to be wholly yours. I
endeavored it before of my own accord, but now I perceive by your Letter, that
you earnestly desire it, I will employ my self more diligently therein, and
will press him more earnestly than I did. You need not doubt but he is highly
displeased with you, but as I know that he has no great reason for it, I dare
undertake to pacify and to dispose him as I list.

Tibi de nostro amico placando, aut etiam plane restituendo polliceor. Quod
ego, etsi mea sponte ante faciebam, eo nunc tamen, and agam studiosius, and
contendam ab illo vehementius, quod tamen ex Epistola voluntatem ejus rei tuam
perspicere videor. Hoc te intelligere volo, pergraviter illum esse offensum.
Sed quia nullam video gravem subesse causam, magnopere confido illum fore in
officio, and in nostra potestate. l. 1. Ep. 1. ad Atticum.

You may see what were Cicero's hopes, but he was mistaken, and you need not be
surprised at it, for there is no body but may be mistaken, if they do not fully
know the ground and bottom of a Business, and one is only bound to judge aright
of what one is informed; after having used all endeavors, says he to Atticus,
very far from settling you in his thoughts as you had been before, I could not
so much as gather from him, the cause of his Strangeness. For whatsoever he
says of your Arbitration, and of the other things, I knew before wherewith he
was dissatisfied at your departure, there is something else he sticks at more
than all that; the which neither your Letters, nor my Mediation cannot
reconcile, as well as you may do your self at your return hither, not only by
Conversation, but also by your Obliging ways, that is, if you think it worth
your while. And do not think strange, that I dare not promise any Kindness from
him, having intimated to you in my last, that I used all my endeavors. You
cannot believe, how much stranger he appears to me than formerly, and persists
more in his Obstinacy.

Cum omnia fecissem, non modo eam voluntatem ejus, quae fuerat erga te,
recuperare non potui, verum ne causam quidem elicere immutatae voluntatis.
Tametsi jactat ille quidem illud suum arbitrium, and ea quae jam tum cum aderas
offendere ejus animum intelligebam. Tamen habet quiddam profecto quod magis in
animo ejus insederit, quod neque Epistolae tuae, neque nostra Allegatio tam
potest facile delere, quam tu praesens, non modo oratione, sed illo tuo vultu
familiari, tolles, si modo tanti putabis, id quod si me audies, and si
humanitati tuae constare voles certe putabis. Ac ne illud mirere cum ego antea
significarem tibi per literas, me sperare eum in nostra protestate fore, nunc
idem videar diffidere. Incredibile est, quantum mihi videatur illius voluntas
obstinatior, and in hac iracundia obfirmatior. 10.

You see by this, that Cicero's moderation was very discreet, and you perceive
that his Friend being irreconcilable, Atticus it may be would not have gone
any farther to have pacified him, and therefore would have had just cause to
blame Cicero, had Cicero done it without his express Order.

But wherefore would not this Man, replied I at these words, declare his
greatest Cause of displeasure against Atticus? You must not, answered
Caesarion, wonder at that; the most Sincere and the most Sensible are they
which say least; because they are Clear, Constant, and Free from making feigned
or frivolous Excuses. Now to what purpose is it to discover a thing, where
there is not a Salve or Remedy for it.

Moreover the greatness of an injury is never well known, but by him that gave
it, and by him that received it, forasmuch as it depends on the Circumstance,
wherein the party offended was, when he received it; to know to what degree he
was concerned, and how far the Offender knew his Sensibility. And from hence it
happens, that the most cruel Injuries be those, that sometimes seem the least,
to those that have not received them.

Besides, there be things that cannot be fully explained without Publishing
others, which it were better to hide and conceal. Therefore, those, which have
committed such Extravagancies, do so often dare those to Publish them, to whom
they have done them, knowing very well the Parties offended will rather
endeavor to Conceal them if they be Wise, but if they be so imprudent to
discover themselves, they are soon punished by their own Folly, by gratifying
others, in declaring what they have suffered; this pleasure is so great and
pleasing to corrupt Minds, that instead of being ashamed to publish their
wickedness, they glory in it, and do manifest, that this very declaring of it
is the accomplishing the Triumph of their Spleen and Malice.

Nevertheless, answered I, there is nothing more generally blamed, than this
unwillingness, of owning the displeasure, one harbors against our Enemy. You
see however, replied Caesarion, that at certain times, there is nothing more just
and prudent, than this kind of Obstinateness.

What Cicero adds afterward, Sed haec aut sanabuntur cum veneris, aut ei
molesta erunt, in utro culpa erit. ibid.
continues he, will more surprise you. But, concludes he, either you will
compose these matters when you arrive here, or which ever of you both are in
the wrong, it will fare the worse with him.

This Discourse which seems so unreasonable, was the very Truth it self. The
Reputation of Atticus's Wisdom and Probity was so well settled, that no body in
Rome would scarce have questioned it, although his proceedings, at all times,
were not the fairest.

He was one of those kind of Sparks, that was neither Eminent by Birth, nor by
Office, nor by any extraordinary Parts, but made himself be talked of by an
affected way of Living, and of being admitted into Great men's company, who, for
the most part, are not the hardest to be deceived. For which purpose, it is
enough to have store of Wealth, and a great deal of Wit; to be born with a
temper incapable of violent Passions, neither good nor bad, and with a great
stock of indifferency for Truth and Justice, that can see these divine Virtues
violated, and be able to violate them, when it is for ones Interest. It is
requisite, to be naturally neither a Deceiver nor Unjust, that one should, in
most occasions, practice these Virtues in show and seemingly, because in a
great measure it is more useful, to be Just and Sincere, than to be otherwise.
Also it is requisite, to appear a Friend equally alike to all sorts of persons,
and not to be so truly to any body. Not much to frequent ones Equals, and
neither to despise them. With these qualities, it is an easy matter to
insinuate into great Men's company, especially if ones behavior be not
Offensive.

If such a person as this will also force himself to flatter great Persons in
their follies, wherewith they are most pleased, praise them for qualities which
they really have, and for which every body blames them, and for those they
think they have, and that every body knows they have not, how do they delight
in such a Person, and how do they cry him up? But especially, if he holds in
favor with those, that are at enmity amongst themselves, then he becomes alike
useful to both party's, they both vie in his commendation, and others, seeing
Persons so divided, agree in admiring him; it is presently believed, it can only
be pure Merit, that can so unite them, and so conceive a good opinion of him,
which, Si liberius, ut consuesti, agendum putatis. ep. 12. l. 5. ad fam.
Sanctissimi hominis atque integerrimi illahumanitate illis studiis, artibus,
doctrina.
diffusing abroad, does insensibly create this shadow of Reputation, wherewith
those are deluded, that do really want it themselves.

Such a kind of Person was Atticus, but his Antagonist was a Man of another
Temper, and of a make altogether as Solid and Sincere, as that of Atticus was
Forced and Artificial. He was called Lucius Lucceius, and was of a very good
Family. He wrote the History of his times, with much Honor and Eloquence, as
may be judged by Cicero's desiring him to write that of his Consulship apart,
and with that Freedom and Sincerity, which was so Natural to him. Pro Caelio.
The same Cicero in a public Act applauds The integrity of his life, his
virtue, Mehercule vir optimus and mihi amicissimus. ad At. l. 1. Ep. 17.
goodness, and learning, with a greatness, that cannot be the least questioned;
especially considering, that writing to Atticus himself about their difference,
he cannot forbear to call the same Lucceius, a very honest Man, and his very
good Friend. He was afterward Competitor with Caesar and Bibulus for the
Consulship, Sueto. c. 19. ad At, l. 4. Ep. 16. Optimates, viri boni ad At.
passim.
and was refused it for no other reason, but for Corresponding with Caesar
against Bibulus. For this Familiarity made him be suspected by the great Men,
which were called the Honest Party, and declared Enemies to Caesar: But as they
could not exclude this great Man, and that 'twas of great Moment to the
Commonwealth, that he should not have the Colleague he desired, they used such
extraordinary means to frustrate Lucceius, that at last they effected their
desires, and and chose Bibulus in his stead.

It appears that failing in this design, he quitted all farther pretensions,
doubting the success, by reason of his many great and powerful Enemies, and in
all likelihood, the very great sincerity of Life, that he professed and
practiced, made him give over the Correspondence he had maintained with Caesar,
for which reason he employed him not in the Civil Wars, as he did all his other
friends, and kept himself all that time in the Country, or privately in Rome at
his Study, or other Domestic Affairs.

But if you desire to know him more particularly, than by what I have already
said, you may be pleased to read a Letter which he wrote to Cicero, upon the
death of his dear Daughter Tullia. Methinks it shows so much tenderness, wisdom
and discretion, that I was much pleased in Translating it. At these words
Caesarion opening a little Manuscript full of Translations made by him, which I
since copied out; I there read this which follows.

LVCCEIVS his Letter to CICERO.
IF you are in Health, I am glad of it; for my part I am much after one rate,
or rather something worse than I use to be. I went to visit you, but was
surprised to hear you were gone out of Rome as soon as you had left me, and am
still so, not imagining what should oblige you thereto. If you are best pleased
with privacy and retirement to write and study after your usual manner, I
rejoice at it, and am very far from blaming you; for one can neither be better
employed in these sad times wherein we live, nor in more flourishing and happy
days, especially such a rare Genius as yours, which seeks a little respite from
the trouble of your great Employments, and that always produces something
delightful unto others, and glorious for your self. But if it be wholly to give
your self up to grief, as you did here, that you are retired, then am I
sensibly concerned for you, because you suffer. But if you suffer me to speak
my mind, I cannot approve your conduct. For can it be, that you, whose
judgment penetrates the most hidden things, don't perceive that your continual
sorrowing does you no good at all, and that you only increase your affliction,
which your discretion should rather mitigate. But if I cannot prevail with you
by my persuasions, I beg it of you in kindness, and by all the respect you have
for me. I conjure you to give off this doleful kind of living, and return to
the enjoyment of your friends; or if you desire to live solitary, in living at
least with your self, as you were wont to do before your misfortune, do so. If
you are displeased with me for my good will, I am sorry to have troubled you,
yet I would fain divert you from the course you take. Being moved with these
two contrary passions, I hope you will either grant what I desire, if you can,
or that you will pardon my importunity if you cannot. Farewell.


LVCCEIVS CICERONI.
SI vales been est, ego valeo sicut soleo, paululo tamen etiam deterius quam
soleo. Te requisivi saepius ut viderem. Romae, quia postea non fuisti quam a me
discesseras, miratus sum; quod item nunc miror. Non habeo certum quae te res
hinc maxim retrahat. Si solitudine delectere cum scribas, and aliquid agas
eorum, quorum consuesti, gaudeo, neque reprehendo consilium tuum. Nam nihil
isto potest esse jucundius, non modo miseris his temporibus and luctuosis, sed
etiam tranquillis and optatis: praesertim, vel animo defatigato tuo, qui nunc
requietem quaerat ex magnis occupationibus, vel erudito, qui semper aliquid ex
se promat quod alios delectet, teipsum laudibus illustret. Sin autem sicut hic
dum eras, and lacrymis and tristitiae te tradidisti, doleo, quia doles and
angere: nec possum te (si concedis quod sentimus ut liberius dicamus) non
accusare. Quid enim? tu solus aperta non videbis, qui propter acumen
occultissima perspicis? Tu non intelliges, to querelis quotidianis nihil
proficere? non intelliges duplicari sollicitudines, quas elevare tua te
prudentia postulat. Quod si non possumus aliquid proficere suadendo, gratia
contendimus; and rogando, si quid nostra causa vis, ut istis te molestiis
laxes, and ad convictum nostrum redeas, and ad consuetudinem, vel nostram
communem, vel tuam solius, ac propriam. Cupio non obtundere te si non delectere
nostro studio: cupio deterrere ne permaneas in incaepto. Quum dua res istae
contrariae me conturbent, ex quibus, aut in altera mihi velim, si potes,
obtemperes, aut in altera non offendas, Vale. L. 5. Ad famil. Ep. 14.


See here, said I, (having done reading) a very obliging advice, and I cannot
tell how a person of such singular merit could be refused, being in the right.
Yet there is nothing more frequently seen, replied Caesarion. The greatest
merits were not most esteemed in corrupt ages, as was the last of that of the
Roman Commonwealth. There shined so many virtues amongst that glorious people
for the space of six hundred years, that it could not be but some footsteps of
them remained in the age we speak of. But in like manner, as craft and vice,
which necessarily attend the greatness of Worldly Empire, had attained unto
their highest pitch: Art had in most things subverted Nature, and the little,
but precious remainder, of ancient simplicity and integrity of former ages,
being mixed with much deceit and seeming virtue, became so much the more odious,
as that it put on the resemblance of truth it self.

In all ages Truth has been called a Chimaera by those that are not able to
understand it, and those which do comprehend it, not putting it in practice,
through malice, speak slightly of it, and give it the worst character they can.
It were well if it were quit for not pleasing them; but as they cannot but
admire it in their soul, they continue not in an indifferency, but go on to
hate it, because naturally men hate what they Esteem very much, but cannot Love.

How is it possible, say they, to live with persons that never will be
reconciled with those they have once differed, that forgive not their friends,
that have no regard for their counsels, nor for their entreaties; that expect
such care and observance, that good Masters would not require from their
Slaves; that do not regard their own concerns, and that will not suffer their
friends to take the care which they ought to take their ownselves?

Cicero might have said all this against Lucceius upon his obstinacy in not
agreeing with Atticus, but he knew very well, that it is only those which easily
differ, that are soon reconciled again. That offenses which deserve but little
notice to be taken of them, being received from indifferent persons, are mortal
injuries when they proceed from a person that one loves, or of those by whom we
think we deserve to be loved; no body is a better judge of advice, than him to
whom it is given; that there are requests which be injurious as well as just:
That one may expect from their friends, the same care and kindness as one has
for them. And to conclude, it is for the most part a kind of reproof, rather
than sign of friendship, to concern one self in others affairs, whether they
will or not.

These are the Rules whereby Cicero governed himself with his friends. But
there were but very few that were so virtuous as he was; as the friendship of
Atticus was artificial, crafty, and suited, and adapted to the Commerce of the
World; so that of Lucceius was pure and sincere, and altogether unfit for the
World: It is not strange therefore, that Atticus his humor was more taking,
and oftentimes procured him an applause that he did not really deserve.

For the World does usually judge of affairs by the persons, instead of judging
by the things themselves, for it requires some pains to examine a business, and
it is a trouble which men do not willingly undergo; whereas there is no pains in
judging of affairs thereafter as one is affected more or less with the person
it concerns. Moreover when once one is settled in a fancy, one naturally shuns
knowing what might change our opinion, because men don't care to know that they
have been deceived.

There is therefore no cause to wonder why Cicero said, That whoever it was
that was in the right, either Atticus or Lucceius, their contest would only
prove prejudicial to Lucceius in the Worlds esteem. Although Cicero wrote so
plainly to Atticus himself, in supposing he might be in the wrong; to Atticus I
say, who always boasted to be in the right. I make no doubt, but knowing him as
I do, this supposition touched him to the quick, though perhaps he was glad at
the heart that Cicero owned, as he did by this Discourse, that his reputation
was settled to such a degree, that it might be supported, even without reason,
against a man of that worth Lucceius was of; and in all likelihood it was to
give him this secret pleasure, that Cicero, who understood him very well, wrote
to him after this manner.

Yet I have one request more to make to you, replied I, seeing Caesarion
silent. It is to know if this grudge lasted always, it is not known, said he,
how they were reconciled. But it appears by Cicero's Letters, that they visited
each other familiarly twelve years after. That Is a thing often seen when one
has to do with a man of Atticus his temper. How much soever one is persuaded of
their perfidiousness, they will make themselves no strangers, and wanting no
excuses of one sort or other, they employ so many friends to compose matters,
that at last one is forced to comply: for commonly persons are more inclinable
to the Offender, than to the Offended; the malignity of nature, being delighted
at the seeing and suffering of ill, never fails, in these Occasions, to incline
to him that gave the offense, to the prejudice of him that received it, under
the specious pretense of making Peace.

Nevertheless I cannot tell but the open Enmity of Atticus had been less
hurtful to Lucceius than their reconciliation: for Atticus never acted but
through respect of his own private interest, and would never have been so
desirous of reconciliation, had he not believed that Lucceius his Enmity would
have been to his disadvantage; not but that his also might have been hurtful to
Lucceius; but there was this difference to be made, that their accommodation
did absolutely remove the disadvantage which Atticus might receive by this
Enmity, because Lucceius could not be reconciled but with a truly good intent,
whereas there was great cause to think that Atticus would not be any truer to
him after reconciliation, than he was before their rupture, especially being
netl'd by the long refusal Lucceius made of being accommodated, and by the
secret reproaches of his own Conscience, wherewith the most vicious persons (do
they what they can to suppress them) are as often tormented, as the most
ignorant sort of men.

By what I had ever heard of Atticus formerly, the description Caesarion now
gave me of him, could not choose but surprise me. I had always heard him
represented as the true model of an honest man: having read his Life in Latin,
French and English, I was fully confirmed in this opinion, and I freely
confess, I feared there might be some affectation of singularity in your
friends sentiment; he judged of my thoughts by my countenance, and having
freely owned it to him, he continued his Discourse as follows.

It is very true, said he, most intelligent Persons, and that are best skilled
in these matters, are of a very different judgment from me touching the man we
speak of, and do not wonder at it. He deceived wiser than they, and those that
had opportunity of knowing him better. I speak of the learned age wherein he
lived, wherein I told you already, that his Reputation was as great as I
believe it was undeserved. You must not imagine that he was the only person of
this kind: I Will instance in others both Ancient and Modern when you please, and
it is very probable his Historian took the voice of the People for it, which is
not always the voice of God. But his error is no authority, and the character
of his Hero is of that importance to be cleared up, that it deserves to be
examined a little narrower than he has done it.

You may guess how easily Fame is acquired by having great Riches, when one
knows ever so little how to use them; to judge aright of a man he should be
considered by the qualities which are least seen; and there is no degree of
Reputation but may be attained without virtue; by riches, wit and a great deal
of vanity; there can nothing more necessary be taught Gentlemen of your age,
than to distinguish counterfeit virtues from real, and not to be deceived by
common report in the merit of particular persons. You cannot imagine the
trouble one has all their life, for admiring persons in their youth, which
deserve not to be admired. And when I speak of merit, pray observe, that I
thereby mean true integrity and honesty, without which I know not any, and it
is that merit which I deny to Atticus, for (this excepted) it was hard to have
more wit and prudence than he had, or to understand the Times, Men and Business
better than he did.

If what you say be true, replied I to this Discourse, his Historian is the
greatest flatterer that ever was. Say rather that he was his Panegyrist, said
Caesarion; Nepos is in most things a down right Liar, and appears to be but of
a mean capacity, as may be judged by what we have remaining of his; he took for
current all that his Hero said to make himself be cried up; and relates, as
undoubted truth, all that he had heard spoken in favor of Atticus, by Atticus
himself.

One cannot be justly more suspected than Nepos is: he boasts to have lived so
familiarly with this Gallant, that he was privy to his Journal of Expenses; he
intervened in his actions, and at his request registr'd some of them. It does
not appear that this Historian made any great Figure in the World, as most of
his time did; so that there is just cause to suspect, that Atticus his
friendship being the highest of his preferment, his own private interest moved
him to advance the glory of Atticus to the highest pitch he could. But you
shall find afterward that he was so unfortunate or indiscreet, that the most
glorious actions related by him, are either convinced of falsehood by other
Writers, of greater credit than him, or related in such a manner by himself,
that unawares he destroys all their Merit in discoursing of their true
Original.

You promise me things that are very curious, replied I to Caesarion; I very
much question if any besides your self could perform your promise, and you will
do me a singular pleasure if you discharge it faithfully. There Is no need of
being a very able man, replied he, to satisfy you therein, and I Will not defer
your desire any longer.

To render the Economy and Liberality of Atticus the more admirable, and to
show that he had not increased his wealth but by honest ways; Nepos boldly
affirms, Nullius rei neque praes, neque manceps. Tu aliquid publicanus pendis.
l. 2. ep. 15.
that he was never concerned in business, neither directly nor indirectly, as
other Knights of Rome usually were. Nevertheless the quite contrary appears by
Cicero's Letters, which Nepos himself testifies to have seen; in which this
Orator calls Atticus Publican in express terms, and gives him an account of a
Decree of the Senate against the Creditors of the Free People, wherein Atticus
himself was concerned, because he had advanced great Sums of money for those of
Sicionia, which were of that quality.

And it would be very strange to conceive, how he should acquire such
extraordinary great Riches, distributing so Liberally, and living so Honorably
as he did, having never born any Office nor Command, if he had not gained
Wealth some other way; and there is no doubt but it was the cause that made a
learned French Critic, in some obscure words which he wrote to Cicero,
discover, that he held a Bank at Rome in his own House, under the Name of
Oppius's, which were at his Devotion, and made public profession of it. But I
excuse Nepos for being ignorant of the thing, for by the dark Enigmatical
manner that Atticus mentions it to Cicero, it may easily be seen that he
concealed it with extraordinary care, and made not his Historian privy to it.

In another place to exaggerate the great esteem every body had for him; the
same Historian positively affirms, that Pompey had no ill will for him, for
staying in Italy during the Civil Wars, without joining to any side, although
he was bound in strict bands of Amity to this great Man. Nevertheless the same
Cicero, who must needs know things better than Nepos, Constitutum omnium
vestrum bonae praedam esse illius victcriae. Vestrum plane dico, nunquam enim
de te ipso nisi crudelissime cogitatum est. ep. 6. l. 11.
seeing he was at that time with Pompey in Thessaly, writes in express terms to
Atticus after the Death of this General, that he esteemed them equally his
Enemies, that had not followed and sided with him, I say you as well as others,
says Cicero, for it was determined, to have used you Cruelly, if we had
returned to Rome.

I would instance in sundry other places, wherein Nepos has not been more
faithful, than in these two now mentioned, but as that would be too tedious, so
I Will content my self to instance one more, after which, you will the easier
credit the rest; it is where he affirms, Ciceroni in omnibus ejus periculis
singularem fidem praebuit.
that Atticus had a perfect kindness for Cicero in all his troubles. You shall
hear what Cicero himself says, and I cannot sufficiciently admire the
impudence of this Writer, to dare affirm a thing so boldly, in a Work wherein
he speaks in the praise of Letters written by Cicero himself to his Hero; L 3.
ep. 15.24. etc.
whereas the very same Letters avouch the quite contrary, and are full of
reproofs and just and vehement complaints, which Cicero makes of Atticus, to
Atticus himself.

I am not any longer surprised at Nepos's Errors, said I to Caesarion, by what
you have related to me of him. But I much admire at Atticus, by what you have
now said, and I could never have thought, but that so great a Friendship, as
that betwixt him and Cicero, should have been maintained on both parts with all
the fidelity imaginable; you will not so much wonder at it, replied Caesarion, if
you consider what fallows, with a little more heed than you have hitherto
done. You will not find in him any symptom of true goodness, and it cannot be
said it was the commerce of the World that depraved him, because in this
respect he was the same in his Youth as he was in his riper Years.

His Father dyed when he was very Young, and left him Wealth more than enough
to serve him as long as he lived. For his Quality, he was but of the Equestrian
Order, that is to say, a good Alderman or Citizen. In his Youth when the most
timorous have some courage, he quited Italy, and retired to Athens under a
pretense of studying, but in effect, it was because a Seditious Tribune had
been executed at Rome, Anicia Pomponii consobrina nupserat M. Servio fratri P.
Sulpitii qui tribunus plebis interfectus est.
whose Brother had Married Atticus his Cousin-german, this was, as you may
perceive, to see a storm far off; and one could not have desired more
favorable circumstances of becoming a perfect Epicure than these were, as he
verified afterward. I don't design to censure this Sect, I perfectly know it is
sentiments as well as you: Nevertheless I cannot but say, that it is a strange
kind of Wisdom, to see ones Country on the point of utter ruin, without
concerning ones self one way or other, although one has Extraordinary means and
opportunities of serving it; and to suffer all things to be turned
upside-downe, rather than to be exposed to the least danger. I make no doubt,
but you have heard of the Law of Solon, that declared those Infamous, which
took not some side or other in a public Insurrection. But this Subject would
engage us too far; you may only observe, that this kind of temper of profound
indifferency, not to say insensibleness, which Atticus had all his life, for
all things which did not directly concern himself, was the true cause of his
continual prosperity; and it was this prosperity that made him chiefly to be
admired. But it is an easy matter to be happy when one is left rich, enjoys
wit and health, and cares for no body.

Do you call that, replied I, caring for no body, to support ones Friends, when
they are forsaken by all the World, with money and all necessaries in their
need, without expecting any return or recompense: Yes answered Caesarion
unconcernedly; I call this proceeding, vanity, ostentation, policy, in fine,
any thing rather than true Liberality, when it is so dissembled, artifitial,
and self-ended, as was that of Atticus, when it has only vain glory for it is
scope, and does not appear as well in private as on public occasions.

He sent money to young Marius his schoolfellow, when he fled proscib'd by
Sylla; it was the greatest name of Rome, Neque longius quam dictum esset cos
debere passus fit, neque indulgendo inveterascere eorum as altenum patiebatur.
and it was hard to judge at that time, if he would not become more powerful
than ever he was before, according to what had lately hapn'd his Father. He
lent to the Athenians considerable sums of Money without Intrest, to pay their
City Debts, and Nepos commends him, for requiring it to be paid punctually at
the prefixed time; so great an itch had he to praise him on any score. He could
not better have bestowed his Liberality than upon the most Illustrious City in
the World, which he had chose for the place of his retirement, at a time when
he thought it not oversafe to stay at Rome. And all kind of respects were paid
him in acknowledgement thereof, nothing was done but by his Ministry and
Advice; it proceeded so far, that they erected Statues in his Honor, whether
he would or no, in the most public places in the City.

I see nothing, said I, but what was very commendable in this action; the
Athenians gratitude could not render the thing to be done out of self-interest,
and it seems to me to inhance the kindness, rather than to lessen it. If there
be no more in it than to say Atticus did it through vain glory; then the best
and most commendable actions may by the same reason be sensur'd, because every
thing may be esteemed vain glorious when it is known, that is, as soon as it
comes to be spoken of.

Nevertheless, replied Caesarion, he did more generous actions than these were
in appearance, the which however Cicero did not very well approve of; and after
the manner that he dealt with Atticus, it may safely be affirmed, that he put
no great value on these splendid Liberalities, seeing he cannot forbear writing
slightly of them unto Atticus himself. But, says he in a certain place, Sed
heus tu Achenis, placet hoc tibi.
Is it true that you have distributed Corn to the Athenians, do you think it is
well done?

This Discourse, if I mistake not, intimates that these actions were at least
much suspected in those times, when they could be better judged of than now;
and Cicero's authority is of far greater weight in this matter than that of
Nepos. Nevertheless it must be granted, it would be unjust to sensure them, did
one know no more than what this Historian does relate; but he reporting others
of the same stamp, which are undoubtly false, one may by the same measure the
more naturally judge of those that be dubious.

After the death of Caesar it was proposed amongst the Roman Knights, to raise
a stock for the maintenance of his Assassinates, in consideration of the
pretended service they had done the Commonwealth. One of these Knights who had
the chief conduct of the business, thinking he could not better advance it,
than by engaging therein one of the chief of his Order, addressed himself unto
Atticus, as unto a particular friend of Brutus, who was chief of the Murderers.
What answer think you Atticus made unto this proposal? Ille consensionis globus
hujus unius dissensione dissectus est qui officia amicis praestanda sine
factione existimaret, etc.
there was need of maintaining an action, which at that time was esteemed
generous by every body, and there appeared no danger in doing it. He made the
whole design fall to the ground (says Nepos) thinking it not fit to serve his
friends by a spirit of faction. Did you ever see a poorer excuse, nor the word
Faction worse applied? and that you may the plainer see that he refused only
out of singularity. Affairs having quite changed soon after, and Brutus with
his accomplices being forced to withdraw, Atticus sent him considerable sums of
money of free gift. But who does not see that this supply, how great soever,
could not be comparable to that which was designed to be given him by the
greatest part of the welthyest Citizens, of which he was deprived by Atticus
his refusal: and to conclude, this denial could proceed only from an
affectation of being distinguished from all others, without any other end or
aim, but an envious fear and jealousy of sharing with his equals in the glory
of a good action.

It Is true, replied I, there appears something very strange in this conduct,
and that renders it something suspicious, and I cannot but own it. But in
requital you must grant in the next place, that there could be nothing more
free and generous, than what he did a while after in regard of Antonius. One
had need be something more than a Prophet, to foresee the Triumvirat during the
Seige of Modena; Antonius declared an Enemy by the Senate, routed, and fors'd
to raise the Seige by Octavius and the Consuls, his whole Army dispersed and
slain, himself flying into Gaul to the mercy of Lepiddus, abandoned by his best
Friends, and persecuted by some of them as by his worst Enemies; his Wife and
Children exposed every moment to the greatest Extremitys. In this deplorable
condition Atticus entertains and supports those of his, that held true to him,
supply's them with all necessaries; accompanies Fulvia in all places,
interceeds for her, and becomes her caution, lends her money without intrest, to
pay Debts which were falen due, without obliging her to repayment. It seems to
me that it is not enough to be good and disinterested to act after this manner,
but also it shows resoluteness and great courage.

To answer the exaggeration you have now made, replied Caesarion; before we
examine this matter to the bottom, let me desire you to make? reflection, which
I have taken from a good authority, which perhaps you have never yet thought
of. At these words Caesarion musing about what he intended to say, we heard a
noise of several Horsemen in the Court, which obliged us to rise and see what
it meant.

The End of the Third Day.
CAESARION. The Fourth Day.
OUr Conversation was deferred for some time by company that came to visit your
friend, and though it wrought in me some impressions not very agreeable unto
one of my years, yet I can say without vanity, that it was with great
satisfaction I returned unto it. Besides the extraordinary desire one has
naturally to improve ones self in knowledge, having never met a man that
condescended more to humor my weak apprehension; our discourse had also in it
the pleasure of Novelty, and I was sensibly taken in that part that was most
grateful to me. I fancied therefore to be returned to the light after a long
darkness, the first time we met together alone, and the delight I conceived
might have been discerned in my looks by any body else, as well as by him. It
was, I shall never forget it, the very afternoon of the same day that our
Company went away, we walked in the same Gallery talking together, which I
told you faced his Closet; and as he could not but wonder at the pleasure I
took in his discourse, not knowing otherwise how to divert the commendations he
gave me on that account, and which was burdensome to me; I bethought my self of
asking him the meaning of the first Picture that offered it self to my view,
amongst several others that were in the same place.

It represented a Man with a Face as great as it was ill fetur'd, very ill
accouter'd after the Greek habit, leaning with one Hand upon his Staff, and
stretching out the other, half open, unto a Statue richly adorned. Nere this
man lay an empty Vessel, part of the Head being out, the bottom of the Cask
might be seen: without much difficulty, by this equipage I knew it was the
Philosopher Diogenes, but the posture wherein he was represented appearing
something strange, I desired to know of Caesarion what it signified; I Will make
you, replied he, the same answer Paulus Emilius made those that desired him in
the behalf of King Perseus his prisoner, that he might not be carried in
Triumph through Rome, That he would ask it of his own self. If I understood
what the Painter had done, said I, I should not have any need to ask the
explication of it of my self, nor of you. And have you not heard, replied he,
that sometimes one knows things that one thinks they be ignorant of. Inquire
therefore of your own self with a little reflection, what this posture means,
and you will find at last, that you will resolve your own self as well as I can.

This Picture, said he, is not like most others which represent Histories.
Painters have not always the judgment as good as the sight, they think that
all things are alike fit to be painted, yet there be but few things proper to
be painted, for the Pensill not being capable, to give the Figures motion upon
the Cloth, it cannot represent but very imperfectly, those Objects which
consist in motion, as Combats, bodily Exercises, Tempests, Incendiaries, and
most of those things which they most of all delight in. I know not if any body
else has felt the displeasure that I have done, in considering this kind of
Painting, for methinks the Figures ought to have Motion, and the Moving Posture
wherein they be represented, though in effect they are immovable, does imply a
kind of contradiction, wherewith my mind is somewhat dissatisfied.

At this rate, said I, you had need of Comedians or Stage Players to represent
things, and you would deprive Painters of the greatest and pleasantest part of
their Profession: That is not my design, replied he, and if it were, I would
not venture to divulge it. But I say to judge naturally of things, it were
better to Paint Histories, whose essential part consisted in a fixed posture,
which the Pensil may very well perform, whereof there has been some instances,
wherein the persons concerned have been in all liklyhood immovable. As for
Example, the action of Saevola, immovably constant holding his hand in the
Flames, whilst Porsenna and the rest that beheld him were immovable through
admiration. Such also was the judgment of Soloman, where the true Mother held
the Arm of him that went to Divide her Child, whilst the pretended Mother stood
immovable in her Obstinacy. And such to conclude, is the Picture that you see.
Imagine then what sense you would give the Action it represents, if you see it
in the Original, seeing it would be but the same that it is in the Copy.

If passing through the Caemariqae amongst the Statues of the Demi Gods of
Greece, Plutar. of Shame.
you should see Diogenes prostrate before one of those Images, holding out his
hand asking an Alms, what would you think of it? I should be much startled at
it, said I, to see so careless a Man begging, and so wise a Man to beg of a
Statue; that is the very reason, riply'd Caesarion, which should make you guess
the meaning of his posture. It don't seem strange to you to beg of a Statue,
but because it cannot give any thing. If then any body asks of it, it is not
because they think to receive any thing; this demand therefore is not out of
Intrest, it is not therefore incompatable with the great indifferency of
Diogenes, there only remains to inquire why he amused himself about so
frivolous (not to say so foolish) an Action.

To understand the true Reason, you need only consider him with attension in
this posture; I should soon be tried, said I, and could not long hold out
without growing impatient. Admire then, replied Caesarion, the patience of this
Phil^sopher in so unpleasant an exercise, that you cannot behold him a moment
without displeasure. If your Patience cannot resist so little a thing, what
would you do at Court, where you would find a Thousand greater occasions to try
it. It would be in vain to flatter ones self with Success, If one did not
practice this important Virtue, as you see Diogenes here does. If one does not
beg as he does without hope of being heard, and of being refused too without
being discouraged. Importunity perseverance, boldness, these be the qualities
necessary to make our servise acceptable to those Idols, to whom our ambition
and covetousness does sacrifice the best of our days; whoever has these
qualities, shall be heard sooner or later; without them, wisdom, valor,
goodness and virtue, are but frivolous ornaments.

You are surprised at this Discourse, replied Caesarion, seeing me silent, you
thought till now, that Merit alone had been sufficient to advance a man in the
World. The several Masters and Tutours you have been under, have only labored
in a manner to no other end, than to imprint this in your mind: That a
perfectness in corporal exercises and virtuous qualities were a necessary and
infallible means of making a fortune in the World. This is true in one sense;
this persuasion was necessary for you at that time and age, doubtless it
contributed very much toward your accomplishment, and it was not very
requisite you should know any more at that time.

But when you left those Masters to enter into the commerce of the world, had
they fully discharged themselves of their duty, they ought to have told you
quite another thing, they ought to have told you what you dreamed not of, that
the best qualities both acquired and natural, are things difficult to be used;
that they must be concealed almost as often as shown; that oftentimes they make
those conceited that enjoy them, make them silly and hated, and sometimes
render them ridiculous, and therefore for the most part do more hurt than good.
That at best they only procure a forced and unprofitable esteem, that they have
very little contributed unto the greatest fortunes that have been made, and
that if any that are endowed with these qualities and know best to use them,
arrive at any extraordinary promotion, they served only for show, he owes the
true cause of it to some other quality of more value in the main, and which
lies more hid.

Caesarion stoping at these words, I confess said I, you surprise me. I
believed indeed there was ill ways of advancement, but I also concluded that
there were good ways no less certain, and that a man of good merit might attain
good fortune without doing any thing unworthy of himself.

You are very much deceived, replied Caesarion, a man of this stamp is a kind
of public Enemy, which all the world has reason to hate; he tyranizes over men
by a kind of necessity, he imposes upon them to esteem him; he is the cause
that all other things are not admired as much as himself; he engrosses a great
many applauses which would serve to gratify a great many others; how then can
he but be envied?

This persuasion is as firmly rooted in the minds of men, as the love of glory
it self; and it never appeared more than amongst the people that were most of
all enflamed with a love of this glory. You know against what sort of men the
Ostracism was set up at Athens: and doubtless you have heard of that Country
Fellow that gave his voice for banishing Aristides; he could give no other
reason for it, but that it displeased him to hear him always be called the
Just. Nemo de nobis unus excellat; sed siquis extiterit, alio in loco and apud
alios sit. Sic. Tusc. quaest. l. 5.
So those of Ephesus expelled the most virtuous of their Citizens without any
other reason, but for these memorable words, That none amongst them should
excel above his fellows, and if there be any here that would, let them go excel
elsewhere. So the Ephori condemned Agesilaus into a Mulct, because he alone
possessed the hearts of the Lacedaemonians. And he that conquered Hanibal
thought he ought to banish himself from Rome, that so he might give liberty to
virtues inferior to his, to appear there; so true it is, that at all times
nothing has been more dangerous amongst men, than too shining a merit.

If this remarkable truth has appeared in the most virtuous and best governed
Commonwealths, do you think it will not appear in Courts, where many times
there is neither order nor virtue? There Is nothing harder than for such a man
as you mean, there to find favor or protection; because those which have the
chief power, are not always of such merit, as not to fear such as are endowed
with higher merit than themselves. One had need have a great stock of virtue,
to love it in another as much as it deserves; this is the most assured sign of
true merit, and one may, without vanity, be fully assured of his own, when one
does right to that of other men's; that one takes pleasure in making it known,
and that one honors the party indifferently, in all places, and at all times.

And such a one was Scipio, that I before mentioned to you; and I cannot better
represent him to you by this great Idea, than in the very words of his
incomparable Historian. After the unfortunate death of his Father and Uncle in
Spain, one of their Lieutenants, called Martius, maintained the glory of Rome,
which had been shrewdly shaken by such two terrible blows, that scarce any that
succeeded those two great men, could not well have supplied their place better
than him: So that of those that were in Rome capable of such employments, there
was none that durst aspire to that, in Spain, but the Heir of the Illustrious
deceased; he was aged about 24 years. How do you think he carried himself
toward this brave Lieutenant, who would have darkn'd the glory of any other
Captain but this, when he ariv'd in his Province? He did not set about changing
the Orders Martius had given; he did not narrowly search into the faults that
might be committed before his coming, amongst so many great transactions, and
of what might have been done better than was done: He kept not strictly his
distance and port, as was due to him as General, and affected not the respect
due to it, Martium secum tanto cum honor habeb at, ut facile appareret, eum
nihil minus vereri, quam ne quis obstaret gloriae suae. l. 26. Aelian. Hist.
diverse. l. 12. c. 16. Quint. Curt. l. 8
with this great Person, more than he did with others his inferiors: neither
did he use indirect ways, as most Commanders do, to disparage the conduct of
their Predecessors; He had Martius always near him, says Tit. Livius, and he
did him so great honor, that 'twas plainly seen, he feared not that any body
could hinder the progress of his glory.

Alexander, surnamed the Great attained not such a pitch of virtue; he was not
so ingenious, says the most impartial of his Historians, in valuing the virtue
and courage of his own Countrymen, as much as he did that of strangers. Another
Author makes a long narrative of the good qualities peculiar unto each of his
Captains, for which he hated them without any other cause, and therefore
Parmenion, him that of all others knew him best, said for an only lesson to
Philotas, My Son be little in thine own esteem. If a person of so eminent
degree as this Conqueror, was not free from jealousy, how can it be expected,
that the most part of the great Men, we speak of, can be exempt from it? And
what assistance can a man of true virtue and merit hope from such, in prefering
him at Court? Yet what possibility is there of being considered without the
favorable recommendation of some or other? The Princes favor and goodwill is
already engaged, how virtuous and valiant soever a person is, he must not think
to be regarded for that reason alone, unless he is engaged to do it by some
other way and means. It Is possible he may do you right, should he reward your
merits; but how unlikely is it, that he will trouble himself to inquire into
your deserts? Something else is requisite for the attaining your ends.

A Prince that has already chose and settled his affection upon his Ministers
and Favorites, before ever you were thought of, thinks that he has no further
need of any body else; he sees by their Eyes, hears by their Ears, and for the
most part Judges by their judgment: So that any body that offer their service,
otherwise than by their means, is not regarded by him, he must move out of his
Sphere to do otherwise: being only familiarly acquainted with them, he knows
not if there be any others that excel them; and herein he resembles that Woman
amongst the Ancients, that supposed all men had stinking breath, because she
never kissed any but her own Husband.

Moreover, Favorites and great Ministers, looking upon the Princes favor to
be uncertain, and a thing that may be lost; they dread nothing more than a man
that is endowed with the many good qualities you speak of; they knowing him a
long time, do judge better than new Comers the effects it may produce in the
mind of their Master; they know how to represent such of these qualities as may
not be pleasing, and use all means to hinder those from being known, which
would please too much.

And do not imagine, that it is interest alone that makes them act in this
manner, in dissipating the cloud that threatens them, it is the general
practice of Courtiers to preceed this way, although they drive at several ends;
and the most opposite agree in this, to discourage porsons of extraordinary
merit from having any shear in the Prince his favor, although they cannot but
have a great esteem for such themselves. It is a compact which they be
naturally inclined to, and they never fail to agree in the executing of it:
they have no need of consulting, nor of being advised to join together in these
occasions; envy and vanity, wherewith they are equally possessed, directs them
to the same end, more than all the consultatious in the World can do.

Let but one of them begin to tell a ridiculous story of such a Person as this,
either false, or so grossly counterfeit, that it can scarce be discerned by
those which know the contrary; he is surprised, that another, who it may be
know's not so much as he does, should presently give such credit to what he
heard, that the other might be ready, to guess at what he so cunningly
invented. Two or three such ill Offices as this, were sufficient to ruin any
Man, were he never so well esteemed by his Prince, who if not very wise, never
inquires into the Cause of things; or if he does, is not for the most part more
favorable to Persons of extraordinary Merit, than his Courtiers are.

Therefore it is, that he scarce ever regards such Persons as these be, for Men
are startled at the least inclination he has for them, and then they are envied
by all the World; and this general design of ruining them, which is a necessary
Consequence of the goodness of his choice, discourages the Prince and naturally
inclines him to be suspicious.

It may plainly be perceived, that the general aversion he find's in Men's minds
for the good choice he should make, does at length reduce him to the necessity
of making a bad one, and then he finds no longer any opposition; for it is only
Virtue and Merit which are suspected; a Man is seldom hated for being Vicious,
the first favors bestowed on him are not suspected, they are attributed to
some other Cause, and it is not believed they can hold long, yet such a person
easily and without opposition, by his corruptness, Establishes himself in the
Princes favor, to the Admiration of all the World; It is not believed till
it is too late, and the wisdom of the Prince being engaged, he is bound in
honor to vindicate it, and will not be persuaded to the contrary of what he
has done.

Caesarion having delivered this Discourse with some concerndness, stoping at
these words, I could not but testify to him my Astonishment at what he said;
for although the consequence seemed very natural in hearing him, yet I did not
well perceive to what it tended. If it be so, said I, nothing is more
difficult, than for a Prince to make a wise choice; there is no question of it,
said he, for he never understands the persons that he chooses, and all that are
about him agree to cosen him; and the life of those especially that are
nearest him is nothing else but a continual Fars, wherein all things are
represented to him in Masquerade: However methinks, said I, when it falls out
that he makes any extraordinary ill choice, it being the intrest of a great
many to inform him of it, it cannot choose, but in time he must be somewhat
sensible of it, and so by consequence reform his error. Then you think it a
small matter, replied Caesarion, to confess that one is mistaaken; this
aversion being natural to all Men, is more particularly rooted in the spirits
of Princes. Vain glory is so inherent to them, that 'twere almost unjust to
censure them for it. Pray tell me which is the best course they can take in the
condition you place them, either to publish to the World the ill choice they
have made by correcting it; or by continuing to persist in the same.

Now by this demand I understand your meaning. I find that what you say of
Favorites is true, and that a Prince is much in the right, not to change them
how bad soever they be. But methinks it should not be so of his Ministers; no
certainly, replied Caesarion, Favorites are not directly concerned with public
affairs, all their actions do only regard the person and particular actions of
the Prince; so that the little Merit they have, is scarce known to any, but to
those which be as near the Prince as themselves, and such are sufficiently
concerned not to disclose it to the rest of the World.

On the contrary, the Function of Ministers of State being public, a Prince
that has made an ill choice of them cannot hide the Error he has committed in
persevering in it; and rather than convince the World of their incapacity, one
of these two things is believed; either that he understands it not, and that
ignorant as they be, he thinks them very able, because they are wiser than him,
or that, if he wants not judgment, and is destitute of humanity and true glory,
seeing he cares not that all the World should suffer through his Fault, and is
less sensible of his Peoples just grievance, than at the shame of owning his
own Error.

And is it not just, replied I, at these words, to judge after this sort? One
cannot judge otherwise, answered Caesarion, but Princes do not think so. And
what can they think, when they prefer persons to the greatest Employments, that
are not capable of discharging the least? They think, said he, and they are not
altogether deceived, that most Men do not judge of things themselves, and much
less of those things that are above their Capacity: that it is easy to deceive
the sight, when one appears but seldom and at a distance; to hide ones
Ignorance when one speaks but seldom, or when one lists, and when one is not
bound to be accountable for on's Actions. To give an outward attention and
seemingly listen to Discourse, and yet though they did so seriously, do not at
all comprehend what they hear. To conclude, they believe that the number of
those that have judgment sufficient, to distinguish truth through the mist of
error, and have courage to defend it, being but very few in comparison of the
contrary party, their wisdom and freedom makes them only be scoffed at, and
they be suppressed by the great numbers of those who are not so juditious, or
if they be, dare not declare what they think.

But grant that all this were true, said I again, were it not better and more
glorious for a Prince, to choose Ministers, that stood not in need of these
poor shifts, to conceal their little Merit from the sight of the World? There Is
no doubt of it, replied Caesarion, but you don't consider, that most great Men
desire not to be often seen, nor narrowly discerned by Men of great Virtue and
Merit.

Persons do not make choice of extraordinary Men, any farther than they
resemble them. It is only a wise Prince, that will make choice of a wise
Minister, and that will praise him, and declare to the World the benefit he
receives thereby. Let us drink said Philip of Macedon, making a Debauch amongst
his Friends, in the midst of his greatest affairs, Let us Drink, Athen. l. 10.
it is sufficient that Antipater is sober. This in my opinion, is the highest
commendation that ever was given by a Sovereign to a subject. To speak after
this manner, Philip must needs look upon the great Merit of Antipater, as
making up a part of his own. A Prince that gave so high an Encomium to his
Minister, had no cause to be jealous of him; he must be as excellent a Prince,
as his Minister was an excellent Minister. And had I no other proof than this
Discourse, I should be no less assured of it, than by the great things which
daily experience shows us.

It Is true, replied I, that of all the passages of Antiquity, that I have heard
of, none touched me sosensibly as this did. Do not you find therein as well as
I, said Caesarion, something that appears not only natural and familiar, but
also noble and great? In the liberty of Wine and feasting of those Times, which
was not so regular as in our Days, to have the presence of Mind excusing his
excess, even when it might have been connived at, to those that might have
blamed it, and of giving a sober account of it, although the time and place
might have dispensed him herein, whosoever knew how to make a Debauch in this
manner, could not be much prejudiced thereby.

But to return to our Discourse; Do not imagine that all great Men, such as the
King we speak of, do glory in having near them Persons of the Merit of
Antipater: An excellent Minister cannot suit with a Prince of little judgment;
it is enough that he may have good servants, and it is also true, that such will
never preserve him from falling into danger. If Agrippa had been a Man of such
a Soul, Augustus had never been Master of the World. These are excellent
Mariners in calm and fair weather, and during a prosperous Gale, but the first
Storm they soon are split to pieces on some Rock or Sands. But they have the
pleasure for a while to diceive the World, and to be thought able persons
amongst such as be not so; their very Shipwreck which awakens the most
insensible, does not always reclaim the Prince from his Error; they impute
the misfortune to the Winds or Planets, and although he does not excuse them,
yet had he rather be dishonored by persons, that he can sometimes look upon as
inferior to him, than to be well served by others, that he must be obliged to
admire.

I cannot tell, answered I, at these words, if there be any such Princes as
those you speak of; but I know that Augustus whom you mentioned but now, was
none of the number: You may, replied Caesarion, be deceived as well as many
others; he had a great deal of wit and ingenuity, it is not to be denied; but
he was not altogether so great a Genius as most do imagine, grounding their
belief upon the report of some Modern Writers, who have not had knowledge
sufficient to be competent Judges in the Case. And I am much deceived,
continued he, if you are not well pleased at what I shall relate to you of him.

You know better than I, Abstinuit congressu hominum Diu prae pudore, and jam
de necanda deliberavit. Suet.
that being informed of his Daughters misfortunes, he was at the same time so
afflicted in hearing that it was known, and so exasperated against her, for the
singular circumstances wherewith it was attended: That he not only refused to
appear in in public for a confiderable time, but had also thoughts of putting
his Daughter to Death. But altering his mind, De silia absens, ac libello per
Quaestorum recitato sub notum senatui fecit. ibid.
instead of wholly conniving at her Debauches, not being willing to punish them
as they deserved, he could not forbear complaining to the Senate, by a
Memorial which he caused there to be read publicly to that purpose. It was his
Custom after this manner to impart his most important Affairs, whether Public
or Domestic, to the Fathers of the Senate, when he did not do it in person.
But some time after, his anger and grief giving place to his Reason, he
repented publishing his own Shame, in such a manner as all the World was
sensible of the business, and in the just displeasure thereof cried out more
than once: Horum mihi nihil accidisset, si aut Agrippa, aut Mecoenas vixisset.
Senec. 6 de Benef.
That if Agrippa or Mecaenas had been alive, he had not committed such an Error.

Nothing can be more to the Subject we speak of, than what you have now
mentioned. This unfortunate Father, so happy in all things else, knew very
well, as you see, the great need that a Prince has (be he never so able
himself) of a Minister, that may be as able or wiser than himself; of one that
he may love and esteem so much, as to suffer him to reclaim him when he does
amiss. And to quit this old pernicious Maxim of Court; If thou do hinder thy
Master from Falling, he will not be sensible, that it is thou that Raisest him
up. But believe me, there are but very few, that will own, as this Emperor did,
that their Counselors have more wisdom than they. And were I to begin the
World agine, I should be cautious how I judged of others by him; and I would
rather give credit to a Courtier belonging to Emanuel King of Portugal, whose
Example may serve for a Rule, to all able persons, that have to do with great
Men.

This Prince, having a Letter of importance to write, commanded one of his
Gentlemen to do it; the Gentleman performed his part the best he could, and
carried it to the King: The King, having read it, drew one out of his Pocket,
that he had composed himself about the same business, and comparing them
together, he ingeniously confessed, that the Gentleman's was the best, and
that he would make use of it. What reflection, think you, made the Courtier on
this Discourse; he took no farther notice of it, but making a profound
Obeisance, went presently and took leave of his best Friend, teling him, That
he had no more to do at Court, the King knew that he had more wit than
himself. I do not conceive, replied I, at this story, that this Example is af
any great moment. In all likelihood this Gentleman was too soon alarmed, and
the Noble sinceririty of his Master, in doing him justice, would have produced
other effects, than to expel a person of his Merit. As it was more glorious to
the King to submit, than it was to the Courtier to be submitted to; he had more
reason to be jealous of his Master, than to fear that his Master should be
jealous of him, and it could not be thought, but a Prince, that could do so
generous an Action, would also put a due value upon it.

Nothing can be better imagined, than what you have now expressed, replied
Caesarion, to me: Nevertheless as nothing obliged the King to show his Letter,
and it not being to his Credit to do it; it may well be supposed he did it
unawares, and that he repented doing of it. Now if you do not think, that the
effects of the displeasure he had for it, would not fall on him, that was the
occasion of it, you have not the same Idea of the hearts of Men that I have,
and especially of great Men.

How can they, without displeasure, acknowledge themselves inferior, in any
thing, to persons that are so far from being worthy to be their Equals? All
that they hear or see tends only to make them believe that they are above all
things; what appearance is there, that they can resist so pleasant an
impression? Men not only endeavor to give them an opinion of the greatest Idea
of themselves, but also strive to find high mysteries in the explication they
make of the meanest of their expressions, which they could never have dreamt of
themselves, by turning into ridioule the good Qualities of their Equals,
thereby to provoke their displeasure, and what is worst of all, and most tends
to corrupt them, is, by disguising their greatest faults with the names of
virtues which resemble them.

Now if private persons, Non vides ipsum illum Aristotelis discipulum tanto
ingenio, tanta modestia, postquam Rex appellatus sit, crudelem, superbum,
immoderatum fuisse. Cic. ad At. l. 13. ep. 2.8
whose whole life is nothing but a continual passage from one subjection to
another, or that at least spend the greatest part of it with persons that have
no need to flatter us, find it so difficult to rule our passions and self-love:
how should a great Prince, whose state is a kind of continual intoxication,
become reasonable, without it be by a special grace of God, or by an
extraordinary gift of wisdom?

Do you not see, cried the greatest Wit in Rome, speaking familiarly to his
best friend of what might be expected of Caesar, (who then appeared very
moderate) if once he became peaceable and absolute Master of the Commonwealth,
Do you not see (says he unto him) how the Disciple of Aristotle so wise, so
modest, became passionate, cruel and proud, as soon as he was mounted the
Throne.

As able as he thought himself, this great Judge was however deceived in his
opinion: the Roman, he prophesi'd so ill of, made as great a progress in
virtue, even to his death, as the Greek, to whom he resembles him, had done in
vice. But Caesar had been 50 years a private person, and besides we do not
every day find a Caesar.

Not that I will say, but that our age has produced great Spirits, that do move
in high Spheres. Nature is as liberal and vigorous as heretofore; not to
instance in those whose reputation equals their merit, such as the invincible
Monarch of France, envied by the whole World. I was told, some years past, of a
great Prince, who at 13 years of age, being praised by his Courtiers, for some
Action that he was not over well satisfied withal himself, he answered in
reproving them of their flattery, I Prencipi fanno sempre tutto been.

But once again, such Answers are not heard every day; and for my part, very
far from wondering or thinking strange, that persons of this degree should not
have the Merit which is duo unto them, I rather think it strange, that they do
not reason as Caligula did, and that our blind submission to their unreasonable
desires should raise their Presumption unto the highest extravagance, Seeing
those that conduct droves of Cattle (said the fool) are not beasts like
themselves, Philo. in his Ambass.
but are of a more excellent nature; is it not just, that those which command
so absolutely over men, and whom all others obey, should be more than men, like
those over whom they command?

This is the effect our flattery does naturally produce in the Spirit of
Princes, and it is what frequently hapn'd for the most part in the times of
Papanism. But if our holy Religion does not allow of these Apotheoses, yet it
does so well establish the absolute Authority of Princes, that it is much
easier for them to offend in this regard, than it was heretofore to those
deifi'd Kings and Emperors.

Although Caesarion had done speaking, I was so concerned at what he said, that
I fancied I still heard him; his discourse seemed so strange to me, and withal
so apparent, that I knew not what judgment to make of it. On one hand I had
much difficulty to disuse my self from admiring the condition of Princes, whom
I always heard called Gods upon earth; on the other hand I could not deny the
weakness's which he demonstrated they were inclined to. But at length, truth
carrying a kind of Majesty with it, which no prejudice is able to resist, I
could not avoid being of his judgment; and in this manner, with as great
pleasure as good fortune, I divested my self of the strong opinion I sucked in,
in my youth.

At this rate, replied I at length, having paused a while, the condition of
Kings is a deplorable state; to judge rightly of it, there is no state more
miserable, said Caesarion, and which deserves more pity; and it is whereof we
ought to be well persuaded when we go to Court. On the contrary, answered I,
methinks this persuasion seems to discourage us from engaging at all at Court:
you are much mistaken, said he. A Courtier that looks upon greatness with such
an eye, not as a sovereign Good, but as a Good whose consequences are commonly
attended with error and ignorance, will not be so easily agitated with those
disorderly and furious desires of attaining them, which trouble the mind in the
same degree as it excites it, which makes a man take ill measures, and inspires
him with rashness and folly. Ambition thrusts him forwards barefaced, it does
not transport him beyond himself with joy nor grief at the appearance of frowns
or smiles; it does not make him, through greediness or impatience, guilty of
any false step, which may without necessity oblige him to discover his designs,
and which may render him ridiculous if he should not succeed in them: There
appears nothing but what is decent, equal, and moderate in all his dealings. If
he does not arrive at some great fortune by these means, yet at least he
exposes not himself much, and it is no disgrace not to obtain, what he does not
very eagerly pursue.

Indeed a man of this temper may be a Courtier all days of his life; he
considers it as a School, where he must go to receive his Masters directions,
and not as an employment. If he seeks his Princes favor, it is that he might
be serviceable to him, either to make Religion flourish amongst his Subjects,
or to defend them from their Enemies, or to see that they have Justice done
them. But not to do any thing all his life, but gaze at a man, and to seek all
occasions to show himself, he would not think all the Riches and Honor in the
World worth he getting, by such an idle dissembling sort of life.

Not but that he likes Riches, and approves of Honor and Glory, and will spare
no just means to attain them; it is because he thinks not that true Glory,
which is attained by these ways. It may be offered to him at a rate that he
thinks unreasonable; he knows what to lay out before he cheapens it, he will
give for it no more than it is worth, and if it be ovevalu'd, he will not
disparage it, but thinks he should be counted a fool to buy it at too dear a
rate.

And do not think, that it is out of any disrespect or aversion for Princes that
he is of this opinion, or because he thinks them to be unfortunate and corrupt.
The faults, which would deserve his hatred in private persons, only excite his
pity toward Princes; and as it is the most active of all the Passions in a
generous soul, it inclines him naturally to assist them, and not to shun and
abandon them to the mercy of Cheats and Flatterers; he satisfies himself in
using all honest ways and means to procure their favor and good liking, that
they may see the need of having such as him near them: If they were duly
informed, they would spare no cost of employing such in their service, for he
excuses in them a thousand things, which those that envy them do condemn: He
says, that it would not be only unjust, but also inhumane to reproach them
with defects, which are almost inseparable from their quality; very far from
that dark, black and malicious spite, mixed with indignation and envy, where
with most of them that approach their persons be infected; he bears to them the
pity and tenderness that a Father does to his Child before it attains the age
of discretion: And the care of a tender Physician to his sick Patient, whose
soul sympathises with the sickness of his Patients body: He has always this
great truth in his mind, that he should perhaps be more frail than they, were
he raised to the same Eminency: By this noble consideration, he bears from them
what he would not from any else; he persists in serving them when all others
forsake them; he prays for them when all the World does curse them, and without
trouble renders them the Religious respect which all Laws give unto them; he
bears always in mind the the saying of the ancient Poet, Senec. Epig. 41. de
Exilio suo.
Res est Sacra Miser.

It was Sun set, when Caesarion had ended this Discourse: I cannot describe the
impressions it made on my mind, and I did not perfectly understand it, but by
the use I since made of it. I only remember that going afterward to walk in a
Garden, that fronted his House, to take the fresh air; I was so concerned, that
I could not speak a word all that Evening, nor do any thing but look at him, as
if I had never seen him before: Any body besides him would have perceived it
with pleasure, and would have let me gone on in my folly, but he laughed at me
as soon as ever he perceived it: Whether it was by nature, or by much study, he
was wholly insensible of the pleasure that self-love usually affords. He
confessed to me afterward in our familiar meetings and discourses, that this
indifferency proceeded from the continual experience he had of his own defects,
and the impossibility he found to prevent them; that they were odious to him,
and no less present in his thoughts, than his good Qualities, although perhaps
less discerned by the World; that it may be every man might say so much of
himself, would they make a diligent scrutiny; but most did not trouble
themselves in examining their thoughts as strictly as he did, wherein he knew
not if he deserved be envied or to be pitied. If it were not to be happy to be
in this temper of mind, it was at least to be prudent and discreet, and you
have as great cause to lament surviving so rare a friend, as I have of
retaining in my mind a tender and religious Remembrance of his admirable great
Learning and Wisdom.

The End of the Fourth Day.

