The Renowned HISTORY, or the LIFE and DEATH of GUY EARL of WARWICK. CONTAINING
His Noble EXPLOITS and VICTORIES.

depiction of Guy on his horse

LONDON. Printed by H. Brugis for P. Brooksby at the Golden Hall near the
Hospital-Gate in West-Smithfield MDCLXXXI.

The Episile to the Reader.
COurteous Reader I have here undertaken to give you a full and satisfactory
Account of the Life and Death of the far-Famed and Most Renowned English
Champion GUY Earl of Warwick, according to what can be Collected out of the
best Historians, both Ancient and Modern. No Work in this Nature ever yet
appearing to the World with more then half a Face, or an imperfect Relation,
the which has rather sullied the Heroic Actions of so brave a man, then caused
them to shine in their Native Brightness, which was one of the chief Causes
that incited me to venture this vast Scene, which includes not only Europe, but
great part of Asia ever it can be finished, having ever had a Veneration for the
Memories of Worthy men I thought not fit to let such Laurels wither in the dust
as hertofore have flourished on the Brows of our Renowned Hero, England's
greatest boast, well knowing how great an Ingratitude it is, to let that Honor
lie buried in silence that of the Nation has deserved so well: and above all, I
consider there is no greater Spur to prick forwards the minds of men to
undertake Great Designs and Vallarous Exploits, than by Reading the worthy
Deeds of such as have thereby attained to the height of Glory: For stories of
Battles and of Warlike Enterprises, if drawn to the Life, do most commonly (as
it were) bear fire in themselves, the which often so inflames the Souls of
youth, that it stirs them up with a desire to imitate the same, and the very
remembrance inspires them with courage, for the Soul of man being composed of a
fiery substance, if not restrained by dullness and gross Humors of the body,
will be ever reaching after this subl^^e, placed in a more then ordinary
Sphere, especially in English men, who at this day are Famed for Courage and
true Heroic Valor through all the yet known World. No Nation under Heaven but
in that must give us the preheminencey, or we may justly claim it as our
Birthrights. And now dear Contrymen since I have taken some small pains in
drawing out this History as near as possible to the Life, I hope you will be so
just to the Memory of this Renowned Earl, as to read over his Warlike and Pious
Actions, if not to imitate them, which is the only wish of him who is a greater
admirer of true worth.

Your loving Country man to serve you JOHN SHURLY.

The Argument.
HOw Guy Lineally descended from Cassibilanus, the Pamous British Prince, with
a brief Account of the Roman and Saxon Conquest over this Isle of Guy's Birth
and Parentage, his Youthful Exploits and first falling in Love with Phaelice,
and what passed between them, how she sent him abroad to Fight, having been
admonished of his warlike Exploits in a Dream, how Guy Landing in Normandy
killed two Champions and grievously wounded the third, freeing a Lady who was
wrongfully condemned to dye, how he was pursued by Duke Philbertus, how he
fought with him at Sea and took him Prisoner, how he worsted all the German
Princes, and won from them the Emperors Daughter, he returning here to England
kills the monstrous Dun Cow, after being sent abroad he kills sixteen of Duke
Ottons men who lay in a wood to intercept his Life; assists the Duke of Lovain
against Lorain, raises the Siege with a dreadful overthrow, afterward makes
Peace, and with two thousand men puts to Sea in order to the Relief of
Bizantium, Besieged by the Turks, meets with several Pirates and destroys many
of them, raises the Siege and kills several of the Pagan Champions, routing
their Armies: Terty wounded and his Lady taken from him, the which he restores
and assists his Father, Besieged by Duke Otton whom he in single Combat killed,
a Dragon and a Bore, then returns to England and kills another Dragon in
Northumberland, after that, is Married, then departs on Pilgrimage to the Holy
Land, Kills Amarant a huge Giant and delivers those that he kept in Tortures,
routs Amanthus and restores Earl Terry to his Earldome, returns to England
Combats Colbron the Danish Giant and kills him, put the Armies to rout, freeing
England, then lives in a Cave unknown to all bus the King, at his death seads
Phaelice his Ring, who coming to him closed his Eyes, and shortly after dies
her self for grief, are splendidly buried in one Tomb, with an Epitaph
infixed, and many other particulars more at large.

CHAP. I.
A Brief Narration of the Roman and Saxon Conquest made of this Island, and of
the miseries it endured, which brings us to the Birth and Lineal decent of our
Famous Champion the Heroic Earl.
WHen Rome had spread her Ensigns wide into the world, and made most Nations
yield unto her Arms, France totally subdued some wenty years before our
Saviors Birth: Caesar ambitious of more Honor, from the distant shore, cast
his Eyes on this our British Isle, enclosed with white Rocks, (from whence
most do affirm it took its name) and rounded with the Sea, then wild and
barbarous, without Law or civil Customs; all painted people and in manners
strange) yet the great Warrior fired with successful Fortune, regarding not
the People but the Land, desirous to anex it to his Conquests, and the Roman
Empire, by reason of its temperate and pleasant situation; set sail from
Callis with 200 Ships, thinking with his experienced Legions and old Soldiers
trained in War, in a short space to over run this Isle, then ignorant in seats
of Arms; but ere he Landed, found true British valor so beyond his
expectation, that he stood amazed: for the Britains having notice of the
Invasion, all assembled under their several Kings or Princes.

Cassibilain a Famous Britain, then being chief; from whom renowned Guy our
famous English Champion sprung; they encountered the Romans so fiertely at
their Landing, that Caesar himself was forced shamefully to retreat with the
lsss of his own sword, and several Ensigns and Standards were taken, his Army
broken and he forced back to France to make Recruits: such was the valor then
our Nation bore, and at the first onset foiled proud Rome, to whose dread Arms
the world their portion homage paid, nor did she make a Conquest here at last
by the Sword, but after infinite loss and twenty years toil, was forced to
grant the Britains their own terms; the which was in the Reign of Augustus,
about the time of our Saviors birth, that Prince of peace who established
peace throughout the world; and for 400 years that the Roman Emperors by their
Lieutenants Ruled this Isle, no nation afforded more valiant and redoubted men,
who were continually drawn out for to supply their Armies in most quarters of
the world: till the Red horse went out to take peace from the Earth, and the
Roman Empier was grown so great, that the bole was not able to support the
branches; whereupon the Goths and Vandals breaking into Italy, tore it in
pieces so that the Romans to save their own nearer home abandoned this Isle,
and carried with them all the flower of Brirish Chivalry; upon which the Scots
and Picts taking the advantage, overrun the Northern parts, destroying all with
sire and sword ^^lamentably, that the distressed Britains were forced to call
unto their aid the Saxons, a ^arlik people that then flourished in Germany
which helped but to make their miseries the greater, for after they had subdued
the British Enemies, they became worse Enemies themselves; for Hingest and
Horsus their two Captains, observing the fruitfulness and pleasant Cituation of
the Country, were loath to return to their own barren soil without good
Bootyes; whereupon, and the better to create a quarrel, the former Married his
Daughter to Vortimor the British King (descended lineally from the before
mentioned Cassibilain) raised no small regret amongst the British Nobility,
especially because through her means the Saxons were preferred to the chief
Dignities, the which increased their interest, and got them sirmer footing in
the Land, of which they complaining to the King and finding no Redress, put
some Affronts upon the Saxon Chiefs, who glad of any opportunity for to beget a
quarrel thereupon (as they pretended for want of their promised pay) seized
several Towns wherein their Soldiers were quartered; this Allarmd the Britains,
who Headed by the young Prince Vortimors Son, overthrew them in a pitched
Battle though not without muth slaughter on both sides: and after having driven
them out of all their places of strength, obliged them to leave the Land; but
long they rested not content, for the next year having gathered a great
strength, they set sail for this Isle, the shores of which were so manfully
defended against them, that they finding no possibility to Land, desired a
Truce, and that they might Treat with the British Nobility about delivering
them their Daughter; the which after some debate was granted, and about sixty
of the Saxons came on shore privately Armed to Treat with the like number of
Britains; and in the midst of the Treaty, every Saxon (as it was before
contrived amongst them) slew his man, unless one who Treated with (as some say)
the Earl of Warwick, the Earl seeing the Treathery prevented him by pulling up
a hedgestake, with which he heat out his brains, and ki^^d five or six more,
himself getting away with only a slight wound in the lest arm. The chief
Nobility being thus murdered by Treathery, the amazed Britains Retreated, and
gave the Saxons opportunity to Land, the which they had no sooner done, but
they fell to their old trade of laying all wast with fire and sword; the which
they exeented with such cruelty, as made the people fly before them to the
Mountains (which are now talled Wales, and are the real ancient Britains)
leaving their houses and what they could not carry or drive away to the ravage
of the bloody Conquerors, who divided the Nation into seven parts, and named it
a Hepterchy, each portion having a King over it, which continued so in civil
wars amongst themselves about three hundred years, till it was totally subdued
by Edgard the great King of the West Saxons ^^^named Athelstone about the sixth
year of whose Reign was the ever famous Champion Giraldus Cassibilanius, (...)
called Guy of Warwick, who as credible Historians do affirm, descended lineally
^^om the British Royal ^^ood, ever since Cassibilanius the warlike Prince
before recited, through the many changes and miseries of War clouded in
obscurity, which no^ will be the Subject of this ensi^ng History; since we have
already shown you the miserie^ of truel War, and the bravery of British spirits
under such afflictions, and traced through the many adverse windings the
descent of our Hero, Englands chief glory, whose name will live while time
shall be no more.

And still be sounded by the trump of Fame,
Where ever she English Valor does proclaim.
CHAP. II.
How Guy descended from Cassibilanius the Renowned British Prince, of his Birth
and Youthful Exploits: and how he fell in Love with Phaelice the Earls
beauteous Daughter, and how she despised his suit.


GUy rald us Cassibilanius Son of Gordian Caslibilanius (but more vulgarly
known by the name of Guy of Warwick, by which name we must trace the History of
his Life) born in the famous City of Warwick, in the Sixth year of the Reign of
Edgard the Great, his Father being an accomplished Gentleman, and had formerly
a very good Estate in Northumberland, which he was forced to part with, to save
his life, at the time of his being taken Prisoner; for bearing Arms under the
subdued Saxon King of Mercia: Upon which resignation obtaining his Liberty from
the Martial in whose custody he was, he came to Warwick and there so well
behaved himself that he won the affections and good likeing of all the Gentry,
but especially of Earl Robands, whom the King had made Governor of the Town
and Castle; who took him into his house and made him his Steward; in which
place he behaved himself so well, that he won the affections of a Kinghts
Daughter in the Town, which he married, and on her begat renowned Guy, the
subject of this famous History, who might be said like Hercules from his very
infancy to be made for War, and great Exploits; being so well limbed from head
to foot, as might denote a stout and Warlike Hero would in time from that bold
infant rise; nay, and his mothers Dreams presaged no less: for during her
pregnancy, she fancied that Mars descended in a bloody Chariot drawn by two
fiery Dragons, and told her, that the infant that her womb contained, should be
the Glory of this Nation; and so great in Arms renownd, as should amaze mankind
and he the terror of the Pagan world; this she declared to the Countess of
Warwick about a month before her delivery, which after wards proved true, as
shall amply he related: For no sooner had he attained to eight years of age,
but he began to practice skill in Wrestling, Running, Throwing stones, and
other Exertises that his tender years were capable of, in which he exceeded all
that were much older and far bigger than himself, to the admiration of of those
that observed him more curiously; his delight was in hardships and laborious
exercise, and so continued till sixteen, at which age few men could encounter
with him, be then was used to enter the List, and wheresoever he came, always
came off with applause. Insomuch that the Earl hearing of his unmatched
exploits, sent for him and entertained him at dinner with himself and several
of the Gentry of that Country, but above all Phaelice his beauteous daughter,
Angel bright, and with accomplished Graces Fraught, on whom Guy firing his
youthful eyes, immediately felt Loves Arrows wound his soul, and passion, like
a Fever burned within; still as he gazed he felt new flames, and so unexpected
a surprise, that all began to wonder at the sudden change; his Father demanded
the cause, but could not get the secret from his breast, it stuck too close, yet
after the sumptuous repast he played several Prizes before the Earl, and being
stung by Love, grew more fierce against his Cumbatants; or perhaps to show the
Lady his Valor, and to make her to have some esteem of his worth; so that at
Wrestling, Back-^word, Faulcheon, or the like, none were able to stand before
him; for his force ^^med more than man, and all that he struck or laid his hand
upon he felled or tumbled to the ground; so that at the last none durst
Encounter him: he seeing that, put on his Clothes, and going to the Earl humbly
desired his License to retire himself, as he pretended, for refreshment; at
which the Earl embracing him, said, Go thou worthy Youth our Nations Pride, and
withal gave him a Ring set with Diamonds, as likewise several other Noble men
made him Presants, the which he unwillingly received, modestly excusing the
Applauses, and Favors they had heaped upon him, saying, he was not worthy of
them, and that his whole Lives Service must make them Restitution for those
benefits he had received at their hands, which modestly made them yet commend
him more, and have a greater Esteem of his Virtues, and each was the more
desirous of his company; but at his earnest request, and the approach of night
they dismissed him, upon his promise to attend them the next day; after he was
departed, and the Table sumptuously spread, wine in abundance was called for,
and supper no sooner ended, but the Earl began Guys health, each of the Lords
and Gentry presant pledging it with their hats off. Such Fame got he by his
prevailing manhood, after which round their whole discourse was of his
hopefulness, and the great Endowments that Nature and Art had conspired to
bestow upon, Guys Father was muth joyed in his happy Son, etc.

But now we must leave them in the midst of their Iollitry, and sollow Guy into
his secret retirement, where being arrived, he began to contemplate upon what
he had seen, and could hardly persuade himself that she was mortal, so far his
fancy wrought upon her perfections, for indeed she was fair even to a Miracle,
so that that age afforded her no parallel; for Eyes she had that glistered like
two Stars, shaded with eyehrows pleasant to behold, a fair high Forehead, and
cheeks as smooth as Alablafter, in which the Roses and the Lis^ies mired so
pure, that none could discern which had the superiority, her Teeth like orient
Pearls, enclosed with Coral Lips, and such a winning smile as might ravish the
beholder, with a smooth chin transparent, whilst in curious wreaths her Golden
Tresses hung; to these add a majestic grace and comely mean: To sum up all
Natures masterpiece, the only wonder of her sex. These considered, wrackt poor
Guy almost to despair of ever attaining such an accomplished creature, while
thus he gives his passion vent, how am I lost, for ever lost, in what a
pathless maze is it I wonder, can Loves soves force be such, to wound a heart
that never injured his deity; but if it must be so, that it is thy sport
(winged god) to wound us Mortals with thy staming shafts let her (in whose
bright eyes thou satest when first thou wingedst them with her Glances and
darted them into my breast) feell an equal passion, or else it is Tyranny to
^orture one thou art not purposed to relieve: how am I wrapped in clouds, not
knowing ^here I am, so quickly snarched into the unknown Regions, where I
cannor turn un^^ the right or to the left, but must either sore aloft, or fall
into confusion, wild and ru^^ (...), the latter is sure if nor ^revented by the
souner; for me to attain that ^^auteous, ^^^ly form divine, my soul-desire, I
fear is altogether impossible, by reason of the in^^^^e dissance in our
Fortunes, she to high and I so mean and low; yet that me thinks should not
divide us; Love is far more pure than Gold, and wieness my wounds its forte is
irresistible: O ye powers! for what are these treated beings, these soster
heauties if not to be enjoyed? or did ye send these Angellick shapes from your
bright abodes, only to be gazed upon and wondered at by Lovesick man, and
punish him by what he never must possess; it is sure they were not, nor can such
lovely shapes lodge curelty, or proud disdain within their breasts, why then
neglect I to declare my suit? who knows but she may prove kind or burn with
equal flame? seeing her eyes bent equally with mine, and glance for glance she
often sent, and now and then a heavenly smile which ended in a blush; I Will be no
longer tortured thus between hope and despair, but will go to her, and with low
obedience tell her that I Love, so receive my sentance of Life or Death from
her fair lips; but alas! how shall I do it, seeing I am unskilful in that
grand affair? assist me then thou god of Love, and send one of thy golden
shafts before to make me room and yield me succesful in this my bold attempt,
Virgin I come, my Fever burns woe fierce to be delayed.

So saying, he stayed his language with a peal of sighs, strait arose from the
solitary ^bed whereon he lay, and in the best attice he had, posted to Warwick
Castle where he heard his Love was gone to recreate her self, but scartely was
he entered, ere he met the Earl with many of the Gentry, preparing for a
Hunting match, all of them welcoming Guy, and desired his company, but he
excused himself by telling them he was much incisposed, and so with much ado
obtained his exemption of the Earl, who immediately sent for his Physician, and
gave him strickt charge to be careful of his bealth and preservation: so the
Earl to Hunting rode, and Guy was conducted to his Chamber, where the Physician
made no small ad^ to enquire into the Nature of his Malady; but the more he
sought the more be found himself at a loss; at which he perceiving Guy to smile
disdeinfully, the better to save his credit, told him he must be dieted,
blooded, and keep his chamber, or his distemper would grow worse; to which, Guy
rising from his seat, onswered; Truly Father, at this time of your
prescriptions, there is no need, nor can your Art afford the least rellef, no
Gallen or Hipocrates themselves were they alive and both here present, could
not give me ease; it is my self must be my own Physician, or my Malady must reign
for ever over me: There is a slower as I have lately heard, of precious worth,
growing in this Castle, the which could I once pluck, would ease me in a
moment; at which the Doctor stood in admiration, wondering what stower he meant,
why truly sir said he it is called Happy, indeed quath the Doctor happiness is
good, but as for a flower of that name, in all my curious search I never found
nor heard of, pray sir said Guy leave me, and I sear not but to find it out,
for I am sure it grows within the^^ walls; at which the Doctor took his leave,
and Guy ascended up the Castle stairs to vi^^^ the prospect of the Gardens
round, into which he had no sooner cast his eyes but he beh^^^ the beauteous
maid that was sole Empress of his heart, sitting alone in a shady Bov^^ to
screen her from the suns hot Rays, while before her the springing water of a
Cristal Fountain played and sent refreshment to each fragrant flower or lovely
plant that crowned the happy place, resembling another Paradise, and she the
first created woman; these Guy takes as happy Omens and resolves to venture now
for life or death, and thus invokes Loves Deity to aid him in the great design.
Oh propitious power, if ever, now prove kind in aiding thy humble suppliant,
who is all obedience unto thy commands and ^aies his unspotted vows at thy
great Altar, which ever blazes bright with slaming hearts of Lovers, offered up
as Trophies of thy power; assist me to Court this famous beauty, and teach me
how to woo and how to Conquer her who has already conquored me: so saying, he
descended with all speed, and coming to the Garden gate, knocked softly, and
soon found admittance by one of the Damsels that waited on fair Phaelice, the
which he no sooner had, but composing his warlike face into the best form he
could; he made toward her with low reverence, who (expecting he came with some
message from her Father) rose up to meet him, when Guy with Love surtharged,
thus began.

Fairest of Creatures, brightest of your sexes, made of such kindred mould to
Heaven that you seem Angelical, a goddess all divine; therefore I have here
brought a heart by Loves command to offer at your shrine; O frown not on me
with disdainful Eyes, least with such a look death enter and destroy the man
that ever shall admire, and with this awful distance adore your matchless
Virtues; despise me not thou only center of my soul, who loves thee more than
life, O that I could express my boundless passion, or that thou could look
into my breast, and there behold how the tormenting flames still roal about my
heart, that with a continual Fever burns, in which the Arrows of your pointed
beauty stick; that Lords and Noble men have courted you I am not ignorant, but
none could Love like me; pardon my boldness Lady, that to save my life I sue,
with the same fear a guilty prisoner beholds his angry Judge; for your power's
for greater when Life or death depends upon your smiles or frowns.

To whom thus Phaelice with majestic countenance replied: Alas sir, Love is
such a thildish toy I never intend to try it, theresore cease your vain suit, a
Virgins happy life shall be my choice for ever; Love is but a dream composed of
idle santies, and that I should wound you is impossible, or if such it could
be, you them must blame your rash and unadvised folly, to attempt things so far
above your reath; could you imagine that the Heir of Warwick would ere
condescend to Marry with one so far beneath in birth, and in each dagree unsi^,
no therefore I would advise you to desist this enterprise, least it come unto
my Fathers rat, and beget the sharp rebuke.

So saying she ended, and Guy prepared to answer, hut she turned away
disdainfully and left hun to himself now hopeless, perplered and tortured worse
than ever.

Cursing the cruel Stars that ruled his birth
And wishing now to be no more on Earth
CHAP. III.
How Guy being denied, fell distracted for a time, till Cupid representing him
in a Warlike posture, and declaring what wonders should be wrought by him to
Phaelice in her sleep, telling her it was his mothers command that she should
love him, whereupon she granted her consent upon condition of his performing
glorious enterprises.


HAlf distracted with what had passed, Guy retires to his Fathers house
thinking to shake off the Chains of Love, or burst them by some other means;
for like Hercules's yovson'd shirt, the more he strove the more the venom
worked and the distentper followed him wheresoever he went, for which he
finding no relief, grew frantic for a time, quite bereft of sense or reason,
and to this purpose uttered his phrensies and ran into disorder far beyond
Orlando or Orestes.

Am I then slighted (sald he) who evermore will trust to womankind? accursed
cruel Love, could thou leave me thus? can she not Love, or loves she some one
else, which hinders her Love from passing unto me? O that I knew my Rival, my
dread arm should hurl such vengean^^ an his hend as should amaze mankind; I Would
drag him cound the world, ore Sea and Land, and (...) him into circling fires,
plung him into roaring Erebus, there to broyl in Brimstone flames and scorched
for ever. O Jove Jove! I Will to thy Courts and hollow loud, nay I will thunder to
your regardless power, and make you deaf with everlasting cries, from the Suns
bright Chariot snatch ^cherial sire, set your Celestial mansions in a blaze,
melt down your golden Roofs, and make your gates of Adamant fly from off their
Tiamond hinges; arm my self with Lightning, and make vollued thunders roar
around the world; Eacus, Mines, Rodomanthus, and all the black Infernal powers,
what have ye done, my Love she is lost, for ever gone; sink sink earths frame to
thy first Chaos, and with thy ruin crush mankind; drop, drop ye ctars and ever
wakeful Tapers of the Skies, and let combustive flames purge this grosser
world; O she is gone, the Beauties gone, now night and darkness cease me, and
eternal slumbers seal my Eyes.

Thus saying, he groand and smote his breast, pulled off his hair, and in
disiracted sort continued till Phaelice being admonished by Cupid in a dream,
sent him more comsortable hopes of her ensuing favors.

When Night had drawn her Curtain, and the world in silence sat, each mortal
in sweet slumbers was reposed, Morbheus the Leaden god of sleep from his drowsy
Coves, by Venus command, coused up his Visionary forms, the which in various
shapes present themselves to men, and one of the Faries dressed in Cupid's
wonted guise, with Bow and Quiver, armed, presents it to the fancy of the
slumbering Phaelice, to whom the shade being instructed, thus began.

Phaelice, behold I from the Queen of Love my beauteous Mother, come to present
unto thee this Martial Here, and with that a shade all clad in Aemour appeared
representing Guy so to the life, that she knew him at first, and started in her
sleep, while thus the winged form proceeded: This is the man designed for thee,
whose warlike deads shall make the world amazed; and to such Fame shall soon
arise that Kings and Princes shall be proud to court him, whilst the terror of
his arm shall spread over greatest part of the Earth; a friend to the
distressed, and the oppressors foe; Fortune shall wait on him, and Conquering
Laurels still be green upon his brows; despise him not fair Virgin for his want
of wealth, it is the treasure of the mind that makes a man truly great; for
know, Beauty was at first treated free, ever Gold was known or from the vowels
of the Earth was brought to light, and since it has been in estimation, it has
corrupied innocence, and Virtue spoiled, therefore is to be despised in case of
Love, that intellectual Essence and bright jewel of the Soul; then as the
powers above decree take him, for his manhood and accomplished virtues think
him worthy of your Love even at the highest rate, for it is most assured he is
so.

So said the Form, and Cupid that was not wanting in the enterprise drew up his
Bow charged with a Golden shaft and aimed directly at Phaelice heart, the which
no soo^^er done, but swift as Lightning slew the singing Arrow through the
yielding air, and fixed its point direct, at which the startling Virgin waked,
and wondered to find a fire so quickly kindled in her breast, so that
contemplating on the Vision, she thus began to sigh her passion out.

Alas and art thou gone thou winged power, what thange is this I feel, I that
so late despised all Love, and laughed at Lovers pains, now feell a fever in my
breast that wist consume me if it get not vent; can it be Guy that I must Love
my Fathers Stewards Son that I denied, must I now sue to him, perhaps now he
will despise me for neglecting him, and triumph over my weakness: O Cupid are
thy Laws then so severe? pardon my offense and sle hereafter grow more mild,
and pity Lovers in distress.

While she was thus struggling with her flame Guy, having recovered his senses,
resolved not to Retreat like a Coward, but Rally once more and try his Fortune,
and after some search, having found her in her Chamber he thus begins.

Most Beauteous, though severe, to you once more I have presumed to come, not
as a Suitor now, but as a condemned Prisoner, desiring you to strike the fatal
stroke, that can only set my soul at rest, for I have born my torture long
enough; no Tirant Love I can endure no more; therefore sweet Lady in pity to a
wounded Lover, if any pity lodges in that fair breast, strike deeper, yer at
last, prove kind and ease my pain, so saying he sighed and tears burst from his
warlike Eyes, not knowing that the powerful god of Love had mollified her heart
and made her sensible of his command etc.

The which Phaelice observing, began to blush, whilst in her fair cheeks the
Roses Conquest over the Lillies gained; then fetching an undiscovered sigh
began no followech. Alas you ask what is not mine to grant; know gentle youth I
at my Father's disposal a^^, nor without him dare I consent to ought, for
should I how prove disobedient, who so long have been obedient to his just
Commands; what would the world of Phaelice say? each tongue would wound my
Feign so deep that naught but death could yield relief; nor should I so escape,
for in the silent grave they would asperse me, and fix Reproach upon my Comb:
To which, thus answered Guy, Fair Lady, doubt not your Fathers free con^eist,
for with this arm I will so far purchase the good esteem of the Renowned Earl,
that my marchless deeds, instend of Gold shall win his greatness to accept of
me your humble slave for his obedient Son, so ended he, and she inflamed with
Love, yet willing to hide it for a time, began; Go then and in fierce Arms your
Fame advance, court breadful Battles while Victoria Crowins your head with her
Triumphant Lamrels, and when laven with the spoils of War, or great
Archievements, you return that I may safely yield without a stain to Honor, I
shall be all your own, till then I shall remain in Virgin-state your constant
Phaelice ever.

At which Guy overjoyed, with humble thanks vowed low as Earth, and at last
through the greess, his Language found a passage, while these words he uttered:
bright Star, by whose divine influence my soul is guided and disposed; If feats
of Arms, greatness in Battle gained, will please my Love, through seas of blood
i will wade, climb to the highest Turret in Fames brazen Tower, and from thence
look down upon the Coward world, with Gh for Caesar now, or the dread
Conqueror of the East, I seell new force, and on a sudden am grown more then
man, i am all on fire till my great task's begun, and for a time I willingly
forego thy beauteous face, which ne'rtheless shall be for ever stamped upon my
soul; my Love farwell, to Arms I must repair, for this sweet Kiss that I imprint
upon thy Corral lips, i will write thy name in Crimson Characters upon the breasts
of Earths proud Champions, that when they see them they may think of thee.

Again Farwell my Love, I must away
To find the coast where Glory bates to day.
CHAP. IV
How Guy putting to Sea landed in Normandy, where be fought with three
Champions, killing two of them, and wounded the third, raking from them a Lady
wrongfully condemned to die by the young Duke of Bilois who had Ravished her, etc.


NOw Guy having taken his leave of Phaelice, prepares for France, and
Embarquinng set Sail, with pronuse of quick art^^al there, but no sooner was
the Ship some ren Leagues off from shore but the Winds began to blow hard from
the South West, and black Clouds overspread the face of Heaven, and laud
thunders from the Northern round began to roar, so that in short time a
dreadful storm arose, while slightning darted thick, and made the Sea seem all
on sire, the Waves incaged by the winds mounted high, and seem to mix with
pitchy clouds, and bandied the Ship from side to side, so that they rode on
furiously before the Gusts all that day and all the following night, not having
so much as the prospect of Sun, Moon or Star, but early the next morning, the
Mariners from the Top-mast-head descryed Land, to which, the winds being
somewhat abated, they made; and about ten in the morning sound it to be Harflew
in Normandy where they put in safe, after an hours continuance in the Port, Guy
and the Captain of the Vessel went a shore to refresh themselves, where they
had not long been, ever they heard loud shouts, and the noise of Drums and
Trumpets, the which was most acceptable to Guy, for now he thought there was
some work for him in hand, whereupon he called his Host, and demanded the
cause, who with countenance sad, which showed a sense of grief, tosd him that a
beauerous young Lady of that place, Dorinda by name, having been sately
Ravished by one of the Duke de Biloys's Sons, the which black crime, four
Russins were subborned to swear that the fact was done by some other person,
and that she had confessed she only laid it upon the young Lord to ^i^^der his
Marriage, in revenge for breaking his promise that she pretended he had made to
her; upon which the old Duke grew so incensed, by reason his son was in a short
time to be Married to the Printess of Parma; that he condemned her to he Burnt,
unless any Champion would he so kind as to vindicate her innocence by fighting
with her sour Accusers one after another; this News was welcome unto Guy, as
hoping now to try his first Erperiment, so that turning from his Host to the
Captain, he sold, Sir, I think this enterprise is worthy of an English sword,
and that wronged Benuty ought not to be left thus, in distress; perhaps the
Dukes power over-aws those that are willing to venture their lives in her
behalf, and so the innocent must perish, whilst the Guilty shall go free: what
say you Captain, said Guy, if I adventure to preserve her, truly said the
Captian I think it a meritorious Exploit, could you a^^bieve it with safefy,
but I hold it no wisdom to hazard your life for the sake of a stranger whom
you never saw; truly said Guy I lest my Native Soil for that intent, my
business is only to win Fame at the hazard of my Life my Fortune, to help the
weak against the mighty, and to relieve those that appressing Tyrants crush: so
saying, he gave order for his Horse and Arms strait to be brought on shore, so
accoutring himself in his Warlike Habillements he took leave of his Host and
the Captain, who endeavored all they could to persuade him from the
Enterprise, but in vain; for having desired the Captain who would willingly
have accompanied him to await his return, he set spurs to his Horse and Riding
to the place where his Host had directed him, he found a great concourse of
people standing round in a Ring made by the Marshal so appointed, in the middle
of which was fas^ned to a Stake the fair Derinda, and by her stood her weeping
(...), on whom Guy fixing his eyes was moved to pitry, and more eager to
vindicate her with his Arms, the which he had scarce time to think upon, before
the Russins (who had accused the Lady) entered the List, well mounted and well
Armed, proudly wheeling to the Right and Left, and then making a stand, one of
them with a loud voice, dentanded who among the Assembly there present it was
that durst, in behalf of that base waman, (pointing to the disconsolate Lady)
enter the List, for says he, although the Dukes pleasure is that he shall
Combat with us four, yet I alone stand ready to receive him on my Lances
point, and in death make him repent the undertaking of a Strumpets cause, while
these my companions have no work left to do: This made Guy storm, so that his
countenance to terror changed, whereupon he bid make way, and with an
undaunted courage entering, thus spoke: See here presumtious man, a Champion
that dares vindicate this Lavies cause, and prove her innocent, not singly with
one will I dispute, but with you all at once to have the sooner done; this so
enraged the Frenchman that instantly he bid the signal Trumpet sound, at which
both couched their Spears, and as swift as Lightning in the midway meet, whilst
the hors^ (...) ^^dring hoofs made earth beneath them tremble, Guy's Spear came
plum upon (...) and through his Armor, and his shirt of Mail a passage found,
and (...) tody rushed, so that down he fell, and with a groan expired; the
other three seeing their Companion thus served, charged all three with
desperate fury upon Guy's high-proofed Arms, vowing Rebenge, the which Guy not
enduring long, drew out his Massy blade which like a Commer portendeth death
and dismal fate, and after having brandishen it began to hew upon his
Combatants so dreadfully, that at every blow their Armor (piecemeal) fell unto
the ground, and afterward their mingled limbs, so that two of them immediately
fell dead, and the other wounded, on his knees begged life, confessing the
whole intreague, how they had been hired to accuse the Lady, and that
Philbertus the Dukes son was really guilty, and had hired them for 1000 Crowns
to do what they had done, at which an universal shout arose each praising and
applauding Guy, and accusing the Duke, calling him Tyrant, each enquiring who
the stranger was that had wrought so great a beliverance to the distressed
Lady, and with all imaginable joy expressed their thanks; Guy being rid of his
foes, went to the Lady and unbound her, and delivered her to her friends, who
embraced his knees, and weeping for joy, implored ten thousand blessings on his
head, offering him Gold, Pearls and Diamonds, but he refused them all, and only
desiring them to provide for the Ladies safety, by conveying her out of the
Dukes power, least he being exasperated, upon his being informed what had
passed, should devise some other means to put her to death in his absence; so
taking his leave he departed to the Ship, and there related what had happened to
his friends who with no little joy gave attention to what he said, yet after
some consult, it was not thought safe to stay in that Harbor any longer, but
wrighing their Anchors they set sail.



CHAP. III.
How Philbertus the young Duke having notice what Guy had done, pursued him by
Sea and of a dreadful Fight that happened between them, wherein the Duke and his
men were taken Prisoners.
PHilbertus having notice what had passed, how one Guy an English man had
(...): three of his Champions, and mortally wounded the fourth, and that his
treachery was discovered, the Lady Dorinda freed and conveyed away he knew not
where, it so enraged him that he quaked with ire, and vowed the bloodiest
vengeance upon Guy that tortures could inflict, nor delayed he, but without his
Fathers knowledge, caused his servants and attendants in number sixty, to Arm
themselves, and strait ways hasted to the Port where he had notice that Guy's
Ship lay, but no sooner arriving there, but he understood that they set Sail
some three hours before his coming, the which made him yet more eager, as
thinking Guy fled for fent of him, and that Dorinda was by him conveyed away,
so that going aboard a stout Vessel that lay in the Port aforesaid, he
commanded to weigh Anchor, and make all the sail they could after the English
ship, whom by a small Boat they understood was sailed to the Eastward; the
Mariners obeyed, and having a fore wind and a swift sailor, in six hours space
they came in sight of the ship wherein Guy was, which bearing but half her
sails rode softly on; no sooner the French ship came in sight, but the
Mariners advertised their Captain of it, who with a Prospective took an
Observation, and assured Guy that they were pursued, and that their foes were
trebble in number, telling him that the best way for their security was to
hoist up all the sails, and if possible, to outstrip them, the which if they
could do till Evening, he feared not but by the help of night to get clear of
them; why said Guy, how many ships have us in chase, truly said the Captain I
can discern but one, yet that one carries thrice the men on board her that we
have; it is no matter said Guy, Captain be of god courage, I swear I would not
for the Crown of France have it reported that Guy ever sled, no rack about and
let us meet them like courageous English Soldiers, my self alone will bear the
brunt of war, whilst you if you please may stand and see fair play; this speech
so incouragrd the Seamen, that they cried, let us engage them strait, and the
Captain, now half ashamed was no less willing, so that they had no sooner put
themselves into a posture, but the ship in which the French Lord was, bore up
side by side, and without any more a do grapled with the English, which made
Guy smile whilst like Mars he stood upon the Deck brandishing his dreadful
sword; the French endeavored to board the Vessel, which Guy gave order to
permit without much difficulty, to that they thinking themselves vittorious,
gave such a shout as made the Drean ring; nay now quoth Guy you have awakned
me, look-to it, for this rudeness, some, or most of you shall sleep until the
day of Doom; with that he began to lay about him with more then humane force,
whilst Arms and Heads and dead men covered all the place whereon he ^ought, for
against his Sword no Armor could defend, but at ruch blow fresh ^^eams of
blood ra^ down, Philbertus seeing such hav^^k of his Soldiers made, ordered
those few that were left alide to retreat if possible to his ship, and
immediately endeavored to ungrapple, which Guy (having cleared his Deck)
perceiving, leaped on Goard the French ship, and alone for half an hour
maintained the sight with such sury that many of them leaped into the Sea, for
to avoid his sword, the which Philbert seeing, encouraged his men all he could,
and as a man grown desperate with bespair, charged on Guy's Helm with such
force as made it sparkle fire, at which Guy no whit daunted, but retuend him
such a blow as made him fall for dead at his feet, which the Soldiers seeing,
cried for quarter, and threw down their Arms; Guy who was always merciful to
the submissive, bid cease the battle, in which space Philbert came to himself,
and with a low submission begged his life, which Guy as freely granted; and
after having transported him and the rest that were left alive into his own
ship, he set fire to the other; and sailing onwards of his intended course,
coasting the Compass till they touched on that part of Normandy that borders on
the German Empire, where Guy, nothing daunted, Landed; the which no sooner done
but he hears that a great Tilt and Tournament was to be held for Blaunch the
Emperors Daughter, a most beauteous and accomplished Lady, and whosoever
carried the day was to have the Lady in marriage, and with her, a brace of Gray
hounds, a Faulcon, and a milk-white steed; upon this welcome News Guy
discharged the Captain of the Vessel, leaving with him the Prisoners, who put
them to their Ransom, and code to the place designed for the noble strife.

Where Honor bated, their his Arms to try
And pluck a Plume from full fledged Victory.
CHAP. VI.
How Guy worsted all the German Princes, and won fair Blanch the Emperous
Daughter, who he afterward left and departed for England.


GUy having taken his leave of his old friend the Captain, rod to the place
designed for the Stage of Fortune, and the winning of the beauteous Prise, to
which, he was lead by the loud sound of the Trumpets, clarions Flutes, and all
manner of Warlike M^sick; where no sooner arriving, but he beheld the Plain
filled with Horses and Chariots and Armed Knights, whose Coats of Arms and
streamers of Gold played with the winds, and their might Armor and glittering
Spears, with the reflection of the Sunbeams, made the place seem all on flame;
a glorious sight for to behold, for most of the Christian Princes and
Chavalours Knights were there assembled with their splendid Retinues, thinking
the Prise well worth their strife, each being ambitious of the honor to be
called the Emperors Son, and over and above to gain the fairest creature that
they ever beheld; Guy was no sooner settled in his station, but the Trumpets
sound the Charge, whereupon Prince Philanus a German by birth entered the List
on his proud steed, who champing his silver bit scarcely endured the Reins;
against him Earl Spartianus came, and both touching their Lances as swift as
Lightning met, and with such force, that the splinters of their broken Lances
flew around their heads, then drawing out their glittering swords they
furiously engaged, till by a blow the Earl received on his Helm, his eyes grew
dazy, and his sword dropped from his hand, himself down from his horse fell on
the ground, which Guy seeing, grew impatient of delay, and setting spurrs so
his bounding steed he came up to the Prince, now proud of his late success, and
laying by their Spears, they charged upon each other with their swords, but ere
they had exchanged many blows, Guy's trusty sword fell with redoubled force
(much like a Thunderbolt) upon the Germans head, and breaking his Helm, bruised
him so, that down he fell intranced, and thence was carried off for dead upon
his Shield; to revenge which disgrace done to his friend, Otton the Great Duke
of Tuscany proudly entered, vowing that Guy should perish by his hand, and no
less then his life should be sufficient to appease his fury, at which Guy
smiling, sustained his first charge without much resistance, but at the second
met him with such a blow as cut quite through his Armor and his shirt of Mail,
so that from the gaping wound the blood streamed fast: which the Duke eager of
Revenge regarded not, till fainting he fell upon the ground; and had not his
blood been stayed he there had bled his last: Duke Rainer next came forth and
bid defiance unto Guy, saying, presumtious Knight this Lady must be mine, nor
shall that Armor guard thy breast from death, since Armed with Love and
powerful steel I fight, he had no sooner said, but Guy undaunted met him stroke
for stroke, so that blows like hail fell thick and thundered on their Armor,
till at last Guy's better blade wounded the Duke in his right shoulder, so that
he could no more resist, but down his sole weapon dropped; this prodigious
valor so amazed the spectators, that long they stood gazing, not knowing what
to think, while various discourses rumoured round, and the ignorant sort
affirmed it was no man that fought, but some-spirit transformed into a humane
shape; the Combatants stood mute, not knowing what was best to do, till the
Duke of Lorain burning with Emulation, pricked forward his proud steed, and
coming toward Guy, said Sir Knight, to me unknown, whom Fortune has hitherto
been pleased to favor, think not to bear these Trophies of honor hence, for
they of right belong to me, so saying, he couched his Lance, but Guy met it
with his sword and at one blow cut it in sunder like a Reed, then charged upon
the Duke, who strait began to stagger beneath the weight of his fierce Arms,
making but weak resistance, so that at a fifth blow Guy broak his Helm and
bruised him sore, at which he cried for quarter, saying, hold dread Champion,
for I yield; nor is there mortal power that can resist thy force, I will no
more with thee contend for womankind, whose strength is so much more then man;
I yield and do confess thou art my Conqueror: this said, his servants bore him
thence. After this Havoc made among the French and German Peers, none durst
approach the List nor talk of Com^ating with Guy, which the Emperor
pereerving, sent a Knight for him, with whom Guy went, and humbly saluted the
Emperor and the fair Printess who sat under a Canopy of State on his right
hand; to Guy the Emperor thus began.

Renowned Knight, tell me what place was first made happy with the birth, for
sure that Country must he proud of such a worthy man, to whom Guy made answer,
May it please your Imperial Majesty, your faithful servant first in England
drew his breath, England my Native Soil, from whence I long have been detained
in toiles of War; surely said the Emperor that place must he impregnable that
has such a Bulwork as thou for to defend it; great Alcides thou have sure
undone, and Hector's Arms could not with thine compare: thou ever have deseeved
my praise redoubted Knight, nor canthe breath of Majesty enough proclaim thy
worth; take there the Virgin thou have won, accept her though she is unworthy
of so brave a man, and with her ask (except my Diadem) ought in my Empire, and
sle freely grant; to whom Guy bowing low returned all humble thanks, and
excused the praises that he breathed upon him, at which the Emperor gave Guy a
Jewel and departed, leaving him and the beauteous Lody to discourse of Love
alone; when Guy after due reverence done, addressed himself in this manner:
Fair Angel, in whom Natures chief Perfections shine, on whom not without besert
the has bestowed her choicest savours, most worthy to be abored and admired,
command your servant to try his obedience, in whatsoever your Princely thoughts
think fit, to which with a modest yet Majestic Grace the Princess thus replied.

Renowned Sir, these praises are not mine, it is I must serve you now, seeing
your Sword has won me, since such is my Fathers pleasure, therefore forbear
these Exrasies, least your words should make me blush and so betray the
weakness of our loving Sex.

At which Guy half o'rcome with Love, a while stood mute, and had been surely
conque^ed by her prevailing eyes, had not his vows to Phaelice made, come fresh
into his mine, whereat he reassumed his manly virtue, and drove assayling
passions headlong ^ach, and after re^ollecting, thus he answers: Fair Lady, in
whom is lively stamped the Image of my Love, in thy fair face my Phaelice now
appears, although my sword has purthased thee with wounds, pet all I can do is
but to be your servant, for know, my hearte'r I beheld your beauty, in England
was linked too fast for any separation, except by the Tyrant Death that Enemy
to Love: I have, said he, a beauteous Lady, not unlike to you, to whom my vows
are passed, never to be recalled, I had not thought that earth could have
afforded such another, but in beholding your perfections I acknowledge my
mistake, for her I roam the world about, to search where Mars's Tents are
spread, in bloody Battles and in Combats great and hazardous to venture all the
slock of life that Nature lent me, so that if I through danger can escape, her
promised Love is the fair Law^el that must crown my toil, at which he ended.

And the Princess fetching a deep sigh thus began, I see, said she, that
Valor dwells not in thy breast alone, but thereby Virtue Reigns, which makes
thy worth the more; sure most happy must that Lady be to whom such vows are
made, and your constancy appears so just and sure, I shall not dare to break
the sacred by of Oaths, that link your distant souls; though I could with --
at which the stopped, and turning sighed, while blushes dyed her Rosy Cheeks, and
all the Lillies were quite put to slight; then turning again, she said, most
honorable man, here take these Jewels and presant her with them from me, who
must enjoy a bliss I dare not think upon, Icast prevailing passion should too
great a Conquest gain over my frailty: so saving, she after having received
Guy's humble thanks departed, the place not longer being able to surpress her
Love.

Guy after leave taken of the Emperor, to whom he made his Love to Phaelice
known, and the cause of his undertaken-travels and hardships, was by the
Emperors command attompansed to the Seaside by all the Nobility of the Court,
where imbarquing, he set Sail for England, as now hoping Phaelice would open
her willing arm to receive the Hero that had bought her Love so dear.

Where Landing, he as swift as Eagles fly
Speed to behold the Center of his Joy.
CHAP. VII.
How Guy at his Arrival was Received by Phaelice and all the Nobility, how he
is sent forth again to seek new Adventures, but ever he goes kills a monstrons
Enchanted Cow upon Dunsmore Heath, and is Knighted by the King, and many
favors bestowed upon him.


Phaelice having received the News of Guy's Approach, and by the sound of Fame
heard all the Warlike Deeds his hands had done, and the Chevalerous Exploits
(of which by this time England rung) she prepares to receive him at so pleasing
a rate as might become his worth and Greatness, yet woman-like resolving to
stifle as much as possible her powerful passion, thereby to make him the more
sond and cager in the chase of Beauty.

Guy now arrived at Warwick Castle, where he heard the price of all his toil in
dreadful battle there remained, who at the inward gare carrended by her
Damzels) stood ready to receive him, whom Guy no sooner saw, but bowing low he
thus Salutes.

Fair Phaelice, from whom I have too long been absent, how thy bright face
refreshes now my soul, and feasts my gazing Eyes, with beauty most
transplendant, as when a long benighted travellour su^counded with dark
terrors, in a pathless maze, from the Orient sky beholds the comfortable dawn
of Light, which us^ers in the Sun's refulgent beams so? to invest the drowsy
world with day; for Madam in the midst of War, when Death was rageing round me,
the thoughts of you inspird me with double force, and gave me victory in all
attempts, so that finding no more to do, I am with joy returned, to claim the
promise that you made, leaving the Beautiess that this Sword in bloody Combats
won, nor could the Emperors Daughter (though divinely fait, and next your
self, earths chi^^est Iem) entire my stay; her sighs had not the pawer to make
me false though through a Sea of Princly blood I waided to obtain her, yet when
obtained, I left her, for your sake, and only took these ^ledges that you see
for the recompense of hazards run; then say my goddess will thou now grant me a
sweet repose, in that loved bosom shall I rest from bloody Mars's toils, and
count bright Venus in thy fairer Arms, speak for ^ would gladly know.

To whom Phaelice blushing replied, most Honorable man, of thy great Exploits
I am no ways ignorant, Fame came before and told them, ever you came I heard
what havoc you have made, and what great Prizes you have won; but yet me
thinks those Beauties should ^a^e been esteemed more by you then to be left for
such trifles, But I know your answer will be, you did it for my sake, it is sure
it was so, I believe as much, and will reward your constancy with Love, a Love
as boundless as the O^ean, and chaste as those bright fires that shine by night:
but to be plain I will unfold a secret Vision that so me appeared, when I was
cruel, and returned disdain for Love: In the midst of slumber, Cupid from his
Cristal Mansion did descend, presenting to my view a Martial Here much
resembling your fell, commanding me to Love you for your great Renown and
matchless Might, saying, the rerrour of the Nations shall he be famed to all
Posterity, Kings shall be proud to court him, and great Monarchs tremble at his
frown, so saying he let fly from his bended Bow a glittering Shaft, that ^xed
in my Breast, at which, awaking I sound the kindled flame burn bright; but
though I love thee dear, yet for my Honors sake, must not consent to Wed, till
thy victorious brow be wreathed with more Laurels, and when thou shall return
once more triumphant, then is Phaelice thine, and toilsome War shall tease.

Then said Guy. I must not yet discharge my servant Death, he must again with
me, while from the terror of this Arm each mortal slies, and Armies fall
before me like Autumnal leaves when the rossing branches are assailed by gusty
winds; come my bright goddess, as I stand within these walls of steel, incircle
me in thy fair arms and cheer my soul with one sofe Kiss, and ever I do return,
i'i send my Trophies home by Fame; thy longing ears shall hear of such great
Actions done, as shall make thee conclude thy servant worthy of thy Love. Be
constant, fairest creatures, and think upon the faithful Guy, who in the midst
of Arms and death will never fail to think on thee, that so at my return,
Hymeneal joys and the possession of thy lovely bed shall crown my distant toil
in War; now look to it ye Champions of the world, Princes and Potentates, for
Guy once more must wanter ^'r the Globe to seek Adventures out: so saying, he
kissed her, and departed to take his leave of the most Noble Earl, whilst she
with eyes brimful of tears withdrew to her Retirement, often acculing her self
for pushing him forwards on such hazardous designs, and yet ambitious of his
gaining Honor, and so between willing and unwilling, she left him to his
fortunate adventures.

Whilst Guy unto Earl Robands goes, who received him with more joy then can be
well expressed, and orders a Feast to be made in honor of his new come Guest,
inviting most of the Gentry thereabouts, who hearing of Guy's Arrival in
England, and that he was to be presant there, they came gladly, as being much
desirous to see him after so many great Exploits, the Entertainment was very
sumptuous, being accommodated with all manner of Music, and what else had
power for to delight the senses.

Which ended, Guy following the Earl into his Retirement, told him that he came
to take his leave of his Honor, and that he had made a vow to Heaven the which
he burst not violate, once more to try his Fortunes in Countries abroad,
because this my Native Land affords no great Exploits worthy to be Registered by
Fame: thus he said, but would not make the Earl acquainted with his Love, nor
that his Daughter had enjoined the Enterprises he designed to make, who
endeavored all he could to persuade him to the contrary, laying before him the
many hazards that must needs attend, and what dire mishaps in such daring
attemps must needs befal^; at which Guy no ways daunted was the niore earnest
to depart, saying, he could not confine himself to Ease, but for the honor of
his Country would spend some days in War, and try the various moods of Fortune
and of Fate, to learn for to contemn them both, and that his mind still
prompted him to great designs, the god of Battle at his Nativity being Lord of
the Assendant.

The Earl seeing his persuasions could no wares work on him to stay, dismissed
him, upon promise at his return he would abroad no more, but live at home with
him; Guy's Father and Mother, bathed in Tears, likewise besought his stay, but
all in vain; for nothing but dread Arms and sounds of War wire pleasing to ^is
ears; all things being in readiness for his departure he embarked for France
again, to seek out new addentures, nothing fearing, though he knew that he had
many there who would (it possible) by strength or fraud, surprise his Life, but
before the Master of the Vessel could get clear of the Lands end, the wind
turned about, and rising somewhat strong, forced them back into the Harbor,
where they lay unknown to the people of the place who they were, then was Guy's
Vessel wind-bound six days, in which space Fame had noised through every
corner of the Land, how that a dreadful and monstrous Beast, formed by Majick
skill into the likeness of a Cow, or rather a Cow of vast bulk possessed by
some tempestuous spirit did terrify the neighboring Plains destroying the
Cattle round about, and putting all their Keepers unto flight, being so strong
and swift in motion, that it was thought no humane force could have destroyed
it; the monstrous description of her as follows, is affirmed by Authors of
great integrity and worth, that she was four yards in height, six in length,
and had a head proportionable, armed with two sharp horns growing direct, with
Eyes all red and fiery, which scented to dart Lightning from afar, she being of
a Dun color, from whence she was named the Dun Cow and the place not many
miles distant from Warwick, where she haunted; from that Monster took the name
of Dunsmore Heath, which name it keeps unto this day, etc.

Upon the notice the King had at York (where he then was) of the havoc and
slaughter this beast had made, he offered Knighthood and several other Gifts of
great worth to any that would venture his life in that encounter, but the
terror of her sierceness had spread st self in such a dreadful shape, that
none durst undertake the enterprise, but each one wishing sor Guy whom all
supposed by this time in France; glad of this opportunity, he leaves the ship,
and having changed his Armor to avoid being known, he takes a strong battle Ax
his Bow and Quiver with him, and so incognito riding to the place where this
Monster used to lodge, which was among a great thicket of trees that grew upon
the Plain, near to a Poole or standing water finding as he had passed along all
the shepherds Cottages deserted, and the Carcasses of men and beasts ly
scattered round about; he no sooner came within bow shot of the place but the
Monster espied him, and putting out her head through the thicket, with dreadful
eyes glared on him, and began to roar horribly, at which Guy who was one of the
expectest Archers England then had, bent his Bow of Steel, and drawing and
Arrow to the head let fly, the which as swift as Lightning, striking on the
Monstr's hide rebounded as from a wall of Adamant, not making the least
impression, at which, whilst Guy was wondering, out she rame with such speed as
seemed rather through the air then on the earth, and at him aimed directly her
sharp pointed horns, which he observing, lifted his Ax on high and smore her on
the front with such a blow as made her to recoyl; at which she more enraged
came on again, and clapping her horus unto his breast, dinted his high proofed
Armor ever he could avoid her, but wheeling his warlike hor^e unto the right he
met her again, and with a redoubled stroke gave her a wound under the ear which
was the only place she was sensible of being wounded in, whereat she roared
aloud, and stamped the ground, Guy perceiving she was mortal, followed that
stroke with another no less forcible, at which she fell to the ground, and Guy
alighting hewed upon her so long that through her impenitrable skin he battered
her skull, till with a horrid groan she there expired, where, leaving her
sweltred in a stream of blood, he rode to the next inhabited Village, where he
made known the Monsters death, to the unspeakable joy of all that heard it, the
poor people honour^ng him with presants and thanks more then can here be told,
thousands from all parts flocking to behold that Monster dead, whom alive they
so much feared: long it was not ever the King had notice of it, who sent for Guy
to York, where he no sooner arrived, but the King embraced him in his arms, and
after a splendid entertainment he gave him the order of Knighthood, with many
other rich gifts, tausing one of the Ribs of the said Monster to be hanged up
in Warwick Castle, of which more hereafter, for now we must leave England and
follow Guy into France.

Where he such deeds in Arms did foon atchieve
That they may stagger most for to believe.
CHAP. VIII.
How Guy Herald, and two other Knights were set upon by sixteen Villains that
lay in wait for him in a Wood, whom he destroyed, they first having Killed two
of his Knights afterward assisting the Duke of Lovain who was besieged by the
Duke of Lorain, he routed Lorain's Armies with great slaughter, and afterward
confirms a Peace between them.


GUy having with much ado got leave of the King to depart the Court, secretly
took ship again, without the knowledge of Earl Robands, or his beauteous
Mistress (who now doubtless would have been contented to have opened her
willing Arms) so that with three Rnights more, ( viz. Sr. Herald, Sr. Edfrid,
and Sr. Martis, who had entered into strictest Friendship with him, vowing to
live and dye in adventuring for his sake;) He landed after two days Sail in
France, where in search of Warlike business they crossed the Country, but
finding no enterprises worthy of their swords, they bent cowards the Emperors
Court, where Guy doubted not but to employ his Arm, and gain the Fame he
thirsted for, but the gerat Duke of Tuscany, Orion by name, hearing of Guy's
approach, supposed he came to deprive him of fair Blanch the Emperors
daughter, into whose Favor ^nce Guy's departure) he had insinuated himself,
many ways excusing the foils he received by the English Knight, and therepon
picking sixteen of the best and stourest Soldiers he had in his Castle, he
gave them Order to Arm themselves and lie in Ambush in the Wood, near to the
Road where Guy must pass, be-before he could come to the Court; and as soon as
they see him, to fall upon him, and after they had killed him; to bury him in
the Wood, that so the Fact might not be known.

To this command of their Lord they Redily consent, not knowing what man ^er of
man they had to deal with, so that placeing themselves behind a thicket of
Trees, they had not long waited before they saw Guy and the other three come
rideing to^ards them, regardless of any such Treathery; no sooner was they
within Reach, but the Russians durst from their Ambuscade and charged upon the
English Hero's; Crying, Kill, kill, at which Guy and his three trusty Knights
began to wonder what it meant, but long they wondered not, before they drew
their Glistering stoords, Courage said Guy my Friends, these Villains shall pay
dear for this affront, with that he frowned with such a look, as when the Skyer
over cast with black Clouds, portend dread Storms and Tempest through the
devious Ait, and then let ^^y with such force, and rage, as all that his Sword
touched fell, slain or wounded, on the Earth, Armor all in pieces, cut Helms,
and Helmed Heads lay scattered on the place, so dreadfully he laid about, that
in short space ren of them lay breathless, but casting round his Eyes, he saw
the remaining six had so fiercely combated his three companions, that two of
them were slain, and Sr. Herald all besmeered with blood, which flowed from
Gapeing wounds at which Guy thus expressed his Ice; Villains whose lives fate
has designed a sacrifice to my revenge, let the Knight rest and combat me,
what do my Eyes behold two of my dear Friends (who left their Native Land for
to accompany me) silenced by Death, and the third more dear then they, mortally
wounded. This Villains is the last vile Acts your hanvs shall ever do, with
that he charged upon them with such force as for exceeded Hercules when he the
Centaures flew, and in short space cut five of them in pieces the sixth upon
his knees begged life, and did confess who had employed them, and to what
intent, whereupon Guy withheld his dreadful Arm, but it was too late, for the
miserable man only lived to tell the treathery, and dyed, thorough his
Excessive Wounds; after which Guy not unmindful of his murdered and wounded
Knights, went to a Hermits Cave not far distant thence, and gave him order for
to bury the two slain, and to take in Herald into his charge, and care, laying
a grievous curse upon him if he meddled with the Rest, and so departed (after
leave taken) through the Sollitary Grove, bewailing much the Loss of his dear
Friends, yet not declining Honors search, no sonner had he passed the thick
shades, but from a rising hill he beheld a fair and Goodly City, before which
on a plain were many armed Knights assembled to just at Tilt and Turna^nent,
the which somewhat Revived his spirits, as well hoping to find Duke Orion
there, and so revenge on him the Treachery, but he was not at that time so
fortunate, for the Duke, by his Scouts, having notice of the death of his men,
and that Guy was approaching, he feigned a sudden sickness and so withdrew
from Court; Guy being arrived, thrust in among the thickest Ranks to seek the
man he so much longed to combat with, but not finding him, he challenged all
there presant, and after having foiled the best that durst encounter him, and
wone the prize, he departed with great applause to the Duke of Millaines's
Court: where no sooner arrived, but the Duke embrated him in his Arms, and
prepared a sumptuous entertainment for him.

Long he had not rested there, before he understood that the Duke of Lovain to
whom Guy had sworn Friendship, was besieged by Lorains power; whereupon Guy
taking leave hasted to help his Friend, as he was rideing over a Moory Plain he
met a Pilgrim, as he supposed, all Clad in Gray, who seemed faint with Travel,
whom he kindly saluted and entreats for to acquaint him with some News -- News
said the Pilgrim, and with that he fetched a sigh, Alas sir, it is a thing I
now am no ways conversant with, but have renounced the world and all its
business, since I have lost my dearest Friend, and on his searth have
travailed, and must travail with many weary steps, for till I sind him, my soul
can take no rest, I pity thee said Guy, but pray be so kind as to deelare the
man, perhaps I may inform you for it is sure that I should know that voice,
Alas said he, it is a man renowned in arms through all the spaeious world, one
for whose sake I left my Native land and one who saved my lift from cruel Foes,
with that Guy understood that it was Herald nor could conceal himself, but
pulling up his Vizage, discovered his sat, and immediately allighting embraced
him while he wept for joy, Expressing these words, and has kind Heaven been so
propitious as to restore thy life whom I supposed dead: behold me Herald I am
he you sought, henceforth let cares be banished from this breast, my only
request is now to know how your wounds were cured, to whom thus Herald replied
with his Eyes over flowed with tears of joy, Oh how can it be, am I thus
unlooked for made so happy, then know worthy Guy, the Hermit with whom you left
me in charge, after having conducted me faint as I was to his Cave, poured
Balsoms into my wounds, and with sovereign Cordialls refreshed my Fadeing
Spirits.

So that after some continuance in his Cave, I gathered strength, but could not
he contented in my mind, for loss of you, which restlessness the good old
Hermit perceiving, was very inquisitive to know the cause, which I as freely
declared, upon which he delivered me this Gown to cover my Armor: that so I
might the more seturely Travail in thy search, the which has now happily been
successful, so spoke Herald, and Guy with joy again embraced him, and thanked
him for his Love and Friendship, causing him to mount behind him, and so they
Rode discoursing of their Various adventures, till they came to the beleaguered
City, and breaking through the Hostill ranks of foes, came to the Gate where
they soon found entrance, the Duke no sooner hearing that Guy was come unto his
Aid, but he came and humbly saluted him, bidding him ten thousand welcomes, and
each drooping soldier was revived at his Name; Crying, Lead on, Lead on, and
let us sally out and charge the Foe, the Duke laying hold on this opportunity
thought it not convenient to let their courages cool, gave order to his
Commanders to prepare for the Battle, and that on pain of death they should be
obedient unto whatsoever Guy should think fit; this being done, the Gates were
opened, and the Soldiers with such a shout that Echoed through the Skies,
Issued out, and charged the Foe with such bravery and courage, that they with
much slaughter, forced them to Retreat, broken and in great confusion; Guy and
Herald persuing them even to their Camp, cutting their way through Armed
Squadrons, and putting them to the rout, far and near, whilst all the blushing
plains lay strewed with dead and dying men, so that Guy in compassion unto
Christian lives, vid spare the sword, and stayed the Soldiers fury, making
slaughter cease.

This overthrow so vered the Duke of Lorain so sore, that he immediately vowed
revenge, giving order that all the Millitia of his Dukedom should immediately
march to retru^e his broken Army, so that within ten days he said siege
again, with Thirty thousand Horse and Foot, vowing not to leave the City till
they had laid it as low as Earth, and thereupon begirt it with his Soldiers
round, Resolving so by curting off communication, to force it to a surrender,
for want of provision, but the Stratagem prevailed not, for Guy and the Duke
from the walls observing their intention, the better to disencourage them in
that point; like Manlius the Roman General, when besieged by the Gailisenes, in
the Cappital, gave order to throw provision in abundance down, t^sting the
Enemy that if they wanted more, upon request they might be furnished, for ^id
Guy I would not starve my for, least when overthrown in bat^^^ he should excuse
his weakness for want of food; but now you have provision feast your elves that
I may find you more resolure in war then heretofore I have done, fore'r the sun
deseends into the Western Deean, dreadful slaughter again shall rage through
all the bloody field: this said he gave order to his Soldiers for to Arm while
Drums and Trumpets roused their drousy courages; then leading forth ten
thousand of the most ex^erte^ in three bands, the first Commanded by himself,
the second by the Duke, and the third by Herald, the two first, each
consisting of three thousand foot and one thousand horse, and the last of two
thousand foot only.

With these embattel^ed Forces Guy marching in the Van, charged the Germans in
the Front, and with his word cut a passage for his squadrons through their
pointed Ranks, that shivered Spears flew cound his head like hail; while this
was doing, the Duke and Herald charged on the right and the left of the Enemy
with such courage and bravery, that the Germans finding themselves assaulted on
all sides, endeavored to fly, and had left their Duke to shift for his safety
amidst his fors, had not pure shame restrained, Guy observing how they fell
into disorder and began to sh^ink together, pressed them the more, and having
made a wide gap with infinite slaughter of his foes, at last came where the
Duke of Lorain fought, who no sooner beheld all smeered with blood and what
havoc he had made, but by retreating amongst his own Squadrons of horse he
thought sit to avoid his sury; and finding shortly after that the battle went
against him, he caused a Retreat to be sounded, so that in much confusion he
withdrew, leaving about ten thousand of his men dead upon the place, whiles Guy
and the Lovanians charged upon the flying remains, tist they styled the ditches
and fields with the slain and wounded, even till Guy out of compassion stayed
the soldiers from pursuing, and with the spoil of the Enemies Camp marthed
hack in trumph to the town, where Guy was received under a Canopy, and a Trophy
raised in memory of his matchless valor as their chief deliverer.

After the Ceremonies were overpast, Guy taking the Duke into a private
retirement, demanded of him, that if after this victory he would make a League
of amity with Lorain, to which he joyfully replied, he was content; why then
said, Guy, I shall he more proud to establish a firm friendship between two
such potentates, than in innumerable victories, for I hold it not convenient
for Christians to war with Christians, and must each other to glut the jaws of
slaughter; but that we rather unite our for^es and dend our Arms against the
raging Infidels who now tiranize over the Eastern world, late by Usurpation
taken from the Roman Empire: Sir, replied the Duke, if you will favor me so
far as to conclude this friendly League, what ever you shall propose I
willingly will sign unto, Guy thanked the Duke, and with a thousand Armed men
marched toward the hill where the Loranians broken forces lay Encamped or
rather scattered, and no sooner coming to the foot of the said Hill but he
sounded a Parley, at which the Duke sent down his Lieutenant General to know
the cause; to whom Guy ^ade known his undertaking, and withal desired a
personal Treaty with the Duke, giving him to understand who he was; this being
no sooner known, but the Duke mounted, and attended by some of his choice
Commanders, came riding down toward the Plain, the which Guy no sooner
perceiving, but giving order to his men to stand in battle array, he set spurrs
to his horse and hasted to meet him, and in the midway they a^lighting embraced
each other, after which Guy thus began.

Great Prince against whom (in our own defense) we fought, and heaven favoring
the righteous cause, commanded Victory to attend us, which has adorned our
Conquoring Arms with spoils, yet forgetting and laying aside all farther
enmity or Quarrels, I from Lovains Great Duke, here bring you terms of Peace,
for why should Christians war, and Christians Arms shed Christians blood? then
let it be no longer so, great Sir, embrace our offered friendship, and no more
let us be foes; we impose no difficulties as Conquerors use, but desire for to
embrace with equal Arms: what though your Nephew was by accident slain, as the
Duke himself confesses much against his will, which was the cause begat this
war, your Highness must forget it; nay moreover when you consider that thirty
thousand lives have made sufficient Atonement to his silent Ghost, let us
henceforth war against the Pagan powers, to drive them back to their distant
Asia, and rid Europe of such a curb, so said Heroic Guy, to whom the Duke
replied.

Most honored man, whose force in Arms no mortal can resist, though I am much
grieved for my Nephews death, by Segwins hand bereaved of life, and more for
these shameful overthrows, yet at thy request it shall be Peace, and hence
forth horrid war in Janus Temple shall be locked up fast, whilst bound in
chains on impious arms she sits complaining, with a hundred bloody mourhs: Go
worthy English man, go tell my Brother, for now enmity is banished, that is the
name that a Royal Tent shall on this Plain be pitched, in which an everlasting
Peace shall be concluded for thy sake, upon which, Guy thanked the Duke, and
returning to the City, declared to Segwin what had passed, who embraced Guy and
paid his labor with rich presants and a thousand thanks, and then issuing out
in pompous attire, attended by all his Nobles, Guy being placed in his Chariot
on the right and Herald on his left, they drove to the Tent or Pavillion of
State where Sigbert Duke of Lorain in splended Equipage attend their coming,
where allighting they embraced each other with such fervecy, as if enmity had
(...) a stranger to them, and sumpruously feasted each other for the space of
six days, so that the noise of war was turned into Joy and delight, caused by
all manner of noble pastime, and at last friendship so far prevai^ed, that at
the earnest reanest of Guy, Duke Sigbert of Lorain gave Segwin Duke of Lovain
his eldest daughter fair Miranda in Marriage, which doubly crowned the joy on
all sides, the which being somewhat abated, Guy impatient of ease, requested
forces of the ^oon Dukes to go against the Sarazens, who had then broke in upon
the Greek Empire, and laid great part of it wast, to which mo^^on they were
very unwilling to condescend, desiring him out of all love to stay with them,
and not to hazard himself in such dangerous enterprises, but they finding him
to persist in his resolution, and that they in vain persuaded him to the
contrary, entreated him to draw out what Forces he thought sufficient, and that
they would furnish them with all things convenient for the war, at which Grant
Guy returned them thanks, assuring them that he would so employ them to the
honor of Christendom, that after Ages should wonder at their prowess; and
thereupon he selected two thousand of the choicest soldiers presant, one of
Loranians and the other Lovanians, who were willinger to go under his command
then can be imagined, so he having Embarked them upon ten ships of war took
his leave of the two Dukes, with promise to visit them at his return, and bring
them such Trophies as the fortunes of war should deal him, whereupon they
accompanied him to the shore, and departed not thence till his ships were quite
sailed out of sight.

So much he honored was where ever he came
And looked upon as the Eldest son of Fame.
CHAP. IX.
How Guy being furnished with two thousand men and ten Ships of War, marched to
the Relief of Bizantum, then besieged by the Turks and Zarazens, and being
scattered from the rest of his Fleet, is set upon by 3 Pirates, two which he
destroys, and forces the third to fly, Relieves the City, kills many of the
Pagan Champions, and in his Return fights with a fiery Dragon and kills him.


AFter a months sailing Guy having coasted Italy, and entered sat into the
Mediterranian Sea, where by a Levant Wind being separated above two leagues
from the rest of his Fleet, he was set upon by three Turks men of War belonging
to Sally, who supposing him a Prize, and that his ship was ^^^led with rich
Merchandise, came boldly up and endeavored to board him, which Guy perceiving
smiled disdainfully, and with many Heroic Expressions encouraging his men; he
drew his flameing Sword, so drendfully known in War, and charged upon the
assailing infidells with such fury, that all he reached glutted the gapeing
jaws of death, cutting their shrouds, Tarkell, and all other their Engines in
pieces like a twine thread, whilst Herald and the rest were not idle on the
other side, for having prepared Pitch, Hems, Tarr, and Rossin, they set it on
fire, and with a certain Engine threw it into the Turks ship that engaged them,
on that side (a Stratagem till then unknown) which catching hold on the Decks,
Masts, and Rigging, blazed into a horrid flame which seemed to curle amongst
the clauds, the which they being no ways able to extinguish, with a dreadful
cry forsook the burning ruined and leaped into the Ocean where many of them
perished, which the other two ships seeing, hoisted up all their sails and
endeavored to fly, which one of them effected, but Guy having close grapied
with the other was leaped on board her, and there made such slaughter that all
the Decks were covered with the slain, which so amazed the Turks that they
cried aloud to Mahomet to come and save them from the devils that fought
against them, but their prayers were in vain, till Guy out of compassion spared
their lives, and putting forty of his men on board, sent them with the
remaining prisoners to his Friend the Duke as the first fruits of his
Achievements; no sooner was this engagement ended, but all his ships came up
with him, who by reason of a Fogg mistook their way, so that Night coming on,
Guy comman^ed them to stand off to the South-East, and sail gently till Morning
for fear of running foul upon the Rocks that are too frequent in those parts,
hid under Water, near to the shoares, etc.

No sooner the ensuing morning had the Sun sent forth his Orient Beams, but
from his Deck Guy viewed the Coast, and from affar beheld a City besieged, and
heard the murmour of their shouts to vollue through the Air, much like the
sound of thunder almost spent, whereupon he ordered his Pilot to fathom for the
next convenient landing place; which being found, he put in, and sent Sr.
Herald with two more Captains to understand if possible who the besieged and
the bessegers were, which message they as willingly undertook, and after about
five hours stay, returned with this following account, which they learnt from
a straggling Turk (whom they also brought with them as their Prisoner) that it
was Bizantium made famous by the honors done to it by Constantine the Great,
and late the Metrapollitane City of the Greek Empire, and that the Sould^an of
Babylon with thirty thousand men laid siege against it, his forces for the
most part consisting of Turks and Sara^ens, and that the siege had continued
with much slaughter on both sides for the space of three months, the City being
defended by a number of Christians, under the command of Albertus a Noble Saxon.

This was not a little pleasing to Guy who had now met with a fair opportunity
of making his valor known, so that immediately he sent Herald and one Knight
more to the Lord Albertus to acquaint him that he lay in the Port with two
thousand Christians under his command, and that if he w^^^d in the Evening open
the Gates that looked to the Seaward, he would fight his way through the Foes
and enter the City; Herald and the other Knight undertake the Embassy, and in
Turks habit having ^or the watchward of the Pri^oner, they passed the Guards,
and being come to the gate knocked aloud, and no sooner declaring that their
Message was to Albertus but the Porter opening the Wicker gave them Entrance,
when strait they were conducted to the Castle where the General and his chief
commanders were assembled in a Counsel of War, to whom after reverence done,
they made known the cause of their coming; at the first mention of which
Albertus and the rest were somewhat doubtful seast it might be some treacherous
design to win the Town, but when these Letter of credence under Guy's hand and
Seal were produced, they stood no longer pausing but recared them with all
imaginable kindness; saying, that they would not only open the gate at the hour
appointed, but likewise at the same time sally out upon the Foe to make his
entrance more easy and so dismissed them with many expressions of joy: the
time being come Guy landed his men as silently as possible, and drawing them up
in Battalia upon the shore, gave order to those that remained in the ships to
stand off to Sea, till he signified to them his farther pleasure by an
appointed sign, which accordingly being done, he marched toward the City, but
e're he could gain entrance, the Enemy took the Allarum, so that Arm, arm, they
cried throughout, they came and drew up from every quarter, which Guy
perceiving held it no time to dally, but heartning his Soldiers, with testing
them the uprightness of their sacred cause, he bid sound ^ charge, ordering his
men to keep together in a Body, he draws his Sword which by Moonlight
reflected like a Comet in the Air, the rest soon imitated him, and giving a
great shout the which was answered from the Town, they fell upon the Foes with
such undaunted fury that they bore down all before them, whilst Legs, ^cadg,
broken Arms, and mangled shirts of Mail belleewed the Crimson plain, Guy
^^forceing himself, with redoubled strength the better to give his followers
encouragement, had made such slaughter where he fought, that the slain like
ramparts hemmed him in, the d^^pure continued exceeding sharp for the space of
two hours, so that what were slain by Guy and the fifteen hundred men he
brought on shoat with him (the rest being left to man the ships) and by three
thou and who ar the same instant sallyed from the Town, and charged them in the
Rear, there perished of the Mahomitans no less then Forry thousand, so that
finding themselves worsted on all sides, the^ in much disorder and confusion
retreated to their Camp, the which when the Souldian heard, he vowed revenge,
and gave orders for assaul^ting the City as soon as day appeared, it being then
Night Guy suffered their retreat as not thinking it convenient to pursue them,
he with his Soldiers entered the Town, and were most joyfully received, and
the hurt men looked ^m with all diligence, Albertus embracing Guy, condu^^ed him
to his own lodging, and there seasted him as well as the place could afford,
and ordered the same should be done to all his Souidiers pa^^ing away most part
of the night in various discour ^s con^^^ning the assaies of the War, and what
had happened since the first beginning of the siege.

Next morning as soon as d^^ light appeared, the Souldian commanded the Captain
of his Army to prepare for the assault, ordering the Drums to bear and the
Trumpers to ^ound, at which the Pagans gave such a shout as made the ^ills
resound the Echo back, which Rou^ed Guy from his slumber, who starting up,
instantly ascended the Tower, and from thence beheld an innumerable Host of
Infidells marching toward the Walls with sealeing Engines; whereupon he gave
order to Herald to get his men in readyness who cacefull^ obeyed his command,
then turning to Albertus, he said, sir, It behooves us this day for the honor
of Christendom to make a brave defense, in my opinion it is most sit to meet
those dar^ing inc^^schers on yon plain, and there to give them battle e're they
can reach our Walls, so that may be a means to check their pride, Victory has
stood for us you see already, which will much animate our Soldiers on, and
disencourage our Foes, and ser me ^ell you she never turned against me yet, nor
sailed to perch upon my Arms and savor me in all my hold attempts, follow Guy
and fear not but Guy's fortunes will attend you; so said the Warlike Hero of
whose high courage Albertus much appraved cendering thanks to Heaven for
sending such a Champion to defend the Town, long, they par^^ed not, because the
Enemy was at hand, but ^inging open the Gate, sallyed our with twelve thousand
men at Arms to mae^ them according as Guy had propsed, he with his Germans
marching in the From, ^is great Standard being a Lion Rampant; no sooner the
Enemy beheld them ^^ march toward them who nor in the least expected any such
thing, but they made a hair, and throwing down their sealeing Engines put
themselves in Battalia, the which Guy perceiving gave order to his Archers that
were in the Front to ^egin the Battle, who drawing their bows fent a shower of
Arrows amongst them, which galled the Turkish Horse and forced them into
disorder, whereupon Guy and Herald broke into the main body, and killing or
wounding all that opposed them began a dreadful sight, so that the Germans
following close after them, still pressed them to the right and the left with
short of Arrows, the which struck no small terror to the infidells the
Bizantines under the command of Albeitus imitating them in a short time put the
Enemies left wing to the Rout whilst Guy fought in the main body, hewing his
bloody way whiles death macked his Eyes, and whereso e're they aimed he flew,
nothing but rout and run enclosed him round whilst Heaps of Slain lay like a
Wall on either hand, fighting on until he came unto the Squadron that was led
by Colbron Lieutenant General of the Horse, he being newly come to the Battle
began to wonder when he saw what havoc Guy had made, and how his Arms were
all besmeered with blood, and staring with broad and siery eyes, he vowed
reverge ^wearing to sacrifice Guy's life unto his Pagan Gods, this Monster of a
man being ten foot high and seven in circuit bearing a weighty spear, and such
a sword as no man in the Pagan Army (himself excepted) could undertake to
weild, so that pressing forwards confronted Guy, crying aloud, Uile, Christian
most odious, to my sight hold thy murdering hand and let us two each others
weapon try, for e're we part I mean to sacrisice thee to the Ghost of my dear
Friends whom thou have slain, at which Guy fixing his Eyes upon him smiled,
saying, thou art the only man I long have sought, therefore let us lose no time.

With that they charged upon each other with such fury, that from rarling
Armor the blows like thunder echoed, whilst either side sent shouts up to the
Skies, Guy having born the brunt of the battle all that day, the Pagans doubted
not but that their Champion would prevail, by reason of his monstrous size and
strength, having been often tried in dreadful Comba^es, but they were mistaken,
for Guy redoubling his strength, cut through his high proofed Armor, making
such wide wounds, that made him roar like the enraged Sea, when boundins from a
hollow Rock, and endeavors to retire, but Guy pursuing him with one full
stroke, cut through his Helm so deep into his head, that down he fell in deaths
Convulsions on the crimson Earth.

At this the Pagans all amazed shrunk together, till Elmadant a fierce Sarazen
charging foremost encoun^red Herald, who sought on the left, but long they had
not engaged ever he followed his Giantick Brother to the shades beneath.

Morgadner another Colonel, monstrous for size, desperately engaged with Guy,
having in his hand a battle Ax, which weighted about one hundred weight, with
which he slew several of Guy's men before he could come on that side where Guy
fought, but Guy no sooner encountered him, but ^^th his sword ^ut off his right
arm, when falling down, and the loss of blood he was traden to death among the
crowd, being unable to relieve himself: Thus the Battle going against them, the
Pagans on all sides fled, nor could the Souldian by his General possibly stay
them being pursued by Guy and the Brizantines, the slain fell down by the way,
to the number of twenty thousand, such havoc made they of those Insidels, at
which the Souldian storming and cursing his gods, gave order to recollect his
broaken Troops, to hazard ^nce more the chance of War, and begin the battle,
but all in vain, for the Soldiers dreading Guy far worse than death were fled
into the woods and Marshy grounds without regard to their Coummanders, at which
the Souldian was so much intaged, that whilst Guy was tabing the spoil, he sent
a Challenge to him demanding single combat with h^^ to: end the business of the
War, which message Guy most joyfully received; and all things being in
rediness, they met with such fury as made the Earth to quake, the Souldian.
being enraged by despair, and Guy courageous for the honor of Christendom,
laid o^ him such irresistible blows, as made his gilded Armor fly like glass,
and yield a passage to mortals wound that followed thick, so that with one blow
on the left side that entered his heart he fell down, breathing out his soul in
curses loud: this, Eskeldath ^ bloody and tyrannick Turkish Prince beholding,
vowed revenge, and coming up to Guy defied him with disdain, cursing him by
all his gods, swearing he had vowed his head unto his Mistress, and would hear
it unto her on hi Lance; have thou so quoth Guy and drawing out his bloody
sword, said, pray take it if thy courage will but let thee dare, least the Lady
think you did promise more then you are able to perform, and then perhaps you
lose her favor: this no sooner spoak, but they charged upon each other, that
fire sprang out of their Helms like Lightning slashes, till the Pagan being
wounded deep into the arm, let fall his sword, and thinking it no time for
taking of it up, he set spurs to his horse and fled to the woods amain.

After this Routand the plunder of the field taken, Guy returns victorious to
the City, where he was received with all the pomp that can be possibly
conceived, whilst as he rode through the streets, the people from the houses
tops, and windows, threw down Garlands before him, and strewed him with
slowers, crying, Long live the Renowned English Champion, our happy deliverer,
and aftewards set up his Starve in the Market place, adorned with the Enemies
spoil, the which was since destroyed by the Turks; Guy having staid there with
Albertus about ten days, was desirous to depart and to return to England, so
that leaving one thousand of his men with Albertus for the guard of the City,
he embarked with the rest, and sailed back for Germany, but one day putting in
to Harbor to refresh; Guy and Herau'd w^nt on ^^^ar, and being much taken with
the plesantness of the Forest that bordered on the Sea, they entered the same
to see if they could find any Venison, the which they had no sooner done but a
horrible noise or cry invades their Ears, at which, standing still to wonder
what it meant, they heard it grow louder, quoth Guy lets on and see what
Monsters this wild plate affords; so passing along, at last they espied a
Dragon and a Lion encountering each other furiously, the which sport pleased Guy
so well that he sat him down to behold the fray, saying to Herald whosoever
gets the Victory shall try the force of my keen blade, the which no sooner said
but the Dragon had so overcome the Princely Lion with his envenomed breath,
that grown faint he turned aside, at which Guy rising charged upon the Dragon's
scaly hide with force exceeding, fell yet as from an Adamantine Rock, his blade
rebounded, till at last espying a bare place under the Monsters wing, he thrust
his sword some too foot deep, so that with a dreadful yell the Dragon seemed to
cast forth a slake of fire, and with his gushing blood his life expired; the
Lion seeing his Enemy destroyed, proved not ungrateful to the destroyer, but
licking of Guy's fect, and expressing all other rokens of kindness, he followed
him to the Ship and then making as it were low obedience for the favor Guy had
done him in killing his mortal foe he returned back to the Forest.

So to his Arms both men and beasts did yield,
Whilst Conquest crowns his brows in Mars's Field.
CHAP. X.
How Guy, and Herald traveling through a Forest, found Earl Terry wounded
and his Lady taken from him by sixteen Villains employed by Duke Otton, most of
whom he kills and restores the Lady to her Husband, etc.


AFter a Months Sailing by several Islands, Castles, Cities and Towns, and the
many various advent^ites that happened in that space, Guy arrived in Normandy,
where Landing, he and Herald take their progress to the Emperors Court, which
was then kept at Burdaux, where they no sooner arrived, but the Emperor having
notice of it came to meet them, most Royasly attended, where in the entrance of
the Palace he embraced Guy, with the endearing affections and favors that
Majesty could bestow, honoring him with the title of Son; so much was our
Heroic Cham^ion ost^^t^ed by the greatest Potentate of Chris^endome, for his
sake the Emperor caused sumptuous Feasts to be prepared, and Banquets
furnished with all manner of rare^ies, and whatsoever could delight the cast,
whilst the gazing crowds flocked cound the Palace to behold him of whom they
had heard so much Fame, each chanting forth his worthy Victories, and striving
to out-doe each other in singing of his praises, as the only worthy of the
world: The Emperor caused Tilt and Tournament to be exercised before him, but
would not suffer Guy to enter the List, because he knew none would engage with
him; after he had stayed there eight days he desired the Emperors leave to
depart that he might keep his promise with the Dukes of Lovain and Lorain, and
with much difficulty obtained it, so loath was the Emperor and all the Princes
and Nobslity of his Court to lose his company; but considring that the dearest
friends must part, they dismissed him with great applause, who ordered the
Captains of the Ships that then lay at Anchor in the Port to sail homewards,
whilst he and Herald trossed the Country the nearest way to the Duke of
Lovains Court, the which they redily obeyed, whilst Guy and Herald mounting
rode on, but had not passed above ten miles, when entering a huge Forest, they
on a sudden heard dreadful screeks and a confused noise of Kill, Kill, toward
which Guy and Herald directed by the sound came instantly, where in a path
they found a man wounded, lying weltring in his blood, whom they assighting
knew to be Earl Terry, whereupon they rasing him up, deman^ed how he came in
such a plight, to whom he (with a faint voice) replied, that he having married
with a beautiful Lady, Osiled by name, whom before he was married unto, Duke
Otton had requested in marriage, but she by reason of his vicious life, had
^efused his proffer, in revenging which he had hired sixteen villains, who
having norice that he and his Lady was to walk that way, lay in ambush and had
set upon and mounded him after that barbarous manner; and not only so but had
taken from him his wife, whom more than life he did esteem.

And can the Duke said Guy deal in nothing but treachery, I lately made his
vssiains repent in death so base a Treason, and if I can find out these that
have thus wronged thee, they shall have equal shares dealt them; cheer up my
friend, and know that I am Guy, and by the Conquests that this sword has won,
and all the bloody Battles this hand has sought, I^^ fetch thee back thy Love
if thou can but direct me which way the vi^^ains went; at Guy's name Terry
revived, and receiving fresh vigor saised his pale comtenance, pale for loss
of blood, and rendered praise to Heaven for fending so worthy a Hero to his aid,
in such a time of great distress, and then turning to Guy, said worthy sir, who
have ^ouch (...) to pirty my misfortune, through that Lane they went by yonder
^ak; this was no sooner said, but they heard the Lady sereek, whereupon Guy
ordered Herald to stay with the Ea^^, and die ^ his wounds whilst he pur^uch
the Ruffins, the which he had not long done before he overtook them, halling
fair Os^ile after a rude manner: To whom Guy thus began.

Villains, what dire mischief is this that your vile hands have done, for which
your lives are ^ir^eited to my revenge; restore the Lady, miscreants and
appease my wrath ere ir heap destruction on your wicked heads; to which they
scoffingly replied, what would this vainglorious fellow have, he thinks, tries
another, to get a name by desperate folly, and that for being slain, in hopes
of rescuing this Lady, the world will pitry and lament his fate; a third
declared that he was surely mad, which so enraged him, that bidding the Lady be
of good cheer, (for that he came to fetch her back unto her Lord) he drew his
dreadful sword well known in war, and with it laid about so furiously, that
scarce a stroke fell but he killed or mortally wounded one or other of them,
bruising their Helms and Heads, breaking their Armor at such a rate, that in
an hours space ten of them lay gasping on the ground, which the trembling Lady
observing, fell upon her knaes and entreated Guy to hold his Conquering hand,
and shed no more blood for her sake, at which Guy moved with pity, put up his
Sword, commanding the remaining sir to ask the Lady forgiveness, and ^o thank
her for their lives, the which they durst not refuse, so that Guy giving them
two or three lusty knocks a piece with his sword in the ^eabard dismissed them,
bidding them tell their treacherous Lord that his name was Guy, and that he
hoped ere long to meet him in Arms, and render him the reward of his treachery;
after which Guy caused the Lady to mount behind him, so they cid to the place
where they left the Earl, who seeing them riding toward him, faint as he was,
came supported by Herald, to meet them, where falling down he embraced Guy's
knees, readring him a thousand thanks, with ^nexpressible joy, saying, He
should be proud to dye fighting in his cause.

So much renown in Arms the Hero won
That his great deeds through Europe now had run.
CHAP. XI.
How Guy and Herald went with the Earl to relieve his Father who was besiged
by Duke Otton and how Guy Raised the Seige, routed the Dukes Army and killed
him in single Combat.


NOw night had cast her Sable vail over the earth, and left only the imperfect
brightness of the Moons silver beams to cheer the drousy Globe, when Guy,
Herald, Terry, and Oslil his fair spouse, had through the Forest, vast and
wild, to travel many a mile before they came to any house or place of
entertainment, but being so good company they passed on joyfully, till coming
to a tuft of broad spreading trees, (that cast a horrid shade, blacker then
night it self) they heard a hideous noise and roaring caused by Beasts of Prey,
who having left their Dens, followed the scent of blood, as Lions, Bears,
Wolves, Tigers, Panthers, Leopards and the like, when casting their eyes round
they espied two Armed Knights standing with their swords drawn on their Guards,
and listening to the self same eryes, who Guy and his associates coming up to,
found to be two Kinsmen of the Earls, at which Terry embracing them. asked the
cause that brought them into such a place so full of dread and danger, to whom
they with a sigh reply. Alas my Lord! to tell you news you would not gladly
hear, your Princely Father in his Castle is beseiged by raging Ottons Power,
begirt with fifteen thousand men, the incensed Duke swearing to lay it level
with the ground, and take your Fathers life in revenge of your taking away his
Love.

Alas said Terry (with a countenance that witnessed a through sense of grief) I
take his Love, just heaven knows my innocence, speak Os^i, tell this Renowned
man if I at any time procured thee to break thy Faith, or ever tempted thee to
act ought against thy will; never, (said the beauteous Lady) thou have been
just in all, that cruel Duke has wronged thy innocence; indeed he did make
known to me his horrid Love, but his design (when I withstood to yield) was to
have Ravished me by force, but Heaven always pitying the distressed,
prevented his black intent; thine I am and ever will be till death shall make a
separation: Well spoke fair Lady, said Guy, in whose breast are such sparks of
Virtue, now I find that I must truly praise thy worth; it is for Love of a fair
creature (far distant from this place) that I wars dreadful task first
undertook, and through a Sea of blood have waded to obtain, and whom ere long I
do intend to see, and lay my Trophies (gained by Conquest) at her feet, since I
have found your constancy in perfect in their beings, fear not worthy Lovers
cease your cares.

Alas my Lord, said Terry, how can I be void of care and grief, when my dear
Father (dear to me as life) must unavoidably be ruined for my sake, if any
guilt there could be in the case, surely I must be innocent, come then life or
death, i will through the Leaguer break and free my Father, or else perish in the
brave attempt.

Grieve no more, said Guy, nor let restless thoughts disturb your peace; these
Arms shall force the daring foe to leave the seige, or like to thundering with
death h^^^l ruin on their guilty heads, I in my Vissage bear the cripple
fates, and where so ^^e I look, severe destruction marks my frowns, and death a
waights to execute my will: long have I wished to meet the Duke in Arms, and
now have found an opportunity unlooked for, and with as much joy go to this war
as I would go to see my well pleased Phaelice smile.

At these words the Earl revived, and put on thearfulness whilst he and his
fair spouse fell at Guy's feet, and would in humble thanks have kissed the
ground, but that he taking them up in his arms would not permit such reverence
for to be done to him a mortal man, etc.

So they marched on till they came within sight of the Castle, the which stood
upon a rising hill; no sooner had Fame conveyed the sound through the Army that
Guy was approaching, but the Commander that had heard the dreadful exploits his
warlike hand had done, fled and left the Duke and some of his particular
friends to order the Forces, the Duke seeing himself in this plight grew the
more desperate, vowing to continue the siege, though ten thousand Devils were
approaching to give the besieged aid.

Guy after having dispersed some few that lay against the Eastern Gate, with
the Earl Herald and the rest entered the Castle, where finding the old Earl in
much perplexity, Guy comforted him, as likewise Terry, Herald, Ossil and the
rest, relating what adventures had befell, at which the old man somewhat
revived, Guy desired him to permit the Soldiers under his Command to sally out
upon the Fee, for said he now fear has made half the Conquest, I in a minutes
time will finish it, which said, all with loud shouts cried lead on, lead on,
to Victory, when on a sudden the Gates on groaning hinges opened wide, and out
they marched against the Foe, Guy in the Front began the Battle with such
courage and fury, spurred on by keen Revenge, that the slaughtered rout fell
down on either hand, and his men following it hard, in less then two hours
space the amazed Tuscanes fled on all sides in confusion, leaving six thousand
of their dead and dying friends upon the place, which the Duke seeing, in a
rage desperately minded, was resolved to dye and not survive his infamy,
whereupon he sought in every part for Guy, whirling his sword about to make him
room, to whom he approaching, said, now have I found thee who have haunted me
from place to place, and challenge thee in Arms to try whom Fortune has
designed to favor, for death is berter then an ignominious loss of honor: to
whom Guy thus replied, proud Duke, whose treacheries are not to me unknown, who
causelessly sent lately to envade my life, know that I joy to meet thee; at
which they rushed together, and like Lions fierce encountered each other, whilst
from their Helms the sparks of sice flew, and rattling Armor ecchoed in the
Skies till the Duke, wounded deep on the right side fainted, and fell down for
loss of blood, the which Guy seeing, remembered that he was a Christian, and
thereupon began to compassionate his unhappy fate, striving to recover him, but
in vain; for ofter his having made a true confession of his many crimes, and
asked pardon of all whom in his lifetime he had offended, the crim Tyrant
death prevailed and led him captive to the shades of night; at which with a
relenting mind, after having delivered him to his friends to be honorably
interred, returned to the Castle, where with great joy he was received of all,
especially of Terry, Ossil and the old Earl, but after having spent two days
there with much delight, Herald and he took their leave and departed.

Still searching glory's stage to court bright fame
And win themselves an everlasting name.
CHAP. XII.
How Guy killed a Monstrous Bore, and of the Honor done him by the Dukes of
Lorain and Lovain, how he returned to England and killed a munstrous Dragon in
Northumberland, and the honor done him by the King, and his Reception by fair
Phaelice.


GUy and Herald having taken leave, proceeded onwards of their journey toward
the Duke of Lovains Court, but not having passed far, e're in the Forest, they
saw coming toward them the hugest Bore that Earth ever bred, whose Eyes like
two Beacons blazed, and on his back the horrid bristles stood much like a Grove
of spears; his Tusks which like two Ivory b^^works stood, were at least two
foot in length, his jaws with blood and slaughter all besmeered, before whose
rage, nor man, nor beast could staud; but Guy nothing daunted, gave his horse
to Heraul for to hold and drawing out his massy blade went to meet him, at whom
the beast coming with open mouth grunted horribly, Guy stood not to complement
him but let sly with all his force, as if lones thunderbolts from broken-clouds
had fest, so that the Bore never feeling such weighty strokes nor smarting
wounds till then, turned tall, and endeavored to save himself by flight, but
all in vain, for Guy pursuing, laid so hard upon his swinish head that down he
fell be smeered with blood, and with a horrid noise that made the Forest shake
breathed out his life, after which Guy hewingoff his head, the which was at
least one hundred weight, bore it upon his Lance to the Duke of Lovains Court,
where no sooner arriving, but the Duke commanded all his Drums, Trumpets,
Clarions, and other instruments of War to welcome him, going with his Nobles to
congratulate his safe return, with all the imaginable expressions of joy, and
ten thousand happy wishes, sending notice of his arrival to the Duke of Lorain,
wh^ with all the Nobility of his Court, in very splendid Equipage came to
embrace the worlds admired man, and to present him with gifts and honors,
though not suitable to his deserts, the two Dukes making a public Feast for
the space of ten days for all comers whatsoever.

But Guy having been so long absent from the bright beauty who was to be the
reward of all his dreadful toil, was much desirous to return for England his
Native place, long it was before he could obtain their licenses to depart, they
still preparing one noble exercise or other to delay him, till at last he
opened to them his Love, giving them to understand it was for that that he so
long had roamed about the world and undertaken enterprises so perrillons,
against which they could find no argument, but ordering one of the best Ships
immediately to be rigged and fitted, they unwillingly dismissed him after
having accompanied him to the Sea side, saying, Go and prosper thou Renowned
Worthy of the world, thrice happy is the land that gave thee birth, and more
happy she that must enjoy thee in her arms; may Victory a weight thee
wheresoe'r thou go, and crown thy brows with new fading Bays.

For which Guy having returned his humible thanks, gave order to hoist up Sail,
and having a good forewind, in four days touched on English ground.

The which the King no sooner hearing of but he sent several of his Nobles to
desire his company at York, where then he kept his Court, Guy hearing that it
was his Sovereigns pleasure, stood not to dispute, but joyfully accompanied
them, though he had rather have gone to his inestimable jewel, the fair
Phaelice.

First no sooner Herald and he were conducted to the Kings presence, where he
sat in his Throne with all his Nobles standing cound about him, but they
offered to kneell as was their duty, but the King forbade it, and rising from
his Chair of State, took them in his arms and embraced them, saying, worthy
Champions, by whom my Realm is famous through the world, and especially by you
fir Guy, whose Arms have done such wonders as amaze mankind, before whose arm
the haughty foes still bowed their stubborn necks; Monsters and Tyrants by thy
prowess fell, and Armies seat^ered, strewed the field with slain, matchless in
War, in Arms not to be equalled, Fames brazen Trumpet has thy worth
proclaimed, and thee the everliving Monument of true Heroic greatness styled,
spreading thy mighty Deeds unto the utmost cornees of the Laud, thou the
Oppressors scourge, and the oppressed's shield, receive such favors as a King
can give.

At which Guy bowing low, and returned all humble thanks, he thus begun, Dread
Sovereign Lord, to whom I all Allegiance owe, your praises of my worth are too
to great for my deserts; but could there be an enterprise found out of greater
difficulty, wherein your most obedient subject could do ought to merit the
least of these favors your Highness heaps upon ^^e, I should think my self for
ever blessed, a happiness so infinite I should be proud to purchase with my Life.

Alas said the King (and with that he sighed) there is an enterprise of
dangerous consequence within the limits of this Isle, but I must hide it from
thee least in such a dangerous attempt I lose the best of Subjects, and thou at
home have thy Herosek deeds ^^lipsed by foil or death.

My ever honored Lord said Guy, conceal not your Printely thoughts, give me
that danger whatsoever it is, and i will with open arms go joyfully to meet it
were it the dreadfullest that ever Fate devised.

Then since thou will know brave English Hero, it is a dreadful Dragon bred
amongst the Rocks in Northumberland, of a Monstrous size, who for this month
past has infested all that Country killing both man and beast, so terrible to
behold, that all the people within ten miles of his Cave have left their
habitations desolate, and for have many their flasks and herds, the which he
preys upon, and gluts his venomous jaws with slaughter; many of our Knights
have gone to Combat him, but with such fatal success, that either wounded with
his mortal sting, or poisoned with the infectious air he breaths, they have
either dyed upon the plate, and there served to gorgs his hellish maw or soon
after, and so cunning is the Feind, that if he sees any number of Armed men
regether, ^e will not descend from his Rocks, but there abide, or with expanded
wings bear himself a loft in the air: I tell you not this because I would have
you hazard your life in so perilous an enterprise, no I had rather that County
shouldly wast then you exposed unto mortal danger.

To whom Guy thus replied. Most redoubted Sovereign, the news you tell me has
already filled me with more joy then can he well expressed, shall I that have
freed so many Nations from the Pests, now in the prime of all my strength,
decline the freeing of this, in which I first breathed my vital air, no, may it
but please your Highness to order me a Conduct where to find this Monster, or
rather fiend, I now by all the favors that your Majesty has heaped upon me,
that before the Sun has twice rounded this Globe of Earth, his head upon a
Lance, fast fixed, shall to your Majesty be brought, more monstrous he cannot
be then him whom I hereaved of Lise in the Lovanian Forest.

At Guy's earnest request, the King ordered twelve Knights to wait upon him, of
whom Herald was one, who had sworn not to leave him in any adventure
whatsoever, whereupon Guy te^k his leave, and the King bestowed many blessings
upon him, wishing him prosperous success, and that he might be victorious over
the destroying Dragon.

No sooner was Guy departed on his journey, but a Messenger from the great
Counsel then assembled at Lincoln, came to give his Majesty to understand that
his Presence was required there, about deciding a business of much concernment,
whereupon he posted thither, where for a while we must leave him and follow Guy
into Northumberland.

Where being arrived, he no sooner came within keen of the Rock, wherein was
the Dragons Cave, but he found the mangled carcasses of Men and Beasts lie
seatrered on the Plain, some half devoured and others swollen with Poison; at
which sight not daunted in the least, he forwards rides, bidding his Knights
stay behind at some distance, least the Monster leaving him should set on them,
not so well able to withstand his force.

Having advanced within a furlong of the Cave, the Dragon espies him, and
greedy of his prey, with broad wing out-spread, that drove the air around him
like a Whirlwind as he flew, came at Guy staring on him with eyes that seemed
to bur^ like Lamps of sire, hissing horribly, Guy having set his Lance in his
rest met him with a full career, and hitting him just upon the breast, his scaly
harness burst the Lance into an hundred pieces without to much as making the
least impression; at which he drew his sword, and with redoubled force laid at
the Monsters head, whiles he extended his forked sling, disgorging black poison
on the ground, and with a dreadful Yell made at him with his teeth and claws,
sometimes on the Earth, sometimes aloft in the air h^ assails the Champion, who
watching his opportunity as he was rising, struck him a full blow under the
wing that spoiled his slight, the swarthy blood gushing out a main, of which
Guy taking the advantage, ran him in so deep, that reathing of life's seat with
horrid yells that made the Rocks resound; he breathed out his last, whilst from
his mouth that opened wide, was seen to issue forth a flake of five; his head
with much labor he hewed off, and firing it upon the Truncheon of his Spear,
he ^id^s hack to his Knights, who overjoyed at his success, welcomed him and
sung him victorious Champion, most Renowned on earth, placing a wreath of
Laurel on his head, and so rid on till they came to York, but having notice of
the King's departure they stayed not there but Posted to Liacoln, where they
were received with all the signs of joy imaginable, the gazing c^ouds from all
parts came to see the mighty Champion so much ^aised by Fame.

The King no sooner heard of his coming, but rising from the Counsel Board,
attended by all the Nobility presant, he want to meet ^im, when beholding the
Monstrous head he blessed himself, saying, it was surely made to devour all
mankind, such glaring Eves, and rows of Monsteous Teeth, Rabid jaws, armed with
scale of Adamant, and forked stings, whose points excerded the sharpest steell,
and at least a yard in length, from which, said he, her caster Heaven defend
this Isle; with that he gave order to one of his Knights to receive it at Guy's
hands, and afterward embraced him with unfeigned joy, saying, west art thou
worthy of our Royal favors, thou most Renowned of men, whose brave Erploits
shine now as bright as the noon day-Sun, Honors first born thou art, and
Eldest son of Fame, how shall we express thy^ praises, whose all-Conquering arm
no power of mortals can withstand.

The which Guy modestly endeavored to excuse, but in vain, for the more he
excused, the more he was honored, the King sending two Knights skilled in
Limnick to take the just proportion of the Dragon's carkas, the which they did,
and found it to be thirty foot in length, and alike in all proportion; the
Picture being hung up in Warwick Castle, but of that more hereafter: By this
time Fame had conveyed to Phaelice the news of Guy's being with the King at
Lincoln (the rest she having heard before) delays not, but mounting her Palfry
came attended with several Ladies thither, where finding Guy, who little
expected her there, they embraced each other, and wept for joy; Alas said
Phaelice, my Love, could thou neglect me thus, as to be in England so long
without letting me know, it is sure thou have forgot thy vows, or were they only
feigned; to whom Guy answered mild: Bright center of my soul, on whom all my
joys depend, and all the dreadful toils of War that I have undergone seem
small, since thou in recompense aford'st me Love; look on me my dear joy, my
faithful heart is ever thine, it was still with thee in all the dangers that I
underwent, thou art the only she this Land contains that willingly at my
Arrival I would first have seen, but being fent for by the King, at my first
setting foot on shoat, I was obleiged to obey my Sovereigns Commond, and after
freed the land by slaying of the hugest Dragon that the earth ever bred.

No more my Lord, said Phaelice, I have heard of all thy brave Exploits, such
hazards you shall never undertake for me again, I am now thy own, in Loves soft
wars we will hereafter contend; so saying she wept for joy, and Guy embraced
her, smothering her Tears with Kisses.

The Marriage day proposed, Guy gives the King to understand the sum of all,
how for Love of beauteous Phaelice he had undertaken those enterprises, and
waded through a Sea of blood, desiring that his Majesty would acquaint Earl
Robands with the same, and procure his free consent, for as yet he knew not of
their Loves.

This the King promised to perform, and that himself, his Queen, and all the
Court would grace the Wedding with their presance, the which was appointed to
be kept at Warwick, the Queen sending Phaelice many Jewels and other rich
presants, and all imaginable preparations great and costly were prepared for
entertaining of the Royal Guest.

Whilst Fame did loudly sing his mighty praise
And Crowned his head with never sading Bays.
CHAP. XIII.
How Guy and Phaelice are joined in Wedlock, and of their splendid
entertainment, how afterward be vows a Pilgrimage, and Travels to the Holy
Land, how in his way he kills Amarant a monstrous Giant, and delivers the
Prisoners under his Tyranny kept in tortures.


THe happy Nuptial day long looked for, being come, the King and Queen with all
the Court to Warwick strair repair, attended and adorned with all the Pompous
Magnificence that can be imagined on so great an occasion.

Earl Roband no sooner understanding by the King's Letter that Guy was arrived
in England, and that for the Love of his beauteous daughter he had undertaken
the dreadful toiles of War, and Combats fierce abroad, and eke at home, and
that he was come to Warwick to ask his consent, and being overjoyed he went to
meet him.

Guy perceiving him come toward him, bowed himself to the ground, whereupon
the Earl hasted, and taking him in his arms, embraced him with all the
expressions of Love and Friendship; Guy no sooner asking his consent, but his
reply was, that he should ever be bound to bless heaven for enclining to so
Heroic and brave a man to ask that of him which he himself had so often wished
would come to pass, and that his generation should be so famoused by an
alliance with the worthiest Champion that ever trod the Globe; for which Guy
returned humble thanks, and thereupon Phaelice being called, blushing with
virgin modesty, freely, and to her no small content yielded.

Business being brought to this pass, the Earl gave order for the sumptuous
Entertainment; commanding the Keepers of his Parks to prepare a hundred fat
Bucks, which were served up with all the choicest dainties of the Land, after
the Churches Seal had joined the lovely pair, Wine flowing round in such
abundance for to entertain the Royal guest, that it was to be admired the
Nation could affoard so much, all manner of Fowls and Fishes rateable, that the
Air or Sea contained: so that Ahasuerus when he Feasted all the Eastern
Provinces could not outdo this; the Banque^ ended, mellodious instruments of
Music were brought, and the Ladies of Honor, and Lords, attendants on the
Court, danced before the King and Queen, the Earl and his Countess, Guy and his
fair Bride, who deck^ with Jewels, sat bright as the Morning Star, nor was
Guy's one Father and Mother wanting to be there: after the Dances ended,
several Plays were presented and Songs sung containing Guy's Heroic Acts, to
the infinite satisfaction of all the Assembly, every one joying the Married
pair, whilst Hymen descending in a Cloud, sung to soft Music, as follows.

SONG.
1.
Happy for ever Blessed be
Whom Heaven has joined in Unity,
Let Peace and Honor still attend
And joys, such joys as know no end.
Still live in Love, and banish care
Whilst I pronounce you happy are.
2.
Great Man of War whom Beauty charms
Embrace thy goddess in thy arm,
Live Live for ever in delight
Loves soster Wars does now invite
To Mars no more dread homage pay
It Is Love it is Love you must obey.
3.
Loves power commands, you must submit
So has the Deity thought fit
Gai^st pointed Beauty, Armour's vain
Through it Love wounds with pleasing Pain
Then happy in each others bliss
Make Earth make Earth a Paradise.
After the Song ended, Masquarades were performed, and all the noble sports
that could be imagined to delight the senses; the Festival continuing for the
space of ten days, but no^ long after, this joy was eclipsed by the death of
the noble Earl, who dyed of a violent Fever, to the unspeakable grief of all
men, making Guy sole Heir of all his Lands and Lordships; the King confirming
upon him the Title of Earl of Warwick, he being ^henceforwards ranked in all
assemblies of Council and other meetings amongst the Lords and Peers of the
Nation, and highly esteemed of all, etc.

But to see in the midst of joy and delight what sudden Eclipses (at which the
world not a little wondered) overspread the bright sunshine of infant bliss,
for Guy tuminating over the past actions of his life, began seriously to
consider with himself what an ocean of blood he had waded through to purchase
his beauteous Bride; for which being smitten with remorse of Conscience, he
fell into a deep Melancholy, and often retired in private to vewail his sins
committed against Heaven, saying, That to gain honor and renown to please a
woman, he had provoked the just incensed God of all the Earth, and that his
crimes were many, great and grievous; and that without speedy Repentance they
would prove his eternal ruin, with many other feeling expressions of deep
sorrow and contrition; so that his warlike eyes that were wont to sparkle fire,
now flowed with briny Tears, whilst sighs and groans declared the agony he
strove under.

Which Phaelice one day having watched him to his retirement, observing him in
submssive wise, entreated to know the cause of so sudden alteration, saying,
if she had any ways offended, she would upon her knees beg pardon, and be sure
for to transgress no more in the like nature; and with that she tenderly wept,
whose Tears Guy not being able to behold, raised her in his arms and began to
comfort her saying, weep not bright Angel, thou fairest and divinest of thy
sex, in whom alone such virtues dwell as can equal the best of women dwelling
on the earth.

No my adoared Mistress, it is for my boundless sins that now turn back upon my
Conscience in their native ugliness and vile deformity, whose numbers are as
numberless as sands on the Barrachian shores, the flower of youth and strength
I have vainly spent, puffed up with sond imaginations and the love of thee, in
a red Sea of blood have I sailed about the world, and with this hand laid
thousands silent, pale in deaths cold Tombs, who else might now have been
alive; but thou art innocent of such impieties, it was fortunate success and my
ambition that prompted me to such extreme ills, the which I now with Tears
lament, and must to Heaven make satisfaction, for a long and weary Pilgrimage
unto the Holy Land I have resolved to take, my vows are past and shall not be
recalled, therefore my lovely Phaelice weep no more, it is to the holy Sepulcher
i will go, and see the place where my dear Savior for sinful man's redemption
humbled himself so low as to abide in, after his having taken our nature upon
him, and where he suffered and laid down his precious life for us unworthy
miserable wretches, who make it our chief ends to disobey his will. So saying,
he sighed and groaned within himself, at which Phaelice again bedewed her
beauteous face with Tears, the which he smothering with a Kiss, and thus mildly
did procaed; alas my fair one, for thy sake I could willingly stay at home,
but for the sake of my immortal soul (more dear) I must perform my vows; live
chaste my Phaenix like the Turtle Dove, and win immortal praises by thy virtuous
life: Remember the Renowned Women of former times, as Penellope, Edilfridia,
and Edilthrudis, with many others, who after being married, accounted Chastity
their greatest pride, contemning all desires of marriage bli^s.

I know thou art so much composed Divine, that thou can equal, if not excaed
them all; for sure it is it was for thy sake, and to procure thy Love, that I
trampled upon Crowns and Scepters, forcing Princes and Potentates to yield
their breaths, though I must confess the fault was only mine, and thou art
innocent; but alas too long I delay to make satisfaction: For my guilt Armor
lie there, and all my Conquests he forgot, in a Pilgrims weed I now will Travel
the world with weary steps: Come my dear and gentle Phaelice deliver me thy
Ring, and take thou mine, the Pledge of our dear remembrance and Love, the
which beholding, though distant many miles divided by rough Waves, let us think
on each other; and if ever I return to see this my Native Land, i will send it thee
that thereby thou may have knowledge of my arrival, he had no sooner ended,
but drowned in tears that burst from her starry Eyes, she wrung her hands
complaining against her cruel Fates, thus soon to separate her from her Lord,
begging on her knees his stay, but finding his resolution fixed too deep to be
removed, she unwillingly consented, promising to have him ever in remembrance,
injoyning him the same by her, so unknown to any, she accompanied him to the
Ship in which he was to pass for I^ally, and there with a thousand endearing
Kisses took her leave of him, not knowing where she ever should behold him
more, and so with sad and heavy cheer she returned to Warwick Castle, where for
a while we must leave her and follow Guy into Itally, where suffering many
storms at Sea, he arrived safe, and Landing only with a staff and scrip
traveled over the Country pensive and alone, passing many a wild Forest and
Desert place, till having gone about two hundred miles close by a murmering
Brook o'r spread with Poplars and Osiers he espied an aged Knight sitting and
greatly be wailing his misfortune, Crying alas! what now but woe and misery,
which naught but Death can put a period too; cruel was the Tyrant thus to
bereave me of all my Sons, not leaving me so much as one for to support and
comfort me in my deelining age; Nay more, what horror seizes me to think the
miseries they endure, by his Tyrannick rage their deaths are lingering, but mine
shall not be so.

With that he drew his Sword and being about to fall thereon, Guy stepped to
him and hindered the intended violence, saying. Reverend Sir, make known to me
the cause of this your grief that has driven you upon such despair, if it lie
in the power of man to right your wrongs, perhaps I may be the man that will
reverse your woes.

At which the Knight fixing his eyes on Guy, with a deep sigh thus spoke. Alas
Pilgrim, thou art not able to give case unto my grief, it is death alone must
cure my plaint, be not so rash said Guy but tell the cause, you know not what
hidden force these Arms contain why then said he, kind stranger, since you will
understand my misery, know that yonder Castle large and strong, dwells one
Amarant a Gigantiek Tyrant, of such a monstrous size, as Earth I think never
brought forth before, who feeding upon humane flesh seizes all that pass these
Woods, and either dead or alive bears them to his horrid Prison, in which not
only of Gentlemen but tender Ladies he at this time holds Captive at least one
hundred, the Women for his Lust and the men for his pastime put to various
tortures; my only daughter unadvisedly straying this way, was taken by the
Monster, upon which my fifteen Sons, desirous to rescue her, went Armed to
fight against the Tyrant, but not being able to withstand his force were all
taken Prisoners, whose Lives I hear, for their sisters sake he spares, but
every day devises for them new torments: now thou have heard me out, what
think thou? have I not cause enough for death?

To whom Guy thus Replied. Alas Sir, I pity you, yet am glad I came so
luckily to save your Life, and free your Sons if yet alive; could you perform
so meritorious a work said the Knight, with humble thanks to you i would kiss the
ground and bless this happy day, but I fear it is altogether vain for to attempt,
for many have whose Skuls lie scattered round the dreadful place: F^ar not said
Guy, lend me but your sword and Armor, i will try that fortune which has never
turned against me yet whilst you stay here, and pray for my success: So saying,
he departed, and coming to the Castle Gate, thundered at it so loud as made the
hollow walks to echo, at which the dreadful Giant reused, came forth Armed
from head to foot, bearing a weighty Club some six foot long, and seeing Guy,
stared on him with Eyes that seemed to sparkle like fire, saying, sirrah, how
durst you thus presume to hinder my repose? know you not it is death for to
approach this place, much more to be so bold, it may be so said Guy, were your
arms equal to your will; but it was to seek you that drew me to this place,
know Tyrant it is not your monstrous size I dread, to which the Giant stor^^ing,
replied, to an ill purpose a^t thou come, for with thy flesh will I feast the
Fowls of the air, whilst my self shall quaff thy ^^^d, and with that laid at
Guy with his Massy Club, who nimbly avoided the coming st^oaks ^ drew his
sword, so that a dreadful fight began, which long continued dou^^ful, till
through excess of heat Amarant began to saint, which Guy perceiving, redoubled
his force and hewed upon his Armor till he dinted and cut it through in
several places, which the crafty Giant finding, the better to recover breach,
feighned thirst, and besought Guy to le^ him drink of the adjacent River, and
not to take the advantage of Natures enforcements, to which Guy readily
condescended, saying, Drink thy fi^^, that so I may have the greater task to
Con^^or thee, who when subdued, shall have no excuse, so said Heroic Guy.

And Amarant strait to the River hasted, drinking largely of the swelling
flood, whilst Guy stood prepared to receive him at his return. The Giant having
ended his draught and quenched his thirst, takes up his Club and comes at him
with all his force, rest having added fresh vigor; the which Guy observing,
nimbly avoided the furious stroke, which falling on the ground entered above a
foot therein, so that before he could recover his stroke, Guy struck him full
on the head, which made him recoil six huge paces, but wheeling about he
charged again with greater force then before, so that the Combat having
continued about the space of four hours, Guy grew thirsty, desiring the like
leave that he before had granted, to which Amarant scoffingly repl^ed, he
never was so great a fooll as to relieve his foe, but to take all advantages;
this so enraged Guy, that with force exceeding he smoat upon the Giants Crest,
and with three blows brought him to the ground, who fasting like a Ciclops made
the Earth to quake, and being down cried out for quarter, but in vain; for Guy
remembering his base ingratitude, immediately lopped off his frightful head,
which divided from the Monsterous trunk he fixed on the Gates, and taking the
Key he entered the Castle, where he found the wofullest Spectacles that ever his
eyes beheld; tender Ladies in ^^^k Dungeons, living for many years on humane
flesh, nay forced to eat their husbands, or their nearest friends; such was the
rigor of the merciless Tyrant.

These he released, but going farther, found a massy door on brazen Pillars
hung, he not having the Keys forced them open with Iron instruments he found in
the Castle, where he had no sooner entered, but he beheld such sights as made
him start with horror, above fifty persons (among which were the Knights
Sonns) hanged up by the heel^s, many of them with their heads downwards, other
by the Wrists, and some by the middle or Privy Members, all looking as pale as
death, who no sooner hearing the Gate open, but supposed it had been the Giant
coming to torment them (as his use was to make himself pastime) whereupon they
with lamentable cries began to beseech him to put them ^ut of their pains: But
contray, Guy gently took them down, who through weakness were no ways able to
stand; when he had done this, he went and called the Knight, who no sooner
entered and saw what Guy had done, but falling at his feet he rendered him ten
thousand thanks, but Guy taking him up, embraced him, saying, he always had
vowed to right the wronged, and help the oppressed against the mighty
oppressor; this he having said, and they understanding he was their deliverer,
with tears of joy blessed the day that gave him birth, and a thousand times
more this in which he had released them from their torments; after which Guy
having comforted them all he could, delivered the Keys of the Castle to the
Knight, with strict charge carefully to look to the distressed Ladies, and the
rest, he put off the Armor, and taking his gown and his staff, departed
toward Jerusalem, with many a weary step over Hills and Rockey Mountains,
through Woods and Forests, where the dreadful wild Beasts roared around him,
sos^itary all alone, and often sitting down in the shade, or by some murmuring
brook, would with tears bewail his sins, and condemn himself for the many great
transgressions he had committed, lamenting his youthful follyes, whilst
Wildings and Berries were his daily food, and water from the Crystal Spring
sufficed for drink to quench his thirst, whom now we must bewailing his
depraveties, and return into England to take a view how Phaelice bears the
absence of her wandering Lord.

Whilst through untroden muzes he does stray
To Juda's Land his sins to purge away.
CHAP. XIV.
How Guy's departure out of England is lamented, and of strange Adventures that
befell him in the Holy Land, how at his return he Routed Amantbuses's his Army,
and restored Earl Terry to his Lordships, afterward returning into England
which he found almost destroyed by the Danes.


NO sooner did the King and the Nobility hear that Guy was departed the Land on
a Pilgrimage, but they were struck mute with admiration, wondering that he could
so soon leave the fairest creature England had, for a toylsome and solitary
life, yet commend his Piety that began such early Repentance, and set his Soul
at far greater value then all his Honors, or glittering Treasures, so that for
this he will gain as much applause as before he had done for his victories.

In the mean while Phaelice pensive, and shunned all converse unless it were
concerning her Lord, keeping her self reserved and Chaste, seldom being seen
abroad, the Queen and several great Ladies came several times to visit her, and
to persuade her out of her melancholy, but in vain; she would not harken to
tales of mirth, but often retiring ints her Closet, she would bewail his
absence, saying, Ala^s where wanders now my Guy, what unknown Climate holds
that far-famed man whom Europe lately held in Admiration; but now unknown in
poor array he tra^es the Deserts thinking on me, whilst Tears gush from his
brim-ful Eyes, and sitting down under some spreading shade bemoans my loanly
state, wishing himself often in my arms. Oh why did we ever part, for this short
moments bliss that was scarce worth his thoughts, did he undertake such toil
and six years spend in dreadful War, alas! could it be my Lord that could
leave me thus forlorn, bere^t of joy, and comfortless, even in the dawn of
Happiness, overcasting with thick Clouds of sorrow the morning Sun, when all my
hopes were growing perfect; a cruel Fate to me, but it is for the sake of thy
immortal Soul which makes me bear it with the le^s regret, and be more patient
in thy absence, hoping one day to behold thy much beloved face again, but where
ever thou art I know thy thoughts are fixed upon mae; thy heart is often in
England, though thou art far remote; it is sure thou can not forget thy
Phaelice whom once thou loved^t so dear, no I know thou can not, I should
wrong thy Virtues should I but imagine it; Oh my Lord could thou but know how
sensible I am of the great dangers that you must needs hazard your self in,
whilst through Wildernesses large and wide you travel, dede^titute of food, and
ly abnoctious, now unarmed, to the devouring jaws of each brast of Prey, and
your absence bath tortured thus my poor bleeding heart with fear, which is
worse then death it self, but wheresoever thou go, this is my comfort my
s^ul a^tends thee, though my body from the watery Globe's divided, Leagues
without number.

So saying, her eyes burst out with Pearlly Tears, and sobs stopped the passage
of her voice, refusing all pleasant Wines or sumptuous Diet, her delight being
only to feast the Poor, and daily to relieve with her own hand such as ca^^e
for Charity, whilst her Lord having traveled through Arabia and Palestin^,
after many a weary step arrived at the long wished for place, the which to
visit in those Popish times, was held^ sufficient to expiate all sins committed
till that time, etc.

Guy took curious Observations ^^th of the Sepulcher wherein the Aramathenian
deposited the glorious body of our blessed Savior inhumanely put to death by
the cruel Jews, after that, the ruined Temple wherein he taught, as likewise
Mount Cal^ary or Golgatha, where his precious blood was shed for sinful man;
then the Reli^es of the Cross, the Crown of Thorns and Scourge, and many other
memorials kept in the Church, now built upon the Holy Sepulcher by the
Patriarch. Having stayed there about some twenty years with great Devotion, he
felt a natural decay, knowing that Age still hurryed death on; and being much
desirous to lay his bones in his Native Land, and to see his virtuous Wife
before death cloased his eyes with long benighting slumber; he takes his leave
to tread back again those steps that he had trod before: Wandering through
diverse Countries and Regions barefooted all day, and when night came reposed in
some hollow Cave that Nature had Arched with Pumice, or beneath some spreading
Oak, laying his head upon the Mossy Bark; so passing on by degrees till he came
into Itally, where long he had not traveled before he met with his old
acquaintance Earl Terry, whose Father being dead, Duke Ottons Son, by name
Amanibus, had invaded his Tertitories, and having overthrown him in three huge
battles, had taken from him his Lordships and Dominions in the revenging his
Father, slain by Guy, and himself being forced to fly to save his life, which
Guy understanding, bid him be of good cheer; for as I am an English man, said
he, I will do thee right, and bear the Usurper back to his own Tuscany at the
naming of an Englishman, Terry revived, and with a d^p fetched sigh, said.
Worthy Sir, there was an Englishman once so much my friend as to save mine and
my Fathers Life from the, assatling Tuscanes; but I fear death has laid him low
in some silent Grave, he not having been heard of in these parts for many
years; his name was Guy a man renowned above the rest of men: so said, the
woeful Earl not knowing Guy (time having so altered his Warlik face) to whom Guy
answered (not willing to make himself known) Most Noble Earl I knew the man you
speak of, and often have seen him in dreadful Battles tried, whilst through the
bloody fields I ranged and chaced the Foe with equal success, speaking in these
ambiguous words, he desired the Earl to fetch him a^uit of the highest proofed
Armor and a strong sword, and then to Muster up what men he had left, and
leave the event to Heaven; in all this he was readily obeyed, so that in a
days space every thing was complete for the March, Guy causing the Trumpets to
sound aloud, at the noise of which some of the Tuscanes ascending the uppermost
Turcet of the Castle, saw four thousand men (all the remains of twenty thou^and
the rest being slain) marching toward them, of which they advertised Amanthus,
who conjecturing it to be Terry, commanded his Soldiers to arm, and opening
the gate ^^ the town issue dout in good order about sixteen thousand strong,
marching in three Battalia's, which Terry observing would have sled, but Guy
hartned him on, saying himself would ^egin the Battle and charge the whole Army
through; long it was not before they came up close to each other, the Tuscans
giving such a shout as made the hills to Echo; upon which Guy having drawn out
one thousand of his choscest men, ordered to sound the Charge, and thereupon
with force exceeding, engaged the first Embatteiled Squadron of the Enemies
main Body, who dreamed of no such fury, and bro^e through their Ranks
disordering and putting them into great confusion, whilst Guy laid round about
him, and at every stroke one or other slew: in the mean while Terry was not
idle, for animated by Guy's example, he on the other side ^harged Amanthus with
the like success, so that nothing but slaughter raged through the Plain, the
conflict continuing dreadful for the space of four hours, when the Tuscans
found themselves infinitelp worsted began to shrink, and by disranking fell
into so great a disorder that their Commanders could not draw them up, which
Guy perceiving, pressed on cutting his way through Troops and Regiments, and
making such dreadful havoc that though Amanthus with many of his trusty
Friends going through the Army entreated them to take courage, yet could he not
restrain their flight, so that all retreat to the town, being cut off by two
thousand that wheeled to the right, they fled confused to the Woods and hills
scattering themselves on every hand.

Guy and the Earl having pursued them till night, returned, where they found
the Citizens come out to meet the Earl, with the Keys, expressing great joy,
for those that were left to guard it hearing of the overthrow durst not attend
the sequel, but abandoned it and fled, which they no sooner perceived, but they
entered in great Triumph, and there that night the Earl entertained Guy with all
imaginary splendour, even weeping for joy to be so unlooked for restored,
desiring to know his name that had wrought such wonders in his behalf, but
refused to make known who he was, nor did he as sormerly, take any delight in
Applauses, or entertainment, but getting up betimes the next morning, left the
City unknown to the Earl or any of his Attendants, so that journying to the Sea
side, he found a Ship just going for England, in which he joyfully Embarked,
the Vessel being bound for Bristol (which was then likewise a place famous for
Merchandise) in eighteen days they arrived there, where Landing they heard
most doleful and unwelcome News, for Canuce King of Denmark on a pretended
quarrel for the loss of his Father, who putting to Sea in a small Boat, and a
Tempest immediately arrising he was driven on this shore, and being taken by
one of the Barons of the Cinque Ports, was carried before the King, who nobly
entertained him, and for his great skill in Hawking made him his chief
Faulconer, which raised such envy in him that he was displeased upon that
account, that one day taking his opportunity in a Forest he slew him and fled
into France.

Which Murder being laid to the Kings charge, who was altogether ignorant of
it, the Danes under their aforesaid Captain, and several others under pretense
of Revenge, but more out of greediness for Prey and Plunder, Landed with about
twenty thousand men, and after them ten thousand more, with which they ravaged
and laid waste the Country, destroying with fire and sword all before them,
ravishing women and Virgins, and then ripping them up alive; dashing babes
against the ground, and all other horrid impieties that can be imagined; so
terrible they dealt, that the people fled before them, dreading them worse than
a Pestilence; the King having garhered together the English Forces, had sought
several Battles in which he was worsted, and thereupon retired with his friends
to Winchester, a Town then so strong that it was impossible to take it unless
by starving, Powder, that Hellish Engine, then lay deep hidden in the secrets
of the Earth, and was not formed to belch destruction to mankind, against which
the Danes having drawn all their Forces, besieged it almost round, there being
no passage in or out but at the Western Gate, Guy upon this sad News and
distress of his King and Country thither he makes all speed, resolving to
raise the Siege or lose his life.

Nor age detains him but through guarding Foes
He Fights his way and deals them storms of blows.
CHAP. XV.
How the King being Besieged at Winchester, Guy undertook to fight with Colbron
a Monstrous Giant, Kills him and routs the Danish Army, forcing them with great
slaughter to fly the Land, and then betakes himself to his solitary Cave where
he lived many years unknown.


GUy no sooner entering the Town, but he went upon the Walls to veiw the Enemies
Forces how they lay Encamped, and what their numbers were, not in the least
making himself known to any: Long he had not been there, but out from a Tent
placed on the Northside, came proudly strutting, an Armed Giant of Monstrous
size, being at least twelve foot in height and eight in thickness, he being the
man that had so terrified the English and made great slaughter on them in all
the Battles that were fought, none being able to resist his strength, but still
fled before him, he wearing underneath his high proofed Armor a shirt of Mail,
and bearing a great two edged Sword: Long he had not stalked like a huge
Colossus on the plain, but (disdainfully) aloud he called unto the King, and
thus began for to Revile, Athelitone now no more King of England, but our
Prisoner, mued up within these Walls which we ever long will Level with the
ground, in vain it is to trust to your defense, come forth and try your
Manhoods in the field, die here like men, and so perhaps you may purchase to
your selves the names of Valiant; but if like Cowards there you stay, till we
slaughter you within your walls, and roast you in the flaming Town, Infamy unto
posterity will blot the false famed English Renown, which has spread wide into
the world, a report of such doowds as you never durst adventure: It Is agreed by
all the Captains of our Army, that if amongst all your Nobles, you can find a
man that dares to Combat me, in which Combat if he remains victorious, they
will not only raise the Siege but depart the Land and leave you in Peace and
quietness; so said the proud insulting Foe, at which their Armies shouted loud
and gave him great applause. At which daring affront, the King being much
perplexed turned to his Nobles, demanding if any of them would adventure on the
Noble Enterprise: Remember said he how great Goliath fell by David's hand; and
shall this Pagan outbrave us thus, for shame my Lords let it not be known: It Is
Heavens cause we fight, for the defense of the true Christian Faith, as well as
for our Countries honor; who can tell but God may have put this offer into
their hearts, either to free us from distress, or to deliver them into our
hands: If none will undertake it, I my self will Encounter with the haughty
Foe, and if I perish Heavens will be done. So said the King, but all around
stood mute, looking on each other who should first Reply, which Guy (who had
stood all that while undiscovered) observing, with anger groaned, and coming to
the King most humbly besought his Majesty to confer on him the Honor of the
Combat, to which the King (not dreaming who it was, for all supposed Guy then
dead, by reason he had not been heard of in so long a time) made answer, ^las
poor Pilgrim, for so thou seem to be, thou art not able to contend with one
so Mighty, I had a Champion once, whom Death has now snatched from me, on whose
head I would have ventured my Life and Crown, Oh -- Renowned Guy for ever lost,
thou would not have seen thy Soveraingn thus affronted and abused, with that
he turned and went, whose Royal T^ars grieved Guy for to behold, still with
supplications, pressing him that he would give consent: Saying, Dread Lord,
though I Am now unknown to you, yet trust my Courage for this once, and by
Heaven, I vow before the Sun descends beneath the Western deep, he that has
braved you now shall pay his Life for the affront, at which Heroic speech the
King stood amazed, and wondered at the greatness of his saying, I have accepted
thee, thou shall be the man on whom I Will venture England, and immediately
ordered his own Armor to be brought, which Guy retiring, put on, least he
should be known, and girding on a massy sword came to the King to take his
leave, which the Nobles seeing, began to offer their services, but the King
would not permit them now, but embracing Guy unknown, said, Go thou worthy man
and Heaven direct thy hand to quest thy Foe; at which Guy returning humble
thanks departed, whilst on the walls all stood for to behold the Frey: No
sooner was he come within call of Colbron's Camp, so was the Giant named, but
he cried aloud: Come forth presumptuous Dane, who durst so late put base
affront upon Majesty; behold me English born that am come to chastise thy
insolence, at which the Dane rousing from his Couch whereon he was laid, came
forth; where no sooner beholding Guy, but frowning, and dreadfully glared on
him with his fiery Eyes, and thus disdainfully began. And could the King
amongst his Lords find out no youthfuller for the Combat fit, but to send an
old man ready to drop into the Grave, who weary of his Life grows desperate,
and fears not death, as knowing by course of Nature a few moments more would
put a period to his days; it is sure he sent thee to mock me, and ma^e me more
enraged; b^^ be it how it will thou never shallt return alive; perhaps so said
Guy, if you can hinder it, but as wise and as strong as you, have been mistook;
contemn not Age in me, these arms and my just cause shall soon decide the
business of the War; so saying, they charged upon each other with such force as
made their rattling Harness Echo in the Skies, and fire like Lightning from
each Helm flew; the Combat being dreadful to teh^^d, bloody and doubtful, the
Dane never been so matched before, wounds were received on both sides, whiles
shouts that rent the Sky (from the Town and Danish Camp) were sent, but Fortune
who till now had stood neuter, began to turn on Guy's Victorious arm, whom she
had failed never, so that with a full blow, he cutting through Colbron's Armor
gave him a wound in the left shoulder, from whence the blood flowing amain, he
begain to faint and faulter, in his strokes, which Guy perceiving laid the
fiercer on, and redoubling his strength, whilst piecemeal down his harness
dropped, whereupon the Giant entreated Guy for to desist, and seemingly let him
the Conquest gain, and he would promote him in the Danish Army: Fooll as thou
art said Guy, thy suit and Coward-fear are now to be despised, think thou
that England's Crown I Will lose unless I lose my Life; no know presumptuous man
how thou were mistaken at the first, and much more now at last; with that his
dreadful blade he swings about his head, which in the air much like a Commet
showed, and with a redoubled blow, which like a Thunderbolt fell on Colbron's
head, he broke his Helm and peirced so deep into his head, that staggering ten
paces back he dropped upon the ground, which the Danes seeing, (contrary to
agreement) came running to his aid, but all too late, for Guy had hewed his
Head off from the Monsterous Trunk, and with his Sword drove the disordered
Squadron back, slaughtering them on every side, so that none durst come within
the reach of his Sword, but to the earth fell wounded or slain.

The King from the walls perceiving in what danger he was in, with six thousand
all that he had left, Sallied out of the Town, and instantly came to his
Rescue, charging upon the foremost with such bravery, that he bore down all
before him, who for loss of their Champion were now grown fearful, so that
breaking through their Ranks he disordered them, and the English fighting
courragiously for their Lives and Liberties, made a great slaughter: whilst
this was doing, Guy who had retired to refresh himself, being well mounted,
returned to the Battle, cutting in pieces and destroying so terribly all that
durst oppose him, that all the place where he fought, lay piled with slain; so
that having drawn out a thousand English Horse, he marching in the Front,
Charged through the main Body of the Enemy, whilst the King Charging their Left
Wing put them to the Rout, so that numbers of their Chief Commanders and
Soldiers being killed and taken Prisoners they fled toward the Sea where their
Shipping lay, but the King and Guy resolving to clear the Land of such a
Plague, pursued hard after them, not without infinite slaughter, for upon the
News of the Overthrow, all the Countries through which they fled, with such
Weapons as they could get fell upon them, that of Thirty thousand, scarce five
thousand got safe to Denmark, most of the Plunder they had gotten being
likewise recovered, so great was the Victory that day.

After the pursuit, the King and his Army returned to Winchester, where he
would have made all the splendid provision for his unknown Champion that could
be imagined, but Guy refused it, saying he had renounced all worldly Pomp,
entreating his Majesty to give him leave for to depart, the which the King
would by no means consent to, till he had declared his name, against which he
urged many Excuses, but seeing the King so desirous, he taking him aside, told
him he was his faithful Subject Guy, and that after many and various adventures
which happened in his so long wandering up and down the Earth, he was come to
England for his Grave, and so happily arrived as to rid his Country of its
cruel Foe, entreating his Majesty not to discover his Arrival to any, not so
much as to his Queen, the which the King promised to observe, and with tears
embracing him, after a long conference gave him License to depart, only binding
him with promise to send him word privately where he resided, which he
afterward did, and the King without any Attendance came often to Visit him in
his solitary Cave, where he lived many years.

So humble was the Warrior whose Renown,
And mighty Deeds, might justly claim a CROWN.
CHAP. XVI.
Of Phaelice her behavior for the absence of her Lord, how she came to have
knowledge of him, of his and her Deaths a^ ^u^als the descript on of their
Tombs and Epitaph, how Guy's Sword and the Trophies of his Conquests were hung
up in the Castle.


PHaelice, not all this while having heard of her Lord, remains pensive and
sad, her only Recreation being to relieve the Poor, who in numbers still flock
about her Gates for Alms, the which she liberally distributed with her own
hand, often enquiring of the Pilgrims that came from the Holy Land, if they had
heard of one Guy her much loved Lord, and they answer no; she would turn away
and weep concluding he was dead, and then breaking out into passionate
expressions, complain of her hard Fate, which Guy himself in disguise often
hearing, his eyes growing thereupon full he would turn aside and weep to bear
her company, many times receiving Alms at her hands, and resolve not to
discover himself: But at last finding Valors strength decay, and that death
approches fast, he thought fit to send the Marriage Ring according to his
promise, being much desirous to behold her once more before he dyed; so that
espying a Traveller coming toward his Cave, he called to him, and out of all
love desired him to do so great a favor as to carry a Ring to the Countess of
Warwick, and if she requested of him to direct her to his Cave, he doubted not
but she would largely reward the utmost of his demands: The man at first seemed
very unwilling, as not knowing what it should mean, making many excuses, till
Guy pressing more and more affirming that he meant no ill, but that the
Countess would gladly receive his message; he at last undertook it, and Posting
to Warwick Castle, knocked loudly at the gate, desiring to speak with the
Countess in her proper person, for such was his Commission, no sooner she being
come, but bowing low, he delivered her the Pledge of dear Remembrance, the
which she no sooner saw but knew it and wept for joy; and ordering her servants
to give the Messenger an Hundred Marks for the good tidings and went with him
to the Cave where her Lord was, who espying her though feeble and weak, went
out to meet her, where they embraced each other, not being able to speak for a
^^md space, till Guy thus expressed himself.

Alas my Love, I see thou have well obeyed my will in every point, with joy
since my return, I often have heard thy praises told, how virtuous and chact thou
have remained and above all, took pleasure to relieve the poor, my self
disguised, having received Alms from thy hands unknown. It was I that freed
England from the cruel Danes, and ever since have had my Lodging in this Cave,
often fed on Roots and drank Water from the Brook, shedding tears for true
Repentance for my crying sins, and now have made my peace with Heaven; he would
have proceeded but she interrupted him, and fetching a deep sigh cried: Ah my
dear Lord, and could you be so cruel to your mournful Phaelice thus long to
conceal your self from her that with such earnestness enquired after you, but
in vain, no news of you ever reached my longing Ear: Alas said Guy it was for
the welfare of my immortal Soul that I made not my self nor solitary dwelling
known, nor should I now have done (though Heaven knows I love thee above all
earthly things) had not this mortal sickness seized me, and according to my
promise I desired to embrace thee once before I dye; weep not my Love, it is but
a short space and we shall meet in Heaven never to be separated more; this
being no sooner said, but a fit of his Disease seized him he fell into a
swound, whereupon she with much rubbing and sprinkling of water in his face,
with the assistance of the Travellor, brought him to life again; then sending
for her servants, ordered them to fetch all manner of Cordials, and would have
removed her Lord to his Castle, but he would in no wise consent to it, saying,
he had chosen that silent place quietly there to resign his breath, the which
he did accordingly in two days after, commending his immortal soul into the
hands of his great Creator, leaving her sole Possessor of all his worldly Goods
to dispose of them as she thought good, during which space of Life she would
not leave him, but warched with him in the cold Cave, and no sooner perceiving
his immortal soul had taken slight, but she cried, Ah cruel death then will thou let me slay, no I will but follow my dear Lord to his Eternal place; which
said, she in the height of Distraction beat her snowy breasts, tore off her
golden hair, and mangled her face, and had done greater violence had they not
restrayn'd her; then embracing the dead Corpse, she fell into a swound, which
her servants perceiving, conveyed her with the body of her departed Lord to
Warwick Castle: Long it was not before the fame of Guy's death (that great
Champion of the World, whose equal Europe could never boast of since or before)
spread through the Land, whereupon the King and Queen left York and came to
Warwick to give order for the Burial of so Renowned a Subject, and like wise to
comfort his of consolate Lady; but could not effect the latter, for she shunned
all converse, delighting more in solitary Darkness than in Light, refusing
either meat or drink for three days space; in the mean while Guy's Corpse by
the King's order was Imbalmed, and all the Castle hung with mourning to the
ground, but while they were sumpteously preparing for his Funeral, the Countess
through extreme grief fell into a violent Fever of which in despite of Art in
a short space she dyed, and breathing out her Soul, cried, now my Lord with joy
I come to enjoy thy company for ever in bright Mansions far above the Starry
Skies.

This renewed the former Grief throughout the Nation, each exclaiming against
the Tyranny of Death, who had bereaved them in so short a space of the most
Renowned pair the Nation ever bred, the one for Matchless Deeds in Arms, the
other for matchless Beauty and Virtue.

The King gave order to Erect a spacious Monument over the Tomb designed for
them, on which was Carved Guy's Noble and Heroic deeds with both their Images,
lying as it were a sleep,, whilst Angels strewed Roses and fragrant flowers
around them, and placed Garlands on their heads: The time of the Solemnity
being come; all the Nobility in England in Mourning attended the Beirs, the
King and Queen being chief mourners, whilst the Trumpets sounded dolefully
before them, and the Priests their Requiems Sung, their bodies were laid has
Tomb, and this Cpitaph was infixed, etc.

EPITAPH.

Under this sacred Pile of Marble Stone
Do lie the Wonders of the World, whom none
Could ever match, here is War and Beauties Pride,
The far-Famed Bridegroom and his lovely Bride.
Great Mars and Venus here Entombed lie
Whose Names Immortal are and cannot Dye.
After this, the King caused Guy's Sword with which he fought most of his
dreadful Battles withal, the Head of the Dragon killed in Northumberland, and
the R^^ of the Dun Cow, with several other Trophies of his Conquest, to be
hanged up in Warwick Castle; as likewise on Cloth of Arras, the full proportion
of the Monstrous Dragon which was about thirty foot in length; appointing a man
a yearly Sallary to keep them, some of which are remaining to this day, and may
be seen for the better satisfaction of the curious or incredulous of the Age,
which will hardly be induced to believe that ever such Worthies were, though
Scripture it self makes mention of several.

FINIS.
A Book of FORTUNE with Prophetical Solutions, Giving Satisfaction in every
condition of humane Life, either as it relates to Love or business. Written in
the Reign of King Henry the Eight, and ever since carefully preserved by a Monk
beyond Sea, and now brought over into England, by George Stranmore Gent. Sold
by Philip Brooksby at his Shop, the sign of the Golden Ball, in west-smithfield
near the Hospital Gate. (...), or Faithful Collection of the Newest, and most
Delightful Songs that are sung at Court and both the Theaters.

Honors Preservation without blood, or a sober advice to Duellists. Being a
Compendious Tract of the most Exquisite Nature to appease the sudden Fits of
Fury, which English spirits have of late been too much subject too, with many
cautions how without the loss of Reputation, or the least imprint of Cowardice,
as well the Nobility as Gentry of this Nation may refuse to Hazard their Lives
and Fortunes on such mean pretenses of Vindicating a Miscalled Honor or
Unmanly Gallantry, showing likewise what dangerous inconveniences men thrust
themselves forward in such cases, with an account how such Duels prove plain
Murder and are contrary to the Laws of God and Man.

There newly Printed for and sold by Philip Brooksby at the Golden Ball near
the Hospital Gate in West-smithfield, where any English or Irish Chapmen may be
furnished with all sorts of Histories, small books or Ballads at reasonable
Rates.


