A short Abstract of a Case which was last Sessions presented to the
Parliament: Being a true Relation of the Rise and Progress of the East India
Company, The Case is since Reprinted, and Sold by A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane,
London.
showing how their Manufactures have been, are, and will be prejudicial to the
Manufactures of England, and what endeavors have been used for and against any
Restrictions. Together with some Remarks and Query's thereon.
THat for several Years after the East India Company was Established, they were
afraid to bring in Manufactur'd Goods, which they knew were very prejudicial to
our own: But now, by their great Stock and Interest, they are got over these
Fears, and bring in vast quantities, opposing all kind of Restraint, tho they
are convinced, and have declared their Manufactures are prejudicial to this
Kingdom.

That as their Manufactures increased, our own were discouraged, and Wool
reduced so low, that an Act was made for Burying in Woollen, and the
Manufacturers at the same time reduced to great Necessities, and many ruined
thereby.

That during great part of the late War, the East India Trade was under some
Discouragement, and while it was so, our English Manufactures flourished very
much, and extended to several Places, where, before the People were out of
Employment, Wool advanced, and bore a good Price, and all other Provisions
raised proportionably.

That the English Manufacturers finding the East India Traders endeavoring to
get an Establishment by Act of Parliament, and knowing how fatal it might prove
to their Manufactures, unless they were in some measure restrained, made their
Application to the Parliament, and in Two succeeding Sessions a Restraining
Bill was past in their Favor in the House of Commons, and a Third being drawn
up in a different Method to the Two former, was stopped thereupon.

That the Proposal of advancing Two Millions for the Supply of the Government,
was the great Inducement for the Establishment of the New Company; And the
Reasons the Manufacturers did not then so vigorously complain and solicit
against the Establishment, as formerly they had done, proceeded from the Fair
Promises given by the New East India Men, and the Hope of a more favorable
Opportunity; being unwilling to disturb the Loan, so necessary then to be
raised.

That the Manufacturers being deceived by these East India Traders Fair
Promises, and finding that the late great Importation and Wear of their Indian
Manufactures are increasing, and have already, in a great measure, ruined the
Canterbury Trade, and obliged the London Weavers to fall upon all sorts of
Woollen Manufactures, to the Prejudice (and may in a short time prove to the
utter Ruin) of several Places where such Manufactures have for a long time
been established, are therefore come again to represent their Deplorable Case,
and Pray the Consideration of this Parliament, and hope they will be pleased to
consider it as well as either the Old or New East India Companies Cases.

Remarks.
Since the Presenting the Case above mentioned, There has been from the 20th of
May 1699, This appears by a Printed List, which is Sold by Edw. Loyd at his
Coffee-House in Lumbard-street.
to the 4th of September 1699, arrived in England from the East Indies and
China, Ten Ships, which have brought in above Five Hundred Thousand Pieces of
Manufactured Goods, which are by very intelligent Persons computed to be worth
about One Million of Pounds Sterling, which vast quantity has already reduced
the Manufactures of this Kingdom (to which they are opposite) to a very low
Price, which has in a great measure ruined the Manufactures in London, Norwich,
and in diverse other Places, as is ready more fully to be made appear.

That there is now gone to the East Indies and China, Vide Loyd 's List. Two
Millions sent to India.
Fifty Ships, which are computed at near 400 Tuns per Ship, one with the other,
and by a modest Computation are reckoned to have carried with them near Two
Millions of Bullion, which is about Forty Thousand Pounds per Ship.

That all these Ships, Five Millions of Manufactures to be brought in two Year,
and an Half.
or as great a number, are expected to make a Return in Two Years and an half,
and their Cargo may reasonably be supposed and valued (when they return) at Six
Million, it being common to make about Treble the First Cost. And it is
reasonable to suppose that Five Parts will be in Manufactures. And how far this
may further damage and ruin the Trade of this Kingdom, is submitted to
consideration.

Two Queries.
If the increase of the Woollen Manufactures in Ireland was judged Prejudicial,
inevitably sink the value of the Lands in England and Ruin our Trade; because
the Irish could under-work, and so under-sell us, as the Act for restraining
that Trade sets forth. Will not the East India Manufactures do the same, and
deserve the Consideration of the Parliament, Irish?

Whether the great Complaints made in Flanders, Vide. The Essay upon the
probable Methods of making a People Gainers by Trade, p. 128.
and other Foreign Parts of the decay of their Linen Manufactures; and their
setting up Woollen Manufactures do not (as the Author of the Essay on Ways and
Means tell us) proceed from the expense of East India Linnens, which are here
worn in their stead; and whether their late Prohibition of our Woollen
Manufactures, do not proceed more from that Cause, than from the late Act made
for the more effectual restraining the Importation of Flanders Lace??

An Abstract Of a Case, showing how East India Manufactures are prejudicial to
England, etc. With some Remarks and Query's thereupon.


