A short Account how the Kingdom of Denmark became Hereditary and Absolute, by
a Difference betwixt the Lords and Commons.
Published as a Warning to other Nations.
Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
AFTER the Conclusion of the Peace between the two Northern Crowns Anno 1660.
some considerable care and time was necessary to redress the Disorders
occasioned by so terrible a War. Denmark had been most violently shaken; and
although the Fury of the Tempest was over, the Agitation caused by it still
continued: The Army was not yet disbanded, nor could be for want of Money to
discharge its Arrears; this caused frequent Insolences in the Soldiers, with a
further Oppression of the Burgers and poor Country People, who had been in a
manner already ruined by the Miseries attending the War. The Nobility, tho
Lords and Masters, were full of Discontents, and the Clergy not in the
condition they wished.

To redress all which Grievances, and reduce Affairs into some Order, by
procuring Money for the Payment and Disbanding of the Army, the King thought
fit to appoint a Meeting of the Three Estates at Copenhagen, viz. the Nobility,
Commonalty, and Clergy; which accordingly followed about the beginning of
October. After some few days Session (during which the Nobility, according to
their usual practice, debated how the Sums of Money requisite might with the
greatest ease and convenience be levied upon the Commons, without the least
intention of bearing any proportionable share themselves) several Disputes
arose, and many sharp Expressions passed between them and the Commons; on the
one hand the Nobility were for maintaining their ancient Prerogative of paying
nothing by way of Tax, but only by voluntary Contribution; and showed
themselves too stiff at a time when the Country was exhausted, and most of the
remaining Riches lodged in their hands: They seemed to make use of this
occasion, not only to vindicate, but even to widen and enlarge their Privileges
above the other two Estates, by laying Impositions on them at pleasure, which
Weight they themselves would not touch with one of their Fingers, any further
than as they thought fitting. On the other hand, the Clergy for their late
adherence to the Interest of their Country, and the Burgers for the vigorous
Defense of their City, thought they might justly pretend to new Merit, and be
considered at least as good Subjects in a State, which they themselves had so
valiantly defended. They remembered the great Promises made them when dangerous
Enterprises were to be taken in hand, and how successfully they had executed
them; thereby saving from a Foreign Yoke, not only the City of Copenhagen, but
the whole Kingdom, the Royal Family, nay those very Nobles that now dealt so
hardly with them: They judged it therefore reasonable, that the Sums of Money
necessary should be levied proportionably, and that the Nobility who enjoyed
all the Lands, should at least pay their share of the Taxes, since they had
suffered less in the common Calamity, as well as done less so prevent the
progress of it.

This manner of arguing was very displeasing to the Nobles, and begat much Heat
and many bitter Replies on both sides: At length a principal Senator called
Otto Craeg, stood up, and in great Anger told the President of the City, That
the Commons neither understood nor considered the Privileges of the Nobility,
who at all times had been exempted from Taxes, nor the true Condition of
themselves, who were no other than Slaves; [the word in the Danish is unfree]
so that their best way was to keep within their own Bounds, and acquiesce in
such Measures as ancient Practice had warranted, and which they were resolved
to maintain. This word Slaves put all the Burgers and Clergy in disorder,
causing a loud Murmur in the Hall; which Nanson the President of the City of
Copenhagen, and Speaker of the House of Commons, perceiving, and finding a fit
occasion of putting in practice a Design before concerted (tho but weakly)
between him and the Bishop, in great Choler rose out of his Seat, and swore an
Oath, That the Commons were no Slaves, nor would from thenceforth be called so
by the Nobility, which they should soon prove to their cost: And thereupon
breaking up the Assembly in disorder, and departing out of the Hall, was
followed by all the Clergy and Burgers. The Nobles being left alone to consult
among themselves at their leisure, after a little while adjourned to a private
House near the Court. In the mean time the Commons, being provoked to the
highest degree, and resolving to put their Threats in Execution, marched
processionally by Couples, a Clergyman and a Commoner, from the great Hall or
Parliament House to the Brewers-Hall, which was the convenientest place they
could pitch upon to sit apart from the Nobles; the Bishop of Copenhagen, and
the President of the City leading them. It was there thought necessary to
consider speedily of the most effectual Means to suppress the intolerable Pride
of the Nobility; and how to mend their own Condition: After many Debates they
concluded, That they should immediately wait upon the King, and offer him their
Votes and Assistance to be absolute Monarch of the Realm; as also that the
Crown should descend by Inheritance to his Family, which hitherto had gone by
Election. They promised themselves the King would have so grease Obligations to
them for this piece of Service, that he would grant and confirm such Privileges
as should put them above the degree of Slaves. They knew he had hitherto been
curbed by the Nobility to a great measure; and now saw their own force, being
able (since they had Arms in their Hands, and the concurrence of the Soldiers)
to perform what they undertook: At the worst, they supposed they should only
change many Masters for one, and could better bear hardships from a King than
from inferior Persons: Or if their Case were not bettered, at least they
thought it some comfort to have more Company in it; besides the satisfaction of
Revenge on those that had hitherto not only used them ill, but insulted over
them so lately. They knew the King, and had seen him bear with an admirable
Patience and Constancy all his Calamities; were persuaded that he was a Valiant
Prince, who had often exposed his Person for the sake of the Public, and
therefore thought they could never do enough to show their Gratitude; which is
the usual Temper of the People upon any benefit received from their Prince.

Scarce was this proposed but it was agreed to; and nothing but the
unseasonableness of the time (it being now near Night) deferred the immediate
Execution of it; but all the necessary Measures were taken against next
Morning. The Clergy had a further drift in this Change of Government; for
having been hitherto kept under by the Nobility, they forecasted to have no
other Superior but the King, whose new Authority they engaged to maintain by
the influence they had on the Consciences of the People; expecting with reason
the like Favor and Protection from the King, together with an increase of
their Power; since he was in a great measure obliged to them for his own; and
the benefits were likely to be mutual for the future, the one having the force,
the other the tie of Religion in their Possession. Which Contract subsists to
this very day, to the great advantage of both sides.

The Court all this while was not ignorant of what passed; there wanted no
Spies nor Messengers to give notice of the Discontents of the Commons. Hanibal
Seestede, a cunning Man, was prime Minister; and the Bishop or Superintendent
Swan, with Nanson the Speaker of the House of Commons, were his Creatures:
These had formerly in secret laid with him the Design, which was now upon the
point of disclosing, tho their hopes were hardly raised so high, as to promise
themselves such mighty Success. The whole Night passed in Brigues and Messages;
the Commons Anger was to be kept up to the requisite height, and the Resolution
they had taken the Night before not to be suffered to cool, but persisted in
betimes next Morning. The Queen, a Woman of Intrigue and high Spirit, wrought
strongly in it by all manner of ways, whilst the King, either through doubt of
the Event, or sense of the Dishonesty and Crime of the Action, in procuring
after such a manner the absolute Dominion of a free Country, could hardly be
brought to comply with it. He declared that indeed he should be pleased the
Sovereignty were entailed on his Family, provided it were done by Universal
Consent; but to become Absolute and Arbitrary, was neither his desire, nor did
he think it for the benefit of the Kingdom; that he was satisfied he should not
make ill use of such an unlimited Authority, but no body knew what Successors
he might have; that it was therefore dangerous both for them to give, and for
him to receive such a Power as might be abused in future times to the utter
ruin of the Nation. But these Reflections, whether they were real, or only
pretenses, whether caused by the Piety or Weakness of the King, were soon
overruled by the more Ambitious and Masculine Spirit of the Queen, who desiring
him to sit still, and see how she and her Emissaries would work for him, told
him, That the Plot was well laid, and had begun to operate prosperously; that
he must not obstruct his own and his Families good Fortune; and in fine, so far
prevailed on him, that he seemed with fear to consent to, and permitted that
which most think he very much desired: Having however by this show of
unwillingness, left open to himself a door of Reconciliation with his People,
in case the business did not succeed.

All this while the Nobles either had none, or but small intimation of the
Designs of the Commons: they had been used so long to slight and tyrannize over
them, that they were not now sensible of any impending danger from thence,
contemning their Threats as well as their Persons, and imagining they would
have repented next day, and complied with all that should be demanded of them.
But the Plot was deeper laid than they supposed; for not only the prime
Minister, but some other Members of their own Body, who had Employments
depending on the Court, were engaged in it. This inadvertency, with the want of
requisite Courage upon occasion, brought upon them the Mischief on a sudden; so
that except two or three who were more than ordinary doubtful of what might
happen, and slipped out of Town that Night, the rest were altogether fearless of
danger, till the very instant that the Evil was remediless.

Schack the Governor of the Town had been gained by the Court to favor the
Design, which he performed effectually, though not with so servile an intention
as others: for when the King, upon the first news of the Resolution of the
Commons, did often openly promise that he would in Gratitude and Recompense
declare them all Free as soon as it lay in his power, by the Gift they were
about to make him; and the People were willing to trust the King's goodness,
and to depend on the performance of this Promise, encouraged thereunto by the
Clergy, who alleged it a thing unbeseeming and dishonorable to require any
other Security from the King than his bare Word; yet Schack urged vehemently
that the Commons should insist to have this Promise under the King's Hand, and
make themselves sure of the Reward for so considerable a Present as they were
going to make, whilst they had so fair an opportunity in their hands. But all
his Instances were in vain; they were in the giving humor, and resolved to do
it generously, trusting the King for the performance of his Word: A thing which
they have since often, though too late, repented of.

Next Morning the Nobles met in the Council-House, and the other two Estates in
the Brewers-Hall; the Resolution of the Commons could not be kept so secret,
but by this time some warm rumors of it had reached the Nobility; but scarce
had they leisure to consider what was fittest to be done on that occasion, when
they were informed that the Commons were marching toward them: for the Bishop
and the President had so well performed their Parts, and urged the necessity of
speedily executing what had been resolved the day before, that all time was
judged lost which was not employed in putting it in practice; they immediately
agreed to go to the Council-House, and there propound to the Nobility their
design, desiring their Concurrence in such a necessary Work for the welfare of
the Kingdom. They marched through the Streets with great gravity, and silence,
by Couples, as before, whilst the Mob by repeated Shouts applauded what they
were going to do. And thus they came to the House where the Nobles were
assembled, who had scarce warning sufficient to receive them.

The President Nanson made a short Harangue, setting forth that they had
considered the state of the Nation, and that they found the only Remedy for the
many Disorders which afflicted it, was to make the Crown Hereditary, and to
give more power to the King than hitherto he had enjoyed; that this Resolution
was already taken by the Commons and Clergy, in which if the Nobility should
think fitting to concur, they were ready to accompany them to the King, and
make him a tender of an Hereditary and Sovereign Dominion; if not, that they
were going themselves, and the matter should be done without them: That a
speedy Resolution was necessary, for they had already sent word to the Court of
their coming, and his Majesty expected them in the Hall of his Palace;
therefore desired to be informed in few words what they resolved to do.

The suddenness, of such a Proposition, and briskness in the manner of its
delivery, caused a general astonishment in the Nobles; one might have seen
those who but the day before carried it so proudly, in an instant fall to an
excess of Complacency, and betray their Fear by their Speeches and
Countenances, as they formerly had done their Arrogance. The Mischief no sooner
appeared to them, but they saw it was unavoidable; there was no leisure allowed
them to consult; and to deny their compliance, or even to delay it, was
dangerous. To give up at once their beloved Power, and submit their Necks to a
heavy Yoke, was an intolerable Grievance: But they saw they were no longer the
Masters; the Commons were armed, the Army and Clergy against them; and they
found now too late, that that which the day before they had considered only as
the Effort of an unconstant giddy Multitude, was guided by wiser Heads, and
supported by Encouragements from Court, nay possibly by some of their own Body:
They suspected each other, and no Man knew whether his next Neighbor was not
in the Plot against the public Liberty. It is easy to imagine what distracted
thoughts afflicted them on a sudden; they were altogether unprepared for such a
dismal stroke: But some answer must be given, and that speedily. Such a one as
they had a mind to give, they durst not; for they were assembled in a fortified
Town, remote from their several Countries and Interests (where they had
governed like so many Princes) in the power of those who could, and certainly
would be revenged in case they proved refractory. The best way therefore was to
seem to approve of what they could not hinder. They answer, that the
Proposition made to them by the Commons was not displeasing, but the manner of
it wanted the requisite Formalities; that previous deliberation was necessary
to an Affair of so great moment; and they could not but take it ill, a
Resolution of such consequence should be concluded on by the Commons without
the least acquainting of the Nobility with it, who were the chief Estate of the
Realm: That they also aspired to the Honor of bearing their part in bestowing
such a material Gift on the King and his Posterity, but desired that the Matter
might be proceeded on with that gravity, and solemnity, which the nature of it
required: That it was not fit such a weighty Transaction should have the
appearance of a Tumult, and seem forced rather than a free Choice. The
Conclusion of all was, That they hoped the Commons would a little defer the
putting in execution their Design; and in the mean time consult with them, till
the Affair were done orderly, and with unanimous Approbation, as well as to
mutual Advantage.

This was with great vehemence by the President denied. He replied, These were
Shirts only to gain time, that the Nobles might be in a Condition to frustrate
the Intention of the Commons; that the Point was already agreed, and the
Resolution taken; that they came not thither to consider, but to act; if the
Nobles would join with them, they were ready; if not, they would do what was to
be done alone; and doubted not but his Majesty would make his use of it.

During these Disputes the Nobility had privily sent some of their Body to
Court to acquaint the King, that the Commons were now at their House, and had
made them sudden Proposals out of form, but such as they should rather concur
with, than be averse to; that they were ready to join with them in offering an
Hereditary Crown to his Majesty, and the Heirs Male of his Family for ever;
which they hoped his Majesty would accept in good part: But desired to proceed
in the usual Methods, which such weighty Affairs merited, viz. by Conference
and Deliberations, that it might appear rather an effect of their just
Sentiments of his Majesty's Valor and Conduct, than the sudden Motions of a
tumultuous Assembly.

The King, with a great deal of mildness, as if he had been wholly unconcerned
and passive in the Case, replied: That he was obliged to them for their Designs
in favor of him, and the Royal Family; that he hoped what they were about
would tend to the benefit of the Nation; but that a Crown intailed only on the
Heirs Male could not be so acceptable to him, as if it were given without that
Limitation; that the Government of Females had neither been a new thing at
home, nor unprosperous in neighboring Countries: That they might consider of
it, and since it was their Gift, he would not prescribe, but it could not be
accepted by him unless it were more general.

In the mean time the Commons grew impatient, the Answer given them was not
satisfactory, and the Nobles had not yet resolved on an entire compliance, nor
were ready to accompany them, because they had not yet an account of the
success of their Members sent to sound the Mind of the Court. The Clergy and
Burgers therefore, led on by their Bishop and President, proceed without them
to the Palace, and were met by the prime Minister, and conducted by him to the
Hall of Audience, whither after some short time the King came to them. The
Bishop makes a long Speech, setting forth the Praises of his Majesty, and the
cause of their waiting on him; concluding with an offer, in the name of
themselves, the two most numerous, and if he pleased most powerful Estates, of
an Hereditary and Absolute Dominion; together with the assistance of their
Hands and Purses, in case any Body should go about to obstruct so necessary and
laudable a Design for the good of the Country. The King told them in short,
That he thanked them; and in case an Universal Consent established this good
Desire of theirs, he would accept the Present they made him; but that the
Concurrence of the Nobles was necessary; which he doubted not of in the least,
when they had time to make the offer with the necessary Formalities: That he
assured the Commons of his Royal Protection, and should not be unmindful of
their kindness, by easing them of their Grievances, and by encouraging Subjects
who had behaved themselves so valiantly, and deserved so well from him:
Concluding with his advice to them to continue their Session till such time as
Matters were brought to perfection, and he could receive their gift with the
Solemnity that was fitting. And thereupon dismissed them.

But the Nobles were all this while in a grievous distraction; they saw the
Commons were gone to the King without them: Their Messengers brought News back
that their Proposition of entailing the Crown on the Heirs Male, was not
pleasing, because a greater Advantage was in prospect; that this offer was
looked upon to proceed from Persons that would not have bestowed any thing, if
they could have helped it: That it was thought they pretended to merit in
giving only a part, when it was not in their power to hinder the taking the
whole. In this irresolution they broke up; and since they were to meet again at
noon upon another solemn Occasion, they resolved at that time to consider how
to proceed in an Affair so delicate.

Monsieur Schele a Senator, and principal Man of the Country, was that
Afternoon to be buried in great Pomp; his Body had lain some Months in State,
and according to the Custom, was to be accompanied to its Interment by all the
Nobility then in Town; this being a Parliament time, was chosen for the
Ceremony, because the Nobles were all together, and a magnificent Dinner was
prepared, as is usual on the like occasions. In the height of their
Entertainment an Officer comes into the room, and whispers some of the
principal men that the City Gates were shut, and the Keys carried to Court: For
the King having been informed by the Governor, that two or three had privily
slipped out of Town the Night before, and being resolved that no more should
escape out of the Net, till he had done his business, had ordered the Governor
that Morning to lock the Gates, and to let no Person in or out without special
Order. The Governor sent one Bill, the Town Major, to put this in Execution;
who as soon as he had done it, came to the House where they were met, and sat
down at Table among the Senators. This dismal News of the Officer was presently
whispered round the Company; who immediately applied themselves to him to know
what the meaning was of such an unusual Proceeding at the time of a General
Convention. They asked him what destiny was appointed them, whether they were
there to be Massacred, or what else was to be done with them? The Town-Major
calmly answered, That he believed there was no Danger toward them; that such
violent Measures would not be taken by so gracious a King, tho he had indeed
given the Orders himself for the shutting of the Gates; and that no Body was to
stir put of Town without leave; but that this needed not disturb or hinder them
from finishing the Work of the Day, and pursuing the Public, as well as their
Private Occasions. There wanted no more than this Confirmation from the Officer
to overthrow all the Resolutions, and Confutations of the Nobles; the dread of
losing their Lives took away all thoughts of their Liberty. They immediately
dispatched Messengers both to the Court, and the Commons, to give notice of
their disposition to comply with what was formerly proposed; assuring them
likewise, that they were ready to agree to all that should be asked of them.

But the King, who had began and played his Game so well hitherto, determined
to pursue it to the utmost, and would not suffer the Gates to be opened, till
the whole Ceremony of the Inauguration was concluded, and the Homage done in
due form; and therefore ordered they should stay, till in the Face of the
People, and the Army, they had sworn Fealty, and divested themselves of all
Right, as well as Power, to cause any Disturbance, or Alteration for the future.

Three days time was requisite to prepare Matters for that fatal hour, wherein
they were to make a formal Surrender of their Liberty; the Scaffolds were
raised in the place before the Castle, and adorned with Tapestry; Orders were
given for the Soldiery, and Burgers to appear in Arms under their respective
Officers. And when all things were ready, on the 27th of October in the
Morning, the King, Queen, and Royal Family mounted on a Theater erected for
that purpose; and being placed in Chairs of State under Canopies of Velvet,
received publicly the Homage of all the Senators, Nobility, Clergy, and
Commons; which was performed kneeling. The Oath, which they were obliged to
take, was in these words:

I A. B. do Promise, and Declare, that I will be True, and Faithful to your
Majesty, as my most Gracious King and Lord, as also to Your Royal Family; that
I will Endeavor, and promote Your Majesty's Interest in all things, and to the
best of my Power defend you from all Danger, and Harm; and that I will
faithfully serve Your Majesty as a Man of Honor, and an Hereditary Subject
ought to do. So help me God,etc.

This Oath they were all obliged to pronounce aloud; and some Men of Quality
that were sick, or pretended to be so, were brought in Chairs: Among others one
Gersdorf, a principal Senator, who was the only man that opened his Mouth in
the behalf of their Expiring Liberties, saying, That he hoped and trusted, that
his Majesty designed nothing but the Good of his People, and not to govern them
after the Turkish manner; but wished his Majesty's Successors might follow the
Example which his Majesty would undoubtedly set them, and make use of that
unlimited Power for the good, and not the harm of his Subjects. Not one of the
rest spoke a word, or seemed to murmur in the least at what was done; and it is
observable, that among so many Great Men, who a few days before seemed to have
Spirits suitable to their Birth and Qualities, none had the Courage during
those three last days, either by Remonstrance, or any other way, to oppose in
any manner what was doing. And I have heard very intelligent Persons, who were
at that time near the King, affirm, That had the Nobles showed ever so little
Courage in asserting their Privileges, the King would not have pursued his
Point so far as to desire an Arbitrary Dominion: For he was in continual doubt,
and dread of the Event, and began to waver very much in his Resolutions; so
that their Liberties seem purely lost for want of some to appear for them.

From the Theater, those that had done Homage, went to the Council-House, where
the Nobles were called over by Name, and ordered to subscribe the
abovementioned Declaration, which they all did.

Thus this great Affair was finished, and the Kingdom of Denmark in Four Days
time changed from an Estate little differing from Aristocracy, to as absolute a
Monarchy as any is at present in the World. The Commons have since experienced,
that the little Finger of an Absolute Prince can be heavier than the Loins of
many Nobles. The only comfort they have left them being to see their former
Oppressors in almost as miserable a Condition as themselves; whilst all the
Citizens of Copenhagen have by it obtained the insignificant Privilege of
wearing Swords: So that at this day not a Cobbler, or Barber stirs abroad
without a Tilter at his side, let his Purse be never so empty. The Clergy, who
always make sure Bargains, were the only Gainers in this Point; and are still
much encouraged by the Court, as the Instruments that first promoted, and now
keep the People in a due Temper of Slavery; the Passive-Obedience Principle
riding Triumphant in this unhappy Kingdom.

It was but Justice, that the Court should pay well the principal Contrivers of
this great Revolution: and therefore notwithstanding the general want of Money,
Hannibal Seestede had a Present of 200000 Crowns. Swan the Superintendent, or
Bishop, was made Archbishop, and had 30000 Crowns. The President or Speaker
Nanson, 20000 Crowns. And to the People remained the Glory of having forged
their own Chains, and the Advantage of Obeying without reserve. A happiness
which I suppose no English Man will ever envy them.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin in Warwicklane, 1700.


