A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE Mineral Waters Lately found out in the CITY of
CANTERBURY.
I. WHEREAS some Persons have, and do still endeavor to divert People from
the Use of the Mineral Waters found out in this City a few Years past; either
out of Prejudice to the Persons concerned, or for other Reasons better known to
themselves: It is thought advisable (that the Public may not be deprived of
the Benefit of so great a Remedy) to publish this short Account of 'em; and at
the same time to desire those Persons that find so much fault with these
Waters, that if they have any thing to object against 'em, or against the
Account here given of 'em, to acquaint the Public with it, that the World may
not be imposed upon and damnify'd by what is here said of 'em.

II. In digging these Wells, they first observed a fat black Mold extending it
self three foot deep, and gradually changing into another sort of Earth very
fat, and like Butter, if squees'd between the Fingers. This second Lay of Earth
was two foot thick; the Color of it was yellow, something mixed: its Odor very
strong and mineral, and being exposed to the Sun for a while, it smelled like
Brimstone. After this they met with a Quicksand of a darker Color than the
first Earth, mixed with several little black Stones; the Smell was stronger than
before. Two foot further under this Quicksand a hard Rock appeared, out of
which the Water gushed out. They dug two Wells at about seven Foot distance
from each other. The Bigness is between 8 and 9 Foot deep from its own Surface,
and 12 from the Surface of the Ground about it, and reaches the Rock. The
other Well is not so deep by two Foot, and only touches the Sand. The first is
stronger of the Spirit, and the Mineral is more ferruginous, but the second is
stronger of the Sulphur.

III. Two Drams of the second Lay of Earth, found in digging these Wells, being
put into four Ounces of Spirit of Vinegar, there presently arose a considerable
Ebullition, and soon after the Spirit was tinged with a yellow browny Color.
This Tincture suffered no Alteration with the Infusion of Logwood, nor with
Galls, but with Oil of Tartar p. deliq. turned greenish, and with the Tincture
of Lignum Nephriticum, of a pale Red.

IV. This Water taken up at the Well, is extraordinary limpid, but grows
something whitish in a quarter of an Hour, and in half an Hour the Spirit is
lost, and the Mineral hangs first on the sides of the Glass, and then falls
gradually to the bottom; and if a Bottle with this Water be never so well
stopped, it will not keep its Spirit. Its Taste is Masculine and austere. The
Smell is mineral and strong, much upon the Sulphur, especially the little Well.

V. The Root of the Tongue and Stools of them that drink of the little Well are
grayish, but if they drink of the great Well they are brown.

VI. This Water is commonly cold; but in Frosty Weather it is so warm as to
smoke, and melt all the Ice and Snow that comes near it.

VII. By Distillation it gives nothing but a Water in every respect like
common Water.

VIII. Mutton boiled in this Water is more white and tender than in common
Water. Some think it has made their Beer stronger being brewed with it. Linen
washed in it turns yellow. It will not lather with Soap. The Glasses the Water
is dipped with grow yellow at the bottom, which no Scowring can take off.

IX. The Weight of it varies much, according to the Seasons and Weather. In May
1704, it weighed three Grains lighter than common Water in the Quantity of a
Pound. In the Spring of 1705, it was equal in Weight with common Water; but in
the Month of August of the same Year, the Weight was considerably increased,
because of the exceeding dry Weather of that Summer; which made the Water so
strong with the Mineral, that it lost its Limpidity. In general about
Midsummer, if the Weather is not over dry, the Weight of this Water is equal to
common Water.

X. A single Grain Weight of Gall will turn a Pint and a half of this Water of
a very noble deep red, and that in an instant. Syrup of Violets turns it of a
Grass-green. With the Infusion of Brasil it gives a deep lovely blue: With
that of Lignum Nephriticum, first a light green, then a light yellow, with a
blue Crown on the Surface: With the Infusion of Logwood a blue black: With that
of Fustick Wood, a dusky yellow: With the Flowers of Pomegranates, a fair
Violet: With Leaves of Green Thea, a fine purplish blue: With good Nants
Brandy, an elegant Sky Color.

XI. This Water turns a Solution of the Sugar of Lead milky in one instant; and
even the Solution of Sublimate in a quarter of an hour. But Oil of Tartar,
Spirit of Vitriol, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, make no Alteration with it.

XII. In calm Weather a thick fat Film covers the Surface of this Water, of
more Variety of Colors than a Rainbow: A Spoonful of it drunk has the Effect
of, and composeth as much to Sleep as a moderate Dose of Opium. Being dried by
Evaporation, it tasted very fat, and set so between the Fingers. Some of this
Powder being cast upon a red hot Iron, most of it immediately consumed away
with some Sparkling; and what remained was of the Color of Rust of Iron, and
tasted partly Stiptick and Earthy, and partly Salted.

XIII. By gentle Evaporation this Water yields a yellowish Sediment, more or
less, according to the Seasons. Last Spring a Quart yielded but six Grains of
it; but in September following it afforded me about nine. Whereas a Pound of
Tunbridge Water gave but one Grain Weight of this Sediment to the Honorable
Robert Boil, as may be seen in his Short Memoirs of Mineral Waters; so that
when these Waters are weakest, they are three to one stronger of the Mineral
than that of Tunbridge.

XIV. This abovementioned Sediment being boiled in River Water, made a strong
Lixivium, with which the Tincture of Galls, nor that of Brasil, nor that of
Logwood, nor the Solution of Sugar of Lead, made no remarkable Alteration: But
Syrup of Violets turned it green, Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of Sulphur, caused no
sensible Fermentation.

XV. Some of the aforesaid Lixivium being gently evaporated, yielded a fat
sulphurous kind of Salt. There is more or less of this Salt, according to the
Seasons; This Spring I had about two Grains of it out of ten Grains of
Sediment; but last Autumn I had about three.

XVI. The Stones on, and the Chanel in which this Water glides along, is always
lined with a yellow hard Crust.

XVII. I will at present supersede several more Experiments made upon this
Subject, designing, God willing, to enlarge upon it another time; and I have
reason to hope here is enough to show,

1. That what some have said, that this Water was Artificial; others, that it
was tinged with Copper; others, that it comes from the Tan-Pits of the
Neighborhood, etc. is the Effect only of Prejudice, or Ignorance, to give it
no worse Name.

2. That this Water is animated with a considerable Quantity of a fine volatile
sulphurous Spirit, admirably sympathizing with that of our Body.

3. That it is impregnated with a ferruginous liquid Sulphur, a Liquamen
Martis, Iron in Embrio, and that to three times as much more as Tunbridge
Water, to which it is also preferable on account of its not being so fixed.

4. That there is in it an alcaleous sulphurous Salt, to about a fourth part
of the whole mineral Substance; and that it is of the same Nature with the Salt
found in the German Spaw-Water.

THE OPERATIONS and VIRTUES OF THIS WATER.
I. THIS Water being drink'd set pleasantly upon the Stomach, (except sometime
in the Beginning, when the Stomach is foul) works it self off by Urine, keeps
the Body moderately open, and sometime purges. It creates a good Stomach, but
not such a voracious Appetite, as to make the Drinkers sick after Dinner; nor
is it so cold; nor does it go off with a kind of Tenesmus, as Tunbridge Water
often does.

II. It manifestly raises the Pulse, chears the Heart, quickens the Spirits,
invigorates the Fibers of the Blood, Glands, and other Vessels, and restores
their springing Property. It cleanses the Body, and gently evacuates all
superfluous and noxious Humors by Stools, Urine, and Perspiration.

III. These Waters remove the Diseases arising from preternatural Heat, by
washing away all bilious and adust Humors, and dissolving acrid alcaleous
Salts.

IV. They cure the Diseases proceeding from want of sufficient Circulation in
the Blood and Humors, or from cold phlegmatic Juices, by giving the Blood a
higher Degree of Motion, increasing the Spirits, and attenuating, dissolving,
and evacuating all excrementious Humors, and assimilating them that are good.

V. They remove all kind of Stoppages, and the Diseases depending upon 'em and
Wind; and upon that score cure many Diseases of the Head and Breast, and almost
all the Diseases of the Belly.

VI. But the Cases in which they are an admirable and almost an infallible
Remedy are, 1. The Infirmities attending Old Age and Consumptions, to which the
little Well is an adequate Remedy. 2. The Stone and Gravel, which they not only
cure by their expulsive, but also by their abstersive and dilating Property. 3.
The Gout and Rheumatick Pains, for which it is an unparalleled Remedy. 4. The
Scurvy, Melancholy, and Maladies depending upon the Mind. 5. Vapors, and most
Diseases of Women. 6. Colicks of all sorts. 7. All inward and outward Ulcers,
if not too far gone. 8. All Scabs, Itch, periodical Inflammations, and other
Breakings out of the Skin, if never so rebellious.

VII. The only Cases I have found these Waters disagree with, are the Diseases
incident to the hot, florid, and pletherick Constitutions of some strong young
People.

FINIS.

