A Short DISCOURSE UPON THE DESIGNS, PRACTICES and COUNSELS OF FRANCE.

In a LETTER to a Friend.

LONDON, First Printed in 1677. And now Reprinted for the Information of the
present Times, Dec. 29. 1688. And are to be Sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall.

A Short Discourse upon the Designs, Practices, and Councels of France.
SIR,
YOu gave me a Brief, and a pertinent Deduction the other day, of the French
Practices, and Designs; the Progress of their Arms, and the Methods of their
Proceedings: Together with a Scheme of the Inevitable Ruin and Slavery that
threatens Europe, without a speedy, and a powerful Conjunction against them.

After this general Contemplation of the present State of Christendom; you were
pleased to take a particular Prospect of the Interest of this Nation; and how
far we are to reckon our selves concerned in the common Calamity: Coming at
last to this Conclusion, that England cannot reasonably expect to stand long,
after the Loss of Holland and Flanders. For the support of this Opinion,
(besides the Force of your own Reasoning) you referred me to several
Historical, and Political Treatises upon the subject; which I have diligently
examined, and made use of, in this following Discourse; wherein I take the
Freedom to give you my Thoughts upon the whole matter.

Your first Charge upon the French, was, Breach of Faith: and you pitched upon
the Cases of Spain, and Portugal; the barbarous usage of the Duke of Lorain;
and the Nulling of the most Christian Queens Renuntiation upon Marriage; (which
was the very foundation of the Pyrenean Treaty) by a pretended devolution of
the Spanish Netherlands, in the Right of that Match: Their underhand tampering
of Denmark, and Swede, to draw the One from us, and hinder the Other from
joining with us; the Influence they had upon our Disgrace at Chatham; Their
playing Booty on both sides, betwixt England and Holland in the Dutch-war: And
to these Instances, (which are all so notorious that they need no expounding)
you might have added a thousand more of the like Quality. But these may suffice
for a seasonable, and a necessary Caution, and without the Helps of Aggravation
and Clamor; especially that extraordinary Action of destroying the Queens
Renunciation, and then invading the Spanish Netherlands upon it: An Action
hardly to be paralelled in the Story of the whole World, for a concurrence of
so many enormous Circumstances. There was in it, the Public Faith of the two
Crowns; which is the only security of Government, and the Bond of Humane
Society: There was in it the Solemnity of an Oath at the very Altar; which is
the most Sacred Tie of a Christian: There was also the highest Profession, and
assurance of Friendship imaginable; which is accounted one of the most binding
Obligations betwixt Man and Man: And then there was a Brother, a Cousin, and an
Infant, in the Case; which makes it matter of Humanity and Honor. And yet all
these Cords were as easily broken as Bulrushes. This single President may
serve, however, for a warning to all Princes and States, not to leave
themselves at the mercy of men of such Principles. But His most Christian
Majesty is not the only Prince that has been abused by Corrupt, and Ambitious
Ministers.

Your next Observation was, that they are the greatest intermediers in the
World, in other Peoples Affairs; that they embroyl all wherever they come; and
that there is hardly any Rebellion, but they are in the bottom of it. For their
Money walks in all the Courts and Councils of Christendom; nay, and beyond it
too: For it is said, that the last Grand Visir was their Pentioner. Was it not
France that debauched Scotland first; and afterward England, into the late
Rebellion? Nay, did they not stand still, and look on, to see the Crowning of
the work which they themselves began, in the Execrable Murder of the late
King? And did they not refuse to our Gracious and persecuted Sovereign -- even
a Retreat in their Dominions? How did they prolong the War in Portugal? What
Havoc have they made in Poland, and what work in Hungary? And are they not at
this day in Counsel with the Port against the Empire, and undermining the
Bullwark of Christendom? How have they dashed England against Holland; blinded
the Eyes of several Princes of the Empire; and baffled all Mediations toward a
General Peace? Did they not formerly, under the Color of protecting Germany,
cut off Alsatia from the Empire? And in a word, this has been their practice
wheresoever they have come: They Covet Harbors in Spain, (says the admirable
Baron del' Isola) Leagues in the Empire; Factions in Poland; Wars in England
and Holland; Passes into Italy; and the Sovereign Arbitrage every where. Their
Quiet consists in the Trouble of all others, and their Advantage is in the
Public Calamities. Nor have they any other way, then by dividing, and
weakening of the parts, to master the whole, which is the Capital design. And
if so, There Is no Fence against a Common Enemy, but a Common Union.

It is already made appear, by what is above said, how dangerous they are to
mankind. The next hint you gave me, was to consider on it, whether the English
may reasonably expect any better Quarter from them, then other People: in which
point, I shall only lay the matter before you, and leave you the Judge on it.

The Four main Interests of a Nation, are, Religion, Reputation, Peace, and
Trade. For the first of these; we shall neither fare the better, nor the worse:
but lose just as much for being of another Communion, as his Catholic Majesty
gets by being of the same. The Question now on Foot is a Communion of State,
not of Faith. The Alcoran, and the Gospel go hand in hand; and at the same
time, the Protestants are protected in Hungary, and persecuted in France. To
say nothing of the Encouragements they give there to the Jansenists, which may,
for ought we know, prove the greatest Blow to the Church of Rome that ever it
received since the Reformation. But what do I talk of Religion, in a Cause that
is dipped in Christian Blood, and in the Tears of Widows and Orphans? A Cause
that is propagated by Sacrilege, Rapes, Depopulation, Slavery, Oppression; and
at least a Million of Lives sacrificed to it already? The very thought of it is
enough to strike the Soul of any man with horror and Indignation.

If you would see now how tenderly they have handled us in the Business of
Reputation: Pray do but cast an Eye upon the Character of an English man in
their Politic de France.

Quant a ce qui est des Anglois, ils n'ont aucuns amiss, ce sont des gens sans
Foy, sans Religion, sans Probite, sans Justice aucune, defians, legers au
dernier point, Cruels, Impatiens, gourmands, superbes, audacieux, avares,
propres pour les coups de main, et pour une promte execution, mais incapables
de conduire une Guerre avec jugement. Leur Pais est assez bon pour vivre, mais
il n'est pas assez rich pour leur fournir les moyens de sortir, and de fair
aucune conqueste: aussi n'ont ils jamais rien conquis, except L'Irlande, don't
les habitans sont fobiles, et mauvais Soldats, etc. i.e. As for the English,
they are a People without Friends, without Faith, Religion, Honesty, or
Justice; Distrustful, and fickle to the highest degree imaginable: Cruel,
Impatient, Gluttonous, Proud, Audacious; they will do well enough for a Rubber
at Cuffs, or a sudden Exploit, but they understand nothing at all of the
Government of a War. The Country is passable enough for them to live in; but
not Rich enough to offer at any Conquest abroad; nor did they ever make any,
but upon the Irish, which are a weakly people, and ill Soldiers.

I think it were not amiss in this place, to desire our Impertinent Undertaker
to turn back to the History of Philip de Valois, and he shall there find that
our Edward the third made a shift with one Army to beat 60000 French, and leave
betwixt thirty and forty thousand of them upon the place; and with another Army
in the Bishopric of Durham to defeat as many Scots, and cut off 15000 of them
too. And it must not be here omitted, that this Scotch Army was also animated
by French Counsels. I would not willingly run out a Letter into a Volume, so
that all other Reflections apart, I shall only add, that if the English had not
once recovered the Field, and another time made it good in two of the greatest
Actions of late that have yet passed betwixt the Imperialists, and the French,
it is the Opinion of wise men, that the latter would not have had much to brag
of upon the success of this War. And this is some degree is acknowledged by the
Author of a French Relation of the Actions betwixt the two Armies in 1675,
1676, and 1677, (how Romantical soever in other Cases.) Speaking of the Battle
under the command of the Count de Lorge, after the Death of the Vicount
Turenne, these are his words, Et a render justice aux Anglois, et aux
Irlandois, on peut dire, qu'on leur doit une bonne party de cette victoire;
That is to say, And to give the English and Irish their due, France is indebted
to them in a large measure for this Victory. But now to our Politician again.
Ils se haissent les uns les autres, et sont en division continuelle, soit pour
la Religion, soit pour le Government. The English, says he, hate one another,
and are still quarrelling, either about Religion or Government.

These Indecencies would almost make a man call them Names; but let us pass
without one Angry word, from the Interest of our Reputation, to that of our
Peace. And enquire how they stand affected to us upon that point. To say, that
England has not for a long time had any troubles either at home, or abroad,
which the French have not promoted, or improved to their own Advantage; is to
say no more then that they deal with Us as they do with all the World beside;
So that we must even have recourse again to their Politiques for some
particular mark of their Favor, where you shall find that our State-Mountebank
has not yet shown all his Tricks, but puts himself with a very grave and
fore-casting Countenance upon the very Project of our Ruin. Vne Guerre de
France, de trois ou quatre ans contre eux les ruiner a entierement, ainsi il
semble qu' il ne faut point fair de paix avec eux qu' a des Conditions qui
nous soient tres avantageuses. A War (says he) of three or four years with
France, would absolutely destroy the English; so that methinks we should not
entertain any Peace with them, but upon very profitable terms. And then a
little after. In fine, says he, the way to undo the English, is to make them
keep an Army on foot; and there is no fear of their Landing in France, but to
their certain destruction, unless they should be invited by a Rebellion;
without which, their Troops will in a short time most undoubtedly fall foul one
upon another. To keep them upon continual Expense, it is but giving them the
Alarm upon the Isles of Jersey, and Gernsey, Wight, and Man, Ireland, and the
Cinque Ports; by which means, they will be put upon the Charge of
Fortifications and Garrisons, which will persuade the People that the King
intends to set up a standing Army, and an Arbitrary Government. So long as this
holds, the Nation will never be at quiet, but torment themselves with fears,
and Jealousies, which may be easily fomented by letters in Cipher, to such or
such particular persons; and in such sort to be intercepted as shall be found
convenient. These Letters may give a Hint of a Descent in Ireland, and
elsewhere, which would dispose the Irish, who mortally hate the English, to a
Revolt; and among the suspicious Multitude they would pass for Gospel. This
Contrivance would make the Scots also to bethink themselves of recovering their
Liberty; where there must be Parties made, and the Sects encouraged one against
another; especially the Roman Catholics, must be fairly handled, and private
Assurance given (in the Name of the King of England) to the Benedictins, (who
are easy enough to be imposed upon) that they shall be restored to all their
former Benefits, according to the Printed Monasticon; which will presently make
the Roman Catholics declare themselves; and the Monks will move Heaven and
Earth for the bringing of matters about: But then Care must be taken to carry
on the Report that the King is of the Romish Religion; which will distract the
Government, and throw all into an absolute Confusion.

From hence we may gather; first, what opinion the French have of us: Secondly,
that it is not only their desire and study, but a formed design to embroyl us.
Thirdly, that they will stick at nothing neither, to compass that end; be it
never so foul: Fourthly, this Libeller has traced us out the very methods of
their working: As by amusing the People with forged Letters of Intelligence,
where the first Author of the Plot must miraculously discover it: By filling
the Peoples heads with fears and Jealousies, and leaving no stone unturned in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, to stir up a Rebellion: Why has he not advised
the Poisoning of all our Fountains too? which would have been a Course of as
much Christianity and Honor. But that this Trifler may not glorify himself too
much in his wondrous Speculations, take notice, that he is only the
Transcriber, not the Author of this goodly Piece, for the Original was betwixt
Richlieu and Mazarine; and it amounts to no more in effect, then an imperfect
History of the French dealings with us for a long time, and particularly in our
late Troubles.

To come now from his most unmannerly Malice, to his Reason of State, If I am
not mistaken, England might longer subsist in a War with France, then France
could in a Peace within it self (the heaviest of all Judgments, when a Nation
must be wicked upon necessity:) And again; when he says that England cannot
hurt France by a Descent, unless called in by a Rebellion; he never considers
that if England had an Army a foot, and stood inclined to make use of it that
way, we should not be long without an Invitation. For we see what the
Bourdelois, etc. did upon their own Bottom, and without any Foreign
Encouragement; and the whole business miscarried only for want of a rigorous
Second. Lastly; give me leave to say that he has extremely overshot himself in
one thing more; for though this has been really the practice of the French, and
is at this day the very Model and Rule by which their Emissaries govern
themselves; it should yet have been kept as the greatest Secret in the World:
for the owning of these Inglorious Artifices in public, makes it one of the
Grossest Libels that ever was written against the French Government: to say
nothing of his oversight in disobliging the Roman Catholics, and laying
Snares to Trepan them.

The question of Trade has been so beaten already, that there remains Little to
be added to it. Nor in truth needs it, since it is agreed at all hands, that
the French set up for an Universal Commerce as well as for an Universal
Monarchy. And in effect, the one is but a necessary consequent upon the other.
Nor is it enough, it seems, for us to be designed upon by them, without lending
them our hands toward the cutting of our own Throats: For upon a sober and
judicious estimate, we are Losers by our Trade with France, at least a Million
and an half per Annum. I shall conclude this Head with one passage more out of
our Politiques of France: (And you will say it is a pleasant one too, but it must
be under the Rose) Upon a Presupposal of mischief that is a Brewing in England,
Now, says he, it will be our business to renew our Alliance with Holland; we
can wheedle them into an Opinion, that they are the only men that understand
the knack of Trade, so that they shall have that to themselves; the Talent of
the French, alas! lies another way, and there is no forcing of any thing against
Nature: and that now is their nick of time, to crush their Competitors for the
Northern Seas. So that we are all of us to be served with the same Sauce; but
it is some degree of Honesty yet, when they tell the World what they are to
trust to.

Now to sum up all that is said. If the French can dispense with Oaths, and
Solemn Contracts; If it be their Custom, and a Branch of their Policy, to fish
in troubled Waters; If they hate us, as Englishmen, and are not for us, as
Reformed Catholics; If they do all they can to wound us, in our Reputation,
our Peace, and our Trade, we may take for granted that they will destroy us to
all purposes if they can, which naturally leads me to an Enquiry how far we are
in their Power, or likely so to be, that we may take our measures accordingly.

It will not stand with the Brevity I propose in this Paper to give you a
Geographical, or an Historical Account of Places, or Actions: But in as few
words as I can, I am to present you with a general view of the present State of
Christendom, with a regard to the Power of France; and then to consider how far
England may come to be concerned in the Common Fate. Here it was that you and I
brake off in our last Discourse; So that in the Prosecution of it, I must try
to walk without Le^ding, (Saving only the helps that I have gathered from
certain Tracts which I have read, upon his Recommendation) wherein I shall
steer a middle Course, betwixt some that overvalue the Strength of France, and
others that will have it to be less then indeed it is.

That the Arms of France are at this day formidable to all Christendom, is not
to be denied, and Tacitus gives you the reason of it, in the Case of the Romans
and the Britains, Rarus (says he) ad propulsandum commune Periculum conventus:
ita, dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur. There must be a common force to
oppose a common danger; they struggled one by one, till they were all
destroyed. The French (no doubt of it) are a wealthy, a populous and a Military
Nation. But it must be allowed that they are more indebted for their Greatness,
to the slips and oversights of others, (And this without disparagement too)
then they are to their proper Conduct and Valor. The advance they made into
Flanders in 1667. was introduced by the Spaniards trusting to their Assurances
of Friendship, and rather imputable to an excess of Charity than any want of
Precaution; though it seemed not very likely that they should march with Horse,
Foot, and Cannon, only to go a birding. Through these and the like Arts they
have raised themselves to that dangerous height where now we behold them;
taking all advantages of the unsettled condition of Spain; the divisions of the
Empire, the Factions in Holland, and of all other mistakes in point of
foresight and Resolution elsewhere. You know very well, the Conquests they
have made upon the United Provinces, the Spanish Netherlands; a considerable
part of Germany with the Terror and Devastation that accompanies them every
where: The Progress of their Arms in Catalonia, Sicily, the West Indies, etc.
Now what may be the consequences of this over-growing Power, and how to prevent
them, is the matter in Question.

AS it is without dispute, that the French aim at Universal Dominion, (which is
only a more plausible Cover for that Universal Slavery which must create it) so
is it accounted as indubitable a Principle, that the Conquest of Flanders must
be the Foundation of it. And according to this Maxim it is, that they take
their Measures; for they have made themselves Masters of the Outworks already,
in Valenciennes, Cambray and St. Omer; three places of very great strength and
importance: And it is generally believed by the recalling of their Troops from
the Rhine, and bending the flower of their Force that that way, that they will
push for the rest this Campania. If they carry it, (as probably they will,
without the speedy addition of some powerful Alliance) take notice I beseech
you of that which Naturally follows. In the first place, the Charge and the
Hazard of that War is over, which in Garrisons, and in the Field, has put his
most Christian Majesty to expense of keeping near 100000 Men in Pay: (which
will then be at liberty to fall in upon the Empire.) Beside, what has been
expended in Management, as the French call it, which in honest English is down
right Corruption. Secondly, This Acquisition will furnish the French King with
men and moneys, for an Army of fifty thousand Men, (and no better Soldiers in
Europe.) Thirdly, what will become of the Duke of Brandenburg, if the French
shall fall into Cleves, and Mark, with a matter of forty or fifty thousand Men
more, and from thence into Pomeren, and Prussia? Fourthly, the whole Patrimony
of the Empire, from the Rhine to the Frontiers of France, fall by an inevitable
Consequence into the hands of the French; as they have already swallowed the
three Bishoprics of Metz, Toul and Verdun. So that the Imperial Army will be
forced over the Rhine, and there probably kept in play, and upon the bare
defensive, by the Princes of the French Interest; while in the mean time, the
Princes of Westphalia will be reduced to an absolute necessity of ranging
themselves under the French Protection and Changing their party. And what can
then be expected from Holland, after what they have suffered already, and under
their present despairs, but to content themselves with such Conditions as
France will give them? For after the loss of Cleves and Flanders, their Case is
wholly desperate, unless England should vigorously interpose to their Relief.
And the State of the Empire is neither better nor worse than that of their
Neighbors; for they must all submit their Necks to the same Yoke. When matters
are brought to this Pass, they have before them, England, Spain and Italy; the
Cloud is gathered already, and it is wholly at their Choice where it shall
break.

There are a great many people, I know, that promise themselves mighty things
from the Event of another Campania, for want I fear of Consulting the Chart,
and the almost insuperable difficulties that lie in the way; The means they
propose, are either by carrying the War into France, by way of Revulsion, or by
forcing the French upon a Capital Battle; The former Proposition seems first
very impracticable; and secondly, of little or no advantage, if it could be
effected. It must be considered that beyond Mentz, Coblents and Treves, the
Imperalists have no Magazine at all beside that betwixt Treves and France (a
part of Luxenburg excepted) is absolutely in the Enemies Power. Now how should
an Army subsist there, that must over and above, pass through a Country of
about twenty Leagues, that is wholly laid wast, and in Ashes, and without any
Cattle in it, or any other sort of Necessary provision?

Put the Case now that the Imperialists should break through all these
difficulties, and carry an Army even into the Lorain it self, the Country of
Metzin, or Burgundy, (which would take them up the best part of a Summer too)
all the strong holds are in the hands of the French, and the Country laid so
desolate, that there is no living for an Army there. When it is come to this,
they must resolve either upon a Battle or Siege. If the former; The French are
at liberty whether they will fight, or no, and there is no compelling of them;
for they are among their strong holds; and all is their own both behind them,
and on each side, and the Country either burnt or deserted. But carry it father
yet, and suppose the French forced upon the Risque of a Battle, First, The
Imperialists are not sure to get the better of it. And Secondly, What if they
should? Nay to the degree of an entire Victory? All that would be expected more
for that year, would be only to take in some considerable Post, and make good
the ground they had gotten for the next Campaign: For it would be a madness to
pursue their Victory into the heart of an Enemies Country, and leave so many
strong Garrisons upon their Backs, which would undoubtedly cut off all their
Convoys and starve them.

But this is still the supposing of a Thing not to be supposed; for the French
in this Case, would stand upon the Defensive, and not to come to a Battle. Or
in case they should, and be worsted; they have men enough in Garrison for
Recruits, that would immediately reinforce them.

Now on the other side, what if the Imperialists should chance to be routed?
The Garrisons which the French hold in Lorain, Burgundy and Alsatia, would in
such Case, totally destroy that broken Army, and cut out such work in Germany,
as has not been known in the Empire for many Ages.

In this extremity, let us suppose that the Empire should yet bring another.
Army into the Field; and try the issue of a Second Battle, and miscarry: And
that the disaffected Princes of the Empire, should declare themselves for the
Enemy; all that part of Germany that lies within two or three days journey of
the Rhine, would be irrecoverably lost; a great part of it being so harrased
already, that it is not able so much as to furnish an Army upon a March, much
less for a Winter quarter.

Now to the Business of a Siege, the French have taught us, by Philipsburg and
Mastricht; that they want neither Skill to fortify a place, nor Courage to
defend it. So that without a great loss of Time and Men, it cannot be expected
that the Imperialists should make themselves Masters of any considerable place:
And when they shall have carried it; what will a Town in Lorain, or Burgundy,
signify to the saving of the Spanish Netherlands, which if once lost, are
hardly ever to be retriv'd?

Now taking this for granted; if England does not step in with all the speed
and vigor imaginable, see what will be the end on it, First, That the French,
being Masters of all the Posts, Passes and strongholds in Lorain and Burgundy,
may dodge and trifle the Imperialists at pleasure; and make them spend out the
year without any Advantage to the Netherlands. The way would have been for the
Imperialists to have pressed with an Army of 50000 men directly into the body of
France, and the Confederate Troops in the Low Countries, to have made another
Inrode by the way of Picardy, or Bologne; but since the taking of Valenciennes,
Cambray and St. Omer, there is no possibility of piercing France that way. So
that a very small Army now upon the Spanish Netherlands, with the help of the
French Garrisons, is sufficient to amuse and tire out the whole force of Spain,
and Holland upon that Quarter.

Secondly, France being thus secured on that side will unquestionably fall in
with all their Power upon the Empire; unless diverted by the Alarm they have
now received from England. Now admitting this to be the Condition of France,
let any man of sense judge, what good the Imperial Army can do to the
Netherlands (upon which single point depends the Fortune of Christendom.) What
if they should march up to the Borders of France with 50000 men? Will not the
French encounter them there with as many, or more? And with this odds too, that
the Imperialists suffer a thousand Incommodities in their March, through a
ruined Country; whereas the French have good Quarters, and plenty of all things
at hand, watching the Others motions and emproving all Advantages against them.

Thirdly, In this posture of Affairs, the Confederates must never expect to do
any great Matter upon the French, in these Provinces, unless they do very much
out-number them.

And it is likewise to be considered, that these troubles falling out in the
Minority of his Catholic Majesty, the distractions of that Government, the
Revolt of Sicily, and great disorders upon the Frontiers of Spain; the
Netherlands have been much neglected, till the Elevation of his Highness Don
Joan of Austria to the dignity of Prime Minister. And that it is not possible
for him, by reason of the many Exigencies of that Crown nearer home, to send
any Considerable succor to the Low Countries, otherwise than by supplies of
Money: So that by that time the Imperialists, and the Hollanders are got into
their Winter Quarters, or at least, before they take the Field again, the
French from time to time will be ready with Fresh Troops out of their Garrisons
to prosecute their Conquests; which by degrees must needs break the hearts of
the Poor Inhabitants, when they find that neither their Faith, nor their
Courage, is able any longer to protect them. And when that day comes; what by
their Armies, and what by other Influences, the French will have as good as
Subjected two thirds of Europe. And there will also occur these farther
difficulties. First, no body knows where the French will begin their Attaque;
which will oblige the Spaniard and Hollander to strengthen all their Garrisons
as far as their Men will reach. Secondly, when the Spanish and Holland Troops
shall be so dispersed, wheresoever the French sit down, they must then give
themselves for lost, for want of an Army to relieve them; beside their furious
and obstinate manner of Assault, for they care not how many men they lose, so
they carry the place. (And then most of the Men too are made Prisoners of War.)
Nor is the season of the year any discouragement to them neither; witness their
first Irruption into Burgundy, and the restless Activity of their Troops even
at this Instant.

So soon as their Work in Flanders is over, (which only England, under Heaven,
is able to Prevent or Check) the French will have an Army of at least 50000 Men
about Lorain, Luxemburg, and Burgundy to face the Imperialists, and at the same
time with as many more perhaps they will seize upon the Duchy of Juliers, and
of Cleves, and from thence pass the Rhine, to countenance those that are of the
French Caball, on the side of Westphalia; and so in due time, several other
Princes of the Empire. It is remarkable that in three years War against the
Confederates, his most Christian Majesty has not only stood his ground, without
losing so much as one Inch of his Ancient Patrimony, but actually and almost
without opposition, taken several Towns, and some entire Provinces, from the
Principals of the Confederacy; And made himself almost as Considerable at Sea,
as he is at Land; Not only in the Mediterranean, and upon the Coasts of Spain
and Italy, but in America too: where he has laid a Foundation of great mischief
both to England and Holland, in the point of Commerce; if not timely prevented.
And he does little less by his money than by his Arms; for he pays all, and with
French money, under pretext of Neutrality, maintains considerable Armies in the
very heart of the Empire; which, it is feared, will be ready enough upon any
disaster, to join with the Common Enemy. It is the French Court that manages
the Counsels of Poland, and they govern the Swisse no less; who, by the
Conquest of the Franche County are made little better than slaves. And yet by a
fatal blindness that Republique still furnishes the French with the best of
their Soldiers, and helps forward the destruction of Europe, never dreaming
that they themselves are to be undone too at last.

But it is no great matter, you will say, to impose upon the Swisse (which are a
heavy and Phlegmatic people) but the French charms have bewitched even Italy it
self; though a Nation the most Clear-sighted, and suspicious of all others. For
their Republiques lie as quiet, as if they were asleep; though the Fire is
already kindled in Sicily, and the danger brought home to their own doors. It
is a wonder, that they lay things no more to heart, considering, first, the
Passages that the French have to favor their Entry. Secondly, that they are
many, and small States; weak, and easily to be corrupted, if not so already.
Thirdly, That though they have been formerly very brave, and many Particulars
remain so still, yet in the generality they are soft and Effeminate. And
Fourthly, That the French is there the Master of the Seas. These Reflections
methinks might convince any man of the condition they are in. And certainly
they that were not able to defend themselves against Charles the Eighth, will
be much less able to encounter Lewis the 14th: Or if he gets in, to drive him
out again, as they did the Other. For they must do it wholly upon their own
Strength, having only the Turk in condition to help them. For Germany and Spain
are sunk already; And the Swisse will neither dare to venture upon it, nor are
they able to do it if they had a mind to it.

As for Spain, it is neither Populous, nor fortified, and perhaps want of
Provisions may keep it from an Invasion. And yet for all that, with a Body of
Thirty or Forty thousand Men by the way of Fontaraby, and as many by Catalonia,
the French may (if they please) in two Campania's make themselves Masters of
Navarre, Arragon, Catalonia, and Valentia: and then it is but sortifying the
Frontiers, and making his Catholic Majesty a Tributary in Castile; Who must
content himself to take what they please to give him, over and above, in
consideration of his Dominions in Italy, and the Spanish Indies: A Possibility
that England and Holland shall do well to think of: For when he has the Mines
in his Power, and Europe under his Feet, there will be no contending.

After this, they have only the Swisse or the English, to fall upon next: For
the Former, they are neither fortified nor united in Affections or Religion.

As for England; They are a People not naturally addicted to the French;
Sensible of their Honor, and of their Interest; and the whole World is
convinced of their Courage. They are United under the Government of a Gracious
Prince; and their Concerns are at this Instant lodged in the hands of the Most
Loyal and Publique-spirited Representatives that ever acted in that Station;
beside the strength of the Island by Situation: So that the French would find
it a hard matter, either to make a Conquest here, or, if they should surprise
it, to keep it. But yet they have finer ways to Victory than by force of Arms;
and their Gold has done them better service than their Iron.

What have we now to do then, but in a Common Cause, to arm against a Common
Oppression? This is the time, or never, for Italy to enter into a League for
their Common Safety, and not only to keep, but, if possible, to force the
French from their Borders; while the Imperial Army holds the Capital Power of
France in Play?

And this is the time too, for the Swisse to recall all their Troops out of the
French Service, and to Strike a general League also for the Recovery of
Burgundy, the only Outwork of their Liberties, and to expel the French
Garrisons, and deliver the places into the hands of the Right Owners.

And will it not concern Poland as much as any of the rest; that stands falls
with the Empire, as the Defense of Christendom against the Turks, and whose own
Turn is next?

This Alarm methinks should call off the Princes from the Acquisitions they
have made upon part of the Swedes Possessions in the Empire, to the Assistance
of the Spanish Netherlands; and make all the French Mercenaries in the Empire
to bethink themselves of returning from the delusions which either the French
Artifice or Money has imposed upon them. He that has no regard for the Head,
will have less for the Dependences, when he has them at his Mercy.

Nay the very French themselves should do well to contemplate the slavery that
is now prepared for them. Their Laws and Liberties are trampled upon; and till
the French Government be reduced to the Bounds of its Ancient Constitution,
neither the People, nor their Neighbors, can ever be secure.

In this dangerous Crisis of Affairs, it has pleased Divine Providence to leave
England the Arbitress of the Fate of Europe; and to annex such advantages to
the Office, that the Honor, the Duty, and Security of this Nation seem to be
wrapped up together. In the Point of Honor, what can be more Generous, than to
succor the Miserable and the Oppressed, and to put a stop to that Torrent that
threatens Christendom with an Universal Deluge? Beside the Vindication of our
selves for those Affronts and Indignities, both Public and Private, that we
have suffered upon our own Account. And then in matter of Duty; It is not only
Christendom, but Christianity it self, that lies at stake. For, in the Ruin of
the Empire, the Turks work is done to his hand, by breaking down the only Fence
that has preserved us all this while from the Incursions of the Ottoman Power.
Now as nothing can be more Glorious, then at all hazards, to hinder the
Effusion of more Christian blood, and to save Christendom it self from Bondage;
It is so much our Interest too, that we our selves are Lost without it. And as
the Obligation is Reciprocal, so the Resolution is necessary: The choice we
have before us being only This, Either to unite with our Neighbors for a Common
safety, or to stand still and look on, the tame Spectators of their Ruin, till
we fall alone. This is so Demonstrative, that if we do not by a powerful
Alliance, and Diversion, prevent the Conquest of Flanders (which lies already a
gasping) we are cut off from all Communication with the rest of Europe; and
cooped up at home, to the Irrecoverable loss of our Reputation and Commerce;
for Holland must inevitably follow the Fate of Flanders, and then the French
are Masters of the Sea; Ravage our Plantations, and infallibly possess
themselves of the Spanish Indies, and leave Us answerable for all those
Calamities that shall ensue upon it: which as yet, by God's Providence, may be
timely prevented. But he that stills the raging of the Sea, will undoubtedly
set Bounds to this overflowing Greatness; having now, (as an Earnest of that
Mercy) put it into the hearts of our Superiors to provide seasonably for the
Common safety, and in proportion also to the Exigence of the Affair; knowing
very well, that things of this Nature are not to be done by halves.

We have to do with a Nation of a large Territory; abounding in Men, and Money;
their Dominion is grown so Absolute, that no man there can call any thing his
own, if the Court says Nay to it. So that the Sober and Industrious Part are
only slaves to the Lusts, and Ambition of the Military. In this Condition of
Servitude, they feel already what their Neighbors fear, and wish as well to
any Opportunity, either of avoiding, or of Casting off the Yoke: which will
easily be given by a Conjunction of England and Holland at Sea: and almost
infallibly produce these Effects. First; It will draw off the Naval Force of
France from Sicily, America, and elsewhere, to attend this Expedition.
Secondly, The Diversion will be an ease to the Empire, and the Confederates,
from whence more Troops must be drawn to encounter this Difficulty, than the
French can well spare. Thirdly, It will not only encourage those Princes, and
States that are already engaged, but likewise keep in Awe those that are
disaffected, and confirm those that waver.

It Is true, this War must needs be prodigiously expensive; but then in
probability it will be Short; And in Cases of this Quality, people must do as
in a Storm at Sea, rather throw part of the Lading overboard, than Founder the
Vessel. I do not speak This, as supposing any Difficulty in the Case, for the
very contemplation of it has put fire into the veins of every true Englishman;
and they are moved, as by a sacred impulse, to the Necessary, and the only
means of their Preservation, And that which crowns our hopes, is, that these
generous Inclinations are only ready to execute what the wisdom of their
Superiors shall find reasonable to Command. I need not tell you how Jealous
the People of England are of their Religion, and Liberties; to what degree they
have contended, even for the shadow of these Interests; nor how much blood, and
Treasure they have spent upon the Quarrel. Could any imposture work so much;
and can any man imagine that they will be now less sensible, when they see
before their eyes a manifest Plot upon their Religion, their Liberties invaded;
their Traffic interrupted; the Honor, and the very Being of their Country at
stake; their Wives and Children exposed to Beggary and Scorn; and in
Conclusion, The Privileges of a Freeborn Englishman Exchanged for the
Vassalage of France?

FINIS.

