A SHORT RELATION Of the most Remarkable TRANSACTIONS IN SEVERAL PARTS OF
EUROPE BETWEEN THE Christians and Turks; INCLUDING An Exact DIARY of the SIEGE
of BUDA.

Written Originally by a Person of Honor, a Voluntier in the Campaign, and
done into English by P. R.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Randolph Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1685.

A SHORT RELATION Of the most Remarkable TRANSACTIONS In several Parts of
EUROPE, etc.
THERE is no question to be made but that the happy success of the D. of Lorain
since he undertook the command of the Imperial Forces, has won him the renown
of being one of the greatest Captains of his time. Nor was the raising the
Seige of Vienna, assailed with the whole Power of the Turkish Empire, the least
of his glorious Enterprises, where the Presence of the warlike King of Poland
did no way eclipse his Honor, while his Councils, his Conduct, and his Valor
entitled him to an equal share of the Victory with any of the Confederates.
For that he then stood firm upon the Basis of his own merit and courage,
fortified with a long experience in War, is apparent by his single Actions in
the prosecution of that memorable overthrow.

His chiefest business, during the severity of so hard a Winter was to enlarge
his Quarters into the Enemies Country which he did as far as Newsol upon the
River Grana, by which means he kept Newhansel so closely block't up, that all
the attempts of the Turk to relieve it were in vain. In the mean time he
labored at Court the reinforcement of his Army against the next Spring; and
the accomplishment of the League between the Emperor, the King of Poland, the
Venetian and the Pope, and which upon the 29th. of February was signed by the
Cardinal Bonvisi, in behalf of the Pope, by the Count of Conlinseck and the
Baron Straetman for the Emperor and Crown of Poland, and for the Commonwealth
of Venice by their respective Ambassadors, being to continue for fix years. Nor
was he less careful in his endeavors to reduce the head of the Rebels, Count
Teckelie by fair means, to which purpose a general Act of Oblivion was
published by the Emperor with pardon to all that would return to their
Obedience; which Teckelie himself was free to lay hold of, as a Gentleman of
Hungary, provided he did not expect to be considered in any higher Degree. And
indeed such was the consequences of that famous Enterprise wherein his Prowess
was so lately and so highly eminent that it seemed to influence the more
Northern people, and warm their valor in that extremity of weather, to add to
the harvest of his Triumphs.

For about the midst of January came News to the Court at Lintz, that the
Cossacks under the Command of their chief Leader Kuneski, having straighten'd
Caminiac a strong Garrison of the Turks in the Vkrain, the Turks and Tartars
under the Leading of their own Generals, joining in a Body of forty thousand
Men, resolved to remove the Enemy at a farther distance from the Town. Of which
the Cossacks having intelligence, drew together no less then thirty thousand
complete, and with a speedy march, unlooked for, upon the fourth of December so
furiously assailed the Enemy, that they slew near Thirty Thousand upon the
place; and in the pursuit, the Earth being covered with the bodies of the slain
for several Miles together, the two Chieftains of the Tartars, endeavoring to
rally their men were both slain, at what time Haley Bey who commanded the
Turks, being taken Prisoner, offered a Hundred Thousand Crowns for his Ransom,
but the Cossacks quarrelling about the division of the Money, slew him in the
heat of the Contest. With the Tartar Generals was also slain the Bassa of
Biatogrod, and several Mirza's, who are the chief Officers of quality among the
Tartars. In pursuit of which Victory, the Cossacks failed not to enter
Budziack, where they wasted all before 'em with Fire and Sword not sparing
either Age or Sex.

These Cossacks so called from Cosack, signifying a Goat; because they wandered
like Goats upon the Mountains, or from Cazack in the Tartar Language, which
signifies a Robber, were a sort of Rovers, the same with the Banditi in Italy,
first taken into pay by Stephen King of Poland, who gave them also leave to
choose themselves a Captain, whom they pleased, of their own gang, to be
consirm'd by the Polish Prince, he assigned 'em likewise the Castle of
Techtimirocco seated upon the Banks of the Borysthenes or the Nicper, with the
Territories belonging to it, for their habitation. And thus embodied into a
kind of a Nation, they lived in subjection to the Polander, till the Reign of
Vladislaus; but in the year 1638, they began to grow tumultuous and rebellious,
from whence arose a most cruel War, wherein the Turks generally took their
part, and at length by virtue of the Articles of Peace between the Ottoman and
the Polander, concluded October 18th. 1672 all the Vkrain, so called from the
Tartar. word, which signifies a Border or Limit, as being the utmost limit of
the Polish Dominions was surrendered to the Cossacks, to hold of themselves;
the Polander at the same time, renouncing all his Claim, Right, Title or
Pretension to it.

In this Province stands the City of Camenecia or Caminiac, one of Natures
wonders, as being seated upon a high and steep Rock, taken by the Turk in the
year 1672 and now in a fair way to be retaken again.

This Victory obtained in December, was seconded by another in January, at what
time the new Palatine or Hospodar of Walachia Dukas, marching with 30000 men to
displace Petrozensco, whom the King of Poland had reestablished in that
Government, and thinking to have surpised the Cossacks in his march, was
himself routed and taken Prisoner with his son, after he had lost seventeen
thousand of his men upon the place, and two pieces of Canon.

Some skirmishes and disputes there also happened between the Imperialists and
the Rebels under Count Teckeley, which though they were not so remarkable as
the preceding, yet the Imperialists still prevailing they served to enlarge
their own and straiten the Quarters of the Enemy.

But so soon as the Season permitted the Duke himself hastened to take the
Field with all the Expedition he could, and so toward the beginning of June the
Army being randevouz'd about Nestria, he passed the Danow at Komorrah, and
marched for Gran where he encamped, expecting the Regiments of Moravia and
Silesia; and thence intending for the Siege of Buda, upon the fourteenth of
June he passed the River again at the same place. Which he had no sooner done,
but upon the sixteenth of June, he invested Vicegrade seated on the other side
of the River, and heretofore considerable for the frequent Residence of the
Kings of Hungary, with a Body of Horse, and the same evening attacked and
gained the Town; upon which the Turks, that were in the Castle to the number of
seven hundred and forty men, came to a Capitulation the next day and marched
out with their Arms and Baggage. But while the Duke was thus employed, the
Garrisons of Alba Regalis, Zygeth and other places, having notice that the
Imperialists had left their Baggage at Gran, guarded only by a small party of
Horse and Foot, under the Command of Major General Holloweil with a Body of six
thousand men advanced to Gran, and with so much fury fell upon the Imperialists
that the foremost Troops being put into some disorder, the Major General was
after a brave resistance slain. But then the Regiments of Rabata standing the
whole brunt of the Enemy, till the other Troops recovering out of their
disorder came into their assistance, they put the Turk to an absolute flight,
and pursued 'em for several Miles. In this encounter the Turks lost 6 or 700
men, and four standards, afterward presented to the Emperor; the Imperialists
about two hundred; among whom the Baron Levi was said to be either killed or
taken. Count Rabata was also a Prisoner, and tied by the Turks to one of their
Horses tayls, but released in the pursuit.

All this while Newhausel had been closely blocked up by Caprara, who had kept
it all the winter time from being relieved by the Turks; so that it was by this
reduced to pinching extremity: And therefore the Ottomans finding they could do
no good with small parties, resolved to succor the Town with a complete Army
of 20000 men. The Duke of Lorrain having intelligence that the Enemy was
advanced as far as Vaccia, between Buda and Novograde, resolved to give 'em
battle. To this purpose he set forward, and coming within sight of the Enemy,
found 'em drawn up in Battalia upon the Hills near Vaccia, having on the right
Wing the River Danow and a large Morass, and the left secured by a thick Wood.
Thereupon the Duke having embattell'd his own men, about eleven a Clock at Noon
moved directly toward the Enemy in two lines, besides the reserve, and the
Troops left to guard the Baggage. The Turks suffered him to advance without
opposition till he came to the foot of the Hill, and then with their usual
cries made a desperate charge upon Taff's Regiment, which was almost in the
middle of the line, and where the Duke being in person, had his own Horse
wounded under him, and two more Horses of the Officers next him killed with
Pistol shot. The Turks having thus spent their first fury, and observing the
firmness of the Imperial Battalions, turned their back for a while; but then
rallying again, fell upon the Christians on every side, and then wheeling off,
returned a third time and made another desperate charge, but not being able to
break their Enemies array, who still made their way in good order, they fell
into confusion, and routed by their own fears, the Horse abandoning the Foot,
betook themselves to flight; being pursued by the Imperial Cavalry of the first
Line for above an hour: but by reason of the swiftness of their Horses they
soon got out of sight. The Foot thus left to mercy were most of them slain; the
rest escaping into Vaccia. This Body consisted of about 20000 men, of which
four thousand were Tartars, commanded by the Bassa of Buda and several Bassa's
under him. The Bassa of Buda himself was supposed to be slain, his Horse being
taken by a private Soldier of Taff's Regiment, who presented it to the Duke of
Lorrain. Nor did Vaccia protect the fugitives, the Imperialists soon after
making themselves Masters of the Town, where the Turks surrendered at
discretion. So that in all the number of the Enemy slain was reputed to be
3000. and 1500 taken Prisoners, and among the rest a Bassa and ten Aga's; with
seven pieces of Canon and several Colors. As for the loss of the Christians it
was very inconsiderable, as not having mist above twenty or thirty men in the
whole Action; Vaccia being thus surrendered, Novograde was immediately quitted
by the Turks, and as soon possessed by the Imperialists.

This Battle was fought the 27th. of June, which Month thus ending with this
memorable defeat of the Turks, at the beginning of July, the Duke of Lorrain
hastened with his victorious Army to Pest, another Garrison of the Turks on the
farther side of the Danow, and began without delay to batter the Town with his
Canon and Fire Bombes. But the Turks in great fear and disorder retired with
the best of their goods to Buda, having first set fire to several houses in the
Town, as also to the Bridge, to prevent the pursuit of the Imperialists. But
they entering immediately, soon became Masters of the Fire, and of a place,
which had the Enemy had the courage to defend, might have cost both time and
men.

The Duke of Lorrain being thus in possession of Pest placed therein a
considerable Garrison consisting of two Battalions of Foot, and a party of
Dragoons; and being reinforced by Caprara with a body of six thousand men,
among which were six hundred Hungarians that had deserted Count Teckelie; and
by Lubomirskie, with an addition of 4000 Poles, in all 40000 strong, repassed
the Danow upon the 11th. and 12th. of July, over a Bridge of Boats laid over
the River not far from the Isle of St. Andrew; while Lesley was ordered with
the Forces under his command toward the Bridge of Esseck, to make good that
pass.

Upon the 14th. of July the Duke of Lorrain having forced the Turks from the
Posts which they had on this side Buda, came with all his Forces and sat down
before the Town.

Buda, by the Germans called Ofen, is a City of the lower or hithermost
Hungary, standing for the most part upon a Hill near the Banks of the Danow,
the other part lying in a plain level about fifty four German Miles from Vienna
to the South, and forty nine from Belgrade to the North. Formerly the Residence
of the Hungarian Princes, and which King Sigesmund adorned, with several
Magnificent Structures; particularly with a Palace built after the old Roman
manner, environing the Castle with beautiful Walls and Terrass'd Walks, that
overlookt most pleasant Gardens and Fields adjoining. It is fortified with
strong Walls and Bulwarks, containing a great number both of private and
public Structures exquisitely built, so that all the rest of Hungary can
hardly be said to show anything more elegant, more pleasant, or more secured by
art and nature: It was taken the 12th. of August in the year 1519. after it had
been eleven times assaulted by the whole force of the Ottoman Army.

The Duke of Lorrain being sat down before this City, in a short time made
himself Master of the lower Town and lodged his Soldiers in the Ditch under the
Wall of the upper Town, before he sent his first express to the Emperor.

Whilst the Duke lay in this posture before Buda, the Turks in a Body of thirty
or five and thirty thousand men hovered about two German miles from the Town
near Hanschabets, expecting all opportunities to relieve it.

But the Duke not willing to be pestered with so troublesome a neighbor and
the toil of continual skirmishes, resolved to dissipate the main Body from
whence these petty Obstacles of his greater Enterprises had life and Motion. To
this purpose about the 21 or 22 of July, after he had left all his Infantry and
what Horse was necessary to continue the Siege, with the rest of the Cavalry
and a thousand Foot commanded by the Count of Aversperagh, together with
fifteen hundred Hussars under the conduct of Count Esterhasi, Governor of
Raab, he marched all night to encounter the main Body of the Enemy, who though
very well entrenched, so soon as they saw the Imperialists, came out of their
Camp about twenty thousand strong: The Duke of Lorrain divided his Army into
two Battalias; the two Wings being each composed of thirty Squadrons of
Cuirassiers, and ten of Dragoons, and the Foot being placed in ten small Bodies
between the intervals of the Horse. The Turks had placed 2 or 3000 Janissaries
upon the descent of the Hill, and six thousand Horse at the foot of the Hill
toward the right Wing of the Imperialists, where were posted a thousand
Hungarians, and made several movements, which plainly demonstrated their design
of attaching their Adversaries in the Flanks, which while the other labored to
prevent, the fight began, wherein the Turks maintained a sharp dispute for the
time; and making use of policy as well as strength drove a hundred Camels upon
the left Wing of the Christians, thinking to have put it into disorder, but the
stratagem failing, by the industry of 30 Dragoons which turned 'em quite
another way, the Turks recoyl'd, and were followed so close, that at length
being all in confusion, they betook themselves fairly to their Heels, and fled
up to the top of the Hill, where they routed their own reserve, while the
Victors in the pursuit became Masters of their whole Camp, as at the raising of
the Siege of Vienna, their Tents, their Baggage consisting of 1000 Camels and
500 Mules, their Artillery being eight pieces of Canon and all their wealth.
Four thousand were slain upon the place, among which were a thousand
Janissaries, beside what were killed and wounded in the pursuit by the Poles and
Hungarians, who was ordered to continue the chase. The great Standard of
Mahomet was taken, which the Sultan usually gives to the grand Vizier, when he
takes upon him the general command of the Army, and the Pavillion of the
Turkish Officer, who is known by the Title of Serasquier; and was chief
Commander of the Army in the absence of the Vizier.

At the same time Count Lesly, lying before Berzeche, or Virovitza a Town about
two Miles distant from the Dravus, had intelligence given him that the Turks
were drawing together all the force they could make between the Savus and the
Dravus to succor the place. More particularly that the Bassa of Marotz, who
had the guard of the Bridge of Esseck, was advanced with two thousand five
hundred Turks as far as Flatina in order to his joining with the Beg of Zerneg
and Governor of Gradischia, who for that purpose were upon their march with
1400 men more, thereupon he sent away four thousand Croats under the Command of
Count Trautmansdorffe to hinder the Enemies conjunction; who marching all night
about seven the next morning set upon the Bassa in his Camp near Flatina; where
after a short resistance the Turks were forced from their Post, with the lost
of many men killed and taken Prisoners; the rest being pursued as far Tarbina.

But then the Victors returning from the pursuit, met with a party Commanded by
the Beg of Zarney, who knew nothing of the defeat of the Bassa of Marotz, with
whom they were going to join, and by that means unluckily dropped into the mouth
of a victorious Enemy. For the Christians fleshed with their late success, fell
upon the half surpised Infidels with that vigorous Resolution, that they slew
near five hundred upon the place, took many more Prisoners with a considerable
quantity of Ammunition and Provision intended for the Releif of the Garrison.
So that the loss of the Turks in both these Actions was reckoned to be no less
than a 1000 of the choicest men of these two Bodies slain outright, while
Trautmansdorffe thus doubly Crowned with fresh Laurels returned with Plunder
and Prisoners to the Leaguer before Vicovitza.

The next day being the twentieth of July Count Lesley commanded the Prisoners
that had been taken, to be placed at the head of his Trenches, and among all
the rest he ordered one to acquaint the besieged with the defeat of the Body
from whence they expected their Relief; to which although the Garrison returned
no Answer; yet did the General grant 'em till five in the Evening to consider
of certain Propositions for the surrender of the Place: and for two hours there
was a Cessation from all Acts of Hostillity.

But then the same Evening the Besieged began to fire again: Thereupon the
General gave order for the filling up of the Mote and the Morass, and for the
providing ten Thousand Faggots for that purpose. Which being done and all
things now ready for an assault; the Besieged began to reflect upon the danger
they were in, and unwilling to venture the last extremity, in season desired a
Parley, and presently after the Hostages were exchanged, though the Articles
were not agreed upon till the next day. But then all things being concluded,
Virovitza was surrenderd to Lesley, and six Hundred Men with the like number of
Women and Children marched out of the Town, leaving behind 'em sixteen Pieces
of Cannon, having all upon 'em the Arms of the Emperors Maximillian and
Ferdinand.

The Garrison according to the Articles of Capitulation was conveyed two Miles
from the City by a Guard of the Besiegers; but afterward meeting with a Party
of Croats, they were all or the most part stripped, plundered, and cut in
pieces together with the Women and Children.

Upon the taking of Virovitza, the Turks having abandoned Soppia, Fatina, and
Werazin, Count Lesley sat down before Bezowits, which not being able to hold
out made a timely Capitulation, and surrendered upon the same Articles that
Virovitza had done. By which means he had both leisure and opportunity to lay a
Bridge over the River Dravus, that so he might be in a condition to join the
Duke of Lorrain upon all occasions.

While thus Count Lesley secured the main Leaguer at a distance the
Imperialists took their several Posts about Buda; and though the lower Town had
no other defense then a single Wall, yet did the General think it convenient to
make formal Approaches to it, as well because of the great Garrison that was in
it, as because of the Communication which they had with the upper Town.

These Approaches therefore being finished, the Duke of Lorrain, caused an
Assault to be made upon the lower Town upon the nineteenth of July, wherein the
Imperialists behaved themselves with that Bravery that they made themselves
Masters of the Place, notwithstanding the great number of Janissaries that
defended it; of whom there were slain not fewer then a Thousand who had not
time to retire into the upper Town.

The next day the Duke caused an attack to be made upon the Fort of St. Gerard,
which the Enemy quitted together, with the Cannon that was in it. And now being
thus Master of the lower Town and the Fort, he caused his men to take two Posts
more; one next the great Tower in the way to Gran, the other near the Court in
that joined the Town and the Castle.

On the other side the Besieged were not idle, but finding themselves very much
annoyed by the Christians from St. Gerrards Hill, upon the first of August,
made a thundering Salley, toward the close of the Evening, which began a sharp
and fierce encounter between them and the Christians; in which the besieged
suffered a repulse; wherein the slaughter of the Enemy could not choose but be
very considerable as being repelled, when it cost the lives of two hundred of
the victorious Besiegers; among whom the Signior Cavallieri Lieutenant Colonel
of the Regiment of Grana and the Marquess Bagni were slain; the Count of
Sherfenberg, Major General, and the Marquess de Parella, with several other
Officers wounded.

The day following the Enemy made another Salley, but retired presently again;
perceiving perhaps those disadvantages in the day; on which they had run
headlong the night before in the dark.

Whatever were the reason of their sudden retreat, certain it is, that the
Turks got nothing by either Salley, but broken pates; besides the Christians
gained a work which the Besiegers had cast up, to guard a breach which the
Besiegers had made in the Wall of the Town; and for some days continued their
Batteries with their Bombs and Cannon with so much vigor, that they made
several other breaches, and proceeded so succesfully in their Mines, that the
Duke of Lorrain minding to give a general assault, sent an Officer with two
Turkish Prisoners beforehand, to summon the Governor Cara Mahomet to
surrender the Town; and to let him know that if he suffered things to run to
the last extremity, he must not expect any Quarter: Which was answered with no
less inhumanity then haughtiness by the Barbarian: For after he had caused the
heads of forty Christian slaves to be cut off in his own and the presence of
the Messenger, he bid him tell his General he would neither give nor expect
Quarter.

However he did not long enjoy the satisfaction of his cruelties, nor his
insulting replies. For upon the sifth of August the haughty Turk received his
death wound by a shot from the Camp as he was viewing one of the Christian
Batteries; of which he died within two or three days after. He was said to be
one of the best Officers the Turks had; as being one who had served in the
Sieges of Candia, Caminiec, and Vienna, in the battle of Choczin against the
Poles, and in all the most memorable Occasions of his time. To whom immediately
succeeded Cheitan Bassa, no less unfortunate, as being killed with a Cannon
shot before he was hardly warm in his Government; so that the closest Aga of
the Janissaries, to prevent a vacuum in authority, was forced to take upon him
the defense of the place.

In the mean time the Christians, though continually vexed with warm and frequent
Alarums and Salleys, failed not to make their approaches with a most obstinate
resolution. To which purpose upon the eighth of August, the Christians after
they had beaten back a thousand of the Turks who Salli'd out early in the
morning, with some loss to themselves, but a greater slaughter of the Enemy.
They also sprung a mine the same day in a place near one of the principal
Batteries of the Besieged; which though it took not the intended effect, yet were
the Besiegers thereby nothing discouraged in their laborious Progress, but
having finished the rest of their Mines within some few days after sprung 'em
together, which so well succeeded that they made a very large Breach in the
Wall. However the Duke of Lorrain did not think it fit to give a general
Assault; for that he found the besieged had made a large retrenchment behind
the Wall of the Town, and understood moreover, that the Garrison was very
numerous.

But there was a more powerful reason for the Duke of Lorrain to defer a
general Assault, which was his small number of Infantry reduced by continual
Salleys and hard labor to little more then 8000 fighting men; and those
disheartened by the loss of several of the young German Nobility, and their
inspiring Leaders. And therefore he thought it more proper to stay for the
Bavarian succors that were daily expected.

While they therefore are marching to his relief, it may not be amiss to give a
brief account of what happened in other parts in reference to the Diversions
which the Christians made in other places; which no question were no small
hindrance to the relief of the Turks in Buda. Among which we are not to imagine
that of the Venetians to be the least. Who with their own and several Galleys
of Malta, the Pope and Duke of Tuscany, consisting in all of forty six Galleys,
six Galleasses, thirty three Men of War, and several other smaller Vessels
manned with twenty four thousand foot, and four hundred mounted Cavalry, under
the Command of Morosini, as Captain General, put forth to Sea about the
nineteenth of July from Corfit, and the next day arrived before Sancta Maura.

This Sancta Maura is an Island joining almost to the Continent, seated in the
Golf of Larta, otherwise Prevesa, famous for the victory of Augustus against
Marc Antony; and wrested from the Venetians by Mahomet the second; since which
time it has continued under the subjection of the Turk, to the great annoyance
of the Venetians by Pyracie; being well peopled and about seventy Miles in
Circuit. The main Fortress is seated at the mouth of the Gulf, on a little neck
of Land, very strong and well fortified, having the Sea on the one side and a
great Morass on the other.

On the 21th. of July the light Vessels entered the Port of Damata, on the
right side of the Island, sufficiently capacious to receive a large Fleet, and
secured by a Mole. Signior Monetta landed first with a hundred and fifty men;
and after him General Strasoldo with two Venetian Regiments, the Popes and the
Infantry of Malta; at what time the rest of the Venetian forces and those of
the Duke of Tuscany landed on the West side.

The next day the General sent a Summons to those in the Fort to surrender it:
To which the Governor returned for answer, That the Fortress belonged to the
Grand Signior, who had given him charge of it, and that according to his duty
he would defend it to the last.

Thereupon a party of Horse was sent toward the Suburbs of the Town on the East
side which they found quitted by the Enemy.

The 23th. of July the Ships began their batteries from the Sea, but with small
success by reason of the high Winds.

The next day the whole Fleet was so disposed, as to do more signal execution
with their Canon; and some of the Galeasses roaring within Musket shot, threw a
great many Bombs and Fireballs into the Place, which did great execution, yet
not so but that the Galleas commanded by General Carnaro received two dangerous
shot from the enemies Cannon, the General himself being wounded with a
splinter; besides that the Galley belonging to Signior Quirini, which rowed the
Galleass, was very much disabl'd.

The 25th. a Battery was finished of 10 pieces of Cannon carrying Balls of
fifty pound weight, and upon the 27th. another somewhat nearer the Castle, both
on the East side of it.

The day following the Christians posted themselves in the Suburbs and raised
another battery on the West side.

Two days after a large breach was made in the Wall; at what time the Turks
Sallied out, but being discovered were soon beaten back. Thus disappointed,
they labored to fill up the breaches with bags of Straw and packs of Wool; but
that labor being easily frustrated by the Cannon from the batteries, the
Christians advanced their Trenches to the Counterscarp, and made a descent into
the Mote.

After that upon the fourth of August they made two descents more into the
Mote, their Cannons having made another wide breach and dismounted all the
Cannon of the Fort on that side.

Upon the sixth all things being prepared for a vigorous assault; the General
sent a second Summons to let the besieged understand, That if they refused the
second offer of his Clemency, they were to expect but the utmost severity.
Thereupon, the next morning three Commissioners were sent out, who being
brought before the General, cast themselves upon the ground and desired they
might be admitted to composition. Which being granted, the Conditions were soon
accepted, that the Garrison should march away with their Arms and what they
could carry about 'em: and the Christians took possession of the Fortress:
wherein they found fourscore Pieces of Brass Cannon, of which twenty had the
Arms of St. Mark upon 'em, together with a great quantity of Ammunition and
Provision.

There marched out of the Garrison about 600 men and the like number of women
and Children who were conveyed to Prevesa; and by this means a great many
Christian slaves were released.

During the whole time of the Seige, which lasted about seventeen days, the
Christians lost 400 Men, the Turks 300.

While things thus prosperously succeed at Sancta Maura, the Seige of Buda
carried on with so much vigor, and the noise of the Bavarian Forces, ready to
join with the Besiegers, so Alarums Adrianople, that the Sirasquier Bassa
receives positive orders to relieve the Town or die in the Attempt. But General
Lesly lay so unluckily posted in his way, that he deemed it necessary to remove
so formidable an Enemy, before he could proceed any farther.

Lesley, having received advice of this, and that to accomplish his design, he
was decamped from Walpa re-inforc'd with several Bridges of Horse and Foot from
Bosnia and other places with a resolution to attack him, posted himself in an
advantageous place, between two Morasses, about half an hours march from the
Bridge which he had made over the Drove, at which time there came to his aid a
seasonable recruit of 800 Croatian Gentlemen, and a 1000 Soldiers from the
Province of Zethmar, which he placed before the two Morasses that covered the
wings of his Army.

No sooner had he secured himself, but the Enemy appeared in sight upon the
nineteenth of August, and the next day made a furious onset upon the Croats and
Zethmarians, thinking to force them from their Station. But they so rudely
entertained their Assailants, and were so bravely assisted by the Dragoons and
Musketeers that were sent to their relief, that the Turks were forced to
retreat with considerable loss, Nevertheless soon after they returned again
with a greater number, and renewed the encounter with such a redoubled
resolution, that the Croats were constrained to give ground, leaving three
Standards in the victors hands: which so highly enraged the Serasquier, that he
came on with his main Forces and fell upon two of Lesley's Posts on that side
of the Morass where the German Cavalry and Infantry were placed; who so stoutly
behaved themselves, that after an obstinate conflict for three hours together,
the Turks were forced to retire, notwithstanding the inequality of their
number: For that the Serasquier had no less then thirty thousand in his Army,
Lesley not above fourteen thousand to encounter him.

In this Action the Bassa lost five hundred of his best men; of the Christians
about two hundred were killed and wounded.

All this while great were the expectations on both sides at Buda; while the
besieged looked many a long look for the Serasquier, and the besiegers
impatiently attended the Baverian re-inforcement. And perhaps it might have
been worse for the Christians had not their cause born up their resolution
above their expectations. For about the beginning of September the Duke of
Lorrain himself, wearied with the toils of Wars, and watchful cares of an
industrious General, fell sick of a Fever which held him till past the middle
of the Month, so that he was forced to retire for a while to a place near the
Camp called the old Town. At the same time also, sickness forced the Duke of
Croy, and Commissary General Breiner to leave the Camp. Which distempers of the
General, and other great Officers though they had no fatal effect upon the
Army, yet it caused some abatement of their wanted successes. It Is true that
the Enemy was repulsed with loss in two Salleys which they made, the first upon
the eighth of September to their great damage, and a second the same Evening
with as ill success; for the Battalions of Souches, Beck and Newburgh coming
into the timely assistance of those that guarded the Trenches, the slaughter of
the Enemy happened to be very great; however they lost Lieutenant Colonel
Souches with several other officers and forty Soldiers. Nevertheless for want
of Foot, the besieged ruined the Works which the besiegers had raised to cut
off the communication between the Town and the River.

Before this also upon the first of September, the Turks made a desperate
Salley in the night, which before they had not done, the fury of which fell
upon the Dragoons who did not expect their coming, of whom they slew a hundred
and fifty with little loss on their side.

The next morning likewise they made a second Salley with Horse and Foot, but
the besiegers having timely notice of it, repelled the Enemy with a far greater
slaughter, and several Prisoners taken.

Equal or rather far better success had Colonel Heuster who being sent out
with a thousand Imperial Cuirassiers, and six hundred Hungarian Horse, and
understanding that a great Convoy, consisting of four hundred Wagons laden with
Provision, drawn every one by four Oxen under the guard of four thousand Turks,
had passed the Bridge of Esseck, and were marching for Alba Regalis, placed a
convenient Ambuscade in their way, which at the first discharge killed above
fifty of the Enemy and put the rest to flight: Yet were they not so totally
routed, but that they ralli'd again in hopes to recover the Wagons which they
had so cowardly abandoned and fell upon his rear. But it was then too late, for
they that were scared before not being able to endure a second charge were soon
constrained to shift for their lives, while Heuster returned to the Leaguer
with all his booty, which proved a seasonable supply for the Army.

These were the most remarkable passages that happened before the Conjunction
of the Bavarian Forces: which about the middle of September was happily
notifi'd to most parts of Europe; for upon the twenty eighth of August the
Elector of Bavaria arrived at Vienna by water, where he was first complemented
by the Deputies of the Austrian Nobility, and then met by the Emperor himself,
who carried him in his Coach to the Palace, being saluted all the way by a
treble discharge of all the great Guns of the City.

On the third of September he departed from Vienna, and the next day arrived at
Presburgh with his Infantry and train of Artillery.

The 5th. he parted from thence for Gran, where after he had randevouz'd all
his Horse and Foot he marched in a body to Buda, and arrived there about the 9
or 10th, of the same Month. On which day was observed at Vienna the Anniversary
of the Cities deliverance by the victorious Arms of the Emperor, the King of
Poland, and those other Princes of the Empire. There was a general Procession
of all the Clergy as well Secular as Regular; at which the Emperor assisted on
Foot with the Nobility, and the Officers of all the Sovereign Courts in their
Robes; which being once over, all the Guns about the Town were thrice
discharged.

So soon as the Elector arrived at the Leaguer with all his Forces, the
Imperial Army upon a Muster appeared to be 20000 Horse and 10000 Foot, besides
the Bavarian Succors, which were about sixteen thousand, and the recruits
daily expected from Suabia and Bohemiah.

And now the Duke of Lorrain, as if the recruit of his Army had recruited his
health, pursued the chase of victory with his accustomed vigor. His Soldiers
also labored in their approaches with renewed courage, while the Bavarians
undertook that part of the Town that lay next the water, from whence they soon
deprived the besieged of enjoying their late Conveniences. For now upon a
general Muster, the whole Army appeared to consist of twenty thousand Horse,
and about six and twenty thousand Foot, reckoning in the Bavarian succors
which together with the recruits expected out of Suabia and other Parts were
deemed sufficient to fight the Serasquier and maintain the Seige at the same
time. For now the intelligence grew hotter then before, that the Bassa had
received positive orders to raise the Seige at the hazard of his life.

Of this Lesley gave speedy notice both to the Emperor at Vienna and to the
Camp before Buda. Who keeping his Post at the Bridge of Turanowath, with a
reinforcement of three thousand Croatians, could not be forced from his
Morasses, but still watched the motion of the Enemy. The Serasquier therefore
resolved to leave him, and march directly for the relief of the distressed
Town. However he could not decamp so secretly, but that the Country People gave
Lesley intelligence of his march; who tho he thought it not convenient to stir
from his Post, yet sent a Party after him, and finding that he was upon his
march toward the Bridge of Esseck, dispatched away his Adjutant General Miglio
to give notice of his design. But notwithstanding the severity of his received
orders, and that he was advanced some part of his way, when he understood that
the Bavarian succors were arrived, and that the convoy sent to Alba Regalis
was surpised and taken by the Imperialists, he put a stop to his march, and as
it was reported, was resolved to have repassed the Bridge of Esseck, as one that
dispair'd to accomplish the relief of the Town. And it is thought he would have
made no farther attempt, had not fresh Commands and repeated Menacies
constrained him to proceed.

In the mean time the Bavarians briskly carried on their two new attacks toward
the Watergate, which they were informed by a Gunner taken Prisoner since the
War, and escaped a little before was the weakest side of the Town, and where in
a short time they had completed three Batteries, while the Imperialists with
no less industry carried on the other attaques, in order to a general Assault.
And so great were their hopes to carry the Town by storm, that upon the 22d. of
September, the Duke of Bavaria sent a Corporal with a Turkish Prisoner into the
Town with Letters to the Bassa in Command, to let him know that his Highness
gave him an Account of his arrival before the Town, from whence he was resolved
not to stir till he had reduced the place under the obedience of the Emperor;
and withal admonishing him not to let things come to extremity. But such was
the resolution of the Bassa, that after he had assembled the Principal Officers
of the Garrison, he sent for the Corporal, and when he had read the Letters in
their hearing, addressing himself to the Christian Officers, made answer, That
he thanked his Highness for the Account he gave him; that he had beheld the
Arrival of his Forces; and that he understood very well the Rules and
extremities of War, as having been a Soldier for many years; however that he
would not surrender the place so long as he had men and Ammunition to defend
it, and provisions to subsist: Which said, he gave the Corporal twelve Ducats
and sent him back to the Elector.

But as this was no more then was expected, so both Imperialists and Bavarians
omitted nothing either of Art or Industry to carry on their approaches, wherein
the Bavarians were so successful, that with a mine which they sprung they made
a considerable breach in the Wall, notwithstanding the frequent Sallies of the
Turks and the great number of Granado's and Artificial Fires which they flung
into the Trenches of the Christians; which did very little or no harm, in
regard that the besiegers secured themselves with Gabions and packs of Wool.

Whilst thus the one side labored in assurance of being speedy Masters of the
place, and the other as stoutly defended the Town in hopes of releif, the
Imperial Camp was warmly alarmed with the approach of the Serasquier; who was
said to be advanced with a Body of five and twenty Thousand Horse without
Cannon or Infantry as far as Alba Regalis formerly the place of the Coronation
and enterment of the Hungarian Kings, two and forty Miles distant from Buda.

Thereupon the Duke of Lorrain leaving the Elector to manage the Seige, set
forward upon the 16th. of September with a Body of twenty Thousand Horse and
Dragoons to meet and fight him by the way. But when both sides came in view of
each other, the Duke found the Bassa so strongly entrenched with the River
Sarwitz before him that he did not think fit to attaque him at so much
disadvantage. The wary Turk also kept close within his Trenches, unwilling to
hazard a battle so far from the Place which he was to relieve. So that after a
short stay the Duke of Lorrain thought it more convenient to return to the
Seige, leaving the Prince of Baden with ten thousand Horse to observe the
Enemies motion; upon his return to the Leaguer, a Council of War was called
where it was resolved by the Imperialists to expect the Enemy in their Camp; to
which purpose the Elector and Duke attended by all the General Officers visited
all the Quarters and Lines of Circumvallation, as well as the Trenches and
Posts toward the Town, and every where gave necessary Orders.

On the other side, the Serasquier observing the retreat of the Duke came
boldly on, and upon the 22th. of September, attacked the Christian Camp with
great fury in two places, endeavoring to break in upon the Imperialists and to
force his way to the Town; but he met with so stout and undaunted a resistance,
that after a sharp and obstinate fight for several hours, wherein many were
slain on both sides he was forced to retire in much disorder, and to leave two
of his Standards behind him. In the mean time, the besieged made a desperate
Salley with fifteen Hundred men as well Horse as Foot, and fell upon the Guards
of the Trenches with so much resolution, that the Besiegers were forced to give
ground; upon which the encouraged Turks advanced, ruined several of the
Besiegers Works, and one of their principal Batteries, nailing the Cannon that
was mounted upon it, with the loss of three hundred of the Christians: but then
certain Squadrons of Horse speeding to their assistance, the Turks were again
beaten back to the very Gates of the Town, with the slaughter of above two
Hundred men.

The Serasquier also retreated that Night about two Miles from the Leaguer; but
the next morning he made another attempt, though not with that Vigor as the
day before; and seemed by the event to be more out of design then that he
thought to do any good. For while the Imperialists were engaged, five Hundred
Janissaries wading through a Morass, which was looked upon to be impassable up to
the Arms in Water and Mud, got into the Town; yet not with that good luck but
that they left some of their Company sticking in the Mire, who became the Sport
of the Musketeers.

These two attacks seconded by a Salley, and three brave Repulses cost the
lives of many valiant Men. However the Serasquier, hoping he had done enough to
save his Neck by putting five hundred men into the Town, was glad he was got
off so, making all the have he could from his unwelcome entertainment, being
pursued by the Duke of Lorrain till he had secured himself under the Guns of
Alba Regalis.

Thus September drew toward an end; a Month no less remarkable for other
notable atcheivements performed against the Turks to their considerable
damage, which as they very much weakened the Ottoman force, so they greatly
impeded the Releif of Buda.

For on the one side the Morlakes in Dalmatia toward the beginning of this
Month, made an incursion into the Turkish Territories, not far from Clissa, and
after they had burnt several Villages, brought away a considerable number of
Prisoners. In their return they met with eight Hundred Turkish Horse marching
toward Clissa, which they utterly defeated, killing two Hundred upon the Place,
and taking all their Baggage. Nor was this all; for being reinforced with a
recruit of six Thousand men, they posted themselves near Clissa in order to
their Conjunction with General Mocenigo, who was resolved to attack that place,
being a neat City with a strong fortified Castle.

Much about the same time another Party of Morlakes and Heydukes, being joined
with the Banditi sent by the Viceroy of Naples to serve the Venctian in
Dalmatia, defeated another considerable Body of Turks that were drawn together
in the vicinity of Spatetro to hinder their incursions, slew between two and
three hundred upon the Place, took several Prisoners, and brought away a
considerable Booty of seven hundred Head of Cattle.

At a farther distance, the King of Poland toward the latter end of August
invested the strong Castle of Jaslowits, not far from Caminiec, and summoned
the Governor to surrender, who at first according to the haughty manner of the
Turks, returned q fierce answer. That he had Powder and Bullet sufficient to
defend the Place, and would therefore maintain it to the last extremity; but no
sooner did the Polish Batteries begin to play, and the Bombs and Caresses to
fly about his Ears, but sudden Terror seized the besieged in such a manner,
that they desired a Parley, which soon ended in a Composition; in pursuance of
which, the Turks marched out the third day after the Seige, to the number of
500 fighting men: at what time several of the Turkish Officers besought the
King for his Protection, and that they might have liberty to remain within the
Polish Territories, being unwilling to return home for fear of being questioned
at their return for their Cowardice.

Which success was attended by another of no less importance; for much about
the same time, the Treasurer of the Crown of Poland wrested a complete Victory
from the Waywod of Walachia, to the destruction not only of his own Forces, but
the Turkish Auxiliaries that were joined with him, who together with their
lives lost also their Camp and all their Baggage. Successes so much the more
considerable, because they kept the Turks upon their Guard in those Parts from
whence the Serasquier expected his chiefest Reinforcements.

In the Upper Hungary General Schultz, who commanded the Emperor's Forces in
those Parts, having notice that Count Tekeley had put an 150 Men with two
Pieces of Canon into Zeben, a small Place bordering upon the Mountains not far
from Esperies, hastened thither, took the Place, and put all the Garrison to
the Sword, in revenge of what Tekeley had done before, upon his taking a small
Garrison from the Imperialists.

Zeben thus recovered, General Schultz sent several spies into Count Tekeley's
Army; by whom being duly informed of the number of his Men, and the Situation
of his Camp he resolved to give him a visit. Accordingly, leaving the lumber of
his Baggage at Zeben, upon the seventeenth of September about five in the
Evening he advanced with all his Cavalry and part of his Infantry, which the
Horsemen carried behind 'em. About three in the morning, being come near the
Enemies Camp, he put his Men into Order, and fell so suddenly upon the
Rebels, that they had no time to put themselves into a Posture of defense. All
they could do in so great a confusion was to think how to save themselves; so
that some flying one way; some another, the Imperialists were soon Masters of
the Enemies Camp, all their Artillery, consisting of five Pieces of Cannon; all
their Ammunition, Tents and Baggage, even to the very Coach and Standard of
Tekeley. He himself was in his Bed, and having hardly time to put on his
Clothes, fled away with only two or three persons in his Company. In his Tent
were found his Sable, his Papers, his wearing Apparel, his Plate and Money.

It is certainly reported that above four thousand were slain or drowned in the
Rivers of Tarza and Secso, which they endeavored to pass in their flight,
being closely pursued all the way by the Imperial Cavalry. Fourteen Standards
and other Colors were afterward sent and presented to the Emperor as the
Trophies of this Victory.

In pursuance of his good Fortune, the Victorious General upon the 24th. of
September sat down before Barfeodt, a Town well fortified with a strong Wall
with several Towers and Redoubts, and a deep Mote, wherein was also a Garrison
consisting of between three or four Hundred men, besides Inhabitants that bore
Arms. Who having notice of the General's March, made all the Preparation they
could for a stout resistance, uncovering their Houses to prevent their being
fired by the Bombs and Fireworks of the Assailants, removing their Goods into
Vaults and Cellars: and then casting up several Works within the Town.

So soon as the General had posted his men, he caused a large Battery to be
raised, under the shelter of which five or six Hundred chosen men commanded by
Colonel Veterani advanced to the Mote and making a descent, lodged themselves
with their Ladders under the Wall. Which so dismayed the Inhabitants, that they
presently dispatched out Commissioners to capitulate; who being sent back for
the extravagancy of their demands, Veterani in the interim made the Inhabitants
sensible how he was Posted under the Wall, and withal told 'em that he had
prepared such a Mine, which would not only blow up the Wall but a good part of
the Town. Which so terrifyed the credulous Hungarians, that they quickly
condescended to meaner Articles, desiring only the preservation of their
Ancient Privileges, as well in Civil as Ecclesiastical Matters. The Soldiers
were to March out with only their Arms; and what they could carry about 'em,
with liberty to such as would, to be entertained in the Emperors Service.
Which Conditions being agreed to, the Garrison marched out, and General Schultz
took possession of the Town.

From hence he marched to the Castle of Muscowitz, which he immediately
Summoned; but the Governor relying upon the strength of the Place, and the
number of the Garrison consisting of 400 Men, besides a great many Martial
Peasants, instead of returning an Answer, hung out a red Flag. Upon which the
General forthwith began to raise his Batteries and make his Approaches, at the
same time throwing into the Town a great number of Granado's and Bombs; by
which means in a short time he made a descent into the Mote. So that the
Garrison apprehensive of the danger of a storm from those that proceeded with
such a swift and vigorous Resolution, after a Seige of fix days surrendered upon
Condition.

During this Seige, Captain Molner one of Schultz's Officers meeting with a
Party of 300 Rebels, under the Command of Subeida, Count Teckeley's great
favorite, who were going to put themselves into the Castle of Maskowitz,
totally routed their whole Body, took Subeida and his Wife Prisoners; and
besides other good Booty forty Thousand Crowns in ready Money.

Nor was the Venetian Fleet less active in the Archipelago; For on the
seventeenth, of September they made a descent near to Dragomasto, anciently a
City of Acarnania called Oeniade, seated at the mouth of the River Achelous; so
famous among the Fables of the Pozes. Where they were no sooner landed but they
were joined by two Thousand and five Hundred of the Greeks, desirous of their
ancient Liberty; and thus embodied marched 50 Miles up into the Country, wasted
the whole Province of Acurnania, burnt two great Towns, Vragosi, and Zapaachi,
together with a great many small Villages; defeated the Sangiac of the
Province, who endeavored, with what Forces he could get together, to make
opposition against 'em, and at length, with a great Booty and many Prisoners,
returned to their Fleet.

But now to return again to the City of Buda, the success of which Leaguer all
Europe listened after with attentive Ears, we find the Serasquier Bassa, after
an attempt to relieve the Town, twice repulsed toward the beginning of October;
and then when he found himself disappointed, retiring back again in hasty
disorder with the Duke of Lorrain and twenty Thousand Horse at his heels, not
daring to make head, or look back till he had posted himself under the Cannon
of Alba Regalis.

In the mean time the Elector no less eager in the pursuit of Honor toiled in
preparing all things ready for a general Assault, raising Batteries, advancing
his approaches, and opening Mines, in a mon ent to demolish the labor of many
years. While the perverse and half starved Enemy, as if they had only fed upon
the hopes of Releif, as restlesly labored with continual Salleys to disturb
the Progress of his indefatigable Endeavors. This was the Pains and Travel of
this Month which exercised both Parties.

Upon the Second of November they made a Salley with three Hundred Men, but
were beaten back again by the Bavarians with the loss of seventy of their
Number, who were slain upon the Place.

The next day they appeared again with between three and four Hundred Horse:
but perceiving that the Bavarians were drawn up in a Posture ready to receive
'em, they presently retreated back.

The very same day they made another Salley on that side next to old Buda,
where the German's guarded the Trenches; but there they were so warmly
welcomed, that they were glad to retreat in great disorder leaving twelve of
their number Prisoners, besides what were slain in the skirmish. These
Prisoners, upon their Examination, affirmed that the Janissaries who got into
the Town a little before, brought no Provisions along with 'em; of which
however there was then at that time so great want, that a pound of Horseflesh
was sold for nine Pence.

On the Fourth of November the Bavarians stormed the Tower of the Castle which
looks toward the Water, by others called the Great Tower; but were not able to
make themselves Masters of it, though they contended for it several hours
together with great slaughter on both sides: However afterward, they made a
shift with a Battery of six Pieces of Cannon to beat down all the Towers of the
Castle about the Turks Ears, and to lodge themselves very near the Castle it
self: so that now all the public Intelligence in this Part of the World
sounded loud to a General Assault, and the fatal Determination of so long and
so bloody a dispute.

And there is no question to be made, but that never any Besiegers labored
with more indefatigable pains; with such an obstinacy, that neither inundation
of Water; nor unseasonable Weather could stop the Career of their Travel,
beyond all the Roman Industry before Jerusalem: But when the day was appointed,
the Duke of Lorrain relapsed to such a degree that the Margrave of Baden was
sent to Command the Army during his Indisposition; and more than that, not to
mention the Rainy weather alleged for another Cause, the Serasquier Bassa,
said to be repassed the Bridge of Esseck, so soon as the Duke had ceased his
pursuit, advances again and lodges himself within four Hungarian Miles of Buda.

It behooved him to use all his Wits to save his Neck: and therefore while he
lay there, he provided five Boats laden with Provision and Ammunition to be
sent up the River, and at the same time having given orders to the Bassa of
Agria to Alarm the Imperialists of P^st, resolved himself to advance near the
Leaguer; as if he intended to assail the Christian Camp, to the end that by the
favor of the Night and such a Diversion the supply might the more easily be
got into the Town. But the Duke of Lorrain, having notice of his design,
commanded Major General Dunevelt to pass the Danaw with a Body of Horse near
Vacia, which he did, directing his March toward Pest: So soon as the Turks
perceived the Imperial Troops, they retreated with all the haste they could. On
the other side Dunevelt advancing along by the River side, had the good Fortune
to meet with five Boats; which he took with ease, and put to the Sword all the
Turks that were in 'em. By which means the support intended for the Garrison
became a supply no less seasonable to the Besiegers.

But notwithstanding this Disappointment, and that the Besieged were said to be
reduced to four Thousand Men; they forgot not their wonted Custom of making
Sallies; first upon the thirteenth of November, at what time they were beaten
in again with little loss to the Besiegers: The next day they came forth again
and forced the Bavarians from their Works, but other Forces coming in to their
timely assistance the Christians regained their Posts, though with the loss of
two Hundred Men. The fifteenth day they made another Salley with six Hundred
Men, and prevailed so far, that they took away and carried into the Town the
very Deal Boards which the Besiegers made use of in working their Mines: Which
nevertheless was not so prejudicial as their Counter-mines which now began to
take Effect.

And certainly it was encouragement sufficient for the Besieged to do their
utmost to preserve themselves and annoy their Enemies; when they saw the
Serasquier Bassa with his numerous Troops o'r-spreading all the neighboring
Feilds; and watching all opportunities to send 'em fresh Relief: For the Bassa
was all this while posted within five Miles of the Town; so that the Imperial
Cavalry being hindered from forraging suffered very much; while the Besiegers
seemed in a manner besieged themselves.

But that which mainly incommoded the Christians was the unseasonable Weather;
which had not only drowned several of the Bavarian Trenches, but begot sundry
distempers as well among the Officers as Soldiers, lying wet and cold, which
had much impaired the Infantry, and much weakened the Cavalry; insomuch that
the Regiments of Savoy, Magni, and Heuster were reduced to Thirty and Forty Men.

Yet notwithstanding all the hardships which they suffered, the Imperialists
could not so soon resolve to go without the purchase of a Place which had cost
the expense of so much time and blood. And therefore perceiving that the
Serasquier emboldened with a Reinforcement of forty Thousand fresh Men, and
fourteen Pieces of Cannon, drew nearer and nearer, within two Miles of the
Camp, a Council was called, wherein they resolved to abide the Enemy in their
Trenches which were deep and well fortified.

On the other side the wary Turk did not think it convenient to make a general
Attacque upon the Enemies Camp, where he well knew he should meet with a
dangerous opposition. For upon his first approaches certain Detachments of the
Imperialists being sent out to encounter his foremost Troops; had given 'em such
proofs of their Courage, that the Bassa was forced to retire: Which the
Besieged impatient of his delays observing, and to ruin one of the Christian
Batteries which did very much annoy the Town, made a desperate Salley upon the
Bavarian Quarters, but were repulsed with considerable loss; at what time
Colonel Kreig who commanded in the Trenches, two Captains and a Lieutenant of
the same Regiment were slain.

On the 25th. the Besieged made another Salley wherein they ruined several of
the Besiegers Works and discovered their chief Mine. Nor was it possible to
prevent some successes of the Enemy, where so numerous an Army daily hovered so
near their Camp. Among the rest it was not the least, that the Bassa of Agria,
having forced the Entrenchments which the Imperialists had made on that side
next to Pest, and put to the Sword those few men that were left to guard 'em,
had conveyed about eight Boats with Men and Provisions into the Town; that
another strong Party of the Turks being sent out toward old Buda, had
surprised several of the Imperial Forragers, had taken 500 Horses and all the
Baggage of the Count de Schram; and that the Bavarians were forced to abandon
their Mines, being all filled with water.

On the 27th. of October the Serasquier advanv'd so near the Christian Camp
that he beat in their main Guard. But the Polish Horse commanded by Prince
Lubomirski not only gave a stop to their further Progress, but constrained 'em
to retire with some loss. Nevertheless the Besieged encouraged with their new
recruits of Men and Provision the same day made so desperate a Salley with 2000
Men, that they forced the Imperialists from their Trenches, and being conducted
by a Renegado who two days before had got into the Town, to their Principal
Mine, they took the Powder out of it, ruined all their Works on that side and
advanced to the Besiegers chief Battery; but the Forces that guarded the next
Post, hastening to their Releif; the Enemy was beaten into the Town again.

Thereupon at length in consideration of the Season, the ill Condition of the
Army, and for that their Principal Mines and Works were spoiled, both Generals
resolved, in pursuance of the Emperors Orders, to raise the Seige. To which
purpose all the sick and wounded men, to the number of 8000 being first sent
away with the Baggage and Camp Attendance, the great Guns were drawn off from
the Batteries; and, for the defense of the Army in their retreat, planted in
the Island of St. Andrew, where the whole Army; consisting of about 30000 men
passed the Danaw, the first of November over a Bridge of Boats; the Cavalry
facing the Enemy while the Foot marched off. Which was performed with that
wariness and exact Order; that they were neither attaqu'd by the Serasquier;
nor from the Town; so that they lost not so much as one map in the Retreat.

This was the unfortunate Issue of this Summers Seige of Buda, which might have
well deserved the Pen of another Homer to eternize the performances of those
great Personages; no less famous then his Achilles's or Patroclus's, whose
valor however could not prevent their being buried in their own Trenches. They
fought only for the honor of one part of Greece, these for the Good of all
Christendom, strenuously endeavoring to have recovered by their courage what
had been wrested from the Christians formerly; and all the while every Salley
and Repulse of the Enemy was a Theme for Heroic Invention: As for those that
survived, they continued their indefatigable endeavors to level the
Fortifications, not only of Art but even Nature it self, till Nature releiv'd
Nature with the Stoppings and Inundations of the Season; and Winter proved no
less favorable to the Turks, than the Summer had been to the Christians.

Yet is not this the first Seige of this Nature raised after the loss of men,
and the laborious toyls of the Besiegers frustrated. We read of the famous City
of Rhodes, that when the Walls were almost levelled with the Earth, and the
yawning Breaches gaped to let in the numerous Enemy, the whole Force of the
Ottoman Empire daily reinforced, continually recruited, was forced to retire
with shame and dishonor from the Ruins of their own Batteries.

But much more Fresh in memory is the late Seige of Vienna it self, a much
weaker Town then Buda, assailed and stormed on every side for several Months,
and yet the haughty Bassa that invested it, was at length constrained not to
rise end march fairly off, but to fly from his Leaguer and leave the whole
Plunder of his Camp to the Victor. It was not so here; for though the Besiegers
were inferior in number to those that came to the releif of the Besieged, yet
they maintained their Posts, drew off all their Artillery, sent away all their
wounded and sick People, all their Baggage, faced the Enemy and marched off
leisurely without disturbance or the loss so much as of one man.

It Is therefore true that the Turks themselves may have some reason to be glad;
nor are they to be blamed for being glad to find themselves in some measure
repaid for their greater and much more ignominious loss before Vienna, by
releiving so seasonably a Town which has preserved 'em the chiefest Trophy of
all their former Hungarian Conquests. But that there should be a sort of
Turkish Christians, that showed themselves so pensive as they did, when the
Town was near losing, and now share with the Turks in the Mirth of their
Triumph, cannot otherwise be thought than very strange. It is said of Solomon,
who first took Buda from the Hungarians, that with tears in his Eyes he
bewailed the slaughter which his Sword had made, and the untimely end to which
he had reduced the unfortunate Lodowic the Second; but these people are sorry
that the Christians were not all Buried under the Walls of Buda and because the
Turk could not do it in performance, please themselves with pursuing and
destroying the retreating Besiegers in their discourse and reports. But then
again when we consider that all this is for Count Tekelie's sake, upon whom
they look as the great Champion of Hungarian Liberty and Property, and Freedom
of Conscience, as they call it, it is not so much to be admired that their
Interests are so twisted with his, and that their simpathy extends so many
German Miles to condole or congratulate the losses or successes of the Turk his
Protector. But this it is, not to understand the depth of true Protestant
Interest; otherwise what greater wonder in the world then that Julius, the Head
of the Papists, should be condemned for calling in the Turks to his assistance;
when it shall be lawful at the same time for these sublimated Protestants to
repine at the successes of their follow Christians, and rejoice at the
prosperity of Infidels? But the Turks were so kind as to relieve the distressed
Pope besieged in Bologna, and now have raised the drooping Spirits of these
Protestant Mussel-men by the relief of Buda. 'Twas pity Count Tekelie, their
adored friend, was so shamefully surpised that their joy might have been
complete. However we have still this advantage over 'em, that they are glad the
Seige is raised; and we are much more glad, 'twas raised without the loss of
Men or Reputation. Which the Turks could not say, when chased and scattet'd
from Vienna.

FINIS.

