A short Account Of the SIEGE OF BANTAM: And its Surrender to the Rebels, who
were Assisted by the DUTCH, and their Fleet, in the East Indies. In a Letter
from an English Factor to a Merchant of LONDON.
SIR,
GReat was our Expectation upon the Success of our late Ambassador, Kaia
Nebbe, his Negotiation into England, of settling a Commerce with that Kingdom,
which as it is of all Nations in most esteem with, so is it most earnestly
desired by the Bantamites, who have a natural kindness for the English in these
Parts.

Whilst we were big with these Joys, a sudden and unexpected Storm happened,
which blasted all our hopes in an Instant, and unmercifully exposed us, not
only to the fury of a Domestic Enemy, but the Spoil and Rapine of a Foreign
Foe.

Sir, It would be but a needless trouble to tell you the true Correspondence,
and real Friendship that has been preserved between the English and the
Bantamites. These allowing them a Factory, and a Place of Residence for their
Consult within the Walls of the Town of Bantam, which is the Capital City of
Java, whereas all other Foreigners, as the Bengallians, Cusarats, Malayans,
Abyssins, Chinese, Portugals and Hollanders, are placed without the Town, nay,
the very Indians themselves, who come from the Borders of the Country, have
their places allotted them without the City, where they have their Markets for
their particular Commodities, the Grand Bazor, or Exchange, being in the East
part of the Town, wholly employed in the English Factory, and for stowing up the
Commodities they Trade in.

Since the last Massacre of the Dutch in this Nation, they have not dealt so
freely amongst us, but keep within their own Plantation at Batavia, which is
some 12 Leagues from Bantam.

The Portugals that deal at Bantam, live out of Town in the same Quarter with
the Chinese. They drive here a great Trade in Pepper, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace,
Sandal-wood, Cubebs, long Pepper, and other Commodities that are sent them from
Malacca; for the greater part of them are Factors, and Commissioners of the
Governor of Malacca, and the Archbishop of Goa.

The English, besides their liberty of Residing within the Town of Bantam, have
free Access through the whole Country of Java Major, which is a vast and
spacious Isle, for, from East to West it stretches 150 Leagues, or of Miles
450, and from North to South 90 Leagues, which is 270 Miles English.

The Dutch, who joined with the Rebels in this unnatural Incursion, to Invade
our City with the more ease, we being so unprovided of Ammunition, and all
other Conveniences, to make any considerable Resistance. In which they had
found much more Difficulty, and it is probable, we might have held out as yet,
had we received that Recruit of Arms and Ammuntion, as was every Day expected
by the Ambassador from England, who is not yet come.

And this (Sir) leads me to the Tragical part of my Letter, which must needs
create pity in you, when you consider in what Consternation this sudden change
has left us, not able to call our Lives or Fortunes our own, nor can we yet
tell whether we are Freeman or Slaves.

During the Absence of our Ambassador in England, a Match was proposed by the
King of Bantam, between his Eldest Son Zerombia Zebbe, and the Daughter of the
King of Mitram.

This was a Match well proposed, and had been Fortunate for the English, had it
taken its wished success, the King of Mitram being as it were Emperor of Java
Major.

The Young Prince going upon this Expedition, fell in Love, by the way, with
the King of Tubans Daughter, which, next to Bantam, is the chiefest Town in
Java.

The Prince having forgot all other Obligations, it was not long e're the
Marriage was unhappily Solemnized, though it was much inferior to what had been
formerly proposed. The King of Tubans Territories being but small, and he
himself a Tributary to the King of Bantam. Besides, the King of Tuban having
Four Wives, Six Sons, and Two Daughters, besides Natural-Children, and
Concubines innumerable; the Princess, which was the former Match proposed,
being sole Heiress to the Emperor.

This so Incensed the King of Bantam, that he Excludes his Son out of the
Kingdom, making his Younger Son, by a Second Wife, his Heir.

The Prince no less Incensed on the other hand, Marched with a small Army of
the Tubanites toward Batavia, desiring Aid of the Dutch, who were forward
enough to Assist him, as well for the old Grudg that continued between them,
and the Bantamites, as to Enlarge their Dominions upon any opportunity that
presents.

There being a Dutch Fleet at Batavia, they took Shipping, and lay before
Bantam, on the 23d of November, playing with their Great Canon upon the Town,
during which time the King made several proffers of Accommodation, but nothing
would be accepted.

At last all our Ammunition being spent, and our Walls Battered down, on the 2d
of December they Enterect the Town, Seizing upon the Bazor, and all places of
Factory and Store, Killing and Plundering all before them.

The King, with the chief Officers of the City, keeps his Army in the Field,
where by Daily Recruits which flock to him from all parts, he hopes, yet, in
some time, to Recover his former Losses.

The Hollanders have possessed themselves of the Port, and the Rebels of the
City. We are every Day Threatened to be turned out, and a Dutch Factory and
Consul Established in our place. All the hopes we have, is, of the Return of
the Ambassador, and the Success of the Kings Army, of which we hope to give
you a better Account by the next.

LONDON, Printed for John Smith, 1683.


