THE FORTUNATE FOOL.

Written in SPANISH BY Don ALONSO GERONIMO de SALAS BARBADILLO of MADRID.

Translated into ENGLISH BY PHILIP AIRS, Gent.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little
Britain, 1670.

To the most Hopeful and most Ingenious YOUNG GENTLEMAN, JOHN TURNOR Esquire SON
and HEIR of Sir EDMOND TURNOR Of Stoake in the County of Lincoln, Knight; One
of the Farmers of His Majesty's Customs.
Honored Sir,

THis Translation, to which I have been bold to fix your Name; From the first
Instant, that I was prevailed with to make it public, I had an Ambition to
present unto you; hoping it will not be unacceptable, in regard its quantity is
but small, and therefore cannot be any hinderance to your Studies, in which
already you have made a progress, beyond what could have been expected from
your years: Nor can I think it will be unpleasing in respect of its quality, it
being a piece of innocent Mirth, wherein my Author does with Horace, miscere
utile dulci. Illustrating his History with Moral and Philosophical Reflections;
and takes occasion, now and then, satyrically to inveigh against several ill
Customs, and Vices of the Age, carefully avoiding all profane and lascivious
Expressions (a crime too familiiar with our Modern Writers in this kind) But
that which I fear, may not so well relish, in this English Dress, with some, is
his peculiar method both in Style and Matter, which he observes, not only in
this Piece, but indeed, in the rest of his Works; which are in all Nineteen
Volumes, besides many excellent Plays; for which, he has merited, in the
esteem of his own Countrymen, a place in the first Rank of the Spanish
Virtuoso's.

Now, Sir, having given this account of the Work and Author, I might apologize
for the careless oversights committed in this rough Draught; but when I shall
have acquainted you that it was done ala volee only for my Divertisement, at
spare hours, and my practice in the Spanish Tongue, I hope it will in some
measure plead my excuse. As to the Faults of the Press, occasioned by my
absence from London during its Printing, I confess they are many and very
gross, amongst which, some of my own, I hope, may pass without distinction.

This, Sir, for your entertainment at your Times of Recreation, I have presumed
to dedicate to you, as a Testimony of the respect and Service which I owe, as
well to your Honored Father, and the Virtuous Lady your Mother, as to your
self, that I may at least acknowledge to the world, how much I stand obliged to
you; though I shall ever be unable to acquit my self any further, than by the
Desires and Passions I have ever to appear in the Quality of

Honored Sir, Your most obliged Humble Servant, Philip Airs.

THE AUTHOR TO THF FOOLISH and PRESUMPTUOUS READER.
IT is most certain, that upon the first View of the Title of this Discourse,
the Ignorant Reader will turn over the Leaf with all the carelesseness and
neglect imaginable, as who should say, what is all this to me? But he does not
consider that by over-acting this Carelesseness, he discovers himself more
concerned than he would be thought to be; so that I shall be supposed to have
thrown away so much Ink and pains to no purpose; but yet for all this, he may
by chance, at some time or other, look further into it (as many times it
happens) and in that case, I could wish he would reflect a little upon the
Obligation he has to me, for the care I have hestowed upon the Drawing of his
Picture, how short soever of the Original; for it would pose a wise man to
report all the Follies which a simple Wretch may be able to commit. He shall do
well therefore to supply and correct the Failings, which he shall find in the
Copy, by the Perfections of the Original. If he pretends to play the Critic, I
must look for many a sour face, some bitter and empty Apology and Reply,
Marginal Reflections in abundance, and other Impotencies of Vanity and Passion;
all which, will make most excellent matter for the Second Part of his History.
In the mean time I shall not envy them the Fruits of their own Weaknesses, that
take a greater Pleasure in Censuring the Lives and Actions of Others, than in
Mending their Own.

Licensed,

October. 21. 1669.

Roger L'Estrange.

THE FORTUNATE FOOL.
CHAP. I. Of the Visit which Don Leonardo and the Licenciate made to the Doctor
Cenudo.
TO the Mothers of the whole Race of Fools, Greeting; and your Attention, I be
seech you; if I may without vanity bespeak so great and so illustrious an
Audience. Bless your selves in your Issue; a Generation of People satisfied in
themselves (for such is the fruit of Ignorance) and whose posterity shall give
honor to their progenitors. Suffer your selves to be undeceived, for you will
find that in all Ages, he that enricheth, he that honors, he that raises a
Family, is a foolish Son; for Fortune befriendeth his Imperfections, and
flattereth his Miscarriages, to make boast of her force in the most unworthy.
And certainly you cannot be doubtful of this Truth your selves, that have so
much multiplied the number of the Ignorant. But we shall rather second our
opinion (then argue it) with a true History that succeeded in our times, and
therefore of the better relish.

I say then, That in our Age there was a certain Coxcomb, though not much
unlike a Philosopher, being so addicted to Books, that he rather seemed to be a
part than an Owner of them. He happened sometimes to keep company with a
Parasite, the Son of an Inhabitant of Madrid, his name Don Leonardo de Vargas;
and with an arrogant Andaluzer, a One that for merit, or in reward of some
great service, sues at Court for Honor or Preferment
Pretendient in the Court, called the Licenciate Campuzano; one that carried a
whole Lucifer in his head, and smoaked his Face with Brimstone to make himself
look pale; he let his Beard grow, affected severity, seldom laughed, contracted
his Brows, and nodding now and then his Head, and saying, It Is well; He says
somewhat; he passed for one of the wisest men in the World.

Their greatest resort was to Booksellers shops, particularly to one over
against San Felipe, where at that time used to meet a great number of Virtuosi.
Here then, one Afternoon, in Christmas Holydaies, met the two Friends Parasite
and Arrogant; who after they had entertained their Eyes with the Beauties that
passed the Call Mayor (or High Street) in their several Coaches; they took up
a discourse to entertain their tongues. Don Leonardo remembering to ask the
Licenciate for the Doctor Cenudo, a man supposed to be very well skilled in the
Critiscisms of Learning; he answered, That it was a great while since he was
stolen from that Concourse, and that he feared he was either out of Town or
sick: Truly, I should be sorry for that, replied Don Leonardo; for though the
Court be so abounding in all things of Pleasure, yet does it not afsord any
that can yield it me, so fully, as the seeing that in it there is one who can
supply it with laughter, I mean this Doctor; of whom it may be better said than
once of an The Emperor Titus.
Emperor it was, He was born for the Delight of Mankind. I am confident that
had this Man lived in the Athenian Republic, they would have maintained him
out of the Common Stock in the Pritaneum, as they did all those famous Men to
whom they acknowledged any Obligation. Is there any thing of so great
importance in a Commonwealth as Laughter? All the Cares of Life are directed
to this end. The Ambitious man loses his Sleep, the Covetous man his Judgment,
the Voluptuous man his Estate and Honor, only for this little Idol, for
Pleasure, whose greatest testimony is Laughter. What needed Epicurus to have
puzzled our Brains, to find out what was the greatest Felicity, knowing there
was Laughter in the World? Which though it should have no other advantage on
its side, then that no man whilst he was laughing and merry, ever committed a
fault that might deserve a frown, is sufficient to call it, The greatest Good
in our Sphere. What Virtue is not to be found in a merry man? At all times you
shall see him liberal, peaceable, courteous, grateful, good company, discreet,
and finally pleasant. Was there ever a melancholy man seen, who has not some
fault that occasioned his Melancholy? There is a Philosopher who would prove,
by natural Reason, that all filthy wickedness proceeds from Melancholy. I am
clearly of opinion, that if we had many of these Men in the World, there would
be but few Vices.

Say not so, replied the Licenciate very angry, I am sorry to hear that, from
so understanding a Person as you: Do you not consider that too much mirth
effeminates the Mind, and that it is unworthy a wise and prudent Man? What do
you call effeminating the Mind? said Don Leonardo. I have read that the
Lacedaemonians went to their Battles with Dances and merry Songs, wherewith
their Soldiers being first recreated, they afterward Charged in the Encounters
with more Gallantry. For you must know, Sir, that fear and sadness go together:
Did you ever hear of a Drunkard, that ran away from those Quarrels, which at
every instant his Wine provokes? It is the cheerfulness of that sweet liquor,
which animateth and strengthens them. Do we not use to say, when any person
is sad, that his heart is streightened; and then on the contrary, when he is
merry, that it is open and free.

Nay, Senon Don Leonardo, said the Licentiate, this is to engage us in
Philosophy, and is improper for this place; more at leisure we'll talk of this
elsewhere, for I promise you I have bestowed some pains upon this very point,
which you will be glad to see. On this manner did our Arrogant escape out of
the Streights; and Don Leonardo seeing himself put off without an Answer, Well
Sir, said he to him, if you will have a merry Christmas, come with me and let
us go visit the Doctor Cenudo, for I know his Lodging, and you will see the
pleasantest Man, that ever you saw in your Life. Let us go with all my heart,
said the Licenciate, for I already have some knowledge of him, as he also of
me, and I assure you, were it not for some singular opinions, the Doctor is an
acute ingenious man, and no ill speaker; but he affects the way of praising
over the left shoulder, as we say, I mean of speaking ill of most men, and
contradicting the well-advisedness of others.

There are of this sort of men, who are not at all pleased with an ingenious
conceit, unless it touches upon Heresy, or is not spoken in a language
patched up on purpose, like a Beggars cloak, but I leave them to themselves:
What I understand is, that they are not to be understood, for by those means
which they think to enlarge their fame, they shall suppress it, and their Works
shall dye with them; for wanting one that should read them with a gloss, they
shall want another that should hear them with patience.

Thus went Don Leonardo divertised, and with saying, Now that you perceive the
Thunder has ceased, you give a flash of Lightning, they closed up the
conversation, and came to the Doctor Cenudo's Lodging, where they knocked, and
inquired for him; a Boy that seemed the Doctors Page answered, My Master says,
he is not within. They laughed heartily at his simplicity, bidding, that he
should tell him, here was the Licentiate Campuzano, and Don Leonardo. The Lad
carried the Message, and before he opened the door, asked, Who the Licenciate
Campuzano was? At this the good Licenciate was ready to run distracted, and Don
Leonardo going about to answer, Do not tell him, said he, my Works will one day
make me known; and if till now I have not given many to the Press, it is, that
I have been detained from it by my modesty. This we strangers lose, for how
much soever we may have singed our Eyebrows at our Studies, none takes notice
of it, no not so much as of the smoke, so licencious is this Age: I much admire
that the Doctor questions who I am, since in more than one Conversation he
might have easily known it. Be not angry Sir, replied the waggish Boy, for it
is not my Master the Doctor that questions it, but I only, that have his order
to deny him to all such as are not of his humor and entertainment, nor does he
yet know that your Worships are here. That I easily believe, said the
Licenciate; and walking forwards, they passed through an Entry and an outward
Hall, well furnished with Chairs, Tables, Cabinets and Pictures; when the Page,
calling through the key hole of a door that was shut, said, There is no
opportunity of seeing my Master now, for he is busy at his Devotions; be
pleased to walk there a while, or return hither some other day, and I will tell
him that you came to do him this favor. Let us entertain our selves with the
many things that are here worthy of admiration, said the Licenciate, for I came
so desirous of seeing him, that I shall esteem the time utterly lost, which I
shall not spend in his Conversation.

Thus stayed they, delighting their Eyes on the various Objects, when Don
Leonardo fearing some whimsey should alter the Licenciates resolution, and
going toward the door to see if they might get in, observed that the key was
left on the outside, and seeing no body to hinder them, for the Page was gone
out a good while before, he opened it, and making a sign to the Licenciate,
they both went into a Room, curiously adorned with Books, Pictures, exquisite
Venice Glasses, Estremoz Pots, and many pleasant curiosities, both of Brass and
Pasteboard; scarce had they entered, when the door with a great bounce was shut
and locked. The Room was but dark, for although it was day time, the windows
were kept shut, and only a Lamp with three lights was burning in it.

At the noise of the door, the Doctor Cenudo (who till then sat musing with a
Book in his hand) started up: Sir, said the Licenciate, The common Salutation
of the Spani ards.
I Kiss your Hands. The Doctor knitting his Brows, in a harsh tone, without
answering to his Courtesy, said, What hoe, Vulgar, come forth. Scarcely had he
pronounced these words, when, without knowing from whence, they saw coming
toward them two men of a monstrous stature, clothed after the old Roman
manner, with their Arms and Legs girt about, their skin black and hairy,
crowned with certain wreathed Serpents, each of them bringing a handsome cudgel
in his hand, with which, showing an anger that appeared in various and deformed
gestures, they fell upon the poor Licenciate with so good a will, that they
took away quite and clean the curiosity he brought with him of seeing the
Doctor.

The Visiters were much affrighto see such a vision, but especially the
Licenciate, who trembled with all his joints, both of them muttered all the
Calendar over between their teeth; no body, till then, would have thought that
the Licenciate had known so much of the History of the Saints; Fear did there
make admirable show of his knowledge: He invoked with great earnestness St.
Anthony and St. Hierom, and all the Flos Sanctorum came from him in a direct
line. The Doctor supposing that he was sufficiently chastized, made a sign to
the Executioners, and in an instant they sank down in the very Chamber.

Whither have you brought me, Senor Don Leonardo? what a divelish place is
this? said the Licenciate: I did not think that this Madrid is called the Court
of Spain.
Court had been so near to Hell. I promise you Mr. Licenciate, said Don
Leonardo, I have also been deceived in this coming, for I did never think that
a Man so much a Christian as Mr. Doctor, had studied Witchcraft. Content your
selves, said the Doctor then, with a severe voice, Content your selves, and sit
you down, for there is much to be said to this purpose. Sir, said the
Licentiate, you may satifie us by writing if you please, for this is no
conversation for sitting. This he said drawing toward the door, and using
diligence to open it, but could not, for as I said that was fast locked: Here
the afflicted Licenciate was like to have died, but seeing he could not carry
it by words, in a place where even courtesies themselves were answered with
blows, he made (as they say) a virtue of necessity, and waxed calm: So all
three sitting down as though no such thing had passed, the Doctor then
proceeded;

I Gentlemen in my younger years, as the World knows, was a Comical Poet; I
made some Plays, which since being printed, were the wonder of Italy, Germany
and France; they were all of a lofty Style, Language, and Spirit, very Courtly
and replete with Novelties, very Pompous of verse, and fluent of Conceits: But
as the Vulgar advances not the flight of his discourse to so high raised
Spheres, and his Center is Ignorance; He began to Carp at the the Language as
strange, the Project as Outlandish, and the Verses as Foreign; Yet this
Contempt stopped not here, but proceeded to impudent hissings, and they were so
many and so strong as raised a Whirlewind in my Opinion, which drowned it in
profound despite, till this very day.

I remained at this accident, like the Covetous Merchant, who having passed to
the Indies, and afterward freight with Jewels of the greatest value, in his
return home, in sight of the Port, where he thought to satisfy the thirst of
his desires, by enjoying happily all his riches; gained more at the Expense of
Dangers, then in Exchange of Goods, the Wealthy Vessel is shipwrecked, striking
on a hidden Rock which lay lurking under the waves for his destruction, and
scattering his Diamonds, Plate, Cristals, and Pearls, amongst the waters, he
has nothing left him, more than the fright, and his life, which as yet he not
slighting, endeavors to save, trusting it to a Plank, and thinking that he
still carries riches to the Port in his undeceiveings.

Of these I served my self, and put silence to my Inclinations, but not to my
Anger; This, that will endure all my life with me, taught me vengance against
the unquiet and Barbarous Vulgar: From hence sprang the contradiction which I
steadfastly do act against all his affairs, there is not a word approved of, by
this beast, which I do not judge Heresy.

My own wit did not seem sufficient for so great an Enemy, but going up and
down tormented with this care, I understood that there was lately arrived at
this Court a famous Conjurer, brought by a certain powerful Nobleman, to
facilitate some Hydropick Ambitions: I had the fortune, to have at that time, a
friend that was his intimate acquaintance. This carried me to see him. He
acquainted with my design, favored my Intention; I told him it was to have
some familiar, who (in imitation of that Devil of Socrates's, which told him in
his ear, many of his fortunate Exployts, as Plato, Plutarch, and Apuleius
write) should furnish me with Reasons and manners whereby to contradict the
Vulgar, and their Extravagances. Gold, entreaties, and a certain conformity of
Disposition, made his Will courteous, in so much that he gave me a Ring wrought
with such Conjurations, and made under such an Influence of the Stars, that it
has virtue bound up in it, as that every time when I shall move it on this
first finger of my left hand, and shall put the Seal whereon is Engraven the
Image of Saturn outward, there shall come as many Devils as shall be necessary
to my purpose: these sometimes do appear in the form, which now they have
appeared in, at other times, without taking any vissible shape, they tell me in
my Ear, reasons and Arguments never thought of by the wit of Man, to contradict
the Opinions of the Foolish Vulgar. But it has nothing, that so much Merits my
thankfulness, as one virtue which I have made Experience of; and it is, that no
body has ever seen them till now, that keeps it not in a perpetual secrecy,
or if he publishes it, suffers not dreadful Torments by their hands.

You, Mr. Licentiate, came in now, with an Ignorance of the rash Vulgar, in
saying that you kissed my hands, what mean you by that? do you not perceive
that it is a folly? Sir, replied the Licentiate somewhat troubled, to kiss the
hand is a sign of obedience, it is to confess superiority. I grant you that,
said the Doctor, to kiss the hand is a sign of Vassallage or subjection, but
to say you kiss my hands, and not to kiss them, is a thing very different,
you may as well say in your salutation, God never give you health. Imitate the
ancient prudence, that saluted with a Salve, the same as God preserve you, and
understanding men use; But it being the first time, I will not be too strict:
You, Sir, will amend, at lest when you are with Ingenious People. This, said
the Licenciate, is a Courtesy so received amongst the Vulgar, that it would
seem a madness to separate our selves from it: So that, replied the Doctor,
with the Vulgars using it you think it sufficiently Authorized; take care
rather that you allege Plato, or Aristotle, for your Author. But now let us
leave this, and tell me, Gentleman, what it was that brought you to this poor
Cottage. Only to give you a Or to wish you a merry Christmas.
good Christmas, said the Licenciate; and at the Instant, the Doctor making
another frown, What, said he, is there yet more Vulgarity? He saw himself
raised up to the Top of the Room, in a kind of spotted cloud, by gray shaddows
amidst many confused flames, with a great deal of smoke. The affrighted
Licenciate had then no Courage left him, not so much as to recommend himself to
the Saints; But remained Pale and dismayed, not being able to fetch his Breath.

Don Leonardo, who saw his Companion so near the house top, that he rubbed the
Cobwebs from the Joyces with his head, thought that he himself was not secure
with his silence, therefore kneeled on both knees, lift up his hands, arched
his Eyebrows, fixed his Eyes on him, between respect and fear, and said, Mr.
Doctor, this Gentleman came hither in confidence of me, he is a most passionate
admirer of your Wisdom, and a Wit, worthy of a greater Estimation; he is a
stranger lately come to Town* and not acquainted with the Laws, which you have
ordained for men of parts: Be pleased for what he is, to pardon him some
mistakes, and to publish the Law before you execute the Penalty. His being a
stranger shall save him, said the Doctor, and in a Moment the whole Cloud was
dissolved, the Licenciate descending from that dignity, remained in the Chair
wherein he was, without Color or Pulses. A brave folly it is, said the Doctor,
to say, that you come to give me Christmas, as though it was not come two days
since: And you say, you come to give me a good one; how do you think to do it?
what Turkeys or Capons do you bring me, or what good news? do you know what
you say? Is it not a foolishness to say what you understand not? Mr. Doctor.,
for Gods sake let him alone said Don Leonardo unless you mean by strangling
him, to bring him out of his swound. Plato's knowledge cost him more, replied
the Doctor. It Is no matter, let him pass these straights, for that wise man
went through greater dangers, sailing through a great part of the Sea, and
travailing almost over the World for it.

By this the Licentiate was returned from his affright, and said, as if he had
spoke to himself: O how much do thou cost me, Virgin, daughter of Jupiter,
and mother of truth! Sacred Knowledge, how much do thou cost me! but who ever
reached the Gold without breaking through mountains of stone? who got to the
Indies without passing the Fears of the Sea, well employed dangers, happy
Solicitudes, that have facilitated me so great a Treasure of Truths. It is
sufficient that I am assured of what I have, as in a Dream, thought of
Zoroastes; It is sufficient that Magic is powerful for such Transformations;
that Devils walk amongst us Cheek by Joul, and we know them not; It is
sufficient that Madrid stands so near the Abyss that it breaths its fiery
breath thorough it. O the great Nobleness of the soul, that has the Infernal
Spirits at its command, at its command (I say) even although it be not
perfectly declared, but only by signs, for upon the very hint do these Devils
move, and in an instant take the shapes of Giants, to obey it!

Wise Doctor, believe not of my Wit, that it will conceive displeasure, at that
which meriteth thanks; I had some knowledge of thy Wisdom, yet but small, and
not comparable to the Experience, which thou have given me; If I before desired
to see thee as an Oracle; If I formerly applauded thee, only attent on thy
reputation, and to so short a reputation, what shall I do after having made
trial of thy Marvels? Such men as thou art do the vulgar despise? such
excellent persons, does he not adore? does he forget the use and Glory of
Statues in a time when thou live? What greater Testimony of his Ignorance, of
his Envy, and of his barbarousness? I likewise to be his mortal enemy do need
no other injuries then those, which against thy illustrious wit he has done,
since in it all illustrious Wits are injured: If not the stroke of this Injury,
yet at least, the Echo lights on all; For even as the Laurel which is given
to a well deserving man, equally Crowns all those that are so; so an injurious
reproach does equally affront them. I will not beg that thou should take me
into thy favor, either because I content my self, and esteem it for a high
Felicity to serve thee always without more Correspondency, or because it would
be a Contempt of thy wit, to require it not to be ungrateful.

I durst have sworn, said the Doctor, that Don Leonardo's friend, would imitate
him in Wit, friendship never grew betwixt unequals. I condemn my Choler, in not
having given you leave to speak, by which, without doubt, I might have known
you, at the very instant, and should have given you the Place which you merit
in my esteem.

Now the Tempest is over, said Don Leonardo, Pray Sir tell me how you Do?
Scarcely had he said this, when at one leap a terrible Monkey of a marvelous
greatness, put himself by his side, playing with his Tail, and moving with
strange Gestures, and bringing in his hand an Urinal, full of Urin; what do you
command me? Said Don Leonardo (with a handsome grace) since you know how
docible I am, that you may teach me, so much to my cost, a thing that, I fear,
will give me another eudgelling bout. This he said, and the Monkey still
persisting to put the Urinal before his eyes, and being very near them; The
poor Gentleman supposed that he would give it him to drink, and therefore was
determined not to reply, fearing a greater punishment; so took it to Obey, and
had already lifted it up to his mouth, saying it is a hard case that you should
use our patience so ill, we being your friends and such passionate ones too:
You might have jested more courteously, and deserved, in your very contempts of
us, much gratitude on our part: but these Jests are not fit to be put upon a
Rogue. You, Senor Don Leonardo, did you not ask how I did? said the Doctor,
with what intent did you ask me? With what intent should I ask? but to know it,
replied Don Leonardo. Why, how can that be known better, then by seeing the
Urin, said the Doctor? and if that be not sufficient, ask it of my Pulfe, with
your fingers: Is it not better and more easy, replied Don Leonardo, to ask it
of you, and that you should tell it? I am sure this is very severe.

No Sir, said the Doctor, observe this, either I am pale and lean in my Bed,
when you ask it me, or I am merry and fat seated in my Chair as I am now. In
the first case, you need not ask if I have my health, for my Phisiognomy says
that I have it not: If then this be certain, the Question comes not, to desire
to know that, but in what Estate the humor is, which causes any infirmity, if
it be upon its departure, or on its stay. This, there is no sick man can know:
to tell it, only the Urin and the Pulse understand it. In the second place, the
Question is very foolish, for either the face is faithful to that which is
within the Body, and then there is no need to ask of the health, because that
tells it, and merits credit, in being the most noble part of our Body: or it is
unfaithful, and appearing cheerful and far, covers ill humors, and then neither
can it answer, nor give account of its health, because those sicknesses which
promise health in the face, and soundness of the members are so traiterous that
they not only deceive others, but himself that suffers them. According to this,
Man is so ignorant of his own constitution, that he is not able to answer to
this Question. Then from hence forward perforce this must be asked by feeling
the Pulse, or by asking for the Urinal: Pray then return it to this my Nurse,
if you have yet conjectured the state of my humor.

Yes truly, said Don Leonardo, (giving back the Glass) I have conjectured your
humor, that you spend a good one; I do not spend it, Senor Don Leonardo,
replied the Doctor, mind but how you speak: I do not spend it, but employ it,
and observe what I say, to spend a good humor is for Talkers, that speak with
good humors, without profiting with it, this properly is to spend. To employ
it, is of discreet men, that treasures up with it, either acceptance or
applause in the hearers, or else teaches the Ignorant, as I do now you two The
Monkey by this time was vanished, and the two Friends having taken a little
more breath, the Licentiate said, Will you not tell me the cause why on a day
so pleasant as this, you are so mewed up in your Lodging, and with an
artificial light, when the Sun gives one so splendid to all this Hemisphere?
Many days since, I have observed, that you do not frequent that part of the
Call Mayor or great Street, as you used to do; what Novelty is this? for in
generous persons, any change argues a strong reason, and in fools something of
accident. You have asked me much, said the Doctor, you have asked me much, and
if the Door was not fast locked, I should fear you would leave me, and be gone
before I should have done answering you: There is much to be said to this; you,
I suppose, have dined already, betwixt this and nine of the Clock at night are
many hours, and it will bo no ill work to entertain our selves in them. You
ask, why I study by an Artificial Light being in the Day time. How if the Suns
light should enter into my Lodging, could I study? would it not divert me, to
consider, that that Light sprang from the Sun, and was beholding to the
courtesy of the air to spread it abroad over all the Universe, and that it not
only gives it to the world, but to the Stars also: That the Moon likewise
borrows of it, as we see in the Ecclipses, and that these show the roundness of
the Earth, as is evident by the shadow; for when it is interposed between the
Sun and the Moon it always appears round.

Hence of force should be considered, whether or no the Waters were upon the
Earth, or the Earth upon the waters; and if both Elelements made not one round
Body. Then how afterward could the opinion of that Philosopher escape my
memory, who said that the Earth was carried upon the waters like a Ship.
Presently I should descend to that fancy of another, who supposed, that the
Water was more ancient, and more noble, than the Earth; and was the cause of
the generation of all things, by its humid quality, wherein Life is founded.

I should from them pass to the generation of Animals and Plants; and should
stop upon the latter, to contemplate on the beauty of the flowers, that with so
much grace and pleasantness, publish the greatness of God. I should afterward
think with Cicero, that if there should be no other Testimony that there was a
God, but the beauty of the world, it would be sufficient to convince a man of a
Divinity. Coming then to this, how could I possibly forget being a Gramarian,
and not observe, that Mundus in Latin, implies cleanness or ornament; and that
this Machin is so called, by reason of the beauty which adorns it? Insomuch
that I could by no means study, if I should see the light of the day.

As to the second, wherefore I am shut up, I will tell you, but you must have
patience.

What do you call patience? said the Licentiate; call it Joy, and it will be
more proper: You stand throwing Jewels out of your mouth, and you esteem our
covetousness so drowsy, that you stop to awaken it. Proceed Sir, I beseech
you, and be confident, that you cast not your Pearls before Swine. The Doctor
supposed he did, because he had seen Don Leonardo determined to be so with the
Urinal. And the Licentiate smelt as though he had been one, with the fear of
the Visions.

He then proceeded, saying, I, Gentlemen, have no stomach to digest so great
Irons, as those I see, when I go forth to walk in this piece of The Country
where the best Iron is made.
Bizcaya, amongst those many which it has: They provoke me to vomit, not being
able to endure it, and they that see me vomit show a niceness; this is an
unreasonable thing, for it is not for Men to have such strong stomachs, but for
Austridges, and Elephants; in a word, for Beasts: And if these make not all
sick, as they do me, it is because they were bred up with this Venom; as once
that Mithridates King of Pontus.
King was, whom it not only did not kill, but rather nourished.

Who is able to endure that Junto of Fools, with Cloak and Gown of the Learned?
I could well enough pass with their being all fools, since I treat with few,
but what are such; that which most incenseth me, is, that they being so, feign
themselves to be Learned: Those wretched People, the rest of the Fools of the
Town are blameless, in regard they know not, that there is such a thing as
Knowledge in the world; or if they do, they despise it in their opinion, and
hold it for a madness: But you that know or understand that there is, and we
much adore it, that you enoble your selves with its Title: You neither follow
after it, nor ever see it. What Imposture is this? If you esteem it, why do you
not follow after it, why do you not overtake it? Not for want of wings, since
there has been no Age so happy, nor so well provided with them, as so great a
number of Books declare, that the Volumes of these of this Age do exceed the
letters of those of that, which was illustrious with so many Philosophers:
neither is it for want of wit, for I see you ingenious in finding out the
faults of others: It is your sloth, it is your vanity, that has persuaded you
that the Glory and Felicity of knowledge, does not consist in being wise; but
in appearing so: you content your selves with the vain ostentation of knowing
Books: This you attain, without more pains, then coming to the Shop where they
are to be sold, by reading the Titles, and tireing out the poor Bookseller, to
reach down this and the other, to consult the first page, and know by it what
is contained in the whole Volume, as by Phisiognomy.

You will say (Mr. Licentiate) why do I not go thither, to that end which
others do, to divert my self, in seeing the people which pass by? Yes, I would
so, if I had patience to suffer it: Who can endure to see there a Squadron of
pitiful Soldiers, keeping their decorum, and making their cringes to many that
resort often to that place: (of the Rabble I speak.) These I say, because they
have heard their Grandsires tell tales, how there has been Wars in the world,
and how in them certain men killed others; They come ^^ther to tell us a
thousand of their lying achievements, which they themselves know not if they
are possible or not; they never saw the Wars nor the Ensigns thereof, and the
worst is, they have no affection at all to its troublesome noise, as may be
seen; for if they had, they would never come to martyrise the Walk of A place
in Madrid where many resort to hear news.
San Felipe for so long a time. For it was the Providence of Heaven to sweeten
great labors, by giving us an Inclination to them. I confess that those of the
War are intolerable, but if there be inclination, they cannot be so. Hence it
proceeds, that many great Princes, who might live in the sweet rest of the
Court, do despise it, being carried away by their Inclinations, and choose, for
greater and more mild entertainment, that horror, and those fears of Arms.

I well know, they say, that they come to the end the King may reward their
Services, that they have none what greater accuser then their very solicitude.
Friend, Soldier if thou were one with all thy heart, in being so thou would
find thy reward. What Mechanic Artificer does not hug himself and esteem that
day happy, wherein he brings some work to perfection? Those men are in their
Center, who busy themselves in the attaining those things which their nature
inclines them to: If thine be to follow Arms, thou would not go from amongst
them. Did thou go out, and have thou escaped Death? by this returning thou
art not of that trade, but art a man of peace; strip off then this bravery, and
let us understand one another.

Three hundred forty and seven years was Rome Triumphant after her foundation,
without giving any Sallery to her Soldiers, without pay they fought, without
pay they extended that Empire of the world. It was a provident action; for on
this manner it happened that none went to the Wars without inclination and
natural boldness, no body went out, carried by hunger, and the desire of
Pillage: It was generosity of mind that preferred them in that ventrous Army.
Hence it was that all were stout, all were valiant.

Would you have me entertain my self in seeing the Coaches? God forbid. I see
so many things in them, that they carry away my patience through my eyes. I
will say nothing of women, because I have need of them, and it is a creature
that conceives most anger at contempts, and yields the most to flattery of any,
others will do it. Let some great man, that wants not another thing to pleasure
them withal, though he be never so great a Coxcomb; I say, let him make this
Iron, since he has wherewithal to guild it, for we that were born ill looked
upon, or under an unkind aspect of the Stars, have need of much cunning and
fair words to be able to live.

We owe great courtesy to Women, and it is not Complement, but a forced real
Debt, wherein we pay all the care, with which they spend days and nights for
our allurements, in trimming, dressing, painting themselves, and preparing
flattering baits in their tongues. They treat of no other matter, they have no
other care, without which they would live a life wholly disconsolate, in seeing
their imperfections and wants, in which nature has maimedly left them, if we
should not comfort them, and blot them out of their memory, with these
flatteries, which, be they never so absurd, they judge for truths, and deceive
themselves with them.

The Doctor would have proceeded further, if the third of his discourse had not
been cut off by a profound sigh, from the Licentiate, which he threw up with
some clearing of his throat. What afflicts you Sir, said Don Leonardo? When you
see the Humanity with which Mr. Doctor does communicate the productions of his
fruitful Wit. You need not now fear any more Visions; besides, with holding
your peace all is remedied. It is no matter of consequence, said the
Licenciate, and gave another double sigh, but endeavoring to suppress it, at
last, fetching short his breath, what is the matter, said the Doctor? what is the
matter, for Gods sake? make not your self strange to my love, for that is to
suspect it of being but little faithful. Pray take notice Sir, that you are in
a place, where no thought whatsoever is concealed, though it retires never so
near the Heart, and gets never so far from the mouth. But why do I weary my
self with asking, having a desire to know?

In saying this, a little Curtain was drawn, and behind it appeared a figure of
Brass, which seemed to be Cupid, with his Quiver, Bow, Scarf and Arrows; no
sooner was it discovered when these words were heard to come from it, The man
is in Love.

The Licentiate had scarce heard this (for now he was charmed against Visions)
when, much afflicted, he said, Mr. Doctor, Heaven has guided me hither to day,
to see you, in a time of the greatest Exegency that my heart has ever had.
That which this Spirit says, is the very truth; I will tell you it at large,
because I hope for a remedy from your profound Science, and you must take
notice, by the way, that the reason why there is so little Love in the world,
is, because I have it all, insomuch that there is none left for any other. In
my heart he keeps all his Armory with great glory, there his Temple and Altars,
with more zealous demonstrations, with more pious Ceremonies, then when
Antiquity consecrated to the flattery of his Deity, the blood of brute Animals:
Here I shed my own blood for the Victim, to him, which by little and little
consumes me with its burning fire.

As I passed, one Summers Evening, in a Coach through the meadow of San
Geronimo, now no more a meadow, but a wilderness, wherein are hunted, with
cruel destruction, not wild beasts, but men; here I fell entangled into nets of
soft hair, was subjected by the darts of piercing Eyes, I yielded my self up to
the smiles of a mouth, and suffered my self to be carried away with the
pleasure of blushing cheeks: The owner of these arms went in another Coach; we
bring together hers and mine, where was a tender yielding on my part, and a
wanton allowance on hers; I never thought that in flattering breaths there
could come revengeful flames, yet they came in those of her peaceful words: I
remained hers, followed her as her slave, learnt her house, her quality, and
that of her Parents; I knew she had a brother equal to me in age and humor, I
procured his friendship by diverse ways, and got admittance by this means, into
the House of Dona Dorothea (for so she is called, that is, happy in all graces)
I spoke to her tenderly, she answered me mildly, read my verses, and applauded
them, gave reception to some of my presents, all which passed with security,
and little notice taking of her Parents, on the score that I was her brothers
friend, they supposed that that was courtesy, and not courtship; kindness, and
not Love.

Time, opportunity, and converse, made me every day more happy in her favor, I
can assure you, that I had hope before I had love, so much did her favors
anticipate my desires. They go forth on their way, it being sufficient for me
to meet and receive them. Finally, this Lady, in regard she was the most
beautiful, was the most desired by all kind of pretenders, because she had
entertainment for all desires; she had Wealth for the Covetous, Nobility for
the Gentleman, Beauty for the Gallants, Virtue for the Sober, and Discretion
for the Wise: But I alone was the fortunate possessor of her Love; I gave
storm to the fort of her Breast, and gained her Heart, but not without my own
loss and destruction, if so peaceable an action deserves so severe a name, as
is the giving mine in exchange of her heart, it is the majesty of Love that
knows not how to yield it self to unequals; must another Love be born, another
must call him to defiance: On this manner passed I the pleasantest hours, that
I can hope for in my Life; when fortune envious, or justly angry, that humane
merits should tyrannize over so divine parts, stole her from mine Eyes and from
my hopes.

It Is three days since I have not been in my self, it is three days since, that
I live without knowing where I am, because I know not where she is, that is
owner of my Sense: I was on Christmas day to visit her, taking occasion of the
time, but found her not within, I asked her mother for her; she told me that
she was gone to see an Aunt of hers; I met her Father in the street, he told me
that her Mother and she were gone to a Novena, at the Holy Covent of Alcala;
and perceiving the deceit, in the disagreement of the Witnesses, I I consulted
her Brother, but found him confused; who not suspecting that so large a share
of the success concerned me, related the greatest misfortune that has happened
in the World.

Miseries of Beauty, how great are ye! Divine Dorothea, I wish thou had never
been born beautiful; if thou were to be unhappy, without doubt, fortune thinks
her self beautiful, since she persecutes so much those who are so; alas, my
destiny! I durst have sworn thou would throw me down with the greatest
hazard, when thou raisedst me up to so high fortune. Things that are wholly
perfect, never endure long: In Perfection it self does danger lie concealed; in
Height it self does ruin stand threatening. The Sun in coming to the Sign where
it is most elevated, begins to decline, and continues not in his greatest
height one minute.

He related to me, as to a friend, in whom he expected not dismays, but
comforts, that his Sister was wanting since the night before, that going in a
Coach with her Mother to Mattins, in returning home without knowing by whom or
where, they were set down at a house so like theirs, as the night and
sleepiness would give them leave to discern, that being deceived, they entered
into it, and in an instant the Coach disappeared, and them they locked up in
two several Rooms well furnished, which showed a rich master; that afterward
they offered a Sedan to her Mother to bring her home in, telling her that her
Daughter was there already without any hurt, that she should hold her peace;
and that the Love of a great man had attempted a thing that had succeeded in
vain; but finally, Donna Dorothea, was free now from all fear: with this her
Mother was deceived, and no sooner had those who carried her come to the street
where she lived, when they entreated her that she would go alone into her
house, because they would not, by chance, be known, by the lights that should
come out to receive her. With this she entered, and they were gone in an
instant: Insomuch that when she knew her Daughter was not at home; and called
to her Father and Brother for Vengeance, they found no body on whom to execute
it.

When I heard such sad news, I remained as dead; he that related them, thought
I had done it only out of my friendship to him, and was glad to find so lively
a resentment, hoping that I would help to search her out as a faithful friend:
So I promised him to do, but in vain, since there is not so much as the least
shadow of her. It Is now three days since that I have sought her with all
diligence, but I am ashamed of my care; for I find no way, not so much as to
show my solicitude: So unhappy am I, that I am not so much as able to show
that I have a desire to find her, by one way or another, that would not be to
her great disgrace.

This puts me besides my wits, this is it, that cannot be contained in my
breast, and gets forth amongst my sighs: This is the cause that I throw my self
at thy feet, most learned man above all that have been born, take compassion,
for Gods sake, of this grievous disaster; let not Fortune boast her self that
she has command over the Wise, since there are that say the wise bear Rule
over Fortune: Tell me where he is that has stolen her? How she has defended
her self, where this confusion must stop? Consult this Spirit that has
penetrated my thoughts, let us know from him the End of my Griefs, since he
already knew the beginning of them.

The Doctor would not have hearkened so long, because he had given him more
jealousies than words, with his relation, but to fix in the Vengeance of this,
and of the Pride with which he had painted himself the sole disposer of her,
who was so, of all, and it was on this manner.

The Licentiate had no sooner ended, but the little Idol, which had given the
first answer, sank down, leaving in the wall an hollow place, through which the
sight might freely pass to another quarter, curiously rich. You, Mr.
Licentiate, take courage, said the Doctor, and you shall see with your Eyes the
estate of your care, peep through this hole, and see that which passes. The
Licentiate did so, and saw Dona Dorothea, who was in discourse with a Gallant,
of a handsome personage and disposition: This, said the Doctor, is sufficient
for the present, and the Curtain was drawn. You shall know, said he, that this
Lady is already overcome, I cannot tell you the place where she is, because it
is not convenient; neither matters it, suppose it was told; To her Parents, You
may say that an Astrologer has prognosticated to you, that they shall bring
her back to her House within a very few days, that in the mean time they make
no bustle, since they will suffer more than any body else in their own honor.
I am sorry that so understanding a man should let himself be deceived by the
flatteries of a Woman. Know, that she never loved you, but only for her
Husband, her Love regarding more your wealth then your person.

The Arrogant Gallant was astonished, and unexpectedly surprised at the wonders
he saw and heard, insomuch that he was struck speechless with rage and
indignation. Don Leouardo that was in no less admiration, supposing that
manhood was now of no use, rose up, taking his leave os the Doctor; at which
the Licentiate did the same, without offering to speak any thing at all; at
last giving him many thanks for injuries, they both went away blundering and
stumbling, and asking one another if it was Truth indeed, that they had seen
the passed Visions.

CHAP. II. The Fool gives an Account of his Life to his Friend, together with
the occasion of the adventures already related.
THe troubles of the Call Mayor (or high Street) were not the occasion of our
Doctors shutting himself up, as he had told the Licenciate; for those had an
easier remedy, since there are other streets in Madrid more quiet, and passages
into the Fields more pleasant. Love it was that had confined him to his house
for his Prison.

Who told thee so, my friend Historian? (will some body say) how do thou know
that? Few there are that can answer to this Question; but I am so great a
friend of clearing doubts, that I very willingly resolve it. It was told me by
a Gentleman of Madrid, a friend and intimate of the Doctors, his name Don Felix
del Prado, he gave me an account of his Life, and particularly of the marvelous
success which gave me occasion to write it.

Don Felix was troubled at the melancholy and retiredness of the Doctor, which
now was taken notice of by all his friends; for Christmas holydays were past,
and their Mirth, without the Doctors having had any taste of them. He was
always in the house, yet never suffering himself to be seen by any body, save
once, that two entered in without his leave, which cost them a sufficient
trouble, as I have related. This Gentleman was of a pleasant nature, always
desirous of making friendships, and had contracted a very firm one with the
Doctor upon occasion of those Amors; even to the making of himself a party in
them

One day then when he saw him more free from Sighs, then he was accustomed to
be; I assure you, my friend, said he to him, I understand you not; you say you
are almost undone for this woman. You have her in the house, and without any
hazard: what would you have more? Enjoy the opportunity: Declare your self to
her, and leave off disguises. I see, said the Doctor, I have these advantages
near and easy to satisfy my appetite; I well see that I can force her without
hazard, since she thinks I am a stranger, with this masque that I have put on
(of which I shall hereafter give you an Account) but I do not subject my
desires to such humble Victories, I covet her Love, I would conquer her Soul; I
pay not my self with lesser pledges: Love is the Salt of all these delights,
with Love the sight of the Lady is glorious, and even that of the Walls of her
house; with Love hope is happy; with Love any promise is of Estimation, every
glimpse is a favor, every word is sweet, all is seasoned with Love; if that be
wanting neither avails the seeing her, nor speaking to her, nor as many favors
as confidence it self can force from her. Now I see, replied Don Felix, that it
is a great misfortune to be a wise man, if you were not such, you would not
spin out a discourse on this manner, but would lay hold on the occasion; enjoy
it, and then, as unconcerned, bid defiance to Love.

We are alone, said the Doctor, and with intention not to go out of this house,
nor let in any body, that shall not be of it; I am big with this thought, and
have made experience of this truth, give me attention, I beseech you; Listen to
the discourse of my Life, and you shall see by the way, how exactly you have
hit on that conceit: You shall see how all the time that I was a fool, I was
the most happy person of the World, only by being so; notwithstanding I was
never so much deserted by men; nay fortune herself, she did also forsake me
then, when I was a fool, because I imagined that, in time, I might cease to be
so. I have no business, said Don Felix, that requires my presence, more than
your cares; and therefore should be glad, that you would tell me the beginnings
of them, because on this manner I might walk with more light: One and the other
(said the Doctor) you shall know this afternoon, although the last will but
renew my smart, and I know not whether or no I shall have patience to endure it.

I (my friend) was conceived in original folly, and can say, I am a fool on all
sides; for my Father, being a man well born, and having taken the degree of
Licenciate in Alcala, with his foot already in the stirrip for a most
honorable employment, fell in love with my Mother, being a Maiden of mean
Extraction, and also a fool, by complexion. This good Father of mine, being
wounded with the darts of her pretty Eyes, grew desperately in love with her,
and therefore contrived how he might deceive her, so gave her a promise of
Marriage, with intention to leave her in the lurch; she giving credit to his
words, they both played the fool: for he was afterward forced to marry her, by
Justice; and she brought her Honor almost to the last gasp.

From this folly of both was I born, at a time when the Council of the Judges,
nominated my Father to a Government in that other World, which was like killing
him, for this: Now I being but newly born, he considered that the embarquing me
with him, was to hazard my life; and therefore determined to leave me in charge
with a Brother of his, then Curate of Odon a Village three Leagues from Madrid:
He did so, and departed with his Wife.

My breeding up, was then in Odon at the breasts of a bouncing wench, the Wife
of a farmer, rude in behavior and language: Here you see my excuse before
hand, if in my History, I use but little order in my words, for what Language
could I learn from a woman of this rank? She gave me in her Milk the
Quintescence of Garleek, Onions, and Wine, which was her daily sustenance. Here
you see me rustic in body and foul; but as Heaven always takes care of those
whom men forsake, I grew strong and robust with this harshness, but I retained
the Phisiognomy of the Nurse, her brown skin, and a surly frown, perchance
learnt from that which she always put on when she looked upon me, so powerful
is the imagination. In such manner did the fear of her severity possess me,
that musing always upon it, it remained imprinted on my face; my head was
fortified by her hideous clamors, and my patience, by mere vexations.

Now at seven years of Age, my Uncle considering that it was time to learn to
read, and write, taught me, in company of another Nephew of his, of the same
Age, which he kept in the house: I, in my looks, showed always a contumacious,
and rebellious Wit: together with a stubborn kind of reservation: Insomuch,
that in the Town, they courteously called me el Cenudo, or the Frowner, in
stead of calling me, the Fool.

My Uncle was harsh of Humor, but had a plodding head of his own, and
therefore notwithstanding he whipped my school fellow, at every turn, for the
neglect of his lesson, yet did he me, but seldom, saying that I, that was a
Fool, for my dullness might be excused, but not the other, because he showed a
free wit: From that time forward did my folly begin to stand me in stead, since
it saved me so many whippings, and I lost nothing in the conclusion, for I
learnt as much as the other, because he learnt very little. Eight hundred
Ducats did the Cure bring in yearly to my Uncle, and yet for all this, he was
so miserable, that he made use of us instead of Servants, and kept no other.
But I was born with I know not what Pride in my heart, which pulled me by the
sleeve, and reprehended me every time I did any thing that was unworthy.

He used to send me for Wine, and I that had always a liquorish palate, played
the Taster to the Pitcher, but that Town being plentiful of water, I repayed it
doubly out of the first River I came at: My Uncle apprehending it, in the Taste,
somewhat troubled, began to say, that I being a Fool, the Woman of the Tavern
still gave me of the worst, and so sent me no more.

To these messages my Companion proffered himself with great diligence, for he
was naturally a friend of play, and loved gadding abroad; but I escaped not
scotfree, for it cost me the care of the Bells, a thing, in my opinion, most
troublesome, and what would almost be impossible for me to undergo, if I were
not otherwise enabled, and my folly should not succor me. The good Curate
contrived to spare a Sexton, and that I should pay for it. I had not a head to
run up and down the turning stairs of the Steeple, so many times a day; nor to
endure the noise of the Bells; for having in the Milk, sucked in so much Wine
and Garleek, my head was in a perpetual giddiness.

I remember once that sleeping in the most sound and quiet time of the night,
there came a husbandman of the Town in great have, to entreat my Uncle that he
would give order to knock the bells for Childbirth, because his wife was just
crying out. My good Curate then waked me, saying, rise Perico, rise, and ring
for Childbirth quickly, quickly; I got up, and as we fools have great
memories, I retained in it, the quickly, quickly, and I knocked the Bells so
nimbly that the Inhabitants of the Town had thought, without doubt, it rang for
fire: At the alarm they all got up, running out of their houses, some with
pitchers, others with kettles, others with buckets, and others with seringes
and several Engines, all came straight to the Church, to ask me where? where? I
answered in such a ones house, thinking that they would know where the woman in
Labor was; and the Curate being fallen asleep again, I had no body to show me
my error.

The Neighbors were all thus gathered together in a Tumult at the house of the
woman in Labor, and seeing a great deal of smoke go up out of the Chymney, for
they had, by chance, kindled the Childbed fire of straw, (which is poor peoples
fuel upon necessity) they all supposed, that there the house was on fire,
indeed, and began to pour on their Pitchers, Kettles, Seringes, and other
Engines of water; to untile the house, and pull down the Chimney that they might
quench the fire; others fell to breaking open the doors, with a terrible
clattering, and hearing the woman crying out with her pains in the bed,
believed she did it for fear of the fire, they carried her out in their arms
into the street, no arguments, nor entreaties being sufficient to prevent it.
When they came near to see more at leisure, where the fire was, there was
fallen such abundance of rubbish upon it that they thought the poor woman owed
her life to that diligence, who was delivered before all the Town in the middle
of the street, and of a multitude of lights; that the Child might be sure not
to want Witnesses nor Goships.

The Relation of the husband was not sufficient with the Town, to persuade
them, that they were not called to the quenching of a Fire, but to Childbirth,
though he swore it a thousand times, yet they believed him not: So ordinary a
thing it is to give more credit to a rascal then to an honest man. I was sorry
the fault was not laid at my door; but my Uncle suspected it, which was best
for my ease, for seeing that I understood not the Office, he resolved to take
it from me in a few days: and dissembled it at present, because he would not
anger the parties agrieved.

A while after, dyed one of the principal men of the parish, a Gentleman and of
good Parentage: But a person that would make a fool of himself, when he was in
his Wine, so that being a little elevated, would go out upon a holy day with a
Tabor and Pipe, to make merry and dance with the maids and young men of the
Town, in a ridiculous manner. My Uncle knew of his being dead, and at the
instant came hastily to me: Go Perico, said he, go ring for the Dead, and
without Laziness, for the Love of God, merrily, merrily: He thought that I
understood he meant the Bells, and supposed it was sufficient to make signs to
me. I went to my Belfry very carefully, to obey him with all punctuality, and
considered how he had commanded me to ring for the Dead merrily. God bless me,
thought I to my self, surely the Physician of the the Town is dead, or the
Scrivano, (or Attorney) since my Uncle has a mind I should celebrate it with
so much mirth. I bethought my self that the merriest sound, in my opinion, was
the Chaccona, and knocked the Chacona with both my hands, on two Bells, so to
the life, and with so much Air, that many afterward swore to me, it had made
them dance.

The Parents of the Dead-man, thinking it was to mock him for being a Taborer,
take their Half-pikes and Lances, and coming toward the Belfry, before they
got thither, they began to shout, and call out Rogue, Rascal, do thou not
know what thou do? I, seeing that Squadron together, armed at all Points,
confirmed my suspicion, and verily believed, they came to make merry for the
death of some of the the aforesaid, with a Or battle dance in Spain, wherein
they skirmish danceing with Lances, daggers etc. in their hands.
Torneo de a pie; I then more pleased my self with the sound, but they
redoubling their noise, I held still a little for curiosity, and heard them say
to me, who bad thee Rascal, who bad thee Ring after this manner? I believing
that they had admired it, answered, my Uncle the Curate; scarcely had they
heard that, when they departed toward his house: but by this, he came running
to the Steeple, with his Gown tucked up at his Girdle, sweating drop after
drop, and crying out, what do thou do, Fool? what do thou do Beast?
Perceiving him angry, I let alone the Bells; and he proceeded, come down from
thence beast, for thou undo'st me. I came down, and found my good Curate,
compassed about by all those Executioners, who made a great noise, but I minded
not what they said, only listening to my Uncle, heard him cry, he will tell ye, Let
him tell: They all replied, he has already told us, and at this, they drawing
nearer, my Uncle called to me, Come hither (Son of a Whore) did I bid thee
knock the Chacona? (my father could have said no more to me). Why, said I? did
you not bid me ring merrily? what then can you have merrier. This gave them all
satisfaction, and they departed.

Who now would not have said that this folly should have been my undoing? yet
it was not, but the ease of my trouble; for my Uncles anger being appeased, and
supposing that I did it out of Ignorance, never beat me for the neglect; and
not to see himself in such another praemunire, took from me my Office of
Governor of the Bells, and gave it to my Cozen and Companion.

He had alittle suspicion of his being somewhat greedy, and in regard he loved
him more then me, he had employed him in the care of the Larder; now the Man
being miserable, he thought he did well to change his Officers, therefore made
me his dispencer, or overseer of his provisions, and gave me the keys of a Room
where he kept all his dainties. You see me here Master of all my desire merely
by my follies.

He delivered all to me by account, Cheeses, Honey, Pome-Citron, boxes of Quince
Marmalate, two dozen Gammons of Bacon, as many dried Sassages, and a thousand
other knacks of the Nuns. In fine, I took him a little out of each of these
meats, and if he said Mass betimes, I also took care to give him a Biscate and
Wine, but thought much to give him all, and leave none for my self; and yet
feared lest my Uncle coming to know the loss, should take from me the key, and
throw me out to the Quire to sing, without more ado. So I hit upon a Stratagem,
and it was to give out a report that there were a world of mice haunted us,
with this I eat as much Cheese, Biscates and Sweetmeats as I had a mind to:
but being somewhat more affectionate to the Gammons of Bacon, I supposed the
mice could not keep me blameless for this, they ordinarily eating little
because they are hindered by the sword of it: Now my Uncle going in daily to see
the State of his Dainties, for certain (said I once to him) there is no
suffering this ill neighborhood of the mice, for I always find somewhat or
other devoured; if you, Sir, think fit, we will put into the Larder a Cat that
shall give them their payment; the counsel was liked well by my Uncle, who was
very angry at the pilfering of the Mice; so he made a Cat-hole in the door, and
I went in to serve for a Cat, and cut what I liked of the Gammons, and
Sassages, and whilst the rest were at Church, and a little old woman gone to
the market for meat, I fried it for my self, and drew the Devil out of my Guts.
The Curate coming home, noted what was wanting, and concluded straight that the
Cat had eaten it and although I did him more mischief, so great was his anger
against the Mice, that he was well enough contented, and said, It Is no matter,
since these scurvy Vermin dye in exchange of my loss. I always kept shut the
Cat-hole, because the Cat and I being then both of one trade, I would not that
she should outdo me in any thing.

Sixteen years spent I in this life, without knowing that I could have a
happier; which was no great matter indeed for me: for whilst a man desires no
more than what he enjoys, he may say that he enjoys his hearts desire. I
found within me a certain covetous inclination to books, which never left me;
and went abroad into the Fields with some of my Uncles, as Guzman the Rogue,
Obregon the Squire, Lazarillo, and others of this kind; I entertained my self
sweetly with these at all idle times, which were many, in Summer in the Shades,
and at the Sun in Winter.

It happened at the time of the Festival, which they use to make to the
Sacrament, that there was in the Castle of Odon, a great Gentleman, prisoner,
for a certain quarrel which he had had with a Nobleman in the Court; He
undertaking on his own account to make it, for that purpose sent for a Company
of Stage Players from Madrid: Those who had made their Autos (or Acts) there on
the same occasion; who represented in Odon two of excellent variety of verses,
of profound conceit, and above all, with great Ornament of Clothes. I was in
great admiration at it, and followed after them open mouthed, as if by that,
all those Graces would have entered into me. They acted some Comedies in the
Castle to entertain that Gentleman, of which I lost not one tittle, neither was
it possible for me to do otherwise.

After they had been there three days, I perceived they talked of going away,
and had a couple of Coaches at the Gate, having already taken leave of the
Alcalde. Here I was ready to lose my senses, wishing I had never seen them, for
it seemed to me I should never be able to live in their bitter absence; so much
did this desire work in me, that it mastered my Cowardice, and that natural
restraint which always (to my great shame) kept me in awe.

I came to one of the Comedians and asked him whither they went? he told me to
Madrid; are you, replied I, to Act as many times there? He laughed at me, and
said, there, Friend, are two Comedies every day, and many times half a dozen,
with those acted in particular houses. I already had knowledge that Madrid was
the chiefest Town of Spain, but I knew not wherein it was so, or what did
illustrate it, because I had never been out of Odon, neither had I ever had any
desire that my Uncle should let me go out of it; when I heard that in Madrid
they had of that every day, and afterward knew that it was but there hard by;
I thought I was very near Heaven, and cursed my fortune that had for sixteen
years deprived me of seeing a place where* there are two Comedies every day,
and many times half a dozen in particular houses. I then purposed to say to
Death when he should come with the Writ of Execution, to do it on my Life, that
there wanted yet sixteen years, because those which are imputed to me that I
lived in Odon, was not to live, nor any thing like it. What, is it possible,
thought I, that any one can live among these Barbarians, that have not two
Comedies every day, and many times six in particular honses? This I repeated
every moment in my Imagination.

It afterward happened that the imprisonment of that Gentleman who was in the
Castle still continuing, there came men of very pleasant conversation, and
Ladies of courtly behavior to visit him; I went up and down there amongst
them, being become all Eyes, as if I would discover a new World, I made a
friendship with a Page of my own years, a very straight one* out of a
covetousness that he should inform me concerning those things. He told me, that
those with whom his Master past away the time, deceiving the sadness of his
imprisonment, were men that had studied good learning, and that made verses,
and such Comedies as not long since had been acted there; and that they also
writ Books of entertainment, of which I already had knowledge. I asked him if
they were of Madrid, and those Ladies: He told me yes. I asked also, with much
simplicity, if in Madrid the Cavaliers used to keep so many women. And even the
Rogues too, said he, keep as many as they can get, with their industry, or with
their money. That, I told him, I had read of the great Turk. Friend, said he, he
keeps them as his own Wives, these do not. So much the better, said I, much
more pleasant seems this manner of Gusto to me: The great Turk surely knows not
how to solace himself with so much ease. When I knew that in Madrid they had
Comedies, ingenious men, delicate and beautiful women, and that without the
trouble of Marriage they were permitted, at the expense of money or industry; I
could not resist this desire, but yielded up my arms to it, and resolved that
my departure should be very suddenly.

Now knowing that it was not enough to go to Madrid, unless money went with me;
because the poor man lives exposed to all miseries in the streets. I fell to
plotting how to go to Madrid in a good Condition.

My Father sent by every Fleet, about four hundred Crowns to the Curate my
Uncle, for the charges which he supposed were laid out on me, in maintaining me
at the University of Salamanca, studying the faculty of the Laws; a thing which
he had often recommended by several Letters; to which my Uncle answered, that
although I was still a Fool, yet he hoped that in a short time he should
civilize me a little more; because I should not be there the mock and laughing
stock of all. At this time came the Fleet and the four hundred Crowns; me
thought it was pity that he should be paid with so much liberality, who bred me
up with so much misery; And as a strong desire, never wants arguments to set it
forward; it seemed to me but a Case of Restitution, to take from him that which
came for my self, so I did; and with regard to my opinion, for even to steal,
it is good to have the opinion of being a Fool.

My Uncle put his breeches where he kept the key of the money, under his pillow;
when he therefore was in bed, it was impossible to open the Cabinet without
manifest danger; wherefore the contrivance was thus.

About two a Clock in the night, it being very dark, I rose with great silence,
and opened the Door of the street, and all the rest, to that where the Curate
was; and afterward being come to my bed, I began to cry, Sir, Uncle, Sir,
Uncle, Thieves, Thieves! He wakes, and hearing the noise, in a moment jumps
into the Floor, taking a sword which he had on the Beds tester, and being
amazed, asked, where do thou hear them? Where are they? At the streetdoor
they make a noise, said I. With this he hastens to the street door, which was
not near, telling me that I should rise and light a Candle. All this while my
Cozen slept.

I searched the pockets, took the key of the Cabinet, where the Four hundred
Crowns were newly come; and finding them in a purse, I left the Cabinet open;
then although I felt the Candle, I went not to light it, till I had first laid
up in security the purse of my Joy, my life, and all my remedy. The Curate
having found the Doors open, fell, in the first place, to shutting that of the
street, and locking of it, and the key being then on the inside, he took it out
of the lock, thinking the Thief was within, and that with this he should hinder
his passage out, and catch him with the theft in his hands: then cried out,
Boy, bring hither the Candle, bring the light. I came down with it, and found
him with his back against the street-door, in a fighting posture cutting and
slashing the Air, and calling out, Sacrilegious Rogues, the Curate; must you
rob the Curate, Sacrilegious Villains?

When the light was brought, come hither Perico, said he, follow me, let us go
visit every Room by its self in order; so we did; and went locking them all,
till we came where the theft had been done; when he saw the Cabinet open, he
was almost dead, and fell into a cold sweat, as if they had taken away his
blood; and no marvel, for money is the blood of the Life, without which no man
is able to breath: At last, after he had a good while considered the robery, he
said, It Is done, we are come too late; then came to the Drawer, and seeing the
Purse wanting, cried, All Is lost; I durst have sworn it; the Thieves are
already gone; that was the noise thou heardst at the door.

Let us go to the Alcalde, that he may take our Testimony concerning the
Substance of the crime: But now I think on it, stay thou in the house, and lock
the door on the inside, lest it should be the Devil, and in the mean time
should return for more; with this he went, and I showed some resentment at the
Accident. The Justice coming presently, did what is usual in such Cases, and
afterward went their ways.

I let some days pass over, and one morning that appeared very cheerful and
pleasant, from which might be gathered a happy Omen, my hearts side being
comforted with the Purse, I took my way toward Madrid, thinking on the new way
of Living, which Heaven offered me; And that which gave me the greatest
trouble, was the Surname of Hernandez, which I inherited of my Parents, and
that Pedro Hernandez sounded like a Fool on a Stage: I remembered me that I was
more indebted to my Frown than to my Father, since by it I had enjoyed so quiet
a Life; therefore purposed always to call my self Pedro Cenudo.

I went into Madrid at the Gate called Puerta de La Vega, and came straight up
to the little Market place of San Salvador, where seeing a confused number of
people, I asked what they were; they told me Alguazils and Scivanos (or
Bailiffs and Attorneys): It grieved me already to think I was come where there
was so much Justice. Sinner that I am, said I, we could not live in our Town,
only for having one Scivano in it: How shall I live here, where there are so
many?

A little farther as I came to the Puerta de Guadalaxara, I met the Page with
whom I had contracted the friendship in Odon. He was very glad to see me: I
told him that I had had a falling out with the Curate, and was come from him,
with intention to live in the Court. Thou come in good time, replied he, for
at a certain place, they have entreated me to seek them out a Page; if thou
have a mind to be one, thou will be in a good way to live. I considered on his
Counsel, and it seemed to me not ill: for although I brought with me, good
store of money, yet that would easily waste, if I should live unprovided, and
it was best keeping it till a time of necessity, to help at a dead lift.

He carried me, at my request, to the Roperia; I bought there a Suite and Cloak
of black Searge; then we came to a Shop, where they sold Starched Ruffes and
Cuffes, these I also bought, and made my self more Gallant then Narcissus, for
Narcissus never wore a starched Ruff; from that time I knew that money was the
most powerful thing of the World: and that it supplied the defects of Nature,
since a man that came so Rustic, as he that had been bred up amongst the
Beasts of the Field, in an instant, by virtue of this great Prince, was
Gallant, full of Air, and Courtly.

He then carried me to be seen, to my Master, who was an Arrogonian Gentleman,
large of stature, and in years, but short of sight: He was married to a young
Lady of about sixteen, and came to Court to pretend for a Title; now to
qualify himself the better, took great care about the Number and Ornament of
those that served him; and seeing me well clad, and of an Aspect as severe as
an Or a Judge.
Alcalde of the Court: This Lad, says he, looks not amiss: Whence art thou?
Native of Madrid, answered I: then, said he, thou art no Fool; as though Fools
could not be born in Madrid. He would have treated about my Sallary; but I, not
well understanding it, said, Trouble not your self, Sir, concerning that, for I
esteem it a sufficient interest, to honor my self with the Title of your
Servant. You shall see here that my knowing little was of profit to me in this,
for the good Gentleman, obliged by the courtesy, took an affection to me, and
gave me what I had need of, with a liberal hand; whereas if I had made a
positive bargain as the others did, he had given me the bare Salary of the
rest, who had not wherewithal to buy shoes.

New clothes, and the occasion awakened in me, I know not what Divine lights,
that made me admire my own self. I went to kiss my Mistress hands, and found in
her the liking as in her husband; she asked me some questions, which I briefly
and mysteriously satisfied; always showing in the blushings of my face, the
honesty and modesty of my Nature.

My Master being a One that sued for an Honor in the Court.
Pretendient, stayed not much at home, which I liked but ill, for he would
suffer neither Page nor Lacquay to stay at home, thinking he lost his Nobility
in losing the sight of any one of us. See what the Honors of the World are,
and the Ostentation which gives credit to merits, which are to be adorned with
little slovenly Lacquays and Pages; from that time I began to Philosophize.

How is it possible, thought I, that all can pass by this madness, and can
take for merit and pledge of Estimation, that which is another; and from so
nigardly and froward a Mistress as Fortune, a woman, in fine, covetous and
variable, that at the first distaste, cries, This is mine, give me it again.

We went sometimes all the day long, following his horse, and I said within my
self, whither suffer thou thy self to be carried? thou followest a beast,
there needs no other proof, that thou shall never come to good. At other times
my Pretendient went out in his Coach, and although there was room enough to
spare, for us four Pages in the Boots, he would not give us that honor, not to
go without that which we gave him, walking a foot round his Coach, with our
Green Liveries, like Footboys of the Pageant Giants, which are carried in
procession.

I rested not in the nights, for the greatest part of them I was employed in
carrying Notes and Messages to this and the other Nobleman, a thing
insufferable for my humor, by reason of the nice difficulties which used to be
at the Doors of these People, and for the Ceremony which their presence uses
to oblige; I could not endure that, of making me dance per force, with so much
reverence, and cringing of my whole Body It was a custom in Spain formerly
when a Page brought any Note or Letter to a Nobleman, to deliver it kneeling.
: Since that the unregarded kneeling to one of these neglectful Grandees, who
for not turning his Eyes, will keep a man cursing with Devotion: Which ill
fortune remained with me so long as the opinion of being wise. The Devil put it
into my head to appear so, and to be a Graduate: For confident of this, my
Master sent me on all messages, that I rested not quiet a moment. I then turned
Fool again, and was fortunate; the manner was strange.

One night very late, being weary, as I used to be, my Master had writ a
Letter, to send by the Post, but being called away to Supper, he said to me,
Close thou this Letter, put upon it the Superscription, and carry it to the
Post of A Kingdom in Spain.
Arragon, for it imports me very much. He went to supper, and I staid reading
the Letter, which seemed to me to be of Love; for after many tender
expressions, he sent to tell a woman, that by all means she should come to see
him, for by reason of his business he could not be absent from home. In the
Margin he put the name of the person to whom he writ, as he ordinarily used to
do, and therefore told not me what I should put in the Superscription:
supposing that I would perceive that it was for a Sister of his, by the name
which he had left written.

Near our precinct was a Lady of Pleasure, one of those that receive visits, a
person so great a friend of her servants, that she could not live unless they
left her some pledge of their passion, whereby she might adore their memories:
To be plain, she was a most impudent hackney Jade, was of Arragon: and called
in mockery the Post of Arragon. I seeing a Love-Letter and for the Post of
Arragon, thought that without doubt, it was for her; so sealed it, but would
not write a Superscription, it seemed to me a madness to put one upon an
amorous paper.

I carried it to the Post, she asked me whose it was; I told her a Gentleman's
of Arragon, whose name came in the Paper, she opened it very amorously, and
read it thus:

My Dear,

TO make me most happy, there needs no more than that thou will have it so; and
thou will show it, in coming to see me: the way is short, and I would to God
that I were free from business, then I assure thee, I would go to thee every
day: there shall not be wanting any thing to pleasure thee, when thou will come
to make joyful this thy House: And because I hope shortly to see thee, I do not
give thee any account of other cares of greater moment. God preserve thee, etc.
Madrid.

She was very much pleased at the courtesy of the paper, and desirous to
comply with what it required, she asked me if that might be a good opportunity,
I told her, Yes: Because my Master showed a great desire that she should come
at the instant that he sent me to call her. She made me sit down in a Chair,
and calling a Servant that was half a Tawny-moor, she went into an inner
Chamber, where she tricked her self up in her Silverlaced Wastcoat, her Mantle
embroidered with Gold, and all her mundus muliebris; and afterward, taking her
Maid by the hand, and seeing but with half an Eye through her Veil, we came to
my Masters House. I went in first to prepare him, and finding him at Supper
with his Wife, I whispered him in the Ear, and said to him, Now, Sir, the Post
of Arragon is here. What do thou say? replied he. That I have brought her
here, said I, beautiful as a thousand pieces of Gold: The good old man knew not
that there was so pleasing a Post; for he thought they had all been bearded,
and understood me not, making me a thousand questions, nor did I understand
him. In fine I said to him, Come forth, Sir, for she expects you in your
Chamber, and it is not courtesy to keep her so long: She tarried less in
dressing her self than your Worship in rising from your Chair.

Up gets the good old man, blessing himself, and coming down to a Room which he
had near the Entry, well furnished, he found in it the Post, a young Cirle of a
good countenance, much gentleness in her Eyes, and sweetness in her Cheeks, all
smiling and pleasantness: Who holding the Paper in her hand, and having made
her courtesy to him that was astonished at the Novelty; she said to him, Sir,
for you to command one, who esteems it so great a happiness to be yours; What
needed so courteous a paper? Any message is sufficient, wherein you command me
to serve you. The old man apprehending the error which happened, and rejoicing
in his heart at it, longed (in good earnest) to be making much of her, and
accounted the mistake for lucky.

My Mistress who had noted the secret which I told him at Table, and that he
had risen up in a surprise from it, was somewhat troubled, and sent a
Chambermaid to watch him, who related both what she did see, and what she did
not see: My Master, said she, has got a Mistress, and Perico is the Pimp,
she is the bravest wench in the whole Town; by my Faith, he is not so liberal to
you as he is to her: This old Dotard, what a Golden Mantle he has given her,
and a Silver Wastcoat! The good man seems young again. This you deserve for
your foolishness, but hereafter you will learn more cunning, being served by so
many Gentlemen as you are. Presently you will be saying; Alas, my Husband, how I
love thee! An ill fire light on the best of him, who would think that his years
were not sufficient to make him ashamed? Pray, consider if this be so, what
will a young beardless Husband be? A mischief on the Bride that shall be
married, these are no times to put trust in any body: By the Age of my Mother,
Mistress, because I saw him so cold with you, I had thought he had forgot his
Love toys with his Age; a curse upon him; for, by my truth, they are not
forgotten with those whom he loves well.

The poor Gentlewoman at this was ready to have lost her senses, but seeing
what a shameful thing it would be for her self, if it should be known, how that
a rotten old man despised her for, a foolish young wench, she dissembled it,
with the greatest mildness she could, pretending not to understand it, and made
show to the Maid, as though she did not believe her.

Away went the Post, and my Master, calling me, chid me, but I satisfied him,
telling him my credulity; and since it had been no ill bout for him, he passed
it by, purposing to hold me from thence forward, in the opinion of a Fool.
Therefore took from me the Papers and other businesses in my custody, fearing
some other folly of greater consequence.

You see me here eased already, only for one folly: What should I have been, if
I had done many? Thus when Fortune considered that I was a Fool, she began to
look upon me with a milder countenance, and to treat me as a friend, for my
resemblance of her.

My Mistress was mollified, by the addresses, cares, importunities, and
subtilties of a Nobleman, who with equal power and caution served her; She
suffered his Courtship, received his Presents, his Comedies and his Treats,
only that she might not be thought clownish; she answered his Notes, not to be
discoruteous; finally, she liked the young man well, because she liked the old
man ill. And accounting me for secret, wise, and a dissembler; and graduating
me with the Pimpship of her Husband, she desired him that he would give leave
that I might be employed in her Service, her messages, and waiting on her; and
that the Page which she, till then, had kept for this, might serve him in my
stead; my Master was glad at the trucque, and struck the bargain, as one that
swops away a horse.

After a few days service of my new Commandress I was called aside by a Duena,
or Governess, into a room alone, peeping in every corner, to see if no body
heard us: I observing her behavior, concluded that, for certain, she would
give me a Schooling for the passed pimping. The reverend Matron, with her
Pontificial habit, a Hermit-like Rosary about her Neck, a little book of
Devotion in her hand, and a pair of large spectacles on her nose, took me by
the arm, and said, Although honest men have no need of being admonished, that
they should be so, because their nature stands prompting them to it; yet for
all this, they often slide into many errors, by not knowing the way: This, my
Son, I will now teach you: You are in a very principal and honorable House,
and till now have served the Master of it; but the neglects which are committed
with them, are not so notable as those which are committed with Ladies; you
serve my Mistress, mind me what I say, you must bend to her desires, you must
accomplish her will; for those who serve must not dispute, whether that which
is commanded be just or not, that is more for Churchmen then Pages: If you
would do discreetly, and for your own good, you need no other Loadstone then
Obedience, and Secrecy: Obey, friend, and be silent, if you would be obeyed
another day; you see many in these Streets that are served well, only because
they have served well.

My Mistress knows you to be loyal, and secret, because you have been so with
your Master, and although this has been to her prejudice, She esteems you for
it, as it is reason, considering that you also will be faithful with her
henceforward, being her Page.

There serves my Mistress (you must know) a Nobleman of this Court, a Person
powerful and liberal; She is a woman ill matched, and owes some gratitude to
the Love of this Prince (and telling me his title) you are to carry him (said
she) this Paper, which is the Answer of another of his, and the reward which he
shall give, will advertise you whether it be good to serve with secrecy or no;
and because it is not convenient to be telling you of it always, from
henceforth I forewarn you, that all the errands which shall be given you for my
Mistresses Cozen, you must carry to the Earl; and this is enough for the first
lesson. I gave her thanks for the good documents, and carried the Paper.

There I perceived how prejudicial a Fool is, since by my folly that
Gentlewoman came to cease being so, by becoming jealous and revengeful to her
Husband. Foolishness in men is like poison in poisonous creatures, of which the
Naturalists write, that it never does hurt to themselves, but to others; I
waxed fat with my follies, and others are destroyed by them: Here I also
observed, that the folly and lightness of married women was for the most part
learnt of their husbands; for, as Pliny says in his Panigerick to Trajane,
they esteem it an honor to imitate their Husbands.

Married friend that most nights leavest thy Wife, and go to seek another;
do not confide in that thy Wife is very obedient, for even for that reason she
may imitate thee with more facility. What a pleasant life did I lead in my new
Office! The first Pages of the World; those that took up this occupation by
their own choice, and not by use, as now adays, and that too, for want of other
employment; they, I say, were allured by this prosperity of Pages: Let us speak
plain (I mean) of Pimping: The Page that is not a Pimp, is not a Page, but a
mere pretender to it. This is the greatest good fortune, to this are all his
desires steared. The Page that thou shall see well, clad, brisk, and full of
money, has already attained to his perfection; the other poor tatterde-mallions
are still in their Sackcloth. How many Plays was I carried to? What sport did
I see? At what splendid feastings was I present? How much Gold had I given me?
What acquaintance did I gain? and from whence came all this good fortune to me,
but only for having the reputation of a Fool! My Mistress thought that I had
understood nothing of what I saw, and therefore confided all in me, as though
she did not confide in me at all.

At this time there happened to me a very pleasant accident, which was on this
manner. The Gentleman of the Horse had a spite to a pretty Lady of a certain
middle humor, betwixt grave and airy: He had treated her as a respectful
Lover, and made her hands sparkle with certain Diamonds, in which his
foolishness was resplendent: And coming a few days before this time, with the
caution which he thought convenient, he catched her napping with a Nobleman;
another night returning, he found her with another; at this he was swollen with
such honorable Jealousies, that he was ready to have burst, therefore
contrived this revenge.

He entreated me to put on my Masters richest suit of clothes, which was in his
custody, and that accompanied by the rest of the Pages of the House, I should
go visit her, feigning my self an Earl, and that I should rifle from her as
much as I could by handsome ways; for she was a woman who not only trusted her
Jewels to Genlemen, but her self also; which without scruple she delivered up
to them. Now I considered that being so grave, she would not be willing that
the first visit should be made by night, we therefore were of agreement that it
should be by day, and in my Masters Coach, who was then three Leagues from
Madrid, seeing the Sister which he writ to, when I called the Post; but the
Gentleman of the Horse charged me, that above all I should feign my self a
Fool, because this foolish greedy woman would confide the more in me.

In this Equipage we came to her House; I, very gallant, in the chief end of
the Coach, and the Pages waiting upon me; bad them say that the Earl of Rapina
was there, they having first given notice, we enter in; I made my congies
little and measured, sat me down, and without speaking a word, st^^d viewing
her from top to toe; and do you think this was the action of one in Love? No
such thing, I assure you; it was a project, as you shall presently hear.

I beheld her, and considered, How is it possible, thought I, that so good a
Face should have such wicked Ends? That so beautiful a head should be so empty?
What a sottishness it is for us to run mad after beauty? I always thought that
they had esteemed good faces, because they promise perfection in all the rest,
as well of the Body as of the Soul: For Nature in nothing dealt so kindly with
men, as in putting in their faces a Superscription, which tells the disposition
of every one: By it is known any whosoever. The Frowner, like me, stands saying
with his face, Take heed of me, for I am discontented and ill conditioned: The
Cheerful one says, I am all pleasantness and goodness: The Swarthy and tawny
complexion, that he has a course Soul: The high colored and bright haired,
that he is desparate. From hence then arose her estimation for beauty, but well
looked upon, it should not, since we see that a beautiful woman, as this, who
(for certain) was so in extremity, was both false and mad; false with my
Gentleman of the Horse, and mad with me, as you shall see.

She was troubled to see my amazement, and I said, It Is she, without doubt,
although she is injured in the Picture. She asked me what it was I said? I told
her, That lying idle at my State of Rapina, I had sent for the Pictures of the
most beautiful women and Ladies of the Court, and that hers had so infinitely
enamoured me, that I left my Lady Mother, and my good Gammons of Bacon, only to
see the Original, and that it had appeared to me more perfect than the Picture.
She laughed at the Lady Mother and the Gammons of Bacon, and took me for a
Fool; already making account that she was Lady of all Rapina: She used a world
of sugared words, and expressions to me; she soothed me up, and lulled me with
much gentleness and tenderness. What think you, that this wrought upon me? No,
for although I have confessed I am a Fool, yet not that I am a Brute.

Is it possible there are those that can esteem this sort of loose women, who
only make their aim at the worst and less stable thing that we have. Three
goods adorn us, of the Soul, of the Body, and of Fortune; the two first, which
are discretion, and good deportment, are the most worthy, the last is not our
own; this then do women court, and lay their allurements and baits to catch it;
this they make much of, and for nothing do they esteem it so highly, as for its
instability, since from thence it is, that it comes to their hands with more
facility; can any man esteem these their flatteries, knowing that they are not
for him, but against him, and that they are saying in plain terms, thou art a
Fool, and ill-favored, thy money pleases me. I do not say that it is not
reason, we should court the Ladies with splendid Liberality, for it rather is
the promoter of Love than the hinderer; what incenses me is, that the Interest
should be the principal, and that there is no remembering of other pledges more
divine.

I assure you, upon the faith of an ill-conditioned man, that this Creature did
not enamour me, but rather she troubled me so much that I shortened the Visit,
letting her, with great tenderness, know how well I was pleased with some
Diamond Rings which she had on her fingers, of those which are set in the
fashion of Stars with many small Diamonds; and without more ado, I plucked them
from off her fingers, saying, By the Life of my Mother, they shall make you as
many more of this same fashion; what well made Rings they are, and how pretty
they show! What hoe, where are you? Let us away to the Jewellers. With this I
took leave, and she came to the door to wait upon me, with many shows of
gratitude and pleasure for this Honor, professing her self to be much my
servant. I carried my Rings to the Gentleman of the Horse, who staid for us
hard by: and taking him into my Coach, gave him my side, and together shared
the booty betwixt us, so ended his Courtship.

I then perceived that those who show an affection to this sort of women, do it
not so much for Love, as for Custom; it is a confusion, not a wound; they do it
as men hair-brained, not as those in Love. I went reprehending his ill choice,
and added, My Love succeeds better with me; for I am enamoured of a young
Damsel, where there is no danger of these businesses. If she does me any favor
it is faithful and true, for covetousness does not teach her to counterfeit: If
she does me none, it is not contempt of me, because I suppose that she does it
but to keep the decorum which is due, and I have hopes too that she dissembles
a love: But I have none of these infamous Jealousies, for I stand secure on her
merits, that yield not up themselves on easy terms.

The Doctor Cenudo was much pleased at the recital of this his amorous
enterprise, expecting great applause from Don Felix, and looking upon him with
attention to see how he commended it, perceived he was fallen asleep. The
Historian being displeased at this neglect, pretended not to understand that it
was a sleep, and knowing he was sometimes troubled with a pain at his heart,
which was wont to make him faint, he took a basin of water, saying, Bless us!
Heaven deliver thee! threw it all in his face. Don Felix awaked, and seeing
that he had taken it for a swound, thought it a great happiness to have found
this excuse for his unmannerliness; and feeling himself very wet, and all the
Labyrinth of his Ruff spoiled, he gave him thanks, saying, that he found
himself not well, and went away promising to return the day following. He
complied with his word, fully determining not to sleep, and after having
repeated the account, the Doctor went on with his History.

CHAP. III. He prosecutes his History, and relates what happened to him in the
Court being a Page, and his various Successes in Salamanca.
THis manner of Platonic Love, these pleasant conceits, and these amorous
inclinations, confirmed me more in the reputation of a Fool: for men generally
are so much enamored of their own parts, that they judge for ill and ridiculous
all that which they see not in themselves: Now there was none that Loved after
this method as I did. Of force then, they must blame it for ill contrived and
foolish: The Gentleman of the Horse laughed at what he should have admired: I
praised to him the caution and wariness with which my Mistress suffered her
self to be seen; and I celebrated her disdains, being more satisfied with them
than if they had been favors, telling him that that was a thing extraordinary
in a woman of her deportment and quality.

The Gentleman of the Horse, that was a merry fellow, said, What will Senor
Cenudo lay with me, that if he goes this evening to see her, in that pomp and
state which he now goes in, and makes her believe that all these riches came
with the Fleet sent by his Father (a thing easy to be believed, since they
knew that I had a Father in the Indies, and in no ordinary employment) that she
becomes not pliable, flatters him, and humbly corresponds with his desires. I
should be ashamed, answered I, to lay wagers on impossibilities: But let us go
now and make trial, with all my heart, if you please. We went then, and sending
in a Page before to tell them that I was there, The Joy of mine Eyes peeped at
a low Grate window, and saw me, but did not yet know me, till I begged leave to
kiss her hands, she knew the voice, came forth surprised, and by the Page
informed her self of the Novelty; he that was already charmed in the lie,
painted me very rich, and my Father President of the Canaries or some such
thing. Out comes the Mother and Daughter to receive us, we enter with a world
of complements: they were astonished at the greatness, not knowing if they
should style me Lordship or Worship: At last my Damsel determined to call me
Thou, with much tenderness and endearments; we were seated first in high
chairs, but she bad me sit down upon a Cushion by her side, because she would
see me nearer: Then took me by the hands, and praised the Diamonds, I assisted
my self by my folly, not to give her them, by not saying they were at her
service; for although it is a fault for a man to fall into the opinion of being
a Fool, it is much greater to fall into that of being covetous, and so I had
the fortune to escape the latter, by falling into the former. She cheerfully
and smilingly took my hand into hers, not to tell me my good fortune, but to
think that she had it very sure.

Ever and anon the Gentleman of the Horse, (whom I then called Cozen) looked
upon me, and at every look fetched fresh blushes into my cheeks, to see how
glad he was to have made that trial. I asked for water, they brought me some,
as also great variety of sweet meats, all sour to me: so much Mistress was
Shame over me, that it suffered me not to reach what she brought me in her
hands, which the Baggage thought I did out of my dullness and folly.

We then take our leaves, having been well treated, she desiring me very
earnestly, that I would see her again that night, that I would not make my self
a stranger there, nor with my new fortune forget the Love which I owed her;
with these and such like follies she accompanied us to the Door (a new
courtesy in Ladies) and the Mother made great offers to my Cozen, of I cannot
tell what, and told him (whilst we were talking by our selves) of the Dowry of
her Daughter, of her Quality, and other things which savored of Matrimony.

My Cozen, when we saw our selves alone, had no mercy on me with his scoffing
reproaches, and I was so much ashamed, and astonished to see that all were
alike, that I yielded up my Love, as he who knew, that neither the first
disdain had been made to me, but to my Poverty; nor the last favor obtained in
honor of my person, but of my fortune; so foolish had I been in her Love, that
I esteemed her contempts as the credit of her value, and used to say within my
self: This is that which ought to be esteemed; This is Glory.

But I served my self of their courtesy, and vifited them sometimes by night,
very fine with my colored Cloak, and Hat like a Spark, and my gilded Sword;
all which belonged to the Gentleman of the Horse, who was much pleased to see
me begin to plot my revenge.

A great while it was that I enjoyed all that which the strict Religion of
Virginity permits; many excellent treats, and some favors of value. Observe
but the madness of Women, who (only for having an opinion that I was rich,
though I had never given them any thing, but rather received many from them)
esteemed me so highly, that they knew not what to make of me.

By this time the cunning Gypsey suspected that I must needs be up to the Ears
in Love with her: For they could not imagine that a man, so much a Fool as I,
could lie or dissemble, with so much confidence.

Now, although I understood that she bare me some Love, yet would I not make
any return: Because I knew that Feast was not made really to me, but to the
false Riches, which they imagined came to me from the Indies: And therefore I
remitted the gratitude to them. I then grew very formally angry, and said
within my self; How is it possible that these kind of women can be so foolish,
as to love what is not, nor cannot be; and despise that which has being and
value? That thus, can love in me what I have not, and despise what I have? With
opportunity and converse I began to set aside shame, in regard it is the
opinion of wise men, that it is an ill companion for the passages of Love; and
spoke to her now as a Master, never mentioning those heretical love-toys which
I was accustomed to do, when I was more a Fool; I remembered me, that she was a
woman of flesh and bone, because I beheld her near; and at the same instant
that I, being incensed against her, did contemn her, she made her self
contemptible; and at the same instant that I accounted her a Fool, she fooled
her self.

I learned then, how important it is for a man to be a Fool, to enjoy his Love;
for whilst I was discreet, whilst I knew how to observe the respect which all
understanding men should observe to Love, I contented my self with wind and
smoke, and yet got the opinion of being a mad man: But after I became a Fool in
strictness, and discreet according to the opinion of the world, I obtained what
I would, being called and entreated to it, like a witness to a last Will.

Without doubt we are in the fault of the pride of women, our esteem gives them
estimation, our respect makes them look for it: For as all are highly
credulous, and chiefly in flatteries give us belief, thinking, for certainty,
that they are what we paint them, and merit the reverence and honor which we
pay them; so they esteem themselves, for that which we esteem them: What
greater evidence of their credulity, then that so soon as they have made an end
of putting on a new face, when, seeing their own handiwork in the
looking-glass, they believe that that white and red color is their own, and
brought with them out of their mothers belly? We may be confident that they
believe it, for if they did not, they would not make such estimation of
themselves as they do. The best way is to despise them, for he that most
respects and adores them, bears arms against himself: There want not some, who
say, that that which made Narcissus mad, and desperate, was not his beauty, but
the flattery of a Nymph: What greater advantage of thy Beauty, then to see thy
self solicited for it, with so many endearments? The Fountain could not say so
much to him, it rather told him that it was a fading flower, and easily subject
to miscarriages.

I found many nights afterward, other visits of several Gallants with her, but
passed by all without being jealous, a thing that gave me letters of favor,
that she should wish me for her Husband; nay Avarice too availed me for this;
for listening once, I heard her Mother praise me, saying: This man, my
Daughter, is for our turns; This is one that knows how to keep his estate, and
not spend it amongst lewd women, since loving thee so dearly, he has never
shown any sign of Prodigality: Well fare the Mother that bare him, for he
pleases me, and not these Sweet-meat Gallants, who with two Farthingworth of
Scholarship, four Complements, eight Courtesies, and sixteen Flatteries, all
learnt as the knowledge of a Parrat, by having heard others say them, without
knowing themselves what they say, would have us believe that they are very
Eagles, and then suffer their Feathers to be pulled like Pigeons.

I having come so often near the Fire, by this time grew a little heated, and
began to treat of Marriage, she thinking that in that word was brought to her
all the Indies: In exchange of it gave me many Corals, Pearls, Cristals, Silver
and Gold, and yet it seemed to her, that she came short: Love did then utterly
forsake me, so great a number of toying fooleries glutted me, so much sweetness
relaxed me, another would have eaten his fingers after it, but the Palats of
men are almost as different as their countenances.

My Master, intending to go out to the A plensant walk on one side of Madrid
whither the Gallants resort every evening in summer time, to take the air. It
is adorued with many curious fountains, and rows of high trees, and is watered
at 3 or 4 a clock in the afternoons by Porters at the charge of the Town.
Prado, one Sunday with more state then usual, because his Majesty that day was
to come down to the Dukes Garden, would needs have all the Servants of the
House to wait upon him, as well my Mistresses as his own; I went amongst them,
and coming to the Covent of the Cl^rigos Menores, I saw two women, veiled with
weaved smoke, and Clouds of Silk, so thin were their Mantles and head
coverings; they looked upon me earnestly, and I accounting my self happy in
passages of Love, began to think that they were taken with something in me;
whereat I being infinitely glad, walked stately, and let my Masters Coach pass
forward, and the ill company of the Pages, endeavoring not to appear one of
them; but it was impossible, because I carried the brand which clave to my
whole body in the Livery. The Devil invented this fashion, I had rather have
carried a Penitential Collar, for that might be concealed under the Ruffs which
they use now a days, but a Livery that on all sides of it makes proclamation
that it is another, there is nothing can conceal it. I drew nearer them,
looking very pleasantly, and said to them: The Prize is yours, my Ladies,
sheath your arrows, for on him that yields up himself so soon they are but
lost; and so was running on with much Courtship, not fit for modest and
virtuous women, but such as is used to those that are loose and wanton, they
held their peace, and looked upon me, one of them whispering to the other now
and then, and sighing: It Is done, as I live thought I, the wench sighs for me,
and shall they hereafter find fault with Plays, which introduce a Lady that
falls in Love with a handsome Gentleman newly arrived, at the first sight, since
I a poor Page, and in a Livery, it being now, at least, four years since I have
trotted up and down the Streets of Madrid, and this woman stands sighing for
me, me thought that shame detained them; I therefore began to tempt her with
Roguery, showing that excellent faculty I had in it, as knowing already by
experience, that that looking another way steers directly forward in these
adventures.

Still the veiled Ladies held their tongues, with which they enamoured me not a
little, for Love is the Son of admiration, and there is none greater than to
see two women siient so long time; at last the most brisk and airy of them,
putting out a hand from under her veil, which might have affronted the snow for
whiteness, made me a sign with it, that I should follow them, and took their
way toward the most unfrequented part of the upper Prado. I followed them more
joyful then Medoro when he triumphed over the fair Angelica, cursing my destiny
that since it had made me so fortunate in my Amors, it had not given me
wherewithal to be grateful.

Being now come to the privatest place of those Groves, they making a stand, I
drew near to her with the talking hands that gave me the sign, and came almost
to join my face to hers, but at the instant she catching me fast hold with one
hand by my Ear, began with the other most furiously to maul me, giving me many
Cuffs and buffets, whilst her companion armed with the two woods of her A kind
of wooden pattens, or clogs which the women use to wear.
Chappines, which she had taken from her feet, showered such a storm of blows
about my Ears, and whole body, as left me half dead: In the skirmish, she that
had laid on with the greatest eagerness, discovered her face, so that I knew
her to be the Liberal Damsel, who, finding the imposture of my Pagick Indies,
took that desperate course, and perceiving now that she was known, they
unsheathed their tongues, and with them gave me many wounds in my honor; I
would have satisfied them, but it was impossible; for they rayled so violently,
that by any means they would not suffer me to utter a word. I fell on my knees,
told them many stories, made my pretense of the Errors of Love, and that Love
equals all, and other follies of this kind: but neither did conceits profit me,
nor humilities, for returning to maul me afresh, at last, they went away
wearied, but not satisfied; threatening me, that the Morsel should cost me my
life.

I unwound the wheel of my Love, after seeing the Chappins, and now began to
grow out of conceit with the place too, finding that the best which it afforded
was stark naught.

It happened a few days after this, that my Master making one of those
Journeys from home, which he was wont to do, the They are for the most part
ancient widows though sometimes wives, and wear a particular habit. Of these
the Spanish Ladies keep, some two, some four, or six, according to their
qualities.
Duena or Governess called me aside, and gave me a paper for my Mistresses
Gallant, charging me, that I should be watchful that night, because the Earl
was to come to see her, and that I should open him the Door. I promised to do
it, carried the paper, and received for a reward a Chain of Gold, with which
the Earl put me into new Fetters. Now though I was naturally free, ill
conditioned, and one that could not brook the seeing things that were undecent;
yet this metal, which by being Son of the Sun, seeming to have its Empire from
its Father, did wrest my disposition, and subjected me as a Slave.

Night came, and my Folly drew me out of this danger, which, without doubt, was
great: The folly was, I had a mind to show my Mistress that I knew the
Straights in which her honor passed, thinking by this means I should gain her
favor, and that she would esteem me, and treat me better; knowing that the
life of her reputation was in my Tongue. Surely though the pleasures of Love
should have no other sharpness more then this, of being subject to a malicious
Page, and deceitful Governess, it would be occasion enough to make us forsake
them, without giving them any farewell.

I came with much Eloquence, and told her the Joy in which the Earl remained to
see himself so near the Port of his hope. This was news to her, nor could she
understand me 'till after she had made a strict enquiry of me, who it was that
had given me the Paper, she fell into account, that it was the imposture of the
Duena, who had bargained to sell her that night, being greedy of the Gifts,
which with an amorous, that is to say, liberal hand, the Earl had given her.
She asked me if I had formerly carried other Notes or Messages, I told her
infinite, and that the Duena had given me them all; whereat she made a thousand
Crosses, being extremely troubled, and said, So, So, you are he that
counterfeited the Fool, and she the same that pretetended Sanctity; You have
brought me to a fine pass, but, upon my Faith, I have a Husband that will know
how to chastize you. Much a do she had to utter these words, in such manner had
anger possessed her breast; wherefore retiring to her Bedchamber, she left me
there in great confusion with the payment that such bad Services deserved.

I was astonished at the Trick that the Duena had put upon me, for a Duena was
only able to fool a man so. This Creature, full of vain ostentation, proves
unfaithful always, with whatsoever comes to hand: From that time, I began to
abhor those kind of women; there are no people so deceitful, nor of such vile
thoughts. And nothing angers me so much as that they should be so ill, under
the dress and Cloak of Devotion. They think not of any other thing, then how
they may sell the young daughter which the Mother has committed to their
Governance: Or the new married wife, which the Husband has entrusted them with:
It Is needful to have a watchful eye over them, for they are very close Bawds,
not like that The Spanish Bawd Englished, and many times bound up with Gusman.
Celestina, who by the rents of her Veil discovered her Office: Who the Devil
invented that dress for them, since they are not all Widows? Their deceit
invented it; and to deceive us they put it on.

How brittle is the honor of women, that neither suffices it to be well born;
neither suffices the splendor of their breeding, nor the Ornament of a noble
Husband: All is broken in the hands of a covetous Duena; who thinking that all
are as ill as she was when she could be so: They imagine that they do them a
kindness when they are injuring them, and promise in their name filthy follies.

I revenged my self of the Duena much to my satisfaction: For it being now
late, and she gone to bed betimes, thinking to rise at two of the Clock in the
night, which was the appointed hour for the meeting: I put on a Farrenden
Cloak, came into her Chamber, and to her bed side, where she lay alone, rusling
my Silks, and speaking with a hoarse voice, I counterfeited the person of the
Earl, took my buckled Girdle, and with severe words and hands, chastized her,
much to my content, pretending to be injured; That an Earl as I, should be
affronted in that manner, her Mistress being so Chaste and so Holy.

I then went down to the streetdoor, with intent to send back the Earl, but
found they had taken away the key, by the command of my Mistress, who, not
trusting to my simplicity, nor to the Sanctity of the Duena, would keep it that
night with her self, and had also locked many other Doors that were betwixt
that, and her own Chamber.

I went to bed, seeing the business was well remedied, but slept not all night
long, for anger, and vexation at the accident, and to consider how uncertain
the Judgments of men are, and how little credit can be given, even to ones own
Eyes, although they are the most faithful Sense: I had seen that she had
received his Presents, and his Treats, but my Mistress knew not that they were
his; for she had thought, that they had been the Entertainments of a Lady her
friend, by whose hand they came. So unhappy is Beauty, that even Friendship it
self practices Treason with it. Let not the unhandsom complain of being little
fortunate; but let them believe me, that Beauty brings with it many cares; and
pays a few false flatteries, with many true griefs.

The next morning I arose with the Day, fearful of what might befall me, went
to the Earl, and found that he was going to bed, complaining of his head, I,
counterfeiting a trouble, besought him that we might be left alone, and said to
him, It Is well that your Lordship mocks with so much despite such principal
women. Sir, I come to acquaint you from my Mistress, that you have entrance
granted you into her House, as well as into her Breast, and yet you come not at
the appointed hour: Your Lordship should have left play for one night, with a
mischief, how much mind soever you might have had to it, you should not have
dealt so discourteously with one that so much esteemed you; in a Case that may
go near to cost her her life. By All those Earls who are also Knights do wear
the particular habit of their order.
the habit I wear, replied the Earl, I have staid there like a stone of the
Porch of her House, since two a Clock inthe night: Then, said I, your Lordship
has ill fortune, for I staid waiting for you at the Door a little before that
hour; and hearing a horse stop, thinking it had been your Lordship, I opened
the Door, and said, Is it the Earl? Your Lordship may come in, for my Mistress
expects you with desire enough.

Scarce had I said this, when the Gentleman alighting (who was my Master) took
me by the arm, and thrust me into the House, commanding a Servant that came
with him, to lock the door, then put me into his own Chamber, where, after he
had given me many Scurges, he pressed me that I should tell him who the Earl
that I expected, was. I told him a feigned name, and that it was not any Plot
of my Mistresses, but my own, and the Duena's, who by the gifts, with which he
had corrupted our Loyalties, had promised him the Door that night; with this he
left me, conjuring me; that I should keep it secret, and went to chastize the
Duena, and know from her the rest. Your Lordship therefore runs a great hazard,
if she discovers it, as I fear she will.

Thou say true, said the Earl, for she is a Woman, I have ill trusted my
business, and have undone my self, for the Husband being an Arrogonian and
Noble, will search me out to kill me, as he has reason on his side, which is a
great advantage: I will therefore absent my self. So he did within a few days,
under pretense of seeing his Towns, and left me accommodated with a Brother of
his, who was to go to The chief University of Spain.
Salamanca, very suddenly, with whom I went a Page, and took the way of
discretion by mere Folly.

See here, that my being a Fool was not only profitable to me, but also the
feigning my self to be one, for only my feigning that I had done so great a
Folly, as going out to receive another which came on horseback, thinking it was
the Earl; (as if Gallants and those so wary as he was, would have gone the
rounds a horseback) availed me, and I gained a new Master, which was to my
great advantage.

He was the second in the Earls family, and had about sixteen thousand Ducats
of Ecclesiastical Revenue coming in yearly, yet had more Folly than Rent. Would
you now have me stop here, to exclaim with ill language against Fortune, and
tell her, she is mad, since she so much disdained such a Wit as the Doctor
Cenudo's, that she made him servant to a Fool, and likewise gave him the
Estimation of a Fool? (for herein also the blind woman shows her malice) and to
the other Coxcomb, a mere dull blockhead, she gave sixteen thousand Ducats of
Benefices, as clear and simple, as he, and it may be too, a better opinion of
being wise, then to me. For as Flattery is the Harbinger of Fame, he had money
wherewith to oblige her, and to hold her ready at his beck, and never spoke a
Folly, which was not applauded for a high conceit.

O Riches! who would think that ye should havevalue (being so uncertain) to buy
immortal Glories? Such as those which good opinion leaves bound up in famous
Monuments: Now I say, that they have reason who adore you, that they are of a
generous and splendid nature, who deliver up themselves in your confidence,
since in it, they enjoy so high ambitions. My Friend, if you that have been
bred up amongst the Vulgar, have understood that there is such a thing as
Fortune, complain of her at your pleasure, either call her Destiny, or
Influence of the Stars, or what you will; but I, who know that all this
Celestial Harmony has its Poles in the Providence of God, have already fallen
into account, that whatsoever shall be distributed amongst us of goods or ills,
cannot but be with a very great deal of Reason and Justice; and if you do not
penetrate the manner, blame your own understanding, or do not blame that, but
your Pride, which would call Heaven to examination: If a blind man should
murmur against the darkness of the Sun, would you not say, that the fault was
in his Eyes? Then why will you not say the same to him, who accuses the
neglects of Providence, in the Sun of Justice? But because you perceive that
the fault is in your selves.

Do you not think that the Fool, my Master, who was born so, had most need of
those sixteen thousand Ducats? Because it was of force, according to the order
of the Heavens; since if he should not have had them, he had suffered two most
grievous detriments, which would have argued injustice: One in being-born
naked, of the chiefest goods, which are those of the Wit: The other, in that
with this want, he remained also without the succor, that should help humane
necessities: The Providence then was, that in regard the most excellent goods
were not given him, those should be given him which all call goods; and since
Wit was not given him, whereby to succor himself, Wealth should be given him,
with which he should be succored: But I who, thanks be to God, was born with
an unbyased, and free reason, if ill tongues had not injured me, what greater
goods? I that could avail my self with it, and being employed in Offices or
other exercises, could gain what my nature had need of; why should I complain,
that I was not born rich and powerful? Complain you that are a Fool, yet take
heed how you complain; for other complaints oblige, but these displease: I am
poor, and have the the opinion of a Fool; but had I the reputation of a wise
man, I should not be poor: Do you therefore undertake for me, and assure me,
that when I take Pen in hand, I shall know what I say, with discretion; I shall
account my self for very happy; and you may go whither you will with your
opinion and vain riches, for you have need enough of them.

The Earl had much credited my modesty, my wariness, and secrecy, a thing that
made me my bed for my ease, in confidence of which, my Master employed me only
in matters of his pleasure: He had also commended to him my simplicity, and I
belyed it not with my Frown; therefore the first Frolic which he did, in
coming to Salamanca, was to make sport with my mildness, and goodness (as he
called it) to his friends, to which he added, that I had now and then certain
pleasant conceits, which gilded over my humor. They determined then to show
what they knew, by discovering what I was ignorant of, but I discovered what
they were ignorant of, by showing what I knew.

There were together about a dozen of the servants of those Gentlemen, my
Masters Friends, that were making merry with him one night, who, wearing their
Fringes, Caps, and, Hoods, like a Junto of Doctors, after the Salva given, with
Trumpets and Kettle-Drums, sent a message to my Master (I being present)
wherein they told him, that in that University, there was an approved custom,
for a long time, that they should make a private trial of the wit, and ability
of every one that should come to learn any faculty; because former Ages, for
not having done it had fallen into many Errors: That they dispensed with his
Worship, in respect of his good opinion, which had already appeared in his
favor; but that Pedro Cenudo his Servant was suspected in his ability, and
therefore that he would give leave he might come to examination; my Master
answered, he should come with all his heart; and thanking much the Doctors that
they would honor his Lodging, he received them in a spacious Room wherein all
things were well prepared for the Ceremony.

The Doctors sat down in their order, as showing that one had regard to the
antiquity of the other; and after one of them had propounded with more dilated
reasons, the same which they had said in their message; there came two
Mace-bearers for me, who set me in the middle of the Hall upon a little Form,
with a lighted Torch on both sides of me, that they might be Witnesses of my
shame.

Each Doctor asked me various questions, them and their answers I have written
in this Paper; which, to convince the Authority of the Doctors, and strengthen
the weaknesses of my opinion; I straight took care to write, putting them
Dialogue-wise, for shortness, with these two letters, M, which stands for
Master, and F, for Fool; do you read it who have the best Eyesight, and you
will see how little we may trust to Doctors, or how little distrust Fools;
since they held these Sentences for Follies. Don Felix took the Paper, and read
thus.

The Fools Examination.

Which is the most discreet Folly? F. Love. M. Which is the most entertaining
Folly? F. Play. M. Which is the most excusable Folly? F. Ambition. M. How may a
Fool cease being so? F. By knowing that he is so. M. How shall he know that he
is so? F. By discoursing with wise men. M. What has a man need of to become
wise? F. To be Modest and Docible. M. Why are there so many Fools in the world?
F. Because no body thinks himself one. M. To what Science are you inclined? F.
To all. M. And are you able to learn all? F. Do you know how to teach me them
all? M. All are taught in this University. F. If then all are taught, why may
not all be learnt? M. The life of man is too short for so large an undertaking.
F. Is there more to be done then to lengthen it? M. How can it be lengthened?
F. by unloosing the knots which restrain it. M. What knots restrain it? F. The
pleasures of Love, the bewitchings of Play, the follies of Ambition, and the
madness of Covetousness: These are the knots, by which the Life, that of it
self is long, appears short. M. Never or very seldom is a Wit capable of more
than one Science, and therefore the University has ordained that we should
make trial of the Capacity of every one, by questions of all Sciences, and then
teach him that wherein he shall answer with most felicity. F. This is a
madness, and not worthy so much Fringe, and Cap: For if I should hit well upon
a Science, what need would there be that you should teach it me? Teach me that
which I shall understand least. M. Although you should have a Wit inclinable to
one faculty, and so inclinable, that without having studied it (guided only by
your natural ingenuity) you were able to answer to any question, yet is it of
great consideration to study it in this University, and to crown your self with
its Laurel; and, in like manner, is it of great consideration for you, that
although you should know more Philosophy than Aristotle, by having learnt it in
Books and Solitudes; for it will not not seem that you know a word, unless you
take your degree of Master or Doctor. F. I have little Faith in Fringes, since
I have seen Carriers Mules with infinite of them; or in Caps, because I have
seen many Madmen wear Caps: But in regard we must follow the Humor of the
world, there is nothing but Patience, I am contented to be examined: Let Us hear
your Questions.

M. Will you learn the Laws? F. I would gladly be a Lawyer, if there was
nothing to be learnt. M. I understand you not. F. The Law is nothing else but
Reason, which guides us to follow what is just; and this lives in minds, not
only Learned, but also Rustic, for they guide themselves likewise with reason,
unless some passion or affection hinder them; but the inconveniency which I
find in this faculty, is, that there is too much written in it, and too much to
be learnt; for from hence arises the obscurity, and clouds of reason and
Justice. When I see a poor Plowman go to advise with a Lawyer, and that by the
way, relating the Case, without understanding what he does, makes known to him
his Justice and the reasons which give him breath; I perceive that the Office
of such a Lawyer is nothing more than to authorize the reason of the other,
with his worshipful Title of Licenciate, or Doctor, such a one. Then who can
endure to see, that the professors of this Faculty should be so little
esteemed, that that if they say, it is now night, they are not credited unless
they allege twenty texts, and Bartolus and Baldus, with a thousand other
Writers. M. The Office of a Judge whither they also go, by this Faculty, runs
not those hazzards. F. Why not? I see every day, that what one sentences,
another contradicts: Why is this? It Is either Passion, or Ignorance. I care not
then sor an employment at such extremes.

M. Would you be a Physician? F. I am no such great friend of feeling the
Wenches Pulses, and handling them; yet I could be one with a good will, was it
not for casting their Waters, and asking how many Stools they have had, which
agrees not at all with my Stomach.

M. According to this, you would only be a natural Philosopher. F. There is no
Science that fits my Nature like this, but to learn it, I would not come to The
two principal Universities of Spain.
Salamanca, neither would I go to Alcala: Because I see that all the Ancient
Philosophers go contradicting one the other, as they succeed in their several
Ages; and that at this day, you reprove Aristotle, and perchance you have
reason for it: Neither can I abide that you should found all natural causes, in
heat, and moisture; and that although you find no creep-hole for many
difficulties, you stand beating your brains all your life time, with
Sophistical Arguments, only because such a Philosopher said it, who, should he
live now, and hear your clamorous disputes, without doubt would tell you, that
he said it not for so much ado: This, in my opinion, is a Science which is
altogether written in the contemplation, and there is no Library like a fresh
and pleasant Field, in an April morning.

M. Me thinks the Good man is given to Poesy and good Learning. F. As for
Poetry, it is long since I have known it. M. The Art of Poetry do you know? I
have seen but few in the world that have known it. F. The Precepts of Poetry
are like the Precepts of the Law of God, which all know, but few keep; and so
it is not to be doubted, but that the Art may be known, but not easily
practiced.

M. According to this you would pass your* Life time in reading Philosophers,
Historians, and Rhetoricians? F. All these seem to me wearisome people: For the
ancient Philosophers were no other than certain idle Fellows, who went up and
down from Feast to Feast, and from Tavern to Tavern, with which they lived
merrily, and engendered good blood, and sometimes at unawares, let fall some
witty sentence, as they that are merry with Wine, utter by dozens; now having a
great and venerable opinion, the sottish Vulgar observed those Sayings as
Oracles; some years after sprang up an Elegant man, who, finding those sayings
Canonized by the Estimation of the People, polisheth them and writes them for
posterity, with the name of the Lazy Coxcomb that said them; and as those who
came after, found them trimmed up, and recommended with the Veneration of
Antiquity, they gave them credit, in such sort that any truth of these,
although it seem but like one of those which we call of Perogrullo the Buffoon,
has as much Authority amongst the Learned, as if it were the Law of a Sacred
Council.

I am a man, who, the day wherein I either get moneys, or good hopes from the
Wench I court, or hear good news, speak more conceits than all those ancient
Philosophers, in more than a thousand Feastings or Entertainments, if it was
not, that this of my not having an opinion, and all the worlds being so full of
wise men, (each of which would be the praised one, without leaving a branch of
Laurel for another) holds me disesteemed, and particularly the tatters of this
Gown; for I was born in an Age, wherein good clothing is a sign of a good wit,
as if there were not horses well harnessed. The Spanish Physicians, when they
go to see their Patiens, do always ride on Mules.
The other day I met a Physician, a friend of mine, and asking him when he
began to clear the world of sick folks: He told me that he expected moneys to
buy him a Mule, as if the Mule had been to feel the Pulse, or cast the Water.

Then the Historians maule and slash me to death: there are no such unquiet
people in the world; these are all for Wars, and more than Wars, like the
mad-mans dreams, and if at any time they relate matters of Peace, they pass as
quickly over them as a Cat over fire-coles: a thousand Musketeers shall not
draw them from the Wars. I account them people of an ill palate, and therefore
affect them not; for their pleasing themselves so much, in painting out an Army
of cowardly white-liver'd fellows: and praising for greatness of Courage the
rashness of some Barbarian: Is not this the Index of a Demonaick nature? I
cannot find a peaceable Historian; a Historian of State; one that I might
converse withal, as with a prudent-man, and not these Furies, that a man
supposing he talks with a person of Judgment, and when he least thinks on it,
he sees him armed Cap-a-pe. Historian of Lucifer! are there not transactions in
Peace that deserve everlasting memory? Does there not marvels of excellent
Virtues happen? Why do thou not relate them? A thousand times have I fancied,
that they, on purpose, do describe thundrings and ratlings of a Battle, only
that they may bring in with it. their pompous and corpulent oration.

Khetorick I call not an Art, but a mere trifle; for, to persuade in speaking,
what needs any greater Art than for a man to know what he says, and have a good
will to say it. When I see a Merchant selling his Merchandise, who without
knowing Rhetoric, persuades that a long napped Cloth is a soft Velvet, and
that Stockins of Cammels hair, are of Toledo Silk, I curse Rhetoric to the
Devil, and him that says it is needful in the world.

M. Now of force, we must understand one another; you, it seems, come to learn
the Mathematical Arts or Sciences? F. God preserve my Judgment, since that
Science that puts it self into conversation with the Stars, certainly savours
of madness; for the Stars are far distant from us: And yet suppose we should
calculate a Nativity by them, and follow the traeks of it, it must needs be a
sad thing, to pry into fortune, and thrice to feel evils, and to defraud the
Joy of good events: Evils are three times felt; before they come, with fear;
when they come, with grief; and afterward with the memory: The Joy of good
events may be defrauded, because now when they come, the hope is slackned, and
their value did diminish by little and little, from the time that they began to
be hoped for.

The other Arts, as Music, Geometry, Arithmetic, and Cosmography, are not for
my Chollerick humor; for in not apprehending them by halves, I tire out the
patience of him that teaches me.

M. These Gentlemen have thought good to give you a term of time, wherein you
should deliberate better of the Science, which shall best suit with your
Genius: And in the mean while, that this your foolishness continues, we condemn
you to serve, which is the proper occupation of Fools.

Don Felix did greatly admire and applaud the Fools Examination; at which the
Doctor being well pleased prosecuted his Theme. All these wise sayings they
held for follies, merely because I answered not as they supposed I would have
done. So that folly amongst men, is no other thing than a contradiction of
Opinions; and him alone we account a Fool, who is not of the same opinion as we
are. Hence it is, that in your Judgment there is no wise man; open your breast,
and behold it well, for I know what I am saying, I know that you esteem your
own Crotchets for high conceits, and that all those who condemn them (in your
opinion) are very Fools: And you are the only one, who perceive not that you
are no Angel, having so many things of a Man, and, I may say, of a Brute too,
and that it is most certain, that you know not any thing for certain.

As I saw that Assembly of so grave Doctors make a Laugh at what deserved
applause, I began from that day forward to despise every man that was called
Doctor, thinking that all were as foolish as those Doctors; I imagined that
discretion and good wit was not in Fringes, because I saw also, that the
water-bearers asses were adorned with them: Nay, so much did I abhor the word
Doctor, that being fallen sick of certain violent Rheums, which, distilling
from my head to my stomach, were so offenfive to my throat, that I was
persuaded it would strangle me; yet would I not do what the Doctor ordered me,
which was to be forthwith let blood. It Is sufficient, said I, that the Doctors
take away my reputation, without taking away my life. Two days after I was
well, and this came by my Folly of not caring for the Doctors; for had I obeyed
mine, I had destroyed my self, if it be certain in Physic, that there is
nothing worse, or more dangerous in cold distempers than Blouding.

I went not to hear those readings which that College of Fools had enjoined
me, thinking that those very same were the Masters, which taught the faculty of
Cannons; and what credited my suspicion, was to see that, without Art or
Method, they taught a Faculty which had so much need of it. I despised them
then, and this Folly procured me much ease and profit: For the time which I
should have spent at these readings, wherein only was treated, of writing the
Dreams or Thefts of such or such a Master, I employed in one Book or another,
of the Faculty, in my own Lodging, where, with better Style, more Clearness,
and greater Elegancy, I learnt in one hour more than I should have done in a
year, at the Readings of the Doctors.

Who would think that Folly would assist toward the making men learned? Yet
you see here what made me a Scholar; for I put by (with this) a thousand
troubles, of pretenders who tired men a whole day with cringes and entreaties
to hear them one hour: I avoided the disquiets of the Schools; they wearied not
me to ask me my Vote: for when I promised it but by halves, they not holding me
ingenious enough to lie, easily gave me Credit: The loud applause of the
Victors, or their Rolls, I was never charged with, it seemed to them that I was
not fit for these; so that, enjoying great quietness, I held them all for my
Friends.

My Master, that saw me so little affected to the Schools, gave me an
Employment, which not only did not oblige me to see them, but even removed me
many Leagues from them. He had conquered, by force of his money, a Girl, all
sweetness; and being jealous, as he had reason, in regard he was but very
hard-favoured, and cold in extremity, he placed me for her guard, supposing
that he who had shown so flat and dull a Wit, would not have prickles to
disturb those flowers; and that which spoke in my behalf was the severity of my
countenance, the gravity of my walking, and the slowness of my speech.

He kept her in a house accompanied by an old Matron, and a young Servant Maid,
and minding to secure her, put me to guard her. There he dined, supped, and
slept; and with knowing that I was became an Argus over the Girl, the Gallant,
my Master, neglected her, as if he had had her in his Pocket: This seemed to me
an enchanted Palace; for without care of any thing, at Dinner and Supper times,
we found the Tables furnished with variety of Dainties, by the care of my
Master, who thought on no other thing.

Now do I blame such women, as show a liking to this sort of Gallants; these
Fools, who having no variety in their Imagination, divert not themselves with
any more excellent care, they think not on any other thing, for wanting
discourse to find out faults, they fall in love more settledly, and esteem with
greater respect. But an understanding man, as having his Soul free, flies from
this thought to another, and has his several ways of divertisement, for he
has variety, and is not seen to subject himself to low Amors: Moreover, at
one time or another he spies out faults; and as he himself is esteemed, because
he deserves it, he comes to despise with more liberty whatsoever fault he
notes; since compared to his merits, it seems great to him: Now the reason why
we commonly see such Coxcombs better beloved then these, is, that they love in
earnest, they solicit in earnest, and adore in earnest. But that you may not
envy their fortune, hear what was my Masters.

He had been bred up in State with his Lady Mother, quarrelling with the Maids
about his breakfast, and other fopperies, more of a young Gentlewoman than a
Student: From whence he had learnt such an absurd fantastical behavior, that
utterly spoiled all his sport: He spoke to this pretty Girl as if it had been
to one of his Aunts, and used certain Complements, which seemed to have passed
the Craggy Mountains of Somosierra; yet not for want of Love, for of that he
had enough, but by a natural constraint and dullness.

With this, the Breast of the Lady was become cold as Ice, and no marvel
indeed, since they are as the Moon is with the Sun; for as she receives her
Light from that Golden Gallant, so Ladies show the Luster of their good
likings, by those which they receive from their Lovers. To think that they will
love thee, be thou never so rich, if thou art cold, is a Simplicity: Being
rich, thou may make thy Lady rich, but not loving to thee; thou ought to
have that which must be pleasing to her, if thou would that she should be so
to thee: If thou art cold, thou art better for a Surpliss than for a Courter of
Ladys: Go get thee into a Cell, and turn Friar; none gives more than he has,
thou will only give her Rheums or Cathars; thou know already, that they are
diseases of the Breast, where the Heart is. This ill has good fortune, that in
giving much confidence, it takes away many favors; for these Noblemen think
that only by being so, they abound in all things, yet they are afterward found
to have been mistaken, and come to serve but as Stewards to those who are
better liked. So it happened to my Master, for not withstanding all his care
and study to court this Maid, and to treat her: I was the happy possessor of
her Heart; for the familiarity and large converse which had passed between us,
had given her to understand that I deserved better than my Master, by being
less Fool, and more fortunate; so that my Master served me, and better than I
could serve him.

What reason now have I to complain of ill Fortune, if being an impudent
Traitor with a Fools reputation, I enjoy sixteen thousand Ducats a year, which
I spend by another hand, in my own Delights? These and other adventures of no
less importance happened to me in Salamanca; but I relate them not all, for not
being so much to the purpose, intending only to tell you the End of my Courses,
which was as Foolish as the Beginning.

The Poets say, that when Jupiter beautified the World with such variety of
Enamels, and illustrated Man with so liberal a stock of Goods, He was very
jealous to see that he made no acknowledgment of this bounty, for he employed
all his Love on those Goods which he enjoyed; insomuch that he remembered not
himself of the Author of them. Anger then suggested to the God a remedy for
this, and being warned from thenceforward by the ingratitude, he blended those
Goods with a certain mixture of evils, which should take from their Estimation,
supposing that with this, men would not love them so much, nor forget their
Creator, but rather as they had need of him, even to enjoy these very goods,
they should invoke him at every instant, and render him the Religion, Reverence
and Memory, which so great a Power meriteth.

He tempered the good of Dignities, with the watchings and cares of
administering them: The felicity of Wit, with the persecutions of Envy: Merits
with Poverty: Riches with Avarice; and so all the goods which adorn men: He
came to Love, and found that it was the greatest good which they had, since
even he himself, although the Father of Goods, always seemed to confess himself
poor in this, by showing so great a covetousness for it: He thought it
necessary to mix much bitterness, to allay so much sweetness: for he certainly
knew that they would not remember him, who saw themselves blessed with a good,
whereof he himself blazoned so much, which is of being beloved; and it was to
be feared, lest they should call themselves Gods, and rebel against Heaven,
seeing themselves glorious with the greatest Ensigns of happiness: He then
mustered up in his memory all the Evils, and that which showed it self most
severe, and cruel, was the same which had then tyranized in his breast.

If I, said Jupiter, being a Deity, to whom such a multitude of shining
Ministers stand seasoning Joys and Tranquilities; If I, who am encompassed with
a Heaven of Diamonds, which evils cannot penetrate, be they never so sharp; see
my self conquered, and all my glory taken away, by the Jealousies which I have
of man; what is there to be doubted, but that this is the greatest of Evils,
and will be sufficient to temper the greatest of Goods? He then mixed Love with
Jealousies, wherewith this good was made bitter.

I happened to prove the bitterness of my Love, when most flattered with its
Felicity, finding my self jealous, which is the same as sick to death; for the
foolish Girl was visited (and in appearance to her great content) by a certain
Gentleman of the City, bravely accoutred with a Ruff, a Gold Chain, and a Plush
Cloak, which was then all the mode: Now, though I did not doubt of my merits,
yet I feared the Maids inconstancy, who as a Child had her Eyes running after
those baubles, and my pleasing conversation had already glutted her Stomach. I
then perceived that many good parts were ill beloved, by the ill Election of
women, who, for the most part, are not very prudent. I envied the Secular Ruff,
thinking that every set hole in it was a discharge of Artillery against that
Fortress, and cursed the restraint of the Students habit, laying on it the blame
of my slights; I threatened her many times with my Master, but she having bought
my liberty with hers, laughed at my threats, concluding that I would keep
secret her boldness, not to endanger her publishing of mine; thus I (perceiving
my self jealous) held it for an ill Augury, thinking that I stood on the
threshold of Discretion, when I remembered what was said by Lope de Vega Carpio,
Oracle of the Spanish Muses, and flourishing Ornament of its glorious Monarchy:
The Man whose Breast no Jealous Passions swell,
And yet pretends his Heart Loves Sacrifice;
Or is a Fool, or else he loves not well,
Because distrust is mother of the wise.


According to this, said I, I should be wise, since I am jealous, surely some
great evil must befall me, being now become wise; and remembered that I had
never intermitted being a Fool, which had not cost me some great trouble. I
called to mind also that the time when in Madrid, I enjoyed the favors of the
Liberal Damzel, only by being a Fool, I had escaped from this Penance of Love:
and was now sorry to be wise, by the evil which I was afraid hung over me: so
that if Folly should have no other allurement on its side, but the being a
Mistress, and free from Jealousies, it is a quality sufficient to make it be
esteemed, and preferred before the higest Discretion.

You may, perchance, wonder to see me sometimes wise, and sometimes foolish;
and then in your malice will possibly be censuring me, for a Dissembler; and I
wish that it be no worse. Malicious Friend, if thou think that the rest of
the wise men, and fools of the world are not so, thou art a Fool: For the
wisest man sometimes is careless, makes intermissions in his Discretion, and
holds it for a Gallantry, to do, or say some extravagancy, either for the
seting off, or strengthening of his Actions; when you shall hear say, such a
one has accomplished his design well, I hold him for very discreet. Think not
that that man is discreet, but that he happened discreetly upon it. The same in
miscarriages; Thou art not to suppose that he is a Fool because he slipped on
some folly, but that he went foolishly to work. When they would Cannonize some
Saint, they are not content with one or two miracles, but with many, and very
remarkable ones; why should thou cannonize any body for discreet, because he
happened on something well, at one time or another? Perchance he being an
errand Fool, could do no otherwise; perchance he knew so little, that in this,
he even knew not how to be a Fool, and suffered himself to be carried by his
Fortune, without making pause at his blind election.

The Auguryes accomplished their threatenings, for ill Auguryes are like Natives
of the Kingdom of Arragon, that will sooner forget their God than their Anger.
It cost me not a few disquiets, for I saw my self encompassed on all sides: so
that would I pass on forward with my Love, I presently found a very shameful
reprehension, that said to me, there is no room for thee; another has come in
with a Ruff so great, and a Plush Cloak so large and swelled, that he can
scarce be contained there. If I should have given the reigns to my anger, and
repaired my injury with vengeance, I feared it would be too much to my own
cost, having reason to be silent, and so must be of force, or dye; and yet I
must of force dye, if I should be silent. So possessed was I with anger, and so
restrained by fear, that I would have accounted it for a happy change, to lose
the past Delights, that I might have withdrawn my body from the present
Torments.

Love is not for Virtuous men; very foolish or bad must he be, that must be
possessed of it: Although there should be no Law of God that should pluck us by
the sleeve, at the engaging our selves in these wickednesses, yet the evils
which go chained with them, would be sufficient to detain us: The unhappiness
is, we are unwilling to cast away from us these pleasures, though I assure you,
that if we could but take off the Cloak from them, and find out the unfortunate
ends, which presently threaten us, we would not give them so much Credit as we
do. For it was a Divine Providence, to season Sin with Repentance, that when we
are most flattered with its Smiles, and Serenities, we should find out the
deceit, and know our blindness.

In fine, I determined to leave her, when I understood she had left me, and
with the hazard, not only of my head, but of my opinion. I acquainted my
Master with what had passed, the frequency of the Gallant, and his obstinacy,
and told him some of those Jealousies which I had too many of. To which his
opinion was, that this quarrel must be had with the Maid; for she not giving
him hopes (he concluded for certain) that he would not have had the boldness,
so much as to look upon her. I commended his discreet contrivance, but seeing
that I endangered my opinion by this way; for she perceiving her self
discovered, would, sure enough discover me: I therefore, not to lose the
occasion, replied, that she in no wise gave admittance to his desires, but that
he was such an impudent fellow, that he took it. With this he rested satisfied,
and with determination to fall severely upon this dareing Gallant.

I well see that I had but little reason in what I said, for I was indeed
always of a contrary opinion; I ever knew, that as many as have hopes, desires
and confidence, do found them on some favor, and that no desire can be had
without hope. But mark, I beseech you, how important a thing it is to be a
Fool, or to appear so, since it serves even to persuade to false opinions, and
to qualify them for true ones. If Plato had said it to my Master, he would
have believed that he had deceived him, by the force of his Arguments, and did
it for ostentation of his Wit: But as a man told it him, who, he thought, had
not the faculty of not telling truth, as if this was not the most difficult: he
had no suspicion, neither any malice at all.

Now my Master was somewhat unskilful and timorous in the business of
Hectoring, therefore had put in readiness all his Servants; so out we go some
six men of us, like so many Lions, guarding his body: And coming to the street
of the Unhappy fair one, we saw the Gallant, waiting with another (both
muffled) at the door of her house: I drew near to know him, and being known,
without making any sign to the rest of the Ambush, I made at him, and at the
first bout I gave him a handsome cut over the Pate: For I had two advantages
over him; one was the being injured, another the beginning the fray. The
Squadron at that, coming up, we set upon them courageously on all sides, and
having given them many sore wounds (for it was an easy matter to lay about us
in such a confusion) we left them for dead, and retired to our lodging.

CHAP. IV. He relates the Life which he lead being a Judge, and afterward, a
Pretendient in the Court for an Employment.
MY Master having the opinion of a wise, modest, and sober man, the very same
persons who had assisted him, murmured at the injustice; and although they knew
that I was the Boreas of that Tempest, no body blamed me, it seeming to them,
that I for no folly deserved a punishment, because I complied but with my
nature in what I did; who would think that it was good being a Fool, even not
to appear one? Yet thus far can this good Fortune extend: I that was the
principal Fool was not murmured at, only because I was a Fool, and my Master
that was wise, he bore the brunt with his Wisdom. We had a strong debate, and
various Votes, what was best to be done; but mine overcame, which was to leave
Salamanca; in regard the wounded, or dead, were of the most illustrious of that
City, so that with whom might be held a good Correspondence, was the main thing
next to be thought on: And this being agreed upon by us, we took Mules the same
night, and in a few days (for fear gave us wings) we arrived at a Village the
best that was in all the Estate of the Earl his Brother, who himself at that
time resided there. Now, although his absence from the Court was not intended
for any long time, yet the spatiousness and pleasantness of the Situation, the
flattery and delights of those green trees, and the bubling of the Fountains so
much delighted him, that made his stay the longer; the same turned also to our
liking, which was but mere necessity.

This good Gentleman had all manner of recreations: as Dogs for Hunting, Books
of entertainment in a great and curious number, excellent Gardens, also thick
and well-shaded Groves, and he knew not the cause of our retirement, for that
being the end of our course, had taken away all suspicion.

I was, yes, and am now, and ever shall be, greatly inclined to the
conversation of women: What a right course I took here to make my self a Fool?
I liked very well the Groves, and the Rivers, but, in my opinion, there wanted
to them the Soul, which is the concourse of this, and the other good face, that
with their sight should guild them, as the Sun does. Therefore I presently grew
weary of that wilderness-like Solitude; yet remembering me of the evils which
had befallen me, for desiring these Goods, I fell to Philosophizing, in so much
that in a few days, I reduced my self to think that the true Felicity was to
bind up a man within himself, this is by adorning himself with Learning, and
Virtues; for other things, which, with a fair appearance, seem to be
Felicities, either they are not so, or are not durable: I likewise considered
that although the enjoyment of the height of them was sweet, yet the fall was
so certain, that the pleasure of them was twice paid for; once with the fear of
falling, for it dares molest us when we are at the highest pitch; and then with
the fall; for this Edifice being founded on pillars of Glass (such are the
follies and frailties of women) it must necessarily yield to any weight.

I took great delight to lock up my self, in the Room where the Earl kept his
Books; there did I pass all hours of the day, and many of the night, laughing
at such as invited me to go a Hunting, to play at Billiards, or at Cards; for
certainly nothing is pleasure to us, but that to which our inclination stears
us: I thought it impossible that there should be any one, who could take
delight in going a whole afternoon, in spite of the violent scorchings of the
Sun, following a Hare, or persecuting a Wolf: And then, for Cards, I could not
believe that any man could have patience to think, that whilst he was expecting
a Seven of Hearts to make up his Game, there should come an impudent Knave of
the Clubs to excuse the Seven, and say that he could not come; and those
tricks of juggling a Card, as if by that, the figure of it could be changed. All
this I held for folly; and gave a thousand thanks to God that had diverted my
inclination from such foolish entertainments.

I spent my time with my Books, the most discreet company in the world, since
knowing so much, they never speak a word, unless they are asked: Sometimes I
wearied my self, and then deceived my weariness with variety; and being tired
with one, took up another; for as I studied not for ostentation, but for
recreation; neither was I troubled for the obtaining of a thought, nor at the
leaving it in the midst of its carreer. Finally, I made a pastime of labor,
and by this means secured the Duration of it.

But the time being come, of returning back from our progress, the Earl hastened
us away, now because I was still quarrelling with Fortune, that she had not
paid me for the Courtship I had made her, in committing the folly of the
skirmish, She did then quit scores with me. I had a great opinion of being
Learned, gained by the locking my self up in the Library; and being confident
of this, I came to the Earl, at a time when I found him alone; and said,
certainly, Sir, Your Honor might well excuse the care which this Journey gives
you; for your Brother (whom God preserve) has no need of seeing those Schools
to be able to read as Chairman to the Masters of them: For although, it is
true, that modesty and retiredness, do a little advantage him, he has a most
profound Wit, and is really devoted to what he professes; I assure you, Sir, he
has attained to more in Three years, than others in Thirty.

Near this place is the Monastery of Irache, where he may take the Degree of
Bachelor, and continue passing his time in this Solitude, which will be more
profitable for him than to go to be diverted, by following his pleasures: and
what he has learnt here, to forget in Salamanca, which in effect is a populous
City, and not so fit for the exercise of Wit as this pleasant retirement. He
liking the Counsel, we Commence in Irache. Thus we excuse two years Colds of
Salamanca, in recompense of one folly.

Two years spent I in that solitary Life, and in them learnt of Civil Law
enough, and of other Learning more than enough; and having gained an opinion of
being studious, and confirmed it with certain Sentences of Cato, they began to
call me Doctor, in the Earls house, and so frequently used it, that now I was
by no other name known then the Doctor Cenudo; and a while after we returning
to our center, the Court, I took my place of Doctor as if really I had been so.

At that time His Majesty honored a Gentleman, a friend of the Earls, with the
Office of An Officer deputed by the King, over most of the chief Cities in
Spain, with Power and Authority little differing from a Lord Mayors. These
always continue three years, and for the most part are Lawyers.
Corrigidor, of one of the most illustrious Cities of Spain. This same
Corrigidor, was mad to be Governing, as might be seen a hundred leagues off;
for having a sufficient Estate to maintain him conformable to his Quality,
nothing would serve him but to be a Corrigidor, and could have eaten his
fingers ends, to be showing his power over the Petty Or Judges.
Alcaldes; but he dreaded the carrying with him learned Or Deputies.
Tenientes, such as would command all, wherefore he consulted his fears with
the Earl, who in conclusion proposed to him my person, for one of the two
Offices, extolling my modesty, and my retiredness, all which suited well with
what the Corrigidor desired; and there wanted not some, who told me, that
amongst others of my praises, he had acquainted him that I was a Fool: Scarcely
had the Corrigidor heard this, when saying, that such a one was what he had
need of, and not your meddling Pedants; he granted him the Office for me, and
further added, that he was a most happy man, in having found out, for his
purpose, so well qualified a Person.

Behold me now, chief Alcalde of a populous City, here you see, the Title of a
Fool availed me more than the Title of Bachelor or Doctor of Law. Is it then
ill being a Fool? I know that more than a few would be so, on condition that
they might but so well attain to their desired ends: And I am confident, as one
faithfully experienced, that Folly is very important, not only for the
obtaining of Dignities, but also for the enjoying them, which presently you
will see.

The other Office of Teniente, or Deputy, he gave to an able, but formal
Coxcomb, much wedded to the Laws, and to his humor: a man whose word it was,
you see it is written, and you shall be made to do it. This was not of the
Corrigidors Election, but the express command of a Nobleman, to whom he owed
the greatest part of his wings: we came shortly after to the place of our
residence, where I soon got the knack of Precedents, Decrees, and other
trifles, for the ordering my business, which the industry of the Procurators
and Scrivanos, or Solicitors and Attorneys, assisted me with; I therefore was
fain to mould my self pliable as wax to them, and denied them nothing; so with
this, and my not scrupling at their Exorbitances, all businesses came to me,
that I gained as much as might have served both my self and my Companion, whom
they called King Don Pedro, because he was so grave, and so zealous for the
executing of Justice; but they fled from him, as from Virtue.

Now you may scoff at Folly, that knows how to favor its own Servants, and
punish others: And you may see if it be good being a Fool, even to the
administering of Offices, which so much require discretion and prudence. True
Discretion, my Friend, is to be pliable, and bend with the Times; but think not
that I could be the Martyr of Alguaziles and Attorneys, although I had been
brought up with Onions and Garleek; no, I am not of so strong a Constitution.

There I knew that the great destroyer of Virtues was Power. Did I not tell
thee how much I came improved out of those Solitudes? What a Philosopher, how
reserved, and close I was! what a Contemner of all Delights, and enemy of
Pleasure! but now seeing my self powerful, I went out of my self, and what
wonder if I was out of my Center: No one knows what it is, to be an ordinary
Judge of a Populous City! I stood upon a high place, my head grew giddy, I must
therefore certainly expect a fall.

The first trip which I gave, was on Pride; I was sparing of my Hat, wherein my
frown assisted me, to my great advantage: With all the Town I was a Lion, only
with my Alguaziles a Lamb: I then threw aside my rod of Justice, the Badg of my
Office, for the Follies of Venus, I went the rounds by nights, not to apprehend
Thieves, nor Murderers, nor any other sort of People, but to deliver up my
self a Prisoner to She-robbers and, Murtheresses: Yet this kind of pleasure did
presently become nautious to me, I liked not the easiness of it, but was most
pleased to meet with the greatest difficulties, I adored impossibilities, there
I set to my shoulder, and there I engaged my self. How many Forts did I
overthrow with nothing but my Rod? How many wills did Fear corrupt? I am
ashamed to tell you the Vile means wherewith I prostrated noble Designs on the
ground. These Victories (said I) deserve applause; these, which when they fly
and are most difficult, do crown the Conqueror.

I went into any house that I pleased, though it was never so close, with great
ease: For I either pretended that I searched for some Delinquent, or that I
would examine the Master of it, for a Witness concerning a fact, which, indeed,
had never been committed. Once I remember that I carried away prisoner, the
husband of a handsome woman, which I had a mind to, feigning certain suspicions
of him, and kept him in Prison as long time as I listed, that he might not
hinder my free access into his House. All these extravagancies were brave
exploits, in the opinion of my under Ministers, they commended them, instead of
disapproving them, and admonishing me against them: and I seriously think that
they liked them well, because all of them are, for the most part, fellows of
this humor, and cry up for good, all actions wherein they see themselves
painted.

I was but a little covetous, and therefore drew on my side the Common People
of the City, as the Taverner, the Innkeeper, the Tailor, and all that rabble
of People, which being the most vile, and most Licentious we have amongst us,
they give or take away a good opinion, at pleasure. The Gentlemen complained
not, though they had reason for it, not to stain their Honor the more, by
publishing their Dishonor. With this I walked unbridled, through a thousand
kinds of Insolences. Oh how important a thing is the choosing foolish or
unlearned men into Offices! the damage is no less, then the throwing poison
into a public Fountain; every one has a share of death, all participate of
these evils: These fetters bind all, though the fault or carelessness of the
Election be but in one only, and one only I here blame.

But because, methinks, you stay expecting to know how I came off with my
Office, should you not know, that those who make it good or evil, are Attorneys
and Alguaziles? Since these then for so many reasons were my Friends, there was
none who did not praise me, instead of accusing me. Finally, at the three years
end I went out w^ll from all, and indifferently rich, but my Companion ill and
poor; I went away the Corrigidors friend, but my Companion his enemy: Is it
good, think you, to be a Fool? It may be, you will tell me, that I was not so
in this, but rather very discreet; you have some reason; for it was discretion
not to contradict my Corrigidor, in any business that he should command, be it
never so unjust; because he, in effect, was my Superior, and I took not upon me
that Office but to obey him: To have friendship with Alguaziles and Attorneys,
what wise man would not do it? To be kind to their requests, was Liberality,
not Folly: but let it be what it will, I was happy by these means.

In Madrid I presented my person, and the account of my residence, and got the
repute of a good and just Judge: Wherefore the Corrigidor assisted me with all
the interest he could make, that His Majesty might bestow upon me some other
greater Employment, and in the mean time lodged me in his House, admitted me to
his Table, and allowed me his Coach; with which I led in Madrid, the Life of a
Prince. Ambition now began to disquiet me, for although I naturally did never
much affect the living in a Garret, the seeing my self put into this way had
quite spoiled my humility, I was glutting my self with the flatteries which
power made me: Me thought I lived not the day wherein I did not command:
Nevertheless the kindness of the Corrigidor was such, and the entertainments
which we had in the Court, so great, that they diverted this desire from me.

I am persuaded, it would be impossible, that Pretendients should have so large
hopes in such ardent desires, if they lived not in such a bewitching place, as
is Madrid, which has so many Lethargies, wherewith to lull asleep any desire,
or any ambition.

At the Fame of my Folly, came Corrigidors by dozens, offering me what mine had
done; but I that must needs be a Fool upon Record, fell to pretending, or
begging at Court, a place of settlement, only that I might not be idle from
commanding every day, as I was then, whilst they bestowed another Office on me:
In which pretension, all the Power that had favored my Corrigidor assisted me;
it is not proper for me to divulge this, but you are a Friend, and will speak
of it to no body. I had an advantage above all other Pretendients, who had
merits only in being a Fool; for they confiding in what they had deserved, used
some slight diligences, to that effect, thinking that those who were to honor
them, had no other care, but to conjecture their deserts by their faces. Worthy
and deserving friend, what matters it, though thou art so, if all do not know
it? Tell it aloud, and use means to procure thy ends, or else never pretend;
for I, who had no other Basis whereon to found my pretensions, besides my
Solicitude, and favor, observed it with much industry.

In this interim I learnt the greatest piece of Courtly discretion, which is,
Flattery, and Courtesy. I staid an hour every morning, before I went out of my
Lodging, to meditate new ways of flattery, wherewith to reap new favors. I was
the first since Adam, till this present, who told great Lords that they
resembled Gods, in doing favors without any hopes of return. Another time I
said to a Nobleman; Your excellency, my Lord, in consideration of who you are,
has a precise obligation to favor me, for your Excellency being such a friend
of doing courtesies and favoring all, I have served you in requesting it of
you; and have given you matter whereon to employ the generosity of your mind.
To another, I once said, The time is now come, wherein your Lordship may
disburthen your Breast, and do favors for being so big with them, only my
short merits may be capable vessels of your Liberality: If I deserved it, my
Lord, it would not be an excess, but in this I serve your Lordship, since
meriting it so little, the benefit lies shrouded, the more under the shadow of
my poor wants. In such manner I spoke these flatteries, as made them believe,
they were really the Princes, who most favored their Servants.

In Bribes and Presents I acquired the name of Fool, amongst some who were so
themselves; because I seldom presented things to be eaten: They told me if I
did not, I should never have good success: For Presents of this nature cost but
little, and were ever acceptable: But I was always of a different opinion, that
they should never give things which would not be present in view a long time,
and represent the memory of the Donor; for which reason, they are called
Presents: Things edible are not of this quality, for either they will be
spoiled, or must be spent presently.

Only I remember that upon an occasion I once forgot this precept, for staying
in an outward room, waiting to see a certain Lady, toward whose North all my
pretensions (with a full gale in Poop) were steered, there came out a Duena to
entertain me and another Gentleman, that was an assistant to me in these
encounters. The Duena began the conversation, asking him what he had eaten at
dinner, what Cook he kept, and other questions of this nature: The Gentleman,
who by the story, certainly, must needs be wondrous discreet, began to invent
a thousand excellent dishes, never imagined before, and that he had a Cook
which made most incomparable Pastys, of the Sinnews of a Leg of Veal, of the
Breasts of Capons, of Partridges; Pigeons, and Turtles, that there was nothing
like them in the World. He had scarce made his boast of his Cook, when the
Duena, whose chops watered after these Pastys, desired of him one for a taste:
The Wiseacre promised it her, and was very joyful that she had believed him;
and that she might think him a man of an excellent palate, at the expense of
much care and money, sought out a Cook that should make good his lie.

I that was a Fool, being affrighted at the fall of my Comrade when the Duena
came to ask me the same, told her, that I kept a Cook-maid which knew how to
make Sassages marvelously, and a Sallad that might be given to one that was
dead; which was truth, for a living body could not suffer the smell of them, I
thought I had turned her Stomach with this; but as I am always so unfortunate
with Duena's, she longed for some of these Sassages, and Sallad; I promised her
them, and complied honestly with my word, but fearing that if the Sassages
should go very cleanly, she would send for more, I sent a Servant to buy some
great dirty ones, of those which women sell at the corners of streets to
Porters, and other poor people; he carried them, and I know not whether or no,
it might be the Duena's greediness, or my commendations of them, for so rare,
or else my misfortune. But every Saturday I received a message from the Duena,
wherein she sent for more Sassages. I was very sensible of that tribute, and me
thought I lost in this my Gentility; and as Liberty obliges men to great
undertakings, I bad a Servant go one Saturday, and bring a whole Sheeps Paunch,
stuffed naturally, without emptying the Guts: He did so, and it seeming to me,
they came somewhat hollow; I commanded that they should fill them up what
wanted, with Onions, and many other sweet and cleanly bits: So I sent her them
well seasoned, and I know not what was in the fault, the cleanliness or my
misfortune: But the Saturday following, she sent me another message to send her
more, and gave me thanks for those past. I had no other remedy than, but to
say, the Cook-maid was dead the night before. See what Creatures these Duena's
are! Half an hour after, she sent another message to me, to desire me to tell
her where I thought to bury her, because she would say certain Masses for her,
and send her Ladys Servants, that they might go to honor her Corpse that knew
how to make such excellent Sassages; and that if, perchance, she had left the
Receipt how these Sassages were to be made, that I would do her the favor to
give her it. I was fain to make a Receipt for Sassages, the first that came to
hand, and send her, telling her, that the Cook-maid was already buried, and
that she needed not take any care for the saying Masses for her. This very day
do I stand in fear lest she should send to me, to know if the Cook of the
Sassages be not yet risen again.

My ingenious Presents had better luck; for sometimes they cost me lesser than
if they had been some rare things to be eaten (which in effect are but slight
and soon gone) and yet, for the most part, were, as if I should have set by
their sides a ^age, that should still be putting them in mind of my business.

One time, to a Minister of State, that was short sighted, I presented a Case
and a pair of Spectacles, telling him that they came from Italy, that a Brother
of mine had sent me them, for the most precious Jewel in all those parts, that
they marvelously preserved the sight, and were the very Spectacles which the
King Don Ferdinando had used during his Conquest of that Nation, and I procured
the Case to be old-fashioned, curious and rich, by which I qualified the
Spectacles with great advantage.

Believe me, you do nothing, you who are confident in the greatness of the Gift
which you offer, if you neglect its Ornament, and setting off. For there are
those, who looking on a horse without his furniture, that should he be more
swift than those of the Sun, and more mettlesome than Bucephalus, would account
him but for a Jade that works in a Mill; and if they should see, well
harnessed, but Don Quixote's Steed, would esteem him like Belerophons Pegasus.
To me it has happened, that I have made greater ostentation with a dish of
Italian Sallad, which, it may be, put me to the expense of about About 6 pence
English.
15 Quartos, than if I had sent them a Camel loaded with Pheasants. There is
nothing to women like Flowers, Patches, Ribbons and Paint; if you think
otherwise, ask the most confident Ladies of our age, and they will tell you,
that were it not for Artifice, there would not be any body that would look them
in the face.

This Minister of Ignorance put on my Spectacles, and persuaded himself that he
was a very Linx with them, and was as thankful for for the present, as if I had
given him new sight, telling me that in respect to my business, Those Spaniards
who are short sighted do wear their Spectacles tied on, all day long,
wheresoever they go.
he would carry me always before his eyes, only with wearing my Spectacles
before them. This then may properly be called a present, that never stirs a jot
from before the Eyes of the great man to whom it is sent.

Another Lord, on whom depended all my hopes, had a good opinion of his own
handsomness, but was somewhat long visaged; insomuch that his cheek bones stood
out too visibly, to the prejudice of his Beauty, as though they had intended
him an ill office: I having notice of a certain Merchant, who had false Looking
Glasses, that would show a thousand several sorts of faces; from amongst these
I chose one that made round plump faces, and had an excellent frame of Ebony,
inlaid with Ivory, which I presented him with, for the most faithful that had
ever been seen; protesting that it was the same Looking-Glass, by which the
Cava used to sit dressing her self every morning two hours, before she went to
enamour the King Don Rodrigo; which had lately been found in the enchanted The
true name of this Lady was Florinda, she was the Daughter of the Earl Don
Julian who to revenge himself on the King for deflowering this his Daughter,
betrayed Spain to the Moors, by whom she was called Cava, which in Arabic
signifies a Whore.
Cave at Toledo, by the industry of a great Magician, that it was a pledge
worthy the placing in a Palace, like that of his Excellency's, if he pleased,
for the Veneration which was due to Antiquity: He accepted it with a smiling
countenance, and looking in it, found himself fat, and almost round, and as
though I had mended his face, gave me thanks for it, telling me it was a gift
that was more acceptable to him then any other thing, which might be believed,
because it flattered him in that he needed.

Trust to Looking-Glasses, and buy them for your friends; wherein you will do
well, since friends there are, which flatter like Looking-Glasses, and make you
believe you are round faced, and perfect, being lean, and foolish in your
affections.

Afterward I knew, that four times in a day he consulted his handsomness in
it, and it so much deceived him, as he said, that that alone was a true
Looking-Glass, and only in the time of King Don Rodrigo, they knew how to make
Looking-Glasses, but in this Age all Arts were so adulterated, that they had
not the skill to make a true Glass in all Spain; so certain it is that nothing
appears true to us, but what suits with our liking. You will say I was a Fool
for presenting a Looking-Glass to a Lord, and that a Horse would have been a
more proper Present. You know not what you say, for a Horse would not be a
Present, in regard it would not be always present, nor put him in mind of my
desire, because he, for the most part, went in a Coach, or in a Chair, but the
Glass was present four times a day: thus very conveniently I set my Cava for an
Intercessor that he might favor me. If these flatteries pass with you for
follies, you your self are but a Fool. What will you say to a Present that I
made of a Clock with an Allarum, which rattled the whole Parish; seems this an
ill remembrancer of my business at all hours?

Yet in no present (methinks) I hit so luckily, as in one that I made to a
great Statesman, who was sufficiently proud, although he had his rise from
base Parentage: Fortune, you must understand, had raised him to that
Preferment, because she otherwise would never shine with such Luster as she
does, nor would her power, but lie in concealment, if she should not exercise
it on such as are nothing, or but very little. He had his clear ascendency from
a Cellar of water, for so was his Grandfather, but he forgetting that those
waters reproached him, as the Poets say, never showed a good face to any body;
the truth is, he had a very ill ill one, for he had still imprinted on it, the
Curses which his Grandsire gave to his Ass that carried his water-pots. Coming
by chance into a Brokers Shop, where was a Parrot to be sold, I began to
bargain for it, and questioning its ability, they told me it was a young one,
and but newly began to speak, and knew not how to say more than Water-man,
Water-man; it seemed to me that I had found an Ashwednesday for the Pride of
this Statesman: I made a Cage for it, which might well have served a Duena for
bigness. Already I have told you how impatient I was to live in Pomp and State;
for this reason, I say, I presented it to my Statesman, for the most rare
qualified and most witty Parrot of the World, the Cage also spoke a thousand
Marvels in its favor: He was very thankful, and my good Parrot showed in a few
days its pregnant understanding, giving Lectures and undeceiving to this
Lucifer in a Gown.

At all times when he came into his house, he found it with a Memento homo in
his mouth, it always received him with Water-man, Water-man, and repeated this
with great quickness; now as it never said any other thing, he considered on
it, and was possessed with an opinion that some Angel had spoken to him by the
mouth of a Parrot; He then began to tremble, changed the Scene, and dispelled
his frowns. Finally, the man was converted by the Lectures of the Parrot, that
he already gave audiences with greater facility; he also spoke with less scorn,
and particularly to me, to whom he would commonly say, he had an especial
obligation, but would not let me know wherefore. He came not at any time into
the house without vailing his Beaver to the Parrot, saying, all that Courtesy
was due to a Master. A few days after, it changed its Note by means of another
Parrot which was at a Neighbors house, of whom it learnt to say, Alas poor
Parrot! and who comes there, who comes there? Nevertheless, the Master lost not
his Credulity, that it was some Spirit clothed in Green, and attributed that
change of Conversation to his amendment from his Pride. So that the Parrot, by
no means, spoke any thing which he accounted not for a Mystery.

I plainly see that this folly might have returned upon my own head, it being
so rash; Therefore do you never trust in follies, unless you are venturous; but
it may be you will say, it is sufficient to be a Fool, to make a man venturous.
In effect I was so fortunate, that I flattered with injuries, and gained
favors with affrontings. But yet methought I was out of my center whilst I was
not in Love. The suing for an Office, and the Courting a Lady, are so much
alike, as that it was very easy for me to pass from one to the other; with
Flatteries we sue for Offices, we Court Ladies with Flatteries, these with
Gifts we facilitate, with Presents those; for Offices nothing is less
important, than the deserving them, because Fortune who disposes of them is
blind: There is nothing of less importance with Ladies, than the deserving
them, because it is either good or ill Fortune that with them gives a winning or
a losing Cast.

I fell very desperately in Love with a Maiden, the Daughter of Noble Parents,
and yet more Rich than Noble: I know not whether or no you have observed, that
all my Loves were with Maids: This was one of the greatest of my Follies; She
was all the delight and care of her Parents; they had no other Child on whom to
divert their Loves, all was on their Fair Daughter; She had been bred up under
the Tutorage of her Mother, with Marmalade, and Carraway Confects, in such
sort, that they had wrought her little heart altogether of Coyness. At the Fame
of her great Dowry, she had been offered many Matches of Different Ranks, as of
Lawyers, Knights of the Habit, and Gentlemen of good Estates: But had baffled
them all, one after another, with her Quirques and Subtilties.

An Alcalde of Sevill, one that was a great Gallant, and an understanding man,
she discarded, only to tell him, she would never see her self in the power of
Justice.

Another Gentleman of good parts, she sent packing, because always when he
visited her (which was very frequently) he asked her how she did; telling him,
he was too curious for a Husband, and that she was not for such inquisitive men.

Another, who being in a Playhouse, she observed to take out a pair of
Spectacles and look through them toward the Appartment of the women; she asked
(as jealous) what he looked at? He answered (to blind her Jealousies) Madam, I
look not at their perfections, but at the defects which are in these Ladies.
Then, Sir, (said she, with a disdainful look) I care not for a Husband, so
great a friend of spying others faults, that to search them out, will discover
his own; I had never known that you had been short-sighted, if you had not been
so earnest to pry into these Ladies wants of Beauty.

Of another, because they told her, he knew how to make Verses, she said, she
would never love that man who esteemed lying and flattery for a Grace.

On this manner was she come to forty years old, her Father and Mother dead,
rather for being tired out with her Whymsies, than for old Age: And now, time
began to swear, that if she delayed to admit Suits, he would force her, that
she her self should be fain to sue, and not without hazard of a Repulse: She
admitted Visits of such as were men of Parts, and was proud to be accounted
discreet; and that they might esteem her for a Sybil in the Town, she gave it
out, that the most learned men came to consult her in various conceits daily.

I then made my addresses to her with the Title of a wise Philosopher, and to
set off my self to the greatest advantage, rehearsed to her, three or four
Sonnets in praise of black Eyes, and half a dozen Stanza's, on white hands,
which I had composed in my younger days, so that with this, and speaking ever
and anon very gravely, and as it were suffering my self to be entreated to it,
I passed for a Cato: But I was sorry to find her so wise, for although I was
ever a friend of discreet women, yet I would not have them to be more wise than
my self, either because equality is always most beloved, or else because he
goes in danger of being cheated, who deals with one more knowing than himself.
Being fearful then of displeasing her, I did not yet make her sharer of my
love, neither indeed was she ever, although I did not (I confess) altogether
dislike her, until one evening finding her alone, when the doubtful light of
the day gives most place to bouldness, and best entertains shame: After we had
discoursed of many things, drawing my Chair nearer toward her Cusheon, whereon
she sat on the ground, I thus addressed my self to her:

Madam, the difference between the Wise and the Foolish, is only this, in my
opinion; That Wise men do and say, for the most part, that which reason and
ingenuity teaches them; But the Foolish, as they are void of one, and the
other, follow their own crotchets, or what they see others do: If you were not
so discreet I would forbear to tell you a thought, which it is long since I have
been desirous of acquainting you with, for I should fear that you would fall
into the opinion of the Vulgar, and call that injury, which really is
veneration; I have loved you tenderly, since the first time that I saw and
spoke to you, but I love you with honorable and virtuous intentions; You are
prudent, and will not suffer your self to be guided by the Vulgar, for I know
they would call it rudeness for a Lover quickly to declare himself. You are
governed by reason, and shall see what speaks in my favor; that for a woman to
be beloved is a most Glorious thing, it is the fruit, it is the end and intent of
their perfection, and for him that loves her to declare it to her; provided the
loving her be not a discourtesie, it is the greatest complement he can show,
because it is a sign of the more passionate love; For that house is not much on
fire which sends not forth out of its Towers, and Chymnies, such Flames as
shall discover it; and small winds lie couched in the bowels of the Earth, if
they break not an outlet for their roarings; But a great Earthquake is the
sign of a raging battle of the unquietness of the Winds.

I love you, Madam, by my own choice; another would say 'twas by the violence
of his destiny; I do not, because I will not have Fortune carry away the praise
due to your Beauty, and my Affection. The name of this Passion seems Arrogant,
I called it Love, 'twill appear more chaste to call it Will; yet this is too
cold to express so great a Flame: Love is in Rigor, but yet it is Noble, and
prudent; not covetous, not blind, expects no correspondence, asks no reward,
because it has it already; for what reward like the adoring her that deserves
it, for her so Excellent quallifications? This love has made me become wise,
what greater recompense? You perhaps will say, that being known, it seems no
more to be Love; you are in the right; yet for this, it does not cease to be
Love: To clear these doubts, let us call it Estimation, and that will suit best
with it; Estimation is more than ordinary, which passes to Veneration, in a
certain manner, with this it escapes out of dangers, and deserves Gratitude if
not Correspondence, Gratitude is not due to him that pays debts; my heart I
owed to this Beauty, to this Discretion, I confess it; But in an Age where
Gratitude is so little in use, it is well there is any who remembers to pay his
debts, with so much fidelity. I give suspicions of being interessed by
mentioning services, but they are false suspicions, I instance them not to
facilitate a reward, but to keep up estimation; for you being sensible I am
such, as that I have known how worthily to adore you, may the more esteem me
for this Ingenuity, or at least not accuse your self of indiscretion for doing
me the favor which you do me, by thinking that I deserve not to receive it,
since to allow me for a wise man, it is sufficient for me to understand what you
deserve.

She having the vanity to think that the world did believe her a Doctress, and
seeing me a Doctor; likeness made us remain friends for that time, so she
continued quiet, and in appearance pleased too. After this, I was still in
Love, but not so much as before; for confidence (as they say) is the poison of
Love.

A friend of mine went one day to see her without me, whom I used always to
carry with me when I visited her, a person of a good Wit, pleasant
conversation, and one that was very ingenious in his conceits; They discoursed
of diverse matters, the conversation was an Italian Salad, a great deal of of
the whole, and a little of every thing; but amongst all there was not the least
word in remembrance of me, so that I perceived the first kindness had been no
more than a courteous liking, which continued in its purity whilst I continued
in mine; but that seeing me with a second intention, she had varied hers, and
that that slighting me was but a contrivance fairly to shake me off: This
having vexed me, I sent Jealousy a hunting for conjectures, which after a
while brought me on as clear as truth; I found that the cause might be her
guessing me not equal to her in riches, for Love is so great a friend of
equality, that even in riches it desires it: But yet for all this, I was not
affrighted with any Suspicion, that this rejecting me was for my want of
handsomness, or of understanding; because I knew already by experience that
Love stands not upon that, if it be true (as the Philosophers say) that Love is
a desire of beauty; The beauties and perfections, wherein this desire may be
employed, are as many as the very desires and opinions themselves; every one
then esteems for beauty, not one certain form, reduced to certain perfections,
but all such as have a likeness with their own, or agree with their
inclination: The Wise man esteems the woman beautiful, that shall be Wise; The
Fool accounts for very beautiful, her that shall be silent, and commends as a
virtue, what is but mere necessity; some praise long Faces, others round ones:
Then what curious colored Eyes? what a delicate shaped Mouth? For Hairs the
opinions are more than the hairs. Finally, beauty is wholly opinion, and for
every opinion there is its beauty apart, and you shall have some say, that
Venus and Hellen were but like Kitchen Wenches, nay and but very homely ones
neither.

It now grieved me for having declared my mind, since my endeavors were
frustrated, and that by my confidence too; But in the end I hit upon a plot,
rather to make trial of my suspicion, than to purchase any Love by it; for
although I was smitten, yet I did not dote on her: I Loved her, but was not
enamoured of her; do you not understand me? Why, I mean, that to Love, and to
be smitten, are not the same, as to be enamoured, and to dote, for that may be
either out of obstinacy, or else for vengance; To dote on her, cannot be but
merely for kindness, or with good liking; now I being vexed at her slights,
abhorred her, and her Labyrinths, with a perfect hatred, and me thought that if
then I could but make her my own, I would quit the Field, and leave the
Conquest, without seizing the Spoils; and would say, It is sufficient I have
the glory of being Conqueror.

I therefore feigned my self sick, and began to complain of my Heart, crying
out that I had a thousand Vipers in it, and other such Frenzical Speeches,
which pain is accustomed to suggest; and had straightly commanded my Servants
not to let any body come in where I lay. Thus for four days I was locked up in
my Chamber, to put a Color to my Fraud, that the whole Town already rang of
it; at which some of my Friends came to me, with the skilfullest Physicians of
the Court; who felt my Pulse, saw my Urine, and with the relation of my
complaints and effected Mellancholy, swear my Sickness was mortal: This made
all believe it, and I almost believed it too, although I felt my self well and
sound; for who could otherwise choose but think it so when four men said it,
being the Portraicts of time, in their Age and Beards? In such sort did this
fear seize on me, that the day following, in stead of mine, I commanded them to
show the Doctors, my Pages water, the most cheerful lively Boy that was in all
the Town; they beheld it, and shrugging their shoulders, sighing forth fears
out of their breasts, with their breath, they said that the Sickness went
tyranizing over the heart, and that it daily showed it self a greater
threatener; then I fell into account, that it was not I who was weak, but they,
who undestood no more of me then what my Servants told them, of my complaints,
and grievous Sighings.

When I perceived that I was well, I prosecuted my Imposture, schreiching that
all the whole Street heard me, nay and my Wise Mistress too, the cause of my
roarings; who without any suspicion believed my weakness, yes and almost more
than I would have persuaded her; yet for all this, she had not the Courtesy to
send me a message to enquire how I did. See but what the inequality of the
goods of Fortune could do; now when I thought that I had had Sicknesses enough
to kill me, for the Physicians had given me over, I made my Will; sending to
call a faithful friend, and the Scrivenor, who being both come, I left for
heir to near a hundred thousand Ducats of freeGoods, my Mistress, Senora Dona
Temeraria, putting in a clause at the end, of my own handwriting (a thing
which pleased the Scrivenor, although he was a Scrivenor) For the tender Love I
have born her, and for the Favor which she has done me, Giving a profound
Sigh at the delivering of it to him. Master Doctor (said my Friend to me,
infinitely confused) what Goods do you leave to fulfill this Testament? Pray
Sir, answered I, content your self till we think how to dispose of those Goods
which remain: I have enough to acomplish what I have bequeathed, in this
Inventory they are, that will satisfy its Debts; with this I gave him a large
Cattalogue of a vast parcel of rich Goods, which were enough for my Testament:
This was an Action that more quallified me for a Fool, and even put me with
every one into the opinion, that I was a Madman.

No sooner was the Scrivenor gone out of my Chamber, but went to ask a reward
for his good tidings, of my Heiress; relating to her all my Will; and
Counselling her that she should cause Masses to be said, that God would take me
to Heaven; not so much because he should take me to Heaven, as that he might
take me away. The Gentlewoman hearing this new excess of my Love, immediately
without the least Moments delay, took her Chair and Servants, and laying aside
all consideration of the honor of her Virginity, was brought sadly weeping to
my Lodging; and as if I had really been her Husband, came to my Bed side, began
to embrace me, and besprinkle my face with her tears, thinking my Sickness was
caused by her disdains, and that her favors would also recover me.

Oh! Vain Women! Who is so much a Fool as not to treat you as you treat us: I
Sick? I Dye for Love? Are you in your Wits? Are you the descreet Lady? We shall
see presently; I suffered her to use her tender expressions, let her cry and
commit her Extravagancies, faigning my self so near death as not to know her.
Now there were met together in this room a great company of my Friends, and
acquaintance; and this seeming to me a good occasion for my Revenge, throwing
off the Clothes from the Bed with great nimbleness, I leapt into the Floor,
^eady dressed, and not a little gallant, ^hen seated my self in a Chair, putting
them into no small admiration, and said thus:

Gentlemen, all this was no more but a mere Drollery, an Amorous Stratagem, I
counterfited Love, and 'twas but Waggary; I was bred up in Madrid not in the
Forests of Arcadia, and have learnt to be aware of Mischiefs, by other men's
examples. This Lady, who for a thousand Excellencies deserves Veneration, was
the Idol of mine; I loved her most cordially, and with no less respect, and
causion; with a just end, and with a courteous and honorable intention: Now
whilst she supposed I equalled her in riches, she almost equalled me in
correspondence; but when she understood that I came short, she took from me of
her Love such a proportionable quantity as I wanted of Estate. I resented this,
and having always been curious, and delighted to examine the reasons of things;
I had a mind to know what they were, which had frozen a Correspondence so pure,
and so well defended: To that end I feigned a Sickness at my Heart, yet have
ever had it sound, for though I might sometime have had wounds in it, yet
disdains were a balm which comforted and healed them; think not then that there
can be any Love without correspondence, for it is impossible. One Love calls
another Love, one liking chains with it another liking; contempts only produce
contempts; it is natural for every thing to beget its likeness. I was pleased
with her, but not in Love; had some little Itchings after her, but not
enamoured with her: In my Will, I confess, I left her my Heiress, but of Goods
which I never was owner of. No sooner did she perceive me liberal, and rich,
but her love was re-kindled, which had lain hid amongst her kindnesses. Do not
suppose me fortunate in my Loves, for I never was so: she never pityed me as
being the Doctor Cenudo; but as being rich, she lamented me. It was not I, but
my hundred thousand Ducats that enamoured her. My revenge might have passed
forwarder, and I have Married her, she being rich, beautiful, and discreet, but
that revenge would have been soundly to my cost; no, I am not for a Wife that
dispises me for the false shadows of Wealth. You gave me the name of Fool for
my excessive Love, but you condemned me without hearing me; Now judge what you
please of it, since you have heard me.

I had scarce said this, when the whole company burst out into laughter, for
till then, Admiration had kept them silent. The Fair Ingrate was so ashamed at
this accident, that without speaking a word, covering her red blushes with her
black Vail, she in all have went her way. The Physicians came presently
afterward to ask if I was not yet expired; and seeing me well, swear they
would burn all their Books: But every one applauded the action for the most
pleasant that they had ever seen, or heard of.

CHAP. V. To Don Felix, the Fool gives account of his Love with Donna Dorothea,
which was the principal occasion of this Discourse.
WIth this Conversation, the Doctor Cenudo diverted his sadness, which Don
Felix listened to with great attention, being delighted to hear the ingenuity of
his Stories, and newness of his Jests. And now that the Holy Days were passed,
it seemed an unjust thing that Donna Dorothea should be cooped up in that
restraint, which cost her Parents so many cares and tears. One afternoon
therefore, finding him in a better than ordinary humor, and proposing these
inconveniences to him, he pressed him, that he would tell him the Center to
which his intentions were directed. But the Doctor, who with a fair Wind was
under Sail in his History, with the breath which Don Felix had given him, by
his silence and applause, swear not to satisfy him in any thing, until he
should have heard the rest of the Story of his Life, which was but little, yet
necessary for the bringing forth the birth of his conceit, that all his good
haps befell him for being a Fool, and all his misfortunes for being a Wiseman;
his misfortunes ('it is true) were not many, because his wise actions were but
few; but his good fortunes were many, because his follies were many.

Don Felix agreed to his proposal, entreating him to be brief, in regard that
the case held him in suspense, and suspense is the Martyrdom of the
Understanding; the Doctor promised him, and proceeded thus. Fortune now called
at my Door with a pleasing countenance, It seeming to her that in me by my
being a Fool, she had such a Minister of her Absurdities, that she needed take
no care where I was, but might sheath up all her crosses and troubles, at least
in the Province where I should be a foolish Judge; since I alone was sufficient
for the scourge of a whole Nation. This blind Woman called to her remembrance,
how well I obeyed her being Teniente, or Deputy, when I badly served the King,
and with this, her confidence rested secure; for it seemed she more solicited
my advancement, than I my self; but Heaven that has as many eyes, as Stars, to
look after the conservation of the World; foreseeing that it would remain idle,
if I was permitted to be a Judge, and man of Power: because I should not have
left a man alive, on whom it might employ from thenceforward its motion and
influence; therefore prevented the danger, which was now threatened; and that
too, with as much prudence and generosity, as as it is accustomed.

It happened then, that being one day in a Bookseller's Shop, near Sancta
Cruze, I saw an old Priest dragged away to Prison, with great severity, and
with the Alguazil or Bailiff, that carried him to the Vicars Prison, went an
ancient man, who filled the streets with his clamours; crying, It is no
Justice, It is no Justice, that this should be suffered amongst Christians. I
came running at the noise, and was scarce got to them, when the Priest that was
the Prisoner, catching fast hold of me, said, it is he doubtless, although he
has a Beard, without question it is he; When I saw my self embraced, and almost
kissed, by a Man whom as might be guessed they were carrying to Prison for some
heinous offense, I thought that he taxed me for an Accomplice in it, at which I
was ready to lose my Wits, and began to cry out, I am not, (I vow,) for I Am a
Son of very honest Parents, and would not have committed what you have done,
for the whole World.

The revengeful old Man, he that made the noise, asked me who was my Father? I
much more enflamed with anger, told him, my Father was a very good Christian,
and so taught me to be, and was as good a Gentleman, as who is best, and never
was said of him any thing that was not very holy and very creditable: They well
know in Madrid who the Licentiate Don Diego Hernandez was, and if I have any
thing of goodness remarkable in me, it is the being his Son; I had scarce said
this, when the same old Man replied; He speaks truth, it is He, doubtless it is
He; and coming to me embraced me very straightly: I that was still in my false
suspicions, and believed that they meant to apprehend me, and that that was to
hold me fast, and not to embrace me; began to exclaim, saying, I Will take my
Oath it is a false Testimony, for I Am an honest Man; at which the old Man that
held me, brake out into a laughter, saying; by this outcry I should have known
him amongst a Quire of Singing-Men, for such foolish clamours could only come
from Pedro Hernandez. Why Nephew (said the Priest) leave off your noise, and
take notice that this Gentleman is the Executor of your Father, who dyed Judge
of the Contratacion of Sevil, and comes to seek you out, to fulfill his last
Will, and because I gave him not a good account of your Person, they were
carrying me to Goal.

I begged pardon for my surprisal, and after they had embraced me once more, we
went to their lodging together, sending away the Bailiff; where being come, and
all quiet, the good Gentleman related to me, how that my Father, through the
desire he had of seeing Spain, and dying where he was born; had sued for, and
obtained a place in the Contratacion of Sevil; to which end, having embarked
himself, and put to Sea, that in his return homeward, my Mother had dyed, and
he fell sick of so violent a disease, as that in three days after his landing
at Sevil, he also ended his life, leaving me in his Will, the one half of his
Estate; the other being to be divided betwixt his other two Sons, which he had
had in the Indies.

I showed the resentment due for so great a loss, and gave Signs of more than I
really had: By which I perceived, that when we lament some dead person, we do
not grieve for the evil that has befallen him; for if he go to Heaven, he has
had none befallen him at all; and if to Hell, neither does he deserve to be
lamented for, since he has what he deserves; nor yet if he goes to Purgatory,
in regard he has hopes of Glory; we do not then bewail him, but our want of
him, and if we want him not, we never bewail him.

I, now seeing that at his death, he left me well provided for, was not much
affected, but yet remained sad; considering that a man begins to die, when his
Father, his Mother, or his Brother dies; they comforted me with discreet
Arguments, but for the comforts of an Orphan, there are none so efficacious as
Philippus Hispaniarum Rex stamped on the dead man's Cash, which he leaves.

Afterward, when the Gentleman saw me somewhat comforted, he took out the
Will, which he kept in a Cabinet, and passing over some Clauses, he read to me
one which said thus:

ANd forasmuch as Pedro Hernandez my Son is an Ignorant, a Fool, an Idiot, and
incapable of any Art, Employment, or Trade, whereby to mantain himself, and
live handsomely in the World; I make provision for him before his Brethren
aforefaid, bequeathing him the one half of my Goods: And I will and require
that one half of my Estate be given him, and settled for a perpetual
Inheritance, to pass to the Idiots, and Fools, which shall descend from my said
Son, and not to the eldest by any means, unless he shall be a Fool, and
incapable; In consideration that he has a better Inheritance, more happy and
more durable, to whom Heaven has given Wisdom, and Parts, to maintain himself,
and raise him an Estate. And whereas my two Sons aforesaid Diego and
Ferdinando, are persons able and sufficient to gain much Wealth; I desire, and
it is my Will, that they content themselves with their proportions.

This Sir, I had a mind to read to you, (added he then) that you might be
comforted; no less than full Four Thousand Ducats a year Rent, are those,
which for an Inheritance fall to your share, all well disposed in good order;
for your Father (who now is in Heaven) settled his Estate with much prudence.

Here you see me Heir to Four Thousand Ducats a year, only by being a Fool; Do
you think this was an indifferent action of my Father? Be not so ignorant, for
how could he commit Follies who was a Judge? what is more just, than to succor
them who cannot succor themselves? to leave Wealth to those who know not how
to gain it? To me, I am sure, that Clause seemed the most just, prudent, and
holy that ever was made. The Executor and my Uncle having instructed me in all
things concerning my Estate, and the means which I should use to receive my
Rents; afterward the one returned to Sevil, and the other to Odon.

Then seeing my self Master of Four Thousand Ducats a year, I sold all my
Law Books, and swear never more to follow any Employment relating to that
Faculty whilst I lived. Now you are to know, that among all my Glories, the
greatest which I ever desired, was to be esteemed by all sorts of People; and
this sprang from the great esteem I always had of my self. The reason wherefore
I call it, the greatest of my Glories, to be esteemed; is, because estimation
or love, as it is founded on meritorious parts, is a Sign, that the Man who is
esteemed or beloved, has eminent ones. Rich and great Men cannot make this
trial, because a rich Man may be esteemed for his Riches, but not for his
Person, and natural endowments; Love may entertain it self with his Gallantry,
Ornament, and Power, which being so splendid and beautiful, beget more esteem,
and love, than their Master, who perchance is a dull Coxcomb, and and of no
parts. Amongst great Men there is the same dangers, because the respect which
all pay them, rather seems a tribute of their fear, than of their love, which
never was tributary to any.

I encountered both these dangers, and was much troubled to think, that being a
Judge, or being a rich Man, I knew not whether or no I had any true friends, or
that I had only forced ones; I feared I should live in a perpetual error with
my self in respect of false friendships, wherein great Men are lost, know
nothing but flatteries and addulations. So I withdrew my hand from my
pretentions at Court, and laid it upon my Estate, concealing it with so great
artifice, that no body but you, thinks I am any more than a poor Doctor: On
this manner I enjoy all the Privileges of Poverty and goods of Riches,
without tasting the bitterness of the one, or of the other: If at any time I
succor the necessity of some friend, as I have not the opinion of one that
has much to spare, it is entertained with more gratitude; If I give any thing,
it seems more than what it is, my low Fortune being considered. There is no
cunning Thief meddles with me; at the report of my not having means enough for
my self; no Woman desires me for a Husband, although she may wish I was her
gallant, thinking I have not an estate sufficient, to keep her a Coach; these
and other conveniences I enjoy, by concealing my Estate.

I keep two Servants of my own Humor, faithful, and ingenious; I have the
House that you see adorned with Pictures, and Books, which flatter my Goust; no
one has yet seen it, I permit not any body to go into this inner Room.

In midst of this good fortune, I fell in Love with Dona Dorotea one morning,
being St. John's Day, as she was walking like a Nymph, on the Banks of the The
River which passes by Madrid.
Manzanares, to affront the Suns Rays, with hers; and having her Hair
disheveld, playing with the gentle Winds, I saw her near the Park, and
straitwaies swear she was going a hunting, and her Eyes did not belie it, since
they made me their prey: What need Bows and Muskets? if there be Wounding
Eyes; What need millitary preparations? if there be Beauteous Eyes; such were
hers, and they were doubly valiant, in regard they killed, and killed at at
small expense of their forces; her glaunces were sufficient for any
destruction.

The time of the Morning, which now had raised Venus above the Horizon, seemed
proper for Courtship, and opportune for the admiting of Lovers amorous
Caresses; I took Courage, spoke to her in that wanton Style, which the babes of
her Eyes prompted me to; I found, I know not what welcome reception in them,
which assured my hope; I followed her, learnt her House, the quality of her
Parents, and all other Circumstances; yet thought it not convenient to Court
her in Public, my Age and profession requiring the contrary; but found out a
trick, how to visit her by night; for She, and her Mother, were great friends
of a Lady of my kindred, and by this means I easily had access to them; so that
that passed for courtesy which really was love.

Six Months are now expired, since I have wrestled with her disdains, and that
with so much caution, as not only my Rivals, but even she her self, knows not
how far the empire of Love is extended over me. I was fearful of incurring the
like hazard as I did with my discreet chastized Mistress, who because I
declared my self briefly to her, though cunningly, she, from her grace and
favor which before I enjoyed, utterly cast me off, and forsook me; as she did
in the event her own credit and honor. I therefore spoke to this, Lovingly,
but with so many several faces, every sentence; that if she had a mind, it
should appear Courtship, she might make it appear Courtship; if courtesy,
courtesy; if Love, Love.

One Christmas night I came to her House, at a time when she and her Mother,
were getting into a Coach; I seeing them ready to go forward, would not speak
to them, but stepped up into the Coachbox, and the Coachman getting up on one of
his Horses as it is usual, left me his place, supposing me to be the
Gentleman Usher of those Ladies; I laid my ear to the window of the Coach
whilst we were going toward the Carmelites Church, and heard this discourse:
Why has not (said the Mother) this Foolish Doctor been here to night? but he
is elsewhere playing the Wise man, I Will lay my life on it: What a tiresome
Coxcomb he is? Is it possible any one should think to overcome us by mere
Arguments, as he does? We are Women, not conclusions. Indeed (said Dona
Dorotea) he is of a pleasant humor; I am confident he is now making Christmas
Carols for some Zealous Nunn of his Acquaintance, for it is not possible, but
such a talkative man must needs be a Devoto of the Nunns. What a confident Fool
is he of his whimsies? he believes that with every conceit he subdues a heart:
It Is a wonder to me, to think that in so much Schollarship, should be couched
so much Folly; Then how does he bedrivel his Chops at every word; God deliver
me from so Phlegmatic a Fellow; For my part I am persuaded, he expects at every
sentence, the Auditors in his applause, should answer with an Amen. Has this
man Meat to his Mouth? replied the Mother, surely if he had any thing to keep
his Teeth in employment, he would not be so vain: It Is mere hunger forces him
to this.

Nay there is nothing in the World, said Dona Dorotea, like the hearing him
pave my Head and Face, with all kinds of Stones; The other day I kept account,
and found that I had by his reckoning in my Eyes, Cheeks, Lips, and Hair, above
a Hundred precious Jewels. I assure you (said the Mother at that, in a great
laughter) he courts thee for Marriage, what fine folly is this? He is wondrous
wise, certainly he knows not that the Licentiate Campuzano, has fewer words and
more deeds; Come come, that man is tolerable; who though he be but a conceited
Ass, yet he is rich, and has what we have need of; In good truth I resolve to
tell him my mind, since he has told me his, and we will strike up a match with
him, out of hand; these matters admit of no delay; for men there are, who in
the morning will be mad for Love, and after dinner more hard-hearted then
Pharaoh; to morrow he will come to give us the good Christmas, and in good earnest
we will take it, and will make up the Match; for thou art now grown a Woman,
and it is a shame thou should be without a Husband.

At this, we came to the Church where they went in to Mattins, but I, in the
dark, staid at the door, Muffled up with my Cloak, and in a brown studdy,
finding my self more touched at her scorns, then enamoured of her beauty,
therefore projected my revenge, and thus it was: When they came forth; the
Coachman was not there, for he was gone to the Hermitage of St. Martin hard
by, to clear his Throat with a glass of Wine. Pedro, said they, bring the Coach
forward; I got up into the Coach-mans place, and brought the Coach for them to
come in, they entered and drew the Curtains, for it was now past two of the
Clock, and they feared the sharpness of the Air; I drove on the Coach, being
full of rage and spite, and leaned back my ear to have drank in more
undeceivings, but they spoke not a word, for they were both nodding.

Seeing them in this case, instead of carrying them to their own House; I
brought them to mine, by the back door, which in regard it is on the right hand
of this Street, and seems in the Porch somewhat like theirs; besides what might
a little excuse them, drowsiness also deceived them; so they alighted, came in,
and I presently sent away their Coach, by one of my Servants, with command to
leave it at the door of their house; and after that the other had carried aside
Dona Dorotea into a Private Room, by her self, made handsome for her; the
Mother was sent home in a Chair, in the very same manner as the Licentiate
Campuzano related to us here.

Since when, you have heard, and seen, all that which has happened in this
Room; Particularly the second day of Christmas, you knew the State of the fears
of Dona Dorotea, and of her Parents. I know all that already, said Don Felix,
and therefore admire you have so little regard to what is due to the quality of
this Gentlewoman, that you so endanger her honor and credit, by a way, from
which you draw so little profit. If she shall get any blemishes in her
reputation, said the Doctor, and not deserve them, let it be at my cost: I will
salve them up by Marrying her; but if she merit them, how am I faulty? This is
Revenge, not ill usage; Defense, not injury.

What do you mean to do with her, (said Don Felix) that you are become such a
Tantalus, with your temptations before your eyes? I am in Labor (answered the
Doctor) with a Thousand thoughts; God direct me for the best. I, my Friend, am
a Modern Philosopher, and that you may not think it strange, you must know,
that what the Ancient Impostors called Philosophy, the Severe Castillians call
Sloathfulness. Now I am of this Sect, and ever have an Eye to my quiet and
ease; At all times when my nature inclines me to any entertainment, before I
yield my self for conquered; I make this compact with it, and say to it, Take
care that I may be Master in my delights, and that you give me pleasure,
without Counterpoiz: Matrimony it is true, is a holy thing, but more holy is
Matyrdome, and ends the Life; seeing then this sweet attended with so much
bitterness, I made a halt, drew forth my feet, and told my nature, 'twas not
this I sought for; and yet I am not so free, but that I feel some Reluctancies
in my heart, which suffers me not to go into Port.

I could willingly thrust my self into holy Matrimony, being thus pricked
forward with Love, as I am; if I might find in Dona Dorotea, any spark of that
glory, which we call correspondence, which could we but be sure of, I hold it
for undeniable that Marriage would be the most pleasant and happy state of
Mortals.

This is my Calm, this is my suspense; for proof of this, I spend all my
discourse; and for this reason, I keep the Delinquent Prisoner, until she
shall have stood the trial of her Offense, which is great; for for her to
enamour with ingratitude, is a crime of Falsity, which is committed, by
adulterating the Seals of Love, since nothing can enamour without Love; and she
has enamoured me, counterfeiting Love,

Give me leave, said Don Felix, if you please, by the ancient Friendship which
we profess, that I may call Foolery what you have styled Philosophy, and may
prove, that this, which you esteemed discretion, and have taken so much pains
to express, is a most absurd Folly; For what Excellency, I beseech you, in your
person can you pretend, that this Lady should bear you Love? you will say, because
you are an understanding man; and it may be too, you will say a Gallant. But let
us stop upon the first: Either she is Wise, or else she is Foolish; if Foolish,
she is blameless, because she is incapable of making a good Election; or you are
not her like, since you are discreet; if she be Wise, without doubt, she will
not affect you; because she will consider, you have the repute of being a Poor
man, or because it is the misfortune of the Wise, to be always envyed of the
Wise. Have you not observed that men of Excellent parts, have never been
admired by others of Excellent parts; because every one would have the glory to
himself, not some share of glory, but the grand title of Prime, Excellent and
Only; besides we never desire what we possess; if this Gentlewoman be discreet,
why should she desire a discreet Husband.

If you were a Fool, and should not speak a word to her, but what was in
commendation of her rare quallifications, and endowments; she would have reason
to esteem you: For what Preacher is there who has not a greater kindness for
that Fellow-brother, who sits sleeping the one half of the Sermon while, and
the other half studdying Complements to applaud it: Then for some great Master,
who carries away from him both the glory, and Auditory. Yet this baseness the
most wise men have, that they know not how to make way for their own praise;
unless they trample upon the heads of others; they cannot pass forward, without
stumbling on him that goes before.

Your good countenance (for certain) could not enamour her; because hers is
something better, and has less beard. This you must consider, if any thing can
make her in Love, it will be the seeing some Excellent thing in you, which she
has not, and she a mind to have it; for all desires are so conceived: But you
have been so great a Coxcomb, that having four thousand Ducats a year (which
might make Four thousand Maids fall in Love with you, because it is a beautiful
thing, and what every one has not) you not only, have not boasted of them, but
have rather concealed them. Of what then do you complain? Study how to make her
in Love with you, and fly not from one conceit to another, for so you will be
accounted but a Madman.

You say somewhat (said the Doctor very gravely) you say somewhat; this conceit
has not seemed ill to me, for it is new, handsome and discreet. Be confident,
you have spoken a thing, that were you a Stranger, would quallify you for a
most incomparable man. I am considering on it, and at every instant, it seems
better and better; I say, it is very well spoken; with great reason certainly
you are my Friend; For there ought to be a Sympathy in Wits. I now yield my
self conquered, and confess I have been a Fool; and from this Moment, resolve
to declare my mind fully to Dona Dorotea, and to muster up all these
advantages, wherewith of force, I must make her in Love with me.

But because this Yoke of Marriage, is wont to endure all ones Life, I would be
glad to build on sure grounds; I will examine this Gentlewoman before hand, to
know if Madrid has not infused its Follies into her; for I have heard, (of I
know not what Philosopher) that the Earth has also its Influencies; the rough,
breeds rough ill natured persons; the smooth and pleasant, those that are mild
and pleasing: And Madrid as it is a plainCountry, promises a plain Easy
disposition, which gives me some small encouragement. That I will allow you to
do, with all my heart, said Don Felix, and leaving him now less heretical in
his Opinions, he took his leave for that time, offering, with earnestness his
Assistance, to the performing of that enterprise.

CHAP. VI. The Doctor makes trial of the Constancy of Dorotea.
DOn Felix, seeing he began to get the upper hand of the Doctor, by force of
Arguments; assumed fresh Vigor and Courage, to prosecute his Conquest; and one
day determined to speak boldly to him, taking confidence, from his Victory in
the past encounters. He went then, carrying in his head his design, how to
leave him reduced; and found the Doctor, with a little Book in his Hand, and
with his Eyes fixed on the Joysts of the Room, so diverted, that he never saw
his Friend enter, nor regarded his courtesy, but was speaking aloud these
frenzical words:

Not without cause, Oh great Son of Venus; Generous Hero! The most Eloquent,
the most High, the most Polite, and most Exquisite of all the Poets, celebrated
thee; Not without cause, thou meritest the Pen of that Swan, whose Song is no
conjecture, nor presage of Death, but an assurance of Life; which kills not,
but rather Immortalizeth. This same is an exploit! This is a Victory! This is a
Triumph! I mean not, to have trod with a Scornful Foot, on the daring flames of
that fire, which did not pardon the very brass; Not to have escaped the
devouring Jaws of Scylla and Charibdis; Not the going down to the Dark Island,
the Kingdom of Miseries; Not to lull asleep the Dog of Hell, to entertain, and
play with its furies, and to affright its Guards; Not to have vanquished so
many Armies, and in a strange Country. In all these Actions he had competitors:
Ulysses escaped the Dangers of the Sea with fewer Mariners: Hercules and
Orpheus went down to Hell, and both without the help of witchcraft, or industry
of Sybill: Alexander made the most remote Kingdoms his own, by force of Arms:
But to fly from a lovely, and amorous Woman, who with her Beauty, and her
charms; lays as it were an Impregnable Seige of Diamonds; none has done it,
but thou, O Valiant AEneas! Thou alone, thou alone, deservest the Sownding
Monument, the Sweet Pyramid, the Numerous Eternity, of the Incomparable Virgil.
Oh that I might imitate thee! Oh that I might give occasion to the Spanish
Wits! that with equal desire, if with less fortune, they might, from time to
time, from generation to generation, declare this my Valor to posterity; yet
there shall an Age come, wherein my Story shall serve for terror, and
admiration; the Aged Father, shall tell it to his hair-brained Son, to animate
him by my Example to despise Love: The sage Historian shall write it amongst
the marvails of this Age, and shall put applause and remark in the Margent,
with glorious attributes, to so high a work. But whether go I? the Heavens I
fear, will not deliver me to the memory of men, with so much advantage, to be
applauded and commended for my Wit; I shall certainly incurr the hazard of
being accounted a Fool, in future Ages: They will call Dullness in me, what in
AEneas appeared to be greatness of Courage; and yet, that is not what Ambition
suggests to me.

But pardon, great Poet, for now I understand thee; Now I know that in the
closets of thy imagination, thou called'st his determinations Follies; It was a
Dexterity of thy flattery, that undertook to lay heaps of precious Stones at
his Feet, who deserved to be stoned; thou flattered'st Augustus at that time,
making him believe it was a glorious thing, to be reckoned in the Rank of his
Predecessors; herein was a Masterpeice also of thy Wit; it was the Gallantry of
thy Eloquence, with false colors to ex toll naked Trunks, barren deserts.

And yet Claudian pleases me better, being a less flatterer and more free; he
introduces Pluto, who in the midst of his blind Empire, asks a Wife of Jupiter,
with the entreaties of a Brother; and forgetful of the inequality between his
Kingdom, and those of the other gods; he is only envious, he is only angry,
at the advantage they have of him, in having Wives: This he requests as in
recompense of his troubles; With this he thinks, he needs not envy the Sea, nor
Heaven, the Kingdoms of his brothers. What Heaven, like a Woman, beautiful,
discreet and pleasing? Here the Eyes, portray the Stars; Here the Hair,
resembles the Light diffused abroad; The sweet Voice imitates the Charms of
their Motion; and all the whole appearance, illustrated by a courtious
pleasingness, is the Picture of the whole Heaven, when most Serene.

Don Felix had scarcely heard him finish this rapture, when, laughing heartily,
he came to the enamoured Doctor, and taking him by the hand, said: This is what
I say, this is my Theme, pray let us understand one another better; You are in
have to come to your desired ends betimes, yet seek ways to go about to them.
Make an end, Sir, why do you destroy your self, with your conceits? You might
have learnt experience from the evil, which threatens you, for being Wise;
since you have never been so by neglect in all your life, which has not left
you a punishment for it.

It Is not long (replied the Doctor) since I was big with this thought, and
cursed my Fortune, for bringing my Judgment to this estate of Perfection; for I
assure you, I pass my solitary hours, the most troublesomely, with this my
Judgment, since it is become Doctor, as can be imagined; for having it so
lively, so swift, and so clear; nothing can be concealed from it, it
comprehends and penetrates all things. The case stands so with me, that I
should do much Injustice to my love, if I should think to avail my self by
discourse, I confess it possesses me wholly, insomuch that it leaves no place
for Reason, wherein to employ it self; You who are free from my passions tell
me, not as a Friend, but as a Lawgiver, your Judgment in this; and suppose you
are taking in your hands, a little soft Wax pliable and disposed to receive any
impression or form; for I can promise you no small hopes of my cure, since at
least it is prudence to confess, that I my self have none, and obediently to
ask it of you.

Don Felix taking hold of the liberty that was given him. There is only one
trial (said he) of Dona Dorotea to be made, which may give you any trouble;
and that is to know if she be fickle, or constant. Let this be the trick; she
thinks already, she is in some Noble-mans house. You may feign your self to be
the German Ambassador; and invite all your friends to Dinner; ordering them
that they come clothed like Ambassadors of several Nations, as of England, of
France, of Savoy, of Venice, and of Persia; you may make them a splendid
Banquet; and let it be in a place, where she may peep and see it all, and
believe it to be real; this being done, let me alone to tempt her; as for the
rest, the effect will show.

The Doctor embraced him for this Plot, and so well approved of it, that he
said, By the Life of the Emperor, this is what I could have wished for; and
gave him in charge to invite the Guests, and provide them with Clothes, at some
Stage Players. Don Felix did so, and the next day, Eight merry Blades, met
together in a Room, which was richly dressed up, where they all sat down at the
Table in great State, to an excellent entertainment; and it was pleasant to see
how well their disguise became them.

In an Inner Room stood Dona Dorotea at bo-peep, accompanied by Don Felix, the
counterfeit Steward of the German Ambassador; she was astonished and almost
distracted to see her self in that mavelous slavery, which Don Felix
perceiving, said, It Is now high time, Madam, that you should know the end which
your admiration may expect.

Arnaldo Boni my Lord Ambassador of Germany, fell passionately in Love with
your Beauty, one day when by chance he saw you, destroying the Gallants of the
Prado with it; and being straightned betwixt his desires, and the Extraordinary
Majesty of his Office, that would not permit him at your House, to wait on you,
and court you, in obedience to his great Love; he determined by means of
Servants and his Friends to steal you away; which he did as you know too well,
it having since cost you many a sad Tear; yet would he not force your will, for
it is no glory, among such great Princes, to use violence in Love: Therefore
above all his Ambitions he desires you will account him for yours, and amongst
other pledges which he gives you as a Testimony of his Love, he delivers you
the excellent furniture, which you see adorns his house; and promises to make
you so rich that you shall be coveted in Marriage, by more then a few Gallants;
you are discreet and cannot choose but see, that in gaining so much, there is
nothing lost.

It seemed Don Felix infused shame in at her Ears, not words, by that which
filled all her Face; but after it had given her leisure in her breast, to send
forth her breath at her Mouth; with many Arguments intermixed with tears,
(which not to make sad the hearer I forbear to relate) she made show of her
noble Spirit, and of the greatness of her Courage; telling him, that Germany
had not treasures enough, to recompense the least neglect of her chastity. Don
Felix added threats, but it was but to add Snow to her; for they all found her
but more frozen to his Suit.

The Steward left her, with gestures that threatened she should fare worse for
this disdainful resolution; and coming to the Doctor of Germany's Ear, he told
him somewhat in secret, which invited the Curiosity of the rest of the
Ambassadors, to take notice of it, particularly that of the Great Turk; who
holding a large Cup of Wine in his hand, to pledge a Health, said, I swear by
Mahomet not to drink this Health, till I know the cause that holds your
Excellency in such suspense: The Doctor (sitting hid behind a huge pair of
Spectacles, which covered his whole Face, and yet there remained Glass enough
to have served his Neighbor) gave a good thump upon the Table, with which he
threw down all on the Ground, and feigning a desperate passion, begal to cry
out, saying; Bring me her hither, bring me her hither presently, for I Will have
her beheaded.

Don Felix came like an Executioner for the poor Gentlewoman, and had but
little trouble to bring her, for fear had almost struck her dead, that she
could only ask Don Felix, if the Ambassador was a Christian or not; and then
was brought to the Tribunal, just at the time that the German was tearing for
Anger a Flaxen Beard, Spick and Span new, which a little before had cost him a
Crown; when Dona Dorotea saw so violent a Choler, she thought she had the Knife
already at her Throat; and she thought not much amiss, for the German no sooner
saw her in his presence, when snatching up a Knife which by chance he found
amongst the Fragments of the ruined Table, he went toward her, like an enraged
Monster; But the Ambassador of France (who was a handsome man, and above all a
Courter and Servant of Ladies) withheld his Arm; by which means, for that time,
he suspended the Sacrifice.

They all then cried out, wherefore is this disturbance? why is all this
uproar, before so many illustrious persons? At these reproofs the German
Ambassador was a little calmer, and entreating their Attention, began thus:

I, by neglect, fell (not long since) in Love with this poor pitiful Wench;
stole her, and offered her the richest Jewels which I brought with me from
Germany; but she is so Foolish, and so Stupid, as she answers me, That my
Nation has not a Jewel which can deserve her. This is it, that puts me besides
my self; Let therefore the most Sober, the most Prudent, and the most Temperate
of you all, judge what punishment she deserves; and let him first consider that
this would be, to give place to too much liberty; if it should be permitted,
that an inconsiderable Foolish woman, should stand it out against an
Ambassador, and with so much impudence, to insist upon her liberty.

Scarcely had the German Ambassador said this, when by strange Gestures, and
mysterious signs, they all gave to understand, that the crime was notorious,
and worthy of exemplary punishment; And after a little pause, the Persian
Ambassador who was a Eunuch, or at least appeared so to be; said, That it was
very impartant, toward the public good of all Nations; that, that woman,
should be torn Limb from Limb, for being insolent, and a Rebel to Love, and
Riches; and that every one of the Ambassadors should carry away his piece, to
terrify others with it. Another aledged that it was not needful, because there
were not in the world, any more of that humor.

The English Ambassador (who was a Gentleman of a pleasing and mild aspect)
said, That not only she did not deserve death, but rather an imortal Statue of
shining brass to be erected in her memory, for being the only contemner of
Moneys. He of Venice was for making a Nunn of her, and drawing out of the
Cloister in her stead, the first Nunn that should come to hand.

On this hazard, ran the life of the disdainful Lady; and after the final
debate, it seemed the major part consented to the taking away of her life, in
regard some had been for the putting her into a Nunnery, and some for tearing
her piece meal, which in effect was all one. The sentence therefore being thus
decreed; The Steward carried her from thence, so dismayed, and so seized with
fear, that death had almost played his part already with her; And whilst the
punishment was preparing for her, the Ambassador of Germany made an Oration to
the illustrious Senate, on this manner:

Most Prudent and Faithful Friends, I have desired this Lady (the honor of our
Age) with a perfect love; I have acquainted her with my desires, like a Lover;
and have confirmed them, as a person of my quality ought to do; yet neither
time, nor my kind treatment, have been sufficient, to work her to favor me;
There Is no brass so hard, as her obstinacy; wherefore seeing that no
entreaties, nor kindness could prevail: I betook my self to threats, and
violence; Yet did but flatter my imagination, to think that fear could do more
than Love; so that one remains as much ashamed, as the other is desperate. You
have now been witnesses of her constancy, and courage more than humane. She
has passed such a Trial, as might be said to equal, if not exceed, that of
Lucretia and of Portia. But it is my misfortune, that I was never in Love with
any woman, though of never so mean a Condition, nor never so much unacquainted
with Courtship; who became not colder then Ice to me. A Thousand times I have
been resolving to compass my desires by Marrying, which although it be a hard
Chapter; I shall do but as the Patient, who suffers his Arm to be cut off, to
preserve his life; Mine knows not how to get reception, where this my
enchantment is not: But her mean fortune contradicts this determination; she is
a poor Woman, a Woman of a contemptible quality; and yet that is not to be
considered, if she be Discreet, if she be Beautiful, if she be Constant, and
Chaste, above all those whom Histories Celebrate. He who thinks that riches and
Ornament of Soul and body may be found, in one only Subject, little knows the
freaks and irregularities, of fortune; since he observes not, that she very
seldom distributes her Treasure, amongst persons of the greatest deserts: Now
he that has but the least grain of understanding, may easily perceive that
this being so, it is a happy choice which employes me, in the sovereign and
chiefest goods; not in those which look on things variable, and unconstant. For
this reason I assembled you, for this reason I made the shows of Anger, which
so much have astonished you. The boasting of my greatness by my wealth, and by
my cruelty, was not enough, to shake her constant and firm breast: What
greater testimony can there be of her virtue; and of the happiness of my
choice? Tell me now your opinions; for although you think, you see me biased,
and altogether swayed by my own appetite; I am not so much, as that it denies
me a better Judgment, and more prudent Counsel.

They all applauded the Doctors management of his plot, with great signs of
admiration. Is this the Fool? cries one. How few (says another) have we in the
World, so ingenious as this man? Assuredly, continues a third, he has a notable
head-peece of his own. Thus was his Doctorship commended, and extolled by all
the Monarchies of the Universe; Who, at last consulting together what was
fittest to be done, in this business; unanimously agreed and thought it
convenient, to undeceive the afflicted Bride, by the Mouth of Don Leonardo; And
that calling together the Friends, and Kindred of both parties, the Match
should be made up. After which the Ambassadors took their leaves, and the
Bridegroom remained well enough contented and pleased.

Now for a Poet, or one that has but at any time spoken with a man, whose
Genious lies that way, to be able with lively Colors, to paint out and
express, the most sweet, most amorous, and most excellent conversation, that
ever Lovers have had, since Venus and Adonis, to this present Age.

O Muse! if at any time, for spite, or for thy pleasure, thou leftest off to
be a Virgin; and out of Curiosity did permit thy self, to be carried away
with the allureing thoughts of Love; if thou were at such time, at any amorous
parley; Now is a good opportunity to enjoy thy self; now thou may make
ostentation of thy Skill, and glut thy self with thy pleasures. But some Poet
will say, What has this Fellow to do to conjure the Muses, speaking in Prose?
What need has he in Prose to invoke the Muses assistance? Ill-conditioned
Poet, if my Prose were as flat as thy Rhymes, thou would guess aright. But I
must tell thee, Poesy consists not in the gingling sound, but in the loftyness
of the Spirit, and Elegancy of the Words.

Venus was risen upon the Horizon, and somewhat scornfully had turned her back
upon her Gallant, the Sun, dispersing her Loves amongst her Rays, of which our
Doctor had no need, and yet it seemed he drank them down. But this might be his
Thirst after these bold attempts. He went then, or rather his affections
carried him to the Lodging of the Confused Dorotea, whom he found sad and much
afflicted. Our Gallants Face and Body now carrying no disguise on them; he
saluted her in betwixt a fawning and timorous manner, as a New-com'd Suitor:
Dorotea could not at first call him to her remembrance; the stories of her
late-past fears, had so distracted her; but hearing his voice, she knew him by
it, answering him, with a courteous and troubled gesture; and no sooner was she
able to move her Lips, when sighing and lamenting she said; Art thou perchance,
the Instrument, that these Barbarians have destined for my death? Pray come
near; come, for I perceive already that you are Joyful, to see the revenge, put
into your hands, of my modesty and reservedness, which you will call disdain:
But hear me, I beseech you, e're you execute the rigorous Stroke; and take
notice before hand, that it is not to lessen my torments, but only to vindicate
my reputation.

The Doctor was about to reply, saying, he came with a different purpose; But
Dorotea, had in such sort her imagination possessed with sear, that even upon
her Knees, with entreaties, more than of a woman; she did beseech him, with
great tenderness, that he would hear her a little.

Be not glad at this revenge (said she) which in effect is not so, in regard it
falls not upon an injury; You have courted me some few Months; you have a
complaint against me, and a great one, that I have made no return to your
courtship or desires: It Is an unjust complaint, for you have either desired me
with licentious, or with modest ends: As to the first attempt, no reward is
due, it deserves no gratitude; for it is a manifest injury, with a mixture of
Treason; since it conceals Villainy, under the covert of flatteries: To the
second all is due, but with modesty; And in this, I have corresponded with you,
which is the forced Echo of a modest Courtship.

Had it not been an undervaluing of my Love, if I should have shown my self
easy, then when I had raised in you an imagination of my being impossible --?
Had I not injured you, to set a low esteem on what you your self had so much
extolled? And if this be pure Love, does not its self alone reward him who
entertains it? since it is so Noble that it illustrates all, and leaves to none
any cause of complaint; by being of its own self a reward, as all other virtues
are: For it was a Providence of Heaven, not to suffer its own pledges to be
rent in pieces, and those also the most divine ones, by leaving them to the
inferior Jurisdictions of Fortune; whom Fooleries and Errors do for the most
part please by Sympathy; and whom good actions displease and vex, by her
Antipathy to them.

Perfect Love is enjoyed, and rewarded, only with loving, which is no vulgar
reward; for he that loves entire perfections (according to the Laws of pure
Love) does intimate, that he himself also has such perfections; and
illustrious fame is attained, by loving those who merit illustrious fame; all
other advantages, are likewise acquired by admiring such as have these
advantages; Now is this any reward? Does it give any? You will say, there can
be no Love without hopes; and yet you will not say so, if you understand Love,
I mean legitimate Love; Love that merits this name; Not that adulterate, with a
counterfeit name; which can boast no such prerogative, as to be free from hope
and fear, as this can; which neither hopes, nor fears, because it enters into
the fruition of what it desires, immediately, so soon as it is born. This gave
it the Title of a Diety in the Golden Age, when hearts were more pure; Then
they called it a god, because its miracles seemed to be the Privledges of a
god, and amongst others, this of making it self possessor of all it desired,
only by desiring it. A man did then only desire to Love; he loved and
possessed; which had not been Love, if he had desired more; At that time, this
fury was but a sport; this Martyrdom but a pastime; because courtesy gave Laws,
to whom she was rightfully the Lawgiver; imposed precepts, which obedience
executed; and there was nothing so hard as not to obey.

Now revenge your self, if you find occasion; I have complied with what I owe,
that, that might not seem despair, which is misfortune; with this I shall dye
more contented, though more complaining. Here her tongue ceased, and her eyes
began to do what she had done, they turned into pearls like her self, no less
winning, nor less precious. Oh! how powerful are Eyes to persuade? How they can
flatter, threaten, or complain!

The Gallant, at this remained without arms, and comforting Dorotea, assured
her, that he came not to take away her life, but to give her his; she coming
better to her self, although in great admiration; and as there is no grief,
which leaves idle the curiosity and desire of knowing in women, she asked him
the cause of that Novelty, who had brought him thither, or what business he had
with her; which he satisfied as well as he could, with fine words acquainting
her, that it had been he who had stolen her away, who had kept her concealed,
and who had so affrighted her: mixing now and then, her want of Love, to
sweeten the Fault.

Thus he gave her a full account of all his Chimera's, and told her of nothing
so largely, as the secret of his Riches, his being Master of four thousand
Ducats a year, and the occasion of having kept them private; this he repeated
many times, as if every Crown had been a shield in his defense; expecting that
his Mistress would have stretched out her arms, to have embraced him, that the
Fortune which he brought with him, might not escape her; and coming nearer,
prepared to receive her: The Lady with a resolute Courage, gave him so great a
stroke upon the Breast, that he fell flat on the ground, with his head aching
somewhat more than before.

Methinks (Friend Reader) I see thee amazed, crossing and blessing thy felf;
which I should not at all be displeased at, if I did so for the joy I should
have to know that thou art a Christian; for I promise thee, I have so ill an
opinion of thee, that I doubt whether thou art one or no; and if thou do
examine thy Life, thou will find it all along but ill-intentioned.

Thou stand laughing at the Fable, and say, Oh what a new fashioned
Aretalogue is this? But yet I know not if thou will say so or not; for it may
be thou can not tell what an Aretalogue is. Here, will thou say, is a fine
introducing of an accomplished Lady, and one that is a Maiden too; to whom,
after he had feigned that her Servant has been making boast of his Riches, and
that he has acquainted her with his desire to marry her; now he feigns to us,
that she is disdainful, and breaks his pate with her Fist.

The case is; This is no Fable, speak civilly if thou know how; for I am not
a man that am used to lie: This is a true History, and so true, that when I
think on it, I am vexed at the Soul with this Impertinent Doctor, and will keep
him all the while I can, down on the floor, in revenge of his mischievous
Jests; and whilst he is complaining and bemoaning himself, at this Coltish
Trick; I Will have a fling or two at thee.

Behold thou, who (in thy lifetime) admirest nothing that thou hear or
see, because thou think that this would be to publish thy ignorance; I
tell thee, that the Natures and Dispositions of men, which thou call their
Fancies, are very different in the world; and the world has not any thing so
beautiful as this variety; every one acting and discoursing according to his
inclination.

Oh what a secret I have told thee! and what a Treasure I have given thee, if
thou know but how to embowel it! I have pointed thee out a thing, that were
I a foreign Writer, I would rather make thee run mad, than reveal it to thee;
I would put it into Ciphers; I would procure help of the Abbot Trithemius his
Or the Art of secret Writing, Printed at Darm stad, 1621.
Stegonographia; I would command thee to purge with Helebore, and afterward
would leave thee as wise and unsatisfied, as thou were two hours before I found
thee. But I am better natured, thou shall know then that in all Moral
Discourses, and in many of the Scicences likewise, the difference of Opinions,
has risen from the difference of the inclinations of Writers.

The Law is a faculty, which errs most of all, in the disconformity of
Opinions; because it has more of Morality than any other. Our understanding,
if it were free from this embarrassement of Flesh and Blood, without doubt
would always hit exactly upon the truth; for it naturally has Idea's,
Notions, or Forms of it, which serve it instead of Originals; insomuch that
seeing it painted out in any Discourse, by comparing it, with its draughts, it
knows whether it be that or no; but what hinders or molests it, is the
affection proceeding from the Intemperance of this Vessel, wherein it is either
preserved or spoiled.

I shall do thee a great kindness, to tell thee, that the intemperance of
affections, does not arise only from the disproportion and discord of heat and
moisture, (as the Peripatetiques say) but from the stars; which, according to
their Motion, Site, Aspect, and Nearness that they have; do influence on us
Affections, Vices, and Natural Virtues; conformable and like to their Motions,
Qualities and Natures.

The Understanding then, guided by the Affections, discourses always like to
the Affections, after the manner of a flattering Friend, (which thou may
call discreet) who talking to thee, concerning that which gives thee most
pleasure, applauds and admires it, be it never so ill contrived and
preposterous. Thou will better understand me by Examples.

A man is born an Epicure, altogether a friend of his delight, of good Liquor,
and a plentiful Table; he is of a pleasant conversation, peaceful, quiet,
always mindful of his own tranquillity; and so careful in this, that he is never
troubled at the death of his Kindred, the misfortune of his Neighbor, nor the
poverty of his Friend: The ambition of Glory, never disquiets him; he is drawn
out by force amongst Tribunals, and to public Solemnities; and unconcerned at
the Government of the Commonwealth; In fine, the man is wholly for the delight
of his Body, feeding, and procuring Mirth, and ever far from any other care.
Put a Pen into his hand, counsel him that in regard he has so good an
understanding, is so pleasant, and so ingenious; he write something that may
serve for a light to others, not so happy; he is persuaded to write, and treat
of the chiefest goods, and being only inclined to his delight, that Affection
which this inclination imprinted in him, treats him as its Scholar, or its
Servant; and causes, that his understanding flatters him, and gains a full
Empire, even in the most sacred place: In the end, he writes, that the chiefest
good, is to regale, and please ones self; and from thence he runs into a
thousand other Errors, as one that suffers himself to be led by a Blind Man.

Chrisipus is born altogether wedded to his rest; wholly given up to Idleness;
he writes of Vices and Virtues, and puts down Mercy for a Vice; commanding
expressly, that no wise man harbor it in his breast, because it pays badly for
its Lodging, and disquiets too much.

Up starts a Covetous and Severe Lawmakers, the very Disgrace of Nature it
self; he finds natural Reason crying out to him, that to serve is against his
Laws; that men were born to command, unless they be fools; who because they
know not how to command, were born to obey; and being guided by his harsh and
covetous nature, finds out Arguments, that it may be lawful, for some men to
subject others, and to be served by others; to kill, and to destroy them; and
without calling to mind so many reasons, as stand laying before him the
contrary; being become a slave to his Affections, maintains that there ought to
be slaves.

Yet there will one day appear a man so pure from all Clouds, and Darknesses of
the understanding; as to declare, That the greatest good of Mortals, is Virtue;
because it is a certain part of God: That the tranquillity of the mind, consists
not, in the pampering and delights of the Body: That Mercy is a Virtue: That
Slavery and Servitude, Discord and Destruction; are unjust, unless it be where
there is no other remedy, and for avoiding of greater evils: That Reasons of
State, for the most part have somewhat in them contrary to the Law of God,
whereby they are discovered not to be Reasons.

You need no clearer demonstration, that Opinions most commonly are governed by
the Affections; than the finding it established by Law, that he incurs the
penalty of Death who shall steal his Neighbors Goods of Fortune: and of
banishment, he that shall wound another: And in former times, In the ancient
Laws, a Buffet, or Blow on the face, was punished (in Spain) with the value of
little more or less than About Half a Crown.
eight Royals. That a Buffet, the highest of Injuries, where it seems the works
of God are defaced, by the hand of the the Agressor; when by Sacrilege, the
Soul is profaned, which appears with the greatest Glory in the Countenance;
and that to be chastised with so slight a penalty! The Buffet, I say, which
stains the honor and reputation for ever, to be souldred up with Money; and
Money punished with the Gallows, or an Axe! Money stolen is not contented with
less revenge than Honor and Blood: and yet Honor and Blood, are contented
with Money, and so little as can scarcely be called Money, who doubts that the
one injury was not greater than the other; by how much the good of the Body and
Soul is greater than that of Fortune? Thus have our Lawmakers had such ill and
vile Affections, as that they have judged quite contrary to Reason; and yet
thought themselves so wise, that they put this for a Law, and left it recorded
for Justice.

Which being considered, never marvel at this Novelty of Dorotea, since it
contains a Mystery, and perchance Wisdom; for it is not of Necessity, that that
only should be infallible and without all scruple, which the Vulgar admits of;
Believe me, for the most part it errs: and if all the Vulgarities, which this
evil Beast has contrived, were laid open; thou would see how many ignorances
they contain, and how ignorant thou art in following them. Now if thou think
that this is Sophistry, or force of Arguments; there is a good remedy: Hear this
Maiden, in whom Reason speaks without Artifice, and thou will remain well
satisfied.

CHAP. VII. The Doctor carries on the Discourse, and the History is continued;
wherein the Fool is made wise.
IF Wills could be sold (said the Singular Damosel) as other Goods are; mine
would run the hazard, of being triumphed over by your Friends; But the Laws
will not suffer that things sacred, should be exposed to sale; because he that
sells, contemnes, and slights, as declaring that he has no need of what he
sells; or at least, that he esteems more the price, than the Jewel. The Will is
sacred, therefore expect no sale of it; It may sometimes suffer it self to be
alienated, I confess, but not into profane hands; only into those of another
Will, against which no privileges avail, by reason of the equality.

You, Sir, have no Will, nor Love, which can stand you in stead, toward the
promoting what you pretend to, I see it in your affections; for, for you to
endanger the loss of my reputation, to bring me to the very point of Death, and
to threaten violence; savours more of abhorrency than of Love. You know this
affection but ill, if you call it blind, and think to advantage your self, by
the Pictures which represent it to you, with a Scarf before its eyes, amongst
your Comrades; since that is no Emblem of Blindness, but an evidence of its
having the very property of a Lynx: In regard it acts what it will, in despite
of its Scarf; Hoodwinked (as they say) it procures its ends; This is then the
Glory, and Excellency of the Eyes, to work blindfolded.

I will never yield up my self to that man, who assists himself with power and
deceit, to conquer good liking and Loyalty: Neither would I have you to think,
but that I esteem more of my self, naked of these Goods of which you boast,
than of you clothed with them; for if at any time, they are to be esteemed, it
is only when they serve to celebrate some pretty Stratagem; not when they
attempt to call out for Empire, and to require subjection. I shall live happily
with him who shall be my Equal; you cannot be so, because you want as much to
equal me, as you exceed me in Riches; since therefore for them you are such an
impudent Clown, pine away, and die without hopes.

She had said more, the sense of seeing her self thus affronted, and mocked,
had so much transported her; had not the Doctor interrupted her. If you have
thought (said he) that there can be a durable Love without correspondence, you
have been deceived. Never fear, Madam, never fear, you shall be beloved with
excess, when you can abhor with excess: I confess my obstinate persisting
herein, has done me but an ill Office, and branded me for a Fool, for desiring
one who cared not for me; but this has not been without mistakes. Whilst I had
hopes, I engaged my self in all occasions, which might assist me toward the
obtaining what I hoped for; but now, that instead of Flowers, I gather
Thistles: Now, I say, that I discover your deceitful humor, and that your
Coldness is not Modesty, but mere Hatred; Never believe, that I shall be so
Marble-like, as not to change; and be sensible that from henceforward it is
Dissimulation, what hitherto has been Love.

If some Suitor should at any time trouble you with his Courtship, after he is
repulsed, or discarded; do not believe that this is Love; for it is but a
persisting to trouble you: Neither accuse him of being facil and changeable, if
he does not Court you still; for this is Courtship and not Coldness; He obliges
you, in not seeing you, if he thinks, he troubles you, when he sees you. You
may be certain, that in all this, you have not run any hazard, in your
reputation; for herein (as you say) my Love has been a Linx, since it has
looked so carefully after it. Return home then to your own house, and suppose
that you are Mistress of this which you leave, without more obligation of pay,
than your having entered into it, and the knowing you have power to command it.

He had no sooner ended this; when calling a couple of Servants, and whispering
privately to Don Felix, who came with them; he took leave of her, not without
admiration of those who beheld it.

It being now night, they carried her, or rather she walked home, waited on by
Don Felix, and other Servants; who as they were instructed by the Crafty
Gallant, left her in the Porch of her House; where we will also leave her, going
in, and crying for joy, with her Father, Mother, and Kindred, to their great
satisfaction; It not being my intent to trouble my self, with painting out
tears, nor whinings; since greater matters call me another way.

Fame divulged this Heroic Action, of the Doctor's, amongst his Friends; who
put a high esteem on him for it; and there was none, who did not Graduate him
for an Ingenious and Wise man; The Chronicler also being his Friend, was a help
in the augmentation of his Applauses; so was Don Felix, for he at no time
related it, that he did not extol him to admiration: He would stay sometimes to
tell the conceit, and then annex a hundred other pleasant ones to accompany it.
Fortune surely bears a share, in things that are spoken well, and in actions
that are nobly performed; and distributes good or evil Fame, amongst us, as she
does her other goods. The Doctor's increased like Froth; nor was there any
discourse of Mirth, in which (without naming the person) he was not talked of.
At the report of this Story, a certain Lady would pretend, she could not endure
to hear of it; This worthy Lady, Madam Fantastical, would not forsooth, allow
by any means, but that Suitors should remain constant to Eternity;
notwithstanding all the scorns and frowns which often distract some, and almost
destroy others of them: Her fancy truly carries no Reason with it, if she likes
not to see a love made, or marred in so short space; Let her therefore (I
advise) improve her opportunity, or she may stay till Crabs grow at her heels,
e're she get a Servant to fulfill her Whimsie.

All the Doctor's Friends were one night met together, at his house to make
merry, and to have a Game at the Play called A Game at Cards.
El Hombre, or the Man; Some played, others looked on, and the Doctor happened
to be El Hombre. One, amongst the rest, who was a pretender to Wit, and
delighted more to quibble on the talk, than mind the play; being unwilling to
lose the opportunity of showing his rare qualifications, said; It is with
reason, Sir, for you (as truly as any in the world) may say you are a man,
since the ingenuity, which you of late days have shown, is much of a man, and
of a very discreet man: They took occasion then every one of them, to commend
him, running on in that Subject a good while, which at last was closed up; all
concluding that this had been the most discreet action, they had ever heard or
seen. The Doctor (modestly and with a grave look) checked them; and afterward
told them, It Is well, said he, you jeer me with this, for discretion; I being
so cried up a Fool: suppose it rather a thing inconsiderately done; or else
attribute it to my Love's leaving me with such ease; for this is also the
property of Fools. Here they were all in a Hubbub, and with a loud noise, not
without some Oaths, made him believe he was as wise a man, as was in all the
Walks of San Felipe. One of them that was a pleasant witty Fellow, said, This
is no ill scruple, which Mr. Doctor has objected; he may well be jealous of his
Reputation, and I find no other remedy for it, than to Graduate him a wise man,
since we have amongst us Doctors of Discretion, here are Poets, here are
Critics, here are Flatterers, and here are Wits; there is nothing wanting.

I accept the favor, said the Doctor (with a cheerful countenance) with all my
heart, that we may leave off this Play; for it is a terrible thing for any body
to be El Hombre, it is enough to make one tremble with fear, and in the upshot
it will cost him some Moneys.

This is a very old complaint, said another, and we can do no less than give
you your degree; yet do not suppose it done on a sudden, without forecast; for
I have brought in writing the Laws which you must keep to be accounted wise.
Then it seems, said the Doctor, you came not to make trial whether I am a wise
man or no, but to dub me one, as they dub a Knight: Truly this is the most
certain and easy way; for I assure you, there are few in the world, who merit
the degree of a wise man; but just as at the dubbing of some Knight; what
famous Actions he has done, are not looked after; it is sufficient if he be
able to perform any, and that conjectured too by his Auncestry; and are
contented for the present, with instructing him, what he is to do, to comply
with the Order of Knighthood; nevertheless this is a great honor, and worthy
of much estimation: So shall I likewise remain highly honored with your
dubbing me a wise man; since at least you assure me that I may be one; in
regard you see some glimmering in me.

Let this serve for an Oration, said one of the briskest, and taking a Book
called Lope de Vega's Plays, he made him kneel down upon his knees, giving
him, with it, three blows on the Forehead, said, Doctor Cenudo, will thou be a
Wise man? To which he answered, I will. Then added the other, God make thee
one; for I cannot.

All commended the Ceremony, and the President gave command that every man
should sit down in his order, to hear the Constitutions of Discretion.

Here happened a great Dispute betwixt the Poets, and the Pretenders to Wit;
which should have the chiefest place: The Batchellors of the Silver Order,
Devoto's of the Nuns and Ladies, considering upon it, said, that to them it was
rather due, as being the very Map of Discretion: But the President or Chairman
determined, that they should give the chiefest place to the Poets, because
though they knew not. Discretion, at least they taught it. In the end, being
all seated, the Constitutions were read almost to this effect.

LAWS and CONSTITUTIONS of DISCRETION.
WE Discretion, Queen and Mistress of all the Universe; To you the Wise men of
the first Class, Novices of the strict order of Knowledge, Understanding and
Words: Know that Relation has been made to Us, of the Excesses and Absurdities
which such of you as are Lovers of pleasant Conversation, do commit, and have
committed, by inventing new ways of Speaking and Doing; from whence has
resulted, and does result great damage to all Humane Wit and Scholarship:
Wherefore for redress of your Disorders; We do establish and ordain the
following Laws; which you shall know, and keep, under pain of our Displeasure.

IN the first place, Because Experience has shown us, that the having a bad
Tongue, being a busy Censurer of other men's Actions, is not Wit, but ill
Intention; And that notwithstanding the faults of men are many, and grievous;
the the ill Tongue does but only relate them We ordain, that such call not
themselves, nor may be called Discreet, but mere Fools for ever: And that
without suspicion of Malice, any one may impute as many more faults on such
Ill-Tongues or Backbiters, as he or they did relate with an ill intention: For
the delight of this perverse people is founded in the procuring comfort to
themselves, in respect of their own faults, by relating other men's; and for
certain they would not seek for comfort, unless they were comfortless.

Item, That every man of Civil Language may doubly be called both Wise and
Elegant.

Item, That no man who is about to be married, or is in Love, may be wise,
during the time that his amorous Fits shall continue, on pain of being
accounted a Clown, a Coxcomb, and a Flatterer.

That no wise man keep in his House the Academy of Complements, nor any
Formulary of Letters; neither write after the common and ordinary style of all
men: because we shall think that he knows no better.

And because we are informed, that in the Visits of Courtesy, or Complement,
there are committed many notable and gross absurdities in unnecessary
Questions; We command, that it shall not be lawful, to ask any handsome Woman,
or any that thinks her self so, If she be in health: because to doubt it, is as
much as to say, she is unhandsom.

That, there being two or more Visitants, come in at several times; he be
obliged to go away first, who came in first; on pain of three years being
esteemed a Clown; or else according as Our pleasure shall think fit.

That to such Visits of Courtship, no man may go by night in a This is the
nightgarb of such as would in Spain be esteemed Valentons or Hectors,
colored Cloak, in a Band, nor with a Buckler: on pain of being accounted a
dull Fellow, and one who can invent no better Discourse, than of his own
Valor, and Achievements.

That no one presume to boast, that he is of a Melancholy Constitution;
thinking thereby to make us believe, he is very wise; unless he be hollowey'd,
Beetle-brow'd, Lean-jaw'd, and Thin bearded; or shall have but little money in
his Purse: for such have License, not only to be Melancholy, but also to boast
of it.

That none show courtesy to one that sneezes, since he deserves it not; for as
much as we are informed, by grave Physicians, that sneezing is an expulsion of
humid excrements; and every expulsion of Excrements is unmannerly.

That no discreet man shall dare to know how to make handsome Legs, dance, sing,
nor play upon any Musical Instrument; neither to snuff a Candle, cut a Melon,
nor carve a Fowl: under the penalty of being suspended from his Office.

That they speak not with Thrum ends of Poetry, nor Raptures of Rhetorique; but
Christian-like, as their Consciences shall dictate, and as their Forefathers
(who are dead and gone) did teach them.

That they keep no set hours for Dinner, Supper, going to bed, nor rising; but
that the appetite, and Will, to one and the other, appoint the hour.

That he believe nothing that shall be told him, unless it be a Mystery of
Faith; but we give leave that for Courtesy, he may make them think he believes
all they tell him.

That he change his Clothes at any time, according as he shall see the season
hot, or cold, without considering whether it be Winter, or Summer: because that
day is really Summer, which is hot; and that Winter, which is cold.

Item, We command to blot out of the wise men's Vocabulary, all Outlandish
Words, as Latin, Italian, Portugueze, Gallegan, and Moorish: forasmuch as the
Spanish Language of it self is Copious, Neat, Sweet, and the most Polite of all
other Languages.

That they wear no Jewels of Diamonds, nor Emeralds; when they can wear them of
Glass and Pebles; in regard they are cheaper, and shine all alike.

We charge the Consciences of Formal Courtiers, that they cool not their Wine
at Christmas; for some there are, who, when their Bottles are so frozen, that
it is a wonder to see; the Wine being as cold as an Isicle, will yet cool it
more.

That no wise man dare to have Great Eyes, a Little Forehead, Flaxen Hair, nor
a Round Face; on pain that no one shall know him.

That if, being in visit with some persons of Quality, there should be brought
to him a Letter, and he open, and read it immediately; We do absolve him of the
unmannerliness at the very instant; because he may not stand in pain, and
doubtful.

That no discreet man ask any persons what they have eaten; nor tell them what
he has eaten; because these Discourses are only fit for Gluttons.

That they talk not to one another concerning new Fashions of Clothes, and
Dresses; since this is reserved for young Ladies.

That he mind not old superstitious Fables, Dreams, nor Southsayings; on pain
of Our Curse: And We declare for Public Fools, any that commit such a Crime.

That none believe that there is virtue in Stones, unless they be Diamonds,
Rubies, or Emeralds, and other Precious Stones, which are sold to Jewellers; or
those which being thrown, brain an Enemy: Nor in Herbs, but such as the
Apothecaries sell, since they have the virtue to make them rich: Nor in Words,
except they be promises, which shall have virtue to give dead Dogs.

Let them not be Boasters of their Blood or Lineage, by any means; nor meddle in
reckoning up their Pedigrees, or bragging of their Gentility; on pain of being
accounted Upstarts, Braggadocio's, and of ill intention.

And because some hold it for an Elegancy, and Ornament of Speech, now and then
to throw out an Oath; We declare them for Fools, founded in Blasphemy; and
command that they enter not into any Civil Society.

That none speak ill of Women, although they deserve it; considering it is but
ill Merchandise, and is not fold off of hand, except it be praised.

That no one presume to have a Mother-in-Law, though it should cost him the not
being married in all his life; for in our Council, shall be taught him a Trick,
how he may live without one and the other.

That he seek not preferment to Offices, without Favor; nor Court a Lady
without Money.

That nobody know from himself, he is wise; but that he know it of all.

The new made wise man promised obedience to the Laws, and began to appear one,
amongst his Friends that night; giving them a splendid Supper, where the
seasoning of the Jests, was no less pleasing, than that of the Dishes; of which
I do not make any larger Relation, for fear of provoking thy appetite to them:
It Is enough for thee to know, that the Supper did sufficiently satisfy a
Legion of Poets; which is as much Glory, as was ever related of any Supper. So
they made an end of that merry Bout; and so ceased the Doctor Cenudo to be a
Fool; and began the Office of a wise man: Mind me what I say; for Courtship and
Discretion are not Graces, but Offices, and perchance of those who vend them.
When thou shall hear say that Mr. Such-a-one courteth Madam Such-a-one; do not
for that think he is altogether a Courter of Ladies; for in this manner you are
wont to ask, What man is this? what person is that? so as it is only to be
understood, he has at this time, that occupation or Office of a Courtier. You
may suppose the same from henceforward of wise men, and let it be on my
account. Would you be a wise man amongst a hundred wise men? Give them a good
Supper, and you shall see, that although you were an errand Pack-horse, they
will commend you, seeing you loaded with Turkies and Partridges.

CHAP. VIII. The Doctor Cenudo is apprehended at the Request of his Enemies.
WAs there ever yet seen a Flash of Lightning, so boasting of its power, that
intending to kill, it would endeavor to destroy without noise? At the Pistols,
Muskets, and other such like Instruments of death, we need not wonder; for
perchance it was the defect of the Artificer, which could not make them silent,
as the valiant are: But what I am confident of, is, that Nature contrived to
temper the malice of the Lightning, with the scandalous rattling of the Thunder,
as being sorry for its formation, and thereby advising the world, that they
should get themselves under shelter. Oh! how penetrating would Love be, if the
noise of it should not cure us: Assuredly Mistress Finical, if you brag of your
Beauty, and the Rays of your Eyes, that they are able to kill with Love; yet
the noise (I must tell you) will help us to escape you; or at least, will bring
such a blemish on your Reputation, as we shall fully be revenged, and so cry
quits with you; for what would become of us, if it should be otherwise? How
freely would you make your shot? if, as you know the Bullets kill us; you knew
not likewise that the Crack and Smoke soyls you.

Dorotea (with blushing Cheeks) told the whole story to her Father and Mother;
and had no great trouble to make them believe her; for as being a part of their
Soul, they understood her Manners, and from thence were assured that there was
no forcing her Will: But she satisfied not the World so easily; who knew the
Nights she had been lamented for at her own house, and made much of at
another's. In fine, the Voice is Wind, it is blown about in the Wind, a Mass is
made thereof, and is given to all, and dispersed into every part; for what does
not the Air penetrate? and the voice carries no greater body than the Air.

The Licentiate Campuzano our Andaluzian Gallant heard it, and who so well able
as he? who was all turned to ears, since he had been made such an Ass of. Oh!
what do Fools lose, by being confident! for in effect they lose more than they
have: Confidence had made our Arrogant Andaluzer conjecture all that beauty of
Dorotea's to be his own; and he was so possessed with this Fancy, that the day
in which he had notice the Lady was stolen away, he undertook her search, on
his own account; and let himself think, she had been stolen from him.
Confident Fool, was it not better to imagine she was not thine? as really she
was not, whereby in case of her loss, any injury done her, or any contempt put
upon her; thou would not have had so great share in her Sufferings, nor
would thou have thought they had taken her, as it were out of thy Bed from
thee; And now that I am talking of Licentiates, I speak to all. Gentlemen, you
who sue for Offices or Preferments, do not sue for them as Campuzano did to
Dorotea, that you grieve not, when you find your selves mocked; but provide
your selves beforehand with patience, by knowing that they are not yet yours;
and if they be given to others, they are not taken from you.

He was now become a Lion, as to Courage; and perceiving that he wanted Paws to
prey withal, he contented himself with roaring, though sore against his will;
but in that manner he accosts the Justice; affirming, That the Doctor Cenudo
was a Conjurer; that he kept a Familiar; and that he daily committed a thousand
violences, by virtue of Witchcrafts; That he ravished Maids; made himself
Master of other men's wealth; and other Miracles which his spite dictated. To
all which a Teniente gave him credit, and went out by night, to apprehend the
Doctor, carrying a great Guard of Alguazils, and other Officers with him, as
also the Licentiate himself for a Guide.

These beset the Doctor's House on all sides, called at the door, and giving
(by Campuzano's advice) the name of Don Felix, to facilitate their entrance, it
was opened to them; and leaving order for some to stay there below, the
Teniente went up, and came to the Doctor's Bedside, where he found him fast
asleep, and fearing that if he should awake, he might assist himself with some
Spirit, he commanded four Sergeants or Bailiffs to shackle him quickly, who
presently obeyed, and would have done as much if it had been to four Devils.

At the noise of this, the miserable Doctor awaked, and seeing himself seized
and bound on that manner, and all his Chamber full of Halberds, being amazed
and affrighted, he began to recommend himself to God and the Saints, with great
earnestness; at which the Teniente was angry and afraid, supposing he had been
muttering his Charms, and already began to fancy himself in the Hobgoblins
Clutches; wherefore putting a Gagg into his Mouth, he sent him away to prison,
with a Squadron of lusty Fellows to guard him; charging them to secure him in
the safest Dungeon; which they did: And the Teniente stayed with a Or Attorney.
Scrivano and other Officers, to find out the Charms, Vows, and Instruments of
his Witchcrafts.

To which end he sent several of his Attendants over all the House, whilst he
still continued with the Licentiate, and the rest of his Train above; who
casting their Eyes on a Cabinet curiously wrought, which stood at the Drs
Beds-head, broke it open, suspecting they might find some Charms in it; the
Teniente examined the Drawers, and discoursing with Campuzano, asked him if he
knew what kind of things Conjurations were; the Licentiate told him, they were
certain Prayers or Invocations in Rhyme; and that in a Commission, which he had
once against a Company of Witches, he had attained to much knowledge concerning
them; and if it had not been the Teniente, he would perchance have made him
believe he himself had been a Wizard.

They were in this talk, when in a Drawer, they espied certain Papers, of which
Campuzano reading some scraps, cried out, These are Rhimes; As I live, we have
found out now the Conjurations: The Teniente who knew as much of Conjurations,
as of Rhimes; and had a great desire the Rhimes might prove to be Conjurations,
that he might make a Holiday, and day of sport for the rude Rabble in the great
Marketplace; after he had often crossed himself, and said some Devout Prayers,
and renounced the implicit Compact, which they might possibly contain in them;
and declared fully and plainly that it was not his intent to do ill to any one,
by reading those Papers; neither to raise up any Spirit to converse with; nor
make the Devil take any visible shape: He began to read the first Conjuration,
according to his Mistake, which he found said on this manner;

Look down (thou faithless Mother of Love) and see
The humble Suppliant of thy Majesty:
And though I with no golden Shrines appear,
At least I come surcharged with grief, with fear.
Take back these flowers, scarce waked by'th' morning Sun,
This hope cut off, so soon as 'twas begun;
Since being at highest pitch of bliss attained,
I find thy promise broke, thy Colors stained.
Henceforth thy barren Favors thou may bring,
And them distribute to some happier Spring;
For whilst they press so hastily on me,
My falls more violent than it would be.
And if the Cruelty which thou do send
Have not had power enough my life to end;
It is because the fright has given me Balm,
And taught me how to lead a life more calm.
Does your Worship observe, said Campuzano, the Sacrifice which this Villain
makes to Venus? Mind here, the Obligation which he presents her with in this
Conjuration. The Teniente was amazed, and having but little skill in
Conjurations, the simplicity and ignorance of the Licentiate Passed with him
for current; so he read on further.

An Allegory of the Madman which Horace painteth out.
He, who, by framing in's distracted mind
Pleasing Idea's, full content could find;
And though's Chymera's did succeed in vain,
Sweet Adulation made all well again:
Illustrated by light, and brought to day,
He chides his Fortune for her traiterous play,
That from a place of Glory so sublime,
Had tempted him to a less happy Clime.
Lay, CINTHIA, thy deceitful pencils by,
Which feign so easy this my misery;
They'lsweetly draw what is cruel, fierce, and wild,
And make that rude, which gentle is and mild.
Let no false Gloss over my griefs be spread.
But faithfully let them be colored;
For Painting steals, when it advantage spies,
Disguise from Truth, only to blind our eyes.
Here the ill intention of the Reader was more clouded, and he said; For these
occasions it is good to have studied Humane Learning; who would have hit upon
it besides my self? Take notice (Senor Teniente) of this Conjuration which he
makes to the Moon. To the Moon? replied the Teniente, I see no such thing;
neither is there a word here whereby it may be conjectured.

The Word Cynthia, replied Campuzano, does not your Worship consider that it is
an Invocation of the Moon or Diana, whom the Gentiles adored by the Name of
Cynthia, for having been born in the Mountain Cynthus? With this respect
therefore he invokes her, as the ancient Magicians did, that she should come
down to moisten and give virtue to the Herbs, of which they are to compound
their Magical poisons.

The Teniente believed him, and I must tell you, that I am half afraid lest the
Reader should also believe it: But not to speak more of the Herbs:

You are to know (friendly Reader) that all Heresies of the world have had the
same beginnings, as these Madnesses of Campuzano. Here you see him with a good
reputation, in Madrid, and such a one, that depending on it, he sues for
preferment; but becoming jealous, would revenge himself; and this Blindness
makes him believe, that a Copy of Love-verses are Magical Charms: Who would
think this of a man so practiced in Learning? Did you not hear him discourse
with the Doctor Cenudo, at the visit of the Machines? Did you not just now
observe him show his Schoolship with the Teniente? Then what can we think
should be the reason of this blindness, but that his jealous passion carries
him on hood-winked.

Discretion, Learning, and Erudition, are with men, like Clothes, handsome
dressing, and Gallantry: Put me a rich Suit of Clothes on a Crook backed man,
or on a tall Lubber, whose Soul forgets it feet, by reason of the great
distance from them; let him walk in the street, and it shall not seem that he
goes, but that he is carried: Dress him up, without sparing Fashion, Curiosity
or Expense, and you will see how ill he sets them forth; and, that as though
the Clothes should carry him, and not he the Clothes, he marches disorderly,
indecently, slovenly, and clownishly; discrediting the Nobleness, and Gallantry
of the Silks with the baseness and unhandsomness of the Motion. On the contrary,

Give me in an ill Equipage, a Youth' all Soul, all Air, and more than Air;
only with a Baies Suit, and that ragged too; that he may set forth his
condition; turn him into the street, let him display himself, put his Cloak in
order, and so dispose himself like a Ship under Sail, playing with the Wind,
and I am confident you will be so much delighted with him, that you shall never
mind his threadbare Clothes: so are the Wits of the world.

Many men there are, that make themselves sine, that learn, that watch, that
study all their life, without suffering an hour to pass idly; but have so
little of air and wit, that they soil and darken all; and it is the same thing,
for Learning to be in them, as in a Book; we must search them, and turn over
their Leaves to pump out any thing from them; and when it comes, pray God it be
to be understood.

There are others with very little Scholarship like your threadbare Gallants,
but so ingenious, witty, pleasant, and eloquent, that with something which they
have learnt at a Play, or heard commended in a Discourse, or observed in some
small Book, they set themselves forth, become so airy and resplendent, that
they draw all admiration after him.

Senor Campuzano (to come to our Story) had a Wit so ill-contrived, that after
he had done, what he could, to procure the furnishing himself with Gallantry,
he was but a Pack-horse loaded with it, not a Gallant.

Of these the world is full, and such is the Ignorant Vulgar, that only for
hearing say, They have a great many Books; They take a world of pains; They
have their Degrees, and other Titles, which give no wit, by all means they
esteem them for wise prudent and discreet.

I should have been glad, Senor Licenciado Campuzano, that you had not been
born in the pride of Andaluzia; to let you see your Error, and tell you that
those Papers which you stand poring on are not Conjurations, but handsome
Verses. They would have passed on further transported with their Devilish
sweetness, if at that instant there had not come up some of the Ministers of
Wrath, who had been searching the House, more to find out, if there was any
thing for them to prey upon, than to make any discovery of the Accusation:
These brought in a great number of Clothes for Devils, Foxes Tails, Wolves
Heads, Sculls, and other such Trumpery, and pieces of Machines; for to tell you
plainly, our Doctor was not a Conjurer, but a man of a pleasant humor, that
with ingenious Artifice, delighted to revenge himself of the troublesomeness of
Ignorant People.

To make short, the third day after, like one that had been under water, he
appeared again at the top, remaining free from that accusation, by the good
diligence of Don Felix, his faithful Friend, who giving him an embrace,
presented him with the welcome tidings of his liberty. He wondered to hear it,
not that his Innocence did not secure him, but because the Negotiation seemed
very short.

Don Felix satisfied all his doubts, not without some laughter, relating him
all the Passages of the Process, and particularly the last means by which he
had overcome all; which was, his having alleged and proved against the whole
Charge of his Accusation, that he was AN IGNORANT, a FOOL, an IDIOT, and that
as such, he had spent his Life, his Time, and Estate in Books, Pictures, and
Devils Clothes, after a particular and pleasant humor, separating himself from
the common use and life of man; That this being proved by a number of
Witnesses, and the Teniente satisfied, of the Artifice of the Machines, and
that how the Papers which he had found in his Cabinet were not Conjurations,
nor Invocations, but Ballads, and Sonnets, and also that it was he himself who
had written them; with which his Foolishness was more confirmed, therefore he
absolved him from the Accusation, and condemned Campuzano in a great penalty
for his Scandal.

I durst have sworn, said the Doctor, that such good fortune would befall me by
being a Fool. He then cast back his eyes on his forepast life, calling to mind
that all his Prosperities and good Successes had come to him by his Follies,
and firmly resolved to commit many, that he might not cease being happy.

With this he took his leave of his Friends, who had entertained him in the
Prison, and with the joy of seeing himself free, he came to my Lodging to visit
me, and to enjoy his Liberty, He then declared to me the Secret, which was the
occasion of his Felicities, and the purpose which he had of being a Fool all
his life; for seeing himself in that straight, he had made a vow to Folly, that
if he escaped that misfortune, he would become a Fool, and profess to be so all
the remainder of his Life. He goes fulfilling his Vow, and I follow his steps.

In a short time, Friendly Reader, thou shall have the Second Part of of his
Fooleries, if thou will promise me not to be tired with them. Take a good
Courage, and hearken to his Follies; for it may be, they have virtue to make
happy him that hears them, as well as him that does them.

FINIS.
These Books are to be Sold by Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little Britain.
Folio.
CAssandra, the famed Romance, 1667. Briggs's Logarithms. Francisci Suarez
Metaphysica.
4o.
Dr. John Pell's Introduction to Algebra, 1668. Nich. Mercatoris
Logarithmo-Technia, sive Methodus construendi Logarithmos, 1668. Jacobi
Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae, 1668. Dr. John Wallis, Opera Mechanica,
Now in the Press. Banister's Works. A perfect Narrative of the Murder of Mr.
John Talbot, Minister, July 2. 1669. Hugh Broughton's Concent of Scripture. An
Account of the Coronation of this present Pope, 1667. Snellii Tiphys Batavus,
Lugd. Bat. 1624. Observationes Hassiacae.

In Nuperam Horrendam Montis AEtnae Eruptionem Carmen. Petrus Paaw, De Ossibus
Amstelreod, 8o. 1633.
8o.
Biblia Hebraea, Josephi Athias, 1661. Gualteri Needham, Disquisitio Anatomica
De Formato Foetu, 1667. Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, 24o. 1668. Buxtorsius's
Epitome of his Hebrew Grammar, translated into English by John Davis, 1658.
Crow, Scriptores in Scripturam. Now in the Press.

