THE SHUTTING UP Infected Houses As it is practiced in ENGLAND Soberly Debated.
By way of Address from the poor souls that are Visited, to their Brethren that
are Free. With observations on the ways whereby the present Infection has
spread. AS ALSO A certain Method of Diet, Attendance, Lodging and Physic,
experimented in the recovery of many Sick Persons.

Printed in the Year MDCLXV.

THE SHUTTING UP Infected Houses As it is practiced in ENGLAND SOBERLY DEBATED.
Brethren,
WE may yet call you so, for our Sickness has only altered our condition and
not our Nature; although our usages bespeaks us worse Creatures, we are yet
men molded of the same earth, quickened by the same Spirit, subject to the same
Law, lying under the same sins and infirmities; loved with the same Everlasting
Love, redeemed by the same Blood, entered into the same Covenant, Members of the
same Church, partakers of the same Privileges and Ordinances, Professors of the
same Faith, expectants of the same Hope and common Salvation with you. Turn not
your eyes from your own Flesh; there is nothing happened unto us that is not
common to Mankind; what is our case to day may be yours to morrow. Have pity
upon us for the hand of God is upon us, and add not sorrow to affliction; and
when we are afflicted of God, O let us not withal be forsaken of men! and if
our Neighbors will stand so far aloof from us as not to look upon us, yet let
them hear us; if our persons are loathsome, our reason is not so, there may be
danger in visiting us; there is none in having compassion upon us, our breath
may be infectious, our words are innocent; hear us and then forsake us.

First Reason against shutting Men up for the Plague, From the Communion of
Saints, and the practice of the Primitive Christians.
1. WEre Men (those sociable Creatures) made thus, every Man to live by
himself? and if the Principle of self-preservation may alter the course of
Nature, is this the Communion of Saints we believed? is this the mutual care we
ought to have one of another? We can endure to read in Eusebius of Heathens,
who as soon as the Pestilence was among them diverted themselves, and fled from
their most loving and dear friends, throwing them half dead in the Streets: how
they left the dead unburied to be devoured of Dogs, to the end they might avoid
death, which yet they could not escape.

While we observe withal how Grace above Nature enabled the Primitive
Christians by reason of their great love and brotherly Charity (they are
Eusebius his own Words) not sparing themselves to cleave one to another, to
visit the sick of the Plague, to attend them diligently, to Cure them in Christ
though it cost them their Lives; and being full of other men's maladies took the
Infection off their Neighbors, and tronslated off their own accord the sorrows
of their Neighbors upon themselves; fulfilling indeed the common saying, that
friendship is always to be retained. In this sort, the best of our Brethren
departed this life, whereof some were Ministers, some were Deacons, in great
reverence among the Common People: So that this kind of death for their great
Piety and strength of Faith may seem to differ nothing from Martyrdom; for they
took the dead Bodies of the Saints, whose breasts, faces, and hands lay
upwards, and closed their eyes, shut their mouths, and jointly with one accord,
being like affectioned, embraced them, and prepared their Funerals, their own
being a little while afterward in all likelihood prepared by others, for the
Living continually traced the steps of the Dead.

Then as the Body was one, and had many Members, all those Members being one
body, so was Christ; for by one Spirit were all Men Baptized into one Body, the
eye said not to the hand I have no need of thee; nor the head to the foot I
have no need of thee; yea, the weaker the Members of the Church were, the more
care they had of them; and there was no Schism in the Body, each Member having
an equal care one of another; and so if one Member suffered, all the Members
suffered with it: they all looking on themselves as the Body of Christ, and
Members in particular: Then they did not Excommunicate whole Families when it
pleased God to visit them; no, then the Elders of the Church carefully attended
them, prayed with them, and the effectual fervent prayer of those righteous Men
availed much.

Second Reason against the shutting up of Houses infected with the Plague, From
the spreading of the Infection by it.
BUt alas! a discourse of public mindedness to private Spirits looks like a
fit of Melancholy; we urge not then your duty, but your Interest, not so much
what concerns us as your selves: alas! while you by this severe course would
secure, you destroy your selves, and that shutting up of infected Houses, which
you think would stop the Infection, spreads it: For,

1. We are acted by a Principle of self preservation, as well as you, and
therefore as soon as we find our selves or any member of our Families infected,
so dreadful it is to us to be shut up from all comfort and society, from free
and wholesome air, from the care of the Physician, and the Divine, from the
oversight of Friends and Relations, and sometimes even from the very
necessities, and conveniences of Nature, that we run as far in City and Country
as our feet can carry us, leaving Wives and Children to the Parishes, empty
walls, and shops to Creditors, scattering the infection along the Streets as we
go, and shifting it from Lodging to Lodging with our selves, till at last we
drop in some Alley, Field, or neighbor Village, calling the people round about
by the suddenness of our fall to stand awhile astonished at our deaths, and
then take their own; each fearful man of us frighted from his own house,
killing his whole Town by surprising them unprepared; whereas were we permitted
to enjoy the content and freedom of our own Habitations, we might by Antidotes
cure others, and be cured our selves.

See, see, we infect not our next Neighbors, and this sickness spreads not
much in any one place, but we carry it from place to place, running from our
home as from our places of torment, and thus the Roads are visited, and men
travel the same way to the Country, and to their long home: Thus the Contagion
has reached most places round the City, which is now as it were besieged with
the judgment, and encompassed with the Visitation and desolation: We have not
yet learned how to manage a sickness, in all likelihood did persons prepare
themselves (upon the first breaking out of the Plague) with Antidotes to visit
the sick, who would be very well contented to keep within doors and converse
only with their nearest Friends, their Physicians and their ghostly fathers)
and administer to them such preservatives, and other necessaries the Plague
might go no further. For,

Third Reason against shutting up Houses visited with the Plague from the
experience of former times, when Plagues did not cease till there was freedom
of Converse allowed.
IN the years 1346. 1348. 1350. there was a great Plague all over the World,
especially in Asia, such as was never remembered to be in any place before,
sweeping away Priests and Physicians first; when Men were troubled with no
other disease, when the Living were not able to bury their Dead, all lay in
common, there was no distinction between Sacred and profane; the very Birds of
the air were poisoned, and Men were all over sore, loosing some Limb or other
if they escaped with their Lives.

As Soon as the people discerned by Observation, by sight or feeling whether
they had this sickness or not, they hasted away, left the other helpless:
Whereupon (says the Historian) many perished for want of sucour, who might
otherwise have been preserved. This inhumane forsaking took its rise from the
Turks, and Infidels; where the Parents forsook their Children, and the Children
their Parents; Brothers and Sisters forsook one another; nay, the Wife left the
Husband, and the Husband the Wife. Nor was this monstrous cruelty wanting among
Christians also, some of whom retired themselves to solitary places, others
kept themselves close in their Houses or Castles to secure themselves as they
thought from the outrage of the general Visitation; but all this could not any
way prevail or prevent Gods Divine judgment, against whom the strongest
Fortification never defended: Whereupon, mark it, many became more resolute and
Christianlike; referring themselves to Gods mercy, and with a holy resolution
to welcome death; they became kind and serviceable to the visited, ministering
to them all things necessary, and thus many recovered health, and became
secure, and then yielded the like help to others: In which Christian course God
so blessed their endeavors, that very many of them were healed by visiting and
assisting one another.

Nay, within many Men's memory now alive, when the effect of Cooping Men up was
no other, than that the Sick were so many that they could not be watched or
kept in by those that were well, in the year of our Lord 1625. and thereupon it
being found convenient that the Sick should have their Liberty to visit and be
visited, and all Men should meet and pray heartily to God to appease his wrath:
What with the freedom of the Air, what with the accomodations Men had for
necessaries, it pleased God that the Sickness which had by shutting up,

Increased thus. Pl. February. Week 1 2 2 3 March. Week 1 4 2 8 3 11 4 9 April
Week 1 10 2 24 3 25 4 26 May Week 1 30 2 45 3 71 4 78 June Week 1 69 2 94 3 165
4 239 5 390 July Week 1 593 2 1004 3 1819 4 2471 Aug. Week 1 3659 2 4115 3 4461
4 4218 Upon the opening of the houses it decreased thus; Pl. September. Week 1
3344 2 2550 3 1672 4 1561 5 852 October. Week 1 538 2 511 3 331 4 134 November.
Week 1 89 2 92 3 48 4 27 December. Week 1 15 2 15 3 6 4 1

A Decrease never before known and never hereafter to be expected, but by the
use of this remedy.

Fourth Reason against shutting up of houses infected with the Plague, from the
condition of those houses and the inhabitants thereof.
BUt if we will not be wise by other men's experience, let us be so by our own
most sad and most deplorable, whereby we have known the healthiest men shut up,
and with the very thought of a sad and dismal restraint, contracting first a
Melancholy, and then a fever, and at last (as all diseases turn to that which
is most epidemical) a Plague. Little is it considered that some spirits are so
averse to the very least restraint, that the locking of their pew door puts
them to a swound, and a days imprisonment to them is mortal. Neither is it a
fourth part of the inconvenience of this mewing up of men, that a whole and
healthy family to day, for want of preservatives, antidotes, attendance, and
(it may be) necessaries of meat and drink, is to morrow none at all. If they
want meat, then the infection seizes their empty veins, if they eat
ill-dressed, or unwholesome meat, that turns to crudities, and that to
distempers, and these to the prevailing one, the Plague. This shutting up would
breed a Plague if there were none: Infection may have killed its thousands, but
shutting up has killed its ten thousands. Little is it considered how careless
most Nurses are in attending the Visited, and how careful (being possessed with
rooking avarice) they are to watch their opportunity to ransack their houses;
the assured absence of friends making the sick desperate on the one hand, and
them on the other unfaithful: their estates are the Plague most dye on, if they
have any thing to lose, to be sure those sad creatures (for the Nurses in such
cases are the offscouring of the City) have a dose to give them; besides that,
it is something beyond a Plague to an ingenious spirit to be in the hands of
those dirty, ugly, and unwholesome Haggs; even a hell it self, on the one hand
to hear nothing but screetches, cries, groans, and on the other hand to see
nothing but ugliness and deformity, black as night, and dark as Melancholy: Ah!
to lie at the mercy of a strange woman is sad: to leave wife, children, plate,
jewels, to the Ingenuity of poverty, is worse; but who can express the misery
of being exposed to their rapine that have nothing of the woman left but shape?

With what art do they neglect the rich? and with what severity the poor? A
world, cry they, for drink, for physic, for sweat, for cordials: by and by
answers the cunning Suecuba, till the poor patient breaths out his soul in
his vain wishes, glad now to escape into a rest and quietness much happier than
his fretful state wherein his disease tormented him much, but his oversees
more, adding her fury from without, to the diseases rage from within, and
proving the more Intolerable Plague. And now the Husbands gone, if Sorrow does
not, a Close Room, and Posset drink, shall break the good woman's heart, equally
divided between her grief for the husband that is gone, and her fear for the
children that are left behind: a needless fear, they shall not long survive,
heirs rather of the parents misfortune, than their estates; and if the blessing
of God and the poor upon the devout and charitable family (according to the
promise made to them and their seed) keeps up a child or two against the
infection of the disease, the unwholsomness of their diet, the nastiness of
their chamber, and the artifice of their tender, they are conveyed away
forsooth, in order to their security, and in the mean time the well-furnished
house lies at a beggar or two's mercy for a quarter, of a year together.

During which time the Plague-brokers diligently attend, and there goes a
Tankard that shall infect the fifth Cupboard; here the set of Spoones that
taint the hundredth dish of Broth; this man steals a bargain of the Cloak
that kills ten Men; another buyeth a Suit that infects Bristol; and a third
gets a fine Child's Coat that shall cut off a firstborn Son. In vain do you
here object the severe Laws against removal of infected Goods before the 40.
days are past, when the careful Nurse dares not stay out the 40. hours, least
a right owner interpose, or cunning Lawyer seize on the house and the estate;
but let the Estate go, a World cries the Patient for an able Physician, that
might help the nature, or a serious Divine that may settle the soul; and
neither must be sent for, for the doors are fast; and if the rigid overseers
permit that civility they dare not come on pain of being shut up themselves,
and by serving the necessities of one man being made unserviceable unto all.

Fifth Reason against shutting men in infected Houses from the Condition of
those Houses.
BUt if you have no bowels of compassion for us; O have a care of your selves,
the shut houses killing no fewer without then within, and being as likely to
breed a Plague if it were not as they are sure to increase it, now it is:
imagine Infection it self penned into a rage and fury ready upon the least
passage through a door or window to break out and choke a whole street, as that
will in a while a City, and that a Kingdom; and this infection growing
stronger by the Leaveless despair of the poor Inhabitants, the Rooms hung with
Cobweb, the Flower having dust and rubbish enough to bury the Infected, the
Meat stinking in the Pantry, and the Beer soweing in the Cellar, while the
people rot in their several Chambers; the Clothes when clean infected by the
owners, and now being foul infecting them; again Dogs and Cats if alive
spreading the infection abroad, if dead increasing it at home; the Air they
breath subtly conveying death that way it did formerly life, the water stinking
and readier to provoke the flame within, then to quench it: Servants formerly
the stay and honor, now the burden of the Family.

The poor peoples own endure, if they cannot, as they cannot commonly under
this Pestilence expel it, killing them, and if they can, poisoning them i^
their sweat is cast by them upon their Clothes, and evaporated upon the House
round them, and by those Clothes and that House sent back again upon them. In
vain are poor people shut within a House, as unless the house itself be shut
within another, and that within a third, and so ad Infinitum; the wind, you
say, purges the Air round about the house, hardly when so deeply infected as a
close house must needs be; yet if the Wind clears the Infection of the House;
would it not likewise clear that of the people were they admitted to an open
and free air?

Sixth Reason against shutting up of Infected Houses, because that keeps Men in
ignorance of the nature of and remedy against the Plague.
NAy this method gives the Plague its power of being deadly, all diseases were
deadly till men by converse understood the nature of them, their original, and
the experience in their cure: What the Pestilence is now, the French Pox, the
small Pox, and the spotted Fever, were in Queen Eliz. time, and had been to
this hour, had men been shut up from Physicians and all other persons in the
small Pox, etc. as they are now under the Plague.

Discourse with the Physician in this case, and he will talk to you, out of his
Books 40. receipts at a breath, but not a word can he say of the experience he
or any other has had of the cure of this disease; which is the only safe way
of practice; speculative rules being at too great distance from practice before
the particular circumstances of the disease, the person, and fits be perfectly
understood; as they are by none but by such as converse freely with the Patient
as men do in Holland and most other parts of the World; where they have
attained to so much familiarity with the disease that (under God) observing how
it grows and begins; how men take it at first, and how they recover of it,
have been able by Gods blessing in a short time to give a stop to the
infection, and health to the infected.

An instance of which experience take here in the 75. ways whereby men have
got this Plague this year 1665. as upon examination of diverse Families now
infected by persons that have conversed with those Families and other infected
persons during this Infection has appeared.

SECT. I. The Ways whereby the Plague has taken Men this year observed by
them that have conversed with the infected in order to the finding out of the
true nature, original, and was of curing the Plague. Which may be a Caution to
the City and Country.
1. FAmily by ones overheating himself, and drinking small Beer upon it.

2. By eating a pound of Red Cherries upon a wager.

3. By a Coat one bought of a Broker behind S. Clements church.

4. By a Sink shut up by reason of the Waters not running in their backside.

5. By the opening of a Vault that had been many years shut.

6. By a Nosegay brought by an infectious place.

7. By a Vow not to eat any thing in 24. hours, and in the mean time going
fasting through an infectious place.

18. By an infected Hackney Coach.

9. By an infected Sedan.

10. By an infected Cushion whereon the Waterman confessed there sat a woman
that within two hours after died suddenly.

11. By eating a Cucumber.

12. By a Melon.

13. By Redishes.

14. By drinking Water.

15. By a Tanker bearer.

16. By a Chair woman.

17. By drying of Clothes before the door.

18. By a Cat in Catter wouling.

19. By a Spaniel.

22. By opening the pores, and excessive sweat in walking.

23. By a Dinner of Soales in Fishstreet.

24. By a dish of Eeles.

25. By stopping of an Issue.

26. By a Codling Tart and Cream.

27. By a Dish of French Beans.

28. By Cabbages.

29. By Turnips and Carrets.

30. By eating the Fat near the Rump of a Loyne of Mutton, and drinking cold
beer immediately upon it.

32. By a Cold which turned first into a putrid Fever, and at last into the
Plague.

33. By siting up too late, and so drying and inflaming the Blood, and
weakening Nature.

34. By an unseasonable sleep that caused C^^^^^es, and indigested matter which
bred upon the weakening of the Vital and Animal Spirit* a Fever, and that
turned to the Pestilence.

35. By neglecting to let blood at the usual time.

36. By want of Necessaries, and by hungry meals.

37. By wetting the Feet in a slip out of a Boat by the Water side.

38. By a burden of Linen carried from St. Giles to Chelsey.

39. By an House of Office near a Man's Window.

40. By close Chambers nastily kept, and looking southward.

41. By an immoderate eating of Caveare, and Anchoves.

42. By a Goosberry fool.

43. By a rotten Shoulder of Mutton.

44. By a Dish of Eeles.

45. By a Sink not well looked to before a door.

46. By an undue and immoderate Venery.

47. By idle Beggars who wandered from place to place.

48. By frequenting scurvy Tippling houses and Bowling allies.

49. By dead Beer.

50. By drinking heady strong beer, after a long custom of drinking Ale, which
bound the persons that did so, and put them in Pestilential Fevers.

51. By eating Pork and Bacon.

52. By Tame Pigeons that flew up and down in an Alley.

53. By the Funnel of Church Vaults, flaughter houses, and shallow graves.

54. By the Rakers or Ragg women.

55 By entertaining all sorts of comers, as brokers, and particularly by buying
of bed clothes and hangings.

56 By the stopping of the monthly courses.

57 By the crudities of plentiful meals.

58 By over long fasting (the bodies being too empty) and receiving more a^^ i^
then they give one, the spirits that were weakened for want of due nourishment,
having least strength to resist the Contagion.

60 By eating of Quinces.

61 By s^^ole ^or and Lettice.

62 By Pompions, Musmillions, and Cucumbers*

63 By festered Wounds and Sores.

64 By conversing with a man of stinking breath.

65 By children running and playing till they overheated themselves.

66 By neglecting to purge at the usual times.

67 By standing fasting before an infected house.

68 By a Letter received from an infected person.

69 By money taken for Physic administered.

70 By an infected Vain of gloves.

71 By Lodgers.

72 By Frettirs, Melancholy, and Disbou^^^^.

73 By an Eastern Window.

74 By an extraordinary definition of humors.

75 By Fevers, caused either

1. By overmuch heat in the spirit^ or breath, which causes either the Febris
simpliciter (...), or the Febris Diaria.

Or 2. By overmuch heat in the humors, which causes a gastrida f^bris which
(...)

I. Within the Vessels, and that either,

1. When all the humors put^^^^^ and (...) equally, and cause a fever called
S^^^^bu^^ (...)

Or 2. When one only humor putrifieth, as 1. Choler which causes a continual
tertian or burning fever. 2. Phlegm, which being putrified, causes a continual
quotidian. 3. Melancholy, which being putrified, causes a continual quartan.


Or, II. Without the Vessels, causing an intermitting fever, either tertian,
if it be rotten Choler; or exquisite, and pure Quotidian, if it be sweet Phlegm,
or Epialos, or glasen, or an intermitting Quartan if it be rotten Melancholy.

Or, III. In the fleshy part, causing either Hectic Fever or Marasmus.

SECT. II. Observations touching the Recovery of those that have been since
April last cured of the Plague.
1. THe Botch appearing on any side the vein, was cut on that side.

2. If the botch appeared behind the ears, or about the chin, or in other parts
of the face or neck, they did let blood in the Cephalica Vein on the same side.

3. If under the Arm-holes, they cut the innermost vein of the arm, on the same
side commonly called the (...) vein, or the middle vein, if that did not appear.

4. If under the shin blood was drawn the Ankles of the same side.

5. The aged and weak are not bled, but cupping-glasses are applied to their
necks, shoulders, backs and legs.

6. If the contagion seizes any man at meals, or when he is full of meat or
drink, he immediately vomiteth; as soon as the body or stomach is emptied,
applying Eleciuarium de Ouo, which the Emperor Maximilian used, or some other
Medicine to the outward parts that might draw the poison of the disease to it,
and call it back from the heart.

7. When the infected person has applied this or some other Medicine of the
like nature, he is laid in a warm bed, made with soft sheets, and well-covered
with clothes, to the intent he might there sweat three or four hours or longer,
according to his strength, and when by this means they could hardly provoke him
to sweat, they laid tyles heated at the fire to his feet, which might, by
reason of their extraordinary heat provoke sweat. And in all this time that the
infected man did sweat in, they took a special care that he neither slept, eat,
nor drank. After his sweating, diligently rubbing, and wiping off the sweat,
with very clean, and fine Linen clothes, afterward permitting the poor man to
rise out of bed, upon condition that he looked not by any means into the open
air, the air of the place wherein the sick lies being corrected and amended by
odoriferous things, and sweet smelling perfumes daily four or five times.

8. The Infected person was removed from one chamber to another, because the
air of one chamber, by the continual tarrying of the sick in it, is much
corrupted, and not easily amended or corrected, the chamber into which he went
being very well perfumed before hand.

9. Two or three hours after the Patient has sweat, they made him some Chicken
broth, which they gave him in little proportions, but often, for an infected
person must be nourished by little and little: to the broth they added the
Chickens flesh, sodden with Sorrel, or with the juice of Lemmons, or else
Verjuice.

10 The sick is kept altogether from sleeping the first day, by talk of the
assistants, by rubbing their extreme parts, by pulling their ears, nose, and
hair, or by dipping a sponge in very sharp vinegar, and holding it to the Nose.

11. The infected man that is thirsty, uses this potion,

. Julep of Violets jjj. Syrup of the sharp juice of Citrons j. ss. Syrup of
sown Endive jj. of the Decoction of Sorrel, Scabious, and flowers of Bugloss
ten, or so much of their distilled waters, commixing them, and making them a
potion, or the like.

12. He takes the water wherein Barley had been sodden a little, and commixed
with it the juice of Roses, of Sorrel, or Lemmons, or of unripe Grapes, and
takes it instead of drink, and he had Medicine that comforted his heart when he
was sick and very weak, and it was this;

. Conserves of Violets, Roses, and Bugloss. ana. j.ss. Bolearmoniack preparate
j. Red Coral j. barks of Citron apple j.ss. Camphire 5. with Syrup of the juice
of sharp Citrons, as much as is sufficient to make an Electuary or liquid
Antidote. Also he did lay upon the Region of the heart (having felt some heat
about his breast) this Epitheme.

. Waters of Roses, Bugloss and Sorrel ana. jjj. Powder of Electa^rium de Gemmis
j. Wood of Aloes, red Saunders, the barks of Citron apples beaten to powder,
the bone of Hearts heart, ana.. Saffron gr. 6. all commixed, and to an Epitheme.
He did not apply the Epithemes but when they were hot, and as soon as they were
cool they took them off, for then they did shut up the pores, and brought him
to no small grief.

13. He used cordial baggs, as this is;

. Flowers of red Roses, water Lillies, and of Violets, ana. jj. of all the
Saunders, Coral, white and red, Spodium, Pearls ana. jjj. Cinnamon, Cloves, the
bone of Hearts heart, Wood of Aloes, barks of the Citron apple, Saffron, j. Seed
of Sorrel jj. Seed of Purslain, gr. iiij beat all these into fine powder, and
made two square baggs of silk, and applied each after the other being hot.

Moreover, he did endeavor to draw the venomous humor to the place where the
botches appeared and burst out, and he did it by setting to it Cupping-glasses,
or by Medicines that had the virtue to draw those humors, which were these;

. Fat figs, in number six, great Raisins jjj ss. salt Gum jj. Honey j. with Oil
of Camomil, made into the form of an Emplaister, and applied hot to the hotch.

14. He used this following Plaster which is commended by all skilful men.

. a great Onion, and cut off the head of it, picking out the core from within,
and fill it with Theriaca Andromachi, adding to it the juice of Rue, or Sage,
which done, stopped the top of the Onion with Lute, and set the Onion in the
Embers to roast, and when it was well roasted, he pulled off the bark, and brayed
it in a mostar, till it was thick, like an Emplaister, and applied it hot to
the botch.

15. This following Emplayster was very much used, for it helped to rot. meat
of Fenugreek and Tineseed of Flours of Cammomill, ana. ss. Roots of Althea and
white Lillies, ana. ss. 6. Figs, Leaves of Deptaine jjj Veterian jj Mustard
seed j.ss. Dovesdung,.ss. Oils of Cammomill and Lillies j.ss. made into the
form of an Implayster.

16. He kept the house where he did lie clean from all filthiness and
sluttishness, he kept the Windows shut, and when he had them open, he opened
them toward the East or North, quarter after Sun rise.

Seventh Reason why Houses should not be shut up for the Plague, Because people
are so much afrighted out of Town, and the bad consequence thereof.
BUt if it be of no consideration among you to allow a liberty to the Infected
to converse with such discreet men as are not so, because they may (as you see
before your eyes some have done to their own and other men's great benefit)
understand the original, the nature, and the proper way of Curing this disease;
yet consider what it is by these severe Courses, to affright so many thousands
from their respective Habitations, thereby not only scattering the Infection
abroad, but obstructing Trade at home, and leaving other thousands without any
employment, to tipple, loyter, and wander from one place to another; and for
want of Necessaries on the one hand, and by excesses on the other, infect, and
are infected; Whereas, had they due employment they would not meet in herds as
they do, they would not surfeit with rioting and drunkness; but they would
securely stick to their work, keep their bodies by exercise and temperance in a
good frame, and provide themselves wholesome diet and Physic; fly, these poor
men cannot as the Rich, for none will entertain them, and they are not able to
maintain themselves; Work they cannot, for none will employ them, and they have
nothing to do but to commit those sins, which certainly deserve, and infallibly
bring the Plague upon them. Take, O take these Reasons and many others, which
your own judgments will suggest to your serious Consideration, but as they are
tendered with all humble and due submission to the care and authority of those
excellent persons who are over us as intent as ever Magistrates were upon the
means of our welfare.

For an Eighth Argument I allege the mischief and sad consequence that may
arise from the high fits of Frenzy, that usually attend this and all other the
like Distempers; wherein the sick (if not restrained by main force of their
Attendants) are ready to commit any violence, either upon themselves or other,
whether Wife, Mother, or Child. A sad instance whereof we had this last week in
Fleet Lane, where the Man of the House being sick, and having a great Swelling,
but not without hope of being almost ripe for breaking, did in a strong fit
rise out of his bed, in spite of all that his Wife (who attended him) could do
to the contrary, got his Knife, and therewith most miserably cut his Wife, and
had killed her, had she not wrapped up the sheet about her, and therewith saved
her self, till by crying out Murder. a Neighbor (who was himself shut up)
opened his own doors, and forced into the house, and came seasonably to her
preservation. The man is since dead, when in all likelihood (had he not by
arising struck in the disease) he might have recovered.

Add to this a serious confideration of the sad condition of Women near the
time of their travel, (or newly delivered) when shut up, (as it is the case of
many at this time) having neither Midwife to help them, nor Nurse to attend
them, nor Necessaries provided for them, nor any friends to comfort them; and
in this condition have continually for their object their own poor innocent
Babes newly brought into the World, either to be starved for want of
sustenance, or poisoned by the Breasts that should preserve them.

For conclusion I shall only say that a liberty of fresh Air, and access of
such as are willing to visit their sickfriends, may be so regulated and limited
as not to spread the Infection, and I am sure will save the lives of Hundreds,
who by so severe and close restraint are little better then Murdered, or
buried alive.

Be ye merciful as your Heavenly Father is merciful. FINIS.

