THE JUSTICE OF THE Parliament, In Inflicting of PUNISHMENTS Subsequent to
OFFENSES, VINDICATED. And the Lawfulness of the Present Government ASSERTED.

With some ANIMADVERSIONS upon the Second Vindication of the Magistracy and
Government of England.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old Baily.
1689.

THE JUSTICE of the PARLIAMENT, In Inflicting of PUNISHMENTS Subsequent to
OFFENSES, VINDICATED, etc.
I. I Happened two days since to meet a Sheet called, A Second Vindication of the
Magistracy and Government of England; and upon perusal, found it to be a weak
Effort to justify what had been before writ in the behalf of the Government
and its Ministers, for the Condemnation and Execution of my Lord Russel. It
does particularly take notice of a Half sheet entitled, A Justification of the
Act which reverses that Noble Lord's Attainder; And I must needs own, that if
impudent, downright Affirmations of Law and Facts, passes for Argument and
Proof, he has effectually performed what he arrogantly undertakes, which is,
the refuting the Reasons and Authorities of that and the other more Learned
late Prints which have been published to do Right to the Name and Memory of a
Person, whose Character is very well described by one of those worthy
Gentlemen, who attested in his Favor at his Trial, That he was one of the best
Sons, one of the best Fathers, and one of the best Masters, one of the best
Husbands, one of the best Friends, and one of the best Christians we had.

II. I shall not presume to obtrude a Defense in the behalf of Sir R. A. and
Mr. H. I shall not do them so much Injustice, as to impose on them so ill ad
Advocate: And therefore the Province I do assign my self principally is, to
expose the Weakness and Fallacies of that Part of the Sheet which relates to
the Justification, and shall not meddle with the rest, farther than is
necessary to make good the Authorities and Positions from which the Justifier
infers that Noble Lord was so far from being guilty of a Legal Treason, that
the Kings Judges and Counsel (in subserviency to a Predestination of the State,
for removing him right or wrong out of the way) were forced to call such
Virtues Treason, as in a more just and grateful Age would have deserved
Statues, Triumphs, and other Demonstrations of Honor, paid by the Romans and
other Nations to their Patriots, and the Assertors of the Liberties of their
Country.

III. Our Author observes, ( page 2.) That Sir R. A. calls the Sentence and
Execution a Murder; and if so, he is sure that he is bound in Conscience to
prosecute an Indictment against the Judges, Recorder, the Grand and Petit Jury,
etc. But he concludes, that nene of these show any fear of it. The Justifier,
and all that have writ on the same Subject, did also in effect, though not
perhaps in express Terms, concur in that Opinion; and for my part, I do not see
how it can deserve a more soft and gentle Appellation. Our Author says indeed,
The Persons that were concerned in it, are as safe as under an Act of
Indemnity. My Temper and Disposition always inclines me to Mercy; and though I
must allow in the Speculation, that the Executing of Justice upon Offenders is
as great a Duty as showing them Mercy; yet I find a very great difference in
the Practice; the Exercise of Acts of Mercy being much more pleasing and
agreeable than of Justice. But if I had the Honor of being a Member of
Parliament, I should think that this natural Tendency of my Mind ought not to
make me forget, that Acts of Indemnity, and all Humane Laws and Sanctions,
must be consistent with the Statutes and Ordinances of God himself; and where
he in his Sacred Word has been pleased to declare himself, in such Cases
neither the Parliament, nor any other Political Constitution, can exert its
Authority. There must therefore be some Account taken for the innocent Blood
that has been spilt in this Kingdom of late Years.

There neither is, nor ever was, any Municipal Law in the World more careful to
preserve the Lives of the Subject, than the Law of England; but it is not to be
denied, that this Law has suffered extremely in its Reputation both at home
and abroad, and particularly in that excellent Part of it, Trials by Juries,
because it has been the Instrument and Property (though a forced and unwilling
one) of its own and the Churches Enemies, to take away the Lives of this Noble
Lord, and others, who they thought willing or able to obstruct or disappoint
their Designs of introducing Popery and Tyranny. And shall there be nothing
done to vindicate the Reputation of our Law, and to make it appear to the
World, that the Fault was not in the Law it self, but in those wicked and
corrupt Ministers and Judges who had the distribution of it?

The Occasion and Inducement of the Statute of 25 E. 3. was, that corrupt
Judges did adjudge Crimes Treason, that were not really so great: But our
Modern Judges have exalted themselves beyond those; they have condemned a Man
of Treason, that was not only innocent of the Crime, but was eminent for his
Virtues, and indeed for no other Crime than discharging his Duty: For I do
conceive, that it is a Duty incumbent upon every Subject, to support and defend
the Government he lives under, and to oppose all Motions and Steps toward the
Change and Alteration of it, that have not the Concurrence of the Legislative
Authority.

I think this Proposition will be allowed as a Principle, and then I am sure my
Lord R. is to be both justified and applauded for all that he transacted: For,
what other Charge was he guilty of than this? King Charles the Second (who was
a Concealed Papist, and by so much the more Dangerous) had, in conjunction with
His Brother, (who was an Owned one, and by so much the more Generous) formed a
Project to extirpate the Protestant Religion, and establish their own in these
Kingdoms; and, as previous and necessary thereto, there was a necessity to
destroy the Laws, and to change the whole Frame of the Government; for both, as
they then stood, and were constituted, were such a strong Guard and Defense to
the Protestant Religion, and were so particularly calculated against the return
of Popery, that it was in vain to attempt any thing, either to the prejudice of
the one, or in favor of the other, so long as the Laws and the Government
continued.

Though there were formerly (I know) several good Protestants that were
incredulous of this Design; yet the Transactions of the State after, and that
King's owning himself a Romanist at his Death, has abundantly satisfied all
unprejudiced Men of the Truth of it since. My Lord R. was one of those that had
so early and so large a Prospect in this Matter, that his Reason fully
convinced him at that time of what every one has been since convinced of. Then
the Treason of my Lord R. resolves into this; That he being upon good and
rational Grounds, determined in the belief that King Charles the Second and the
Duke of Y. had conspired to abolish the Church of England, and to subvert the
Laws and the Government; and observing the Counsels, Measures, and all the
Proceedings of the Court to be correspondent to that End, and to have a direct
and natural tendency toward it; He did join with one Judas, but with diverse
other Great and Worthy Personages, to consider how to preserve our Religion,
our Government, and our Laws, in that time of danger and distress: For before
the date of any of the pretended Treasonable Practices objected to him, it
ought to be remembered, 1. That the Fountain of all our Laws and Liberties, our
High Court of Parliament, was polluted by Court-bribery and Subornation. 2.
That it had been frequently and abruptly broke up and dissolved, before it
could perform any of the Trusts or Duties it owed to the Country. 3. That there
was an infamous Declaration ordered to be read in all Churches, solemnly, in
the time of Divine Service, against the Proceedings of the House of Commons;
which could have no other aim, than to render that part of the Constitution
obnoxious to the People, and to make them believe it was become impracticable,
and unsafe for the Government to assemble them. 4. That there was a mortal
Wound given to the Privilege and Rights of Parliament, by the Trial of
Fitzhrrris in the King's Bench, being under an Impeachment, and by the
Encouragement and Welcome given to the Addresses and Abhorrences of the Mobile,
importing a Condemnation of Parliamentary Proceedings. 5. That there had been
Witnesses tampered with, if not actually suborned, to swear diverse Noblemen and
Gentlemen out of their Lives. 6. That there was a bold and open Incroachment on
the Charter and Franchises of the City of London, which ushered in that general
Desolation which succeeded on all the Corporations of England. The extorting
the Charters from all Cities and Buroughs by Quo Warranto's, and involuntary
Surrenders (which diverse were forced to make to save their Lands and their
Charitable Donations, which they were threatened should be otherwise seized) did
effectually encompass the Design of overturning the Government. For all Writers
in Politics do agree in this Proposition, That when the Legislative Power is
removed, or altered from that Place, State, or Position in which it was settled
upon the Original Constitution, that Government is dissolved: And I think it
very clear, that by the Destructions of the old Charters, and the Establishment
of our Cities and Buroughs under the new, the King had in effect usurped the
whole Legislative Authority: For he had before a Power over two Parts of it,
which were Himself and the House of Lords; because he could prefer what Number
he pleased of his own Creatures to be Members of that House, who should vote as
He should order and direct; and he had now got the House of Commons under his
Girdle, by the Powers he reserved in the New Charters, to model and change the
Magistracy, and the Officers who had the Conduct of the Elections, and the
right of returning the Persons Elected. In these violations of our civil
Rights, some Persons (as I have the Charity to believe) did engage and concur
through Inadvertency, not seeing through that Scheme which had been concerted
between the two Brothers, for the bringing about their design, and these
withdrawing from their Counsels when it appeared barefaced; and their being so
instrumental and assisting to the late Revolution, and the settling us in our
present Condition of Happiness, seems to Atone for past Errors. 7. It must not
be forgot, that originally in Scotland, the Privileges of the Subject were
greater, and the Prerogatives of the Crown not so large as in England, and yet
there the old Constitution was so demolished, that there hardly remained the
Ruins of the ancient Government; but it might be said jam seges ubi Troja
fuit, and there was (avowedly) exercised an Arbitrary and Despotick
Jurisdiction. The Duty and Obligation of the King was as great to govern the
People of Scotland according to their Laws, as to govern us according to our
Law; and therefore we might conclude we should receive the same fate and the
same measures of Justice, whenever the King should think it as safe and as
feasible. There were these and several other palpable steps and advantages
toward Popery and Arbitrary Power, antecedent to any of the Facts charged on
my Lord Russell: And was it not every English Man's Duty as well as Interest,
to endeavor a stop to the Course of those Counsels, which were so directly
aimed and levelled at our Church and Government? And was there the least Proof
that my Lord Russell's Consent or Privity extended any further?

IV. In Page 3. He bestows large Commendations on the Person that was the Kings
Solicitor at that time, and excuses the Council, by saying, That every
Advocate is to do his utmost, and a failure had deserved the worst of Names,
etc. I do acknowledge that in all times Lawyers have allowed themselves too
great a Latitude, when they Act merely as Council, and it is an Opinion that has
obtained among us, That we ought not judicially to be called to an Account for
any thing we offer or press in favor of our Clyent, or against his Advesary,
so we have it in our Instructions; and though I must always have a deference to
the Memory of my Lord Coke, and must own my Obligations to his Learned and
Painful Works, yet I cannot without the highest degree of Indignation, consider
his Conduct when he was Attorney General against Sir Walter Raleigh in his
Trial; nor can I forgive my Lord Bacon for his vehement and partial streining
of Law and Fact against his Patron and Benefactor the Earl of Essex in his
first Trial upon the Articles exhibited against him for miscarriages in
Ireland. But let it not pass for Authentic Doctrine, That a Council is a
Criminal, or that he does not perform his Duty if he does not impose false Law
upon the Court, and false Facts, and false Consequences deduced from the Facts
upon the Jury, which was plainly done in the Case of my Lord Russell, as has
been already, and shall be in this again further evinced. As to the then
Sollicitor's Character, if his Actings as Counsel against this Honorable Lord,
and some other Persons, be put in a Parenthesis, it is as great as any Man of
the Profession of the Law; but if he were my Father, I must condemn his
Deportment in those Cases, and some others whilst he was Solicitor to the two
last Kings.

V. In the same Page, our Author says, That the World guesses that he who wrote
the Reply (viz. Sir R. A.) did write the half Sheet, called the Justification,
and says it is really sportive to read the Justifier, commending the Defender
and Replyant doing the same good Office for the Justifier; and that he spends a
whole Page in the most fulsome Praises on that small bulk Author, and rejoices
that the Work was done to his hand, which is a very pretty Jest. It is at most
but R. for A. and A. for R. and R. A. still, which is much better than the
contrary Practice, of which some Authors have been guilty. 1. The World he here
means is (I dare say) his own self, since none else can have so weak a
Judgment, as so far to wrong the Defender, by suspecting him to write so simple
a thing; and I assure our Author, if I had not a very mean Opinion of his
Understanding, the Justifier would value himself extremely upon the mistake. 2.
The Justifier owns the Defender to have disparaged his Judgment, in the Praises
he has bestowed upon him, to which he was led by his Zeal and Affection to the
subject Matter the Justifier writ upon; the Justifier disclaims all Title and
Merit to any other Commendation than this, That he writ upon no other Principle
hope, or inducement, than the doing right to the Memory and Reputation of the
Noble Lord who is dead, to his Lady, Children, and other Relations who are
living; and to the Public Justice and Laws of England, which were violently
wrested to give a Sanction to his Condemnation, that we may reasonably presume
was first resolved upon, before the Crime was considered or concerted that he
should be Condemned for. 3. He might have spared his Reflection on the small
bulk Author, since he was industriously so for the Reasons therein mentioned,
it being hinted, that it was designed only for the satisfaction of such as had
not the opportunity, or wanted leisure to peruse the greater and more deserving
Works upon the same Subject. 4. In the next Print it is desired our Author will
be pleased to explain his last Period recited in this Section, viz. It is at
most but R. for A. and A. for R. and R. A. still, which is much better than the
contrary Practice, of which some Authors have been guilty. I understand what is
intended by the Capital Letters, but for my Soul I cannot find out the
Antecedent to the Relative It; or if It be a Mark of impersonally, I am at a
loss for the Antecedent to the first Relative Which; and I am at a loss to know
what Practice it is that some Authors are guilty of contrary to the Practice of
R. A. At present all this is unintelligible, and therefore the Author must
pardon me if (until his Clavis or Commentary comes out) I put this Sentence
under Title Nonsense in my common Place.

VI. In Page 4. He says, The Author of the Remarks quarrels with the legality
of the Jurors, the Defender with that of the Indictments, and both with the
Evidence. The Author of the Sheet differs from them in the two first, but
agrees with them in the last. The Author of the half Sheet, called the
Justification (which I suppose he means by the Author of the Sheet) is so far
from differing from them in the two first, that he does think the Indictment
faulty, and not so certain as it ought to be; but he conceives the Objections
to the Jurors and to the Evidence are never to be got over. Indeed the
Justifier takes no notice of the defects of the Indictment nor of the Jury; not
only because he could add nothing on those Heads to what had been observed
before, but likewise because it was not so pertinent to his purpose, which was
to frame and digest the Case of my Lord Russell into such a plain, short, and
easy Method, that no Person might want Leisure to read, or Capacity to
understand it: And therefore where he was obliged to use our legal Terms and
Ideoms, he was very careful to add an Explanation to them. To understand the
Force and Validity of the Objections to the Indictment, and to the Jury, there
was required considerable Skill in Law and the Rules of Pleading; and the
Justifier did not presume to be able to instruct any one so qualified; but
there is no Woman wants Logic to conclude, that my Lord Russell was innocent,
if it be true, as the Justifier affirmed, and proved by quoting his
Authorities, That his Sentence was against the express and direct Opinion of
the two greatest Men of the Law, the Lord Coke and Hales; against the Opinion
of several Parliaments; against a general and certain Maxim of the Law, and
against the First and Original end of making any Statute concerning Treasons. I
say there could be none of so small an Understanding, but must upon the
reading, determine either, That the Judgment against my Lord Russell was
Illegal and Arbitrary, or that the Justifier was disingenious, in imposing upon
the People false Quotations and Authorities, which even our Author has not the
brow to charge him with, though he does endeavor to avoid the force of them by
such distinctions, as shall be considered in their proper Place. Our Author
therefore has given us a great Instance, either of his Candor or his Sense, by
inferring that the Justifier differs in his Opinion from the two Learned
Gentlemen abovementioned, as to the Indictment and Jury, because he was filent,
and delivered no Opinion at all one way or other.

VII. In Page 5. He says, That the Replyant refers his Reader to the
Justification, and therefore let us examine that a little; a third part of it is
spent upon the Evidence, but that is not within my Province, etc. 1. He is
extremely mistaken in his Computation, for there is not a tenth part of it
spent upon the Evidence: The Justifier did, and does conceive the Evidence in
respect of the Character of the Witnesses in general, the particular
Circumstances they were under, and of the subject Matter which they did Depose,
to be so defective, and so far from maintaining the Charge of the Indictment,
that he took it for granted, that there was none so hardy as to defend it. 2.
But our Author did not consider well, when he said that the Evidence was not
within his Province; for the Province he has undertaken, is to Vindicate the
Government in its Proceedings against my Lord Russell; and if the Government be
suspected and charged, for giving assurance to Prisoners, that they should be
Pardoned or Hanged according as they Swore Matter to Convict or Acquit this
Noble Lord and others, and for refusing to grant Pardons, until the Terms and
Conditions of obtaining the same were actually performed, by swearing this Lord
out of his Life to save their own; I say, if the Government be charged for
using these and other indirect Courses, to procure Evidence against him and
others, (as it really is from the Mouth of one, if not more, of the Witnesses
themselves) then the Government wants Vindication in that Particular, and
consequently the Evidence is as much within his Province as the Indictment and
Judgment; and as the Actings of the Judges and Counsel, which in another place
he owns to be his Province to defend and justify. I desire our Author
hereafter, to postpone the giving his Works a Title till he has finished them;
for the Contradiction and Incongruity between the Title and Body of his Sheet
is really a very great scandal and reproach to him.

VIII. In the same Page he goes on thus: As to the rest, the force of it, if
any seems to be founded on his first Assertion, the Conspiring to do a thing is
not the doing a thing, and he quotes two great Men's Names for it, I would have
agreed that, though he had spared the Authority to justify it, but this is
sufficiently answered in the Sheet. 1. Our Author now gives us an instance of
his Sincerity, as he has done before several times of his Judgment; I desire
him to point at that part of the Justification, out of which he quotes that
absurd and ridiculous Assertion, That the Conspiring to do a thing is not the
doing a thing. I should never have been able to guess what he meant, if he had
not added the Quotation of the two great Men's Names; the two great Men are the
Lords Coke and Hales, which the Justifier cites to prove, That Conspiring to
Levy War is not Treason, nor an Overt Act to prove the Intention or compassing
of the King's death. The Justifier uses their own Words, and tells his Reader
so; and is not our Author a Man of a strange Forehead, to Construe Positions
laid down by Coke and Hales so absurdly? 2. If the Proposition, Conspiring to
Levy War is not Treason, be to be expounded, (as our Author does) That
Conspiring to do a thing is not doing the thing, what becomes of our Judges,
who have adjudged, That the Conspiring to do a thing was the doing a thing? for
they adjudged to Levy War, Treason, within the intent of Stat. Edw. 3. tho it
be not in the Letter. Our Author one might think played Booty; for tho he
assumes the Style of the Judges Vindicator; yet he loads them with a more gross
and stupid Imputation, than either the Defense, Remarks, or Justification; but
I Will be his Compurgator, I believe him true and faithful to his Trust, this was
a Blunder, and Blunders we find to flow from him, with a wonderful and natural
Facility; and we may observe one more in this period, where be says, This is
sufficiently answered in the Sheet: Now, tho I never saw that Sheet (he must
mean his first Sheet) till lately; yet, I am assured it was printed before the
Justification came out, and then I desire to know, how he comes to Answer a
Paper he never saw, nor knew to be in being; there must be Prophesy or
Revelation in the Case, that is certain; but admitting he had said, That what
was writ in the Sheet, did resute this part of the Justification, and so
rendered an answer now unnecessary, which was his intent, if he had any at all,
I say, That to a general Affirmative, I can but oppose a general Negative, that
it is not, etc. I confess I might have spared my Criticism on the Incorrectness
of our Authors Expressions, since there are so many more important Faults and
Errors, to entertain me with.

IX. In the same page, He says, that the Justifier offers an Argument from the
late Statutes declaring Treasons; because they were Temporary; but I answer as
the Sheet does, they were in affirmance of the Old Law; and I can show him
three or four Temporary, and an hundred other Acts of Parliament that are so,
and therefore that is no Argument at all; but I am, as the Party I justify was,
confined to a Sheet, and therefore cannot enlarge. 1. The Temporary Statutes
for making a bare Conspiracy to levy War, Treason, were one of the Topics from
which the Justifier drew his Arguments to prove that it was not Treason within
the intent of the Statute of E. 3. upon which my Lord Russel was indicted; for
he did, and does still think, that so many Parliaments would not have troubled
themselves to make special Statutes concerning it, if they had thought it
Treason by any Statute before in being; and did also infer, that all those
Parliaments did not judge it fit to be a continued standing Treason, because
then they would have made their Statutes perpetual, and not remporary. When
there were Jealousies and Apprehensions of an Invasion from a Foreign Enemy,
and of the Subjects holding a correspondency with him, as in Queen Elizabeth,
and other Reigns; upon such, and the like Emergencies, the Wisdom of the
Parliament did think fitting to make a Conspiracy to levy War Treason; and
there is no doubt but such an Act would be at this time seasonable. 2. His bare
and confident averment that they were in affirmance of the Old Law, and that he
can show three or four Temperary Statutes that are so, must not bear down those
strong Reasons which induce me to believe that they were introductive of New
Law; I believe he may be so learned as to produce a great many other Acts, that
are only declaratory of the Old Law; but I Am sure it is not common nor usual to
make temporary Acts in affirmance of perpetual Acts of Parliament, which is the
Point in question: For if our Author means any thing that is pertinent, it is
that these temporary Acts are in affirmance of the Statute of E. 3. which is
perpetual. It Is true, the temporary Statute of 13 Car. 2. (as our Author cites)
does enact, That if any person or persons whatsoever shall, within the Realm,
or without, compass or imagine the Death of the King, etc. and such
Compassings, Imaginations, etc. shall express, utter, or declare, by any
Printing, Writing, Preaching, or malicious-advised Speaking, being legally
convicted thereof by, etc. then every such, etc. shall, etc. But no man (except
our Author) would say that this is in affirmance of Stat. E. 3. as to the
compassing the King's Death. The Statute of E. 3. does provide, That there must
be some Overt Act; but it does not determine what shall be a good and
sufficient Overt Act to prove the Compassing: If the matter be clear, it leaves
it to the Judges; if there be any doubt or difficulty, then it does expressly
direct the Judges to respit their Judgments till the meeting of the Parliament,
that the Case may be resolved there. But the Statute 13 Car. 2. declares the
compassing the King's Death, and particularly the expressing the same by any
Printing, Writing, Preaching, or malicious-advised Speaking, to be Treason, the
Copulative And makes it clear, that the principal End of this part of the
Statute was to particularise and ascertain, That such Facts therein mentioned
should be sufficient Overtacts of the compassing during King Charles's Life,
that were not so by the Statute of E. 3. which left it general, and at large.
Is not our Author a man of an excellent Head, to apprehend this to be only a
Confirmation of the Old Statute in words at length? Indeed he does say, That it
was agreed to be so in the House of Commons, 1 Jac. 2. and when a Motion was
made to renew that Law, the Lawyers, answer was, That the 25 E. 3. did the same
thing. I have enquired of some diligent and observing Members of that
Parliament concerning the truth of this Allegation, and they assure me there
was no such Answer made by the Lawyers, nor no such thing agreed by the House;
but they give me this Account of the matter: There was a Bill brought in to
renew the Statute of 13 Car. 2. and upon the second or third reading, it was
moved by Mr. Tipping ('it is for his Credit to be named), That there might be an
explanatory Proviso, That Preaching, Writing, or Speaking against Popery, and
against the Doctrines and Principles of the Church of Rome, should not be
construed or intended within the intent of the Act. This was thought so
reasonable, that it was immediately agreed unto, and a Committee appointed
presently to withdraw into the Speaker's Chamber, to pen the Proviso, and the
Bishop of St. Asaph came there to be assisting in it. Upon this, the Bill was
dropped and let fall, and no man ever after pressed it further; which may give
all men satisfaction what use was at that time designed to be made of it; and
that all our Learned Clergy who did since Preach and Write against Popery,
would have been in danger (if the Bill had passed) to have been construed into
a Treason, Praemunire, or some other great Penalty within the intent of that
Bill, to the ruin of Them and their Families. This was in King James's first
Parliament, when we had the most simple, plain, and solemn Assurances of
Protecting our Religion and our Laws, that was possible to be devised. It does
now sufficiently appear how insufficiently our Author has answered this
Argument of the Justifier: It Is true, he does make an Apology (and a very
pretty one it is), That he is confined to a Sheet, and therefore cannot
enlarge. He says, when he comes to answer Mr. H. That he wants time. But I
desire to know, How it comes that he cannot spare time, or that he is limited
to a Sheet? Who is it that does set these bounds unto his Writings? It were to
be wished, That the person who has so great Authority over him as to confine
him to a Sheet, would improve it a little further, and engage him not to write
at all. If it had been a year ago, I should have presumed he were thus
straightened from the attendance he owed to some great Place; for I believe
truly, his Parts, Learning, Integrity, and other Qualifications, could not fail
of recommending him to an Eminent Office (perhaps a Recorder of a Great City,
or the like) in the late Reign. The Reader may observe what sort of man he is,
who when he is gravelled, and can offer nothing of Reason, is forced to have
recourse to so poor and pitiful a shift, as to pretend he wants time, or that
he is confined to a Sheet, which bears the Price of four Sheets; and,
considering the value of if, he might have afforded more of them for our Money.

X. In the same Page he observes, That the Justifier lays down a Rule for
Construction of Statutes, That a thing particularis'd in one part, is not to be
construed within the general words of another part; but that Rule has near
fourscore Exceptions in the Books: Besides, it comes not to this Case; for here
is compassing the King's Death made Treason, and declared by Overt Act; then
levying War is made Treason. Now, says the Repliant, nothing can be an Overtact
of the first, that does any way concern the latter, which is a Non sequitur,
etc. 1. It Is very true, the Justifier does lay down the Rule, and does thence
deduce, That conspiring to levy War cannot be within the meaning of the Clause
of Compassing the King's Death in the Stat. E. 3. because levying War is
particularly mentioned in the Statute after. 2. The Rule is admitted; but it
has, it seems, near fourscore Exceptions; though, by reason of the misfortune
of our Author's being confined to a Sheet, or time being wanting, he has not
obliged his Reader with one of that great number. It would have been much more
material for him to have showed, That any of the said Exceptions, or the Reason
of them, did extend to the Point in Question, than to tire his Reader with a
long impertinent Preface, and a tedious insignificant Digression of the King's
Prerogative of Peace and War, (which take up two or three Pages). If he had
omitted these, he needed not to have exceeded the Standard of a Sheet, and yet
have room enough to have given better and more satisfactory Answers, if he
could. 3. The Consequence, That conspiring to levy War is not an Overt Act of
the Compassing, etc. because it belongs to another species, is clear from the
express words of Coke and Hales; which see in the Justification. And if the
Makers of the Statute had designed to conclude Conspiring, etc. it would not
have cost them above three words more to have added it to the Clause of levying
War, where it would have more properly come in, then under the Clause of
Compassing, to which it has no Relation, nor no Man could dream of finding it:
The positive Opinions of Coke and Hales, the Authority of a Rule of Law, and
the consideration of the motive and end of the Statute, which all make against
our Author, do justly merit so great a Complement and Respect to be paid them,
that the Case should be admitted to be doubtful; and if it be doubtful, then by
the express Direction of the Act, the Judges ought to have suspended their
Judgment, till they received the Determination of the Parliament. Our Author
refers to the Sheet for several Instances to the purpose; I have examined a
great many of them, (at length I was weary) and I Will assure him there was not
one that warranted the Judgment in my Lord Russel's Case; Mr. H. has been so
particular in answering them, that he has saved all others the Labor. I do not
say, but that there has been as extravagant Opinions as this, as in the Case of
him, who said, His Son was Heir to the Crown, meaning a House, that had a Crown
for a Sign to it; and of him, Who wished Stag-horns, and all in Kings Belly,
meaning one of that Name, etc. These and the like were in violent corrupt
times, adjudged Treason; but no man ever defended these Resolutions, or esteem
them to be Law, tho they have the Sanction of the judicial Opinions of their
side.

XI. He proceeds and says, The Lord Cobham 's Case is endeavored to be
answered by a wonder, that Sir Edward Coke, late Lord Chief Justice, and then
Sheriff, should differ from Mr. Attorney Coke; for we know his Thoughts in Sir
Walter Rawleigh 's time, and in his Speeches in Car. 1. his time, they are as
different each from the other, as the times were. I have now (as I had before)
occasion to reprove our Author for false Recitals; the Justifiers never said,
nor wondered, that my Lord Coke's Opinion was different at one time, from what
it was at another; and he was so far from saying, that his Opinion was
different when he was Attorney, from his Opinion in his third Institution,
(which our Author means) that he believed there was no such Resolution, as was
pretended in the Lord Cobham's Case, because my Lord Coke did not take notice
of it in his Inst where he taught a Doctrine quite contrary; and also, because
Hales gives another Account of the Offense of the Lord Cobham, than was
alleged in my Lord Russel's Trial, by the Kings Council. 2. I am as free to
Reproach my Lord Coke, for his Carriage against Sir Walter Rawleigh, as I am
the late King Charles the Second Council, for theirs against my Lord Russel;
but for his Speeches in Car. 1. his time, if he means these delivered in
Parliament; as many as I have read of them, are very Honest, and denote a Zeal
and Affection to the Laws and Liberties of his Country, and do not in the
least derogate from the just and ancient Prerogatives of the Crown. 3. Upon the
whole, there is nothing material here answered to the Objections made by the
Justifier against the Authority of the Lord Cobham's Case, quoted in the Trial,
as will appear by comparing this answer with the Justification; nor is there
any thing said to my Lord Hales stating Cobham's Crime different from the
Trial, from whence we may conclude it was more than a bare Conspiracy, etc.

XII. He says, Sir Henry Vane 's Case is endeavored to be answered by this,
that Syderfin mentions not the Overt Act in the Indictment, but he does say the
Treason alleged, was a compassing the Kings Death; and every Man knows what
Sir Henry Vane did to accomplish that; he neither Signed the Warrant to Execute
that Murder, nor was he actually concerned in it; The Justifier says, He does
not remember it printed any where, but in Syderfin 's Reports; for the
refreshment of his Memory, I Will tell him of another Book, where it is, and that
is Keeble 's Reports 1 Vol. 304. and there the Indictment is said to be, for
compassing the Kings Death, and endeavoring to accomplish the Treason, by
Changing and Usurping the Government, and Levying War; which Case does directly
overthrow all the Defenders, Justifiers, and Repliants Arguments, from the
distinctness or difference of the sort of Treasons. 1. Here is another mistake,
for the Justifier does not endeavor to answer Sir Henry Vane's Case, because
Syderfin mentions not the Overt-Acts; but he does not only endeavor, but does
effectually answer it, because there was other Matters proved against him, that
did amount to a good Overt Act; and tho he did not Sign the Warrant to Execute
that Murder, yet he was concerned in Designs for incompassing his Civil Death,
which is within the Act, as well as his Natural. 2. The Devil owed our Author a
shame, when he prompt him to refer us to Keeble; for by that Book, it expressly
appears, that the Changing and Usurping the Government, was part of Sir Henry
Vane's Charge, as well as Levying War, which does necessarily imply the Kings
Deposition, which no man ever doubted, but was Treason; but, how comes this to
be applicable to my Lord R's Case? 3. This Case is so far from overthrowing all
the Defenders, Justifiers, and Repliants Arguments, from the distinctness of
the Treason, that it is plainly consistent with them, and all other Arguments
they use.

XIII. Then for Doctor Story 's Case, it is hard to justify it for Law, whereas
there are above forty places, where it is cited, and agreed, etc. if any thing
be Law, that is so, and not distinguishable from the Case in question; but that
the Evidence was different, which the Justifier would make a reason to
invalidate this Indictment; the Logic of it passes all understanding, etc. 1.
I do say, It Is hard to justify Doctor Story's Case according to the summary and
imperfect Report of it in Dyer; but take it with all the Circumstances, it is
Treason; and is nothing like my Lord Russel's Case, who was never pretended to
be guilty of adhering to a Foreign Enemy, nor a design of Deposing the King, as
in truth Story was. 2. I desire our Author to reconcile his saying here, That
the Justifier would invalidate the Indictment with what he said before, that
the Justifier admitted the Indictment to be good, and only quarrelled with the
Evidence; but Contradictions and Incongruities, are small Faults. 3. If the
Logic of distinguishing my Lord Russel's Case from Story's, because the
Evidence against them were different, be past his understanding, I cannot
imagine what is within the reach of his Understanding; for it is clear, that the
Evidence is the principal and most essential Thing to be weighed and
considered: It Is true, our Author has said, That the Evidence was not his
Province, but that his Business was to defend the Court and Council. I have
already delivered my Thoughts upon that Expression, and shall now further ask
our Author one Question concerning it; whether, if the Evidence was short, and
did not warrant the Indictment, it was not the duty of the Court to tell the
Jury so much, and that therefore they ought to have acquitted the Prisoner? By
his Doctrine, if any Man be Indicted of compassing Death of the King, and the
Evidence be crossing a Ri^er in a pair of Oars, the Court is not to trouble it
self about the Evidence, nor to instruct the Jury of the insufficiency of it;
and if the Party be Convicted, the Court is in no Fault, because the Indictment
was as good as against the Murderers of King Charles the First, and the Cases
are only distinguishable by the proof. Now I have been all along under an
Error, (and the unanimous Consent of the Books have led me to it) that the
Jurors were entirely to be determined in Points of Law by the Court, and that
the Court was to state the Law, arising from the Proofs to the Jury, and that
they were only Judges of the Fact.

XIV. In 2d Ander. Grant 's Case, 'twas held, That when any Person intends or
contriveth to Levy War for a thing which the Queen by her Law or Justice, ought
or may do in Government, as Queen; it is not material, whether they intend any
hurt to Her Person; but if they intend to Levy War against the Office and
Authority of the Queen, that is enough; and that Resolution overthrows the
Justifiers Notion, that J. S. 's design was only to defend the Laws; though the
13 Eliz. was then in force, it is a good Argument to answer that Pretense. 1. I
have not 2d Ander. by me; it is out of Print, and I cannot procure it, tho I Have
sent to several Booksellers. 2. But even as our Author represents it, it is
nothing to his purpose, because he was Indicted on the 13 Eliz. which made a
Conspiracy to Levy War, Treason during her Life; and also, because his Design
was against the Office and Authority of the Queen, which implies her Dethroning
or Deposition: But by the whole Tenor of the Evidence against my Lord Russel,
it is plain, he was assenting to no Consultation, Debate or Resolution, than
what was for the support of the Regal Office and Authority, if the Preservation
of our Religion, Laws and Government be so.

XV. Our Author refers us to the Case of the Earls of Essex, etc. before the
then High Steward. In that Case, there was an actual sorce, and levying War,
and therefore not applicable to the Case in question; for their Offense was
specified in the Stat. E. 3. which my Lord Russel is not concerned in.

XVI. In page 6. Our Author, under the pretense of justifying the Guards, makes
a long impertinent Excursion, and maintains the King's Prerogative of Peace and
War, and challenges any body to show the time that there were no armed men in
England; and expounds the meaning of the Parliament, that they did not design
the Guards in their Instrument of Grievances. 1. No man questions the King's
Prerogative of Peace and War; and the Author must own himself impertinent to
talk of it here, unless he will justify this Consequence, That if the King can
declare War, etc. then he may keep standing Guards in times of Peace. 2. It is
as little to the purpose, though England was never without Armed Men; for we
know there were several Castles, Garrisons, etc. kept up, and maintained as
necessary for the defense of the Realm against Foreign Enemies; but I challenge
him to show me where any Kings in times of peace were allowed to keep, and
quarter Soldiers upon the Subjects, until King Charles the Second's time. 3. I
desire to know whether the Guards were not part of King James's Army? and
whether they were not quartered contrary to Law? and if so, then, I Am fure,
they must be included in the Instrument of Grievances, as well as any other
part of the Army. But he takes no notice of what the Justifier said, That they
were on great debate voted illegal by the House of Commons in King Charles the
Second's Long Parliament, of whose zeal to the Prerogative no man ever doubted.
Nor did he consider that time was, when Judges and others were impeached for
persuading the King to give Liveries to great and unusual numbers of men to
attend him, which were no other than Guards. ( Temp. Rich. II.) That one
Article of Maladministration against that King himself, was grounded upon his
Armed Multitude of Cheshire men. That even in the times of the War betwixt York
and Lancaster, when the Title to the Crown was so ticklish; yet Standing Armies
were not endured then. That King Henry the Seventh, having occasion to raise
some Forces, was limited by Act of Parliament to the Number of Twelve Thousand.
That our later Acts against Martial Law, and quartering of Soldiers upon
Persons against their Will, presuppose all Standing Forces in times of Peace to
be Illegal: since without Marshal-Law, and Quartering of Soldiers, a Standing
Force cannot subsist. We know of how late standing the very Yeomen of the
Guards are: And by an old Act of Parliament we are taught, That to the King it
belongs to prohibit all Force and Arms; And that in order thereunto, His Leiges
are bound to Assist him according to the Laws and Customs of the Realm (7 Edw.
1.) But I find no Legal Warrant for our King's raising a Force in times of
Peace and Quiet, without Consent of Parliament.

XVII. I have now considered all that our Author has been pleased to answer to
the Half sheet called the Justification, etc. and do conceive the several
points it undertook to make out, to be vindicated from our Author's Cavils
(viz.) That the Judgment against my Lord Russel was, 1. Against the Authority
of the two best, and most authentic Opinions of our Lawyers, Hales and Coke.
2. Against the Opinions of several Parliaments. 3. Against a known Rule and
Maxim. 4. And Lastly, Against the end and inducement of the Stat. Ed. 3. And if
this be true, then I submit to any impartial Judgment, whether the Noble Lord
might not be said to be Murdered? It is not such a Murder as can be punished
in the ordinary course and methods of Justice, because it was committed under
the countenance of Law, which I take to be so far from lessening the guilt,
that it is an aggravating Circumstance, To pervert that Law which is framed and
instituted for the security of the Subject, to be a means of his ruin and
destruction, by undue, violent, and arbitrary Interpretations of it. The
Original Legislators and Founders of our Government never thought, nor could
comprehend, that any Age could arrive to such pitch of wickedness, and
therefore they provided no punishments for the offense: As the Law of Rome had
appointed no punishment for Parricide, because they believed no Man would be so
great a Monster as to be guilty of it. Crimes of such an extraordinary nature,
are to receive their condemnation by the Legislative Authority of every
Government; and here in England it has been very frequent with our Parliaments
to enact punishments other than were appointed by preceding Laws; or to add to
them, when the offense was accompanied with unusual and aggravating
circumstances; neither can it be pretended that there is any injustice in
punishing by a Law, ex post facto; any thing that is an offense in it self, and
that receives its denomination of evil from an intrinsic quality inherent in
it; such as Parricide, which in Rome had no punishment allotted by the Law; and
the barbarous Murders of the Duke of Gloucester in Calais, and of the Bishop of
Rochester's Servants by Poison, were by special Statutes declared Treason, and
the Murderers of the Duke of Gloucester underwent the common punishment of
High Treason; and those of the Bishop of Rochester's Family, were ordered to be
Boiled to death; neither of which was the legal punishments of their respective
Crimes: But indeed it would be very unjust, at once to make the Offense and to
punish a person who had been guilty of it, when neither the Word of God, the
Light of Natural Reason, nor any previous municipal Law did warn or instruct
him of the Transgression; such are the Facts of Coining of Money, Transporting
of Wool, and the like, which are very innocent in themselves, and are unlawful
and punishable, because they are prohibited as things of a public damage and
detriment. Acts of this kind never were, nor ought to be punished without an
anrecedent Law to justify it. I do not now plead for excepting out of the
Indemnity any persons whatsoever; my design is only to show what is just and
lawful, not what may be expedient for the Parliament to determine against such
as brought my Lord Russel and others to an illegal, cruel, and untimely death;
and it is our Author's bold affirmation, That they are as safe as under an
Indemnity, that has ministered the occasion of discoursing upon this Topic. I
consess I am very ill instructed in the Cases of the rest that were hurried to
their Graves through the violence of the late times; my remembrance of them is
not more perfect, than one may be presumed to retain from a transient and
cursory perusal of their Trials; but by a general consent of all Lawyers, the
Sentence against many of them is not more to be defended than that of my Lord
R. Mr. Sidney's, and Mr. Hampden's, had the same weak foundation, only with
this difference, That the latter pleaded guilty; but it is plain from what has
been already said upon my Lord Russel's Case, that he was not, unless he was
conscious of some other guilt, than was charged on that Noble Lord. It Is true,
in all Inferior Jurisdictions and Courts he is estop't to say he is innocent,
and that the Plea was extorted from him through menace of Hanging, Drawing and
Quartering, because the admittance of such a Plea is, repugnant to a Rule of
Law, That there can be no averment against matter of Record, and the Plea is
recorded: but whatever Acts in pais, and that are not recorded, a man executes
unvoluntarily by duress or threat of being beaten, imprisoned, or sear of other
bodily hurt, he may avoid them by pleading the special matter in an Inferior
Court; as for the purpose, all Bonds, Specialties, Deeds, Conveyances, etc. If
a man consider this difference abstracted from the aforesaid Maxim, it will
seem very absurd, and unreasonable, that one shall be allowed to disannul an
Act he persormed to save a beating, or a short Imprisonment (for which the Law
would have given him reparation proportionable to the damage he should sustain)
and that Mr. H. shall not be received to make vo^d his Plea, by saying, That he
was forced to it to save himself and Family from the ignominy of dying under a
Gallows; therefore in Cases of this nature the Parliament ought to give aid and
relief, which may be done without inconvenience; since the Parliament (the Seat
of the Legislative Power) has an unlimited Jurisdiction, and neither is, nor
ought to be so straightly bound up as Subordinate Courts. From Mr. Hambden's
Plea there ought no inference to be made to the prejudice of my Lord Russel,
since it was altogether involuntary. Upon the whole, I have perused that Noble
Lord's Trial with the exactest care and curiosity, and I do profess I can
discover no Crime, nor Conspiracy, other than he was engaged in by an
hereditary and unshaken Zeal and Concernment for the Religion; Laws and
Liberties of his Country; and yet our Author has the boldness to repeat in
both his Sheets, That his Relations were pleased with the Justice dispensed to
him by the Court. His Judgment cannot be defended without reflection on our
present Government, which is founded on the generous, and successful Attempt
made by the People of England, under the Auspicious Conduct of His present
Majesty, to recover their Ancient Birthrights. It Is true, we that engaged in
this Revolution, are justified by a greater number of breaches and violations
of our Laws. And we have carried our resentments further. There were
Encroachments sufficient upon the people (as appears before) to authorize
whatever he transacted; and we found they improved and grew at length to such a
height, that we were forced to abandon our beloved Doctrine of
Passive-Obedience and Non-resistance; for a long time we were restrained the
use of other than the Spiritual-weapons of Prayers and Tears; so long, that all
the Secular and Civil Rights of the Kingdom were destroyed: At length those two
Leviathans, the Dispencing Power, and the High Commission Court were set up,
and began to prey upon the Liberties and Properties of the Church, and then our
Confessors gave us leave to resort to other sort of Arms, which in less than
six weeks time redeemed them and us. For my part, I was bred, and will live and
dye in the Communion of the Church of England, as by Law established. I believe
it to be the best constituted Church in the World both for Doctrine and
Discipline; and as upon the Reformation She cash^ered those luxuriant
Ceremonies that in the Church of Rome spread so far as to cover and shadow the
root and substance of Religion, so She seems to retain sew more than are
competent and necessary for the decent and orderly discharge of Divine Service;
but my Affection to the Church cannot so far blind my Judgment, as to approve
the conduct of a great many of her Ministers, and Clergy. I was willing to
compound with them, and to admit, That Fighting their Mothers Battle with so
great Courage in her late distress, should be an expiatory sacrifice to shrieve
and absolve them from their former errors and miscarriages: But I can hardly
forgive such as now unseasonably return to their Vomit of Passive Obedience
(which they themselves, by experience, so lately found to be absurd and
inconsistent with the general Laws of Nature and Self-preservation) and that
endeavor by their example (as much as in them lie) to alienate the bearts of
the people from the Government, at a conjuncture, when the common danger of
Religion and Laws do absolutely require the closest union, and the strongest
and most entire coallition of all the Protestants Power and Interest. I cannot
frame any colorable excuse or apology for these sort of Men. Their Murmurings
and Discontents cannot proceed from the influence of their ancient and exploded
Principle; for even those steps toward the late Change which they encouraged,
authorized, or concurred in, were as much a departure from, and a contradiction
to the notion of Non-resistance, as the Abdication it self: Neither can I allow
that they can be the result of just and rational fears of a design to turn this
well tempered Monarchy into a Republic; since that is more effectually
obviated and prevented by settling Their Majesty's upon the Throne, than it
would have been by the Regency, or any other project that has been propounded
or discoursed of; nay, I had almost said, That the Regency did change our
Monarchy into a Commonwealth; for it stripped King James of all his Prerogatives
and Powers; it left him indeed the Title of a King, but the administration of
the Government was to be lodged and entrusted in other hands. Sparta had an
Officer that bore the style of King; but notwithstanding that, the Government
of Sparta is transmitted to us under the Title of a Commonwealth; for in truth,
the King had not these Jurisdictions nor Franchises, in which the Essence of
Monarchy consists. Such a King as there was (of old) in Sparta, would the
Project of the Regency have made King James; which really was no more than to
set him up as a Pageant of State, and a Statue of Authority: But by settling the
Crown upon Their Majesty's, it is preserved in its true, rightful and ancient
Luster, Powers and Prerogatives. It Is true, The Rules of the Hereditary
Succession are, and must have been broke when King James was laid aside, and no
person whatsoever could, during his Life, be exalted to the Throne under that
Qualification; for non est baeres viventis, a living Man can have no Heir, is a
Maxim of our Laws. Since therefore all thoughts of King James's Restitution
were abandoned, and that no person could of right lay claim to the Crown, it
would have been next degree to madness, to appoint any person for King, that
was not in a capacity to discharge the Duty and Office of a King, which is to
defend and protect his People. Such a Power I do conceive to be a more
essential Qualification and Property of a Sovereign Prince, than any Right or
Title by Descent or Proximity of Blood; for that is required by the Fundamental
Maxims of Government in general; this only by Municipal Laws and Sanctions. So
that if a People set up for their Supreme Governor one that wants some Legal
Qualifications, the worst imputation that malice can fix upon them, is, that
they do transgress against the Laws of their Country; but, if they let up one
for their Governor that is not able to protect them, they do certainly offend
against the first and original End of all Political Constitutions, which is the
Public Peace and Safety: and how far the Municipal Laws of any particular
Kingdom or State do retain their force, when they come to interfere with the
Superior Laws of Nature and Self-preservation, and with the Ends of Government
in general, I submit to every man's consideration. What our Ancestors here in
England thought of this Matter, may be easily collected from the great number
they had of Kings de facto, that were not so de jure; and as no man that is
versed in our Histories can be ignorant of this, so no man that is any thing
acquainted with with our Laws, but must know they make no difference (in point
of Allegiance) between a King de facto and de jure. Whatever is High Treason
against the one, is against the other; nay, our Books carry this matter higher,
and do teach us, That the levying War under the Authority of a King de jure
against him that is King de facto, is such an indelible Character of a Traitor,
that he may be tried and condemned in the Reign of such King de jure, if ever
he happens to be a King de facto likewise.

As His present Majesty was the only Person able to restore to us our Religion,
and our Ancient Government; so it was on Him alone we could have depended for
the continuance of these Blessings. When I reflect upon the Temper and
Disposition of our English Army after the Revolution, upon the Powers and
Strength of France and Ireland, and upon the uncertainty of Scotland, I do not
see how it was possible for us to have supported our selves, if the Prince of
Orange had withdrawn himself, and his Troops, from among us, and left us to
shift for our selves, as undoubtedly he would, and ought to have done, if we
had excluded him from any share in the Regal Office; for every body knows he
made such a Figure in the Government of the States General of the United
Provinces; as rendered him one of the greatest and most considerable Princes of
Christendom; and was it reasonable to expect he should have relinquished his
Post in his Native Country, and be content to live among us in the quality of
a Subject? Was it reasonable that he should expose his Life, his Fortune, and
all that was dear to him, to rescue us from that State of Thraldom and Misery,
that we and our Posterities seemed to have been condemned to; and should we
make so ungrateful a return on our parts, as to place him in a meaner Degree,
and ina more private Condition of life, than he was before he underwent such
hazards, and sustained such Difficulties for our sakes? Certainly the
dissatisfaction some People express at our present Establishment, must be
occasioned for want of a due and serious consideration of that Deliverance
which Providence has made our King the Instrument of. If any man maturely
reflects upon the preceding and concurring Accidents and Emergencies of the
late astonishing Revolution, he must admit, that God Almighty did in an
extraordinary and particular manner direct, conduct and approve the Rise,
Progress and Conclusion of it.

To conclude, The setting the Character of my Lord Russel in its true and
deserved Light; the redeeming his Name and Memory from the stain and infamy of
the highest Crimes; the proving his Childrens Title to the greatest degree of
Honor and Virtue on the part of their Father (which by the Universal consent of
all they will derive and inherit from their Mother,) and restoring to the Laws
and Justice of England their primitive Credit and Reputation, are the sole
abstracted Motives which prompted me to this undertaking. I have not left the
least handle for malice or ill nature to suspect, that what has been here said
in relation to the Government, or my Lord Russel, is the result of any external
hope of advantage or preferment, or of a servile disposition to flatter such as
are in Power. My Resolution not to be known, will both secure me against those
Imputations, and against that Contempt, which is the reward of ill Writers.

I do not pretend to be of so morose, nor Stoical a temper, as to think that at
all times, and upon all occasions, men should confine themselves to speak or
write nothing but what is the true and real Dictates of their Judgments. The
extravagant strains of Flattery which Pliny bestows upon the Roman Emperors in
his Panegyricks, was no hindrance to his living and dying with the reputation
of a very honest and sincere Person: To magnify the Power of Jupiter, and the
other Heathen Gods, in a Declaration or Poem, was never esteemed Blasphemy
against the Great Jehovah: And if a man be to speak or write to his Mistress,
'twill be ill manners to tell her that he courts her for her Fortune, though it
be the truth. I do not censure the University Orator (who, I Have heard, did in
his Speech to Charles the Second, highly commend him for his Sincerity,
Singleness of Heart, and his exact observation-of his Word and Promises) for
any other thing than this, That he should have praised him for some other
Virtues, than those he was so universally known never to have practiced. Upon
these Occasions it is expected men should exert their Wit and Fancy, not their
Veracity; and I cannot deny, That to make truth on these Occasions the
standard, may be clownishness and ill-breeding. But, I Am sure, I would as soon
cut off my Right Hand, as suffer it to write any thing that is not the result
of my sober and deliberate Thoughts and Judgment upon so serious, weighty and
solemn a Subject as I have here presumed to discourse upon.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Baldwin.
THE History of the Most Illustrious William, Prince of Orange: Deduced from
the first Founders of the Ancient House of Nassau: Together with the most
considerable Actions of this present Prince. The Second Edition.

A Collection of Fourteen Papers, Relating to the Affairs of Church and State,
in the Reign of the late King James.

The Character of a Trimmer. His Opinion of I. The Laws and Government. II.
Protestant Religion. III. The Papists. IV. Foreign Affairs. By the Honorable
Sir W. Coventry. The Third Edition, carefully Corrected, and cleared from the
Errors of the first Impression.

An Impartial Relation of the Illegal Proceedings against St. Mary Magdal^^
College in Oxon, in the Year of our Lord 1687. Containing only Matters of Fact
as they occurred. The Second Edition. To which is added the most Remarkable
Passages, omitted in the former, by reason of the Severity of the Press.
Collected by a Fellow of the said College.

The Absolute Necessity of standing vigorously by the present Government: Or, A
view of what both Churchmen and Dissenters must expect, if by their unhappy
Divisions, Popery and Tyranny should return again.

A Defense of the Late Lord Russells Innocence, By way of Answer or Confutation
of a Libellous Pamphlet, Entitled, An Antidote against Poison: With Two
Letters of the Author of this Book, upon the Subject of his Lordship's Trial.

Together with an Argument in the Great Case concerning Elections of Members to
Parliament, between Sir Samuel Barnardiston, Plaintiff, and Sir William Soames,
Sheriff of Suffolk, Defendant, In the Court of King's Bench, in an Action upon
the Case, and afterward by Error sued in the Exchequer-Chamber.

The Lord Russel's Innocence further defended; by way of Reply to an Answer,
Entitled, The Magistracy and Government of England Vindicated. Both writ by
Sir Robert Atkyns, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath, and now Lord
Chief Baron of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer.


