SERIOUS REFLECTIONS ON TIME, AND ETERNITY. With some other Subjects, Moral and
Divine. To which is prefixed an Introduction concerning the first Day of the
Year, how observed by the Jews, and may best be employed by a serious
Christian. By JOHN SHOWER. The second Edition Corrected, and very much Enlarged.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Watts, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1689.

TO THE READER.
THE visible Decay of Piety, and Evangelical Holiness, is a common subject of
Complaint: and hardly ever more justly than now, with respect to the Generality
of Churches, and particular Christians. All serious and considering Persons
must needs reckon themselves obliged on that account both to Mourn and Fear.
The causes of serious Mourning are too many, and too notorious, to be
unobserved by those, who have any Knowledge of the present State of the
Christian Religion in Europe, even among the most Reformed. The general
unacquaintedness with the Mysteries of the Gospel; the Reproach of the solemn
Assemblies by the Corruption of its Doctrines and Worship, and the dishonor
cast upon its most sacred Institutions; the late terrible Desolations of the
Temple and Sanctuary, and grievous sufferings of our Brethren in many parts of
the World; the shameful Apostasy of so many Thousands from the Doctrine and
Worship of the Gospel, and other considerations of this kind, which might be
named, do carry with them a loud call to Humiliation and Mourning.

But the Practical Degeneracy of Professing Christians unto Worldliness,
Profaness, and Sensuality, does not only afford matter of Lamentation for the
present, but too much ground to Fear, that the bitterness of Death is not past;
that God 's Anger is not turned away, or his Controversy ended with the
Protestant Churches. And after we have known so many Thousands to renounce and
abjure their Religion in an Hour of Temptation, and see so many more (yea the
far greatest part,) in a preparedness to Revolt, on the like or lesser Trials,
by reason of their vicious Lives, (because they receive not the Truth in the
Love of it,) what can we reasonably expect, but further Tokens of Divine
Displeasure?

And how little of any encouraging Prospect is there, by the serious
Reformation of Persons, Families, and Churches to turn away his Wrath? Where
are there any Symptoms of the Recovery of the Power of Godliness, from whence
in our Age there is so undeniable a Declension? (and acknowledged by all
Parties that there is so.) How little is to be seen of any such thing, among
those who are most Forward and Zealous in espousing the Reformed Interest? even
such as would be thought of all others to be most concerned for its
Preservation, and have suffered not a little for it?

The distressed case of our Brethren cannot but move our Bowels of Compassion,
when we read or hear from time to time the Relation of the barbarous
Proceedings of their Persecutors. But the sensual wicked Lives of professedly
Reformed Christians, is certainly a more dreadful object to be considered, and
ought so to be regarded by us, as the Consequences of it are much more to be
feared, than of the fiercest Persecution by open and avowed Enemies. For the
Church of Christ never lost either Truth or Holiness that way; it has rather
been a considerable outward Means, for the preservation and increase of Both.
Though this cannot be said, but the direct Contrary, concerning Protestants
persecuting one another for lesser Differences.

The sad Effects of it have been seen and felt to that degree, in weakening the
common truly Christian Interest among us, that now, if ever, there is a louder
Call than ordinary to Forbearance, and Forgiveness, and Unity of Affection;
that our Divisions, with a revengeful, persecuting Spirit, may not prove our
Ruin.

And whatever Expectations we may and ought to have, from the unfulfilled
Prophecies, of God's rebuilding Sion, in the latter days, and destroying her
Enemies; (which we have no reason to question but he will most gloriously
effect, and ought daily to pray that he would hasten it, for his Names sake:)
yet can we never hope to see any thing considerable of that kind, in our Time,
without a great Repentance and Reformation, and the more Plentiful pouring out
of the H. Spirit for the healing of the Nations. I therefore wish that the
confident expectations of a speedy deliverance of the Church, may not divert us
from the present Duty we are called to, as the proper appointed Means, to which
God has directed us for that end.

Before the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, what was it that did hinder the
Jews from harkening to the Voice of God and Man for their Preservation; but
this Presumption, that at that time their Messiah would come and save 'em? And
that Day of the Lord which is expected, (wherein he will plead the Controversy
of Zion against Babylon,) how Glorious soever it may be in the Issue, may be,
it is likely it will be such, as shall disappoint our vain and foolish Hopes
concerning it. God will thoroughly purge his Temple, and punish the Men that are
at Ease, and settled on their Lees, and tread down the Outer-court of false
Professors. Therefore all ranks and degrees of Men should be awakened to
serious Repentance.

And are there any hopeful Beginnings of such a Thing, within view? Is there
any thing on Foot to be observed, like such a retrieving of Gospel Holiness in
the Hearts and Lives of Men? Does not the Name and Thing grow more and more
into Contempt every day? and who can tell how far it may proceed, to procure
Judgment upon any particular Place or Country, that is guilty of so general,
and provoking a Defection?

It concerns us therefore, every one to look to himself; to Repent, and do our
first Works, and make our Peace with God, that we may be found within the small
number of those, who shall be thought worthy to escape the almost Epidemical
infection, and to stand before the Son of Man. On which Account, any thing that
is likely to awaken Men to Consideration of the great acknowledged Principles
of Religion cannot be unseasonable. Yea, in such a case the meanest, and
weakest Endeavors may be of some use. The Subjects of the following
Reflections are most of them of that kind, necessary to be attended to by all
sorts of Persons; and so cannot be too often pressed, though in different Manners.

The usefulness of the subject Matter, and the smalness of the Bulk, are two
things which are wont to recommend a Book to most Readers. For which reason, I
may Hope, this will be read by several, who suffer much better, (because
bigger,) books to lie by them neglected. Some may possibly give it the reading,
as a New Years gift. And whoever shall be so far persuaded by it as to set
apart some Time in the beginning of the Year, for Self-examination, Confession
of sin, Repentance, Thanksgiving, and solemn renewal of his Covenant with God,
(which several of these Reflections may not only excite to, but are intended to
direct and assist him in,) I am persuaded he will thank me for putting him in
mind (at least,) of so seasonable an Exercise. The greatest part of these
Meditations were begun on a New Years day, tho some others are thought fit to
be inserted, as tending to promote the same design. But knowing how much easier
it is to stir up other Men's Devotion, than to command and keep alive my own;
it is desired that the most devout Thoughts contained in these Papers, may be
looked upon as what the Author aims at, and would persuade to, rather than what
he has already attained: as what he knows he ought to be and do, and does
seriously endeavor rather than what he is, and has been: heartily lamenting
wherein he has been Faulty, or defective in such duties, as these, and the
like Reflections, do oblige to, and enforce upon All, who shall read them, and
therefore much more upon himself.

That they were Penned at several times, and in occasional Retirements for
Spiritual Exercises, will, with the difference of the Subjects, be a sufficient
excuse, that some are larger and others shorter, and that the Style is in some
places more neglected than in others. If I may hereby render any Service to the
Souls of Men, if any secure Sinner, any Self deceiving Hypocrite, or
backsliding Christian be hereby awakened, or any serious Believer's Devotion be
quickened and advanced, I hope God will accept it. To his Blessing I humbly
recommend it; for those Ends.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction, which shows from what time the Jews reckoned the Beginning
of their Year: of the difference between their Sacred and Civil Account. The
Feast of Trumpets on the first day of the Year, its Institution, Nature, and
Design: the Traditions and Customs of the Jews respecting that Day. page 1
Sect. I. Of the changeable State, and short Duration of Earthly Things;
especially of Man, how little it is considered and believed: how necessary it
should be. page 15 II. Of the Change in Men's Inclinations, Opinions, and
Actions which one year shows; How observable it is in Others: how much more
discernable in our Selves. Honor and Reputation, etc. how uncertainly
preserved, and how easily blasted. p. 21 III. Of the Uncertainty of Living to
the Period of another Year. The Vanity of this Life: The Swiftness of Time, and
how to be improved. p. 28 IV. Of the seeming Difference, between so many Years
Past, and the same number of Years to come. p. 34 V. The little Portion of our
Time on Earth considered, by a Computation of the Life of Man, from the number
of Years and Hours. p. 36 VI. Of the Redemption of Time, how precious and
valuable a Treasure it is, and will be thought to be, when it is too late. p. 40
VII. Of the Ordinances of Heaven, Day and Night, Summer and Winter, Seed Time
and Harvest; their order and succession established by God, is the effect of
Infinite Wisdom and Goodness. What they may teach us. p. 45 VIII. Of Evils to
be expected in this Year; the Wisdom and Mercy of God, in concealing from us
the knowledge of future Events. p. 50 IX. The supposition of dying this Year,
should be improved: the consequence of redeeming Time, and providing for
Eternity farther pressed. The Folly of Elder Persons is condemned and checked from
the Example of Children. It Is advisable to familiarize the Thoughts of Death,
and to imagine beforehand what Apprehensions of things we shall then have. p.
54 X. The Brevity of Life considered as the fruit of Sin. There are but three
ways of leaving this World, as Abel, Adam, or Enoch. A diligent improvement of
Time farther pressed: and the neglect of it bewailed. p. 59 XI. Of the
Expectation of Another Life. The Vanity and Misery of Man in his Best Estate,
if there be none. The satisfactory removal of that supposition by the Thoughts
of God, and of Eternal Felicity in his Blessed Presence. p. 63. XII. The
consideration of the Death of others, especially of Relations, Friends, and
Acquaintance, how to be improved. What instructions we may learn by the fight
of a dead Carcass, or a Deaths-Head, and the usual Motto on it, and what by the
death of Holy Persons, to quicken our desires to be as they. p. 70 XIII. What
Influence the consideration of Eternity would have upon our Hearts and Lives,
if soundly believed and considered. Especially if the supposition of Dying this
Year be annexed to it. p. 77 XIV. How a good Man may improve and encourage
himself under the Supposition of dying this Year, even in the most uneasy, and
undesirable Circumstances. p. 82 XV. Of dying in a Foreign Country, and of
dying Young. Considerations proper to Reconcile the Mind to both. p. 89 XVI.
The contemplation of our approaching Change may assist us to mortify the Lusts
of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and Pride of Life; to cure Ambition, and
promote Contentment. p. 96 XVII. The same Argument considered farther as
disswasive from Worldliness, and Earthly mindedness: and as proper to confute
the vanity of long Projects, and great Designs for this World. p. 100 XVIII.
The consideration of the certain near Approach of an Everlasting State
amplified, and pressed, to enforce an Holy Life. p. 104 XIX. The Punishments of
the Damned considered, as Intolerable, and Everlasting and as unquestionably
Certain: What the Reflection upon Hell Torments, may and ought to teach us. p.
112 XX. The Eternal Blessedness of HEAVEN considered, as the Perfection of
Holiness, to quicken our desires and endeavors after greater Meetness to
possess it. p. 125 XXI. A devout Meditation upon the 73. Psalm 25. Whom have I
in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee. p.
140 XXII. The Glorious Appearance of Christ to Judgment considered as Certain:
The Terror, and Astonishment, Confusion, and Despair of Wicked Jews and
Christians, to behold their Judge: and bear his condemning Sentence to
EVERLASTING Destruction. p. 149 XXIII. Meditations of the Glory of Christ in
his Glorified Saints, and of the thankful Admiration of Believers when He shall
come again from Heaven, which shall be continued to all Eternity. p. 159 XXIV.
Concerning the Examination of a Man's Heart and Life: the Reasonableness,
Advantages, and Necessity of it. Some Direction and Advice concerning the Time
and Manner. That we may know in what Preparedness we are for ETERNITY. p. 171
XXV. How Christans ought to examine their Decays of Grace and Piety. The
greatness of their Sin, and of their Loss under such a Declension: God's
Displeasure, and departure from them, considered, to awaken endeavors of
Recovery. In what manner the Faith of Adherence may be acted by one, who has
no Assurance. p. 183 XXVI. Confession of Sin, Humiliation, and Repentance must
follow upon Self-Examination. Advice concerning Repentance of some particular
Backsliding. The great Perplexity and Distress of a Penitent Sinner
represented, as a Caution against returning to Folly. p. 196 XXVII. The
necessity of Christian Resolution to Upright, Persevering Obedience; how full
and extensive it ought to be, and yet humble; by what means we may be assisted
to perform that which we resolve. p. 208 XXVIII. The Import, and Obligation of
our Baptismal Covenant. The renewal of it by a solemn Dedication of our selves
to God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, exemplifyed and recommended. p. 217
XXIX. Practical and consolatory Reflections on the preceding Self-dedication,
or Covenant with God. p. 224 XXX. Thanksgiving to God for his Innumerable
Benefits and Mercies, particularly in the Year Past: with some Direction and
Advice concerning it. p. 234
THE Introduction. From what Time the Jews reckoned the Beginning of their
Year: of the difference between their Sacred and Civil Account. The Feast of
Trumpets on the first day of the Year, 'its Institution, Nature, and Design:
the Traditions and Customs of the Jews respecting that Day.
UPon the deliverance of the Jews out of Egypt, the first month which began
with the new Moon next to the vernal Equinox, was to be accounted Exodus 12.1.
the beginning of Months; it answers to the latter end of our March, and the
Beginning of April; and is sometimes called Nisan, and sometimes Abib. It was
ordinarily after that Deliverance, reckoned the First month of the year, in
their Sacred or Ecclesiastical Account. Therefore the Passover kept in this
month, is said to be observed in the first month: and the Feast of Purim, which
was kept in our February, is said to be in the last month, that is, of the
Sacred year. A Period so remarkable and extraordinary, as that was to the Jews,
deserved very well to be particularly remembered and taken notice of: and might
justly be accounted the First, or chiefest of their months. And by comparing
Exodus 12.41. with Gal. 3.17. it may be concluded that Abraham received the
Promise, on the fifteenth day of this month: and it is computed that about the
same time of the year Isaac was born; and the Tabernacle afterward erected in
the wilderness.

As the Redemption of Israel, from their Bondage in Egypt, was but a Type of a
more glorious one be the Messiah, he was pleased to suffer Death in this John.
18.28.
Month. According to this Computation, the Month Tisri, (which began with the
first new Moon next to the Autumnal Equinox) is often called the Seventh Month:
but was not so accounted before the Deliverance of Israel out of Egypt. As to
Civil and Political Affairs, it was for the most part reckoned the First Month
of the year. on this Account, this Month Heidegeri Hist. Patriarch. Tom. 1,
diss. 12. 22. de Anno Patriarcharum
tisri (which answers to part of our September, and part of October) on the
Fifteenth day of the Month was the Feast of Tabernacles, when the Exodus 23.15,
16. See Ger. I. Vossii Isag. Ckronol dissert. 23 caliger de Emend. Temp.
Lydiat. de variis Annorum formis. Seldom de Anno Cirili vet. Jud. Joel 2.23. 1
Kings 8, 2 Lightfoot Horae. in Math. Cap. 2. v. 1.
Fruits of the Earth were gathered in, and is said to be in the End of the
year. Much has been said by many Learned Men for the date of the Worlds
Creation, and the Beginning of the year, from the Vernal Equinox or the Spring;
and the Egyptians are alleged as keeping the great Festival of Aries, or of
the New Year, when the Sun enters into Aries. But however uncertain that be,
and how difficult to determine it, yet in Autum is Computed by the Jews, the
Creation of the World, the Birth of the first Patriarchs, the Reparation of the
Tables of the Law, the Dedication of the Temple, the Three Great Solemn Feasts
of the Beginning of the Year, and other Remarkable Passages. As many Religious
assemblies, and Solemn Feasts were appointed to the Jews in this Month Tisri,
as in all the year besides.

That the Birth and Baptism of our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ should be at
this time of the Feast of Tabernacles, is as Considerable, as that his Passion
should be about the time of the Jewish Passover. He was Sacrificed for us at
that time, when by God's appointment the Pascal Lamb was to be offered as his
Type: And at the Feast of Tabernacles he came to pitch his Tent in our nature,
to John. 1.14.
tabernacle in our Flesh, and dwell among us. The Scepter was so far gone from
Judah that the Jews were compelled by a foreign Power, instead of observing the
feast of the Tabernacles at Jerusalem, every one to repair to his own City to
be taxed, as the Emperor Augustus had commanded, (and it is not very likely he
would appoint that in the depth of Winter, the time of our Christmas) and now
was the Season for Shilo to appear.

The Eighty first Psalm, composed by Asaph for the first day of this Month, or
the feast of Dr. Hammond in loc. Godeau univer. Hist. de l Eglise. Tom. 4. c.
1.. 6. Hospinian. de Fest. Judaic
Trumpets, is supposed to have been in Remembrance of that Deliverance out of
Egypt: the Sounding of Trumpets being a token of Liberty. This Feast of
Trumpets on the First Day of the New Year, according to their Civil Account, is
thus commanded, Levit. 23.24. Numb. 29.1. and 10. cap 10. that it should be, a
Sabbath, and a Memorial of blowing of Trumpets, an holy Convocation, etc. Some
think it is called a Memorial of Trumpets to preserve the memory of Isaac's
Deliverance, by the substitution of a Ram to be sacrificed in his stead; to
this purpose it may be alleged that it is sometimes called by the Jews, the
Binding of Isaac: which they suppose to have been in the same day of the year.
By others termed Festum Cornu, the Feast of the Horn. But it is more probable,
that this name was not given, with any respect to Isaac, but on the account of
that kind of Trumpets, which were then sounded, viz. such as were made of
sheeps or rams horns. Others think it to have been Appointed as a grateful
remembrance of former victories which God had afforded them. Particularly that
at Jerico, where was the first opposition they met with in their passage to
Canaan, and the walls of the City fell down at the Sound of such Horn-Trumpets;
Josh. 6.13, 20. But the most likely account of it is this: That it was intended
to solemnize the Beginning of the New Year, to mind them of the Beginning of
the World, and to excite their thankfulness for the Fruits and Blessings, and
Benefits of the year preceding. The extraordinary Blowing of Trumpets by the
Priests at this time, (in all their Cities, as well as at Jerusalem, where two
Silver Lightfoot's Temple Service, chap. 16. 5.
Trumpets were also used at the Temple, as well as these of Horn, and the
Levites sung the 81 Psalm) might serve both to stir up the People to bless God
for the Favors of the Year past, acknowledging his Goodness in preserving them
to the beginning of another; and withal excite them to pray for his Protection
and Blessing, for the New Year, on which they now entered.

Maimonides, the famous Jewish Rabbin, thinks the sounding of Trumpets at this
time was designed to signify some such Exhortation as this Canones de
Poenitent. cap. 3. can. 6.
, Arise, O ye sleepers, out of your sleep, and you that slumber awake out of
your slumbering. Search your works, and turn by Repentance. Remember your
Creator, you that have forgotten the Truth, and have exchanged it for the
Vanities of the World; and have all your Lives wandered after Vanity, which will
not profit or deliver you. Consider your Souls, consider your Ways, and Works,
and let every one of you forsake his evil way, and his thoughts that are not
good.

Some have imagined a typical Representation of the two Covenants in this
Feast. The Old Covenant figured by the Year passed; and the Covenant of Grace,
or the Gospel state by the New Year then begun; and that by the sound of
Trumpets was prefigured the future Preaching of the Gospel, according to that
of the Apostle, Their sound went forth unto all the Earth, and their words unto
the end of the World; and so the Feast of Trumpets is abrogated by the
Preaching of the Gospel, if that were typically signified by it. The
publication of the Gospel is the joyful sound, Psalm 89.15. And Ministers are
to lift up their Voice like a Trumpet, Isaiah 58.1. the discharge of their
Office as Watchmen, is expressed by setting the Trumpet to their mouth, Hos. 8.1.
Ezekiel. 33. When the Jews shall be converted to the Faith of Christ, it is said,
in that day the great Trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come, who were
ready to perish, Isaiah 27. ult. 'Twas the Office of the Priests to sound these
Trumpets, Numb. 10.8. The public Dispensation of the Gospel is committed to
Ministers, set apart for that Work, as the Sons of Aaron for theirs. We read
but of two Trumpets at first, for Eleazar and Ishamar, the two Sons of Aaron,
Numb. 3.4. But David added many musical Instruments: And in Solomon's time, at
the dedication of the Temple, we read of one hundred and twenty Priests who
sounded with Trumpets, 2 Timothy 5.12. Without supposing any Type here, in a
strict and proper sense; we may yet farther consider the Parallel, and observe,
how the Joy and Gratitude of these Trumpets did excite, is exceeded by that
greater rejoicing, promised and foretold by the Prophets, when the glad tidings
of the Gospel of Salvation by the Messiah should be published to the World, Isa.
54.1. Luke 2.11. Gal. 4.27. which has been in part accomplished: And will be
more complete, in that Kingdom of Peace and Purity, which Christ will establish
upon Earth, toward the end of the World: And shall be finally perfected at the
end of Time; when Days and Years, and Time (thus measured) shall be no more.
When the Messiah our B. Savior, having finished his mediatory undertaking, as
to what concerns Earth, shall come again from Heaven, with the Trump of God, to
raise the Dead, and summon all the World to their final Judgment. Then shall he
deliver up the Kingdom to his Father: And the Faithful enter into the Joy of
their Lord, and be for ever with him.

There is a Tradition among the Jews mentioned by Maimonides Canones de Poenit.
chapter 3. can. 5.
, that on the first day of the New Year, God enters into Judgment for the Sins
of the Year and Life past. That every ones Faults are weighed against his good
Works. He that is found Righteous is sealed unto Life: And he that is found
Wicked is sealed unto Death.

And it is a general Custom that has obtained among the Jews, for the ten first
days of the New Year, to rise out of their Beds in the Night, and to continue
in their Synagogues praying and worshipping until break of day. The
superstitious and ridiculous Ceremonies of the Vid. Ceremones and Cout. parmi
les Iuifs d'aujourdhuy, par. 2. c. 53
modern Jews on this Day, I shall not repeat. However vain and groundless,
superstitious, and absurd many of their Customs, and Practices are on this Day:
Yet this blind Devotion of the Jews may justly shame and condemn the Christians
of our Age; Who commonly spend the Beginnings of every Year worse than any
other parts of them; and instead of any solemn Retirement for Prayer and
Meditation, which might assist them to number their Days, and prepare for
Eternity; (instead, I say, of such seasonable Exercises) how do vain and
hurtful Sports and Pastimes, or trifling and unedifying mirth, and fruitless
conversations consume the greatest part of the Days, (and Nights too) of the
beginning of the Year! And thus when the first fruits of the Year are offered
up to Sin and Vanity, it is no wonder if the following parts of it are employed
to no better purpose; without any due concern for the Soul, and an Everlasting
State.

To endeavor some Remedy to those disorders, and give some Assistance to them
who desire seriously to make Religion their Principal Business, is the end of
publishing these Reflections. I most heartily beseech the God of all Grace to
influence by his Holy Spirit, the Conscience of every Reader, that some such
effect may be attained. Having found the Practice recommended, to be of some
use to my self, and my own Heart warmed in composing the substance of these
Papers, (though without any Intention at that Time of exposing them to the World)
it is not unreasonable to hope, That what has been beneficial to one, may be
helpful to another. It cannot certainly be unadviseable, or improper to Begin
the Year with God, with whom we should begin every Day. It Is decorous and
becoming, to Dedicate our selves to Him, in a more solemn manner than ordinary,
at such a Time: Thankfully to acknowledge the Favors and Blessings we have
particularly received the Year Past: And to recollect the Sins we have been
guilty of: to aggravate them with Humility, Contrition, and deep Remorse: to
renew our Covenant with God: to repeat and fortify our Resolutions of living
better; imploring his Grace to assist us in it: to reflect seriously on the
Mutability, Frailty and Brevity of our present Life: to consider the Swiftness,
Uncertainty, Irrecoverableness, and consequently Value of our Time: to look
forward to a Blessed, or Miserable Eternity, one of which we must share in; and
to confirm our Faith in the Certainty thereof, and consider our near Approach
to such an unchangeable State: to think what Improvement we should make at the
Death of others, especially of Relations, and Friends, who have lately been
called home: To make the Supposition in good earnest, that we may follow them
this Year, and dye before another New Years-Day; to imprint such a Thought on
our Hearts, and the Inferences that may naturally be deduced from it: to beg of
God, to enable us to Redeem our Time, and discharge the Duty of our particular
places; and prepare us for all the Events of the following Year; and so
effectually Teach us to number our days, that we may apply our Hearts unto true
Wisdom; lest we be surprised by an Unexpected Death before the period of
another Year. And lastly, to pray for our Relations and Friends, Families and
Neighbors, and our Enemies too; and plead with God on the behalf of Sion, and
the afflicted and deformed state of the Protestant Churches. To some of these,
and the like Purposes, I hope what is here offered, may be subservient; if
considered with Seriousness and Application, after humble Invocation of the
Blessing of God, and the aids of his Spirit; composing our Minds and Thoughts,
as in his most awful and holy Presence.

I have only this to request: That if any shall find any real Benefit in this
kind; he would so far requite my charitable Assistance of him, that when his
Heart is most serious, his Spirit most composed and devout, and his Affections
most vigorous and lively, he would not forget, to put up one Prayer to Heaven
for me, for Greater Holiness and Abilities to Honor God, and persevering
Faithfulness to his Truth and Interest, what ever Temptations to desert it may
be employed by the World, the Flesh and the Devil: the three Great Enemies of
thine and my Salvation.

DEVOUT REFLECTIONS ON TIME AND ETERNITY, This World and the Next.
I. Of the changeable State, and short Duration of Earthly Things; especially
of Man, how little is is considered and believed: how necessary it should be.
WHen I consider that yesterday was the conclusion of the last year, and that I
now am entered on another; it is seasonable to reflect on the mutable Condition,
and short Duration of all Thing in this World, which are measured by Time. That
as they have their Beginning, so they have their End: And that the distance, or
space of Time between the one and the other is very little. Let me not then, O
my Soul! Rejoice and please my self too much in New Enjoyments, remembering a
Change may be at hand, and the End is certain.

Many who were Rich and Flourishing the last year, may be reduced to Poverty
and deep distress, before the end of this: who are now in a capacity to relieve
others, within a few months, or a shorter space, may be objects of other Men's
charity. The thing which has been, is that which may be; and that which has
been seen in one year, may happen in another; so easily, so quickly may a
Change be made! Riches may unexpectedly change their Owners, and borrow wings
of a thousand Accidents, wherewith to fly to Heaven for a new Disposal. 1 Cor.
7.29.
They therefore who possess, should be as if they possessed not; for the
Fashion of this world passes away. Innumerable casualties may effect that
change, which no human Art or Skill can possibly foresee or hinder. Afflictive
unexpected evils attend us every where: we cannot promise our selves
Tranquillity for a Day, much less one Year to come. They lay in wait for us on
every side, enter at every crevice, and commonly overtake us, when we are least
apprehensive of their approach. Job 9.25.
Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of Trouble: He comes up
as a flower, and is cut down: flees as a shadow and continues not. What then
are Riches, Beauty, Strength, and Honor, the accidents of this Substance, which
is it self but a Shadow! How false is the Hope of Man, and how frail is all his
glory! One day can make an end of all his Riches and Honors. And yet what
solicitude, care and labor, to get what we desire of these things (though
often we do not need 'em) and then to keep what we have gotten, and then to
increase it, and then to defend it, and at last to enjoy it, and in a moment it
is snatched from us, or we from it. His Life is but a vapor, on which they all
depend; then how much less are they? To how speedy an alteration are they
subject! What numberless Instances of this does one years experience furnish!
What sadning Disappointments and unexpected Calamities have befallen many since
this Day Twelvemonth! and multitudes who are now at ease, and think their
mountains too strong to be removed, shall meet with sharper Trials before the
end of this year. Alas! how few consider or believe it, till they find it so?
All men should count upon trouble and disappointment, suffering and sorrow in
this world; and he that has the least share, is reckoned the most prosperous
man; and yet he knows not how soon his Portion may be doubled. We reckon our
Joys by the absence of some degrees of Sorrow and Calamity that others meet
with; and before the end of this year, our condition may be as disconsolate as
theirs. O my Soul! though I know this to be true; though I cannot, I dare not
deny it; yet how difficult is it to conquer the Love of this World, and of this
Body, to that degree I ought! to undervalue the interest of a short, a mutable,
uncertain and troublesome Life, in comparison of the permanent possession of an
everlasting Good! Though I know that what is earthly and temporal must needs be
thus changeable and fading; and that it is as true of Man himself as of any
thing under the Sun; yet how do I forget what Man is! not only mutable in his
State, his Body, and his Life, but in his Mind too, so as to love and hate, to
choose and neglect, to delight in, and abhor, such things at one time as he did
not before. He does not pass the same Judgment, nor retain the same Affections
at one time as at another. How do I live, as if all this were as certainly
false, as it is unquestionably true? admire, love, fear, trust in Man, as if he
were the direct Contrary to what he is, and seek for Immortality upon Earth,
and act as if I were assured of it, and were not liable to any Change; though I
acknowledge and know the contrary. Though the last years Experience, and the
observation of every day does convince me of it; though all History, and all
the Records of the Grave attest it; though all Mankind in every Age have found
it so; though it be a manifest notorious Truth, legible in the various changes
and calamities, but especially in the dust and ashes of all who have lived
before us (our Graves being often made of our Predecessors Dust, and the Earth
we bury in having once been living) yet how little is it believed, how seldom
considered! The Confirmation of it which one year gives us, has little
influence on our hearts or lives, with respect to the next. We ought therefore
to accustom our selves to these thoughts, before such changes happen, to which
our Final change shall ever long succeed. They will be less efficacious, if
never admitted till our minds are oppressed and feebled by the weight of
Affliction. We shall then want that vigor of Reason which should cooperate
with the Remedy; and which, if used beforehand, would help to support and stay
our minds under all subsequent Revolutions. For those Considerations may be
able to fix and stay our minds under Changes, that may not be sufficient to
recover and raise our Spirits after they are dejected and fallen.

II. Of the Change in Men's Inclinations, Opinions, and Actions which one year
shows; How observable it is in Others: how much more discernible in our Selves.
Honor and Reputation, etc. how uncertainly preserved, and how easily blasted.
WHat a discovery does one Year make of the Mutability of Man, not only of his
outward Condition, but of the Man himself, his Temper, his Practice, his
Inclinations, his Aversions, etc. He abides not at one stay; every breath of
wind turns him to another shape. We despise to day, that which we admired
yesterday; and to morrow hate the object of our present love. We begin
Friendships, and cancel them on slight occasions; And a mortal Enmity often
succeeds to a tender Affection: The very Persons who are in one year our
darling Friends, and possibly deserved to be so, may yet be open Enemies the
next, and seek our Ruin. Lord! what is Man? How deceitful and mutable the
Heart of Man! We know not what other Men are, or will prove to be till a trial;
and we are equally ignorant concerning our selves till an hour of Temptation.
How patiently do we think we could bear Afflictions till we feel them! how
partial and mistaken a Judgment do we make of our Wisdom and Strength in
reference to the future! we counsel others to Submission and Resignation in the
most difficult trials, and wonder they complain so loud; when we our selves
despond and sink under half their Burden; and send up our more impatient
murmurs to Heaven, when God thinks fit to prove us by a lighter Stroke. We
censure and condemn Others, who are in an higher Station, and are called to
more difficult work than we; when by a little Advancement, and the like
Temptations, we discover that we are as bad as they. They who were reputed
Humble, Temperate and Religious, when they have been Exalted higher, become
proud sensual, and ungodly. Had some been told a Twelve month since, what now
they are, and speak, and act, they would have made Hazael's Answer, Am I a Dog,
that I should do this? A change in the public Affairs of the State, and by
that means of particular Interests, or some Alteration of our own private
Circumstances (calling us to new Duties, and exposing us to new Temptations)
discovers us more to our selves, and to other Men, than was expected, and
proves us to be very different from what we appeared to be. Such a change, for
Instance, as from Poverty to Riches, from Sickness to Health, from Obscurity to
Honor, from Privacy to a Public charge, etc. or on the contrary. Men cannot
bear the weight of Temporal Happiness, but Riches and Honors make us to be
Other Men, than before we seemed to be. How weak a thing is Man! that cannot
carry his own Wishes, without falling under them: That cannot prosper in his
designs, without being changed in the Temper of his mind, upon every success.
So true is it that Man in Honor is like the Beast that perishes; And changed
ordinarily for the worse, as to serious Religion. May we not fear, that some,
who a year since dared not live a day in the neglect of Closet and Family
Devotion, do now omit it, for many Days and Weeks together? And that some, who
once were careful to improve the whole Sabbath to religious purposes, now place
the whole of their Religion in attending the public Worship, and think it
enough, not for that Day only, but for the whole Week. Under the Afflicting
hand of God, or some Apprehensions of an approaching change, or sense of guilt
upon great Transgressions, the Convictions of Sin are lively, Conscience is
sensible and awake, Affections warm, Resolutions strong, etc. But alas! how
soon does the case alter! our Spirits cool, our Zeal abates, our good Purposes
untwist and die, and come to nothing. By degrees we return to Folly, and boldly
venture on that Sin, we lately trembled at. Through the want of continued smart
Afflictions, or of a serious awaking Ministry, and friendly faithful
Admonition; or through the Temptations of vain Company, and the remaining power
of fleshly Lusts. So that we falsify our most sacred Promises and Resolutions,
violate our holy Vows, cancel the bonds of God upon us, suffer the Devil to
re-enter, and prevail again, to take possession of our hearts, and yield our
selves an easy prey to his Temptations, till our latter end be worse than our
Beginning. Oh what a change does one year let us see! in Persons as well as
things! in our selves as well as other Men! And as it is with Man himself, so
with every thing that he Values himself upon, or for which he is esteemed by
others; and even his Esteem and Reputation is also changeable and uncertain.
Not to Instance in Riches, but in what is nobler, Learning, and the
Improvements of the Mind by study; how soon may the violence of a Disease
disturb or stupifie the Brain to that degree, as shall reduce the greatest
Scholar to the pitied Condition of a Fool or Bedlam? And where is his
Reputation and Renown, in such a Case? But much less than that will blast the
fairest Reputation, with the far greatest part of the world: It may be lost by
unwary mistakes, by false reports, by envy and Malice, by the subtle hatred of
Enemies, or by the weakness and credulity of Friends, (who will listen to every
Backbiters story) or by one or two Indiscretions of the man himself; and no man
can be certain to secure his Reputation whilst he lives; much less after he is
dead. Who can content all men, however he live? And who is well spoken of by
all when he is dead? Who is so esteemed, that some do not despise him? The
wisest Conduct cannot hinder but some will judge hardly and a miss.

How vain and faulty is an Ambition to be talked of afater we are dead, which
will be but by very few, and that very differently, and but for a little while.
There is no Remembrance of former things, neither shall there be of things to
come, with those that shall come after, Eccles. 1.11. For how little a while do
the proudest Monuments last, that are set over the rotten Flesh and Bones of
many, to preserve their Memory? God has promised, it is true, that the
Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembranc; but it must be understood so
far only as the frame and state of this World, and the Revolutions and
Vicissitudes of Time will permit. But what Good can it do us, farther than the
Interest of Gods Glory, and the Good of others is concerned in it? The Blessed
will not need it, and the Damned have no advantage by it. And no Endeavors can
be certain of Success: For People will talk of us as they please; and their
Opinions very often change from one Extreme to the other. But he who has the
loudest Fame, shall only be talked of a little longer than his Neighbors; and
that by a few dying Men, that must themselves be ere long forgotten. And how
small a part of the inhabited World, is acquainted so much as with the Name of
the greatest men in Europe? And how different and contrary are men's Opinions
and Discourses of them, where they are known and talked of? And how many holy
excellent Persons are buried in Oblivion, or misrepresented as unworthy to
live on Earth, whose Names will be found in the Book of Life? Our Life is yet
as mutable and uncertain as any of theirs. The Time is hastening when we shall
be too old to Live, but at any time we are old enough to Die. Our Breath is in
our Nostrils, and though there be room enough for it to go out, we have no
assurance that we shall have power to draw it in again.

III. Of the Uncertainty of Living to the Period of another Year. The Vanity of
this Life: The Swiftness of Time, and how to be improved.
I Now begin another Year: But what Assurance have I to outlive it? I cannot
say how soon my Sovereign Judge may call me hence, and summon me to appear
before his Righteous Bar. O let me not defer my necessary Preparation for
Death, which may be nearer than I imagine! Let me mind the Great things first,
which are of absolute necessity to be done, some time or other before I dye.
This perishing Body which I have pampered and indulged, at the expense of so
much Cost and Time, may be putrefying in a silent Grave, before half this Year
be past. Lord! bless this thought, to awaken my diligent endeavors to secure
the Blessedness of Eternity! to mortify the Desire of Great things for my
self, in future Years, by the considered possibility of dying before the end of
this! Let me look into the Graves of others, and consider that this may quickly
happen to me, and must ere long be my own case: Let me think what this Body
will shortly be, when it has been six or eight days separated from my Soul;
how vile? how loathsome? that I may despise the Beauty, and be dead to the
Pleasures of the Body, which so easily, so suddenly, so strangely may be
changed. For no Glass is more brittle, no Bubble more vanishing, no Ice more
dissolving, no Flower more fading, no Shadow less substantial, no Sleep or
Dream more deceiving, no Sound more transient, nothing more vain and more
uncertain than Life, on which all other things in this World depend. My days
are as nothing, says Job, though they lasted above two Ages. There is hardly
any thing very Frail and Fading, Mutable and Uncertain, but the Spirit of God
in Scripture sets forth the Vanity of Life by; as if he would teach us by it,
from the Light of every perishing Object, which our Eyes behold, to reflect on
our own Mortality. We sleep every Night, in the outer Chambers of Death: And in
some Diseases Sleep, which is the image and Picture of Death, is taken away, to
give place to the Original, and make way for death. And every year, every week,
every day are hastening to our final Change; which may overtake us ere we are
aware. Every day we lose some part of our Lives; in our very growth from
Infancy to Manhood, our Life decreases and grows less. Every Pulse and Breath
does tell us we are hastening to the End of Time, and calls upon us to dispatch
our Work. Every Word we speak, is formed of that Breath whereby we live; and we
may not live to pronounce another Sentence, but the Lamp of Life may be
extinguished and blown out by a sudden Blast. Every thing we do, carries away
some Sands of our little Glass of Time; and how little may remain? Or how soon
may the Glass be broke? Our Souls are in our Bodies, as a little Air enclosed
in a thin Bubble; how easily is that broken, and where are we? How many who are
now alive, in health and vigor, who deliberate on their Meat and Drink, and
are curious of Air and Exercise, to maintain themselves in Health, and please
themselves with the Dream of Years to come, shall never see another
New-years-day? It may be not another month, or week or morrow? Many have
promised themselves great things on the morrow, but dyed before Night: Let me
not say, I shall not dye this Day, when I may this Hour; and it is but once for
all, there is no amending an ill Death, by another Trial. When I lie down to
sleep, I hope to rise stronger and fresher, and fitter for work; but I know
withal, I may rise no more. And may not my Name be on the Roll of those who
shall next be called, at least some time this Year? Let me not then neglect or
foolishly delay my Principal Business, to provide against a Change, which is
inevitable, but the time of it altogether doubtful. Ought not my first and
chiefest Care be employed to make my Peace with God, (He alone can be my
Happiness; to his final Judgment I am hastening: His Favor alone can give me
support and Joy in a dying Hour: To his Mercy I must trust, when I leave this
World, and can have no advantage more by any thing in it:) that he may
mercifully receive my Soul at Death and be my Everlasting Portion? Do I know my
Life is thus vain and transient, and shall I not seriously improve it to such a
Purpose? Shall these Thoughts leave no Impression upon me? Do I breath
continually in this Element of Vanity, and yet forget where I am, and remain
insensible of so near a Change? Shall these Thoughts pass away as a vanishing
Cloud, and distill no softening drops on my Soul? Shall the Image of Death,
which meets me every where, be only like an appearing Ghost or Phantasm, that
startles and scares a little, but is presently gone, and no more considered? O!
let me now remember to make God my Friend, and secure an interest in his
Eternal Mercy, while the Day lasts; yea, while my Reason and Understanding are
free, and not disturbed and clouded by Fear and Pain, and the Disorders of the
Body, as commonly they are in Sickness, if God should vouchsafe me that
Warning, which yet I may not promise my self to have, for I may be cut off by a
Sudden Stroke, before the end of this Year, I now begin.

And how great and necessary a Work have I to do in so short and so uncertain a
Portion of Time? endless joy or Misery will be the consequence of spending this
present Time. My ignorant Soul must be instructed, my carnal Heart renewed,
many false Opinions must be unlearnt, and sinful Customs changed, and powerful
Lusts mortified, and strong Temptations overcome, and many Graces to be
obtained, exercised, strengthened and preserved, to please and serve, and
gratify an Holy Omnipresent God, my Sovereign; and express the Thankfulness of
my Heart and Life to Christ my Savior; and is all this nothing? Is not all my
little hasty Time too little for such a Work? to prepare for a safe and
comfortable Death in order to a blessed Eternity?

IV. Of the seeming Difference, between so many Years Past, and the same number
of Years to come.
WHen I look back on the preceding Years of my Life, how easily can I grasp
them all at once? they are even as Yesterday when it is past. But so many Years
to come has something great and vast, which fills my Thoughts, and affects my
Mind, after another manner. Such is the difference between past Enjoyments, and
the Expectation of future. Let me suppose the same term and duration of Years,
and yet how different are my Apprehensions of what is past, and of what is yet
to come! Things past by a remembrance of some remarkable Passages, when they
happened, seem to be present with me: But not knowing what may happen in the
same number of Years to come, I have nothing whereon to six my Thoughts. Or the
Reason of this Difference may rather be, that Men in this degenerate and
necessitous State (with unsatisfied Desires reaching after Happiness, and
sensible nothing present can afford it, and knowing by Experience that nothing
past could have done it, (are eagerly desirous of Felicity; and because we know
not but what is to come may procure it, we hope it will; which makes the Time
seem long by reason of our Expectation and Desire of Good. Whereas the
foresight of Evil, and the Expectation of that, some years hence, makes the
Time rather seem short and near at hand: So many years to come, in the
expectation and desire of Good, are long and tedious; such Hope deferred makes
the Heart sick; even though it is of that sort as must needs fail our
expectations. Prepare me, Lord! for what thine unerring Counsel shall please to
order, as to the remainder of my time on Earth; and suffer me not to count upon
a great number of Years to come, since this, for ought I know, may be my last;
neither let me expect Rest and Happiness in this World, which nothing Temporal
can afford. This is not the state or season, wherein, by any promise of God, I
am encouraged to hope it. And if fifty or threescore years to come, be thought
so great a matter, and really is so, as to our stay on earth; Oh what
apprehensions ought I to admit concerning an endless, everlasting State!
especially being as certain of the latter, after Death, as I am uncertain about
the former; whether so many Years be yet to come before my Death. Let me not
herereafter be so preposterous in any Solicitude, Cares and Fears, as to be
anxious for to Morrow, and yet be thoughtless of Eternity.

V. The little Portion of our Time on Earth considered, by a Computation of the
Life of Man, from the number of Years and Hours.
THink, O my Soul! how short is that Life at longest, made up of Years and
Months, and Days; such little parts, and yet in number few. Well therefore may
it be expressed, as I find in Holy Writ by Years of number, That is, such as may
soon be numbered. When a few Years are come, says Job 16.22, 12. Ezekiel. 16. Isa.
10.19.
, (or the Years of number, as in the Original) I shall go the way, whence I
shall not return. By the years of an Hireling, which were not above three, Is.
16.14. We usually compute Threescore and ten Years, to the Life of Man: Let me
suppose four score. The Bed with most imploys one half; and hardly one in
thirty does reach the Age of Seventy Years. And Winter-Evening Conference,
Conf. 1.
they who live to such an Age, do yet complain how soon it is done. Ignorant
Childhood and heedless Youth, and infirm old Age, may be supposed to take up a
third part of that Time. In either of them very little of the great Ends of
Life are answered. We ordinarily begin to reckon our Lives from our Birth;
whereas for a good while after we know not whether we are alive or no, but are
beholding to others to make the account for us. When we first come to the
steady use of Reason, or what we call the Years of Discretion; how few are
there but from the Prejudices of Education, from the Corruption of Human
Nature, from the want of Experience, from the Infection of bad Company, how
few, I say, but spend their younger Years in those things, which afterward
they are ashamed of, when Experience has taught them the Wisdom of Men? How
great a part of our remaining Time is taken up in the Necessities of Nature
about Food and Raiment, and in lawful Cares, to support the Body? and how much
more than needs, in pampering, dressing and adorning it? Out of the small
remainder, how much is employed in the concerns of a Family and near Relations,
in particular Callings, in necessary Civil Business, and in getting, keeping or
improving an Estate? Besides all the Time that is spent in Recreations, Visits,
unprofitable Discourse, impertinent Thoughts, Journeys, Sickness, and
innumerable other Occasions, some allowable, some unavoidable, and many
needless? After this, how little Time remains wherein to cultivate and improve
our Minds, by Languages, Arts and Sciences, or the knowledge of a Trade, etc.
How little then after all, may we say, is left for the matters of Religion? for
Devotion to God, and serious preparation for another World? Alas! how small a
number of Years make up the Life of Man! and how small a Portion of that is
employed about the Principal Business, for which we were born, and for which we
live? We divide Time into Past, Present and Future: But the Past is not now
ours; the Future is not yet, and the Present now is past, ere the sound be
pronounced. And yet this is all the Time allotted us, wherein to secure the
Blessedness of Eternity. How many Hours more of our little Time might be
improved than commonly are by the Best? In every Year there are 8775 Hours: If
we allow the greatest half for Sleep and necessary attendance on the Body, and
take but 4000 Hours for our Work and Business of consequence: How poor an
acconut can most Men give of all these 4000 Hours in every Year? not one hour
in seven, not one in ten, is ordinarily devoted to God, and the purposes of
Religion. Should it not affect us, seriously to consider this? especially if we
remember, at what an uncertainty we are, how small a number of Days and Hours
do yet remain. This Year, this Month, this Week, this Day or Hour may be my
last. What an unsuspected Accident or a sudden Disease may do, I know not: But
this I know, that there is scarce any thing that has not killed some Body; an
Hair, a Feather, a Vapor, a Breath has done it, and when the Apostle James
asks the Question, What is your Life? He answers, It is even a Vapor, that
appears a little while, and then vanishes away.

VI. Of the Redemption of Time, how precious and valuable a Treasure it is, and
will be thought to be, when it is too late.
IS the Life of Man so short and fleeting, our Days on Earth so few, and so
uncertain, how careful should I be to manage every Hour; endeavoring to match
the Swiftness of Time by my celerity and diligence to improve it? I can have no
Business of greater or of equal Moment to mind, than to secure the Happiness of
my Soul in another World. And shall I lavish my Time, and lose my Pains about
things unnecessary? What will all other Business signify in the end, if this
be neglected? Is there any Interest more weighty, that calls me from such
work? Is there any thing else that so well deserves my Time? That may be put
into the Scales, or weighed in a balance against this? Shall Eternity, which
comprehends all Time, have the least share of my Time allotted for its
concernments? How little a part of my Time has been hitherto employed in such
work! How reasonable, how necessary is it to redeem the little Inch of Time
that yet remains, but hastens to a Period? For as there is no Covenant to be
made with Death, so no Agreement for the Arrest and Stay of Time; it keeps its
pace whether I redeem and use it well or not. The greatest part of our Life is
designedly employed to avoid Death; we eat and drink, and sleep, and labor,
and rest, that we may not die; and yet even by these we hasten to Death. Every
Breath, every Pulse, every Word leaves one less of the number which God has
appointed me, and carries away some Sands of the Glass of Time; and yet how
little care is taken to employ it well? We seldom value it, till we can no
longer use it to any advantage; and though we know it can neither be retarded
in its motion, or recalled when past, yet of nothing are we more prodigal. Yea,
how many complain of it as a Burden, and know not what to do with their Time,
are exceedingly at a loss wherein to employ it, what to do to be rid of it? But
alas! how near is that Change, when they shall think nothing too dear to
purchase some few Grains of that Sand, which now seem too many, while they are
passing through their Hourglass? How sad will be the review of our lost and
ill-spent Time? How different an Opinion of its Value shall we have on a
Sickbed, or when our Time and Hope is gone? How many Weeks, and Days, and
Hours, O my Soul, have I trifled away in Sloth and Idleness, in foolish Mirth,
and hurtful Company, in vain Thoughts and impertinent Discourse, in excess of
Sleep, and needless Pastimes, Feastings, inordinate Care to adorn the Body, or
gratify the sensual Appetite? All that which is past is irrecoverable; and the
little remainder flies apace. How quickly will it be gone? How soon, how
suddenly may an unexpected Stroke of Death conclude it? And yet this is all the
opportunity I shall ever have to make my Peace with God, and prepare for the
everlasting World. Did we consider it as we ought, we should not foolishly
throw away so much of it in Trifles and things impertinent, or what is worse:
How much more might we redeem than commonly we do? To how much better purpose
might we husband it? How much more work might we do, were we never idle, or did
not loyter? We might walk far, did we not often stand still, or go out of our
way. We see it plainly by the great and excellent Effects of some few men's
Industry in every Age. Art has found mean to set Spies and Watches as it were
on the Sun, that he cannot look out, but they take hold of his Shadow, and
force it to tell how far he is gone that day; and yet while we are curious in
making Time give a just account of it self to us, how little do we consider the
account of our Time which we must shortly give to God? Oh that such a Thought
might effectually persuade me to redeem it! that I may not tarry till the end
of Time to know the worth of it! Let me not undervalue it, while it is given me
to be used, that I may not eternally regret my Folly, when Time shall be no
more.

God calls me to Diligence and Labor; the Work he calls me to is excellent,
and the Reward glorious; to know, and love, and serve, and obey him, in order
to eternal Life; and shall I yet be idle? Is this the Use and End of all my
Time? And do I know it and believe it? Do I indeed believe it, and yet delay
and loyter, and waste my precious Hours in vanity? Am I going into Eternity,
and entering into another World, and know that I must be in Heaven or Hell for
ever, and have I Time to throw away? Am I fit to die, and to appear before my
Judge, or am I not? Am I made meet for Heaven by pardoning Mercy, and
sanctifying Grace? Have I the Earnest of the Spirit to witness and assure me of
it? Is my Interest in the Promise of Eternal Life as firm, and my Evidence of
it as clear as it may be made? Am I not conscious to my self, that much of this
necessary Work is yet to be done? And shall such an unprepared Soul as mine be
careless and indifferent how I spend my Time?

VII. Of the Ordinances of Heaven, Day and Night, Summer and Winter, Seed Time
and Harvest; their order and succession established by God, is the effect of
Infinite Wisdom and Goodness. What they may teach us.
WHen I consider the beginning of another Year, I can hardly avoid reflecting
of its several parts, Summer and Winter, Spring and Fall, Day and Night, and
their alternate Turns. This calls me to observe and admire his Eternal Power
and Godhead, Wisdom and Truth who is the Great Author of this admirable
variety; Who has fixed the Earth whith his Foot, and hanged it on nothing. and
settled the Luminaries of Heaven for Excellent Ends: The Sun to Rule by day, and
the Moon by Night, thereby to distinguish Times and Seasons, to separate Day
and Night, Winter and Summer, and consult the convenience of Man and Beast by
their due succession. The Day is thine, the Night also is thine, thou make
Summer and Winter: How wonderful is their Order, Beauty and constant course,
that when the Sun withdraws, and the shadows of the Evening cover the Earth
with darkness, to conclude the Day; the Moon and Stars supply the place of the
absent Sun during the Night: and that tho they differ in length, yet gradually
lessen till they are both equal at the years end, and have made the same
Circuit. How excellent a work of God is that quick succession to one another?

The supposition of a perpetual night, is a dismal gloomy Thought. O what will
the Everlasting Darkness of the Infernal Prison be! The Sun by day enlightens
the Earth, directs our motion, guides our way, governs our Travail, assists
Conversation, awakens Industry, warms the Earth and Air, gives life, and vigor,
and fruitfulness to all things under the Sun, and makes the whole Inferior
Creation to rejoice. An Emblem of God's universal Goodness, who is kind to all
his Creatures. How admirable is its Luster! how glorious is its Light! how
loudly does it proclaim his Power and Wisdom! who made this, and the other
Lights of Heaven, his powerful Word, and preserves them hitherto by his daily
Providence. If God be now so glorious, contemplated in his works, considered in
the luster of the created Sun, viewed only through the Windows of Sense; how
much more glorious will he appear hereafter, when we shall see him face to
face, and nothing interpose btwixt us and his incomparable Light! If mine Eyes
dazzle to look upon the meridian Sun, in what inaccessible Light must he dwell,
who is the Father of Lights? If this lower World, the common receptacle of his
Friends and Enemies, have so much of his Glory vouchsafed them by the Heavenly
Bodies; O what a place will Heaven be, where shall be no Sun or Moon nor need
of any, but the Glory of God shall lighten it, and the Lamb be the Light
thereof? While I thus consider the Sun and the Day, I must not think the Night
is useless, which discovers another part of the Heavens, not discernible by
Day, viz. the Stars and Planets, refreshing the Earth, cooling the Air, giving
necessary Rest to the Creatures etc. their order, motions, aspects,
oppositions, influences, are all useful, and instructive. The agreeable mixture
of Light and Darkness, the regular succession of Day and Night within a few
hours are exceeding wonderful and advantageous. In other parts of the World,
where the Sun beams are more direct and its Heat excessive, God has made
amends by the length of the night, (under the Equinoctial Line it is always
Twelve hours) and in the more Northern parts, where the Influence of the Sun is
weaker, the days are proportionably longer. So good is God to all his
Creatures, in all parts of the world! As the Morning and Evening answer to the
day of Twenty four hours; so does Spring and Autumn to the Twelve Months of the
Year, that we may not pass immediately from one extreme to another; but
gradually be disposed for so great a change, as is between Summer and Winter,
and Winter and Summer. So merciful and gracious, and infinitely wise is God in
all his Works! so that we cannot say, one part of the Year is more necessary
than another. The winter is as useful for the good of the Universe, as the
summer: In this we are supplied with what is necessary to maintain us in that,
and the admirable situation of the Sun, (most probably) in the Center of the
World, seems much to contribute to it. If it had been at a farther distance
from us, our earth would have been in a manner desolate; be cause the influence
of the Sun could not have been considerable: And if it had been nearer, the
Stars above would have wanted Light, and this Earth under, been burnt up. The
Excellent order which it has now obeyed for above six Thousand Years, is also
wonderful. The Sun never stood still but once, and that by a miracle; Tho much
inferior to that of its daily Progress. What a subject is here to admire the
Power, Goodness, Wisdom, and Faithfulness of God? Lord! what is Man! for whom
thou do all this? And because I find every year that the Day dies into Night,
the Summer into Winter, and herbs and plants lose their beauty and verdure, and
shed their blossoms; may I not hence learn to consider and prepare for my own
approaching Change? In prosperity, health, and ease, and life, to expect, and
make provision for trouble, sickness, pain, and Death? as every wise man in
Summer would do for Winter; and work all my might, while it is called to day,
while the Light continues, because the Night of darkness is at hand, when none
can work.

VIII. Of Evils to be expected in this Year; the Wisdom and Mercy of God, in
concealing from us the knowledge of future Events.
NOt only few, and uncertain, but Evil likewise are the days of the Years of my
Life, may every one say, with the Patriarch Jacob. A sufficient portion of Evil
for every year may well be expected, when our Lord tells us, there is a certain
measure allotted for every day. Sufficient to the day is the evil of it. Not
only is our Life short, but troublesome, full of vexatious Mixtures. We cannot
sing a Requiem to our Souls, when one great Calamity is past; for we know not,
in this Region of Changes, but another, a greater may be at hand. One Messenger
of ill News may succeed and outdo another, as it was with Job. We come weeping
into the World in a most helpless forlorn state; and if we escape the dangers
of Infancy, and the casualties of Childhood; and after that, outlive the
Snares and Follies of Youth, We are tossed upon the Pikes of Time and Chance, and
sadden and disquiet our selves with a thousand Griefs and Sorrows, by
inevitable and unexpected occasions; though we increase the number of needless
Cares and Fears, and Discontents; Till at length a sudden stroke arrests us, we
fetch a groan, and die. Who can give a Catalogue of the Afflictions and
Calamities, Perplexities and Disappointments, Encumbrances, Crosses, and evil
Accidents of Humane Life? By means whereof Millions are disconsolate and sad,
mourn and complain, weep and sigh, and from day to day are fed with the Bread
of Affliction, and the water of Adversity. Not to mention men's fluctuating
restless Thoughts of Heart, importunate Desires, baffled Projects, defeated
Purposes, which suppose or bring vexation. A good share of these is not to be
avoided; and yet very few can be particularly foreseen. Who could prognosticate
a year ago the Mercies or the Evils, which have happened since? Public and
private, personal and relative, to the Countries, Cities, Families and Persons
we are concerned for? And who can certainly foretell the Events of this ensuing
Year? God has intermixed Good and Evil in the Life of Man: He has set
Prosperity against Adversity, says Solomon, to the end, that Man should find
nothing after him. Eccles. 7.14. that he may not know what shall come next,
whether a Prosperous or a Calamitous Event. What a change may be made in a year
by the mere Casualty of humane Events? by the treachery of Friends, or the
malice of Enemies, or the more immediate Hand of God? We know not what shall be
on the Morrow, much less what a twelve Month may produce. Because whatever may
be disposed to happen, from natural causes, or civil counsels, may be altered
by a particular decree of Providence. Prepare me Lord! and every of those in
whose Felicity I more especially take part, for all the Calamities and Sorrows,
thine infinite Wisdom shall think fit to exercise us with, this following year:
and by thy merciful Providence, and gracious Conduct, cause them to work for
Good: Furnishing us with suitable strength and wisdom, to acquiesce in thy good
Pleasure, and obey thy Will. Let me follow thee, as the Father of the Faithful,
'tho I know not whither thou will lead me. Knowing the wisdom and faithfulness
of my Pilot, let me therein be satisfied, though I know not particularly what
course he will steer. I thank thee, O Heavenly Father! that thou have reserved
the knowledge of future Times and Seasons to thy self, and hid Events from Men;
Lest by considering them Certain, we should presume in case they are Good; or
should despairingly afflict our selves, by foreseeing the Evil we know, to be
inevitable. Did we certainly foreknow the Good that would befall us, we should
not Trust in thee to bring it to pass, or heartily implore thy Care and
Conduct. Did we foresee the Evils we shall suffer, before they overtake us, we
should be overwhelmed with diffidence and Despair. Many a Mother who rejoiceth
at the Birth of a Son, would mourn to foresee what a Man, what a Son he will
prove. Such an increase of Knowledge would increase our Sorrow; such a
Prescience would transport and discompose us, by unseasonable Joys and Sorrows,
born out of Time; make us remiss in our Duty to Thee; and weaken our Dependence
on thine own unerring Wisdom, Truth, and Power.

IX. The Supposition of dying this Year, should be improved: the consequence of
redeeming Time, and providing for Eternity farther pressed. The Folly of Elder
Persons is condemned and checked from the Example of Children. It Is advisable
to familiarize the Thoughts of Death, and to imagine beforehand what
Apprehensions of things we shall then have.
THe longest Life is but a day multiplied; and who can certify or assure me,
which will be my last? He only who was God as well as Man, could say, Mine Hour
is not yet come. Is all my Life given me to resolve this Question, Whether I
shall be in Heaven or Hell for Ever? And have I any time to lose, and squander
away, as superfluous? have I any more than needs? It Is no impossible or
unreasonable Supposition to make, that I may dye this year. Let me admit that
Thought, and imagine my self on a Bed of Sickness, wearied with Pain, and ready
to leave this World: the Physicians gone, despairing of my recovery: my Friends
about me weeping: and all things in a doleful melancholy Posture, suited to
such a state; feeling within my self the presages of Death; expecting the final
stroke, in an hour or two more: What is then the value of sensual Pleasures?
can I then relish or savor them? what then is Honor to me, who shall never go
abroad more to receive it, till carried to my Grave? will it then comfort me to
have lived in Reputation, and Applause, if my Heart was not humble under it,
and the Honor of God promoted by it? can Riches and a great Estate support me,
when I am just packing up for a removal to the other World? in that hour will
it be any satisfaction, to have made a stir and noise for a few years upon
Earth, to be talked of for a while longer than other Men? are these the things
my dying thoughts will be most concerned to reflect on? These dignities,
pleasures, and possessions offered to a dying Man, would rather upbraid than
tempt him; they come too late, as a Princes Pardon to a Man whose Head is off.
Die I must, and appear before my Judge, to answer for all that I have received
and done in the Body. Fool that I was, (shall I then too justly say to my
self,) not to have considered this much sooner! not to have provided for it at
a better rate! my Sins stare me in the face, my Conscience tells me I am not
ready for such a Trial: I have lived a stranger to such thoughts as now I
cannot refuse, and which should have been admitted sooner. But if to such a
state any hope of Mercy may be granted, (tho it be unspeakably little,) yet I
cannot promise my self any such warning by sickness. The sleeping Virgins were
called at Midnight, and so may I. Where can I pitch my Tents on Earth to be
secure against a sudden remove? Lord! make these Thoughts effectual to prevent
my loss of precious Time, which at such a season, will be esteemed precious,
though now it be not. O how swift, how short is my Time of Trial in order to
Eternity! how difficult, how important a work is it to prepare for an
Everlasting State! What is all this World, how little, how mere a nothing, to a
departing Soul! and shall I after such Reflections, continue to pursue shadows,
and please my self with empty dreams? when being so near my final Judgment, the
common wisdom of a Man requires me to mind it in good earnest; and be more
sollicitous about it than for any thing Temporal? O in what manner will Death
open my Eyes, by shutting the Windows of Sense! How shall I then see the
nothingness of what is but Temporal, and the reality of what is Eternal! We
sometimes laugh to see the vanity of little Children, who are greatly pleased
with painted toys, and busily employed about trifles. It extorts a smile to see
them eager, and industrious, and mightily concerned in their childish sports:
to see them fight or weep for little things which we despise: to observe with
what solicitude and care they will raise a little fabric, which three Moments
after they themselves pull down, or would otherwise tumble of its own accord.
We laugh at these, but should weep over our selves, as the greater and elder
Fools; who are every whit as silly, yea infinitely more; so that considering we
know the frailty of our present Life, and can look beyond the Grave to another
World, should yet mispend our precious time on things which cannot profit; and
please our selves with what is so unsuitable to our Age and State; and suffer
our Passions to work with violence, for a thing of naught; and our greatest
diligence, care, and zeal to be exercised on things impertinent and vain; that
are perishing in themselves, and can contribute nothing to our Eternal welfare.
And is it not thus with reference to all that Men toil and labor for with the
neglect of an immortal State?

The voluptuous Sadducee will not refuse the present gratification of his
sensual Appetite, because he is uncertain of another day. Let us eat and drink,
for to Morrow we dye. Should not the same motive quicken my Diligence in a
better work? and because my Lord may come suddenly as a Thief in the Night,
immediately prepare to meet him? Let me now therefore, O my Soul! look forward
to the end of Life and Time! and so let me esteem and seek, and choose, and do
every thing in the first place, which then I shall wish I had! Let me do
nothing now, which I verily believe I shall then be ashamed, or sorry to
reflect on: that by thinking what a condition I shall then wish to have my Soul
in, I may now provide my self, much better than I have done hitherto. That
while I am in the greatest probability of living, I may suppose my change to be
near, and so not dare to do any thing, but what I would or might do, if I were
in the present expectation of death. To this end, let me go down to the Potters
house, descend to the consideration of my Mortality, and dwell among the Tombs;
remembering the Aegytians built themselves better Tombs than Houses, because
they were to dwell longer in them. Let every Nights repose serve me as a
memorial of my last sleep! and let my Bed stand for the model of my Coffin!
This is the only way, to be dead to this World; to be able to judge of things
now, as we shall do after Death, according to immutable Eternal Truth.

X. The Brevity of Life considered as the fruit of Sin. There are but three
ways of leaving this World, as Abel, Adam, or Enoch. A diligent improvement of
Time farther pressed: and the neglect of it bewailed.
THE shortning of our Days is the fruit of Sin. All the Funerals that have ever
been in the World, have been caused by Sin. We dye because we have sinned, and
yet we should not sin as now, if this were not forgot, that we must dye. From
the first Transgression of Adam we derive our death; and therefore some of his
Posterity lived longer than he. Which proves that the lengthning of our Days is
the peculiar Gift of God; and yet it is such a Gift as was more desired
formerly, than since the appearance of Christ: for we read of none in the New
Testament, since Life and Immortality is brought to light by the Gospel, who
desired a long continuance here on Earth. Were we delivered from Sin, the sting
of Death, by having made our Peace with God in the Blood of Jesus, Death would
not be frightful, or put on such a ghastly Vizor, as to most it does. But we
are uncertain of our Justification, we waver between hopes and fears as to our
final Sentence; and are conscious to our selves that we are not ready for our
great Account. This makes Death so terrible. Considering with all that it is
inevitable; the way of all the Living. For though the curse be removed, and the
sting be taken out by our B. Savior; so that the Souls of Believers are safe,
and shall not be touched by the second Death: yet God has not taken away the
stroke of it from the Body. Though a Christian is assured of deliverance from
Hell, he is not exempted from the Grave, as his passage to Heaven.

Prepare me, Lord! by the free Remission of all my Sins, and make me meet for
the Blessed Inheritance, by sanctifying Grace; and then thy Time is best; Thy
holy Will be done. No matter then, whether my Death be violent, or what we call
Natural. It will be one of the two, for I cannot expect to be Translated, by a
miraculous change, as Holy Enoch was, and as they shall be, who shall be found
alive in the World, when our Glorious Judge shall come again. There are but
those three ways of leaving Earth: and the Three first Men of whose departure
we read in Scripture, are Instances of all Three. Abel of a violent Death, Adam
of a natural one, and Enoch of a Translation. The variety and order of their
Departure, as one observes, is very admirable, and deserves to be considered.
For all Mankind must follow one or other of those three Examples. Every Man or
Woman, that is born into the World, must leave it by one of those three ways;
Either be cut off by a violent Death, as Abel, the first Man who dyed: or dye a
natural death, as Adam did, who was the second: or be translated, as Enoch, who
was the Third we read of.

But though I know that within a few years at farthest I must leave this World by
one or other of these ways; though I have been dying ever since I began to live;
am Dead to the last year, and to all the preceding Portions of my Time; and
know withal, that what remains will quickly pass and be gone, after the same
manner; yet how have I overloved this Body, as if I should never live out of
it! and set my Heart and Affections on this World, as if I should never remove
to another! and trifled away my precious Time and Life, as if a change would
never come!

That few do seriously admit such thoughts is too evident, by the general
course and practice of their Lives. For to what hazards do Men expose
themselves? what pains will they take? what Inconveniences will they bear? with
what unwearied Industry will they toil and labor, to get a little Money, or
Honor in this World, though they know not but they may be called out of it,
before the end of this Year? And yet the same Persons are remiss and slothful
about a future Life; negligent and unconcerned about an Eternal state; careless
and indifferent, yea sottishly stupid, about the welfare of their Immortal
Souls. Henceforward, O my Soul! whatever other others do, let me resolve to
live in the expectation of a Change, which I know is certain, and may be very
near.

XI. Of the Expectation of Another Life. The Vanity and Misery of Man in his
Best Estate, if there be none. The satisfactory removal of that supposition by
the Thoughts of God, and of Eternal Felicity in his Blessed Presence.
LET me retire a little, O my Soul! and bethink my self, what a World this is;
what Men design and seek, and do and suffer; with what false and feigned Joys
they are pleased, being only happy by comparison; and with what real Sorrows
they are afflicted; what innumerable disappointments, sicknesses, (and as
troublesome remedies,) dangers, labors, pains, and calamities of all sorts,
Multitudes groan under, and loudly complain of? and what little unworthy ends
are pursued by all that do not seriously seek Eternal Rest? and how often
frustrated? And withal consider the Cares that disquiet us, the errors that
deceive us, the many Temptations that assault and overcome us; how busy we are
about Vanities; how often dejected, and melancholy for the breaking of a
Bubble; how eager and industrious to pursue a Shadow; active and in earnest to
destroy our selves, and one another; and then reflect on the Malice, and
cruelty, the Filthiness, and Impiety, and great Corruption, which abounds every
where; whereby God is dishonored, and provokt to Anger? After this what a
Theater of Tragedies, must this World appear? what an Hospital of sick, and
diseased, or rather distracted Persons? How should I be tempted to say, Lord!
why have thou made all Men in vain? If I could not look from this Sea of
troubles, to the Haven of Rest; from this dark Prison, to the Region of Light;
from this deceitful, troublesome, and defiling Earth, to a Blessed, Everlasting
Heaven: For verily, if there be no World but this, every Man in his best Estate
in this World, is altogether Vanity, Selah. Psalm. 39.5. It Is a certain
undoubted Truth, the prefixed verily tells us so; and that it deserves to be
well considered, we learn from the concluding Selah, Every Man is Vanity. Not
the Inferior parts of the Creation only; But Man the Lord of all: And Every
Man, every Adam from himself, to the last Man that shall by ordinary Generation
descend from him. Not the Ignorant, Poor, or Wicked only, but all the
Individuals of this Species. Young or Old, strong or weak, beautiful or
deformed, rich or poor, high or low, good or bad, (in respect of the Body, and
this present Life,) every one is vanity; and this is true, suppose him in his
Best Estate, not only in helpless Infancy and Childhood, or in decrepit old
Age, not only in pain, and poverty, and disgrace; but in his most settled, most
flourishing, most envied, and admired condition upon Earth; in the midst of
strength, and wit, and honor; when at best, as to body, and mind, and outward
Circumstances; when he looks fairest, when he shines brightest; in the height
of all his Glory, with the greatest likelihood of a Continuance; yet then he is
but vanity. In his frame, in his temper, constitution, inclinations, actions,
and employment; he is a mere Shadow, an empty, mutable, inconsiderable thing,
and not to be accounted of. His Heart, his head, his imaginations, reasonings,
desires, purposes, projects, hopes, and fears, are all Vanity; and altogether
Vanity, in all the parts, and kinds, and particulars of it. He not only may be,
but he is so, in his best Estate: if this World be his Best; if this be our
All, and nothing more to be expected after death. And how should such a
Reflection strike me to the Heart, to suppose that after a few years are ended,
I must return to my first Nothing, and my very being be Vid. Mr. How Is vanity
of Man as mortal.
swallowed up of Eternal Death! what satisfaction can I then take in any
present Enjoyments, if an Eternal Annihilation be at hand, when I must bid
adieu for ever to all that I now possess? What delight can I have in the
ordinary comforts of Life, with this Belief, that within a year or two, it may
be to Morrow, I shall sink into the dust, and exist no more? What Pleasure in
any thing with this dismal Expectation? The more flourishing my condition is in
this World, the more should I dread to lose it, if nothing better, nothing at
all, can be enjoyed after Death. Some Philosophers have ignorantly urged such a
consideration as an Antidote against the fear of death; but the admission of it
may rather deprive a Man of all the comfort of Life. What then is the advantage
of a Wise Man above a Fool? the exercise and improvement of our noblest
Faculties would render us more miserable than others, if nothing be expected,
and certain, when this Life is over. Not only sensual, but intellectual
Pleasures would be disturbed and destroyed by such Thoughts; that very shortly,
the next Year, or Day, I must disappear; and all my Enjoyments and Hopes be
utterly and for ever lost, with my very Being. Were the case thus, (which such
Consequences evince it is not,) it were better for most Men they had never been
Born; whether their condition here be Prosperous, or Afflicted. For what
Comfort or quiet can any Man have in Plenty and Prosperity, when this frightful
apprehension of an approaching end is ever present? and what consolation can it
yield a Man who is afflicted and Calamitous, and yet loves his Life above all
things; to think that he shall not cease to be miserable, but by ceasing to be?
And what is become of all Religion, if such a thought be entertained? All
devotion to God is thereby extinguished, all the restraints of vice removed, the
Floodgates of Impiety opened, the encouragements of Virtue, the rewards of
Holiness; the Foundation of Tribulation, and suffering for Righteousness sake;
all at once taken away. Lord! confirm my Belief of the invisible future state
of Rewards and Punishments! and let not Sadducism and Infidelity damp my zeal
in thy service, or rob me of the comforts of this Life, which, if I have any
solid ones, must suppose the hopes of a Better. Let others therefore, O my
Soul! who expect not an Everlasting Heaven beyond the Grave, place their
affections on Earthly things and mind this World, as if there were no betrer,
no other. Let them who doubt, or disbelieve the promised rewards of Eternity,
take up with what they must shortly leave, and labor for the Bread that
perishes. But since I profess to believe and seek the Life Everlasting; let me
daily entertain my self with the hopes of it, and let all the flattering dreams
of what is desirable upon Earth, give place to nobler and better thoughts. Let
me derive my principal Joy, from the promise and expectation of that future
Felicity, and endeavor nothing more than a meetness to partake of it. O my
God, my God! thou art my Life, and Joy, and Portion; in thee, and in thy love,
all my desires, and hopes are answered, and all my wants supplied. However Evil
this World is made by Sin, yet thou art the infinite and supreme Good. How
mutable, how uncertain, how perishing soever are all sublunary things; yet thou
art the rock of Ages, the fountain of everlasting Life, and have appointed
another World, and another Life, when this is ended, wherein thou will be
better known, and loved, and served, and honored, and communicate thy self
more abundantly than now, to those, the desire of whose Souls is toward thee,
that believe and love thee, that partake of thine Image, and are devoted to thy
Fear. The assurance of this and nothing else, will answer the objection of the
present vanity and misery we are subject to.

XII. The consideration of the Death of others, especially of Relations,
Friends, and Acquaintance, how to be improved. What instructions we may learn
by the sight of a dead Carcass, or a Deaths Head, and the usual Motto on it:
and what by the Death of Holy Persons, to quicken our desires to be as they.
Has divine Patience added one year more to the number of my Days, when so
many others were removed by Death the last Year? Others, whom a few Months
since I knew in vigorous health; wiser, stronger, more likely to live, and to
answer the ends of Life than me; some of them, my near Relations, and useful
Friends; in whose converse I took delight, and promised my self advantage by
their Company and Examples; But they are taken, and I am left. Thy Holy Will, O
Lord! is done: and they, who were prepared, are infinite Gainers by this my
loss. Quicken my preparations by following their Piety, to meet them in thy
Heavenly Kingdom. Let thy long-suffering lead me to Repentance; and suffer me
not to slight thy warning by the Death of others, to expect my own. Lord! cure
my Earthlymindedness, and practical unbelief; and by all such admonitions of
thy Providence, teach me to possess, and use this World, as knowing I must
shortly leave it; and let not the thoughts of my Mortality wear off, as soon as
the Funeral of my Friends is over.

Every year some or other of our Acquaintance drop into the Grave, we attend
them thither, and lament, it may be, for a few days, their departure and
removal; but consider not, that others will e're be long do the same for us; it
may before this year is ended. Oh how soon do we forget our deceased Friends,
and our selves, who are likewise dying! and count upon a long Life, which we
cannot reasonably expect; and hug the enjoyments of this transitory World, as
if our present state would last for ever! Will nothing but our own dissolution
effectually convince us of our mistake, and folly, in this particular?

Though the Arrows of Death fly continually round about us; sometimes over our
Heads, when Superiors are taken away; sometimes fall at our Feet, when
Children and Servants, and Inferiors die; sometimes on our Left hand, when an
Enemy is cut off; and while I am pleased with that, in that very hour, it may
be, another Arrow on our Right hand strikes the Friend of our Bosom and
Delight. And can we see all this, that great and small, high and low, friends
and foes are all Vanity, and drop down dead round about us; and shall we not
consider, that we are as Vain as they, and must shortly follow? Shall we not by
a Christian Chemistry extract Spirits out of these dead Bones? and by these
Examples learn the End of all Men, and lay it to Heart?

Whenever I see the Funeral of another, let me think thus with my self; why
might not I have been that Man or Woman, that is now carried to the Grave? If
we had been compared a few days since, it is probable I should have been thought
as likely to have been his Monitor, by dying first, as he mine. By such an
improvement of these warnings, the request of the rich Man to Abraham were in
great measure granted; for it is a call from the dead that speaks loudly to us,
to consider our selves, and prepare in time for so great a change: and say, as
the Prophet to Hezekiah, Set thine house in order, for thou shall dye.

Can we look upon a Deaths Head, and not remember what we shall shortly be? may
not much be learnt from its common Motto? Sum quod Eris, Fueramque quod Es. I
am that which thou shall shortly be, and have been that which thou art now:
that is, I have been as gay and jocund, as brisk and merry, as proud and vain,
as rich and great, as careless and secure, as honorable and as much esteemed,
as beautiful and as well beloved, as witty and as learned, as Thou art or
can be now. I valued my self as much upon my Estate and Trade, and health,
and beauty; upon my Education, Profession, Employments, Parts, Friends, Family
etc. as thou have ever done, or can do: I lived in ease and pleasure, in
mirth and jollity; I minded the World as much, and indulged my self as much in
sensuality; and was as careful of my Body, pampered and pleased my Flesh as
much as thou, and thought as little of a sudden Death, and prepared as little
for such a change, as thou do: but now my dry Bones are looked upon with
contempt and scorn, but thou shall shortly return to dust, and be as vile as I
am.

It cannot but affect us, did we consider it, to see diverse snatched away in
their Youth, and outward Prosperity; and in the midst of their Sin and Folly,
without any visible signs of true Repentance: Or in terrible anguish and horror
for their past crimes: And yet how few do take the warning, carefully to
prevent the like unhappiness? O Lord! preserve those strong Convictions, those
serious Thoughts, those holy Resolutions, those lively Apprehensions of the
Life to come, of the Evil of sin, and the Terrors of thy wrath, which the Sight
of dying persons has at any time awakened in my soul! O the Eloquence of a
dying Sinner, to persuade to Repentance! Even when he has lost his Speech, and
lies gasping, and trembling, on a bed of sickness; breathing out his last faint
breath, and passing into the other world, to answer for the crimes and follies
of a wicked Life! Lord! revive these thoughts upon my soul, and let me feel the
power and influence of them, in the hour of Temptation, and in every time of
need! And let the consideration of the death of Believers, the Blessedness they
are thereby entered into, and the Holiness they are possessed of, quicken my
desires and diligence to prepare to follow. When I think where they are, and
what they are doing, what is their work, and what their state, what their
continual employment, and what their Enjoyments; and how different from ours: I
cannot but wish to be with them; to be as they are, and do as they do, to know
and love and praise God as they. They are not hindered by such a clog as this
Body is to us; or tempted by their senses, appetite and fancy, to sin against
him: they complain not of a seducing flesh, unruly passions, low and disordered
thoughts, of Temporal Afflictions, spiritual Desertions, the snares of the
World, and the malice and subtility of the Devil: We who are Pilgrims and
Travelers are exposed to these difficulties, and storms which they are freed
from. They are now rejoicing in the light of Gods countenance, and shall never
question his love more, while we are in Tears and Sorrows, groaning to be
delivered.

But think, O my soul! that They were lately such as We are now. They were
members of the militant Church, before they entered into Joy and Triumph. They
had their conflicts and difficulties, their hour of Temptation, and time of
trial, as we have ours. They were slandered, and persecuted, and sadned, and
disappointed, as their Followers are: They went to Heaven the same way, and got
the victory after the same manner, by Repentance, and Faith, and humble
persevering Obedience. They were once imperfect as we are now; and complained
of the Body of Sin and Death, and struglings of unmortified lust, as we do: And
were sometimes in the dark about their interest in the promise, and walked
heavily by the hiding of Gods face, and endured Temptation, even as we. And as
we have nothing to do, or suffer, but what they met with; we have the same
encouragement, that administered to their support; the same God and Savior, the
same way and rule, the same assistance, by the aids of his H. Spirit, offered
to us; the same promises, and the same rewards proposed, which they enjoyed,
first in faith and hope, and afterward in fruition. Yea they passed through
the dark valley, and so must we: Their Earthly tabernacle was dissolved, and so
must ours be. We must expect to go the same way to Rest and Glory; and wait
Gods Time for our admission. We must finish first the work which God has for
us to do and suffer, and then all Tears shall be wiped from our eyes, we shall
grieve no more, we shall sin no more, but be as the Angels in Heaven, or as the
Spirits of the Just made Perfect.

XIII. What Influence the consideration of Eternity would have upon our Hearts
and Lives, if soundly believed and considered. Especially if the supposition of
Dying this year be annexed to it.
WIth what Humility, Mortification, and Self-denial, what Seriousness,
Watchfulness, and resolved Constancy, would every Christian live on Earth, did
he act always under the influence and power of a confirmed Faith concerning
the Life to come? We should not then grudge at a little labor, or boggle at a
few difficulties in our way. What though I meet with injuries and affronts,
hadships and inconveniences; Being now in a Foreign Country, and every day I
live, one days journey nearer my Eternal Home! Shall I not patiently bear
momentany Sorrows, while I believe I am hastening to Eternal Joys? Did I look
more to the Everlasting World, should I not make the pleasing of God, in order
to my Eternal welfare, the great business of my Life? Should I not serve the
Lord with more fervency of Spirit, and be better fortified against the fears of
man, who can but hurt and kill the Body, nor that neither, without the
permission of God? Should I not order all my affairs, answer all Temptations,
mortify inward Lusts, live in the Exercise of Grace, and in circumspect
persevering Obedience, in order to it? Should I not watch more over my Heart,
and Lips and Ways, be more diligent to trim my Lamps, more crucified to this
world, more careful to call my self frequently to an account, and renew my
Repentance? Would not my converse be more useful and edifying, my discourses
more savory and full of Religion, my Prayers to God more humble and earnest, my
Charity to men more unfeigned and extensive, and my preparations every way more
suitable to such a Faith, and to such apprehensions of an Everlasting State?
Could we carry the thoughts of Eternity about with us every day, and often
admit them in our civil and secular affairs, did we repeat it frequently to our
selves, at least every Morning, as soon as we are awake, that we are near
Eternity; this grain of Incense would perfume the whole Temple; and be an
Antidote against inward Lust, and impure Thoughts, against the Infection and
defilement of bad Company, and the snares of worldly Business, and do much to
prevent vain and sensual actions, and to cure vain affections.

Did we believe it, and believe it near, should we not take as much pains to
secure Eternal Life, as we see Men do to get Riches? Should we not use the same
diligence, care, and circumspection, the same prudent foresight, watchfulness,
and perseverance, to prevent Everlasting destruction as others do to provide
against Poverty, and to live in Plenty a little while on Earth? Should we not
rejoice as much in the promise and hopes of it, as others do in the prospect
and expectation of some Earthly Advantage? Lord! I confess and bewail the
weakness of my Faith. How often have I concluded, and said, that Heaven alone
is the place of Happiness, and yet my carnal Heart is too much affected with
Earthly Things! How often have I resolved, (upon the conviction of the
certainty of the Eternal World,) to mind this less, and to affect and seek it
no more as I have done! and yet my foolish Heart is hankering after it still. O
crucify my affections to things below! and let the believing Thoughts of the
next Life, render me victorious over all the Temptations of this. Pardon and
cure the staggering trembling Thoughts of an unbelieving Heart, by greater
measures of a lively Faith. That my desires may be strong and urgent; and my
diligence and stedfastness in the way of Truth, be some way correspondent to
this important Article. Let me live only for Eternity, hope for nothing but
Eternity, design and intend nothing as my chief end, but Eternity, and seek and
mind nothing in comparison with Eternity! Did we believe it, how would every
thing in this World be looked upon as eligible, or fit to be refused, as it is
like to be an help, or an hindrance, with reference to Eternity! we should then
endeavor to do nothing unbecoming such an Expectation. Considering this World
as our Passage, and the invisible future World as our abiding Country, where we
are to dwell for ever; whatever we meet with here, whether sweet or bitter,
easy or troublesome, pleasing or ungrateful, we should not much matter, but as
it relates to hereafter.

And were I certain I should have no longer time of Trial in order to this
Eternal State, than this one year, which is now begun: if a Messenger from God
should convincingly assure me of it; what would I not do to prepare for Death,
and secure the interests of Eternity? With what remorse and deep Repentance
should I reflect on the Follies of my past Life? With what importunate cries
should I beg Forgiveness? How patiently should I bear Calamity, for so short a
time? How little should I value the favors or frowns of Men? How circumspect
to improve every Season of doing and receiving good? How careful to avoid
Temptation, and how resolute in resisting it? Did I verily believe I had no
longer time to live on Earth, than this one Year at most: how insipid would be
the offer of carnal Mirth, vain Pastime, sensual Diversions, idle Company,
etc.? how should I value every Hour, every inch of my little Time, under the
apprehension that Eternity is at hand? O my Soul! shall I make no provision
against the possiblity of such a case? Is not my change as certain, as if it
were this year, as if it were to Morrow? though I am not certain it is so near,
nor certain but it may be. Let me then seek first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness: let me fix it well, and make it clear, that I have secured my
great Concern, and am ready for a sudden summons.

XIV. How a Good Man may improve and encourage himself under the Supposition of
dying this Year, even in the most uneasy and undesirable Circumstances.
I May dye this Year: then all my Cares and Fears, if I am Rich, all my Sorrows
and calamities as to this World, if I am Poor, will die too. I may dye this
Year: then I shall have no more Enemies, no more Sickness, and which is
infinitely better, I shall Sin no more. I must shortly die, it may be, this
Year: but there is no other way to come to a blessed Life but by dying; and my
Savior has dyed for me, and he that believes in him, shall never see death.
He lives who was once dead, yea he lives for evermore, and has promised, that
I shall be with him to behold his Glory. He has the Keys of Death and Hell: He
is the Resurrection and the Life; he has removed the sting of Death; and I
need not fear a conquered Enemy. If I dye this Year, I must quit the Company of
all my dearest Friends on Earth; but I shall go to better Company above: and if
they are the Friends of Christ, we shall shortly meet again, and love one
another in a better manner than now, and never more be parted. I may dye this
Year: my Friends and Enemies may dye too. Let me enjoy the one as mortal dying
Persons, that must e're long leave me, or I them: and not fear the other, who
may so soon Perish, and quickly be incapable of doing me or others Mischief. I
may dye this Year: let me not then think much of Temporal Sufferings, of any
Evils which may so soon be over. Oh what would condemned Sinners in the other
World give to be able to believe and say so of their Sufferings! I may dye this
Year: and can I wonder that I am sometimes Sick and in Pain, and that my Body
is out of order? Am I not Mortal, and dwell in an house of Clay, which must
shortly moulder into Dust? and is it any thing strange, that such a crasy
Building does sometime shake, and need repair, and threaten a dissolution? It Is
a greater wonder, I am any time well: That such a Body, compounded of so many
little parts, and so easily disordered by innumerable accidents, should be in
Health, is hardly less to be admired, than that an Instrument of a thousand
strings should be kept in Tune. I thank thee, O Heavenly Father! for the many
advantages of Sickness, to weaken the power of Sin, to humble my Pride, and
cure my Worldliness and Sensuality, to reduce me from wandering, to empty me of
Self-conceit, to awaken the consideration of Death and Judgment, to impress the
Thoughts of the Vanity of this World, and the Eternity of the next, to assist
me to mortify the Flesh, to rule my Passions, to exercise Patience, and
quicken Prayer, and try my Faith and Love, and excite my diligence to redeem
Time, and convince me of the Worth and Uncertainty of it, and thereby promote
my Preparations for my final change. The Great Apostle by dying daily, had as
many victories over this World, as he lived Days. Oh that I might so far walk
by the same Rule, as every day to think of providing for my last! and in Health
to do that which in Sickness I shall wish I had done!

I may dye this Year: It may be by some tedious painful Sickness, some
troublesome and loathsome Disease. But God has promised his Grace shall be
sufficient; he will make my Bed in my Sickness; and put under his everlasting
Arms for my support; and not suffer me to be tempted above what I am able: he
will increase my Patience and carry me through the pangs of Death, and the dark
valley, and when Heart and Flesh fail, be the strength of my Heart, and my
Portion for Ever.

I may dye this year: What if it should be by an hand of Violence; if for
Righteousness sake, in defense of the Truth, for a good Cause, and a good
Conscience, and my Peace be made with God, and I am accused for doing well, or
innocent of the Evil which is laid to my charge; there is ground enough for
encouragement and support. Thousands of my Betters have met with the like,
whose names are precious and renowned. Innumerable Christians have dyed by the
Sentence of a Judge, with more Chearfullness and Joy, than others, or it may
be, than they themselves, would have done, by the sentence of the Physician.
The Torture of many Diseases is unspeakably more formidable, as to the mere
Pain, and for all else, the Righteous Lord who loves Righteousness, will clear
my Integrity, if it may best subserve his own Great and Holy ends: at least he
will stand by and help me, when all forsake me; and if he speak Peace, and give
inward Consolation, who can speak Trouble? and his final Judgment, which is
near at hand, will distribute rewards and Punishments to all, according to
their works.

Suppose farther, that I should want a Sepulcher, after Death. There is nothing
I could better be without. If God receive my Soul, and will raise my Body at
the last day, whether it putrify and consume under ground, or above it, is no
great matter. They who are alive will be more concerned in that, than I shall
be; Graves are for the sake of the Living rather than the Dead. The Sun, the
Rain, the Air, Birds, Beasts, Worms, will all contribute to give me Burial, if
Men deny it. The only difference is, that it will be a little longer ere I am
buried. If my Soul rest in the Bosom of my Savior, and by persevering in the
love and practice of the Truth, I have secured my Reputation with wise and good
Men, I need not be sollicitous what become of my Body. My Almighty Judge will
raise me a glorious Body, like his own, and reunite it to my Soul; As easily,
as certainly, as for any of those, whose Bodies were preserved in Caves and
Vaults, in proud Sepulchers, and under stately Monuments.

I may dye this Year; and shall not then have the satisfaction to see my
Children or nearest Kindred educated and provided for, settled and disposed of.
But is not the Everliving God the same? cannot he as well take care of them
when I am gone, as now? answer all my Prayers after my decease? and exercise
that Fatherly Care, Wisdom, and Love, which shall dispose of their conditions,
save them from Temptations, and supply all their wants, and exceed all my
desires, in reference to them? and fulfill his Covenant promise from Generation
to Generation, to the Childrens Children of them that fear him? O how weak is
my Faith, that cannot trust God in so common and plain a case!

Lastly, I may dye this Year: and not live to see the ruin of the Antichristian
Kingdom, and Interest, and the accomplishment of many Excellent Promises, which
concern the Rest, and Peace, and Purity and Glory of the Churches of Christ on
earth in the latter days. But have I not deserved by my provoking Unbelief,
Ingratitude, and Disobedience, to dye in the Wilderness, and not behold behold
the promised Land, or see the Peace of Jerusalem? and will not the struglings
of Satan to support Babylon, infer a dismal night of darkness and distress,
before the expected Morning of Deliverance? so that it may now, if ever, be
truly said, Henceforth, Blessed are the Dead who dye in the Lord. And if God
will take me to himself in the other World, I cannot possibly be a loser: though
I should not see the Beginnings of a New Heaven, and a New Earth, in this.
However I rejoice in Hope, and pray incessantly for the Resurrection of the
Witnesses, and the rebuilding of Sion, and the more plentiful effusion of the
H. Spirit, (the great comprehensive Promise of the later Times) to effect a
glorious Kingdom for Christ on Earth: and my Faith assures me, I shall
hereafter see the Son of God revealed from Heaven, clothed with Majesty,
sitting on a Cloud, leading the Heavenly Host, raising the Dead by his powerful
Voice, summoning all the World to appear to Judgment, gathering his Elect, and
finally destroying Death, and him that had the Power of it, the Devil,
condemning the wicked to Everlasting Destruction, but acquitting, honoring,
and rewarding his poor Members, with infinite and Eternal Blessedness.

XV. Of Dying in a Foreign Country, and of Dying Young. Considerations proper
to Reconcile the Mind to both.
I May not live to the end of this Year; God in his Providence having called me
abroad, I may never see my Native Country more. Let me still remember, O my
Soul! that wherever I am, I am traveling toward the Grave, and passing to
another World: that I may live in all Places, as a Pilgrim and Stranger here on
Earth; with Affections suited to my condition, becoming one who is traveling
in a Strange Land. Let me bear the Inconveniences I may meet with in this
World, as Strangers in their Travels are wont to do. Let me not repine at the
ill accomodations of an Inn, where I am to lodge but a night or two: but
encourage my self with the assurance of better Entertainment at home, when my
Pilgrimage is ended, and my Journey over. One of my dearest Holy Friends; and
Fellow Travelers, (whose memory will be ever precious, Mr. Thomas Bent, who
dyed at Geneva, May 10. 1683.
with those who knew him) quickly arrived to his Journeys end, and is entered
into Rest betimes. Which of his Companions shall next follow, we know not, or
how soon. Lord! make me apprehend the nearness of my change in every place: and
if I am prepared for dying, no matter where it be. There is no one Country
farther from the Presence of God than another. The whole World may be
considered as one Great House, and the several Kingdoms and Countries of it,
but as different Apartments in the same House: and they who tarry at home are
no more exempt from Death, than they who travel abroad.

The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; I can go no where to be out
of his Territories, I shall still tread upon my Fathers's Ground. I had rather
be an Israelite in a Wilderness with the Presence of God, than a Courtier in
Idolatrous Egypt. Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, and the friend of God,
was banished from his own Country; and should I never set foot again on my
native Soil, there is no reason of murmuring against my God, who has dealt
thus with many of his Favorites. And while I have been in a strange Land, he
has not suffered me to feel the wants and necessities, and heart of a
Stranger. Among a People of a strange Language he can, and does provide for me
all things richly to enjoy. I may set up my Ebenezer, Hitherto has God
supplied all my wants.

The Presence of my Gracious Father is every where the same: in some measure,
Blessed be my God, I have hitherto found it so. And may I not rejoice in God in
a Desert, though all the World should forsake me; though all the World should
be against me? Should I have no other Friend or Helper; is not God, an infinite
God Enough? and without his Favor and Presence, what can all this World do for
me? If I am sick, and in danger of Death, among my Relations and Friends, if
the comforts of the Almighty do not refresh and delight my Soul, they cannot:
and if I want not these in my last Agonies, no matter in what part or corner of
the Earth I breath my last. If the word and promise of God be my Foundation, an
holy Hope my Anchor, Christ my Pilot, and Heaven my Country, I shall not fail
of being landed there at last. Suffer me not to forsake thee, O Heavenly
Father! while I live; and do not thou forsake me in my last Hour; and let it
come when, and where thou will! If my blessed Savior will receive my departing
Soul at Death, I am not sollicitous in what Country, or part of the Earth it be.

And that I may not be unwilling in the flower of my Age and Time, in Youth and
Strength, to leave this World; let me think often, that no one age or part of
Life is more privileged against the stroke of Death than another. If I have
done my work betimes, as my deceased Fellow Traveller had, is it not better to
receive the Blessed Recompense, than to tarry longer, in a World of Sin and
Suffering, absent from the Lord? Shall I not thereby escape a multitude of
Temptations, Sins, and Sorrows, which others by living longer are exposed to?
If my Peace be made with God, what should make me willing to live at this
distance from him? What should render this World so desirable, where God is so
dishonored, where I am so often tempted to displease him, and so often yield
to such Temptations? And may I not fear lest I should fall into such scandalous
and grievous sins, that may bring a public reproach on the Gospel of Christ,
and sadden the Hearts of all my Acquaintance who love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity? By dying early, I shall contract less guilt, and commit less Sin,
and see and feel less Sorrow than others who live longer. And though I should
maintain my Integrity, yet in this World my highest love and obedience to God,
and my sweetest Communion with him, is but imperfect. How many impediments and
Diversions do I daily meet with, that deaden my Heart to Heavenly
Contemplations and Affections? What disappointments, and sorrowful disasters,
to convince me that this is not the place of Rest and Happiness? What smart
afflictions may some of my Relations prove? What dangerous Snares may attend me
in the remaining Portion of my Time? What Opposition and Hatred from Men may
the steadfast professing of the Truth, and fidelity to God expose me to? What
public national Calamities may I have my share in, etc.

But if I consider old Age it self, which we do desire to reach; what and how
many are the Infirmities and Griefs, and troublesome Circumstances which attend
that State, which dying young will prevent? Are not most Men who reach a very
great old Age, helpless objects of Pity? A Burden to themselves, and to all
about them? And (which commonly happens,) may I not then be as unwilling to
dye, as at present? As loath then to leave the World as now, though in a manner it
will have left me? For how many old Men, past the relish of sensual Pleasures,
are yet inordinately fond of a longer Life!

Have I not been told by Heathens, as well as Christians, that it is not the
length of time, but its improvement, that does really make a Long Life? If I
have answered the ends for which I were born, it is not too soon to dye. No Man
ever miscarried as to his Everlasting Interest, because his Life was short, but
Evil. He that is prepared for Death, he that dies in the Lord has lived long
enough, and should thank God for a speedy call to the possession of that
Felicity, which the Holiest Saints on Earth desire and breath after. Gideon
lost nothing by returning from Victory, while the Sun was yet high. He has
fought long enough who has gained the Victory. If I have wrought but a few
hours in a Vineyard, and done but a little Service for my Lord and Master; and
yet am dismissed, and rewarded, before the rest of my Fellow Laborers; shall I
repine, and think my Lord does not befriend me? If he has any farther Service
for me, he will prolong my days, and make me diligent, I hope, and contented.
Otherwise I pray he would make me ready to dye, and make me willing, and
desirous to depart this Life. For to be only content to dye, that I may be
perfectly Holy, and fully Blessed, is methinks too low for a Christian who acts
like himself, believing the Certainty of his avowed Principles and Hopes, and
knowing that while we are present in the Body, we are absent from the Lord.

XVI. The contemplation of our approaching Change may assist us to mortify the
Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life; to cure
Ambition, and promote Contentment.
ALL that is in the World, says the Apostle, is the Lust of the Flesh, the
Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life. The Dust and Ashes of our own
Mortality duly considered and applied, will help to deaden and extinguish each
of these. By Pride of Life, we lift up our selves against Heaven, and despise
our Maker: by the lust of the Flesh, we overlove and indulge the Body, and
study to gratify the sensual Appetite: by the lust of the Eyes, our Desires
are immoderate after Temporal and External Goods. the thought of our
approaching end has a tendency to oppose and mortify these Lusts; to humble
us before God; to take us off from the inordinate love of the Body; and to
moderate our Passions to Earthly Things. It may help us against Pride, by
showing us the infinite distance between the Eternal self-sufficient God, and
such poor Dust as we; who are but of yesterday, and if he uphold us not, and
maintain our Souls in Life, shall be laid in the dust to morrow. It will mind
us of his Justice against Sin, the Parent of Death, and of all the miseries of
our mortal State; and convince us of our weakness to resist his Will, or avoid
his Wrath. As to our fond Affection to the Body, it may instruct us, that it
deserves not to be so much accounted of; it will open our Eyes to discern the
Preference of our immortal Souls, and what concerns them, to the interest of a
perishing Body. It may convince us, that we are Cruel and unkind to our very
Bodies, by overloving them, because we thereby contribute to their Eternal
Sufferings: and so teach us to love and use our Bodies, as Servants to our
Souls in this World; and as expecting to share in Glory with them, after the
Resurrection. It may also help to moderate our Desires after Earthly Good, and
so cure the Lust of the Eyes, by letting us see the vanity, uncertainty, and
short duration of these things, and their insufficiency to make us Happy, and
give us true Content.

The Thoughts of an approaching Change may, if any thing will do it, damp the
mirth of the Luxurious Epicure, and strike him into a fit of trembling, as did
Belshazzar's handwriting on the wall. It may discover the distraction of living
in Pleasure, and of care to please the Senses, and the fleshly Appetite, when
the End is so near. It may likewise check the folly of Ambitious Designs: that
Men should make so much ado to get into slippery places, from whence they may
so easily fall. Where being puffed up with vain applause, they forget themselves,
and their latter end, till their Life, and Glory expire together. Where are now
the Great, and Mighty, and Honorable, who have made such a noise in the world?
What is now the Difference between the Dust of an Alexander or Caesar, and that
of their meanest Slaves or Captives? Could their Dignities and earthly Glory
preserve any of them, from the stroke of Death, or the Judgment of God, or
without Repentance, from his condemning Sentence?

Think, O my Soul! how little it will shortly signify, whether I have been
known and honored among Men or no; any farther than God may be glorified by
it. How should it suppress vain Glory? to think of being one day esteemed, and
worshipped, reverenced, and applauded by dying Men, and laid in the Grave the
next? Let me rather seek that Glory and Honor, to which Immortality is annexed:
and labor to be accepted with God, at whose Bar I most be judged, endeavoring
to keep the testimony of a good Conscience; and then it is not much whether I
pass through good Report or evil Report: no contempt, or frowns, or threatenings
of Men need then discourage me. Though I should be trampled on by the foot of
Pride, while others are happy in a dream for a little while; and it may be have
a prosperous passage to damnation; I Will rather thank God for delivering me from
their Temptations, and giving me the opportunity, and call, to hasten my
Preparations for a better World. Let God dispose of my Condition here, and
Reputation too, as best shall please his Sovereign Will: only be pleased to
keep me upright, and to preserve me from everlasting Shame and Confusion of
Face, after the general Resurrection, and final Judgment. Vouchsafe me a
Portion now in thine approving Love, and own me for Thine at last, in the Great
and terrible Day of Reckoning; that then I may hear the Blessed Euge, and enter
into my Lord's Joy!

XVII. The same Argument considered farther, as dissuasive from Worldliness,
and Earthly mindedness: and as proper to confute the vanity of long Projects,
and great Designs for this World.
ARE the Years of my Life but few, and they hastening to a Period, and may this
be my last? Let me not then greedily covet Riches and abundance, and waste my
little time to scrape together large Provisions, for many years to come; when I
have no assurance to see the end of this. Is it becoming such a belief, to toil
from day to day, that I may lay up that which I must so soon leave? as if I
were to spend an Eternity here on Earth, and in the mean while neglect the one
thing necessary. Am I not upon the shore of Eternity? May not the next Tide
carry me off? And shall I spend my whole Life in Diversions from the main
business of it? Have I nothing else to do, but to gather Shells, (if they were
Pearls, the absurdity were still the same,) and pile them upon heaps, till I am
snatched away past all recovery? Shall I be regardless of an Eternal State, and
run the hazard of being undone for ever, by sollicitous care about pretended
Necessaries for a long abode on Earth? Much less for Superfluities; when I am
not certain of the Possession, this one Year? Shall I magnify and admire what
is so soon to be parted with? Value my self upon these things, so as to despise
those that have less, and envy such as have more? and suffer my Mind to be
distempered, and my passions immoderate on every Change of these things? Though I
know besides my own Mortality, that to enforce the Argument, there is a
principle of Corruption in all these things; that our very Manna here in a
little while will stink; and Bread, which is the staff of Life, moulder; our
richest Garments wax old, and rot; Silver and Gold rust, and the greatest
Beauty wither, and every thing that is Earthly, decay and perish. And shall not
this teach me to sit loose from all such things? Can I imagine, that in my last
hour it will be easier to part with much, than little? or better in the day of
Judgment, to have a great Estate to answer for than a lesser one? We read
concerning the Patriarch Abraham, (who rightly understood the transitory nature
of Riches, and his own mutable Condition,) that the only purchase he made with
his Riches, was a Grave: choosing to take Possession of the Land promised him
rather by a mark of his parting with it, than of his possessing it. Did I think
oftener and more seriously, O my Soul! of tarrying here but a little while; I
should more easily be persuaded, that a little of this World were sufficient to
carry me through it. I should consider more that my Heaven-born Soul is made
and designed for another, an endless World: and therefore should not so far
forget his own People, and Fathers House; as eagerly to pursue and seek what is
suited only to the Body, for a little while, and whereof a little with
Contentment will be sufficient.

The same Reflection may be useful to contract our Thoughts to present Duty;
that we may not perplex our Minds with long designs and Projects; which if we
dye this this Year, will come to nothing. Our great Business in this World is
adapted to the little portion of Time, which is allowed us. Not that good
Designs for the public Benefit, may not be begun by one, and finished by
others: or that we are not obliged prudently to provide for those who shall
come after us, by attempting many Things of probable Advantage to Posterity.
But considering the shortness, and uncertainty of Life, not only should the
most necessary Things be first minded, and not put off by prosecuting such
designs, as may signify somewhat to others, when we are Dead: But we should
not now omit that which we may hope to compass our selves; to begin such
things, whose accomplishment must depend on the Pleasure of our Successors.
Consideration and faithful Counsel would in this case have prevented the
fruitless Expense of many Men's Time and Money; which if otherwise employed,
might have turned to good account to themselves and others.

And this heightens our Folly, that while we pursue great Projects in reference
to this World, and dye without effecting them, our preparations for Eternity
are neglected; and so we are suddenly cut off in the midst of our Folly, and
all our Thoughts perish. How easily, how soon may they do so! The difference
and distance between Death and Life, being no more than that of a Candle
lighted, from its being blown out; and if it is exposed to all Winds, how
quickly may that happen?

XVIII. The consideration of the certain near Approach of an Everlasting State
amplified, and pressed, to enforce an Holy Life.
IN this World we begin a Year, and quickly come to the end of it; and ere long
the little number of our Years, and Days, will be expired. But when Death
conveys us into the World of Spirits, the day of Eternity shall never be closed
with an Evening. Of how fearful consequence is that Death, by which an Eternity
must be decided! What attention, what seriousness, what diligence, what care,
does the dicision of so important a matter call for! ETERNAL! what will be the
next word, O my Soul! how much am I concerned to know it! will it be
Blessedness, or Misery? will it be Life or Death? This one word is the Joy of
Angels, and the Horror of Devils; the unspeakable delight of blessed Saints,
and the confusion and despair of condemned Sinners.

At the Creation of the World, Time got the start of us, and was five days
elder then we: but our Immortal Souls shall endure beyond the utmost limits of
Time, and last as long as the Everlasting Father of Spirits, of whose duration
there is no end. Shall I then exist and live, though my Body perish and see
corruption? Shall my Soul, my Self exist beyond the Grave, in Felicity or
Misery, and that for ever and according to my present Actions? What am I then
most concerned to mind? What am I to choose? What am I most to fear, to wish, to
do? What is a shadow of Honor and Reputation among dying Men? What are a few
drops of fleshly Pleasure for a Moment, to eternal Rivers of Pleasure, at God's
right hand? What are the sufferings of an hour or two, to the pains and anguish
of Eternity? What can the World, Flesh, or Devil give me, comparable to eternal
Life? What can I suffer in the way of Holiness, that may be set in the Balance
against an Everlasting Hell? And yet how often, O my Soul! how boldly, how
unconcernedly, how foolishly do I hazard the one, and forfeit the other, for
the Sins and Vanities of this World! Whereas one prospect of Eternity should
make every thing that is Temporal, appear little in my Eyes: the highest
elevation of earthly Greatness, abundance of Riches, the great Affairs,
Business, and Employments of the World, Pomp, and Splendour, and Reputation, and
all that now flatters the Senses, and the vanity of Mankind.

Oh that I could but live as believing and expecting an Eternal State! as
having it in my Eye, managing all my affairs with a visible reference to it;
discovering to all the World by my Behavior and Deportment, that I do in
earnest believe it certain; for be it never so Certain, if I do not apprehend,
and consider it as such, it will no more affect me than a Fable. Neither is it
enough to consider it as certain, but as near: for the most weighty, the most
terrible things, apprehended as at a great distance, will little move. Thinking
of the long Interval between the advantage of being exempted from such Evils
for so long a time, will please me more than such distant Calamities will
affright.

Let me therefore endeavor to impress the consideration of Eternity, as at
hand, more deeply on my Heart, that I may walk, and live, discourse, and pray,
and demean my self in every thing, as near an unchangeable State. Am I not
convinced that this is certain, from the nature and operations of my Soul, from
the reflections of Conscience, from the Righteousness of God, in his Government
of the World, from the present unequal distributions of Good, and Evil by his
Providence, and from the plain and frequent assertions of his Revealed Will? I
have nothing to object, nothing to reply; but I find a necessity of inculcating
and urging the consideration of it in order to its influence. I find it needful
to reflect often, how near I am to such an endless State: that in one Instant,
by Death, I enter upon it: and that this Instant may be as near me, as my next
Thought. That the holy Scripture describes the two contrary Conditions after
death, (and every Man and Woman in the World shall share in one of them) as
both Everlasting: the one, by Eternal Life, Eternal Glory, an incorruptible
Crown, that fades not away, an incorruptible Inheritance, an House Eternal in
the Heavens, etc. the other, by unquenchable Fire, a Prison whence no escape,
Eternal Damnation, Everlasting Burning, everlasting Punishment, everlasting
Destruction, a Worm that never dies, wrath that is ever to come, blackness of
darkness for ever, ever, etc.

Think, O my Soul! that in one of these two contrary States, I must abide for
ever; In endless Joy, or Sorrow: Blessed in the Presence of God, or for ever
banished from it. And whoever thou art that read this, apply it seriously to
thy self, it is thine own case. Yea I tell thee from God, that Holiness of Heart
and Life is absolutely necessary to the former, and that without it thou shall
never see his Face, but be punished with Everlasting Destruction from the
Presence of his Glory.

Is this an unquestionable Truth? O let me consider it, till I feel the Power
and Efficacy of so important a Principle! let the Impression be deep and
lasting! let it pierce and enter into my very Soul! to cool the heats of Lust,
to quench sensual and earthly desires, and to mortify all inordinate
affections to this World; and fix my resolutions to mind and seek Eternal Life
with all my Heart!

These are not difficult and perplexed Niceties, which wise and holy Men differ
and disagree about. They are not Metaphisical Subtleties, which few can
understand; but the express Word of God, and the daily dictates of my own
Reason and Conscience, which all Christians, and almost all Men in their Wits,
except in an hour of great Temptation, confess and own; or whether they will or
no, are forced to expect and fear, if they are not in a condition, to consider
them with a joyful Hope.

Lord! cure the unbelieving doubts concerning these Great things, which
notwithstanding the plainest Evidence, the Devil may at any time suggest! let a
confirmed Faith, be the Reality of what is thus future, that my Soul may be
influenced by them, as it is wont to be by things present! Let it be the
Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things unseen, and as yet at
a distance; as if the Day of Judgment were already come, and there were no
intermediate Time to pass between this and that.

O Eternity! Eternity! the more I consider it, the more unfathomable still I
find it. Unchangeable Blessedness, or remediless, endless Torments! An Eternal
blissful Day, or everlasting Horror, Darkness, and Despair! Life or Death,
Glory or Destruction, to last as long as the immutable Living God! None of the
Patriarchs who lived longest, arrived to the period of a Thousand years, which
in comparison of God's Everlastingness is set forth but as one day. But
strictly considered, millions of Years and Ages have no proportion with it;
because no multiplication of them will amount to Eternity. Whereas one hour
has some proportion to an hundred thousand years, Because a certain number of
Hours will amount to so many years. But no number of Years or Ages, never so
often multiplied, will make up Eternity: as no substraction of Millions of
Years will lessen it: and entire Eternity will be still to come, and will ever
be to come. When innumerable myriads of years are past, Eternity shall then
seem but to begin; because when as many more are over, it shall be as far from
an end. Oh that the thoughts of Eternity may be powerful and prevailing above
all others! that I may Judge of every thing by its relation to it, by its
influence upon it! Choose now, my Soul! whether Everlasting Joys, or Miseries,
shall be thy Portion: but consider well, that thine Eternity is concerned in
thy present choice: and that this choice must be pursued with stedfastness and
constancy, as long as I live: And what are a few years to prepare for an
Eternal State? were we obliged to spend several hundred years in serious humble
preparation for it, with the greatest strictness and severity of Life, during
all that Time; it were infinitely less than to spend an hour or two in
preparing for the greatest Dignity and Employ on Earth, which can be enjoyed
but for a few years at longest. For to these an hour has some proportion; but
an hundred or thousand years have none, with an Everlasting Duration. Therefore
to consider how many years of toil, and pains, and diligence, many bestow on
the probable prospect of some Temporal Good, should reprove and shame my
negligence and remisness in providing for Eternity.

XIX. The Punishments of the Damned considered, as Intolerable, and
Everlasting, and as unquestionably Certain. What the Reflection upon
Hell Torments, may and ought to teach us.
THE Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom, the entrance into the way of
Life, as it is ordinarily one of the first means to awaken the Soul to a
serious concern for Eternity: Let me therefore first consider the Endless
Punishment of the wicked, in the other World, before I enter upon the ravishing
Prospect of the Blessedness of Heaven, promised to the Righteous. And with what
serious trembling should I think of the Terrors of an Everlasting Destruction,
which our Lord shall be revealed from Heaven to render, to All who know not
God, and obey not the Gospel. When the wicked shall go away into Everlasting
Punishment; as the Righteous into Life Eternal. The dreadfulness of that
Punishment, the endless Duration of it, joined to the consideration of its
unquestionable Certainty, deserves the most attentive Thoughts of every Man,
who loves his Soul, and would manifest he does so, by securing his greatest
Interest.

The description of that Misery, under insupportable and Eternal Torments,
demands more than a transient view: because no words can sufficiently express
the Horror of that State. What is it, O my Soul! to be banished from the
Blessed Sight and presence of God for ever, and all the impressions of his holy
Image and likeness? and to know that this is the fruit of my own choice, that I
lost it by my own Fault and Folly; that I deserved to lose it; that the
Sentence is as Just, as it is irrecoverable? Who can fully imagine the dismal
despair of a condemned Sinner, under this anguish of a Guilty self-accusing
Mind? while under the stroke of God's Almighty revenging Justice, with a
distincter view and knowledge than now, of God and his Excellencies, of himself
and his own vileness and malignity, which must greatly increase his rage and
Torment. Add to this, his being enraged by the accusations and cries of wicked
Acquaintance, and Relations; and his being mocked, and insulted over, and
tortured, by malicious damned Spirits; with a clear understanding of that
glorious Felicity he despised, refused, and forfeited; with a deep sense of his
former Madness in preferring the sinful Pleasures and Advantages of this World;
and this after so many warnings, and invitations, and calls from God, to have
prevented it; never to be diverted one Moment from the consideration, sense and
feeling of his Misery, and the duration of it; to have all his Passions let
loose with the greatest violence, and nothing to satisfy them; and continually
to preserve an Hell of wickedness and Horror in himself; and to endure the
reproaches, convictions, regrets, and stinging Reflections of Conscience, the
gnawing Worm, which shall never dye; who can conceive the unspeakable misery of
such an accursed State? So great Calamity, and yet Everlasting! How long does
one Day or Night now seem, to a Man under some violent racking Pain, in any one
part of his Body, though he be under the means for Cure, and have his Friends
about him to pity, comfort, assist him, with the hopes of Ease in a little
while, and the certain, knowledge that it cannot last long? Oh what then will
be the dismal state of tormented Vide Mr. Baxter's Saints Rest, part 2. chap. 4.
Sinners in Hell! How infinitely must it exceed the most terrible Idea we can
now frame of it! to languish out a long Eternity in that Gulf of Darkness and
Despair, under unpitied intolerable Torments, without Intermission, or hope of
End! Miseries without measure! Judgment without Mercy! Pains and Sorrows
intense, and yet endless! without the least succor or relief, relaxation or
remedy, diminution or change! without a drop of Comfort, without a moments
Rest, without the smallest beam of Light, or the least glimmering of Hope!
Perpetually dying, and never dead! under unsufferable Wrath, which yet will be
for ever Wrath to come! seeking Death, and never able to find it, but Eternally
to endure all that Calamity, which the Conjunction of Death and Life together
can render dreadful! What Groans and Cries will these Thoughts, and these
sufferings wring from their Hearts? But no refuge will then be found, no
excuses admitted, no Prayers, no entreaties will then prevail no Tears move
Pity. He that made them, will show them no Mercy, and he that formed them, will
show them no favor. It Is Never, Never that is the killing word that breaks the
Heart of those hopeless Prisoners in the place of Torment. When once delivered
over to that Prison of Gods Wrath, they shall no longer be prisoners of Hope.
Judgment shall be brought forth unto final victory: and the Redemption of the
Soul shall cease for ever.

The vain hopes of Sinners shall then be ended in eternal desperation: Hell
will be full of those, who did once hope they should never come there, and full
of those who despair of deliverance from thence; but shall suffer exquisite
Pains that cannot be numbered, or measured, or endured, but that every Minute of
an hour will seem an whole Year, and yet must eternally be endured by miserable
Sinners, who will not be wise in time to prevent such an intolerable Portion.
Let me therefore, O my Soul, descend into Hell by Meditation whilst I live,
that I may not descend thither when I dye, and be shut up for ever in that
Prison, the place of endless Torment.

Might we but suppose, that one of those Miserable Souls did let fall but one
Tear, in an hundred thousand years; and if after he had by this means wept so
much, as that his Tears would equal the drops of water in the whole Sea, his
Misery should have an end; this were Hope, this were Comfort. But alas! after
that Period, his Misery will be as far from an end, as when he first began to
feel it. It will then be but the Beginning of Sorrows, which will never, never,
never End.

Think, O my Soul, that this is the Portion of the Sinners Cup; this is the
wages of Sin, and the certain doom of final Impenitence and Unbelief. It Is no
politic Cheat, or melancholy dream, but the express repeated word of God, and
Christ, the holy Prophets and Apostles, and the voice of Reason too, supposing
but the Immortality of the Soul, and the power of self-Reflection, the
punishment of Sinners must needs be Everlasting, as carrying continually an
Hell within them; unless God work a miracle to prevent it, which there is no
ground to imagine he will, or shadow of reason why he should. God has pawned
his Truth, and his Deuteronomy. 32. c. 40, 41.
Eternity, to execute this Sentence of his threatened wrath. He is a God of
infinite Mercy, it is true; but he has told us how far his Mercy shall extend.
He will not exercise one Attribute to the dishonor and the disparagement of
the rest. That obstinate and impenitent Sinners, shall thus perish, is not
because the goodness and mercy of God are not infinite, but because his other
Perfections are so, viz. His Holiness, Justice, Truth, Sovereignty, and Wisdom.
Was it Wisdom and Goodness to annex such a Penalty to the violation of his Law;
and can it be inconsistent with them, to inflict his threatened wrath? Shall we
suppose God to uphold his Dominion and Government by a Falsehood? to keep the
World in awe by the menaces of such Punishments, as shall no where, never be
executed? Is it unlikely, that God should exercise so much severity? and is it
not as improbable, that his repeated Word and Oath should prove false? Is it
not a righteous thing with God, as the Governor of the World, thus to punish
the obstinate Despisers of his Grace? who slighted his Authority, disobeyed his
Law, affronted his Sovereignty, derided his Power, denied his Truth,
contradicted his Holiness, and joined Issue with the Devil, to pull him from
his Throne; who abused his Patience and Long-suffering, and scorned all his
threatenings; who thrust away their own Happiness, and would not take warning;
who burst all his bands asunder, and broke through all obstructions; and would
not be stopped in their course of Vanity and Folly, or so much as consider their
danger; who rejected his calls to Repentance, and refused his Mercy, when it
was offered; and preferred a Lust before his favor, and the Pleasures and
Profits of this World before the Heavenly Glory; and notwithstanding all the
methods of his Grace, and the checks of his Providence, and of their own
Conscience, they will go on, they will Dye? Let me, O my Soul! adore the
Sovereign Justice of God in all his Judgments; and tremble at the threatenings
of that Eternal Wrath, which so few consider or believe, till it is too late.
Let the foresight and the fear of such an intolerable endless Punishment, be a
means to save me from it! Let me herein read the evil of Sin, and learn to
abhor and avoid it. Let me pity, and warn, and counsel, and pray for those of
my Relations and Acquaintance, who live in Sin, and run the hazard of this
Eternal Ruin. Let me not envy the foolish Mirth, and momentany Prosperity of
the Wicked, whose present joy must ere long expire, and an everlasting
Destruction succeed in its room. Joh. 20. chapter 4, 5.
How short is the Joy of the Hypocrite! and the triumph of the Wicked is but
for a Moment. Let me fear and dread every thing, that leads to this dismal
issue, and improve every thing that may help me to escape it. And by
consequence, let me less value all the Good and Evil of this present Life;
judge of all things by this light; be patient under temporal Calamities, and
thank God that it is not Hell; and thank him more, that present sufferings do
help to save me from Eternal ones.

Whatever I can suffer in this World, let my condition be never so dark and sad
and afflicted, it is not, it cannot be such, but that every one of the Damned
would think it an infinite Happiness to exchange with me, and be as I am. Let
me think of those exquisite and eternal Flames, to cure my Impatience under the
sharpest Trials and Afflictions I may now suffer.

Did I believingly consider an Everlasting Hell Qui non expergiscitur ad haec
Tonitrua, jam non dormit, sed mortuus est. S. Augustine.
, I should not think much of any thing that is required to prevent it. The
severest exercises of Religion, the strictest Temperance, the nicest Chastity,
the largest Charity, the greatest Self-denial, all the hardships of Repentance
and Mortification, and continuance therein to the Death, tho for many years
more than I am like to live, would be reckoned easy, as well as just, if set
in the balance against the Eternal Mischiefs of the Damned.

What will not men do and suffer to prevent a Temporal Death? They will endure
a painful course of Physic; tear out their very bowels, by Purges and Vomits:
and are content to be cut and scarrified, and to suffer any thing almost to
save their lives: But how little will they do to be saved from the wrath to
come! One would think, they should have no Rest, or Peace, or be able to live a
quiet hour, till they had made some Provision against the hazard of this
Eternal Destruction: and look upon all men as their Friends, or Enemies,
according to the help, or hindrance, they received from them, in reference to
it. But the direct Contrary is every where apparent. Men are careless and
secure, jovial and merry in the way that leads to Hell; and esteem, and love,
and choose that Company that will help to bring them to this place of torment:
Yea, such is their stupidity, and strange perverseness, that they will not
suffer to be told of their Danger. If you tell them, that by such a Course, or
such an Action, they will lose so much Money, or their Lives will be in danger;
they reckon it an obligation, will take it kindly, and return you thanks: But
when they are told, by such Courses and Actions they will lose their Souls, and
the Favor of God, and the Hopes of Heaven, and must Perish for ever; this they
will not receive, they despise the message, and scorn and hate the Messenger;
are displeased and angry at such faithfulness.

O bless the Lord, O my Soul! for any good hope through Grace, of escaping this
Intolerable and Endless Misery. And let all that is within me bless his holy
Name. I have deserved the same endless and unsupportable wrath, which Thousands
are now under, and shall be under to all Eternity; but he did not suffer me to
fall into it. To be delivered out of those Torments after many years misery,
would be thought an admirable, unspeakable kindness; And is it not a greater
favor never to be thrown into Hell, which I have so often deserved? How
grateful would a damned person be, to be freed from those Flames, and placed in
the same condition I now am in? What a Life of serious, self-denying obedience
would he lead? And has not God done more for me? Am I not more indebted to his
Goodness? He has kept me out of Hell, and offers me the Heavenly Glory upon
reasonable, honorable, and easy Terms. Blessed be God, I may yet escape the
wrath to come.

Let me heartily compassionate the delusion of those multitudes of deceived,
perishing Souls, whose eyes are blinded by the God of this world; who will not
believe it, till they are convinced by the light of that Fire which shall never
be extinguished. Yea, when I read, or hear of Ten or Twenty thousand men slain
in a War, (whteher of Infidels or Christians) let me think of it, with other
apprehensions than formerly I was wont to do. Considering that many, it may be,
the most of these shall never have any Comfort or Mercy more; fearing lest the
same Sword or Bullet that gave them their mortal wound, has fixed them under
God's Everlasting Wrath; and that by dying, they are undone for ever. In very
many other cases, the Faith of this Article would rectify my Opinion, and
direct my Actions, if seriously considered and improved. This would make me
think of Death under another Notion, than it is commonly considered. For without
the consideration of Hell annexed to it, it is not so very formidable, but that
Heathens have been able to despise it. The most contrary Sects among them, on
different grounds have been able to do it; but consider Death as a passage to
Eternal misery, as the Gate of Hell, as the end of all Comfort to a wicked Man,
and the beginning of an endless Calamity, and nothing can be imagined more
dreadful to a Guilty unholy Soul. Some of my Acquaintance, it may be, who died
this last year, are now among those Hopeless, Despairing Wretches, who expect
the final Judgment of God, to consummate their insupportable Misery. If they
were permitted to come, and tell us what they suffer, and what they know; what
a terrible consuming Fire God is; what Vanity, Lust and Folly, brought them to
this place of Torment; what diligence they would advise us to, while in a State
of Hope, to prevent the like; if we have any love and and kindness for our
selves, any Bowels of Compassion to our own Souls; what a Change do we think it
would work upon us? But if we will nor hear Moses and the Prophets, Christ, and
his Apostles, neither should we believe, tho one came from the Dead.

XX. The Eternal Blessedness of HEAVEN considered, as the Perfection of
Holiness, to quicken our desires and endeavors after greater Meetness to
possess it.
Does one year after another hasten me to the end of Time? And does the
Blessedness of Eternity depend on the Communications I now receive from God? On
the Preparations I now make, and the Meetness I can now attain for Eternal
Felicity in the Presence of my God and Savior? O, with what Intenseness of
mind, should I now prosecute that glorious Object! with what unwearied
diligence should I run the race that is set before me, lest I fall short of the
Incorruptible Crown of Life? How should every thing be undervalued and
rejected, that would divert, retard, or hinder me from pursuing this end? Lord!
be not a stranger to my Soul in this distant Wilderness state! Let me see more
of thy Light! be transformed more into thine Image! experience more of thy
Love! feel more of thy vital Presence, and quickening Spirit! let the Divine
Life in my Soul be more powerful! and the Characters of thy Likeness be more
legibly stamped upon it! by the daily exercise of Faith, and Hope, and holy
Affections, carry me through this World! till my Pilgrim state be over, and
thou have brought me to perfect Everlasting Holiness! And let the believing
fore-thoughts of it, till all the Powers of my Soul with Joy, and Wonder,
Desire and Love!

Give me, Lord! to think a right of the Heavenly Glory; as a confirmed State of
positive perfect Holiness; of heavenly Light, Love, Liberty and Joy; with the
satisfying Vision of God, in the Face of Christ, and his impressed Likeness;
dwelling for ever in the direct and steady view of his transforming Glory; with
complete conformity of the Soul to Eternal Goodness, Truth and Love, as its
Perfection; esteeming nothing, desiring nothing but that God and Christ may be
glorified with an entire Subjection to his Will, adherence to him; Rest and
Confidence in him, swallowed up in the Love, Admiration, and Praise of God, and
our Lord Jesus, living in joyful repeated Acts of Subjection, Adoration, and
acknowledged Dependence; ravished to behold the Glory of God, in the Face of
Christ, to see his blessed Image perfect in every one of the Saints, etc. When
all the present Blindness of our Minds, the Errors of our Judgment, the
Perverseness of our Will, the Disorder and Rebellion of our Passions, the
remaining Aversation from God, and Disaffection to him, which in this World we
complain of, shall all be done away: The Flesh shall no more Lust against the
Spirit; or the Law in our Members against the Law of our Minds; but an
everlasting Tranquillity and holy Peace take place; a Peace which passes all
understanding, without any outward Molestation, or inward cause of Disquiet.

Our corrupted Nature shall no more cast forth Mire and Dirt as now; we shall
have no more vain or wicked Thoughts, no more sinful Fears, or foolish Hopes;
unbecoming Heats, unruly Desires, sensual Inclinations, earthly Affections,
feeble, slothful, spiritless Duties, dead and heartless Prayers, cold
Thanksgivings, etc. but as we shall then know God without Error, and see our
Lord Jesus face to face, so we shall love him without reserve, more than now we
can think, and serve him without Dullness and Distraction, and Praise him
without Weariness; the spiritual Actings of our Souls shall have no allay of
Dross. And thus shall we be with him, and admire and enjoy him, without end.

Thus when Death is swallowed up in victory; and what was imperfect is done
away, and what was Corruptible and Mortal, has put on Immortality; God in
Christ shall be All in All: And when it is truly and perfectly so, Then it is
Heaven. The blessedness whereof is unconceivable. A Blessed Person is not
expressed in the singular Number by the Hebrews, but in the abstract, and in the
Plural. Beatitudes instead of Blessed, because the Blessings are as many and
great, as they have Powers and Capacities to partake of Blessedness; so will it
be in Heaven. A Word, tho commonly used as little understood, as Holiness;
which is one of the greatest Mysteries in the World. But will hereafter be
fully and delightfully understood by the Blessed Saints; as the Malignity and
intrinsic Evil of Sin shall be, by the damned Spirits.

Oh, that I might now feel more of this Heavenly Life, begun and carried on in
my Soul, by a farther Participation of his holy Image, and Conformity to his
Will! by more vital Effects of his indwelling Spirit in my Soul, forming it to
be a Temple to himself, for his own delightful Residence! that forgetting that,
which I have received, I may still be Covetous, and desirous of more;
forgetting what I have attained, I may press on with an holy Eagerness and
Fervency toward the Mark!

When I seriously examine my own heart, had I nothing else to prove the
weakness of my Grace, and the sinful remainders of Unbelief, but the low
desires, and few comfortable Thoughts, the seldom joyful prospect of this
Blessed State; how sad an Evidence were it of my low seize, that I
breathe with no more Impatience, after that Blessed, Holy Rest, in the
enjoyment of God and Christ; and labor no more in preparing for it? When we
profess to believe that all the Desires of our Souls shall be fixed on Him, and
filled with Him, as our Infinite and Supreme Good; and all the Expectations of
Faith and Hope, swallowed up in endless Admiration, Gratitude and Joy; being
fully satisfied, and at Rest in the Presence and Vision of God; without the
least Inclination or Desire of Change. And by consequence,

There will be no need of Novelty, as now, to give a relish to our Happiness.
All Happiness in this World is by comparing a Man's present Condition, with his
past, or with that of some Inferiors. But the Intrinsic Good, Felicity, and
Joy of Heaven, will need no such Foil to set it off; no such Comparison to make
it prized. The Blessed Spirits will never lose the lively Sense of that low and
miserable Condition, from which they were raised to so great a Glory; and so
will ever equally rejoice in the Happiness of their Translation and wonderful
Change. And what was at first delightful, will for ever be so; and not be
disdained or lessened by a continuance; as it happens in this World, from the
Emptiness, Shallowness, and Vanity of the Creature. An Affectation of Variety,
and desire of Change, proceeding always from a Sense of Want. But Holy Souls
shall never be weary of seeing, loving and enjoying God; his blessed Presence
will afford us undecaying and endless Satisfaction; Pleasure, never to be
interrupted, or abated, and never to cease. The blessed Object is absolutely
Infinite, and so will be always new to a finite understanding; and continual
fresh Communications from his infinite fullness, must needs make our subjective
Happiness to be always new, and eternally such.

Let me by such Thoughts quicken and excite my diligent Endeavors, after a
greater meetness to enjoy so great a Bliss. And to that end, consider whether
any of those happy Souls, who have finished their Course, and obtained the
Prize, do now regret their utmost Diligence, Patience, and Perseverance, during
their short abode here, to secure the Blessedness of an endless Life: No, no,
they are far from repenting the Time they spent, the Trouble they were at, the
Care they used, the Difficulties they met with, the Sufferings they endured; to
conflict with the World, and the Flesh, to resist Temptation, to watch over
their Hearts, and Words, and Ways, to work out their Salvation, to please God,
and be faithful to him, etc. They find to their unspeakable Comfort, and
everlasting Joy, that Heaven makes amends for all they could do or suffer in
order to their coming thither. Yea, they find that they were not Diligent, and
Humble, and Patient, and Circumspect enough. That they did not love God, and
seek his Glory, redeem their Time, and improve all their Talents and
Opportunities of doing and receiving Good, and give up themselves entirely to
prepare for Heaven, to that degree they should have done. They find by the
transcendency of the blessed Recompense, that it deserved infinitely more than
the most Active, Zealous Christian upon Earth did ever do, in order to it.

Lord! quicken my Resolutions and Endeavors by such thoughts as these? Inspire
my sluggish, carnal Heart, with holy Light, and Life, and Zeal, and Fervor!
that looking to the things which are not seen, which are Eternal: I may 1 Timothy
1.19.
lay up a good Foundation against the Time to come, and so lay hold of eternal
Life!

But alas! How much have I neglected the great Duty of Holy Meditation? How
little skill and experience have I in it? How tastless and insipid oftentimes
are my Thoughts of God! how confused and unsteady! how little Pleasure or
Advantage have I by contemplating his highest Excellencies? Yet methinks, could
I but retain the same awakened, lively thoughts of Heaven, and Eternal Life,
which sometimes I have had; might I continually feel the sweet and sacred
Influence, as for a little season I have sometimes felt it; how little, how
very a Nothing, would all this World be to me! how comparatively weak, its
strongest and most alluring Snares, to draw me off from God! with what an
unshaken mind could I refuse and resist 'em! with what an unconcerned
indifference could I look upon all its most charming Glory!

Could I maintain such a frame of Spirit, as I have sometimes had for a little
while, in the serious Contemplation of Divine Mysteries, in Fervent Prayers,
and other Solemn Duties of Religion; when the acts of Faith were strong and
lively, my Heart set on fire with love to God, and holy breathings after him;
admiring his matchless Grace to fallen Sinners, (and to my Soul in particular)
when he brought me to the very Suburbs of Heaven, (tho alas! how seldom!) by
the delightful Thought of what the Blessed Spirits above enjoy, in being where
Christ is, and beholding his Glory; when I was ready to say within my self,
It Is good to be here; this is no other than the Gate of Heaven; Oh, when shall
Mortality be swallowed up of Life! But when I thought at any time to fix and
settle in such sweet Contemplations, how quickly did my lazy backward Heart fly
off! how soon did the flame decay and dye away! how soon did I find my self
fallen down to Earth again! sunk down from the Bosom of my Lord, presently
forgot my self and Heaven, to dwell among the Pots, and embrace a Dunghill!
'Twas not on my own Wings, O Lord! that I soared so high; but I hope by the
breathings of that holy Spirit of Light and Love, who blows when, and where,
and how long he lists. Who gave me at any time any such first fruits of the
Spirit; who convinced me of the Certainty of the Heavenly Inheritance, by a
lively believing foresight of it; who made me earnestly desire the Wings of a
Dove to be gone, and appear before God in Sion; made me Pant and Groan to be
delivered, and to be with God and Christ, with inexpressible Desire and Joy,
unconceivably mixed with Sighs and Groans. O my God! let not this experience be
only such a Taste of the Powers of the World to come, as is consistent with
final Apostasy! only the seeming Zeal of the stony Ground! the rapturous Joy of
an Hypocrite! from the Power of Imagination, and a heated Fancy; from the
workings of mere natural Self-love; upon mistaken apprehensions of God, and a
false Opinion of Heaven; but by the holy effects, let me be assured of the
Cause and Principle; that it was of God!

Teach me from the sweetness of a Spiritual Communion with God now in any of
his appointed Ordinances, to argue to my self what that most ravishing
Satisfaction will be, that the Enjoyment of God in Heaven will afford the Soul.
Our Holiness is now imperfect, to what it shall be: and therefore our
Consolation, Peace and Joy, is but in part, and incomparably less than we are
assured it will be, when we shall be admitted to behold the Glory of the Lord.
It Is now at most, but as the Break of Day, to the Luster of the Meridian Sun.
But if in this low imperfect State, we can sometimes obtain so near a View of
his Glory, and feel such sweet Communications of his Grace; how much more of
this Consolation and Joy is reserved to Heaven? If in this Pilgrim State, the
Gifts and Graces, and Comforts of the Holy Spirit are so refreshing: O! what
has God prepared beyond the Grave, for those who love him? If now he sometimes
shed abroad his love in our Heart, after such a manner; how much better shall I
love him, and feel the influence, and evidence of his Love to me, when I shall
be with him, and see him Face to Face? If the apprehensions of this future.
Blessedness, do now encourage, raise, and animate my drooping Soul: O, what
shall I know and see? And how shall I rejoice, when the Vail is removed? If a
Sacramental Communion with God and Jesus Christ, be sometimes so sweet, and so
affecting; what will the Blessed Communion with God, and all his Saints above
amount to! when I shall sit down with all the Children of God, in the Presence
of the Bridegroom, at the last great Supper of the Lamb in Glory! If the
Earnest of our Inheritance be so reviving, what will be the full Possession of
it? If the Hopes of that glorious Day, by holy Meditation, be so transporting;
what will be the end of our Faith and Hope? If a Grape or two in the
Wilderness, be such a Cordial; what will be the whole Vintage in the Land of
Promise?

Shall I after all this, forget my own Experience, and run from God and Heaven,
to embrace or seek a perishing Toy? Shall I hide my self with Saul, among the
Stuff and Lumber of this World, when God is calling me to a Glorious Crown? Art
thou, O my Soul! a King's Son, an Heir of Heaven, an expectant of such great
Felicity, and yet stoop so low? Hope for Heaven, and yet grasp this Earth, and
hug the vain Appearances of earthly Good? Hope to be like to God; (and oh how
Glorious an Hope is that!) to partake of his Image, and live Eternally with
him; and yet be sollicitous, anxious, and disquieted about Honor and Money,
and a Temporal Interest? And mightily concerned about the momentany
Gratifications of the Flesh, and the Enjoyments of this World? Art thou a
Pilgrim and Stranger here, and traveling home to the Heavenly Country, and yet
eager and passionate about earthly Things? Should an Heart that is set upon
Heaven, (or may be so, and ought to be so) should it burn with such Kitchen,
such common Fire? And neglect the unconceivable Riches and Pleasures, and
immortal Honors of the other Life, and the dawnings of that Glory upon my
Soul, by the foretasts of it in this? How great is the disproportion between
the Heavens and the Earth? How vast the Circumference of the one, and how small
a Point the other? How many thousand Miles does the Sun travel in the Heavens,
while it passes but one Inch upon a Dial? Oh that my Affections were carried
to heavenly Things, with a swiftness somewhat answerable to the glorious
Object. And let their motion to earthly Things be rather slow and insensible,
like that of the Sun on a Dial. Since I profess to believe, and wait for the
heavenly Glory, should I not live, as seeking such things, as expecting such a
Glory? And are careless and indifferent Thoughts, sleepy heartless Prayers,
faint and weak Endeavors, becoming in such a case? Shall I not mend my Pace,
and double my Diligence in my preparatory Work? When I can believingly foresee
the blessed Recompense; waiting for that Everlasting Light of the Sun of
Righteousness, which no Eclipse shall ever darken or obscure; for that Eternal
Glorious Day, which shall never be closed with an Evening. When I shall see the
Face of God in Christ, and be like him, participate more of his Image, rest in
his Love, and dwell for ever in the Light of his Countenance, according to the
Prayer and Promise of my Blessed Savior.

And ought not such a prospect to sweeten the Bitterness of all our
intermediate Sufferings? We are now oftentimes in Heaviness and Sorrow; but
Eternity will be enough for an interrupted Joy. When we shall exchange all our
Troubles for everlasting Rest, our Prisons for perfect Liberty, our Poverty for
the Riches of God; Darkness for Light; discord for Love; Deformity for Beauty;
our Weaknesses and present Languishings, for Strength and Vigor; Folly for
Wisdom; Disgrace for Glory; Sickness and Pain for eternal Ease and Health; the
Animal for the Angelical Life; Imperfection and Pollution for consummate
Holiness; our Sighs, and Tears, and Sorrows, and Complaints, for triumphant
Everlasting Praise; our Losses, Affronts, Disappointments, Perplexities, Fears,
Groans, and Death, for Crowns and Scepters, Hymns and Hallelujahs, Light and
Life, and Bliss unutterable; and such great things as are fit for us to hope,
but too great to be now particularly understood and talked of; while we know but
in part, and see through a Glass darkly; yea, it seems as if it were not lawful
to utter 'em, 2 Cor. 12.4. and now they cannot be expressed, or fully known; for
Eye has not seen, or Ear heard, or can it enter into the Heart of man to
conceive that prepared Glory.

XXI. A devout Meditation upon the 73. Psalm 25. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee.
WHat is there in Heaven or in Earth, O Lord! but thy Presence to be valued,
loved, desired, chosen, sought, or delighted in? There is nothing in either
World desirable without Thee, nothing certainly above Thee, nothing in
Comparison with Thee. In Thee alone I trust; on Thee I depend; in Thee I repose
my Confidence and Hope; from Thee I expect all my Felicity and Salvation. What
ever I can lose, yet with the continuance of thy Favor, which is my Life, I
have still Enough. With that I am Rich, without it I am Poor and Miserable. And
if I want the Love of God, all that Heaven and Earth can give besides, will not
make me Happy. In Thee, therefore, I would terminate all my Affections, all my
Devotions! There is nothing of Heaven to be had on Earth, but in thy Favor,
Image and Love, and the reviving Sense of it. And all the Heaven I expect
hereafter, it is in the more full and immediate Communications of these in thy
blessed Presence. I can desire nothing upon Earth; I can enjoy nothing in
Heaven, but Thee! both here and there, thou art, and shall ever be my
all-sufficient satisfactory Portion, my Everlasting All! None else can be the
Portion of my Soul. Nothing else can fill up all its Wants, answer all its
Cravings, be suited to all its Capacities, appease and charm all its restless
Motions, and give complacence to all its Desires, and be the proper Object of
all its Affections.

What is there else can justly claim my Love, or pretend to my supreme
Affection in comparison with God? Thou art alone the proper Center of it. Thine
infinite and incomparable Excellencies, (who art Love it self) deserve my
choicest Love; and thy numberless Mercies and Benefits, challenge it as a just
Debt; as a piece of Homage due from all, and of special Gratitude also from me.
Oh that I could love thee above all things! who alone art worthy of all my
Love! O that Divine Love might be the ruling Principle within me! to inspire
all my Thoughts, to regulate all my desires, to set all the Powers of my Soul
on Work! O that it might take the full Possession of my Heart, and so animate
and order all my Actions to please him, whom my Soul loves! If as yet I cannot
say with thine Apostle, Lord! thou that know all things, thou know that I
Love thee. Yet I can say, Lord, thou know that I would Love thee! Thou have
provided for our Happiness, by that first and great Command of loving thee with
all our Hearts, and Souls, and Strength. But alas! how backward is my sluggish
carnal Heart, to this delightful Exercise? Tho I have so often been told, that
God is Love, and that he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in
him. O shed abroad thy Love into my Soul! that I may feel the vital Power and
Influence of it, and live continually in the Love of God, and that nothing may
ever be able to separate me from it.

Whom have I in Heaven or Earth, to Hope in, but Thee? I expect more from
Creatures, than they can or will perform; but God can do for me more abundantly
than I can ask or think; exceed my largest thoughts, outstrip my highest
Expectations. And no man was ever disappointed, who made Thee his Hope. When I
meet with Crosses, and Wrongs, Unfaithfulness, Contempt, Hatred, and
Persecution from Men, I need not wonder; I was never told by God, it would be
otherwise here. Did I look for less from Creatures, and expect more from God;
Did I reckon this World to be a state of Trial, and not a place of Rest and
Satisfaction; My Faith and my Desires would be stronger with respect to God and
Heaven; and temporal Calamities and Disappointments less afflictive and
vexatious.

And what is there, O Lord! in Heaven, or in Earth, my Soul can desire besides
Thee? Is there any thing desirable, but as it is thine, of thee, and from thee?
And bears some Impression of thine Excellence, or brings some Intimation of thy
Love? And what can I reasonably desire; what that is worth desiring, or having,
but thou art able to be, and do, and give?

In whom, or what, shall I Rejoice, but in Thee, O Lord! shall I solace my self
in transitory Goods, that slip between my Fingers, and perish in the Using? or
relish carnal Joys, which pollute and debase the Soul? When I may and ought to
Rejoice in Thee at all Times, as the only Source of perfect Everlasting Joy.
Let me then stir up my drooping, desponding, unbelieving Heart, to rejoice in
God; who takes Pleasure in the cheerful Service and Obedience of his Children;
who delights in those, who delight in him. Is not Vid. Mr. How, Of
Delighting in God.
Delighting in God, a most essential, vital part of Religion? Should it not be
my constant Frame? Has not God sufficiently provided, that it may be so? Can I
say and believe, that God is the Portion of my Soul; that he is my God, and I
hope to live with him for ever, and not Rejoice? Or can I consider the Grace of
the new Covenant, the matchless Love of Christ, and the precious Promises of
the Gospel, and not see reason to Rejoice? Yea, does my Soul love God, and
endeavor to please him; and is not the very Act and Exercise of holy Love,
mixed with unspeakable sweetness?

Whom is there in Heaven, or in Earth, or Hell, that I ought to Fear, but Thee?
Who have a negative Voice in all the Designs of Men and Devils; an hook in
their Nostrils; a Bridle in their Mouths; to make them fulfill thy Pleasure, and
in every thing accomplish thy Sovereign Decree.

Is there any other, in whom I may repose my Trust, but in Thee, O Lord! the
Rock of Ages? The might of thy Power, the unsearchableness of thy Wisdom, the
righteousness of thy Nature, the stability of thy Truth, the riches of thy
Grace, and the immutability of thy Promise, are a sure foundation, for my Soul
to trust to, and rely upon. Thy word stands firm for ever: and the Truth of
thine ability, and readiness to help, in every time of need, endures the same
throughout all Generations. At all times, and in all places, my soul may trust
in thee, and find relief. And they who know thy name will do so: for in the
Lord Jehovah is Everlasting Kindness and Strength. To answer all my doubts, to
supply all my wants, to fill all my desires. May not God take it unkindly, that
I trust him no more? And is it not a criminal unkindness that I give him not
the glory of all these Excellent Attributes, which are the grounds of Trust; by
a constant, steady, entire dependence on him for all that I need?

I have none in Heaven but Thee, O Lord! as the object of my Invocation and
Worship. Let other Christians have recourse to new Mediators, and call upon
other Gods: I will make mention of thy Name, and of thy Righteousness only. And
ask of thee whatsoever I need, for the sake of thy Christ, my only adorable
Mediator. Him thou hear always; with him thou art always well pleased. I
honor the holy Angels, as glorious Attendants about thy Throne: and bless thee
for them, as Ministering Spirits, for the good of thy Servants; but I dare not
invoke, or worship 'em, because they are Fellow Servants. On the same account I
honor the memory of Departed Saints, but neither invoke them, or pay them
religious worship. That Glory, thou will not give unto another. I have no
precept in Holy Scripture to direct, no promise to encourage, no Example to
authorize the invocation of any other but Thee; in whom I believe, and trust,
Romans 10.14.

Having such a God in Heaven, what can I need on Earth? His Eyes behold me, his
Wing is over me, his Hand can supply me, his Grace provide for me. I can want
nothing that is Good: unlese I should need somewhat which God, the infinitely
Blessed and Allsufficient God, cannot bestow. If thou art the Portion of my
Soul; all mine Enemies cannot make me miserable: unless they can void Heaven of
the presence of God, hinder his care, bind up his hand, or obstruct his Love.
But tho my Enemies cannot, I fear my Sins may. They alone can separate between
God and my Soul. And considering the multitude and aggravations of them, and
thine unspotted Holiness and Justice; I should have too much reason to fear and
tremble, yea, and utterly despair, If I had none in Heaven but Thee. But thy
word assures me, that I have a Mediator there: a faithful and a compassionate
High Priest, Jesus Christ the Righteous: whom thou have exalted to be a Prince,
and a Savior, to give Repentance and Remission of Sins. Who lives for ever in
Heaven, to make Intercession, till he has brought me there, to behold his
Glory, and partake of it.

That Glory, O Lord! thou have reserved for Heaven: in this world we only
desire, believe, and hope to enjoy it. Whom have I in Heaven? That is the place
of Fruition. What can I desire upon Earth? This world is the place of Desires,
as the other of full Enjoyment. Most of that which men call Enjoyment in this
Life, consists but in Desire. Desire or Lust is all that is in the wicked
world. 1 John 2. c. 13. the Riches of a Covetous worldling makes him desire
more: and the great mystery of Intemperance is to create and increase desires:
and Desires of another kind are the portion of good men in this world. O that I
could breathe after a state of perfect Fruition in Heaven with more importunate
desires! Who will give me to be in Heaven with Thee? On Earth I desire nothing.
So one version. Let me, O my Soul! think of Heaven, as such a place, or state
of blessed Enjoyment! speak of it, seek it, long for it, prepare for it, as
such. And let Jesus Christ, who is the desire of all Nations, (through whom all
Divine Communications are made to fallen Sinners) be the great object of my
present desires and love! Let me desire nothing but as in him; and for him;
that believing his Word, obeying his Law, adoring his Person, imitating his
Example, trusting his Promise, constrained by his Love, partaking of his Image,
filled with his Grace, and comforted by his Spirit; my meditations of him may
be sweeter, and my love stronger; and I may have nothing more left to desire
for my self, but that God who has raised and exalted Him, would keep alive my
faith, and hope, and holy desires, till he has made me meet to be with him;
and after having guided me by his Grace, and Spirit, and Councels, here on
Earth, would receive me to his most Blessed and Glorious Presence in Heaven.
Amen, Amen.

XXII. The Glorious Appearance of Christ to Judgment considered as Certain: The
Terror, and Astonishment, Confusion, and Despair of Wicked Jews and Christians,
to behold their Judge: and hear his condemning Sentence to EVERLASTING
Destruction.
WHen our Blessed Savior shall appear to judge the world, I read that it shall
be, in his own Glory, the Glory of his Father, and of the Holy Angels. If by
the glory of his Father, be meant that of the Divinity, as the Original and
Author of all things in nature, as the Almighty Creator of the World; and by
the Glory of his holy Angels, be understood that of the Legal administration,
the Law being given by the disposition of Angels; and by his own Glory, that of
the Gospel, as he is the Messiah; that in the Glory of all these, he shall come
to Judgment: we have a summary account of the three different Revelations which
God has made of himself to mankind; by the Light of Nature; that of the Law,
and the more manifest one of the Gospel. According to which every man is to be
judged at the last day.

Tho we cannot distinctly tell what or how great our Lord's Glory will then be;
we may be certain, it will be suitable to the dignity of his Royal person;
suitable to the grandeur of his Father's Majesty; with the splendour of a
Triumphant Prince, who is Heir of all Things, and has all power in Heaven and
in Earth committed to him; the Great Lord of both Worlds, Head of Angels and
Men: and suitable to his glorious office, as Mediator, and the appointed Judge
of Quick and Dead.

If at his Transfiguration his Face shone, and his Raiment was white and
glittering, How much more splendid will his last Appearance be? When the Bodies
of his Saints shall be seven times brighter than the luster of the Sun? And if
his Members shall then be so glorious, how transcendantly more so will their
Head, their Lord appear? If the delivery and promulgation of the Law, on Mount
Sinai, was accompanied with such circumstances of terrible Majesty, how much
more may we suppose the Great Assize will be attended with? When he comes to
judge for the violation of the Law, and the contempt of the Gospel. And if even
Moses did then exceedingly quake and fear, what will be the consternation and
trembling of the wicked World at the Coming of Christ? When he shall be
revealed from Heaven, in flaming Fire, with a glorious retinue of his mighty
Angels, as so many bright Stars about the more glorious Sun of Righteousness.
The lights of Heaven shall be Eclipsed; the visible Sun shall vail its blushing
head as infinitely out-shone: the present glory of the Creation be all
benighted, by reason of his transcendant Brightness. Yea, the Heavens shall be
wrapped up as a scroll; the Elements melt away with a mighty noise: the Earth and
all its works be burnt up; and the whole Universe as one great Bonefire, to
adorn the Triumph of our Lord's Appearance. And this ushered in by the voice of
an Archangel, proclaiming his approach: and the voice of God supplying the use
of a Trumpet, to raise the Dead, and possess mankind with an aweful Reverence
of their Judge.

Thus in Triumph, as a Conqueror, and a Judge, shall he come again, who once
appeared in the form of a Servant to be judged and condemned by Man. Then he
was called King in scorn: now he will appear as much above all Earthly and
Humane Greatness, as once he stoopt for our sakes beneath it. Then the Contempt
of Nations, and no way esteemed Desirable, when he came from the womb of his
Virgin Mother: now the Terror of the World, when he comes again from the right
hand of his Father. No more to be subject to a state of Meanness, but to render
vengeance to all, who know not God, and obey not the Gospel: and to be
glorified in his Saints, and admired in, and by all them that believe 2 Thessalonians.
1. chap.
.

He was put to shame in the days of his Flesh, made himself of no Reputation,
and accounted unworthy to live; but when he comes again, he will put on a
Garment of Vengeance, to repay Fury to the Enemies of his Cross, and make his
wicked Despisers rise again to shame, and everlasting Contempt. They that once
bowed the knee to him in mockery, and shaked their heads at him in derision,
shall then see every knee bow before him, of things in Heaven, things in Earth,
and under the Earth; Angels, Men, and Devils in subjection to him as Lord and
King. Pilate, who condemned him as his Prisoner, shall appear before him as his
rightful Judge; and know, that he was another-guess King and Monarch than the
Roman Emperor. The false-witnesses, who accused him of Blasphemy, shall be
impeached by one another, and their own guilty Consciences, before his Bar,
with the other Jews, who once dragged him before their Tribunal; and be
confounded to stand before his Judgment Seat. His Crucifiers shall behold him
on a Throne of Glory, whom they Nailed to an infamous Cross. They shall be
astonished to behold him sitting at the Right Hand of God, whose Hands they
bound, whose Body they scourged, whose Side they pierced. They who Crowned him
with Thorns, shall (with all the World) behold him with a Crown of Glory. They
that spit on him, and smote him on the face with the fist of wickedness, shall
have their own faces covered with Confusion. They that approved his
Condemnation to Death, as a Criminal, shall be sentenced from his mouth, as
their Judge, to Everlasting Destruction. They that scourged him, as a
Malefactor, shall be beaten with many stripes. They that made him stagger under
the weight of his Cross, shall sink under the Guilt and Punishment of despising
it. They that Nailed him to the accursed Tree, between Thieves and Robbers,
shall be sentenced to endless Punishment in much worse Company. They who gave
him Gall and Vinegar to drink, shall not be able to get a drop of water to cool
their own Tongues. Where then shall the wicked and ungodly of the Christian
World appear? who Crucify the Son of God afresh, since he has declared
himself to be so, by his Resurrection, and the Mission of the Holy Ghost, and
fulfilling his threatened vengeance on the Nation of the Jews, etc?

If the Jews shall have a sorer Condemnation than Ignorant Heathens, who never
heard of Christ, never saw his Miracles, or were informed of his Doctrine; How
shall we escape? For he will come again as a Conqueror, and a Judge, and not as
a sufferer and a surety, as he came at first; and tho he was numbered with
Transgressors, and made his Grave with the Wicked, at his first Appearance; he
shall hereafter be attended with the shouts of Angels who excel in strength,
and the joyful Acclamations of his Saints, glittering as the Light, and paying
Homage to him as the Judge of Quick and Dead. He, whom we have despised, shall
then be encompast with a dazzling Glory that will confound us. He, whom we have
affronted, will be clothed with a Majesty that shall astonish us. He, whom we
have offended, shall be armed with Power, and with Wrath to punish us; and all
that continue to lift up the Heel against him, shall then be made his
Footstool: all that refuse to kiss the Scepter of his Grace, shall be broken in
pieces by his Iron Rod.

The holy Scripture does frequently and expressly assure us, that he will thus
come again, and for these ends. He is exalted, and gone to Heaven, as the Head
of his Church, and the King of Glory; and when he foretold his Ascension, he
gave a promise of his Return. The Heavens are to contain him till the
restitution of all things. By his Providence, and by the Holy Spirit, he now
carries on the designs of his Death: and when these are accomplished, he will
appear, to the Joy of Believers, and the Confusion of the Wicked. He is entered
as our Heb. 6 c. 19, 20. 10 c. 10.
Forerunner, within the Veil, to prepare Mansions, and to take possession for
us, and will not always leave us in this dark and defiling World. He knows
our Sorrows, and hears our Prayers, and bottles our Tears, takes notice of
our Groans, and in all our Afflictions he is afflicted. Being reconciled by his
Death, at his first coming, we shall be saved by his Life, since he lives to
make good his word of coming again.

How comfortable is the News of it? how joyful will be the Meeting, to such as
expect and prepare to see him? when the Sea and the Graves shall yield up their
Dead, and all the Prisoners of Hope lift up their heads, arise, go up, and meet
the Lord in the Air, and ascend with him to the Heavenly Glory. But who can
express how dismal a sight this will be to the Secure, and the Impenitent, to
all who die in their sins? to behold their Judge (who formerly offered to be
their Savior) upon a glorious Throne, and all the Children of Adam summoned
before his Tribunal! to have nothing to answer against his Charge, and no way
to escape his condemning Sentence! they despised him as a Lamb offered in
Sacrifice to take away the sins of the World: but shall no longer do so, when
he comes as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, to devour and destroy the Enemies
of his Cross. Now they will not own him for their Lord, but shall then find he
is so, by the Vengeance he will execute. As a Jesus, as a Savior, they
rejected him, making light of his Salvation, despising his Mercy, refusing his
Grace: but the neglected Gospel will then be a more killing Letter than the
Law. He who by his Ambassadors does now entreat Sinners to be reconciled, will
then be as deaf to their Entreaties, as they have been to His: Because they
would not turn at his Reproof, hearken to the Call of his Word, and obey its
Voice, they must hear the Sentence of Condemnation, and feel the Execution of
it, whether they will or no; yea, the Blood of his Cross will upbraid, accuse,
and plead against them. And whatever foolish Evasions they now make, to
continue in security, they shall then be Speechless, and Self-condemned.
Nothing will be able to hide them from the amazing Presence of their Judge, or
from the Wrath of the Lamb. He then will inflict an intolerable and righteous
Vengeance, an Everlasting Destruction, upon all the ignorant and ungodly World:
the Greatest, the Stoutest, the Boldest of them, shall then be humbled, and
stand before Christ's Tribunal, upon an equal Level with the meanest; seized
with horror, filled with guilt, anguish, and despair; and find, to their
eternal Confusion, that the Judge is no respecter of persons, but every man
shall receive according to his works. The Mighty shall not be spared for his
Greatness, nor the mean man for his Poverty. O Fool! O Wretch that I am! shall
many then say, who now brave it out in Pride and Vanity, unconcerned about a
future Judgment! not to be persuaded by the terrors of the Lord, which I was so
often warned and foretold of! What Refuge of Hope can I now fly to? What can I
say for my self? What can I do to escape, to die, to exist no longer? I would
have no compassion on my own Soul; I would not so much as consider its danger;
I shall now find none from Christ, I can expect none! His Mercy is gone, and
gone for ever! I am lost, undone, tormented, and must eternally be so! O the
Amazement, Horror, and Despair of self-condemned Sinners in that day of
Vengeance!

O my Soul! what is there of greater consequence, or of greater certainty from
the Word of God, than that I must appear to Judgment, when Christ shall come
again? Lord, teach me to believe it firmly, to consider it often, to lay it
seriously to heart, to act under the Influence and Power of it as long as I
live; that at the Great Resurrection from the Dead I may lift up my head with a
joyful Hope, and find the Judge to be my Friend, my Advocate, my Jesus, and not
my Enemy and Destroyer.

XXIII. Meditations of the Glory of Christ in his Glorified Saints, and of the
thankful Admiration of Believers when He shall come again from Heaven, which
shall be continued to all Eternity.
THE terror of our Lord's Appearance to Judgment cannot be greater to the
Wicked, than the Comfort and Joy of it will be to the Saints. When they shall
see Him whom their Souls love, ascend with him to Heaven, and be welcomed,
according to his promise, with those endearing words, Matt. 25.
Come, ye blessed Children of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from before the foundation of the World. 'Twas for your sakes I assumed Flesh,
lived on Earth, and died on the Cross, to purchase this Glorious Kingdom for
you, which I now come to give you the Possession of. 'Twas for this I prayed
and suffered on Earth, for this I interceded ever since in Heaven: I was heard
in that Prayer, accepted in those Sufferings, and my Intercession granted, that
where I am, you may be also, to behold my Glory. Come therefore, good and
faithful Servants, enter into your Lord's joy. O what ravishing words will
these be! What an Ecstasy of Love and Kindness is implied in them! What matter
of rejoicing may it now give me, to admit the Hope, that my Blessed Savior
will say such words as these to me, and bid me stand upon his Right Hand, among
his Sheep! O what an exulting frame of Soul will such Expressions raise! How
shall all my Doubts and Fears and Sorrows be scattered in a moment, and cease
for ever! O Glorious Day! when my blessed Lord shall thus publicly acknowledge
me for his own, and plead my Cause against all the Accusations of Satan, and
the malicious Calumnies of all his Instruments! when I shall be able to say of
all my Sins and Sufferings, as my Lord upon the Cross, It is finished, it is
finished! My warfare being accomplished, being more than Conqueror over all,
through him who loved me, and died for me, and now is come to wipe away all
tears from mine eyes, as it were with the Napkin that was bound about his Head,
when laid in the Grave; all being the fruit of his meritorious Death. Then
shall I have nothing more to fear, or wish, or beg. I shall offend, provoke,
and dishonor him no more; or by my folly and scandal discredit his holy Name
and Gospel: but by consummate Holiness be fitted to rejoice in his Presence and
Love, and celebrate his Praise for ever. I shall never more lament his Absence,
or complain of his Anger; never see a cloud on his Face, or a Frown in his Look
any more. Now I must wait and pray, struggle and strive, labor and suffer,
desire and expect, believe and hope, etc. but then perfect Rest and Holiness,
Love and Joy, Vision and Fruition, Bliss and Glory, unutterable and
everlasting, shall take place.

All the Attributes of God, all the wonderful Perfections of Christ, will then
be glorified in Believers, and admired by them. His invariable Truth will then
be honored, which they trusted to, and waited for; for now they shall know and
find they did not wait in vain: They hoped in his Word, and ventured their
Salvation upon it; and now they shall receive the end of their Faith and Hope,
infinitely beyond what they ever expected or believed.

The Glory of Divine Wisdom will then appear, when the Constitution,
Administration, and Design of the Mediator's Kingdom shall be fully known, in
the admirable Order and Beauty of every part of it, with the exact tendency of
all the particulars to one Glorious End, and the whole Undertaking crowned with
so blessed an Issue. What is now a Mystery even to Believers themselves, and
has a Veil upon it, shall then no longer be so; all the Riddles of God's Grace
and Providence shall be plainly understood. O how transporting a View must it
needs be, when the Glory of all the Divine Attributes which God intended to
accomplish, in and by Christ, shall be manifest to his Redeemed Saints. The
whole method of our Salvation will then appear to be the fruit of unsearchable
Wisdom, when we shall all see the Reality and Substance, and entire Scheme, of
all that God designed in and by him; all that was typified of him, and foretold
concerning him, in the Old Testament. How will it all appear to be the manifold
Wisdom of God! Ephesians. 3. c. 10.

As in uniting Heaven and Earth together in the Person of our Mediator;
fulfilling the Truth of a terrible threatening in his Death, and by the same way
accomplishing Vid. Mr. Charnock of the Divine Attribute Wisdom.
many gracious Promises; satisfying Justice, and at the same time showing
Mercy; manifesting infinite Grace and Kindness by shedding of Blood; conquering
Death by dying, and disarming the Law by Obedience to it, etc. afterward
subduing the world to the Faith of the Gospel, by the foolishness of Preaching;
making men wise to Salvation by the knowledge of the Cross; and spreading that
Faith the more by all the opposition made against it, etc. How wonderfully will
a clear View of these things discover, and glorify the Wisdom of God.

But the Love and Grace of Christ; the infinite Goodness and Compassion of God,
will then be magnified in an especial manner. What but Sovereign Love in the
whole Contrivance and Counsel of God about our Redemption? What admirable Love
and Grace in the whole management of that design? What unparalled kindness in
the accomplishment of it, by the Sacrifice of the Son of God? And how Glorious
will this Love appear, when he shall come again to give us the full Harvest of
all his Purchase? With what admiring Thankfulness shall Believers then
contemplate the unsearchable Riches of his Grace? In all the Parts and
Instances of his Humiliation, from his Conception to his Crucifixion and
Burial; in all the Evidences and Discoveries made of it, from the first Promise
to its Completion; yea, from before the Foundation of the World, in the
Covenant of Peace between the Father and the Son, until his second Coming, to
Judge the World, and deliver up the Kingdom to his Father.

How shall we then admire and adore his Powerful Grace, which snatched us as
Firebrands out of everlasting Burnings; that effectually shined into our minds
by heavenly Light; conquered the Opposition of our stubborn Wills; Sanctified
our carnal Hearts, rescued us from the Tyranny of Satan, and the Dominion of
Lust; giving, cherishing, and preserving the holy Seed of Grace, and making it
Spring up to Eternal Life; defeating the malicious and subtle Endeavors of the
Devil to destroy it; inabling us to endure Tribulation, and persevere to the
end; giving us Victory over Death; conducting us through the dark Valley;
raising our Bodies, reviving and reuniting them to our Souls, and rendering them
glorious like his own Body; and at length rewarding our imperfect Services with
Eternal Life. Yea, tho our best Services were mixed with Sin, our holiest Duties
spotted, our most courageous Sufferings mixed with unbelief, yet rewarded with a
Blessedness that has no alloy of Evil, but all the ingredients of a Perfect
Felicity, and nothing to lessen and interrupt it: How shall we then admire the
Bounty of our Gracious Lord, the Freeness, Tenderness, Riches, and the
exceeding Greatness and Glory, of his Infinite Goodness and Grace to poor
Believers?

With what Ecstasies of Joy and Gratitude may we imagine that our Lord will be
then admired by all his Redeemed ones?

Saying, This is He, who made our Peace with God, and reverst the Sentence of
Damnation, which we were under; who bought us with the price of his most
precious Blood, bore the Wrath of his Father, and submitted to an infamous and
cursed Death for us. He assumed our Nature, that we might partake of his;
became the Son of Man, that we might be made the Children of God; for our sakes
he became poor, that we through his Poverty might become Rich: He stoopt to
bear the greatest Ignominy and Reproach, to confer Honor on us: He was for a
time forsaken of his Father, that we might not be so eternally: He felt the
stroke of his Anger against Sin, that we might not perish under it. He was a
Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Griefs, that we might Rejoice: His Agonies
and bloody Sweat were for our Refreshment, and by his Stripes we are Healed: He
bowed his Head on the Cross, that we might lift up ours in Triumph; and because
we had eaten of the forbidden Fruit, he hung on the accursed Tree. 'Twas for us
that he suffered the Frowns of Heaven, the Enmity of Hell, the Rage of Devils,
the Hatred and Persecution of the World: He was judged, that we might not come
into Condemnation: He was Crucified, that we might be Glorified; and he is now
Come again finally and fully to effect it.

O the Height, and Depth, and Length, and Breadth of the Love of Christ, which
passes Knowledge, but calls for Admiration, and everlasting Gratitude! This is
the Blessed Day, we longed and waited, and prayed for! This is our Gracious,
our Glorious Lord, whose Love melted our Heart, whose Promise was our Support,
whose Word was our Rule, whose Spirit was our Comforter, whose Cross was our
Crown, and the hope of his Appearance our chief Consolation!

Lord! what am I, what was I, that the ever Blessed Son of God should do and
suffer, and purchase all this for me? I can remember when I was ignorant of
God, a Stranger to him, at Enmity with him, under the Power of Darkness, and
the Devil, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, hastening to Hell, and liable to
his Wrath. But he chose me out of the World, stamped his Image upon me, pardoned
my Sins, and embraced me in the Arms of his unchangeable Love. O happy Change!
and yet how little did I prize his Grace, admire his Love, and express my own,
or promote his Glory, and honor him in the Eyes of others? How did I dishonor
my Profession and holy Calling, as his Disciple, by aggravated Apostasy? But he
recovered me by Repentance, and healed my Backslidings, and received me
graciously, because he loved me freely. O admirable Grace! to pardon, and save,
and bring to Glory such an unthankful Wretch, as I have been! to make such a
Difference between Me and Others, whom I knew on Earth! that the same Power,
which makes them Miserable, now makes me Blessed! that when they are banished
from his Presence into Everlasting Destruction, I am admitted to behold his
Glory, and shall dwell with him for ever!

O, how much more do I now see and find, than ever I believed, of the Love of
Christ, and his promised Salvation! How much more glorious is the Person of my
Redeemer! How much more Excellent is the heavenly State, than ever I thought or
expected! I could not have imagined the thousandth thousandth Part of that
which I now see and feel. I cannot but admire, and spend an Eternity in
admiring, and praising the incomparable Grace and Glory of my blessed Redeemer.

Such holy Admiration will certainly produce the most thankful Adorations of
our Lord Jesus. Saying one to another, O Bless the Lord of Love and Glory! who
humbled himself so low, as our Mediator, and has exalted us so high, as the
blessed Fruit of it! How can we ever enough adore and praise him, who
condescended so far, and has done and suffered so much for us? See how the
holy Angels worship this King of Glory! and have not every one of us more
reason to do so? O let all the Quire of Heaven celebrate his glorious Love! and
let us his Redeemed, his Glorified ones say continually, Let the Lord be
magnified; who has loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, and
made us Kings and Priests unto God his Father, and through him ours.

O merciful Savior! O glorious Change! O happy Society! with whom we shall
Eternally adore our Common Lord. We can some of us remember when we lived
together on Earth, how we wept and prayed, and fasted and mourned together, how
we suffered, and complained, and sinned together. O the mavelous Change our
Redeemer has now wrought for us, and in us! These Bodies, these Souls, this
Life, this Place, this Company, these Enjoyments, are not like those in yonder
World. But alas, who can describe what Believers shall then think and say to
extol their Savior! How small a Portion is it we understand of that World? How
little can I conceive, and how much less express? Blessed be God we know so
much, as the matter of our joyful Hopes; and for ever Blessed be God, who has
promised and provided such a Glory for us, as cannot now be fully known.

What inexpressible Sweetness might Believers taste by rejoicing in Hope, did a
more lively Faith realize all this to their Souls? We might listen as it were
to the Shouts and Acclamations of the Saints above, and say Amen to their
Thanksgivings. We might behold them about the Throne of God, and of the Lamb,
with Palms of Victory in their Hands, a Crown of Glory on their Heads, and
Songs of Triumph in their Mouths, saying, Allelujah; Rev. 4. c. 11. 5. c. 12,
13.
Worthy art Thou, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power, for thou
have created all things, and for thy Pleasure they are, and were created. And
worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing. And again, Blessing, Honor,
Glory, and Power be unto him who Sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, for
ever and ever.

Whence is it, O my Soul! if indeed, I believe and expect all this; that I can
Hear, and Read, and Think, and Speak of these great Things, with no more ardent
Affections, suitable Preparations, inportunate Prayers, and vigorous Desires?
How should the believing Thoughts of that Day promote my heavenly Mindedness,
Selfdenial, Contempt of the World, Patience and Perseverance? Quicken my Zeal,
secure my Stedfastness, and give Life and Spirit to my Prayers for the
hastening of it? How should my Soul rise toward Heaven, by holy Love and
Desire? Ascend and meet him, get as near him as I can, breathe after more of
his Presence, and beg him to prepossess my Heart, to anticipate his second
Coming by clearer discoveries of his Love, and fuller Communications of his
Grace? Even so, Come Lord Jesus!

XXIV. Concerning the Examination of a man's Heart and Life: the
Reasonableness, Advantages, and Necessity of it. Some Direction and Advice
concerning the Time and Manner. That we may know in what Preparedness we are
for ETERNITY.
I Am hastening every Year, every Day, to the period of this Life: I must
shortly appear before my Glorious Judge; and experience these Terrors or
Comforts, this Blessedness or Misery, which I have now read of. Shall I not
therefore inquire, which of the two belongs to me? Is it not worth considering,
whither I must go, and how I shall fare, when I quit this Body? What is like to
be my next Habitation? To which of the two unchangeable States I shall be
adjudg'd? Shall an Inquiry of so much consequence be put off, to an indefinite
hereafter? Do I not desire to know the worst, while a remedy may be found? Or
am I content to dye, through an unwillingness to discover that I am Sick? The
question to be resolved, is of infinite weight. Shall I not spend a few hours
to know what will become of me for ever? An error is more than possible, it is
easy to mistake; and the hazard of doing so is unspeakably great. How many
thousands perish eternally, even under the Light of the Gospel, who never
suspected their Danger? How ordinary, how common a thing is it, for Men to be
thus deceived! how successful is the Devil in this stratagem against the Souls
of Men! Is it not then a most criminal stupidity, to be contentedly ignorant,
and unresolved, whether I am reconciled to God or no; whether I am led by the
Flesh or the Spirit; whether I am in the broad or narrow way, which lead to
such contrary ends; that is, whether, if I die in this condition, I shall be
saved, or perish? Can such an enquiry be frivolous or indifferent? Is the
subject of it so contemptible, or my concern in it so small, that it merits not
to be attentively considered? Shall I never ask my Soul, till I am leaving this
World, (the unfittest time of all to begin so important an Affair) what am I?
to whom do I belong? whose Image do I bear? how have I lived, and what do I do?
what do I love most? what do I most constantly desire, and choose, and seek?
how does the Pulse of my Soul beat? is it quickest toward God, or toward the
World? whither am I going? what will be the final upshot and issue of my
present course? is it Heaven or Hell I must be translated to by dying? what
security have I got for Eternal Life? what provisions have I made? what
foundation have I laid?

How strangely infatuated are most men, who talk of an Everlasting Life as an
Article of their Creed, and say they count upon it that they must dwell in
Happiness or Misery for ever; and seldom or never bethink themselves in good
earnest, and for any time, with a settled composed exercise of thoughts, which
of these Two is like to be their Lot. Or if they begin to search and try
themselves, they come to no Conclusion, or conclude too hastily; they pluck off
the Plaster as soon as it begins to smart; they are either frighted with the
horrid prospect of past Crimes, or, having escaped the grosser Pollutions of
the World, judge too favorably of their own ease. They commonly do the work
but by halves, and so go from the Glass, and forget what manner of persons they
were.

Let me therefore, O my Soul! sequester my self from the World, to commune with
my own heart, to reflect upon my past life, and look into my present state, to
recollect and review the most considerable passages of my course and time
hitherto. O how neglected and disused a Practice is this, which does challenge
and require our principal and most serious Concerns about it! And how many
begin it, and are discouraged, and leave off without reaching the end of such
an Enquiry!

How much wiser in this respect are the Children of this World, in their
Generation, than the Children of Light? Who is so exact in his Accounts between
God and his own Soul, as Tradesmen in their Dealings with one another? Who is
at the pains to write down his Sins and his Mercies? the grounds of his Fear,
and the encouragements of his Hope? or keeps a Journal and Diary of his
Spiritual State? Who does at set times, once a Month, or once a Quarter, or
even once a Year, take a just view of Himself, his Heart, and Life, and State,
as a Christian; that he may see what he has received and done, what he owes,
and what he may expect; that he may know whether he thrive or decay; whether he
increase or decrease; whether he go backward or forward; wherher he be Richer
or Poorer this year than the last? And is it not a symptom that you are
declining, when you love not to examine your Accounts? Is there not ground of
jealousy and suspicion, that you are behind hand, because you are loath to
inquire, whether you are or no? and unwilling to know the worst of your
Condition? Nevertheless, without such Enquiries, and bringing the matter to a
Determination, at what uncertainties must we live? and how unconceivable an
hazard do all Hypocrites and unrenewed Sinners run? And how reasonable, how
necessary is it that we should know, and in order to it, prove our selves? We
must therefore bestow Time and serious Diligence about it, that we may examine
matters to the bottom, and come to some Result; so that we may form a right
Judgment concerning our own case.

He that would do it to good purpose, must endeavor to understand clearly the
terms of the Covenant on God's part, and on ours: and take care not to Judge of
himself by mistaken rules; by a false Standard, that God will not justify; or
by any such characters as will not conclude. But most men are unwilling to
bring themselves to a Trial, or to let Conscience deal plainly and faithfully
with them. They are stupidly secure, and see not the necessity of this duty. Or
do not suspect themselves. They presume they need not be at that Trouble: or
are so taken up with the World, that they cannot find time and leisure for it.
And many men dare not bring their Hearts and Ways to a Trial. There is commonly
some secret Lust indulged, which they are loath to let go. But most go on in
sin, and perish Eternally, because they think there is no danger of perishing:
and never Repent, and make their Peace with God, because they fancy and presume
it is done already.

Therefore let me beg of thee, whoever thou art, who read this, to put the
case to thy self, seriously to admit the doubt, whether you are not mistaken;
make the supposition, that you have not hitherto sufficiently considered the
State of your Soul. You are confident that all is well; and thereupon are
unwilling to examine farther: but for that very reason you ought to question,
whether it be so or not? Do but ask your selves seriously, what is the ground
of your good Opinion concerning your self? For what reason can you thus
conclude?

Did you ever seriously lay to heart the Characters, and Description, which the
Scriptures give, of those whom Christ will own at the last day; and of such
whom he will reject and reprobate? With unfeigned application to your own case,
have you therewith proved your selves? and come to a settled Judgment, after a
deliberate Enquiry? And was the Conclusion to your Comfort and Joy? If so, what
influence has it since had upon your Heart and Life? Has it promoted Purity,
Thankfulness, Heavenly-mindedness, Contempt of this World, and stronger Desires
after the Image, Love, and Presence of God, and the Glory of Christ? Moreover,
consider,

Is not this a good while a-go? How have you behaved your self ever since? Have
you not reason to look back with shame? If you but slightly examined your self
formerly, resolve to do it more effectually now: Review the sins you have been
since guilty of. And if you have not done any thing considerable of this kind,
you ought now to begin. It is seasonable to begin the year by such an Exercise,
and it will be found of great use, in all the following parts of it: especially
when you come to examine your self afresh, in order to the Lord's Supper. For
we ought frequently to renew the sad remembrance of our former Sins; that from
time to time we may renew our Repentance, which is the work of our Life, and
not of one day. And he that comes to the Sacrament, and will look no farther
back, than to the last Communion, may possibly presume too much, that all was
then as it should be, and not be humble enough.

If any one therefore resolve in good earnest upon an holy Life, and seriously
design to prepare for Eternity, as it is necessary to make a general review of
his Life, so I desire to afford him the best Counsel I can, in order to it.

It may be advisable, Vid. Mr. Baxter's Saints Rest. p. 3. chap. 7, 8, 9.
if you have not formerly begun this work, to employ one hour at least in a
Day, for several Days following, in writing down the most considerable Passages
of your Life you can remember, desiring God's Assistance therein; and keeping
your Eye upon your End, in the whole; that is, thinking seriously that it is in
order to Eternity, that you now examine your self. Choose a place of Retirement,
and the most convenient Time, that you may not be interrupted, and when your
Heart is most serious. Every man may divide his Life into several parts, as
from Infancy till he left off going to School, or was bound Apprentice, or
settled in any way of Education. From thence, 'till fixed in some Employment: If
a married person, till entered into that Condition. And from thence to another
remarkable Period, or to the present Time. It may better assist some persons
memory, to consider the several Places of their abode, and compute according to
them. In each portion of time, recollect what sins you were most addicted to:
in what Instances, with what Frequency, and with what other various
aggravations, you committed 'em: and what have been the effects and
consequences of those sins, to your selves, and others, in order to Repentance,
and godly Sorrow. Which must not be judged of by Tears, but Grief, and inward
hatred of Sin. Remembering that no man is the better merely for being examined,
if there follows nothing after it. It Is in order to a Judgment to be passed
upon our selves. It Is to search out our own Iniquity, our Beloved sin, in order
to the mortification of it. That Goliath must first be slain, if ever the other
Philistims are conquered. In some it is Pride, in others Worldliness, in some
Uncleanness, in others Drunkenness, Gluttony, etc. That you may discover it,
observe,

What sin it is you are most unwilling to part with: which you could even wish
were not forbidden.

Which you have formerly been most apt to plead for, to extenuate or excuse,
and hide.

The thoughts whereof do most frequently occur; especially when alone: first in
the morning, and last at night: and are most distracting in Prayer and Worship.

Which an awakened Conscience has most plainly told you of; under a Sermon, or
at a Sacrament, or under some heavy affliction, or on a sickbed, etc.

Which you can least bear to be reproved for.

Which the Temperament of your body does most incline to.

Which your Calling, Employment, Company, and Converse, administer the greatest
Temptations for.

That especially which has the Throne of the Heart, and sets all the faculties
a work to contrive fuel and opportunities for its Gratification.

Observe likewise what Passion was most Predominant in each Period of Time, or
is yet so; and what ill effects it has produced. Consider farther what
dangerous Temptations you have met with: how you have fallen by 'em, or been
enabled to resist. Consider withal the Time, and the Means, whereby God has at
any time formerly awakened, convinced and humbled you; what Purposes of
Amendment, and Promises of Reformation you have ever made; and how far you
have, or have not performed 'em. Recollect likewise all the special Mercies you
have received from God in every State and Period of your Life, in order to
thankfulness. The last Section of these Papers may give you some assistance
therein, and consider what Returns you have made to God, for all his Kindness.

You may do well to consider your self also, in the Relations you have stood to
others; as Inferior, Equal, or Superior; in Family, Church, or State; in your
Calling, Profession, Employment, etc. And examine in what more notorious
Instances, you have been faulty in your Relative Duties. How you did ordinarily
carry it in your Place and Station; for that is the best, the truest Picture of
a Man, which is like him in his ordinary every days Habit. Particularly reflect
upon the Sins you have committed in Company with others. By whose Example you
have been drawn to Sin; who may probably have been tempted by yours, and bewail
it; and if the Persons are living, admonish them to Repent; and if you have
injured and wronged any, acknowledge your Fault, and to the utmost of your
Power, make speedy Restitution, If any of your Companions in Sin are dead, and
you fear dyed without Repentance; humble your self particularly before God for
having contributed to their Damnation. I know of some who have made such a
Catalogue of their Sins, with the most observable Aggravations of them; which
they constantly preserved, and frequently reviewed, to keep them Humble,
Penitent, Watchful, and Thankful; and on some occasions of secret Humiliation,
have spread them before the Lord (as Hezekiah did the writing of his Enemy)
covering themselves with Shame and Confusion of Face, by considering what they
have been, and thence admiring the Riches of free Grace, in the forgiveness of
such Crimes, through the Blood of Christ.

Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my Reins, and my Heart, for thy Loving
kindness is before mine Eyes, and I will walk in thy Truth. Thou have searched
me, O Lord, and known me; thou know my Thoughts a far off; all my secret
Sins are in the Light of thy Countenance; and thou art acquainted with all my
ways; set my Sins in order before me, that I may Repent, and forsake them. Show
me mine Infirmities and Weaknesses, that I may watch against them. And teach me
to Judge and Condemn my self, that I may not be judged of the Lord, or
condemned with the World.

XXV. How Christians ought to examine their Decays of Grace and Piety. The
greatness of their Sin, and of their Loss under such a Declension: God's
Displeasure, and departure from them, considered, to awaken Endeavors of a
Recovery. In what manner the Faith of Adherence may be acted by one, who has
no Assurance.
IT cannot but be of use to Believers also, at stated Times to examine
themselves, concerning their Languishings and Decays in Grace, falling from
their first Love, to a Spirit of Indifferency and Lukewarmness, disorderly
walking or unfruitfulness; whether gray Hairs are not here and there upon them,
and they know it not. For God may withdraw by degrees, so that his departure
may not presently be perceived. And some kind of Activity in Duty may be
continued upon false Principles, and from Common Assistance, while a Christian,
as to his spiritual State, may be under a dangerous Consumption. It Is not
difficult for others to observe it some times, and would be visible enough to
themselves, would they spare a few hours to examine the matter. The Punishment
of such Backslidings, the loss of the quickening and comforting Presence of the
Holy Spirit, deserves likewise to be inquired into, in order to a speedy
Remedy, and should enforce the Counsel.

I mean not barely the Ebbing of Affections in the Duties of Religion, or the
want of Life, and quickening from sensible Consolations, which new Converts,
(especially such as have been reclaimed from a course of notorious Impiety)
have more of at first than afterward. This doubting Christians should
particularly take notice of, by the Instance of the Prodigal, who was
extraordinarily feasted at his first return, but was doubtless contented
afterward with the ordinary Provisions of his Fathers house. Neither does God
dispense the same measure to all alike, nor to any alike at all Times: Some,
who are called to greater Services and Sufferings, than others, or had greater
Conflicts before Conversion, may have a greater share than the rest of their
Brethren. Neither will the same degree of Grace imparted to some Persons, so
discernably move and comfort, as it will do some others of a different Temper.
It Is not therefore so much to be the matter of our Enquiry, (if at all it need
to be so) whether we have more or less of sensible Joy in the performance of
Duty. But

Whether we are not fallen and declined, as to the inward vital Acts of Grace,
and in the outward Fruits of Holiness. Whether we have such clear convincing
Apprehensions of Divine and Spiritual Truths, and the Mysteries of the Gospel,
as formerly; whether our minds are not become more vain and heedless; whether
our Knowledge of God, and of the Revelations of his Will, be as powerful and
efficacious upon our Hearts and Lives, as heretofore; whether there be no less
Frequency, less Consistency, less inward Satisfaction in holy serious Thoughts,
than formerly. You were wont to pray and endeavor, that God might be first and
last in your Thoughts every day, and by frequent Ejaculations in civil Affairs,
to maintain a daily converse with God; but now you mind not whether it be so or
not; yea, you cannot but know, that it is not thus with you still. It was once
your Burden to be pestered with foolish, filthy, worldly, vain Thoughts,
especially on the Lord's Day, or in the Worship of God; you rejected and
disowned them, you lamented and prayed against them; do so much as examine,
whether it be thus still.

Consider all your Affections, and their several Objects; and see whether a
criminal Lukewarmness has not diffused it self into every of them. Examine
every Grace; and see whether your Faith, Hope, Love, holy Desires, and Delight
in God be not miserably abated; as to the strength and vigor, the efficacy, and
frequent exercise of every of them; so that your Thoughts of God are few, cold,
and lifeless, without desire, delight and love.

Consider the Opportunities of Public Worship, and solemn Occasions of
approaching the Divine Presence: Are they as much the desire of your Souls, and
the rejoicing of your Hearts as once they were? Are you not more easily
diverted from them, less satisfied and refresht by them? Are not all Gospel
Ordinances less powerful and quickening, and your profit and advantage thereby
unspeakably less then formerly? Do you hunger and thirst, and pant as the Heart
after the Waterbrooks, to draw nigh to God, and come into his Courts? Do you
make Conscience of preparing before hand? Do you come with a real desire, and
design, and expectation of profiting, and bettering your Spirits? Do you join
in every part of Divine worship, with that attention, seriousness, and
composure of mind, and taste the sweetness and benefit of such solemnities, as
formerly? Are such services performed with that Awe of God, with that Humility,
Fervency, and Intensness of Spirit, as sometimes they were? Are you not more
negligent and unconcerned before and after, whether you find any thing of this
or no? Tho your Desires are weak, your Hearts flat, your Thoughts wandering,
your Spirits trifling, so the work be done, and the duty be over, (in how
formal, customary, and careless a manner, soever it be) you consider it not,
you lay it not to Heart, you reflect not upon it, you bewail it not, or at
least are better contented and sooner quieted, and take less notice of the
frame of your Heart in such Duties, than formerly?

Examine farther, how it is with you as to the great distinguishing Duties of an
upright Christian, (if performed as they ought to be) I mean Secret Prayer and
Meditation: Are you as strict and careful, constant and Conscientious, frequent
and abundant in these, as formerly? May not our Closets and places of
Retirement witness against us? How seldom are we there? How quickly are we
gone? How easily diverted? How soon tired? How do we trifle in that work, and
shuffle it over, and take up with the shadow and image of Prayer? Our former
humble and importunate Prayers, joyful Thanksgivings, and sweet Contemplation
of the Mysteries of Religion, compared with our present daily practice, will
testify that we are declined and fallen.

Moreover consider the Evil of Sin, and how your Heart stands affected to it.
Is not your Hatred of Sin, and Zeal against it, much decayed? especially with
respect to inward Spiritual sins, such as the secret workings of unbelief, and
distrust, pride, envy, uncharitableness, etc. Do you bewail it, strive against
it, and shun the occasions, and fear the temptations that may lead you into
Sin, as once you did? Have you not lost much of that tenderness, and holy
Jealousy over your heart and ways, you formerly had? Do you not now make more
bold with Temptation? Are you not oftener conquered? and with less Reluctance?
and by smaller Temptations? etc.

Are you not more Unserviceable? Root and Fruit in a withering condition? God
less Honored, and others less profited, and edified by your Example and Life?
Do you not adhere more to the world? conform to it, and comply with it in many
things, which formerly you durst not have done? and are every day waxing worse?
Make a pause a while, and bethink your self, what this will come to at last?
When even the little Good that remains, is ready to dye.

May I not ask such Christians, or desire them to ask themselves; What is
already the effect and consequence of this Declension? Is not God's Spirit
removed, and the Light of his Countenance Eclipsed? Yea as to many of them, are
they not under sad apprehensions of God's displeasure? Do they not feel the
terrors of the Lord? Do they not walk heavily from day to day? They that could
once converse with God on all occasions as a Friend, and a Father, do now think
of God and are troubled: Thick Darkness does incompass them round about: They
have lost the sense of his Love, the comforts of his presence, and their Song
in the night, and see no relief. This is a more hopeful case however, than
theirs, who are under great Backslidings and Desertion, and hardly sensible of
it. To awaken and assist both; Consider I beseech you, whence you are fallen,
and what you have lost, and what will be the issue of this; if Sickness, or
some smart Affliction overtake you; or if you should dye in this condition. And
inquire seriously, and presently, into the cause of all this Evil: for a few
transient thoughts will not affect the Heart and persuade to Action. And do it
presently, because by every delay your work will be the harder, your danger the
greater, and your recovery the more difficult. Reflect upon the Sinfulness as
well as Affliction of this case. Know that you have displeased God, and run
from him, neglected his Presence, and grieved his Spirit, and in what Instances
you have done so; that has made him weary of his dwelling? what Ordinances you
have slighted; what Duties you have omitted; what sins you have given way to;
in order to Repentance and deep Humiliation.

Can you contentedly sit still, with this dismal State of things? while God
has somewhat (yea a great deal indeed) against you, for having left your first
Love? Will you not endeavor to remove that, which has made such a separation
between God and you, and brought you thus low? What Communion with God, what
Communications of his Grace, what Influences of his Spirit, and Evidences of
his Favor have you lost? And will you not acknowledge your Iniquity, and abase
your selves in the Dust, and return to the Lord, and do your first works? that
he may heal your Backslidings, and receive you graciously; that you may again
take hold of his Covenant, and be at Peace with him.

But to be at Peace with God, is not the whole of your Concern, you need not
only a Pardon, but a Physician to heal you; as does a Malefactor, that is not
only liable to the Law, but desperately sick. Your State is sinful, and
dangerous, as well as troublesome. From performing duties in such a manner as
you now do, you may quickly be Tempted to let them altogether alone. God may be
so far provoked to suffer Satan to make attempts upon you of that kind: (and he
is forward enough to make use of such an opportunity, to try all his Snares and
Stratagems against you:) till he prevail with you, to think hardly of God
himself, Vid. Mr. Gilpin of Temptation. p. 2. chap. 6.
unthankfully to overlook all his former kindnesses, to put the worst
Interpretation that can be upon all his Providence; to distrust and quarrel
with him, as if his faithfulness had failed, and his Mercy were clean gone for
ever, and there were no hope left, for one in your case: and so run into
Desperation, and through the subtlety and violence of Satan's Temptations, try
the most foolish and unlawful means for ease and cure; either open
Licentiousness, or it may be Self-Murder.

Therefore speedy present Repentance is necessary, to find out, and mortify
every Corruption, and that especially, which Conscience tells us, you have most
indulged; from whence your Distress does principally arise: Confessing your sin
freely, fully, and without reserve, and waiting on God in the diligent use of
all means, for the recovery of that which you have lost: and Justifying God in
his Righteousness, Truth, Wisdom, Holiness, in all his Rebukes. That you may
regain a Spirit of Prayer, and taste the sweetness, virtue, and efficacy of
every Duty, and of every Ordinance; and God may give you the Garment of Praise
for the Spirit of Heaviness, and the Joy of the Lord may be your Strength, for
future service and suffering.

In the mean time, do not cast away your Hope, but tho you have (too justly)
deprived your self of the Faith of Assurance, yet endeavor to maintain and
exercise the Faith of Adherence Vid. Dr. Owen on Ps. 130.2.
. Say unto God, that because there is forgiveness with him, therefore he is to
be feared. My sin is not too great to be forgiven. It Is not the Unpardonable
Sin: for I desire to repent, and am resolved to return. I will still cleave to
the Lord, and wait upon him, and follow hard after him, and take no other
course for Deliverance and Comfort. Mine is not a single Case: I am not the
only Soul that has been so distressed, and yet found relief, by seeking unto
God. It Is therefore good for me to hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of
God Lam. 3. c. 26.
. I will draw near to God; I will lie at his foot; and continue in all ways of
Worship and Duty, wherein I may hope to meet with the quickening, and comfort,
of his Spirit: I will seek relief from no other; I will keep as near him as I
can; whither else shall I go, he alone has the words of Eternal Life; he alone
can create (what is the fruit of his own lips) Peace, Peace.

Vid. Mr. Baxter's Method for Peace of Conscience.
I will encourage my self in the consideration of his General Grace, and the
probabilities of his special Love: I will recollect my former Experiences, when
I had some good hope, through Grace, concerning my Adoption: I will remember
the years of the right hand of the most High. If God will give me so much Grace
as to continue waiting, I will hope still: and though I walk in darkness, and
see little or no Light, I will stay my self upon the Lord. And if by the want
of sensible Consolation he will make me more humble, and keep me in a greater
Submission to his will, I will bless his holy Name; and derive more comfortable
hope from thence, than from the most sweet and sensible Considerations I ever
had; and look upon Humility, Self-denial, Dependence on God, Resignation to
him, and Hatred of sin, as a better sign of his Love, than the highest fervors
of Affection in his service can be.

Oh that I had formerly done as much for Holiness, as I have for Comfort! by
the enjoyment of the one, I should have had more of the other: the Exercise of
Grace would have discovered the Truth of it. Let me therefore accuse and
condemn my self; but still trust, and love God, and wait upon him. Let me
resolve never to choose a new Lord or Master. Or take up with any Portion
beneath God himself; or any way of Hope or Salvation, but by J. Christ, my only
Savior; neither let me forsake the way of Faith and Holiness, for all the
hopes and Happiness of this World, if put to my choice. But be always able to
say, (Blessed be God I now can) that I will return to my former Husband, for
then it was better with me than now. I had peace and refreshment in my former
ways, I will return to them. Lord, forsake me not utterly! Keep not thine Anger
for ever: Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy H. Spirit from
me: Restore unto me the Joy of thy Salvation, that my Heart may be enlarged to
praise thy name, and to run the way of thy Commandments.

XXVI. Confession of Sin, Humiliation, and Repentance must follow upon
Self-Examination. Advice concerning Repentance of some particular Backsliding.
The great Perplexity and Distress of a Penitent Sinner represented, as a
Caution against returning to Folly.
THat we may turn unto the Lord, is the end of searching and trying our Ways.
Lord! I have been searching my Heart, and considering my ways, but can find
little or no good; neither can I discover all that is evil in both. But I find
enough to make my own Heart condemn me, and Thou, who art greater than my
Heart, and know all things, may much more condemn me. I am altogether
unclean, polluted, and abominable.

If I go about to enumerate the Sins of my Thoughts, Words, and Actions, in all
the periods of my Life hitherto; if I consider my Omissions of Duty, and daily
Crimes by actual Commission; if I reflect upon my Sins according to their
respective Object, as either against Thee, O God, and against my Neighbor, and
against my own Soul or Body; and compare my Heart and Life with thy strict and
holy Law, and think in how many Instances I have transgrest every of thy
Righteous Commandments: I find they are more than the hairs on my head, they
cannot be numbered. Who can tell how often he has offended? Many of my sins make
little Impression on my Memory, (I observe them not, I remember them not): but
this hinders not, but they may make deep Impression on my Conscience, which
will one day be awake, and set them in order before me; and they are all
written in thy Book of Remembrance, in order to my final Judgment. All my sins
are before thee: but thou requirest my humble Confession of them, in order to
Repentance; and as a part thereof, that I freely acknowledge their heinous
aggravations to shame, and humble my self the more before thee, whom I have
offended and provoked.

How long did I serve diverse Lusts and Pleasures, with the neglect and
forgetfulness of God? How sad a prospect may I take of the far greatest part of
my Life past? Especially of my younger years, which have been trifl'd away in
vanity and folly? And since I have known the way of Truth, how shamefully have
I prevaricated with God? I am confounded to consider, how often I have despised
the Commandment, and rebelled against the Light; against the Principles of
Education, and the checks of Conscience, frequent warnings from God, and
reproofs from Others; contrary to my Profession, and Experience, contrary to
the obligation of peculiar Mercies, solemn Promises, Resolutions, and
Engagements, and a nearer Relation to God than many others; Which sins have
more dishonored my Lord, discredited his H. Gospel, gratified the Devil
scandalized the world, and strengthened the hands of the ungodly, than the sins
of others. And alas! How much of my precious Time is thus gone, which if duly
improved, would now afford me comfort to review.

How much Guilt have I contracted every Year, particularly in this last? I now
begin another, which will soon be gone as that which was concluded yesterday.
And shall I only advance in Age, to increase the number of my sins, and
heighten my Account against the Day of Reckoning? In Temporal and Civil Affairs
Day unto Day utters knowledge, and Night unto Night teaches Wisdom. We are
Taught by Experience many useful Lessons which we should not else have learnt;
to reform many Errors and mistakes, to correct many rash and foolish Actions
and Speeches, etc. And shall I not learn wisdom by the Experience of another
year, in what concerns my greatest, my Eternal Interest? Shall not the
reflection on my past sins prevent my Commission of the like? Especially
considering how my sins are aggravated by every Mercy I have received; by every
Affliction I have undergone; every awakening Sermon I have heard; every motion
of God's Spirit, and every check of my own Conscience that I have resisted;
every offer of his Grace; every warning of his Providence; every invitation and
call of his Word; every purpose to Repent, and every resolution I have made to
forsake sin: The greater knowledge I have had of my danger, the longer time I
have deliberated about it; the oftener I have confessed my sin, and been sorry
for it; every reproof I have had from others, and every promise I have made my
self, does aggravate and increase my Guilt.

How many Years has God vouchsafed me to work out my Salvation? but how little
have I done toward it? Had I died this last year, how unprepared must I have
made my Appearance before his Tribunal? What opportunities of doing and
receiving good have I let slip? Have I not made it more my business to seem
Religious, than really to be so? How much of the Patience of God have I abused?
refusing his calls to Repentance, resisting the strivings of his Spirit,
smothering my Convictions, and turning the Grace of God into wantonness?
Instead of returning gratitude for all his Love, I have repeated my
Transgressions after Forgiveness: and gone in a circle of Repenting and
Sinning, even to this day. Lord, I am ashamed, and lay my self in the dust
before thee. To me belongs nothing but shame and confusion of Face. If God
should condemn and punish me as a Rebel, and a Traitor, and give me the Portion
of Hypocrites, I cannot but own his Justice; even in Hell I must do it, with my
flaming Tongue and Breath.

O Spare me for thy mercies sake! Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, for
in thy sight shall no flesh living be justified: if Thou lay Judgment to the
Line, and Equity to the Plummet. Give me Repentance unto life, never to be
repented of, never to be retracted again. Bring me to the Blood of Jesus, which
cleanses from all sin. Behold the sighings of a contrite Spirit: For I
acknowledge my Transgressions unto thee, against whom I have sinned: O Lord,
forgive the Iniquity of my Sin. I am unworthy to lift up my Hands and Eyes
toward Heaven, unworthy to be called thy Son, or thy Servant: I am vile in
mine own eyes, because I have made my self vile in thine. For this I am
troubled, and mourn, and my Soul is grieved within me.

O thou Heavenly Physician of Souls! from thy Pity alone I expect my cure. I am
miserable and undone without thy Compassion; and expect no relief but from the
Treasure of thy Grace. I must perish, and sink under the burden of Sin, if thy
merciful hand do not save me, and lift me up. I am entangled and ensnared by
the Devil and my Lusts, and without thy Succor can never hope to get free. O
Lord forgive my Sin, and heal my Soul: Deliver and save me for thy Mercies sake.

May I not yet hope in thy Mercy? Thou have mercifully born with me hitherto:
thou call me to repent; thou command me to return, and promisest to
forgive those Sins which are confessed and forsaken: O do not cast me out of
thy Sight and Presence, now I desire from the bottom of my Heart to return to
thee! I abhor my self in dust and ashes, for my past Iniquities. But alas! such
is the hardness of my Impenitent Heart, that I am even ashamed of my humblest
Repentance: how much more may God despise and reject it? But have thou not
given thy Blessed Son to dye for Sinners? and exalted him to this very end, to
be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance, and Remission of Sins? And by
the word of thy Grace, thou beseechest all, (even the Greatest Sinners) to
accept of mercy; and art more willing to pardon, than we can be to Repent. It Is
thy Delight and Glory, agreeable to thy Nature, and declared Name, as a God
gracious, and merciful, slow to Anger; and of great Kindness, forgiving
Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin. O Pardon mine Iniquity for it is great; and
receive an humble Penitent, who implores thy Grace, according to the Tenor of
thy new Covenant, flying to the arms of thy Mercy, through the merits of Jesus
Christ, who is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him.

Lord, hear my Prayer, and let not the mixture of my weaknesses and
unworthiness turn it into Sin: but graciously vouchsafe to look upon a
returning Prodigal; and cause me to hear the voice of Joy and Gladness, that my
sorrowful Heart may be comforted, and my life be directed to thy Praise. Lead
me into the path of life, that I may no longer err from the way of thy
Commandments: Teach me to do thy Will, O God, and write thy Law upon my Heart,
that I may never more return to Folly. I am convinced of the Evil of Sin, of
thy Right to govern me, of the Equity and Justice of thy Law, of the sweetness
and rewards of keeping thy precepts: O sanctify my Heart, and make me Sound in
thy Statutes, that I may hate every false way, and be devoted to thy Fear, the
remainder of my Life.

If there be any particular Lust, or Wickedness, which through the power of
Temtation, and the deceitfulness of Sin you have fallen into; that has wasted
Conscience, and robbed you of your Peace, and provoked God to write bitter
things against you; be sure to humble your self without delay in an especial
manner for that Backsliding: Confess it freely, with its aggravations. Consider
whether it was not after some special manifestation of God's Love, after some
special warning, some strong Conviction, under or soon after some great
Affliction from God, or some more than ordinary kindness of his Providence,
etc. And impress such Thoughts, to humble your self the lower, search into the
grounds and causes of such Apostasy, such as the abatement of your
Watchfulness, the neglect of serious closet Devotion, making bold with
Temptation, too great compliance with vain Company, venturing too far in lawful
or indifferent Things, too much Confidence in your own Wisdom, Strength, and
stedfastness, not fearing sufficiently the Approaches and Beginnings of Sin, or
avoiding the fuel, incentives, and occasions of it, etc. Palliate and disguise
nothing, that may make your sin exceeding sinful, lest by some little Art of
the Devil, you deceive your self by an half-Repentance; and the Evil Spirit,
you think to be cast out, return again with seven worse than himself, and so
your latter end be worse than your Beginning. For if the sin be not truly
hated, but only covered over with penitential Ashes, it will quickly flame out
again, when it meets with combustible matter, and a strong blast of Temptation.

But if you are grieved to the very Heart, and abhor the Sin, and resolve to
quit it, you need not doubt of God's readiness to receive you to Mercy. His
Spirit is yet striving with you, if you are willing to Repent, and return to
God. He sought you, and called you to return, when you were wandering as a lost
sheep in the broad way; and can you think, he will not be found of you, if you
seek him with your whole Heart? Therefore renew your Repentance, and beg more
earnestly a Spirit of Humility, Holy Fear, and Watchfulness: And every morning
implore Divine succors against that Sin, and all Temptations to it. ( Which,
as much as possible, you must avoid.) Constant and fervent Prayer, after
Repentance, must be your refuge, and your Remedy. If you let fall your hands,
this Amalek will prevail again: As soon and as far as you fail in the
constancy, and fervency of that Duty, your Sin will get strength, and
successfully attempt you another Time. But by this practice, God may turn Evil
to work for Good, make you gain by your loss, stand the faster by your Falls,
and become stronger by the discovery of your weakness, and so be better
established for the future.

But take heed that you pervert not the Grace of God, and encourage your self
to sin again by the supposition, that if you should Fall, it is but to Repent,
and renew your Resolutions, and all will be well. This is a subtle Artifice of
Satan, but such methinks, as should take with none, who have ever known by
Experience, what it is to Repent. Who have felt the burden of Sin to be heavier
than a Millstone; than Luke 23. c. 30. 17. c. 2.
the weight of a Mountain. Who have tasted, how evil and bitter a thing it is,
to depart from God. Who have loathed and abhorred themselves, with deep
Remorse, and Sorrow, and Anguish of Spirit: wishing with all their Hearts, that
they had not sinned; and if it were in their power would give all the world to
retrieve it; and would rather dye than commit that Folly again, they then
repented of. Let those who have not their own Experience to confirm this, read
over (and consider the case of David, when he wrote) the Penitential Psalms.
How many like him have roared and cried out under the sense of sin, of stings
and furies in their Conscience, of the poisoned Arrows in their Souls, and his
Terrors surrounding them wherever they went: from the sense of sins Malignity,
the apprehensions of God's Anger, and the consequent Fears of his Wrath.
Serious Repentance after great Transgressions is another Thing than most
imagine it. When their aggravated Sins shall beset them behind, and before, be
placed in order before their eyes, and set in array against them. It Is always a
work of Difficulty as well as Importance, to crucify corrupt affections, to
tear a beloved Lust from the Heart, with self-indignation to abhor and cast
away what before you loved and delighted in. How did David's Sin stare him in
the Face? it is continually with me, it is ever before me, says He. It haunted
him like a Spectre, or like Belshazzar's handwriting on the wall, it still
appeared before him in some horrid shape.

However Sin may smile in its first address, and bespeak us in flattering
language, and promise Pleasure, and Profit, and great Advantages and
Satisfaction; these are but fair Appearances; This is but the outside of the
Cup, and the color of the Liquor: it will prove Gall and Wormwood, and a
mixture of deadly Poison, if ever God set it home upon the Conscience, and
awaken us to a true sense of it. And the Continuance of daily Repentance for
Sin, which all Christians are called to, is no such easy matter neither.
Constant self-abasement and Humiliation before God, from a sense of his Majesty
and Holiness, and of our many Sins, and pollution thereby: The imperfection of
our best duties continually to be bewailed; inordinate affections to be still
mortified; always resisting and opposing Sin, in its Root and and Branches;
conflicting against the whole Interest of the Flesh, the World, and the Devil;
seeking after more Holiness; to be derived unto us by the Grace of Christ, to
be wrought in us by his Spirit, and maintained by his Power; and making daily
applications to the Fountain of all Grace, for spiritual strength, to continue
our warfare against Sin, in all Instances of outward duty, and inward Actings
of Grace, even as long as we live; all this is included in it. Due
Apprehensions concerning Repentance, as so comprehensive and difficult a Duty,
would teach us to beware of Sin.

XXVII. The necessity of Christian Resolution to Upright, Persevering
Obedience; how full and extensive it ought to be, and yet humble; by what means
we may be assisted to perform that which we resolve.
HAving acknowledged my transgressions unto God, and begged forgiveness, and
experimentally learnt the Evil of Sin by the bitterness of Repentance, I
resolve for the future to watch against it more narrowly, and against every
thing that leads to it; endeavoring to please and honor my God and Savior by
an upright, obedient Heart and Life. And for the remission of my former
contracted Guilt, I trust to Jesus Christ, according to the Revelation made in
the Gospel, of what he is, has done, and suffered, and continues to do in
Heaven, for the Salvation of repenting Sinners, who desire to come unto God by
Him.

But how often, O my Soul! have I mocked God, and deceived my self, with formal
and faint Purposes of Amendment? My good Resolutions have been all of them as
the morning Cloud, and the early Dew, which quickly passed away. One fresh
assault of Temptation has swept away all my good Purposes as a Spider's Web. I
have falsified so many, and broke my word so often, that I dare not trust to
any thing I now resolve, or rely on any promise I should farther make. Succor
me therefore, O Lord, by thy powerful Grace, that what was defective in my
former fruitless Resolutions, may be now rectified. Let me be more humble in
the sense of my weakness, more dependant on thy Grace, and more heartily seek
it from time to time. Strengthen me with Strength in my Soul, with Might and
Power in my inward man, that I may so resolve and purpose, as to perform; that
I may not be one day hot, and the next cold; zealous in the Beginning, but
faint and lukewarm in the Progress; fervent and serious only in Resolving, but
weak and impotent in the Execution.

Having changed my Master, my End, and my Hopes, by returning unto God, from
whom I had gone astray, I firmly resolve, through the assistance of his Grace,
to change my Course of Life; that Old things being done away, all things may
become New; that Romans 6. c. 22.
being made free from sin, by pardoning Mercy, and become the servant of
Christ, I may have my fruit unto Holiness, that my End may be Eternal Life. In
the interim, whether I live or die, let it be unto the Lord, resolving both in
Life and Death to be absolutely His. And to that purpose, O my Soul! let me
seek for continual supplies of Grace from Christ my Head, to enable me to yield
ready Obedience, in the most difficult, hazardous, painful, and humbling
Duties. In vain do I resolve it, without the assistance of his mighty Power, to
strengthen my Heart and Hands, whenever I am called to such a trial of my
Sincerity. Without it I shall never recover my Liberty, or break asunder those
Bonds and Cords wherewith I have formerly been held Captive, as the Servant of
Sin and Satan. Such is the Weakness and Treachery of my own Heart, the
influence of ill Examples, and the subtlety and cunning of the Tempter, that
otherwise I shall quickly change my mind, and return to Folly, as the Dog to
his Vomit. The Spirit is so weak, and the Flesh so frail; the Snares of the
World so many, the Power of remaining Corruption so strong; and of my self I am
so unsettled and wavering, fickle and unsteady, and prone to backsliding, that
all my strongest purposes will not be sufficient, without daily strength from
above. My Senses are so deceitful; my Passions so ungovernable; the Rule and
Law I am to walk by, so strict, and spiritual, and extensive: Criminal
Omissions may be so frequent, and so easily overlooked; so many several and
difficult Duties are to be performed; and by every change of my Condition, or
of God's Providence, so many new Dangers and new Duties may arise, that I fear
the issue of my firmest Resolutions. So strict a Watch must always be kept;
such Humility and Caution is everywhere to be practiced; such speedy Repentance
required after every fall; with thankfulness and contentment in every State,
under all Calamities, be they never so many, or never so pinching; and
perseverance herein absolutely necessary, though never so many Stratagems be
used to discourage me from proceeding, or to entice me to go back, or turn
aside to some other Path; insomuch that if God had not promised me his
continued Presence, and that his Grace shall be sufficient for me, and that I
shall not be tempted above what I am able to bear; I should utterly despair of
making good what I now resolve.

But besides these Promises to encourage my Resolved Obedience, he has left
upon Record in his Word many glorious Examples of his assisting and rewarding
the Courage and Resolution of his Servants to continue faithful; as in the case
of Joseph, Daniel, and his Three Friends, etc. If Christ stand by, and
strengthen me, I know I shall be able to do all things; I shall not then be
flattered, or frighted out of the way of my Duty; no Wind that can blow shall
then turn me to another Point; nothing shall then be able to prevail for my
consent to a wilful and deliberate forsaking of God; no Argument, no
Temptation, though Privacy, Opportunity, Impunity from Men, with Rewards of
Worldly Gain and Honor, should all concur to enforce a Temptation. But, by
that Heavenly Assistance, I shall be preserved Humble, Temperate, Chaste,
Patient, Thankful, Self-denying, Crucified to the World, and hold fast my
Integrity till I die; still perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, growing in
Grace, and in the Knowledge of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, waxing
stronger from day to day, be seldomer surpised, offend less, and repent more
quickly, and watch more narrowly afterward, till at last I receive the Crown.

Especially, let me watch against my Constitution Sins, such as I am most
inclined to, and where a Temptation does most easily enter; where the Devil can
take the fastest hold, and be least suspected; where he has formerly sprung a
Mine, and made a Breach: I have known some humble watchful Christians, after
being recovered from their Backslidings, who abhorred every Temptation to that
sin, by which they had been defiled and wounded: they can hardly put up a
Prayer, but they mention it; hardly have their hearts affected in any
ordinance, but they are inwardly ashamed of it; hardly hear of any one guilty
of the like, but they are ready to burst out into Tears.

Fix therefore, I beseech thee, most Gracious God! my unfeigned Resolutions of
cleaving to thee, with full purpose of Heart: and show thy strength in my
weakness, by inabling me to do what I now resolve. To that end, teach me to
watch over my Heart, to keep it with all diligence, to be more conversant with
my own Thoughts, examining the motions that arise in my Heart, whence they
come, and whither they go, and what they tend to, that I may suppress the
beginnings of Sin. The unsearchable Deceitfulness of the Heart, the rovings,
straglings and wanderings of the Thoughts, the ungovernable motions and
stirrings of the Passions and Affections, with the corrupt Inclinations that
are ready to comply with Temptation, make such a constant Watchfulness
necessary. Let me live no longer as a stranger to my self, but by
Self-reflexion dwell more at home, reckoning my principal Work to be within
doors, to keep my own Vineyard. Teach me to watch over my Senses, to guard the
door of my Lips, to govern my Passions; to be wary in the Choice of my Company,
and in the Right Use of it; to be Circumspect in every step of my daily walk,
to call my self frequently to a Reckoning, to cast up my Accounts at the foot
of every page, by every days review of my Actions, to live always as in God's
presence, and be awed every where by the thought of his Holy Eye, to shun the
occasions and appearances of Evil, etc.

By the neglect of this, Spiritual Distempers will insensibly creep upon us.
There is such a venom and malignity in Sin, to wound and weaken the Soul, to
put us off the Hinges, to disorder and unfit us for any Spiritual Service, to
make our Hearts vain and frothy, lazy and listless, that we shall easily let
slip our Opportunities, lose our Seasons, and languish and pine away,
notwithstanding all the means of thriving and growth. And hence it is that so
many Professors mourn and complain, lick the dust, and lie among the clods, are
dead under the most awakening Ministry, and barren under the most fruitful
means. Hence it is they do little Good, as well as taste little Comfort; some
duties are neglected, and others performed slightly; and in none of them do
they meet with that Sweetness and Satisfaction, that Refreshment, and
Advanvantage, Fruit and Benefit, as formerly. And all from the neglect of
Watchfulness, making bold with Temptation, and not standing upon their Guard in
the use of their Christian Armor.

And because no Place, no Condition, no Employment is exempted from
Temptations, let me fortify my self every morning against all Assaults for that
day, by Serious Prayer, as Holy David was wont to do. My voice (says he) shall
thou hear in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I direct my Prayer unto
thee, and will look up, Psalm. 5. v. 3, 4. Let the Law of God be my daily and
delightful study: that I may be able presently to bring my Words and Actions to
the Touchstone; and know how to manage the sword of the Spirit, on all
occasions, against the fiery Darts of the Devil: that knowing the rule, I may
not be doubtful, or at a loss, when ever I am tempted: I may not make a stand
to parley, but immediately summon all my forces to Resist, and reject the
Snare; being assured from God, that the Continuance of this Warfare shall end
in a most Glorious Victory. He will shortly tread down Satan under my feet.
Thanks be to God, through Jesus Christ, my Lord.

XXVIII. The Import, and Obligation of our Baptismal Covenant. The renewal of
it by a solemn Dedication of our selves to God the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, exemplified and recommended.
ALL this, O my Soul, which I have now resolved on, is no more than what I am
obliged to, by my Vow in Baptism; to renounce the Devil and his Works, the
Flesh and the Lusts thereof, the World, and conformity to it, that I may Love
and Serve the Lord: agreeable to the undoubted Right which God has in me by
Creation, Redemption, and his inuumerable other Benefits. But the outword
washing of Baptism, and a visible profession of obedience, will not save me,
without the Answer of a good Conscience toward God; 1 Pet. cap. 3. v. 21. May
I not by the consideration of my Baptismal Covenant suppose God speaking to my
Conscience, to this effect? Will you take me for your whole Portion and
Felicity? and my Law for the constant Rule of your obedience? and fight against
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, to your lives end? Will you believe in
Jesus Christ, and receive him as a Prince and Savior? and adhere to the faith
and obedience of the Gospel, how hazardous and difficult soever the profession
and practice of it may be? Will you receive the Blessed Spirit as your Teacher,
Sanctifier, and Comforter? and cherish all his Motions, to inlighten, purify,
confirm, comfort, and assist you? It Is my hearty consent to these Terms, and
resolved compliance with them, which Baptism obliges to; and this is the
Answer of a good Conscience toward God.

I have often renewed this Covenant on several occasions; but did I ever duly
consider the tenor and obligation of it? How have I lied unto the God of Truth?
dealt deceitfully with him? and been False and Fickle, Treacherous and
Unfaithful to what I promised? O let me now again repeat it, and give up my
self once more to be the Lord's, more unfeignedly, more firmly than ever I have
hitherto done! that the Bonds of God upon me may be strengthened, and my Soul
more thoroughly engaged to be the Lord's. O help me to do it with the greatest
seriousness, as the most important Affair of my whole Life! by thine aid and
Grace alone shall I be sincere and cordial in this surrender, and Dedication of
my self. O breathe upon my Soul, most Holy Spirit, (the Power of the Highest)
that there may be no Hypocrisy, or Reservation, in this so weighty and solemn
Transaction between God and me!

O most Blessed and Glorious TRINITY! Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, Thy favor
is my Life, and thy Lovingkindness is better than Life: Thy Will should have
been my Rule, thy Word my Law, thy Glory my end, to please thee my principal
Business, and to enjoy thy Love and Presence my ultimate Felicity. But I am one
of thy revolted Creatures, who have lost thine Image, and rebelled against thy
Law, slighted thy Authority, and rejected thy Grace, and deserve to be cast out
of thy sight, and banished from thy Presence for ever. Nevertheless, O most
merciful God, and Father, upon thy gracious invitation and call, I now return
to thee my rightful Lord: acknowledging thee, as my Almighty, Wise, and
bountiful Creator, my absolute Owner, my Righteous Governor, my End, my
Happiness and Chief Good. I now accept thine offered Mercy; I now submit to the
Scepter of thy Grace; and give up my self to Thee, as my King, and my God; to
rule and sanctify me now, and be my Everlasting Portion. I desire to be no
longer my own, but Thine, to whom of right I belong, and ought to be devoted. I
yield my self to Thee, O my Lord! Accept and possess that which is thine own. I
lay my self at thy Foot, at all Times, and in all Conditions, to be at thy
dispose, and in every thing to acquiesce in thy Good Pleasure. Deliberately
resolving, with unfeigned and free consent of my Will, to walk before Thee in
Holiness and Righteousness all the days of my Life. Hereby I consecrate and
devote my self to be thy perpetual Avowed Servant: Lord, I am thy servant, I am
thy servant, the Son of thine Handmaid. Though other Lords have had dominion
over me, I will now make mention of thy Name, and of thy Righteousness only, by
Jesus Christ.

O Blessed Jesus, my All-sufficient Savior! Thy dying Love, infinite
Condescension, and matchless Grace has at last overcome me, and constrained me
to resolve to be wholly Thine, who have redeemed and bought me with thy most
precious Blood. I now acknowledge and own Thee, as my Lord, and my Jesus, my
Prophet, Priest, and King; my Sacrifice, Surety, and Ransom, to satisfy for my
Sins, and reconcile me unto God, to instruct me in his Will, and teach me the
Mysteries of his Kingdom, and the way to the Father. How often have thou opened
thine arms, and called me, yea beseecht me to come unto thee, and accept of
Life? but I refused to come. I adore thy merciful Condescension, that yet thou will receive me on such easy Terms. O thou Lord of Life and Glory, now accept
of an unworthy helpless Sinner, who flies to Thee as his only Refuge and Hope!
who is convinced, that None but Christ, None but Christ can make his Peace with
God, and save from wrath to come. I acknowledge thy Title to me, and my
obedience, and to all I have, by dying for me. I desire to take thy Yoke upon
me, for it is Easy; and thy Burden, which is Light. I desire to be entirely,
and for ever thine, in an Everlasting Covenant, never to be broken: to take up
the Cross, and follow thee, whithersoever thou shall lead me; through the
straight Gate, and the narrow way. I will reserve no Lust, refuse no Labor,
grudge at no Suffering, stick at no difficulty, so I may please, and honor
thee, and continue in thy Love. O shed abroad more of thy Love in my Heart, to
make all Things easy for his sake, who has loved me, and washed me from my
Sins in his own Blood.

O God the Holy Ghost, I acknowledge Thee as my Great Teacher and Sanctifier,
and give up my self to Thee, as the Author of all saving Knowledge and Holiness:
By Thee I have been convinced of my Sin, against the Law of God, and the Gospel
of Christ, and of my necessity of his Merit, Satisfaction, and Righteousness,
to justify my guilty Soul, by procuring the Forgiveness of Sin, and my
acceptance with God; and of the freeness of his Love, the Riches and
alsufficiency of his Grace, toward all who come unto God by Him. I adore Thee,
O most Blessed Spirit, as proceeding, and sent from the Father and the Son, to
renew all the Powers of my Soul, and restore the Divine Image there; to
enlighten my mind, to know and receive the Truth, as it is in Jesus, and purify
my Heart: and to sanctify all the Members of my Body, and make them Instruments
of Righteousness unto Holiness, which before were Servants unto Sin; and
gradually to deliver me from the power, the defilement, and abode of Sin; as
from the Guilt and Punishment by the Blood of Jesus. And as the Witness of God
to the Truth of the Holy Scriptures; and as the Great Paraclete, to comfort and
establish the Hearts of Believers, sealing them up to the day of Redemption,
and giving them the Earnest of the Heavenly Inheritance. O blessed Spirit, be
thou my Witness, that though I have violated the Law of God, and defaced his
Image, and formerly undervalu'd the Love of Christ, and the Grace of the
Gospel, yet by thine Aid, I now accept what I have so long neglected: and
thankfully devote my self henceforward to be the Lord's in a Covenant Relation.

But fearing and distrusting my self, I give up my self entirely to the conduct
of thy Grace, depending upon it for my establishment and perseverance. O form
my Heart into an obediential Frame! that in every thing I may endeavor to
answer the Ends and Obligations of this Devoted State.

To this One God I have once again dedicated and resigned my self; to serve,
and please, and honor Thee, in Thought, Word, and Act, to the last moment of
my Life: in the Performance of all Duties, even those which I have been most
averse from; in the mortification of every Lust, and the forsaking of every
Sin, even those which I was once most addicted to: Resolving deliberately to
allow my self in nothing, great or little, secret or open, which I shall know
or believe to be contrary to thy holy Will; making it my business to be
fruitful in good Works, to the praise of my Redeemer; waiting in the use of all
his appointed means for higher measures of Grace and Holiness, to be more
victorious over inward Lusts, and outward Temptations, still pressing toward
the mark for the prize of my high and holy Calling, even Eternal Life.

I call Heaven and Earth, O Lord, to witness this day, That I own and avow this
to be my Mind, and the settled Prevailing Purpose of my Soul. This I again
ratify and confirm, without any Clauses, or Exceptions. So help me, O my God.
Glory be to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit.

XXIX. Practical and Consolatory Reflections on the preceding Self-dedication,
or Covenant with God.
I Have this day solemnly avouched the Lord to be my God, to walk in his ways;
thereby to fortify my Resolutions, that I and my Deuteronomy. 6. c. 17, 18.
House, (and All that I can persuade to be of my mind) will serve the Lord. I
intend, desire, and hope never wilfully to violate the Faith, which I have now
plighted in the presence of God; but to continue steadfast, unmovable; always
abounding in the work of the Lord, etc.

Should I undertake any new Employment, or enter into any new Condition, or
change the place of my Abode, where I might see more of God's dishonor, and
meet with more and stronger Temptations to Sin, and be called to the
performance of more difficult duties, greater watchfulness and self-denial,
etc. I would hope hereby to engage the presence of God with me, and his
Blessing on all my Affairs, (on which depends the success of all that I
undertake:) and would hope the better to preserve my Integrity, not only This
Year, but in all the remaining portion of my Time, by the abiding sense of my
Covenant with God; thus seriously renewed.

This is the method I have been often advised to, for Peace of Conscience,
under doubts and scruples concerning my spiritual State: to put the matter out
of doubt, by again accepting the offered mercy and Grace of the Gospel; and
heartily consenting to the new Covenant: giving up my self to God in Christ, to
be ruled and saved by him. Blessed be God, I have now done so. Lord, say Amen
to thy part of the Covenant, that Thou art and wilt be my God; as I desire
unfeignedly to do to mine, that I will be thy Servant.

But beeause Articles are sooner consented to, than made good; (tho I seriously
intend never to disown this my solemn Act and Deed, but firmly to adhere to it
as long as I live; that having sworn, I will endeavor to perform it, that this
shall be my Everlasting Choice, never to be recanted or altered, yet)
considering the sad Instances of my former weakness, and the vigilance and
subtle malice of my Great Adversary, I again implore the succor of Divine
Grace, to keep it for ever in the purpose of my Heart, that it may be as the
Laws of the Medes and Persians, never to be reversed. I have given up my name
to be Thine; O put thy fear into my Heart, that I may never depart from Thee!
Imprint thy Laws upon my Heart, that my obedience may be uniform and universal,
unwavering and perpetual; suitable to so honorable and near a Relation to
Thee! I am sensible I want Wisdom and Strength to that purpose, but thou have
bid me ask it of Thee, who give liberally, to All without desert, and
upbraidest not, with present unworthiness, or former faults. O lead me not into
Temptation, but deliver me from Evil. Stand by and Strengthen me in the Hour of
Trial, lest I forget my vows, and deny Thee. O that my Soul may never draw
back, lest Thine have no Pleasure in me. I can serve no better Master; O let
mine Ears be bored to the door of thine house, as the Token and Assurance of my
being thy Servant unto Death. I know it is my Duty, I am sensible it is my
Privilege and Honor; I am convinced, that it is my Interest and Felicity; my
Soul, my Life, my present and everlasting Welfare, and All depends upon it,
that thou should be my God for ever: O conduct me by thy Holy Spirit of
Grace, that I may walk and act, as having heartily consented he should be so:
and direct my Heart into thy Love, and the faithful keeping of thy
Commandments. That when so many Professors make shipwreck of Faith, and a Good
Conscience, and discredit the Religion of my Lord, by their shameful Falls,
thou may make me to stand, and improve the warning of their Examples, to walk
humbly; and while I stand, to take heed least I fall.

Having thus surrendered my self to God, what is there, O my Soul! that is ever
like to prevail with me to go back, and revolt from him? Is the gratification
of a Lust, the securing of an Estate, compliance with a Friend, the pleasing of
a Superior, living in Ease and Honor, and outward Prosperity for a little
while, the saving my Body from Suffering, or my life from Violence, (or what
ever else be the Motive of my unfaithfulness to God, and Apostasy from Him) Is
Any, is All of these any way considerable, compared with the Blessedness of
having God to be my God? For thereby I have the forgiveness of all my Sins, and
the Assurance of his Favor; the certainty of present Protection, and
Provision; all Creatures reconciled to me, and to be employed for my Good, as
the Friend of God; All things to work together for my Advantage; and by the
evidence of my Adoption, a well grounded Hope of Eternal Life. God as my Sun
and Shield, will give Grace and Glory, and withold no Good Thing. So
unspeakably Comprehensive are the Privileges of so near a Relation to God in
Christ. O happy are the People who are in such a case! Blessed are the Persons
whose God is the Lord.

Do I resolve to abide by my Choice, and to trust in Christ, for persevering
Grace? and shall I not, ought I not to take Comfort in it? Shall I not give God
the Glory of his infinite Goodness, by adhering to him, and rejoicing in him,
notwithstanding all Temptations to the Contrary? Casting all my Care upon him,
and quieting my self in the Alsufficiency of my Heavenly Father: having a God
in Covenant, who will supply all my wants, and take care of me as his own.
Shall I not give him the glory of his Truth and Power, by trusting him in every
Condition? By confidence in his Promise, Dependence on his Word, Faithfulness
to his Interest, and Constancy in his Service to the end? Is it not a most
encouraging Thought, That God does never Abandon any, who do not first forsake
him? And after such strict Engagements, as I have laid upon my self, shall I
ever strike the fatal stroke with my own Hand? Shall I be off and on, say and
unsay, promise and retract? And after I have proceeded thus far, shall I
forsake the Fountain of Living Waters, and turn again to broken Cisterns?

After I have examined my self, considered my ways, confessed my Sins, and upon
serious Deliberation am come to a Resolve, and in pursuance of it have devoted
my self with such solemnity to be the Lord's, shall I ever after this, forsake
Him, and my own Mercies, and lightly esteem the Rock of my Salvation? Now I
have learned in some measure what Sin is, by the sorrows and anguish of an
Hearty Repentance; now I have discovered so much of the Snares and Devices of
Satan, whereby I have formerly been betrayed: now I am sensible of the dangerous
and powerful influence and infection of bad Company; the Treachery of fleshly
Lusts; the bewitching Temptations of the World; and have tasted a little, by my
own Experience, of the Pleasantness of Wisdom's Paths, the Peace and
Satisfaction of Devotedness to God, by the present Rewards of a calm
Conscience, the communications of Divine Grace, and the Encouragement of an
Holy Hope, etc. and am persuaded of the Stability of his Word, and the
Certainty of Eternal Life to all who continue in well-doing; shall I, after all
this, ever break with God again? Shall I ever cancel this Engagement? violate
this my Vow? and falsify so many repeated Promises and Resolutions? Oh that
his Power may rest upon me! and his Grace work in me both to will and to do!
that this God may be my God for ever, and my Guide unto Death. Let me never
reassume this Gift, and Surrender of my self, or defraud God of his Right and
Propriety. His I am, and Him I will serve: living wholly to Him; using all I
have for him: being willing he should do what he list with his own, and
consequently dispose of me, and of all that any way belongs to me, as shall
seem Good in his Eyes. I am Thine, O Lord save me. Command me my work, appoint
me my Duty, direct my Station, order my Condition. Let me be Thine, tho
employed in the meanest service, and the most laborious self-denying work. Tho
I should be but a Doorkeeper in thine House, an Hewer of Wood, or a Drawer of
water; Tho I must pinch the flesh, and swim against the Tide, and renounce what
before I valued: yet This God shall be my God for ever.

By this means when I come to Dye, (if God should add more years to the little
number I have past, besides this I have now begun) I may be able to say with
Upright Hezekiah, Remember Lord, how I have walked before Thee in mine
Integrity. That in the face of Death, and the Grave, in the view of another
World, and the near prospect of Eternity, I may be able to Rejoice in Hope, and
Say, Lord Jesus, Receive my Spirit. Thou art my Savior, and I have waited for
thy Salvation. I have sought Thee with my whole Heart; I have chosen thy Favor
rather than Worldly Grandeur and Prosperity; I have prized thy Love, and
endeavored to obey Thee, (as the best Expression of my own) tho with many
Imperfections, which I bewail; I have delighted more in thy Service and
Presence, than in the Pleasures of Sin and vanity; thy Testimonies have been
the Joy of my Heart; I took no delight in the Company of the ungodly, after I
was devoted to Thee; O let me not have my Portion with them in the other World!
Fortify me now against the King of Terrors, strengthen me in this my last
Conflict, enable me to triumph over Death by the Cross of Christ, (my
victorious Redeemer) and carry me through the dark valley, at the divorce of
Soul and Body; and grant me an abundant entrance into thine heavenly Kingdom;
Let me be numbered among thy Chosen, and my Body wait in Hope, 'till the general
Resurrection, that I may then see thy Glory, and dwell with Thee for ever.

I gave up my self to Thee, and do not Repent my Choice; acknowledge me now for
Thine, and do not lose that which is thy own. Lord Jesus! Thou have paid my
Ransom, to deliver me from Satan, and from Eternal Wrath, oh do not now reject
me, and cast me off. Is it not thine Office and Covenant to save those that
Trust in thee? Oh remembr thy Word unto thy Servant, wherein thou have caused
me to Hope, when I ventured my Salvation on thy Promise, and trusted to thy
Gracious Word for Eternal Life. Thy Love has already overcome the greatest
impediments of my Salvation. It Is as easy now to receive me, as to Love me.
Thou have prepared Glory for thy Redeemed ones; and have bid me believingly to
follow thee, and wait for thy Salvation. Thou have begotten me to a lively
hope, by the Incorruptible Seed of the Word; Let me not now be deprived of the
Inheritance. Can that Love that pitied me in my Blood, and fetched me from the
Gates of Hell, now suffer me to fall into it? Oh Crown thy Grace, and perfect
thy Preparatory Mercy, with Everlasting Mercy.

By voluntary Consent and Choice, thou art my God; and thy Presence in Heaven,
my ultimate Felicity; I have trusted to thy Gracious Promise, to prepare me for
it, and bring me to it; O fulfill thy Word unto thy Servant, wherein thou have
caused me to hope; and mercifully receive my departing Soul, that seeks Thee,
that loves Thee, that breathes after Thee, and desires nothing but to know Thee
better, and love Thee more, and be more entirely conformed to thine Image, and
live always in thy Blessed Presence. Thou have called me out of the World,
placed thine Image upon me, enabled me to make it my Business, though with many
Imperfections, to serve, and please, and honor Thee; Oh Receive me to the
fullness of thy Love and Grace, and present me faultless before the Presence of
thy Glory, with exceeding Joy. Amen, Holy Father, be it unto me according to
thy Word; through the Merits and Intercession of my Alsufficient Savior, Jesus
Christ, the Faithful and True Witness, in whom all thy Promises are Yea, and
Amen.

XXX. Thanksgiving to God for his Innumerable Benefits and Mercies,
particularly in the Year Past: with some Direction and Advice concerning it.
HOW precious and delightful are the Thoughts of thy Benefits? O Lord, how
great is the sum of them? Should I count them, they are more in number than the
Stars. Shall I not observe and consider them? maintain a grateful sense of
them, and publicly acknowledge them on all occasions? that I may Bless the Lord
at all Times, and his Praise be continually in my mouth. More especially should
I conclude and begin the Year, with solemn Praises to my Great Benefactor and
Preserver. I ought to begin and close every Day with it, thereby to make the
outgoings of the Morning and the Evening to rejoice in God. Every Year, every
Day, every Hour, every Moment offers me an occasion to praise Him: because he
is every minute gracious: and has been so ever since he gave me my Being.

Almost one half of my Time has been spent in Sleep, when I remember not God,
nor my self; yet does He, who never slumbers or sleeps, remember me in Mercy,
and watch over me for good. Yea, though in the other half, by Day, I have
forgotten him in a worse sense, by casting off his Fear, and not remembering
that his Holy Eye is upon me, yet has he not forgotten to be Gracious.
Therefore I will praise the name of God with a Song, and will magnify him with
Thanksgiving, and never forget his benefits. With which Sacrifice he is better
pleased than with an Ox or Bullock, that has horns and hoofs.

He has prolonged my Life this last Year, when so many others, of his more
useful Psalm 69. v. 30.
Servants, have been removed by Death: and given me farther Time and Space to
Repent, when multitudes have been surpised in their Impenitence. Yea, it was
He, who formed me in the Womb, and brought me safely into the World, by whose
Providence I have hitherto been supplied: in Him I live, and move, and
continually exist; To his undeserved Goodness I am beholding for all the Good
of any kind, which I ever enjoyed: To his Bounty I am indebted for all that I
now have; and must depend upon it, for whatever I can hereafter expect.

Through Infancy and Childhood he was pleased to preserve me; favoring me with
many advantages in my Birth and Education; providing for me a Competent
Livelihood; disposing the Circumstances of my Condition, Relations, Places of
Abode, etc. more advantageously than he has done for Thousands: affording me
many Helps, for the Improvement of my mind, and the increase of Knowledge: and
preventing my Necessities, and even my Desires, with numberless Blessings,
which I never so much as asked for. He has caused several of my Relations to
yield me Comfort, when they might have been sore Afflictions. He has raised up
Strangers to befriend me, and show me kindness. How many favors have I
received from God, by the Instrumentality of other Men? to whom God gave the
Will, and the Power, the Opportunity, and the Inclination?

How often has he delivered my Soul from Death, mine Eyes from Tears, and my
Feet from falling, by seasonable Preservations? so that I do yet walk before
him in the Land of the Living. He has rescued me from the brink of many a
Precipice, which, through Ignorance or Inadvertency, I did not apprehend or
Fear. When I knew not which way to turn, he has made my Path plain. Under
sinking Disappointments he has commanded Succor; and been a present Help in
the time of Trouble. In Great Perplexities, his Eye has been my Guide, and his
own Arm has brought Salvation: it may be by the Ministry of his Holy Angels,
obeying his order, and giving unusual Intimations of very great, and otherwise
unsuspected Dangers: or sending Relief and Deliverance, by such small,
unlikely, and unexpected Means, as carried the name of God visibly engraven on
them. Innumerable Calamities he saves me from, which others groan under: and as
many Blessings am I favored with, whereof they are destitute. He Spreads my
Table, and fills my Cup, and gives me All Things richly to enjoy, when many
Excellent Persons, of whom the World is not worthy, are fed with the Bread of
Affliction, and the Water of Affliction. Others have only Necessaries, or but
few Conveniences, in Comparison with the Plentiful Provisions God has made,
for my Cheerful Obedience to Him. And shall I not Praise Him for Deuteronomy. 33. v.
13, 14.
the precious Things of Heaven, the blessings of the Earth, the dew, and the
deep? and more especially for the Goodwill of Him who dwelt in the Bush, to
sanctify and sweeten all: Whereby Common Mercies become the pledge and
forerunner of better Things; as the fruit of his Special Kindness, the witness
of his Truth, and the seed of Peace and Joy, and Righteousness, and Praise; by
reason of his Blessing on all that I possess, which otherwise would prove a
Snare, and a Temptation, and be intermixed with a Curse.

And besides the ordinary and Continued Bounty of every Day, in the midst of
how many Difficulties and Dangers have I felt the dear obligations of his
Preserving Mercy? abroad and at home; in Foreign Countries, as well as my own;
in the midst of Enemies, and among Friends; in all Places, and at all Times.

He has prolonged my Health, or made my Bed in Sickness. He has often granted
the Desires of my Heart when ever it was for his Glory; and contradicted my
Wishes, and disappointed my Endeavors, in other Instances, when it was more to
my Advantage. From how many Mischiefs has he saved me, by such Things as I
deprecated, and would have hindered? How many Evils has he turned for Good? He
has heard my Cry in the day of Adversity, and set my feet in a large Place. He
has Chasten'd me for my Profit: His Rod and his Staff have comforted me: He
has spoken comfortably to me in the Wilderness. Affliction has been useful
and necessary Physic; made an Instrument of Virtue, and so a token of his
Love. Therefore Psalm 89. v. 1.
I will sing of the Mercy of the Lord for ever, and with the voice of
Thanksgiving will I make known his Faithfulness.

He has all along conducted me by his Wisdom, guided me by his Providence, and
the Angel of his Presence has directed my Path, and ordered all my Goings. He
has been a Cloud to me by Day, and a Pillar of Fire by Night: he has helped
me in my Straits, and supplied my Wants, and comforted me in all my Sadnesses:
His powerful and gracious Presence has been my constant Guard: and his
Sovereign never-failing Goodness has compast me about with Mercy on every
side. For which, O most Merciful Father, my Soul, and all that is within me,
desires to speak thy Praise.

The advantageous Circumstances of many divine Favors do raise their value, and
deserve to be particularly observed and acknowledged. How suitably, how
seasonably, how wisely has he conferred his Benefits? with what Tenderness and
Kindness? with what Freedom and Readiness? Of his own bounty and good will,
without any Necessity, or Obligation on his Part; without any Desert, and
Sometimes without so much as a Prayer on mine. And what is more,
notwithstanding my Ingratitude and Forgetfulness of Him, and great
Provocations, heightened by the abuse of so much Mercy: demanding nothing after
all, in requital of so much Kindness, but my Acceptance of his Love, and
grateful sense of his Goodness, and the sweetest and most reasonable
Expressions of it, by Thankful Obedience.

More especially, would I bless the Lord, for Inlightning my mind in the Great
Mysteries of Religion: disposing in wonderful Wisdom the several means and
methods, whereby he brought me to the Knowledge of the Truth, by Parents,
Ministers, Friends, Acquaintance, Books, Afflictions, etc. Beginning with me in
Childhood, awakening and cultivating the inbred Notions of God, and natural
Religion, of Good and Evil, Rewards and Punishments, by the careful
Instructions of Parents, or others concerned in my Education: giving me the
advantage of Good Examples, Counsels, and Encouragements, to know and do well;
with more assistance, and less hindrances, and diversions, than to many Others.
Particularly, for the Excellent Privilege and inestimable Blessing of his Holy
Word and Sacraments; the liberty of the Christian Religion, in the Purity of
it, in most of those Places, where God has been pleased to cast my Lot. Causing
me to lay down in green Pastures, and leading me beside the still Waters:
Instructing me in the Revelation of his Will and Grace by Jesus Christ:
acquainting me with the sublime Principles and Articles, Precepts and Rules,
Promises and Hopes of the Gospel, in order to Eternal Life.

I bless Thee, O Lord, and shall for ever do so, that with any or all these
Advantages and Helps thy Holy Spirit has taught me to know the Truth as it is
in Jesus, heartily to believe and obey it. That by thy Grace I have been
convinced of Sin, and brought to Repentance; showing me the necessity of a
Savior, to make my peace with Thee, the all sufficiency of his Grace, the
fullness of his Merit, the freeness of his Love, and his readiness to receive me
to Mercy, inviting and calling me to it, and enabling me to accept his gracious
Invitation, and obey his compassionate Call; making me willing, by a Powerful
and Victorious Grace, drawing me with Cords of Love, and so effectually
persuading me to consent to thy Covenant, and comply with thy Message, on the
gracious terms of the Gospel. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who, through his abundant Mercy, has begotten me again to a lively
Hope; having humbled my proud Heart, and conquered the perverseness of my
stubborn Will, and brought my Soul to an entire subjection to himself: who took
pity on me when he saw me in my Blood, spread his Skirt over me, cast a Mantle
upon my Nakedness, washed me from my Sins, and put his own Comeliness upon me,
by Sanctification: who opened my eyes, when I was leaping blindfold into the
Pit of Destruction: who healed my Soul, when I was sick unto Death: who rescued
and recovered me from the Slavery of the Devil, when I was led Captive by him
at his will. Shall not a ransomed, redeemed Slave, be thankful to his
Deliverer? Shall not a miserable undone Sinner, who is received to Mercy, be
thankful for a Pardon? Awake, O my Soul! and utter a Song of Praise to him,
Psalm. 103. v. 3.
who forgiveth all thine Iniquities, and heals all thy Diseases; who
redeemeth thy Life (thy Soul) from Destruction, and crowns thee with
loving kindness, and tender Mercies.

Has he made thee Partaker of his own renewed Image and Likeness? given thee
his Son, his Grace, his Spirit? and taken such a wretched Creature into so near
a relation to Himself; and promised to be thy God and Guide, thy Portion and
thine Inheritance, thy Friend and thy Physician, thy Sun and thy Shield, and
thine exceeding great Reward? and shall not my Soul speak aloud his Praise?
Has he been Isa. 43. v. 14.
merciful to my unrighteousness, and blotted out my sins? Has he gathered me
with his Arm, and carried me in his Bosom? Has he been my Savior and
Redeemer, adopted me into his Family, and promised to make me Blessed in his
Glory, with the holy Angels? the Curse being removed, and the Handwriting
against me cancelled, the Price paid, the Breach made up, the Mouth of Justice
stopped, and the condemning Sentence of the Law exchanged for a gracious Pardon,
through the Sacrifice of my Blessed Lord Jesus? and shall I not praise his
ineomprehensible Love and Grace?

I likewise thank Thee, most holy Father, for saving me from Guilt and Ruin,
when assaulted by powerful and dangerous Temptations; that by preventing Mercy,
or restraining Grace, thou have kept me from many scandalous and presumptuous
Crimes. I thank Thee, for making the Sins of Others a Warning and a Caution to
Me, an Argument to Humility, and a Motive to Watchfulness; for preserving my
Judgment from many Errors and Delusions, by which others are seduced; for
enabling me to improve any Opportunities of doing Good, and making me in any
thing useful to Others: yea, I thank thee for all thy Mercies to other
Christians; for all the Gifts and Graces and usefulness of any of thy Servants,
wherein, as a Member of the same Body, I desire to rejoice; for any Support and
Comfort to me, or any of them, under honorable Sufferings for thy Names sake.

I desire unfeignedly to bless Thee, for any Succor, Relief and Victory, with
respect to the Snares and Buffetings of Satan, and the vilest of his
Temptations. When he has tempted me to Apostasy, and Infidelity in Speculation
and Practice; to question the Truth of the Holy Scriptures, and the Life to
come; to doubt of the foundations of the Christian Faith, or to despair of the
Mercy of God, and give up the Reins to sensual Lusts; or to draw me from God,
by the love of the World, and the praise of Men, by Evil Company, Intemperance,
secret Wickedness, etc.

I Bless Thee with my whole Soul, for calling me back from any of my
Wanderings, and by infinite Goodness recovering me after great Falls, enabling
me to return when I had gone astray, and seek thy forfeited favor, that thou
may heal my Backslidings; giving me, in order to it, a deep sense of my own
Sin, and of thy Sovereign Grace; leading me to a Savior, whose Blood cleanses
from all sin, when my guilty defiled Soul so much needed its pardoning and
cleansing Virtue; awakening me to make holy Vows, and calling upon me by thy
Word, and Spirit, and Providence, to perform them.

I Bless Thee, who have guided my feet into the way of peace, when by the
terrors of an accusing Conscience, and the sense of unpardoned Sin, and the
apprehensions of thy deserved Wrath, I was ready to despair: that though thou
did most justly hide thy Face at any time, it was but for a little while; but
did seasonably, and in Mercy return, to wipe off my Tears, restore the Joy of
thy Salvation, and chase away the clouds and darkness on my Spirit, by the
reviving presence of thy own. Thou who art the Author, wilt be the Finisher of
my Faith; and therefore, though thou have visited mine Iniquities with a
Fatherly Rod, yet thy loving kindness thou have not taken from me, or suffered
thy faithfulness to fail, or thy Covenant of Peace to be removed; but have
refreshed me with hidden Manna, after great Perplexities, saying unto my Soul,
I am God, even thy God; making me to hear thy Voice, which was sweet, and to
taste thy Love, which is better than Wine; enabling me to say with thine
Apostle Thomas, My Lord, and my God; and to have any Communion with thee since,
in public or private Duties.

For all these innumerable Mercies I desire to praise Thee, which yet are but
in order to greater, to Everlasting Kindness in Heaven. These are but the taste
and Earnest of what thou will bestow hereafter. O how great is his Goodness,
that he has laid up for those that fear him? And now, Lord, what wait I for?
my hope is even in Thee. I thank thee, who have thus put it into my Heart, to
render thee solemn Praise, and once more to renew my Covenant with Thee.

I will magnify the Lord, and my Spirit shall rejoice in God my Savior.
Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with me.
While Psalm. 104.33.
I live I will praise thee, and sing Praises unto my God, while I have a Being.
O come, and behold the Works of the Lord, what be has done for my Soul! The
Lord lives. Psalm. 18.46.
Blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my Salvation be exalted. Let my Heart
be glad, and my Glory rejoice, for the Lord is not ashamed to be called my God.
Thanks be to God, who has caused me to triumph in Christ Jesus. Sing unto the
Lord, O ye his Saints, and give thanks at the remembrance of his Holiness!
Psalm. 30.
I cried unto Thee, and thou have healed, and saved me: I will give thanks to
Thee for ever. Psalm. 119.62.
I will show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness
every night. For the Lord is Good, his Mercy is Everlasting, and his Truth
endures throughout all Generations. O enter into his Gates with Thanksgiving,
and his Courts with Praise: be thankful unto him, and bless his Name. Bless the
Lord, all ye his Works, in all places of his Dominions: Bless the Lord, O my
Soul.

Let me add for a Conclusion, That the particular Deliverances, Supports, and
Consolations, which at any time God has given in Cases of great Exigence, or
in answer to importunate Prayer, ought never to be forgotten. Many experienced
Christians have been wont to write down such remarkable Appearances of God for
them, with the particular Circumstances that did recommend and enhance the
Mercy, (whether Spiritual or Temporal) as an Encouragement to trust in God in
future Difficulties; and have afterward found the Comfort and Advantage of
being able to have recourse to such Papers. This Practice I recommend as what
has been useful and consolatory to diverse Christians, for many years
afterward; and to some others, of their more intimate Friends, to whom they
might without vanity be imparted. What Experiences might be recorded of signal
Returns to Prayer, and seasonable Manifestations of the Truth, and Goodness,
and Wisdom of God, if all the Instances thereof were duly recollected and
preserved! And how sweet and pleasant would the Work of Prayer and Praise then
be! With what rejoicing and delight should we set about it, and live in it, if
the constraining Goodness and Love of God, and a thankful sense of his
unspeakable Mercies, did bring us to him, and indite and animate every word!
What Support, and Comfort, and probable Hopes (at least) of the special Love of
God, might we derive from the various passages of his Compassion and Kindness!
And hereby we may be able more heartily to give him thanks for Pardon,
Sanctification, and Adoption, which we commonly mention with too much doubt and
fear.

It may likewise be advisable to examine and record the Workings of your own
Spirit, under such Dispensations: what thoughts you then had of God? what Acts
of Faith, Love, Thankfulness, you did then manifest? what Evidences of God's
Favor, and what discovery of your own Sincerity, you have had at such times?
when, and how and by what means you were cured of your uncomfortable Unbelief,
and raised from your Despondency? what Promises you had recourse to for relief?
what Considerations were most helpful to you? what frame of Spirit you kept up
in Prayer, before and after? what Resolutions and Engagements you made to God,
to love, and and trust, and praise, and serve him, and give up all to his
dispose for the future? and what consequent Obligation may be inferred from
thence, to acquiesce in the Will of God, and resign our selves entirely to Him,
saying, This God is our God for ever and ever, and He will be our Guide unto
Death.

THE END.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Joseph Watts, at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
CRadock's Harmony of the Four Evangelists, Fol.

Chardyn's Travels into Persia and the East Indies, Fol.

Rushworth's Historical Collections from 1618, to 1629. Fol.

Flavell's Method of Grace. 4 to.

-- His Treatise of the Soul. 4 to.

Journals of the House of Commons relating to the Popish Plot 8 vo.

James of the Corruption of Scripture, Councils and Fathers, by the Prelates,
Pastors and Pillars of the Church of Rome, for the maintenance of Popery 8 vo.

The True Nature of the Divine Law, and of Disobedience thereunto. 8 vo.

Reformed Devotions, in Meditations, Hymns and Petitions, for every day in the
Week: By G. Dorrington. 12 o.

An Earnest Invitation to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. 12.

The Mystery of Iniquity: By Dr. Burnet. 8 vo.

Trial of Lord Russel, etc. Fol.

-- Of Coll. Sidney. Fol.

-- Of Edward Fitzbarris.

Sure and Honest means to Convert Heretics: Writ by a Roman Catholic, but
published for the Common good.

True Test of the Jesuits; or the Spirit of that Society, Disloyal to God,
their King and Neighbor.

Treatise of Monarchy; in Two Parts, concerning Monarchy in General, and this
Particular Monarchy: By Hunton.

A Discourse, wherein is held forth the Opposition of the Doctrine, Worship and
Practice of the Roman Church, to the Nature, Designs and Characters of the
Christian Faith: By Gilbert Burnet, D. D.

Moun's Jurieu's Reflections on the Ecstasies of Isabel Vincent, who ever since
February last, sung Psalms, prayed, preached and prophesied about the Present
times in her Trances.

A Representation of the Threatening Dangers impending over Protestants in Great
Britain, before the coming of his Higness the Prince of Orange.

An Exhortation to Repentance and Union among Protestants: By John Shewer.

The Present Correction and Reproof of Sin; or, a Discourse on Jer. II. 19. By
John Shewer.

A Complete Discourse of the Nature, Use and Right managing the Baroscope, or
Quicksilver Weather-Glass, with the True Equation of Natural Days, for the
better ordering of Pendulum Clocks and Watches: By John Smyth.

No Antiquity for Transubstantiation plainly proved from the Judgment of the
most Learned Men that lived in the time of the Saxons.

Transubstantiation a Peculiar Article of the Roman Catholic Faith, which was
never owned by the Ancient Church, or any of the Reformed Churches: By Tho
Goodwin.

Dialogues between Philerene and Philalethe, concerning the Pope's Supremacy.


