A SECOND VINDICATION OF THE Magistracy and Government OF ENGLAND, By way of
ANSWER to the several REPLIES, etc.
IT is very observable, that since the late Revolution, nothing has more
disturbed our Peace than the Liberty of the Press: and amongst all our new
Prints, the most malignant and mischievous Libels on the present Government
have been written by those Lawyers who pretend themselves the greatest Zealots
for its Honor and Service; which may be suspected as false, unless it be withal
considered, that some modern Royallists have nothing recommendatory of
themselves but the miscarriages of others; and others of them have such great
ones of their own, that an extenuation or excuse is impossible, and therefore
to cloud their own Deformities they would blacken other Men's Reputations, and
in order to it they have censured Innocence, and arraigned Laws; and where a
slip or fault has been, tho so small as scarcely to deserve the name of one,
they have magnified it into an execrable Villainy; and for a color of such
their Calumny and Slander, they have vented new Gospel and Law both: nay they
have broached such Notions to the World, as are directly fatal to that Crown of
which they boast themselves the Makers and Supporters, and yet in doing so they
pretend to merit --

It is strange but true, for the Fact is plain, and the Consequence too: upon
the present Change, the Republicans of both Gowns, did deem it their Policy and
Interest to bespatter and reproach other Men's Actions; and like base and mean
spirits, gave ill Names and Words to every thing in which themselves had not
been concerned, and made reviling so customary, that it is become the modish
sin of the Age. It is most certain the old English Honor, Frankness, Ingenuity,
and good Nature, is quite abandoned from some Companies and Places in the Town,
and instead of Folly, we have assumed a vice in our common Conversation,
instead of Drollery and Banter, the new fashioned Wit at -- 's allows nothing
as acceptable but Lying and Slander; nay the very Spark of a Courtier has
changed his note, whereas fulsom, gross, and false Flattery was wont to be his
Talent, he is now got to the other extreme, i.e. revengeful, weak, and false
Characters, both of Persons and Actions. Which is the worst is difficult to
determine, but falsehood is the most predominant humor in both, and that Age is
surely unhappy which is plagued with a Surfeit of either, especially when the
excess is so great as now, that no Gentleman can be thought a good Companion,
no Clergyman a true Protestant, no Lawyer an honest Englishman, no Courtier a
faithful Servant, unless he can, and do Rail, and Snarl, and Scold, and that at
things that were justly used in former times, and must necessarily be used in
these times, and will be so in all times whatsoever, even in Secula Seculorum.
These little stinging Animals do value themselves upon their Honesty, because
they find Faults, but it is in cases where no Eye can spy them but their own;
they value themselves upon their Wit, because their censures are sharp and
biting, but that is so easy, so very easy a Province, that Nature teaches
even the rudest of her breed to be Satirical, and the Natural oftentimes
outdoes the pretended Scholar in Rib^ldry, and has perhaps a better faculty
that way for fancy and piquancy of reflection.

Now as the Fact is thus Criminal and Ridiculous both, so must the Consequence
prove fatal to the Government which they would be thought (but intend not) to
support, for when once resolved to Arraign all past proceedings, they are
forced for the maintenance of such their Reflections to vent those Opinions,
Doctrines, and Rules in Divinity and Law, which have in every Age (save one)
been justly exploded as destructive to the honor and being of the then
Possessors of the Crown; and can conduce to no other end than the utter
Subversion of this, and every other Government that does but smell of a
Monarchy.

It cannot be denied but in most Reigns there have been some occasions given
for disgust to the People, that Kings have born too hard upon their Subjects,
that the Subjects have worthily complained of some Warps from the Law; but no
Man ever with Sense pretended that this is a reason to induce a belief, that
every Act of State, and every Judgment of Law in former times was Arbitrary and
unwarrantable: no surely, the Publishers of such Reflections are of another
thought themselves; and some folks imagine, they who formerly were engaged in
Seditious Practices against the Crown, would now upon the present occasion
explode that Law which does condemn such Practices, that they may with impunity
repeat them whenever the King or his Ministers shall chance to disoblige
them, and that this is the true reason of half the new Libels and invectives
upon past Proceedings.

It is now apparent to all Mankind, that every Line, or at least Page, of some
Men's Works are designed only as a Courtship to the Mobb, by bridling the
Sovereignty, and clipping the Prerogative, even to such a degree, as does
absolutely deprive it of those Rights, Powers, and Authorities, which the
ancient Law, continued Usage, and our present Representatives consent to allow
it.

To check this growing itch of Pamphleting the Nation into another Change, and
to vindicate the Rights of the Crown, and justify the Magistracy of England
from the obloquy which was industriously thrown on it in one Particular: there
was three months since, a Sheet Printed and Published, at which some Men took
offense, but others were of Opinion, that its Publication was seasonable and
well timed; that its reflection on the trifling Defense which it assumed to
answer, were just and smooth, and very soft, considering the occasion given for
a more Satirical Style from the fondness and incoherence of the Defenders
expressions and inferences, and that the mode of managing his Argument, was
modest and tender, with a decent and due regard to the memory of the
unfortunate deceased, which had suffered more than enough of Injury by that
pretended Justification.

A Choleric and Sedulous Enquiry has been made after the Authors Name, but
the Inquisitor is still at a loss, notwithstanding his confidence of a certain
knowledge who it was that came behind and struck him, etc. But to give him some
satisfaction, after all his fatigue in searching, I will ascertain who it was
not; he may assure himself that none concerned in that Trial, were concerned or
privy to its Vindication, and when it was Composed and Writ, the Party intended
it chiefly for his own and the worlds diversion, from the ungrateful necessity
of Reading always on one side, by the interposal of a few Lines on the other;
that our Humors might not be quite sowned, and our Genius turn too pevish
through the influence of Satyr and Libel, with which the World has too much
abounded of late years; nor had there been one word more published upon that
Subject, but that the Authority of the Defender does challenge a Vindication,
and the word of a Priest says that it needs one; both shall have an answer
presently.

But first it is remarkable, that this new Reply has got a License, when none
of his other elaborate Works could procure one, however it is possible that the
Licenser may hereafter renounce, or retract his Allowance in this case, as he
has done in several others already, when his Superiors are acquainted with
the Contents and Tendencies of that to which he has given his Imprimatur; for
it is not to be supposed, that Ministers of State will ever be so incurious of
their Masters Honor, and the Rights of his Crown, as to approve their
diminution, when once they perceive it.

The single Point which the Advocate for Magistracy assumed to maintain, was
that the Indictment in question was Legal and Good, sufficient both for matter
and form, and did warrant the Judgment which was pronounced upon the Verdict
that affirmed its truth. This seems the principal Assertion in that Paper,
which whether his Presidents and Authorities, Arguments and Reasons, are
sufficient to prove, the Reader must judge. That the Cases he cites are truly
reported for so much as he uses them, none can deny, and that the Law is with
him upon the whole matter, shall be further evinced.

But since that Sheet has made some noise amongst angry Men (which was little
expected by him that wrote it) it will not I hope be thought impertinent to
spend a few Paragraphs upon the boisterous and blustering invectives and
remarks made against its Author in a pretended Reply. In his Vindication
therefore I shall observe, the Temper, the Wit, the Guess, the Reason, the
Religion, and lastly the Law of that Replication.

As to the Temper it seems to be writ under some disappointment, for the Author
does in every Sentence declare his Passion, and plainly tells us that he was
then discomposed, but whether his displeasure were conceived at a past or
present Chief is not so easy to determine: to expose his fury, it is enough to
repeat his Epithets of Daring, Bold, Impudent, Presumptuous, Base, Ingenerous,
Insolent, etc. and all this despised by his reputed Author, and smiled at by
the real one. He is pleased to call the Sentence and Execution a plain Murder,
which if so, sure I am that he is bound in Conscience to Prosecute an
Indictment against the Judges, the Recorder, the Grand and the Petit Jury, the
Witnesses, the Clerks, the Sollicitors, the Jailer, the Sheriffs, and the
Executioner, for they were all concerned either as Accessories, or Principals,
and demerit a Halter if the Repliants Opinion be Law; but it is observed
amongst Honest Men that none of these Parties show any fear on it, and the
reason they give for it is, because the Indictment was as good as their
Jurisdiction, and the concurrence of those two makes them as safe as an Act of
Indemnity can do: but all this was Passion.

As to the Wit on it most of his Readers are at a loss where to find it, unless
it be in his English Verses, which do so hit the sense of the Original, and
contain such strong and pregnant flights of English Poetry, that some of his
Readers have compared them even with Sternhold and Hopkins, and others are of
Opinion that they do not come short of the Essays of the two Gray's Inn Poets,
one of which Translated Grotius, de Veritate Christianae Religionis, and the
other Coke upon Littleton into Rhyme, but the generality do declare that for
height of Fancy, Propriety of English, and exactness of Rhyme he has much
outdone all those: but for my part I believe that last Rhapsody was added not
so much for the Ingeny sake, as to menace the Answerer with a design to
Sacrifice him whenever an occasion should offer it self, and consequently to
do what the whole Book complains of; but that Advocate is not so much a Coward
as to be afraid on it.

As for the Guess, it is very cunning, and argues more Figure Knowledge than
true Judgment in Styles, Modes, Dialects, or Peculiarities of Speech, or
Writing, for he will have the Author of that Sheet, to be the Author of the
Antidote, though he never saw it till he had the misfortune to have read the
Defense; and his particular Idioms are as different from those of the Antidote,
as they are from those of the Defense; but this is all guess. He will have it
one of the Council of that Trial, because he has put Council before Court: a
Cunning Man would have guessed the contrary, as supposing it done fallendi
gratia, for the sake of disguise; but he may be assured it was mere accident
that occasioned that fault. He will have it to be the then Solicitor, because
of his Reputation, which is supposed to be touched in that Defense: but his
Readers think that that Gentleman's Figure for Learning, Honor, and Virtue is so
far above the reach of a little Pamphlet, that all the virulent Reproaches of
the Reply cannot Sully it, nor is it in the power of any Tongue or Pen to
prejudice his Character in the World; but however it is prudent to suppose to
my self an eminent Adversary, that if a Foil be my fortune, it may be the
easier.

But since we are at guessing, the World guesses that he who wrote the Reply,
did write the half Sheet called the Justification; and it is really sportive to
read the Justifier, commending the Defender for a learned worthy Person; and
the Repliant doing the same good Office for the Justifier, and almost in the
same words commending him: nay he spends an whole Page in the most fulsom
praises upon that Small Bulk Author, and rejoices that the Work was done to his
Hands, which is a very pretty jest. It is at most but R. for A. and A. for R.
and R. A. still, which is much better than the contrary practice, of which some
Authors have been guilty.

As to the Reasoning part, the Reader must excuse my brevity, for in truth
there is very little in it of that nature: however a few remarks may quicken
and revive that faculty against the next turn. The Advocate owns it to be writ
in answer to his Defense, ergo it Reflects upon the Nations Wisdom. He
expresses a resentment at my Lord Russels engaging in such a weak and Criminal
Enterprise, ergo he Reflects upon the Nations Justice. He names the Lord Russel
(though with the most tender Appellations that could be used) ergo he Reflects
on that Lords memory. He vindicates the Indictment as good, ergo he justifies
all the Proceedings in that Case. He argues that the Sentence was Legal upon
such a Verdict, ergo he is against the Reversal. He puts a Case, offers a
Point, and makes a Proof on it, ergo he is transcendently impudent. These and
such like are the inferences, and do demerit a Laugh.

As to Religion I see none in it, unless it be in the mention of the Devilish
Powder Plot, which is still as much to the purpose of his Reply, as the story
of Transmigration of Souls was to that of his Defense; only Meekness is
transparent in his Style Humility in the Title Page, and true Christian Charity
in his Menaces of an exception out of the Act of Indemnity which he repeats
three or four times at least, as if his whole interest were designed to promote
it. The Gentleman's Danger is from public and scandalous Actings in the Eye of
the World: which were (says he) laboring to Support the Government, every Man
knows what sort; lashing the innocent with a bitter and sharp Tongue, and
inveigling of Juries with Rhetorical flourishes. Now to examine a little these
three monstrous Transgressions, let us go backwards; as to the last, a Duty can
never be a Crime, every Servant owes Truth to his Master while such: every
Advocate is to do his utmost, and a failure in it had deserved the worst both
of Names, and Punishments, which the Repliant could invent, or his interest
procure. For all Mankind must agree, that the now Servants of the present Crown
are obliged to do the like upon the like occasion; if otherwise, the Jacobites
side will be the sa^est. I will not reflect on the weakness of the Juries that
were thus inveigled, if any such there were, but rather suppose that the Oaths
of Witnesses, not the Pleading of Counsel did govern their Consciences. As to
the second, that is false, and needs no other answer. As to the first, that
Gentleman's Honor and Merit afterward, is as remarkable as his Fault at first,
if it were any; but however he is likely to have abundance of Company, in
Desert at least, if not in Censure: for a Duke of York's Creature, is certainly
as Culpable as a King James's Servant. And Andrew Marvels Characters in his
growth of Popery, will be as true a Directory to decypher Criminals as the four
Volumes of noted Trials. And perhaps if the Ordinance of May 10. 1650. should
chance to be revived, danger and fear may seize other Men, as well as those
that lately served past Governments; it is therefore thought advisable for all
to sit down quiet, and forgive and forget what is past, but serve God and their
Majesty's for the future, and not belabour the Excepting one another; for if
any should be such Fools, the Knaves will get the better on it, and the
Righteous scarcely be saved. So much for Religion.

Now for the Law if we can find it, But because the Defender seems somewhat
displeased at the repetition of that unhappy Lords name, whose Case gives
occasion for the present question. Let us there put it like Mooters, John a
Styles was Indicted for that he, at such a time and place, did Compass to
deprive his Natural Lord the King, that then was, of his Regal State* and to
destroy his Life, and to Subvert the Government, and raise a Rebellion, and to
fulfill that imagination, he, together with others, did then and there consult,
and agree to raise a Rebellion against the said King, and to seize and destroy
the Guards of the said Kings Person, contrary to, etc. The question was not
whether J. S. was Guilty? Nor if the Witnesses Swore false? Whether his
Attainder were fit to be Reversed; But the dispute was whether that Indictment
were Legal? Whether supposing J. S. to be found Guilty, the Court that
pronounced the Sentence of Treason against him, ought to have Arrested such
Judgment on the motion of J. S. that the Indictment was insufficient? The Sheet
argues that the Indictment was good, and consequently the Sentence pursuant
thereto was warrantable by the Laws of this Land. The Argument seems founded
both upon the Reason of Things, and the Authority of Presidents.

First, The reason alleged was, that the last part, which in Lawyers terms is
called an Overt Act, was a natural and genuine Sense or Declaration, or Overt
signification of the first part, which is an internal secret Thought, i. e. the
Imagination and Compassing, which is the Treason Prohibited and Condemned. That
the latter directly and consequentially tending, and conducing in the common
Sense and Reason of all Mankind (excepting the Defender, and two or three more)
to the accomplishment of the former, makes a good and sufficient charge within
the Stat. Ed. 3. A Repetition is tedious, and an Abridgment is scarcely
possible, the whole Sheet being but a Breviate, I shall therefore refer you
thereto.

Secondly, The Authorities there urged, are either the Opinions of Judges and
other Lawyers, or Precedents of Indictments of the like, or the same nature,
from which the Legality of this may be justly concluded. The substance of them
on the whole matter is, that Overt Acts to Depose the King, or despoil him of
his Regal Office, or take him by Force or strong Hand, or to Imprison his
Person, till he yields to the demands of those who practice such endeavors,
are sufficient Overt Acts to prove the Compassing and Imagination of his Death.
That Levying War, causing an Insurrection, promoting an Invasion, nay that
Consults, Conspiracies, Practices, Advices, Letters, Persuasions, and other
Motives, and preparations to an Insurrection, or Invasion, though none succeed,
have been held Overt Acts of Imagining the Kings Death. I will not repeat the
Cases but as occasion offers from the other side.

The Objections there mentioned and answered from the Penning of the Statute,
are too trivial to deserve a remembrance, nor would they have ever been thought
otherwise, but that J. S. was a Noble Person, and the Defender a great Man, and
the Prefacer thought so too, either by himself or others. These and such like
ingredients have made some semblance of difficulty: and in truth, had there
been a real doubt in the Case, the Author of the Remarks on that Trial, who
wanted neither Sense nor Will to Censure it, had his Opinion so inclined, I say
he would certainly have fallen foul on it in those invidious Observations of his
upon the late Times. He quarrels with the Legallity of the Jurors. The Defender
with that of the Indictment, and both with the Evidence. The Author of the
Sheet differs from them in the two first, but agrees with them in the last,
that Testimony delivered for fear of Life, or hopes of Pardon, or other Reward,
is hardly Creditable; but that is not the Point. Let us see if the Replication
does overthrow the Charge as insufficient, and for my part I cannot find a Line
of Argument in it, but only it is naught because it is naught. The Consulting,
and Concluding to make an Insurrection and Rebellion, and seize the Kings
Guards, is not a Declaration of the Parties compassing the King's Deposal or
Death, and why? Because Conspiring to Levy War is not a Levying War, and
Levying War is a distinct Treason; this is the substance of the tenth Page, if
I can read: The Sheet said and truly, That Levying War it self might be
alleged as an Overtact of the Compassing, and has been so frequently, and
meeting and agreeing to rebel and seize the Guards, has a direct tendency to
promote a Demise of the King either natural or civil, and therefore might as
well be alleged an Overt Act as most things whatsoever.

I had almost forgot one Clause, and that is, the unnecessariness of making 13
Car. 2. if it should be as the Advocate argues; I suppose he means the first
Paragraph, for the second is agreed to be introductive of a new Law, etc. but
the first is only a Paraphrase upon the 25 Edw. 3. It is thus. That if any
Person or Persons whatsoever, shall within the Realm, or without, compass,
imagine, invent, devise, or intend death or destruction, or any bodily harm
tending to death or destruction, maim or wounding, imprisonment, or restraint
of the person of our Sovereign Lord the King, or to deprive or depose him from
the style, honor, or kingly name of the imperial Crown of this Realm, or of any
other his Majesty's Dominions or Countries, or to levy war against his Majesty
within this Realm or without, or to move or stir any Foreigner or Strangers
with force to invade this Realm, or any other his Majesty's Dominions and
Countries being under his obeisance, and such compassings, imaginations,
inventions, devices, or intentions, or any of them shall express, utter, or
declare, by any printing, writing, preaching, or malicious advised speaking,
being legally convicted thereof, by the Oaths of two lawful and credible
Witnesses upon Trial, or otherwise convicted or attainted by due course of Law;
then every such, etc. shall, etc. Now what is all this but a confirmation of
the old Statute inwords at length; which was agreed to be so in the House of
Commons, 1 Jac. 2. when a motion was made to renew that Law, the Lawyers Answer
was, that the 25 Edw. 3. did the same thing, and a Man may boldly say it, that
here is nothing declared Treason, but what had been adjudg'd so before, and
Attainders and Executions had pursuant to it: The Sheet mentions Cases enough
and to the purpose, tho some think otherwise; but I Will not repeat them:

In the 11th. page the Reader is referred to the justification in the half
sheet; and therefore let us examine that a little; a third part of it is spent
upon the Evidence, but that is not within my Province, which is only to
vindicate the Vindication: As to the rest, the force of it, if any, seems only
to be founded on his first Assertion, the conspiring to do a thing is not the
doing a thing, and he quotes two great Men's Names for it, I would have agreed
that, tho he had spared the Authority to justify it; but this is sufficiently
answered in the Sheet: He offers an Argument from the late Statutes declaring
Treasons, because they were temporary, but I answer as the Sheet does, they
were in affirmance of the old Law, and I can show him three or four temporary,
and an hundred other Acts of Parliament that are so, and therefore that is no
Argument at all; but I am, as the Party I justify was, confined to a Sheet,
and therefore cannot enlarge.

He lays down a Rule for construction of Statutes, that a thing particularized
in one part is not to be construed within the general words of another part,
but that Rule has near fourscore Exceptions in the Books; besides, it come not
to this Case, for here is compassing the King's Death made Treason, and declared
by Overt Act then levying War is made Treason: Now says the Repliant, nothing
can be an Overt Act of and conduce to promote and accomplish the first, that
does any ways concern the latter, I say it is a non sequitur; for there are
several Instances mentioned in the Sheet, which respect the levying War, and
yet are a genuine evidence of the intention and compassing; and if so, the
Judges who have ruled such Indictments to be good, did neither assume an
arbitrary Power, nor transgress any Rule of Law, as the half Sheet insinuates.

Then the Lord Cobham's Case is endeavored to be answered, by a Wonder that Sir
Edward Coke late Lord Chief Justice and then Sheriff, should differ from Mr.
Attorney Coke; for we know his thoughts in Sir Walter Rawleigh's time and his
Speeches in Car. I. his time; they are as different each from the other as the
times were; and in this particular, that Gentleman has had more followers than
precedents; but the Query is, What is law.

Then Sir Henry Vane's Case is endeavored to be answered by this that Syderfin
mentions not the Overtact in the Indictment, but he does say the Treason
alleged was a compassing the King's Death, and every Man knows what Sir Hen.
Vane did to accomplish that, he neither signed the Warrant to execute that
Murder, nor was he actually concerned in it; the Justifier says he does not
remember it printed any where but in Syderfin's Reports; for the refreshment of
his Memory I Will tell him of another Book where it is, and that is Keble's First
Volume of Reports, 304. and there the Indictment is said to be for Compassing
the King's Death, and endeavoring to accomplish the Treason by Changing and
Usurping the Government, and Levying War, which Case does directly overthrow
all the Defenders, Justifiers and Repliants Arguments from the distinctness or
difference of the sort of Treason.

Then for Dr. Story's Case, he says it is hard to justify it for Law; whereas
there are above forty places in our printed Law Books where it is cited and
agreed to be Law: Now it is pretty odd, that a Case so resolved and so ratified,
should one Hundred and eighteen Years after, be arraigned in print, for 'twas
Hill. 13. Eliz. if any thing be Law, that is so, and not distinguishable from
this Case in question, but that the Evidence was different, which the Justifier
would make a reason to invalidate this Indictment; the Logic of it passes all
Understanding; besides, it is very observable, that the Benches were filled both
with Learning and Integrity in 1571. and 1662. neither of those times were Tory
or Popish; and in Dyer 298. the reason given was, that it could not tend but to
the great peril of the King's Person, and therefore an attempt to promote such
Invasion, tho none followed, was adjudg'd as aforesaid: In 2. Anderson pl. 2.
fo. 5. Grant's Case 'twas held, that when any person intends or contriveth to
levy War for a thing which the Queen by her Law or Justice ought or may do in
Government as Queen, it is not material whether they intend any hurt to her
Person; but if they intend to levy War against the Office and Authority of the
Queen, that is enough, and that resolution overthrows the Justifiers Notion,
that J. S. his Design was only to defend the Laws, tho the 13 Eliz. also was
then in force, it is a good Argument to answer that pretense:

Now I have repeated and observed all the Replication or Justification offers
in answer to my Friend's Sheet, the Reader may perhaps expect some new Matter,
not so much for confirmation, as to give occasion for a further further
defense. In Sir Fr. Moor's Rep. fol 621. pl. 849 on the Trials of the Earls of
Essex and Southampton before the then High Steward, the Justices did there
resolve, that when the Queen sent to the Earl of Essex the Keeper of her Great
Seal, and others, with a Command to him to disperse the Persons armed which he
had in his House, and to come to her, and he did refuse to do so, and continued
the Armor and armed Persons in his House, that this was Treason; and they did
also resolve, that when he went with a Troop of Captains and others from his
House to the City of London, and there prayed Aid of the Citizens to assist him
in defense of his Life, and to go with him to Court that he might get into the
Queens presence, that he might be sufficiently powerful to remove from her his
Enemies who were there attendant, that this was High Treason, because it tended
to a Force on the Queen, etc. I make no inference, let the Reader do that; it is
plain that an actual mental intention of hurt is not material in the one Case
or the other. As the Duke of Norfolk's Case is related by Cambden in his
History of Q Eliz. 163. the Treason which the Duke confessed, was a Plot to
seize upon the Tower of London and deliver the Queen of Scots, and that is all.

There Is nothing remains in doubt, but the legality or illegality of the King's
keeping Guards for the preservation of his Person; they say the Law takes care
of him, and therefore he is to take none of himself, and that the Judges are
his Guards, and therefore he needs no other, that Hen. VII. was the first King
who had any other. But let us reason a little; Can it be supposed, that he
should be so sacred in his Person, so great in his Power, and of such Authority
as to make War or Peace abroad, and raise Forces and suppress them at home, as
the Danger or Defense of his Realm should require, and not be able to provide
for his own personal Safety de presenti, can he only punish by his Judges
afterward, or prohibit by Proclamation before, but not defend himself for the
present? Is it sense to suppose it? The Kings of England might have, and
actually had Soldiers or Guards (call them what you will) even in times of
Peace, and long before Hen. VII. as well as continually since; I may be so bold
as to defy any man to show me the Year, the Month, the Week, or the Day, since
the Conquest by William I. that England was without armed Men actual upon Duty
in some part or other of the Nation. This Sheet is not intended for a studied
Argument on this Subject; and perhaps it would be difficult to justify a
standing Army as warrantable, when there is no occasion for it; but to say he
cannot by force even by force provide for his own personal safety, when he
apprehends it in danger, as every English King has continual reason to do,
especially if some Men's Doctrine prevail, it may be modestly affirmed
unreasonable: Has not every Subject power to keep Arms as well as Servants in
his House for defense of his Person? Is not his Mansion called his Castle? And
yet the Law protects him too by Prohibitions a part ante and Punishments ex
part post: There are many Tenures in England which oblige to the annual
payment of certain Sums toward Soldiers Wages for Defense of the King and
Kingdom; there are others oblige to the annual finding certain quantities of
Grain in kind for the supplying the King's Castles and Garrisons, as well as
Household; which being annual, do demonstrate the lawfulness of their
continuance, even in times of Peace, and their being immemorial do conclude a
Common Law right in the Kings of England to have those Occasions, as they do
conclude him a right to have them supplied by such like Services: Nay Grand
Serjeantry is either by Services of attendance on the King's Person in time of
Peace, or for Military Aids, in time of War. The Crown may raise Forces by
Commission or of the Militia to suppress Insurrections in case the Civil Power
of the Sheriff is not sufficient or ineffectual: The Kings of England have the
sole Power and Force of the Nation, Complaints have been in Parliament against
Billeting Soldiers contrary to the Will of the Hosts, but never for maintaining
a Guard for their own Person at their own charge; Complaints have been of a
Standing Army, but never of a select company for his personal preservation; a
Terror to the People may as well be pretended from his Coachmen, Footmen, or
Grooms, if their Numbers be great; besides, for a competent Power in Arms he
always may have occasion, when his Subjects know nothing on it; it is his
Province to foresee and prevent as well as suppress and punish domestic
Tumults, and the business of War is separately his Office, and that exclusive
of his Subjects any otherwise than as they are bound to obey and fight, or
desired to assist with Aids and Subsidies, and for this to avoid a numerous
Volume of Citations, I Will name one notable Roll or two, in Parliament. 6. Ric.
II. Mem. 9. the manner and way of the prosecution of a War being given in
charge to the Commons to advise upon, they answered, that this nec doit nec
solayt appertain al eux mes al Roy, and so they did, 31 Edward III. Part.
prim. n. 11. and 21 Edward III. n. 5. it is true in 5 Edward II. n. 4.
Ordinances were made, that the King without the assent of his Barons could not
make Wars, but those were repealed and dampened. 15 Edw. II. Parl. Rot. m. 13.
because prejudicial to the Royal Power of a King, and this is sufficiently
affirmed by the Act concerning the Militia in Carol. II. his time. It is well
known in what time Bryan Chief Justice said, that if all the Subjects of
England should war with the Subjects of another Kingdom, that this is no War,
unless the King denounces it: It suffices for my friend's Point, that the King
may lawfully have armed Men or Guards, when himself judges his Person or People
to be in danger, or stand in need of them: And that he may, when reasons of
State will not admit their publication to the World; but however some standing
Force the Crown ever had and ever will have, tho not always to such a degree as
shall be burdensome or oppressive; and our old Law Books say that Arms as well
as Laws are necessary for the Prince, not only in but against the times of
necessity, I mean War or Tumult; besides in Bracton lib. 3. cap. 3. de Corona,
it is said, that crimen lesae majestatis is the greatest Crime because of the
greatness of the Person against whom it is committed; his description of it is,
presumptio contra personam ipsius Regis; then when he particularizes the
several sorts of Treason, the first which he names is, Si quis ausu temerario
machinatus sit in (i. e. toward) mortem domini Regis, vel aliquid egerit vel
agi procuraverit ad seditionem Domini Regis vel exercitus sui, licet id quod in
voluntate habuerit non perduxerit ad effectum. I Will make no Inference, there
needs no Paraphrase, the words are plain; an Act tending to the destruction of
the King's Host is High Treason against his Person; agere ad seditionem
exercitus regis est presumptio contra personam Regis, and presumptio contra
personam Regis est crimen lesae Majestatis: Now can Bracton be thought to speak
only of Treasons in time of War, Glanvill. lib. 14. c. 1. crimen lesae
Majestatis dicitur de seditione Domini Regis vel regni vel exercitus: and Fleta
lib. 1. c. 20. De seductione exercitus sui: and cap. 21. the same words,
seductionem ejus vel exercitus sui; this was the sense of the old Law, and is
very appositely applicable to the Case in question, as I could easily show,
would my Paper bear it. There is one thing which I had quite forgot, and that
is, that the Instrument of Grievances which the Prudence of the present
Parliament has provided, complains of a Standing Army; the Answer is easy,
it is not of Personal Guards; and the wise enquiry of the House of Commons into
the quantum requisite to maintain such and such Forces during the present
occasion, and of the Expenses of the Crown in Household, Courts, Guards, etc.
afterward, do plainly show, that that was not the intended Grievance: Now to
sum up what is not answered at all or endeavored to be so; by the Defender,
nothing is said to the reason of the thing, or the necessity and nature of an
Overt Act, to the opinion of Coke in theplaces cited, to the Case of Sir Walter
Rawleigh, the Case of the Cardinal, the Case of Mr. Coleman, the Case of
Constable, the Case of Owen, the Case of Burton, the Cases of Sparhauke,
Awater, and Heber, the Indictment against Sir Willam Ashton, Germain and
Tailor, and Tho. Burdett, Collingbourne, and College, nor to the Opinion of
the Judges in the Lord Stafford's Case, as if 'twere all impertinent, but the
Reader is Judge if it be so.

Now for the Prefacer, I Will be as short upon him as he was upon my Friend; he
said that the Sheet needed a Vindication, and I have given it one, and if this
needs another, I hope the Crown will find some Friend to write a Third; he
seems so used to the word Libel, that he cannot forbear calling it an infamous
one; he says it has not one true material word in it, I Will remember him of one,
that mocking is catching in the Proverb, that is, A Grumbletonian in the
Stirrup generally proves a Tyrant -- in the Saddle; that is enough for him to
remember: If he wants any more truth, and that he may not say this has none
in it, Treasons are easier committed than distinguished, by some Men especially,
and the reason why I say this, is because of his Octavo Preface when he is
grumbling still, for I always thought that he had smarted too much for
Libelling on Ministers of State and Male-Administrations, to venture again; but
when a Priest meddles with Law, he is like an Apothecary at Politics, he
generally runs himself into a Nooze, for he will never leave off till he is
advanced one way or another. To conclude, the design of the Sheet was to
justify the Prerogative of the King and Queen, and the Rights of their Crown,
and the Republican is angry, that either should have any, and from thence
flames the Passion; nay, rather than it should be allowed, they will attempt
another Change, from which good Lord deliver us. Prove. 28.2.

During the composure of the Premises, News was brought me that another Pen had
been procured to attack the Vindication, viz. The Author that runs a muck at
all Mankind, except his own Patroons: A deserved and full remark upon so
voluminous a Book, is not here to be expected, however, this Appendix may serve
for an Advertisement to the World, that the new Repliant is in several
particulars obliged to Solicitor Coke, and the other Regicides defense on their
Trials for much of his Materials, time is wanting to show the Parallel, at
present it is fit to be observed, that hisblind side also is apparent, and
consequently capable of a sufficient Answer, and to give my Reader a Specimen
thereof. I Will take notice of a few (amongst many) Mistakes both in Fact and
Law, which he has wilfully committed; In the first Page he says, That to
justify what has been taken ill, accuses the present Government of Injustice;
which is false. In Page 2. he says, That the Vindication ventures on a Point of
Law which it pretends is the result of the Evidence given; there is no such
pretense in the whole Paper, the only Debate was upon the Indictment: He says
in the same Page, that it is said his Relations were pleased with the justness
of the Trial; it only says, His Relations were pleased, and his Enemies angry
with those who then sat upon the Bench, and that is true; for some of his
Relations cannot deny it, the Fact is so well known: The last line of Page 3.
and first of the next are also false; for 'twas neither written, perused, nor
approved by any of his pretended Criminals: I believe they thought the Point
too clear to need a Vindication; but this is just like his wonted positiveness
in his Remarks; where for instance he says, That one of the Judgments he cavils
at was the first that was ever given without Argument or Reasons delivered in
Court, which is also false; for in Plowden's Comment. 459. In Sir Tho. Wroth's
Case, the Author takes express notice, that the reasons of the Judgment were
not disclosed when the same was pronounced; and Fifty other Cases I could name
him of the same, but one Instance is enough to falsify a general indefinite
Position, tho there are several more even in that very Book.

But to run over his Volume, Page 2. is only a farther scurrilous Reflection to
vindicate his own Remarks, and an impertinent bombast of words on the Phrase of
English procedings: The 3. P. assigns four Reasons of Printing, the two last
are applicable to himself only, and he thinks so of the fourth, or else his
Story is foolish like -- In the 4. P. he boulsters up himself in his Railery,
by resorting to his refuge of the Parliaments Authority that reversed the
Judgment, which all Men agree to be just, but it was not because the Recorder
did not arrest the Judgment on that trivial Exception to the Indictment, but
because the Prosecution was supposed malicious, and the Evidence supposed false
or deficient, or both.

The 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10th. Pages are all impertinent to the Point in
question, and contain nothing but a Vindication of his justly condemned Clamor
in his former Book; concerning which, I Will boldly say it, in seventeen Points
of twenty he is out in his Law; if 'twere convenient to publish the proof on it,
I could make it plain. His design is to show in those Pages his Wit and Fancy,
more than Candor or Law; for my part. I am of his Friends mind that he comes
not short of the old Observator for managing a Dialogue: But all this is not to
the purpose, he is not come at it yet, he 12. page savours of the same Kidney,
the 13. and 14. are no better: there he vents his Gall, and that in Ribaldry;
no softer a name than Tools can be afforded to Men of Worth and Honor: if
himself be one, as some suppose him, I am sure it is not to the present
Government, for he plainly condemns it, and declares the People, i. e. his sort
of them, unsatified with it, for its sparingness in vengeance, and it is
because others are not punished for maintaining the Law, and themselves not
preferred for Arraigning it: some Men know my meaning. He says he is only for
mumbling of Judges and Counsel, Causa patet.

But I must tell him two things. 1. The inclinations of Englishmen, and the
Laws of the Land, will never quadrate with a Commonwealth.

2. His supposed Criminals do not depend on their Number, but the Law, which
ought, and will justify them; if it does not please, let it be changed by
Parliament, or if the Author thinks that a tedious way, let us burn all our Law
Books at once, and then perhaps his Remarks and Reply will be thought to be
Reason, and himself the greatest and only Lawyer in the Realm; but till then,
he must give others leave to know, and to say that they know, he is mistaken:
for Resolutions, and Opinions, pursuant, and agreeable to the Opinions, and
Rules of former Ages, I mean frequent and repeated Presidents, approved by the
Lawyers of the Age that used them. I say these will be Law to the end of the
World, unless altered by new Statutes.

And now we are come to debate the Question, all that is past is upon the
Times, and not the Point. In page 18. is his Reasoning part, which is no more
than was said before in, etc. To redargue him I must repeat; if therefore he
will observe what is said by the Sheet page 22. I will say no more on it, but
submit to the Judgment of the Reader, he says the inferences are Ridiculous, I
say they are Rational and Genuine: the single issue is, if his, or my friends
Arguments are the most Logical and Natural, let the Reader judge.

Now for Authority, Let us see if he urges any on his side, or answers that on
the other. He admires (page 24) at the assurance of the Sheet Author, and
others admire at his. He says the Parliament had often adjudged it, but none
can show any Judgment in the House of Lords, or Vote of the Commons House to
that purpose. I have shown the Sense of the present Parliament in the Point of
Guards, and his temporary Laws are already answered; nor would any M^n but he,
and one more, pretend that they are Judgments in the Case. Surely it will not
be pretended that his Case of the Earl of Northumberlands in Hen. 4. time, is
any thing to the purpose: Nor is it any Argument to say, no King of England was
ever killed for want of Guards.

Now for Cases page 26. He says that in the Earl of Essex's Case there was an
actual War Levied, and that as I said before, destroys the Argument from the
different sorts of Treason. As to Cardinal Pool's Case, he only says there was
another Statute in force then, but no Record or History says that he was
indicted on any other then the 25. Edw. 3. As to Dr. Story's Case, he tells a
long Tale out of Camden about the Fact, but answers not one word to the
Indictment, whatsoever the Evidence was, the Indictment was as the Sheet
alleges, and that is enough.

His answer to Coleman's Case is that, that things happening afterward proved
more, but the Evidence was no more than what my Friend alleges. As to Sir
Henry Vane's Case, his answer is, his own hearsay of what was proved, but the
Judgment he never perused, argued like a Lawyer. As to Constable's Case and the
rest, he gives no answer, but only that a repetition of a number of Cases makes
a mutter and a noise, and so it does when they Govern and Rule the matter in
question, and are not answered. Owen's Case he says the Author presses it
strangely and that is all. He says the Cases of Burton, Duke of Norfolk,
Awater, Heber, and Crohagn, are not to the purpose, let the Reader judge if they
are not pertinent: As to the Opinion of the Judges in the Lord Stafford's Case,
he does not mention it, but says the reviving that Case might have been spared,
and that is all, a pretty answer; as to Colledg's Case, he talks of a proof of
a self Defense, but nothing to the Point it was urged for. As to the Cases of
Lord Cobham, Gray, and Rawleigh, in 32. 33, 34, 55. page Setting aside his
scandalous Invectives and Reflections upon those Times, Ministers, and
Governments, he no ways attempts to answer the Argument drawn from them, viz.
that the Charge was the same as in the Case in Dispute.

Now do I appeal to any Man of Sense and Reason that will Read and Think
closely, if the Repliant has offered any one Argument more than the Lord
Russel's Case, Defense and Justification had alleged. If he has shown any one
Judgment where such Indictment was resolved naught. If he has given any answer
to Dr. Story's, Collingborn's, Sir William Ashton's, Burdet's, and Sir Henry
Vane's Indictment, in short if he has answered any two of the Cases cited: or
if he has done any thing but reflect on past and late times, and if the
Indictment remain not good both for matter and form, notwithstanding all these
pretended Replies. Upon the whole matter, I desire the Reader to peruse the
Books cited, and to judge if there be not presidents enough unanswered to
justify the Indictment in question, and that the Recorder gave a good Judgment
upon the Verdict that affirmed its truth; quod fuit Probandum.

To conclude, Since the Repliant is in love with Horace, I would advise him to
consider one hint of his

-- Forum, putealque Libonis
Mandabo siccis. --
Hor.
FINIS.

