RESIGNATION TO THE Divine Good Pleasure In every condition: RECOMMENDED, AS
THE DUTY and HAPPINESS OF Every Good Man.

IN A SERMON From 2 SAMUEL XV. 26.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the Stocks-Market. 1684.

A Letter from the Author of the following Sermon, to his Friend, concerning it.
SIR,
I Have herewith sent you the Sermon you desired, and wish it may contribute
any thing to promote that Resignation to the Will of God, wherein so much of
our Duty and present Happiness consists. Nothing but the seasonableness of the
Subject can be a sufficient motive to make it public. And while we live in a
troublesome and sinful World, and in an Age of Changes, it must needs be
seasonable. Could we meet all Events with a prepared mind (which this
Resignation will assist us to do), we might find a more easy passage through
the miseries of this life, to the blessedness of another, than most men do. It
would establish us against all our fears, and fix us under all Changes, and
give us inward peace in despite of the World: It would compose our Spirits, and
quiet our thoughts under the vicisitudes of human Affairs. It might be our
Refuge in a Storm, our ease in trouble, our light in darkness; and give us
Manna in a Wilderness, and Food in a Defart: It would be an Helmet against the
approach of Evil, and afford us consolation under actual sufferings: Yea,
'twould furnish us with the truest satisfaction when we prosper in the World.
We may then be assured, that what seems good, is really so; was designed for
our good by the Divine care, and conduces to it by the guidance of his
infallible counsel. If you think the following Sermon may be of any use to such
excellent purposes, I pray God accompany it with his blessing. I kiss your
Hand, and remain,

Sir, Your Affectionate Friend, and Humble Servant, SHOWER.

Resignation to the Divine good pleasure in every condition.
2 SAMUEL XV. 26. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, Behold here I
am, let him do unto me as seems good unto him.


THE particular occasion of these words was the fears and distress of David by
Absalom's Rebellion; an account whereof we have in the preceding Verses. Ver. ^
It came to pass after Forty years, that Absalom, who by various Artifices had
gained the hearts of the people, begs leave of his Father to go to Hebron; for
which he pretends Religion, and a Vow to the Lord, as the ground of his
Request, and the Reason of his departure. The most probable computation of
these Forty years, is from the time when the Israelites first desired a King.
David had now reigned Seven and Thirty years, to which, if we add the Three
years of Readiness Reign, viz. one with Samuel, and Two alone, it answers to that
number. With his father's consent, he goes to Hebron, about Sixteen Miles from
Jerusalem, Ver. 10.
the place of his own Nativity, and the Metropolis of Juda: The Father there
began his Reign, and the Son designs there to begin his Rebellion. Two hundred
of David's Household are persuaded to follow him thither in the simplicity of
their hearts. Their absence from his Father might weaken his Party, and their
presence with Absalom gain credit with the people, That 'twas by the King's
Commission and Order he should assume the Government. The subtilty of
Achitophel assisted very much to the contrivance and management of this and
other Policies to the same purpose. Ver. 12.
The Conspiracy begins to be strong, and the number of Volunteers does every
day increase. The love of novelty and change, with the Caresses of an handsome
young Prince, and some contempt of David's Age, engaged diverse of the people to
join in that Treason which an undutiful Son, and a disloyal Statesman had
before contrived and hatched. David being quickly informed of Absalom's design,
and the strength of his growing Party, Ver. 14.
resolves to retreat from Jerusalem, to prepare for resistance, and prevent a
threatened Ruin. Ittai, a Foreigner, with many of his own Subjects, and most of
his Domestic Servants, testify their love and duty by tears and lamentations,
Ver. 17, 18,
and accompany him over the Brook Kidron, toward the way of the Wilderness,
between Jerusalem and Jerico, Zadock and Abiathar, the Priests, are desired by
the King to return back to the City with the Ark of God, being loath to hazard
that, and those who attended it; or supposing they could do him more service by
tarrying at Jerusalem: tho it is most probable the removal of the Ark from
thence was not a fault, as some imagine, because at that time it was not fixed
to a certain place, as afterward. But whatever were the Reason, he desires the
Ark might be carried back: For, says he, if I shall find favor in the eyes of
the Lord, he will bring me again, Ver. 25.
and I shall see both it, and his holy habitation. But if the Lord should say,
I have no delight in thee, Behold, here I am, let him do to me what seems
good unto him.

He wholly refers himself to the issue of Divine Providence, professing his
readiness to comply with the Will of God, whatsoever the event shall declare it
to be. Now that David's Example may be a president to us for a calm submission
to the Divine good pleasure, amidst the many casualties of human life, and our
frequent disappointment thereby, I shall endeavor to show from these Words:

1. What is necessary to this Resignation of our selves in every thing to the
Will of God. 2. What abundant Reason we have thus to refer our selves to God's
dispose. 3. The advantages and benefits of doing so. 4. Improve it by some
Inferences of Truth and Duty, which this Subject may suggest for our
instruction and practice.
1. What is requisite to this entire Resignation of our selves to the Will of
God. And there are some things necessary in reference to God, others which
regard our selves, and other things which relate to the affairs of this present
life, wherewith we shall have some concern during our abode on earth.

1. In relation to God it is requisite,

1. That we firmly believe his Being and Providence. We ought to be convinced
and satisfied, that there is a gracious Creator, and wise Governor of all
things, in whose hands we are, and within the compass of whose care and
providence are all his Works: That all the powers and abilities of Creatures
are from him; that they execute his will, perform his pleasure, and are the
instruments of his Decrees: and that it being his part to manage and direct,
it is ours to submit and acquiesce in his Government, and adore his Will. If we
believe that his order or permission be concerned in every event, what should
follow but a devotion of all to his choice, with an hearty well-pleasedness in
the rank and station wherein God shall place us? An infinite God, ordering all
the issues of time, we shall never have any Reason to distrust the care of his
Providence, to question his Faithfulness, or dispute his Sovereignty, or
impeach his Righteousness or Wisdom in any thing that befalls us. And if we can
have no Reason for any of these, we may safely resign our selves to him in the
words of the Church, Psalm. 47.4.
Lord, thou shall choose our inheritance for us.

By a Reflection on God as Creator and Governor of the World, we may argue our
selves into this Resignation: Did he make, and does he govern the Universe, and
can he not order my affairs to the best advantage? Has exquisite Wisdom,
Goodness and Power framed all things out of nothing, and will he not rule all
things which he has made in the best manner? Has his Providence preserved and
guided his People in all Ages, and can he not direct me? Is his Arm shortened,
that he cannot deliver me, or his Understanding darkened, that he knows not how?
Has he conducted so many Saints to glory by an unerring Wisdom, and
never-failing Mercy, and can he possibly mistake the best way of bringing me
thither? From the belief and consideration of this merciful Providence of our
Heavenly Father, we may leave it to him to choose our allowance, and dispose of
us, and all our affairs, as it shall seem good in his sight:

2. It Is necessary that we often contemplate the Divine Attributes and
Promises, which are proper to engage our Resignation to his Will, and
dependence on his Word. We ought seriously to consider what a God he is, and
what he can do for us, and how far he has promised that he will; that in all
the emergencies of life he is able to give us suitable relief and help; that he
knows all our needs, and how to supply them, and is willing to do so when it is
most seasonable and fittest to be done. Such an apprehension of his Almighty
Arm is necessary, as may dispose us at once to trust him in a way of duty, and
yet to despair of success in an unlawful undertaking. Such a believing
consideration of his Wisdom, as will prevent our questioning whether that be
best which his holy Will declares to be so: and of his Truth and Faithfulness,
as will strengthen our Faith in his Power, to extricate us out of every
distress: Such a persuasion of his love and kindness, as will excite our
gratitude, and preserve us from doubting of the good issue of what he shall
please to order. Moreover, such a review of his gracious promises, as may
encourage our dependence on his word, That he will grant the desires of those
that fear him, and be ever mindful of his covenant. That his grace shall be
sufficient for us. That all things shall work for good to them that love God.
That we shall not be tempted above what we are able. That they that fear the
Lord shall want nothing that is good. That in a public storm he will be a
refuge and an hiding place to his people. That the rod of the wicked shall not
always rest on the lot of the righteous. That the God of Israel, who is the
Savior thereof in the time of trouble, a God working Salvation in the midst of
the Earth, can take the wicked in their own craftiness, ensnare them in the
works of their own hands, make them perish by their own counsels, and fall into
the pits which they have dig'd for others; baffle their policies, prevent their
designs, alter their purposes, blast their expectations, and defeat their
Plots, and bring to light the hidden things of darkness: and save his people
when no other arm can bring Salvation, etc. It Is necessary to believe that not
only he can but will accomplish what he has promised; and His Attributes are
the ground of our faith in this particular. For if any others do will our good,
they may want power to effect it; but Omnipotence is here our security. They
are mutable, and may recall their word, or alter their mind; but God's Truth is
as inviarable as his Power is infinite. Men may find a necessity to fail their
promises, by reason of somewhat they did not foresee, their knowledge being
bounded as well as their strength; but unsearchable Wisdom can never be
mistaken. The most intricate occurrences of time being open and naked from
eternity to the view of his Omniscience, no occasion can be supposed why God
should not be faithful to his word. The consideration whereof will have a very
great influence on this resignation of our selves to his good pleasure.

2. Some things are necessary with respect to our selves.

1. That we expect sufferings, troubles, and disappointments in the World.
Religion will not exempt us from the ordinary calamities of human life, to
which every man is incident, tho we abstract from the consideration of the
Gospel, and Conscience. What sensible afflictions had David by his nearest
Relations! how frequent occasions of sorrow did he meet with in the time of his
Father-in-law Saul, from Michaels folly, and her Father's hatred! what breaches
in his Family, and divisions in his Kingdom afterward! his Subjects revolt
from their obedience, and his own Children in the head of an Army against him.
He is forced to make War against those whom he would not hurt. How smart an
affliction in his Tamar and Ammon, and his beloved Absalom, during his whole
Life, (one instance whereof the context relates) and at his death too: and
after that, in the combination of his Son Adonijah with Joab, 2 Samuel 18.22, 23 ^
etc. And why should we expect to be exempted? Let us count upon it as our Lot
and Portion, if we would be able under actual sufferings to resign and submit
to the will of God.

As to the case of suffering for conscience sake, we are bid to expect it, and
have reason to prepare for it. It Is the voice of Heaven, That through many
tribulations we must enter into glory. Christianity injoyns us to look for
persecution and the Cross: and has made a Covenant of Sufferings, and promised
blessings to it. Most of our graces are passive, and adapted to a suffering
state; and as followers of the Captain of our Salvation, we must expect our
share. But for the most part we are unwilling to hear of calamities before they
come; and then we cannot bear them, because they come suddenly; it is the
unexpectedness of the Cross, that is the subject matter of our complaints in
the day of adversity. We think it irksom and unpleasant to forecast how the
case would be, if God should try us in such or such an instance, if he should
call for such a blessing we value, snatch from us such a relation whom we
tenderly love, or frustrate our designs and hopes in such a particular; and
therefore we will not consider it beforehand, and then the surprizal adds a
sting to the calamity. For no kind of evils are so amazing and terible, as
those which are unexpected; the suddenness of them deprives us of that
stayedness of mind which is requisite to a due deportment under such a trial.
And our passions then transport us into many indecent excesses, and make us
foam with impatient murmurs, and cast up mire and dirt.

2. Let us always maintain an humble penitent sense of sin, and our own
unworthiness. This is necessary, because Pride will indispose us for submission
to the Divine Will. And if we join impenitence, 'twill make us contend with the
Almighty; overlook his Goodness, despise his Wisdom, distrust his Faithfulness,
and find faults with his Providence, as if things could be better ordered than
they are by Gods management. Whereas an humble Soul, sensible of the desert of
sin, thinks every condition good enough, and so is willing to be at God's
dispose. Lord (will such a man say, with admiring thoughts of the divine
goodness and bounty) what can be too little for me who am less than the least of
all thy mercies? What temporal calamities too severe, when I deserve eternal?
What condition too low that is on this side the bottomless pit? What cup too
bitter where thy wrath, and remediless despair, are none of the Ingredients? Am
I not thy creature, and may thou not do what thou will with thy own? Have I
not provoked thee, and shall I not receive correction? Have I merited
damnation, and can I be wronged and injured by a temporal sorrow? What are
gentle Rods to fiery Scorpions? And the light and momentary afflictions of this
life, to the agonies and torments of an eternal Tophet? Oh pardon me now, and
save me at last, and do with me what seems good in thy sight. Deny me not an
entrance into Heaven, and let thy will be done upon earth.

This is the proper Language of an humble penitent, referring himself to the
divine choice, as to every thing in this World.

3. Some things are necessary respecting the affairs of this present world.

1. That we have right notions of Prosperity and Adversity, of temporal good
and evil. For according to the Judgment we make of these, will our Passions be
exercised: We ought therefore to endeavor to understand what is their due
value, and what estimate in Reason we should make of them: We ought to
consider, as to the good, That it is fleeting and inconstant, uncertain and
temporal; may be lost on a sudden, and must be left shortly; that no outward
advantages above others, do on that account rfcommend us to God, or entitle us
to his favor; That it is no Argument of his displeasure to be poor and
despised, to be afflicted and calamitous; that bread is not always to the wise,
nor riches to men of understanding, but time and chance happens to them all;
Ecl. 9 11.
That all things under the Sun are mutable, and it is a madness to think they
will never change; That it is necessary God should make a difference and variety
in the conditions of men, that some should be rich, and others poor, Because
neither could subsist without both: The meanness of some is no less needful to
the order and harmony of the World, than the greatness and abundance of others:
the Rich cannot live comfortably without the Poor, nor the latter be supported
without the former. Besides, it is to be considered, That a prosperous
condition, without God's blessing to improve it, will but administer to our
sin, increase our guilt, and advance our ruin; That an abundance of Temporal
enjoyments is attended with many dangerous temptations; and very few perish by
Famine, in comparison with those many who die of a Surfeit; That there is no
Temporal evil but God can support us under, and sanctifi^ for our good; That
the loss of life is the utmost we can fear; and having the promises of a future
blessedness, that is not to be dreaded; and if our lives are spared, we can
only be deprived a little sooner of those comforts which otherwise we must
relinquish when we quit the body: And suppose the worst that can possibly
befall us, the time of its continuance cannot be long; within a few years,
suppose Thirty, or Forty, and hardly that number of the greatest Assembly shall
then be left alive: And after this life we shall meet with no disappointment
evermore to trouble us; no cross Providence to try our patience, or require our
submission; no sudden loss or casualty to be the matter of a complaint; no
public storm, or private adversity to discompose us. And having this hope in
us, as to the other life, for shame let us resign all things to the Will of
God, as to this. And if we consider our selves either as Men or Christians, the
calamities and sufferings to which we are exposed are so many, that it is a
merciful dispensation our Lease is shortened, and the number of our sorrowful
days on Earth diminisht; that whereas our Forefathers were trained up in the
School of the Cross for many hundred years, we are not to live so long, but may
hope to get to Heaven sooner; and there only remains a Rest for the people of
God.

2. It Is necessary that we mortify our love to this World, and moderate our
Affections to earthly things. Love seems to be the measure and Origin of all
other Passions: And if this present World, and its enjoyments, be inordinately
loved, we shall be apt to repine or despond when evil befalls us. Our sorrow by
the loss of outward blessings, will hold proportion with our fond Affection,
while we possessed them; and our dejection under calamity be proportioned to
our fears, lest it come to pass: Whereas if our Affections be moderate, and
guided by Faith and Reason, we shall not be much concerned at the evils we can
suffer: we shall not much trouble our selves for the want of that which we
neither value nor love, but within the limits prescribed us by God: For what we
embrace with the greatest fondness, that we part from with the greatest regret.
And as many ways may we be miserable, as there are variety of accidents to
separate us from what we inordinately love. This is the great Reason why the
calamities we suffer, dissolve our patience, and rob us of our peace, Because
we love this World too well, and are over-fond of that which we may easily
lose. And how quickly may that man be miserable, if there be so many Worms can
make that Gourd wither which he sits under the shadow of, with inordinate
satisfaction? Nay, with Temporal enjoyments, or without them, we can never be
at rest, if we love them too well; for all our days we are either perplexed with
fear lest they should be lost, or with sorrow in case they are. If we love any
thing very much, besides God, it is seldom but we meet with occasions for as
great a sorrow as we entertain the Object with an undue Affection: But loving
God above all, and every thing else only according to his prescription, would
make us willing to be at his dispose, and content with his order: What pleases
him, cannot then displease us; and what is according to his mind, cannot
contradict ours; and so we may speak it from our hearts, let him do unto us as
seems good unto him.

2. Let us consider what abundant Reason we have thus to refer our selves to
God's dispose: 1. Upon the account of our Profession. 2. Our Duty. 3. Our
Interest.


1. Upon the account of our Profession. We own our selves the Disciples and
Followers of the Holy Jesus, who as he cheerfully performed, so he patiently
submitted to the Will of his Father, declaring his Resignation under his
sharpest Conflicts; Father, not my will, but thine be done. Mat. 26.39.
And as we are Redeemed by his Death, and are the price of his Blood, we are
obliged by his Example. We profess to follow him as the Captain of our
Salvation, and ought to remember he was the most glorious instance of
submission and patience, of trust in God, and resignation to his Will, that
ever the World was acquainted with. As his Victory should be our Encouragement,
his Example must be our Pattern: As he was perfected by sufferings, and stooped
to the severest ones, Heb. 2.10.
to purchase glory for us, we are directed to expect our share, to prepare us
to partake of that glory. To consider him who endured the contradiction of
sinners against himself, Heb. 12.^.
is propounded as an expedient against fainting in our minds: And so it may
prove, if in imitation of him, we are satisfied in every thing with the Will of
our Father. We call God Father, and own our selves his Children; and shall we
not be content he should choose our Allowance, and dispose of our Conditions? We
pray that his will may be done on earth, as it is in heaven; and shall we be
displeased that our prayers are answered, and that he does as we desire him,
that is, what seems good in his sight? The blessed Spirits above, flee
wheresoever they are sent, cheerfully obey his Will, and execute his Pleasure;
and shall not we be satisfied with his Government, ^. 18.11.
and pleased with his Orders, and drink of that cup which our heavenly Father
gives us to drink? Certainly we may trust his Wisdom, because he is God; and
his Love and Faithfulness, because he is a Father, who knowing what is best for
us, will do nothing but what really is so. We know that every Commission
concerning the events of time, is signed by our Father's own hand; and do we
think he will set his hand to what is really for the prejudice of his own
Children, whom he tenderly loves? What we shall eat and drink, and wherewithal
we shall be clothed, where we shall lodge, and what we shall do and be, and how
in every thing we shall be disposed of, are things that belong to his Paternal
Government to order; and obedient Children will leave it to their Father's
care, and acquiesce in his choice.

2. Upon the account of Duty.

1. In gratitude for his abundant kindness, whereof we have had already such
large experience.

He formed us in the Womb, and brought us into light with our entire senses and
integral parts: He disposed of us in our Infancy, educated our Childhood, and
guided our Youth, and has compassed us about with mercy on every side: The
streams of his Fountain have continually refresht us, and shall we overlook the
innumerable instances of his past kindness, by not trusting him for the future?

We cannot fully display his benefits, their wonderful greatness, or
undiscerned freeness, their excessive multitude, and large extent; their
suitableness and seasonableness, their convenience and duration, etc. Our
imaginations cannot conceive the dimensions of his Goodness, nor our speech
utter them; such as the advantages of our Education, the protection of his
Providence, the provisions of his Bounty, the restraints of his Grace, the
privilege of his Gospel, and the assistance of his Holy Spirit; his goodness to
our Bodies, and to our Souls; to our Friends and Relatives, in all the places
wherever we have lived, and in all the portions of our time hitherto; some
blessings immediately from God, and others from such instruments to whom God
gave the Will and the Power, the Capacity and the Opportunity, and Inclination
of doing us good. How many hazards that we thought inevitable, has he rescued
us from? How many difficulties that we thought insuperable, has his Wisdom and
Power enabled us to wade through and conquer? From how many surprising
Casualties has he secured us? From how many Maladies and infectious Diseases
has he preserved us? How many unobserved dangers has his care prevented? How
many of our fears has he delivered us from? How many of our doubts has he
wisely resolved? How many of our prayers has he graciously answered? He has
given us ease and health, raised us from sickness, and plucked us often from the
Jaws of Death: Have we met with Affliction? we have either had present support,
or speedy deliverance; he has either diverted the calamity, or given us
strength to bear it: he has known our souls in the day of Adversity, and
succored us from fainting in the hour of distress. And if the rod were not
presently removed, he increased our patience, and sanctified the visitation,
and in the issue 'twas good that we were afflicted. Moreover; no affliction we
have been under, but had many concomitant Mercies (unmixed misery is only the
portion of Hell, as perfect bliss the state of Heaven.) And why should we not
receive some evil at the hand of God, as well as good? Job 2.10.
Especially considering the vast disproportion. For how many blessings have we
received to one adversity? When some mercies are taken, are not others left of
the same or greater consequence? Have you lost part of your estate? did not God
give the whole; and does not he continue health, without which you could not
enjoy any of it? Are some of your Relations snatched away by Death? does not God
continue or raise up others in their room? Therefore in the day of Adversity
consider, ^.14
as well as in the day of Prosperity rejoice, for God has set the one over
against the other. If then he should deprive us of what we now have, we ought
to be thankful we had it so long, and content if we enjoy it no longer; and
consequently be willing he should do with us what seems good unto him. The
greatest evils we can now suffer, are consistent with his favor, which is our
chiefest good; and the good we have received already, is more and greater than
the evils we have felt or fear. And have we tasted so much of his bounty, and
shall we quarrel at a change of Providence? What condition have we ever passed
through, but the present mercies of that condition would more than counterpoise
the calamities and sorrows of it? The measures of God's Grace, say the Jewish
Rabbis, is larger than the measure of his judgment. For one cross we have many
blessings. Have you not the Love of God, the Testimony of a good Conscience,
the Influence of the Holy Spirit, the Ministry of Angels, the Promises of the
Gospel, and the Hopes of Glory? These you have kept, or might have kept,
notwithstanding all your afflictions. After such reflections as these, can we
reasonably suppose that there will ever be any just ground of dissatisfaction
in God's disposal? Ever any reason for us to quarrel with his Providence, and
be displeased with what he does? He has done us good and not evil all our days
hitherto; and are we loath to be guided by so Gracious a Father? Are we
unwilling to be disposed of by so good a God?

2. We ought in duty to resign to his will, if he had not thus obliged us by
his benefits, because we are his Creatures, and owe him subjection, and because
by our many sins we deserve his wrath. He has an undoubted right to order us
by his Providence, as well as govern us by his Law. And it is a vile contempt of
the Authority and Wisdom of our Absolute Sovereign, to dispute his will. We
cannot suffer any evil of affliction but what is of his sending. Poverty as
well as Riches is his gift. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken, blessed be
his holy name. Job 1.21 Prove. 22.2. Psalm. 39.8. 1 Samuel 3.17.
The rich and the poor meet together, the Lord is maker of them both. I was
dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou, O Lord, did it, says David. It
is the Lord, let him do what seems good unto him, says Eli. We owe obedience
to all the instances of his declared will. And when we see his hand at the
bottom of the Warrant, silent submission becomes us, as we are his creatures;
especially considering that we have provoked him, and deserved his Wrath; that
all the good we receive is undeserved, but none of the evil we suffer is so. We
cannot challenge his favor, or merit his love; and therefore should be
thankful for every mercy. We cannot but confess that we deserve his judgments,
and therefore should humbly submit to every Affliction: Shall we not bear the
indignation of the Lord, Mic. 7.9. Lev. 26.41. Ezra 9.13.
having sinned against him? Shall we not accept the punishment of our
iniquities, especially when it is less than our sins deserve? Has God removed
any one comfort we did not forfeit? Does he inflict any one calamity we did not
merit? And ought we not with thankfulness to acknowledge his mercy, and with
entire submission resign unto his good pleasure?

3. Upon the account of Interest. We are not only obliged to this Resignation
of our selves to the Will of God, in duty to him, but for our own Interest and
Convenience; Because,

1. God knows better what is good for us than we can possibly do our selves. 2.
Because having resigned all to his Will, the worst that can befall us will be
really for our good.
1. God knows better what is good for us than we can possibly do our selves. We
think that to be evil which God brings about for good. From the finiteness of
our Nature, and the feebleness of our Reason, we cannot view the full circuit of
his Providence, or discern the gracious design in every dispensation which he
infallibly carries on, and will at length discover. We have nevertheless the
highest Reason to adore his Will, and hold the general conclusion, that
whatever he does is best, Eccl. 3.11.
and 'twill be beautiful in its season. It Is therefore our Interest to refer
our selves to him; Eccl. 6.12.
For man knows not what is good for himself in this life. God, like a wise
Physician, may consult our health, when he does not gratify and please our
Palates: He may deny us in some particulars, to grant us in others, which will
be more for our advantage: He may contradict our designs and wishes, to secure
our greater good. How many men who have waited for a Wind, and missed it, have
fretted and disquieted themselves for being occasionally absent when the Ship
set Sail, who soon after have thank't the Providence of God for preserving
their lives by so cross an accident, when they heard that the Ship perished in
the Voyage, and all the men were drowned?

We know not how much God may be befriending us, when we think he acts like an
enemy. As he gives us many things by his Providence for our good, which we
afterward find to be so, but would not have chosen; so he takes away many with
the same design, which we are loath to part with. God may take away one blessing
which we prize, to substitute another in the room of it that is much superior.
So that were we offered our choice, what we would have, we could not do wiser
than to put the choice to him again, and desire him to choose for us: For we
behold not the series of good or evil consequences which would follow upon our
Wishes, if they should be granted. That may be good on a naked prospect, which
a series of depending events may turn to evil: And so on the contrary. But God
who holds the Chain of all Causes in his view, sees what reference one part
has to another, and so orders all as may best attain his great design, and our
truest interest. Jacob understood not till afterward, that the loss of Joseph
was the means of his advancement to the Throne of Egypt, and the preservation
of his Family in a Famine, the intended issue. His Brethren sold him for a
Slave, that he might not become their Master: And by that very means it came to
pass, that their sheaves bowed down to his, according to his dream. We only
take notice of what is good at present, but know not what would be so for the
remainder of our lives: but God can order things so as to be for our greater
and more lasting good. And hereafter we shall find, that what now afflicts us,
was a real kindness and advantage. Even those barren Women in Jerusalem, who
longed to become joyful Mothers, and for want of children, would not be
comforted; when Titus sacked the City, and the Inhabitants were destroyed by
Fire, Sword, Famine, and all sorts of Calamities, they then found the words of
our Savior to be true, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare,
and the paps that never gave suck.

Besides, we know not what is best for us, as we stand related to others, and
in reference to the public. The public good of Mankind may be promoted by our
private inconvenience and loss; and of that, God is the best Judge. We are
troubled at the frustration of our endeavors and hopes, as to some instances,
when that disappointment may conduce to the public advantage, because we
should but have got into the room and place of our betters, who are of greater
use and service to the common Interest of Christianity, and the general good of
the World. And should we have our Wills in one particular against the purpose
of God, it may be it would cross the designs of God in a thousand others: for
great things may depend upon that which we would have to be otherwise than it
is. Lastly, God only knows what is best for us in order to our eternal
happiness. All men would choose to be prosperous in the World; but how many
thousands would perish, and be undone, if they were so? Riches may impoverish
and ruin us; health and strength may weaken and undo us; and that which we
desire and choose may prove a curse and a snare, an inducement to sin, and shut
us out of Heaven. We know not how we could grapple with the temptations of an
higher condition. All men cannot carry a full cup without spilling, or be
advanced very high but their heads will turn round. We discern not those many
instances wherein our Temporal interest would contradict our Eternal; where our
present satisfaction would be inconsistent with our future blessedness. But
since God does, it is our interest in all things to resign to his dispose; and
the rather, because,

2. Having resigned our selves to the Will of God, the worst that can befall us
will be really for our good. God does never afflict willingly, or in vain, but
in great faithfulness to us, and for excellent purposes; never without a just
cause on our part, and a gracious design on his. He can no more do an unwise
act than an unholy one, being infinite in Wisdom as well as in Purity. He
intends us good by all, and has promised that shall be the issue. Rom 8.28. 1
Cor. 3.21, 22.
He has put losses and calamities, afflictions and Death it self (the Death of
others, as well our own) into the covenant of grace: they are all comprised
within a promise, and shall work for good. All the evil God at any time
inflicts on his Children is only another method of doing them good: That by
suffering in the flesh we may cease from sin: That when our hearts are melted
like wax, we may be capable of Divine Impressions: That he may open our ears to
discipline by the voice of his rod: Check our Pride, and humble us at his foot;
prevent our security and cure our earthly mindedness; perfect our patience,
beautify our faith, and repair our inward vigor; imbitter this world, to raise
us above it, to take us off from our false hopes, and carnal dependences; to
awaken our sleepy consciences, and revive a Spirit of Prayer, etc. And the
Wisdom of God does oftentimes suit our necessities in these particulars, by the
kind and season of the affliction. And Blessed are those sufferings which bring
us more into a Conformity to his Holy Image. Happy are those depressions to the
Earth, which afterward lift us nearer Heaven. Those sighs and groans are
matter of joy, whose echo is a more holy and circumspect Life. And welcome
should be that evil, which thus effects our greatest good. God, the great
Physician of Souls, can Cure the Plague of the heart by a bodily Disease; and
make one troublesome distemper more effectual than many Sermons. He can teach
us such Lessons from the House of Mourning, as we should never have learnt in
the House of Feasting. Yea, he does sometimes cause his Rod to be a Staff of
comfort, and give the sweetest inward peace to his People through streams of
Bitterness. For some never read the love of God so legibly as under the darkest
cloud of outward distress: As the Ark was nearest Heaven when the Waters of the
flood were highest. Besides, is it not our advantage, if he will prove our
sincerity, and exercise our Grace by a change of Providence? To see whither we
can love him as a Father, while we feel his Rod; whether we can believe the
truth of his Promise, when humane succors fail; whether we can derive our
support from his covenant love, when we have little else to depend upon;
whether we can live upon the Fountain, when the streams are cut off and the
cisterns fail. Now if this be the merciful design of Heaven in the worst that
can befall us, we are traitors to our own interest, not to resign our selves
entirely to him. But this will lead me to the 3d particular, to

3. Consider the Advantages and Benefits of this Resignation of our selves to
the Divine good Pleasure. And they are such as follow.

It will very much prepare us to receive without murmuring the smartest
correction, and qualify us humbly to improve the severest strokes; Still
encouraging our selves in the Lord our God, to whom we have surrendered our
selves and the management of all our affairs.

It will fit us for Prayer, and dispose us to a Spiritual Communion with God
therein. For without such a temper, no prayer respecting the things of this
life can be acceptable to God.

It will prevent our making use of unlawful means to avoid any feared evil, or
to extricate our selves from any present difficulty, because God can bring
about good by seeming evil. He can make the earth to help the woman, accomplish
his gracious designs by what seems to oppose them.

It will suppress an undue Inquisitiveness after things future: And keep us
from making use of any irregular or suspected methods to be informed of what
shall come to pass. For keeping within the bounds prescribed us by God, and
managing our affairs with the best discretion we can, we may be very well
satisfied by referring the success and issue to a divine conduct.

It will take us off from blaming second causes, and fretting against
Instruments under afflictions, and will make us look higher to that hand of
Providence which manages the Rod, and has wisely appointed it.

It will assist us to glorify God in the fire, acknowledging his supremacy, and
subscribing to his Wisdom, and believing his faithfulness; and thereby
satisfying our minds, that if losses and disappointments, poverty or
tribulation, or any other calamity, be God's appointment, that is best. If to
be crossed in our desires, deceived in our expectations, deprived of our friends,
goods, or reputation, be the Will of God, that is altogether best. From such a
temper we may be able to say, Lord here I am, ready for any service, prepared
for any suffering, girt for any encounter, resolved for any difficulty, and
satisfied with whatsoever thou shall please to order. Lead me to the right hand
or to the left: lift me up or cast me down: Do unto me what seems good in thy
sight. I submit to thy direction: I am thine, and at thy dispose, and resolve
to follow thee without disputing thy pleasure. If thy Will be such, and thy
Wisdom advise it, Poverty is better than riches, disgrace than honor, a prison
than liberty, losses than possession, missing more eligible than obtaining,
frustration a greater kindness than success, and a Tempest more desirable than
a Sunshine. Such a temper as this will secure the peace of our minds, and
consequently our happiness in every condition. For our desires and choice being
subjected to the will of God, our own wills may be said to be done, when his is
so. Then only may we have whatsoever we will, when we will nothing but what God
will give, and are pleased with every thing which he thinks fit. Let the
weather be fair or fowl, let the world smile or frown upon us, by such a frame
of heart we may commend our selves to the blessing of God, with an humble
boldness invoke his aid, and with a Christian confidence wait the execution of
his purposes, and expect the performance of his promises.

From the preceding discourse we may learn diverse things for our Instruction
and Practice. As

1. This may instruct us in the true reason of men's distracting fears
concerning future events, and their despondency of mind under actual
difficulties, viz. the want of Resignation to the will of God.

1. From thence arise our distracting fears concerning future events. For did
we upon a sound belief of the nature and word of God, resign our selves to him,
we should not be afraid of evil tidings, or disquiet our minds by the
apprehension of approaching evil. Psalm. 34.4. Isa. 33.16.
God has secured us of all necessary good, by his promise, That there shall be
no lack to them who fear the Lord; That bread shall be given them, and their
water shall be sure. And no such case can we imagine, wherein God by his Wisdom
and Power cannot send us relief, wherein his presence cannot give us support
and joy; or any thing fall out but according to his wise counsel, to whom we
have resigned our selves.

2. It Is the want of Resignation is the ground of our despondency and dejection
of mind under actual sufferings, and present difficulties. When any thing
happens contrary to our desires, how unreasonably do we repine against God, and
torment our selves? send out our complaints against Heaven, and fret against
the Governor of the World; or sit down in despondency, as if there were no
hope, and no sorrow were ever like ours? Which is a base reflection on the
Providence of God, an affront to his sovereignty, a disparagement of his
Wisdom, the reproach of his Goodness, and the dishonor of his Truth. And such a
temper is not only Sinful, but Unreasonable and Vain, it is both absurd and
fruitless. For it not only implies great unthankfulness for our present
mercies, and supposes the preference of our own wishes, before God's
appointment, (as if the Wisdom of God were to be advised by our foolish
fancies) But it supposes an impossibility that things should ever be
otherwise, or that any remedy or relief should ever be found out for the evils
we suffer. Whereas that wheel of Providence whereby we are now at the bottom,
may at the next turn, raise us up, and surprise us by unexpected favors. We
know not what blessings God designeth us, what mercies are teeming in the womb
of futurity for us. It Is unreasonable to suppose when we are in adversity, that
things will never alter; and it is in vain to torment our selves, if they do
not. For God's Counsels shall stand, and his will take place, whether we are
willing or unwilling. Tho the Birds may flutter and be impatient of
confinement, he that carries the Cage in his hand will go never the slower.

2. Should we resign our selves to the Divine good Pleasure? We ought not then
over-eagerly to desire and pursue any temporal good; or be over-earnest and
positive in deprecating any temporal evil. If God grant us the blessings we
wish for, let us praise his name by the acknowledgment of his bounty; but if he
think good to deny us, we must sit down with submissive satisfaction without
them; Not envying those who have more than we, as believing we have a goodly
heritage, and that the lines are fallen to us in a place sufficiently pleasant,
because by God's direction. We should not set our hearts so much on any earthly
design, as not to be satisfied, if we meet with disappointment; nor on any
outward blessing, so as not to be content to lose it when God shall think it
fit. Let us do what we can, and what we ought, and yet leave God to do what
seems good to him. For we dare not deliberately wish for a total exemption
from calamity and sorrow in this world. What if God say to any of us, Since you
are unwilling to submit to my conduct, and refuse to trust to the care of my
Providence, since my Wisdom, Power, Goodness and Truth, are not thought a
sufficient security; I Will cross thy desires no more for the future, in every
thing thou shall have thy choice: but beware the event, etc. The miserable case
of such a person thus left in the hands of his own counsel; may convince us of
our error.

3. Should we resign our selves entirely to the Divine good pleasure? Let us
then undertake nothing of any moment or consequence, without imploring his
direction to guide us, and his blessing to succeed our undertaking.

It Is common for men to ask counsel of God, when they are firmly resolved what
to do themselves. But we ought to have recourse to God for advice before we are
determined in our own thoughts, and not lay the plot of our own affairs, as to
what we intend to do, and then suffer God to come in only as the Executor of
our Wills. Our Resignation to the Will of God would teach us to ask Counsel
from Heaven, as well as success.

4. This may instruct us in the unlawfulness of anxious prying into futurity,
and dissuade us from it. Let us mind what God will have us to do, and refer our
selves to his good pleasure, and we neither need, nor shall be over-solicitous
what he will do with us. Our times and ways are in the hand of God; and in much
Wisdom and Mercy has he hidden future events, to prevent the confident
presumption of some, and the melancholy despair of others, by the certain
foreknowledg of what will come to pass; That we may live by Faith, depending on
his Word and Promise, and be resigned to his Will. It Is true, that some have
tried to mend their own Fortunes, by telling those of other men, pretending
that every man's Temper and Condition is legible in the Planets, and the future
events of Persons and Kingdoms may be known by the Stars: but such may be
confuted and reproved by the challenge of God by the Prophet Isaiah, when he
foretold the destruction of Babylon; Isa. 47.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Evil shall come upon thee, and thou shall not know from whence it rises: and
mischief shall fall upon thee; thou shall not be able to put it off: and
desolation shall come upon thee, which thou shall not know. Stand now with
thine enchantments, and the multitude of thy sorceries; if so be thou may be
able to profit, if so be thou may prevail. Let now the astrologers, the
star-gazers, the monthly prognosticators stand up, and save thee from the
things that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble, etc. If we
love to be concerned about futurity, and will be prying into things to come,
let our solicitude be employed about our everlasting state, what will become of
our Souls for ever, but let us resign our selves to the Will of God, as to all
our Temporal Affairs.

We see then upon the whole, what is our Duty, and where is our Happiness. And
thanks be to God who has graciously connected them together, that by complying
with the former, we may most effectually secure the latter. We are apt to think
we can never be happy till our desires are granted; but the Remedy must be by
the change of our Minds, and not of God's Providence: For an humble Resignation
to his pleasure, with a satisfaction in his choice, would settle the peace of
our minds, and silence all our complaints, knowing that God has an undoubted
right to do with us what he pleases, because of his Sovereignty; and a fitness
to rule us for our good, because of his infinite Wisdom; and that he will most
certainly do so from his Mercy and Truth. Let his Promises be our Refuge, and
his Providence our Comfort; his Wisdom our satisfaction, and his Almighty Power
our Encouragement and Support; his Mercy our only Treasure, and the secret of
his presence our Pavilion; cheerfully referring all things to his management,
steadfastly depending on him in every strait or difficulty, practically
acknowledging him in every dispensation of his Providence, and quietly
submitting to whatsoever he shall order: for he can do nothing but what is
best, because he himself is infinitely wise, and infinitely good. And were we
well in our Wits, we could desire nothing but what is best; and of that God
only can judge, and of that we are fully assured in every condition.

THE END.

