No Peace to the Wicked. A SERMON Preached on the FAST DAY, May 23, 1694. Being
the Day appointed by Authority for a General and Public Fast in London and
Westminster, etc. in most devout and solemn manner, to supplicate Almighty God
for the Pardon of our Sins, and to implore his Blessing and Protection, in the
Preservation of their Majesty's Sacred Persons, and the Prosperity of their
Arms at Land and Sea.

By JOHN SHOWER.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. and to be sold by John Lawrence, at the Angel in the
Poultrey. MDCXCIV.

Mr. SHOWER's FAST-SERMON, May 23, 1694. ON 2 King. ix. 22. And Joram said, Is
it Peace, Jehu? And he answered, What Peace, so long as the Whoredoms of thy
Mother Jezebel, and her Witchcrafts are so many?



No Peace to the Wicked. A FAST-SERMON. Proving SIN to be an Enemy to all kind
of Peace.
2 KINGS ix. 22. And it came to pass when Joram saw Jehu, that he said, IS IT
PEACE, JEHU? And he answered, WHAT PEACE, so long as the Whoredoms of thy
Mother Jezebel, and her Witchcrafts are so many?


AS soon as Jehu was anointed to be King of Israel, by one of the Sons of the
Prophets, Ver. 4.5.
with a Commission from God, to extirpate the whole House of Ahab, and to
avenge the Blood of the Prophets, and of all the Servants of the Lord, Ver. 6,
7, 8.
that had been shed by Jezabel, he immediately hastens to Jezreel, where was
Joram the Son of Ahab, to be recovered of the Wounds he had lately received
from the Syrians; and with him was Ahaziah King of Judah, who had married his
Sister, and came thither to make him a Visit.

Upon the Approach of Jehu, and the Watchman's notice of it, Ver. 12.
King Joram dispatcheth an Horseman to enquire the Reason of his coming, and
to demand if all things were in Peace. He receives a short Answer, What have
thou to do with PEACE? turn thou behind me. A second Messenger has the same
Success. V. 18, 19.
Upon which the two Kings hasten to their Chariot, as under a Divine
Infatuation, to go out to meet Jehu, and his Company. The Detention of two
Messengers, might have sufficiently alarmed them to expect an Enemy: But such
whom God intends to destroy, seldom suspect a Danger till it is too late. Upon
the meeting of King Joram with Jehu, he asks the Question in the Text, IS IT
PEACE? And receives the following Answer, WHAT PEACE, so long as the Whoredoms
and Witchcrafts of thy Mother Jezebel are so many?

This Joram who asked the Question, was an idolatrous and wicked Prince, King
of the ten Tribes of Israel; the wretched Son of two infamous Parents, Ahab and
Jezebel.

There was another Joram, or Jehoram, King of Judah, the Son of good
Jehoshaphat, who began not his Reign, till the fifth Year of this Joram King of
Israel. 2 Kings 8.16.
He was the Father of Ahaziah, who was now at Jezreel with King Joram: of him I
shall have occasion to speak afterward, as being slain with him.

Jehu, who makes the Answer to the Question in the Text, was the Captain of the
Hosts of Israel, but by God's Command anointed to be King of Israel, with
express Orders to root out the Family of Ahab, and execute the Judgments of God
on his whole House. And in the following part of the History we find he did so,
with some Exactness as to the thing, tho not with that Integrity of Heart and
Design as he ought to have done it; for he still cleaved to the Worship of the
Calves at Dan and Bethel. 2 King. 10.31.
The best of the Princes of Israel were of such ill Characters, that of twenty
of them we hardly read of one good; Jehu was one of the best, as Ahab the
Father of this Joram was one of the worst. But Jehu is anointed by God, to
destroy that wicked Family of Ahab; and upon his anointing he hastens to
Jezreel, to accomplish it upon this King Joram, Ahab's Son. As soon as he sees
him, he asks this Question, IS IT PEACE, JEHU?

For the Import of the Question, Is it Peace? or, Is it well, Jehu? as it might
be rendered, and is so in other Verses; it is as if he should have said, Is
there no bad News, Jehu, that occasions thy unexpected coming? What means this
thy sudden and hasty Journey? Is the Army routed by the Syrians? Is Hamath
recovered again? Is it Peace? Is there any new Rebellion or Conspiracy? What
ill Tidings do thou bring? Is it Peace, Jehu? There needed no stay for an
Answer, the very Countenance of Jehu doubtless spoke Death to Joram; and his
Tongue seconds it in the following Answer of the Text, viz.

And Jehu answered, What Peace, so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezebel
are so many? i. e. Thou speak of Peace with Men, when, by thy impious
Idolatry and Blood, thou and thy House have bid Defiance to Heaven, and made
God thine Enemy. What Peace, so long as Thou and thy Mother are in open
Rebellion against God? What Peace, while Heaven has a Controversy with thee and
thy Family, while the Wickedness of thy Mother Jezebel is avouched and
entertained as thine own? What Peace, what kind of Peace do thou look for?
Or, how can thou expect any? There is no Peace, there will be none, there can
be none, it is in vain to imagine there shall be any. No, the Voice of thy
Mother's Guilt has reached to Heaven, and awakened Divine Vengeance against
thee and thine House: God will destroy that wicked Woman, Her and Hers, Root
and Branch, as a Generation of Vipers. What Peace, so long as the Whoredoms of
thy Mother Jezebel, and her Witcherafts are so many?

By Whoredoms here we may understand Idolatry, which is often so called. And
the Idolatry of the House of Ahab has particularly that Name affixed to it, 2 Chronicles. 21.13. where the other Jehoram is charged with making Judah to go a
whoring, like to the Whoredoms of the House of Ahab. I do not exclude literal
Whoredom, and all other Uncleanness, which does sometimes precede, and usually
accompany, or follow Idolatry, and false Worship.

And it is not improbable, but that by Witchcraft here the same is to be
understood; the Worship of Idols being the Service of the Devil, and a kind of
Compact with him, it is a sign that he has powerfully bewitched and deceived
the corrupt Minds of Men, and may well be called Witchcraft. Under one or both
of these Crimes here mentioned, Idolatry is doubtless to be understood; because
that was the great Sin of Jezebel, for which Jehu was to execute Judgment, and
it is not likely he would omit it in his Charge against her.

Our Modern Infidels, who deny any such thing as Witches, can take no Advantage
of this Interpretation, because the comparing of Idolatry to Witchcraft, does
suppose that there is such a thing as Witchcraft; and there are other places of
Scripture that mention Death to be the Punishment of it.

What Peace, so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezebel? etc. Her Crimes
are mentioned, rather than his; partly, as they were more infamous and
notorious; partly, as it was for her Sins, that God was now about to execute
Judgment; and partly, as this Joram had been nursed up and educated in her
cursed Idolatry, and so her Wickedness became his own: But especially are her
Crimes taken notice of, to show that it was not a particular War with Joram,
but with the whole Family; and that the Anger of God, which Jehu was to
execute, was against the whole House of Ahab and Jezebel. Which is a sufficient
Account why Jehu makes such a smart Answer to Joram's Question, Is it Peace? as
this, What Peace, so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezebel, and her
Witchcrafts are so many?

This therefore is the Sum of these Words as the Ground of my following
Discourse, that there is no Peace to be expected by impenitent, unreformed
Sinners. Or, That Sin is an Enemy to all kind of Peace. What Peace, so long as?
etc. That I may confirm and improve this, let us, first, consider that there is
a threefold Peace. First, Divine Peace, or Peace with God. Secondly, External
and Civil Peace between Man and Man, and this in lesser and greater Societies.
Thirdly, The Peace of the Soul, inward Peace, or Peace of Conscience. Now if we
look above us, or round about us, or within us, there is no Peace to be had,
while Sin is not repented of, and reformed.

In general, Peace is taken for all kind of Good, for all manner of Blessings,
as sometimes for Spiritual Blessings. The Legacy of Christ is Peace, John 14.27.
My Peace I leave with you. In me you have Peace. Chapter 16.33.
Sometimes for all Temporal Blessings. God threatens to take away PEACE from a
People, even Lovingkindness and Mercies. Jer. 16.5.
Hence the ordinary Salutation, Peace be to such an one, or Peace be to such a
House; that is, Blessing, Favor, Mercy. Now Sin, as the Cause of all Evil, is
an Enemy to Peace in this Latitude, as it is that which separates between God
and us, and hinders all good things from us. But let me speak more distinctly
to these three kinds of Peace, Peace with God, and Peace with Men, and Peace
with Conscience.

I. Peace with God. That Sin is an Enemy to this kind of Peace, I need not so
much to prove, as to apply. You know it is the abominable thing which his Soul
hates. Jer. 44.4. Psalm. 7.11. Romans 1.18. Psalm. 11.5, 6.
That he is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity. That he is angry with the
Wicked every day. That his Wrath is declared from Heaven against all
Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men. That on them he will rain Snares, Fire
and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest. God has no Enemy in the World but
those which Sin makes him. The Wicked are represented in the holy Scriptures as
Enemies to God, Fighters against him, Haters of him, etc. This Contrariety of
Sin to God must needs make it obstruct our Peace with him. It is a walking
contrary to God, it is a Contempt of him, a Rebellion against him, a bidding
Defiance to him; and therefore, while Sin is unrepented of, God is our Enemy.

And of how dreadful Import is that to a considering Mind, to have God for our
Enemy! For who knows the Power of his Wrath? Whose Heart can endure, or Hands
be strong, if he engage against us! If he rise up against us, if he enter into
Judgment with us! He is a consuming Fire, and we like Thorns and Briars, which
he will go through and burn up. Whither shall we flee for Shelter, or seek for
Refuge? And how fearful is it to fall into his Hands, who is the Almighty and
Eternal Judge, the God to whom Vengeance belongs, when the time of his Patience
and Long-suffering is over! How can you have a Moment's Rest, when God is
apprehended to be your Enemy? How can you live merrily or in quiet for one Day
or Hour, while you have no ground to apprehend the Breach is made up between
him and you; while his destructive Vengeance hangs over your Heads, and is
every moment read to fall on you, and crush you into everlasting Destruction;
while, for ought you know, the next moment may for ever divide between you and
all your Comforts, and all your Hopes; I say, for ever. O think of that little
Word, for ever, Everlasting. You that are not reconciled and at Peace with God,
by Repentance toward God, and Faith in the Blood of Jesus, and yet are content
and careless, think of this, and tremble. Don't make light of the Divine
Threatenings, and despise that Wrath, that in a moment can destroy you. Let such
think of it, who go on securely in some hidden course of Sin, upon the brink of
Eternal Ruin. Spell me that Word EVERLASTING added to the Wrath of God, and
tell me how many Syllables of Time go to the compounding of it. There is no
Peace, says my God, to the Wicked; but Indignation and Wrath, and a fearful
looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation. O consider it, believe it,
apply it, while it is possible to make Peace with God, and escape his Righteous
Vengeance.

II. Sin is an Enemy to Civil Peace between Man and Man. What else is the
Original of Wars and Fightings, Confusions and Strifes, James 4.1.
of all the Tumults and Disorders, Desolations and Confusions, in Human
Societies; that Men are Wolves, and Bears, and Lions, and Tigers, and almost
Devils to one another? What else is the great Makebate of the World, that
destroys the Peace, and disturbs the Order, defaces the Beauty, and obstructs
the Happiness and Tranquillity of Families, and Churches, and Cities, and
Nations? I might show this in diverse Particulars. As,

1. Some Sins, and some Lusts, have a direct Influence and Tendency to hinder
and destroy Civil Peace; as Pride, Covetousness, Envy, Ambition, Wrath, Malice,
Revenge, inordinate Passions, etc. It Is the Pride and Ambition of Princes that
puts them upon enlarging their Territories, with the Destruction of their
Neighbors: Tho they have many Pretenses to color their Ambition,
Covetousness, Envy, or Revenge. The Defense or Promotion of true Religion is
sometimes made a Cover for Violence, Rapine and Murder. How many thousands of
Indians and Infidels have been massacred by the Spaniards, to make room for
Christianity, and to plant the Gospel among them? And how much innocent Blood
has been shed in Christendom, to reduce Heretics to the Unity of the Roman
Church, or punish their Obstinacy or Apostasy who would not return to it? And
this under the pretense of Religion and Conscience, and a Zeal for Truth, in
Obedience to Christ's Vicar, to propagate the Faith of the Gospel, by a sort of
Christians who think it their Duty to destroy all others, when and where they
are able to do it, if the Pope require and encourage it for the Catholic
Cause. Ambition and Pride, ignorant Zeal, and Envy, Covetousness and Cruelty,
are the Spring of those Disorders in the Christian World.

2. God has threatened, as the Punishment of Sin, to take away Civil Peace from
a People: Jer. 4.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
Because thou have rebelled against the Lord, says the Prophet, there shall be
Destruction upon Destruction. These things have thou procured unto thy self,
this is thy Wickedness; because it is bitter, it reaches unto thy very Heart,
etc. For the Punishment of a particular People, God appoints the Sword, where
he will, and as long as he pleases. Against Ashkelon, and the Seashore, it is
said, he has appointed it; Jer. 47.6.
and therefore it shall not be quiet, the Sword shall not be put up into the
Scabbard. The like Passages you have in other Prophets, Isa. 10.5, 6, 7.
O Assyrian, the Rod of mine Anger, the Staff in thy Hand is mine Indignation.
I will send them against an Hypocritical Nation, against the People of my Wrath
will I give them a Charge to devour and destroy. The like is threatened by
another Prophet; Ezekiel. 7.25, 26, 27.
Destruction comes, and they shall seek Peace, and there shall come none:
Mischief shall come upon Mischief; the Law shall perish from the Priest, and
Counsel from the Ancients. The King shall mourn, and the Princes shall be
clothed with Desolation, and the Hands of the People of the Land shall be
troubled: I will do unto them after their way, and according to their Deserts
will I judge them; and they shall know that I am the Lord.

3. On the contrary, if Sin be repented of and forsaken, Civil Peace is the
Matter of a Promise. Isa. 48.18, 22.
O that thou had hearkened to my Commandments! then had thy Peace been as a
River, and thy Righteousness as the Waves of the Sea! But there is no Peace,
says the Lord, unto the Wicked. If our Ways please the Lord, he has promised
to make our Enemies to be at Peace with us. Prove. 16.7.
All their Designs and Attempts, tho never so probable, never so formidable,
shall be blasted by God's appearing for us. Isa. 8.9, 10.
Associate your selves, and you shall be broken in pieces; Gird your selves,
and you shall be broken in pieces; take Counsel together, and it shall come to
naught: for God is with us. The most insolent Invader shall have Orders to
retreat from such a City, or shall not come nigh to such a Place. Isa. 37.33.
Thou shall not come before it with a Shield, or cast a Bank against it, or
make a Trench, or shoot an Arrow, says God of the proud King of Assyria, the
old Enemy of Jerusalem; For I will defend this City to save it, says the Lord
of Hosts. To the like purpose it is promised in several places of Scripture.
Isa. 32.19.
My People, that obey my Voice, shall dwell in peaceable Habitations, Prove. 1.
ult.
and quiet resting Places: They shall dwell safely, and be quiet from the fear
of Evil. Every one shall sit under his own Vine and Fig Tree, Mic. 4.4.
and none shall make them afraid. I will be their God, Ezekiel. 34.25.
and I will make with them a Covenant of Peace; and they shall dwell safely in
the Wilderness, and sleep in the Woods, etc. There are many such Promises of
Peace to an obedient, reformed People.

4. The turning from Sin, besides the Promise of God to reward it, has a
natural, direct Influence in it self on the Peace and Welfare of any Country.
For nothing would more promote the good of Human Society than a faithful
Observance of the Laws of Christ. By the Rules of Christian Religion, God has
provided for the Welfare of Mankind in all Capacities and Relations. If Men had
the Wisdom to observe and follow what God has mercifully directed and
enjoined, the World would be blessed with Peace: Every Man's just Rights would
then be preserved, in his Relations, Life, Liberty, Estate, Reputation, etc.
For the Divine Commands are caculated to make a People happy; tho some of them
are such as suppose the Corruption of Mankind to be so great, as that the
Generality will not observe them. And even that is an Instance of the Divine
Wisdom and Mercy.

We are under an Obligation to think of, Phil. 4.8.
and pursue whatsoever is True and Venerable, Just and Pure, Lovely, and of
good Report; and to do Good to All, to have an obliging, condescending Carriage
to All; and as much as in us lies, to live peaceably with all Men. This would
prevent Contention, or quickly end it. But there can be no valuable or lasting
Union among Men, without practical and serious Religion, especially without
Humility and Christian Self-denial. For sinful Selfishness, which is the
contrary to it, is the source of all Confusions and Quarrels; but Humility and
Self-denial would bring Men to Peace and Concord: it would make us propose and
prosecute the most excellent uniting Ends; and by conquering and curing the
inordinate Love of Earthly Things, take away the great Occasions of most
Quarrels. It would make Men follow after Peace, and value it, and the things
that make for Peace. It would make them of a public Spirit, and do what they
can to promote the public Welfare, and prefer it before their own private
Interest; as Mordecai, Nehemiah, David, etc. Esth. 10.3. Neh. 1.2. and 2.3, 4.
Psalm. 137.5, 6.
But a selfish Man is his own End, and cares not what becomes of the Public
Good, so he thinks he can promote his own. Magistrates and Subjects could not
live in Jealousies of one another, as having contradictory Interests, if the
honoring and pleasing of God, and the common Good, were the principal End and
Interest of both. Husbands and Wives, Brothers and Sisters, Masters and
Servants, Neighbors and Acquaintance, if obedient to Christ, would not live at
Variance with one another.

The Lust of the Flesh, Sensuality and Luxury, have exposed many Countries to
the Desolations of War, and particular Persons and Families to Ruin. The Lust
of the Eyes, or lusting after those things which Men see others enjoy, has had
the like Effects. The Pride of Life tends to Discord and Contention, which
produce private Animosities and bloody Wars. But serious Godliness would keep
the World in Peace, as forbidding these Sins, and mortifying these Lusts.

It would render Magistrates and Subjects mutual Blessings to one another, if
they would mutually observe the Laws of Christ. It would make Princes and
Rulers to be Just, and Gentle, and careful of their Subjects Good: It would
oblige and animate them to preserve Right, encourage Virtue, and check and
punish Wickedness. It would make Subjects Obedient, Loyal and Peaceable, paying
due Honor and Tribute to Magistrates.

If our Rulers were Men fearing God, they would be Ministers of God for Good;
Terrors only to Evildoers, but a Praise to them that do well: They would then
seek the Glory of God, and keep up his Authority, and prefer his Laws before
their own: They would be Examples of Virtue and Religion in their public
Station, and so they would do much to draw others to Holiness, Unity, and
Peace. Holiness in Magistrates would make them love those who are holy, and
give them Encouragement, Countenance and Protection: It would make them hate
Sin, and remove the Abominable Thing with which God is displeased: It would
save them from the dangerous Temptations of their Riches, Power, and
Advancement. Authority and Holiness together would make them highly esteemed
and honored, as bearing the Image of the Heavenly Majesty and Goodness. The
like for Subjects in the faithful discharge of their Duty: The Fear of God, and
Obedience to him, is proper to make Men the best Subjects; thereby we are
obliged to honor and obey our Rulers, as the Officers of God. This would make
us understand the Blessing of Civil Government, and the Advantage of Protection
by it. It would make Men true to their Oaths and Obligations, and dispose them
to Unity, and keep them from seeking their own things against the public
Welfare. It would establish the mutual Obligations of Governors and Governed
by the firm Bands of Conscience, and so prevent Violence and Oppression on the
one hand, Faction and Murmuring on the other: and while every one has his due,
Order, Peace and Safety would be established.

In short, Consider the Gospel-Rules of Charity, Righteousness and Equity; of
loving our Neighbor as our selves; of doing to others, as in the like case we
would desire they should do to us: How would these promote the Peace and
Welfare of Societies? The like might be said of the Precepts of Contentment,
Meekness, Patience, Sincerity, Plain-heartedness, Benignity and Kindness,
Compassion and Tenderness, Inoffensiveness, diffusive impartial Goodness, and
readiness to do Good to all as we have opportunity; For bearance of one another
in Love; mutual Forgiveness; not seeking Revenge, or repaying one Injury or
Ill-turn with another, but doing Good for Evil, and praying for them that hate
and curse us; not meddling with other Men's Matters, but minding every one his
own Business, etc. These and the like Commands and Rules of the Gospel tend
directly in their own Nature to the Peace and Happiness of Civil Society. So
that Sin, in its own Nature and Tendency, as well as by the righteous Judgment
of God, is an Enemy to Civil Peace.

All the unbecoming Heats and Janglings, Strifes and Persecutions among
Christians, all the uncharitable Fewds, Contentions, and Hatred among
Neighbors, are from the Lusts of Men. This is one Instance of the present
Correction and Reproof of Sin. Did we but observe the Orders of Christ, and
follow the Gospel-Rule, with how different a Face would the World appear? how
happy would be the Nation, the City, the Family, where the case were thus? But
what Contentions and Enmities are caused every day by Pride, Drunkenness, and
Evilspeaking? in every Town, Village, and Neighborhood, we might find
Instances. Were it not for the Corruption of Mankind, and the sad Effects of
that, there were no Foundation in any sense to call the State of Nature the
State of War. The Peace and Harmony, and consequent Happiness of the World had
not been destroyed, but by the Sin of Man. What Nation was ever set on fire
within it self, or made desolate by a Foreign Power; what Battle was ever
fought, (much less a Duel;) what War was ever commenced, or prosecuted, but on
one side or both, Ambition or Pride, Rashness or Rebellion, Fury or Revenge was
at the bottom? Hence they spring as from their grand Source, by these were they
cherished as by their proper Fuel. The great Convulsions and Desolations that
tear Provinces and Empires, and destroy Kingdoms, are caused by Armies of
Iniquities rather than of Soldiers. Discord, Prove. 13.10.
Contention and War, are the Scum of Pride. Whereas the Meek shall inherit the
Earth, and be delighted with multitudes of Peace. Psalm. 37.11
Among the sinless Angels, tho there be many Legions, we read of no Wars. The
Earth only is the Seat of War; Jerusalem above is free. If Men would cease to
do evil, and learn to do well, Spears would be turned into Plow-shares, and
Swords into Pruning-books. And the Inhabitants of the Earth would learn War no
more, did they once forbear to be wicked. Princes would not oppress and murder
their Subjects; nor would Subjects rebel against their lawful Sovereigns. A
blessed universal Peace would return to the Earth, which is now such a Stranger
to so great a part of the World. So that the Reproof and Correction of Sin,
thundering in our Ears by the noise of Canon, and the Instruments of War, is as
loud as the beating of Drums, and the sound of Trumpets: it should pierce our
Hearts, as do the last Cries of mangled Soldiers; and affect us in a like
sort, as do the Tragical Effects of a lasting War.

III. There is another kind of Peace which is inward, or Peace of Conscience.
And as no Peace with God or Man can on good grounds be expected, while Sin is
unrepented of; so nor Peace with our selves. It Is by the Faith and Obedience of
the Gospel, that the Understanding, Will, and Conscience are made to agree, and
have a peaceful Harmony in the same Subject. It Is by resigning our Judgments to
the Divine Wisdom, and our Hearts and Affections to the Divine Will in his Word
and Providence, that we must attain and keep inward Security and Peace. It Is by
Uprightness and Sincerity, in contradiction to Hypocrisy and Dissimulation,
that our Hearts are fixed and established, and the Tranquillity of the Soul
maintained in all Conditions.

It is true, through the Deceitfulness of Sin, through the Pleasures and
Diversions of this World, through the Blindness and Security and Hardness of
Men's Hearts, the Influence of Satan, and oftentimes the righteous Judgment of
God, Multitudes do speak Peace to themselves in a course of Sin, in a way that
is not good: But this Peace is their Disease, it is no better than Stupidity,
it is the Insensibility of a Man in a Lethargy; and if it be joined with
sensual Mirth, it is the Jollity of a Madman. For true Peace of Conscience
cannot consist with Sin not repented of, and not forsaken. For the Proof of
this, consider,

1. There is no Foundation for any such Peace. After all their bold Atheistical
Talk, they cannot disbelieve there is a God that made and governs the World, to
whom they must be accountable: They cannot extinguish the differences of Good
and Evil in their own Minds: They cannot have that inward Calmness and Peace,
after great Provocations, as after resisting Temptation, and doing those things
which Conscience approves: They cannot but apprehend that there will, or at
least may be a future Judgment: they cannot be persuaded, that God takes no
notice of their Sins; or that tho Conscience condemn for them now, God will not
punish hereafter. These things they find when they durst be so bold to think of
Death, and the final Judgment of God, and of passing into an everlasting State,
which ordinarily they think of as seldom as they can. At such a time their
Peace is disturbed, and they ready to sink under the Fears of an
After-reckoning. This is ordinarily true, except of those who are stupefied and
hardened, so as to be past feeling; which is not the Case of all, nor is it
presently the Case of any. But great Peace have they that love thy Law, and
nothing shall offend them. This cannot be said of others, whose brutish
Sensualities, and flashy Joys, which they call Pleasure, are tinctured with
Uneasiness, and end in Sorrow. They have Care, and Fear, and Trouble, and
Weariness and Regret; and do those things daily, which must make them
unsatisfied with themselves when they come to review them. But the good Man
has the promise of having his Desires granted and fulfilled; and while he
walks uprightly, may expect things will proceed fairly, orderly, sweetly, and
with Delight: he has the ground however of inward Satisfaction.

2. The most of such, who live under the Ministry of the Gospel, and yet
continue in Sin, do act against their own Light, and the Dictates of
Conscience; they live in a Contradiction to what they know they ought to be and
do, and therefore can have no inward Peace. Conscience tells thee that this thy
Course is not pleasing to God, that this is not according to Scripture-Rule;
that thou must leave thy vain Company, and redeem thy Time, and live no longer
in the neglect of Prayer; that thou must repent of Sin, and endeavor to make
thy Peace with God, and prepare for another World, and be in a readiness for a
sudden Death. Thy Conscience tells thee thou must do so, and therefore while
you live in a neglect of this, and in a contrary Course, you are self-condemned.

And how many such are there, who from Morning to Night are under the
Convictions and Condemnations of an accusing Conscience; but yet are held in
the Chains of some Sin, so that their Lusts prevail against their Convictions.
You know you ought to worship God in private and public; that you ought to
acknowledge him in all your Ways, and make it your Business to please and
glorify him, tho you do it not. You know you ought to avoid evil Company, tho
you continue to frequent it: You know that Drunkenness is a Sin, and
Uncleanness a Sin; and Oppression, Covetousness, Injustice, Theft,
Overreaching, Treachery, Perjury, etc. are Sins. You know for such Sins the
Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven: You know your Guilt, you know you have
not repented, you know you are not fit to die; you know you ought to turn to
God, and seek his Favor, lest you be surprised by a sudden Death: but your
Lusts are too strong for your Light.

I wonder not that such Persons cannot bear Retirement, that they do not love
to be Alone for serious Consideration; nay, that they are afraid of waking in
the Night; and for that very Reason some of them have confessed they usually
drink more freely in the Evening, than otherwise they would do, that they may
sleep soundly, to prevent the Uneasiness of their own Thoughts, in case they
should not sleep: As some Malefactors will make themselves drunk when they are
to be executed, that Death may not be terrible; which is a Medicine against
Repentance, not against Hell. By some such Methods Men may in part keep off the
feeling of their Misery, till the hope of Cure and Relief be past. But what a
sort of Peace is this? For if they awake in the Night, their Conscience is
awake: And the Light of Conscience does not only shine, but burn and scorch
them even at Midnight. Some of those who pretend to be above such Fears,
notwithstanding all their Hectoring, and Damning, and Blasphemy, and Railing,
are followed with bitter Reflections of Conscience, and are often filled with
Horror and Astonishment, from the Gripes and Terrors of a guilty Mind, as
diverse have afterward acknowledged, tho Inconsideration, sensual Pleasures, and
the hope of Death being at a good distance, kept them from such constant Fears
in Health.

3. The Rage of some impetuous Lusts, and the Violence of sinful Passions, is
manifestly inconsistent with inward Peace. It Is from Lust and Luxury, from
Pride and Envy, from Malice and Spite, from Ambition and Covetousness, and such
Dispositions, which the Grace of the Gospel is designed to cure, and
Christianity condemns, that Men cannot enjoy inward Peace and Tranquillity.
While their Passions run violently and wildly toward the basest or meanest
Objects, they must needs be punished with inward Uneasiness, Remorse, and
Dissatisfaction. They travel with Iniquity, and conceive Mischief; they are in
as great Pain almost as a Woman in Travail; and all to bring forth a Lie; Psalm.
7.14. One burns with impatient Lust, which is its own Torment; another eats out
his Heart with Envy or Malice; another is even choked to Death with Thirst
after Money, and is sick and in pain because he cannot reach the Estate he
covets. Tho the more he gets, the more he thinks is yet necessary e're he can
be happy and at rest: his Fever is still growing. Not to mention the
Extravagancies of Lusts and Passions, there is nothing almost so ridiculous and
absurd, brutish and abominable, but the Violence of sinful Passions has
brought Men to. The outward Disorder and Folly of their Actions, show the
inward Disturbance and Discomposure of their Minds.

To this purpose says the Prophet, that the Wicked are like the troubled Sea
that cannot rest, that is always casting out Mire and Dirt. They are hurried,
and torn, and set upon the Rack, by the Violence of various Lusts: Their eager
Desires of gratifying some, and the Fears of Disappointment in others, and the
Dread of Discovery at other times, and the continual Fears of Punishment
afterward in most cases, must needs destroy the inward Peace of such Men's
Minds. But he that walks according to the Rule of the Gospel, needs not be at
all this Pains to prevent Disappointment, or Shame, to guard himself, and
suspect every body, to curb his Tongue, and watch his Memory, and manage his
very Looks and Gestures, to obviate other Men's Jealousies, or contrary Designs,
and to prevent the Discovery of his own Intentions; or secret Actions. And I
might add, that the Contrariety and Inconsistency of some Lust, does also
hinder inward Peace; as while Covetousness makes a Man toil and labor to
scrape together and hoard up, his Pride and Vainglory prompts him to spend and
scatter, that he may not be outdone by his Neighbors.

4. In Adversity and Affliction, in bodily Sickness, or the prospect of Death,
we then find what an Enemy Sin is to inward Peace. Then Conscience begins to
awake in most Men; then, when they think of passing from one World to another,
they are restless and uneasy, and afraid of every thing, and of nothing more
than Dying; then their haughty Spirits are brought down, and they now tremble
and talk at another rate, and will suffer a Minister, or a serious Christian to
discourse freely with them, whose Reproof or Presence before they would not
bear.

5. God does sometimes in this World punish Sin with terrible Rebukes and
Terrors of Conscience. He makes them possess their former Iniquities, he sets
their Sins in order before them, he awakens Conscience to do its Office as a
Witness, and a Judge, and in some respects an Executioner too: So that they
accuse, condemn, and torment themselves. How many careless profligate Sinners,
after great Transgressions; and how many good Men, after great Backslidings,
have experienced these Terrors and Rebukes of Conscience?

Believe it, Sinner, whoever thou art, one Sin set home on the Conscience with
the Frowns of God, will sting the Soul as with fiery Scorpions; it will rend
thy Heart with the most desperate Rage, it will make thy Lips quiver, thy Knees
tremble, thy Bones rot, thy Spirit to fail within thee; it will make thee
apprehend all the Miseries and Torments threatened in Scripture belong to thee:
it will make thee cry out, I am feeble and sore broken, mine Iniquities are a
Burden too heavy for me! O how shall I appear before God! How shall I flee from
his Presence, or bear his Wrath! O that I had never sinned, O that I had never
been! O that I might cease to be! How much better if I had never been born,
never seen the Light! Lord! if I should now die, what would become of me? and
if I should yet live, will the Lord ever be merciful to me? The Sins I have
committed are numberless and heinous, the Wrath I feel is unexpressible; that
which I fear is Infinite and Endless! Lord! I see if I live I am an undone,
accursed Creature! and if I die, (O let me not die) I fear I shall be for ever
a damned miserable Sinner! Is there no Mercy, Lord! no hope for such a Wretch
as I have been! And in such cases all the Pleasures and Diversions, the Riches
and Honors of the World will signify little, they are Physicians of no value,
you can taste no Sweetness in them; they can give no Rest to thy disturbed
Thoughts, they cannot calm thine accusing Conscience: God alone can create the
Fruit of the Lips, Peace, Peace: Men and Angels are not competent Chyrurgions
for such a wounded Spirit. If God speak Trouble, who can speak Peace? Ministers
and Friends may repeat the Promises of Mercy and of Grace, but all in vain,
until God bind up the broken in Heart: He alone that removes the Guilt of Sin
by pardoning Mercy, can remove the desparing Sense of it by speaking Peace. Now
consider this, Ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver!

The Improvement of this Discourse may be for Instruction, Reproof, and
Exhortation. There are several things we may learn for our Instruction: as,

1. What Peace, so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezebel? etc. Observe,
that it is the Wickedness of Men, (especially of Persons in great Places) is
the true Cause of Wars, and public Calamities. Nothing more common than to
charge the public Calamities of a Country upon Religion, and the Professors of
it, as Ahab did the Famine in Samaria, and his Son Joram likewise, on the
Prophet Elisha. But his Answer will serve in both Cases; when he taxes him as
the Troubler of Israel, he replied, It is Thou and thy Father's House that have
troubled Israel, in that you have forsaken the Commandment of the Lord, and
followed Baalim, 1 Kings 18.17, 18. You may as well say, that Health is the
Cause of Sickness, as charge Wars and Contentions, and public Calamities upon
serious Godliness. It is from the Lusts of Men, from the Wickedness of
Magistrates and Subjects, that either obstruct the Peace of a People amongst
themselves, or provoke God to take it away by desolating Wars. Religion is not
to be blamed for any such Miscarriages of Christians, as disturb the public
Peace. You do not condemn the Laws of the Land, because Thieves and Murderers
break them: The Laws are good, and oblige to nothing but what is good, tho ill
Men will not observe them. So is it with the Laws and Precepts of Christian
Religion. So far as real Christianity prevails, it will influence the Hearts
and Lives of Men for the Good of every Society whereof they are Members.
Christians acting according to the Laws of Christ, will honor their Rulers on
God's Account, as his Officers: They know they obey God in obeying them, and so
will do it for Conscience sake; because of his Authority whereof they partake,
and of his Command to be in Subjection to them. Therefore so far as they fail
in their Duty, by Faction and Rebellion, etc. they forsake their Rule, and
offend their Heavenly Lord and Master. And it is not owing to their Godliness
and Christianity, but to the want of it.

2. What Peace, so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezebel, and the Crimes
of the Family of Ahab, are so many? Observe, that the Sins of Courts do
sometimes bring Judgment on the whole Land. The People were punished with a
dreadful Pestilence for David's Sin in numbering the People, 2 Samuel 24.17. And
he acknowledged and said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly; but
these Sheep, what have they done? Let thine Hand, I pray thee, be against me,
and against my Father's House. God turned not away his Anger from Judah and
Jerusalem, notwithstanding the Reformation of Josiah, for the Sin of his
Grandfather Manasses, and his Father Amnon, 2 Kings 23.25, 26. tho there was no
King before him that turned to the Lord with all his Heart, and with all his
Soul, and with all his Might, according to all the Law of Moses; neither after
him arose there any like him: Nevertheless the Lord turned not from the
Fierceness of his great Wrath, wherewith his Anger was kindled against Judah,
because of all the Provocations that Manasseh had provoked him withal. And the
Lord said, I will remove Judah also out of my sight, as I have removed Israel;
and will cast off this City Jerusalem, which I have chosen, and the House of
which I said, My Name shall be there. Therefore in the Confession of National
Sins, we must look further back than the present Reign, lest the Guilt of
former Princes bring Judgment on the Nation.

So the Sin of Saul brought three Years Famine upon the Land, till Judgment was
executed, and God's Anger turned away. Thus Israel was here punished for the
Wickedness of Ahab, Jezebel, and Joram. And doubtless their Example had
infected the People too. My Anger, says God, was kindled against the Shepherds,
and I smote the Goats; Zech. 10.3. that is, against the Officers in Church and
State, who were the Ringleaders in Sin; and the Community suffered upon that
Account, the People were smitten. What reason have we to pray for holy
Magistrates, and to bless God when we have such?

3. What Peace to thee, O Joram, while the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezebel?
etc. Observe, that Children may be punished for the Sins of their immediate
Parents; and if they continue to commit the like, they may expect it to the
third and fourth Generation. Wicked Parents little consider how cruel they are
to their Children, by entailing the Curse of God upon them, and leaving them
Heirs of his Judgment and Wrath, as their Inheritance. We find Naboth's Blood
that was shed by Joram's Father, is mentioned to him his Son, and thrown in his
Dish. The Prophet Elisha scruples not to call him the Son of a Murderer, 2
Kings 6.32. And it is remarkable, that his dead Body is cast into the same Plat
of Ground, where Naboth's Blood, it is probable, had been spilt, Ver. 25, 26.
of this Chapter. That very Ground is manured by the Blood of Ahab's Wife and
Son, where Dogs licked the Blood of Naboth, who was murdered by Ahab's Order.

4. What Peace, so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezebel? etc. We may
learn how dangerous it is to be related to a wicked Family, with which God is
angry. For these words are spoken to Joram, who was not so bad as his Father
Ahab, and whose Wickedness was inferior to that of his Mother Jezebel: For it
is said of him, tho he wrought evil in the sight of the Lord, yet not like his
Father or Mother, 2 Kings 3.2. and yet you see the Issue by this Text. Let
Parents remember this, and younger Persons who are not entered into a married
Relation. It is a bold and dangerous thing to match into a wicked Family, to be
in their Company, and to be of their Kindred. For King Ahaziah, who was now
with Joram, he was slain too. Tho he were the Son of good Jehosaphat, yet he
married the Daughter of Jezebel, and thereby was brought to walk in the Ways of
Ahab; and he also was destroyed, 2 Kings 8.18. compared with 2 Chronicles. 21.6. and
12.13.

It is dangerous in respect of Sin, lest we be infected; and it is dangerous in
respect of Judgment, lest we share in their Plagues: For all the seventy Sons
of wicked Ahab were cut off, as we read in the next Chapter, 2 Kings 10. For
the Sins of Jeroboam God cut off all the Remnant of his House and Family, 1
Kings 15.30. And all the Kindred, and Children, and Friends of Baasha died for
his Iniquity, 1 Kings 16. It is so ordinary for the Branches of a wicked Family
to share in Punishment with the Heads of it, that the Spirit of God takes
notice of it, as an unusual and extraordinary thing, if it fell out otherwise,
Numb. 26.10, 11. The Earth opened and swallowed up Korah and his Company; and
it is added, as deserving to be particularly taken notice of, that
notwithstanding this, the Children of Korah died not.

5. What Peace, Joram, while thine and thy Mother's Sins make God thine Enemy?
We may learn, that the Peace, Safety, and Happiness of a People depend upon the
Favor and Protection of God. Some of the Heathens have had some Apprehension
of this, that the Presence of their Gods would do more for their Defense, than
all their Fortifications, or Soldiers: And therefore when they went to War
against any People, they used several Methods, which they thought were likely
to get the Gods of such or such a City out from amongst them; or they
endeavored, sometimes by Bribes and Presents, and sometimes by Enchantments,
to gain them over to their side.

A very little Observation from History and Experience will confirm it, that in
Matters of War and Peace, the Hand of God is chiefly to be regarded: His
Providence is most remarkable in the Management and Success of National
Revolutions. The Canaanites had their Hearts hardened, that they did not seek
after Peace, would not make Peace with Israel. This came of the Lord, to the
intent they might be utterly destroyed; Josh. 11.20. At other times he girds
with Strength for War, he musters the Horse to the Battle, he breaks the
Bows, and burns the Chariots, and cuts the Spears in sunder, and determines the
Success of National Wars. It is the Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon that must
secure the Victory. The latter without the former will prove a wooden Dagger,
and do not Execution. But if God be on our side, we need not fear when Men rise
up against us. Hence it sometimes comes to pass, that mighty Armies have been
blasted by Divine Providence, been ruined we know not how, falling as it were
by their own Strength, withered and come to nothing by a secret Curse of God:
great Politicians fooled, firm Alliances strangely broken, resolute Commanders
disappointed, sometimes fearing where no Ground of Fear was, sometimes as
resolute and foolhardy against all Reason, to their own Destruction. Our Age
is not without Instances of this.

6. We may not then wonder, if this War is not honorably and speedily ended.
It should not be thought strange, if God should not give Peace in our Days; if
he should not establish and settle us by a speedy, honorable, and gracious
Issue of the present War. For what Peace can we expect, while the barefaced
Impieties and Provocations of our Age and Nation, in Court, City, and Country,
in Fleet and Army, are so many; when there is so little Appearance of
Reformation, and all Attempts for it meet with such Opposition? It is rather a
Wonder, that we remain escaped at this day, and enjoy so many of the Blessings
of Peace, while other Countries feel worse Effects of a Lasting War. We may
rather sit down and wonder, that, after so long a time of God's Forbearance,
after so many Trials as he has given us, after so many slighted Warnings, after
such strange Methods of Divine Providence, as we have had to awaken us, that
yet, though unreformed, we are not destroyed. For all our former Judgments have
not humbled us, or united us: Our late Mercies have not made us thankful: The
most astonishing Appearances of God among us have not wrought a Cure; We are
impenitent, and divided, and stiff-necked still. We complain sometimes that
Poverty is coming on us like an armed Man: but we consider not the National
Sins, or our own in particular, whereby God is provoked. Is it then any Wonder,
that the Sword is not put up into its Scabbard, when the Case is thus with us,
as to the Generality of the Nation, and so few Exceptions are to be made?

II. There are several things also observable from this History of Joram and
Jezebel, which may hereupon afford Matter of Reproof, with respect to several
Transgressions amongst us of the like kind. Not only as the Openness, and
Boldness, and Impudence in Sin, under which the Land groans, is parallel with
the Case of Israel at this time: But there are other Instances observable from
this History; As,

1. Does not Spiritual Whoredom and Carnal abound, and the latter too much
unpunished? Though open and avowed Idolatry, we may thank God, is not tolerated
amongst us, as a few Years since: Yet Covetousness and Worldliness are also
called Idolatry, and by Luxury and Intemperance Men make their Belly their God.
And for carnal Whoredoms, the Impurities of the Flesh, and the Lusts of
Uncleanness, and that which contributes to them, Luxury and intemperate
Drinking. No Time or Place can be named since the Reformation, wherein these
Sins ever prevailed to that Degree, or rose to that shameless Height, as of
late Years in these Islands: and this under Gospel Light to confront it: Which
is an high Aggravation, it being the great Design of the Knowledge of Christ by
the Gospel, to help our Escape from these worldly Pollutions. Woe be to such a
People, whose Magistrates connive at such Offenses, and overpass the Deeds of
the Wicked! Shall I not visit for these things? Shall I not be avanged on such
a Nation, says the Lord? Jer. 5.28, 29.

I cannot but acknowledge with Thankfulness to God, and to the just Honor of
the Magistrates of this City, that there has been much done this last Year, to
suppress and punish these and other scandalous Crimes. But what Opposition and
Discouragement have they met with, (Inferior Officers especially) in their
Endeavors of Reformation? How has the Attempt been ridiculed? and their
worthy Zeal been mis-interpreted, nicknamed, and reviled? How few have done
what they might and ought, to strengthen their hands? How backward are the
Generality even of good Men, to assist the Magistrate by giving notice of the
Guilty, that they may be punished? Though they know there are such in
Commission, as would be a Terror to Evildoers, and not bear the Sword of
Justice in vain.

Few have the Heart, or Courage, or Honesty, to endeavor the Punishment and
Suppression of Debauchery and Profaneness, though the Instances be such as
pollute the Land, Jer. 23.10.
and make it mourn. They think it beneath 'em as Gentlemen, or Citizens, or
Neighbors, to be any way concerned. But ought not every one to do what he can,
to prevent and purge out Wickedness from the City and Nation, by endeavoring
the exemplary Punishment of notorious Offenders? Is it not by this means, that
the fierce Anger of the Lord, kindled against a People, is to be turned away,
Numb. 25.3, 4, 11. And from themselves too. If a Soul sin, and hear the Voice
of Swearing, and is a Witness of it, whether he has seen or known of it, if he
do not utter it, then he shall bear his Iniquity. Levit. 5.1. and 24.14. He
that hears Cursing, and bewrays it not, is Partner in the Sin; Prove. 29.24.
And they shall share in the Punishment of such Sins. It is reckoned among the
Iniquities that separate between a People and their God, and cause him to hide
his Face, that none calls for Justice, nor any pleads for Truth, Isai.
59.2, 4. Thanks be to God, there be some Gentlemen and others, though of
different Persuasions in some lesser Matters of Religion, who yet heartily
agree in a Public Spirit as to these things: To these the City and Nation are
obliged, and God I hope will reward them and increase their number. But if
private Persons, in their several Places, would have done what they could to
assist the Magistrate in this Work of Reformation, where one Malefactor of
either Sex has been punished this last Year, there might have been twenty. And
so good a Beginning this Year, might probably have been carried so far, as that
not only succeeding Magistrates would find it less difficult to carry it
further; but obtain likewise, that other Towns and Cities throughout the Nation
might imitate their Example, with the like good Success.

2. Are not many Parents amongst us too much like Jezebel in bringing up their
Children; in educating them in Rebellion against God, in Pride, and Vanity, and
fleshly Lusts, instead of endeavoring to save them from these? How little care
is there in most Families to instruct, reprove, and admonish Inferiors; or use
the Authority God has given Parents to restrain their Children from Sin? So
shameful is the Neglect of Parents in this kind, that it abates our Wonder to
find so many Complaints of wicked disobedient Children: for Parents themselves
are greatly accessory to the Wickedness and Ruin of their own Children. How
little is done by them, to save them from the Sin of Pride, to antidote them
against the Impurities of the World? How seldom do they put them upon secret
Prayer, and reading the H. Scripture and other good Books, as soon as capable?
How little care to teach them the strict Observation of the Lord's Day, by
their Counsels, or by their own Examples? And is it any Wonder, when these
Children come to set up for themselves, and have Families of their own, if they
do not pray in their Families, or sanctify the Sabbath, when they knew little
of any such thing when they lived with their Parents? Many a damned Wretch will
curse the Day of his Birth, for having an Ahab to his Father, or a Jezebel to
his Mother See more of this in Three Letters to a Friend, of Family Religion.
12o.


The Son of a Giant, the Son of a Murderer, the Son of a wicked Woman, and the
like Expressions in Scripture, are not only Reproaches, but Reasons why such
Children are no better: for as a good Son makes a joyful Father, so a wicked
Parent seldom makes a good Child. An Abraham may have an Ishmael; and an Esau
may spring from an Isaac; but usually Religious Families are Nurseries of
Religion. On the contrary, there is an Entail of Vice and Wickedness in
Irreligious Families. In many Cases the Entail may reach even to Doomsday. And
then how great is that Wrath which is treasured up from Father to Son, and
multiplied on still unto the Day of Wrath? If it be hard to answer for a
thousand Sins, how much more for many thousand Souls, that have successively
miscarried from Age to Age, by the Negligence or ill Example of wicked Parents?

3. Another Sin observable in Joram, was the not consulting God when he was
about to engage in a Matter of great Consequence. For when he, and Jehoshaphat,
and the King of Edom, went to War against Meah, 2 Kings 3.10. being in a great
Strait for want of Water, Joram impatiently complains of God, as having brought
out three Kings, to destroy them together in the Wilderness. But says
Jehoshaphat, who then began to bethink himself, Is there not a Prophet of the
Lord, that he may enquire of the Lord for us? Very good; but this they should
have done before: They were now gone seven Days Journey in the Wilderness; that
present Strait brought this Neglect to the Mind of good Jehoshaphat. But we do
not find Joram troubled himself with such Thoughts.

Are not many of you guilty of the like Sin? Do you not undertake great Matters
of Moment and Consequence, without asking Counsel of God; as new Relations, new
Conditions, new Employments, considerable Voyages or Journies, removal of
Habitations to distant Places, etc. without begging God so to direct by his
Providence, so to govern and dispose of Inclinations and Hearts, your own and
others; that by the Use of your own Reason, and the Advice of Friends, you may
make a true Judgment, what is the most rational and Christian Course? Instead
of this, you mock God, by praying for his Blessing upon that which you have
contrived without him: you leave him only to be the Executioner of your Wills.

4. Impenitent distrustful Impatience in a great Exigence and Strait, is
another thing observable in this History of Joram, 2 Kings 6.27. compared with
33. When Samaria was besieged by Benhadad King of Syria, and the Inhabitants
distressed by Famine, (insomuch that an Asses Head was sold for 80 pieces of
Silver, and a Cab of Pigeons Dung for five;) King Joram walks upon the Walls,
and a Woman cries to him for Help, saying, Help, my Lord, O King. But he rends
his Clothes, and falls to cursing and raving, If the Lord do not help thee,
says he, how or whence should I help thee? How shall I help thee? let the Lord
help thee; Go and pray to the Lord, as Elisha directs, let him help thee; see
how ready he is to do so, by suffering Matters to come to this Extremity. And
thereupon vows to have the Head of the Prophet, and curses himself, if he did
not effect it that day.

Now consider a little what was the Case of this poor Woman, she demands a sad
piece of Justice of him: For the Famine being very sore, two Mothers had agreed
and engaged against the Laws of God and Nature, to eat their Sons; to devour
their little ones, to reassume into their Bodies the Fruit whereof they had
lately been delivered. One of them yielded to have her Son boiled, and eaten;
but the other Parent, after she had her part of such a Banquet on her
Neighbor's Child, refuses to part with her own, and will not stand to the
Bargain. Upon the Repentance of one of them of this Engagement, the other
appeals to Joram, in the Anguish and Bitterness of her Soul, crying out, Help,
O King. O the Terror of Famine, sharpened with the Anger of God, as the bitter
Fruit of Sin! that will make the tenderest Mother of you all, not only to lay
violent Hands on the Fruit of your Womb, but Teeth too; and make you eat the
Flesh of your little ones, even of an only Son or Daughter. As delicate Women
in Jerusalem, as any in London, for ought I know, were reduced to this, and
glad to do it. As we read, Lament. 2.20. Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom
thou have done this: Shall the Women eat their Fruit, the Children of a Span
long? And Chap. 4.10. The Hands of the pitiful Women have sodden their own
Children, they were their Meat in the Destruction of the Daughter of my People.
This God has threatened before, Deuteronomy. 28.57.

But in this Distress King Joram frets against the Lord, and the Prophet
Elisha; instead of mourning for Sin, he murmurs against God, saying, Why should
I wait upon God any longer? this Evil is of the Lord. Is it so? For that very
Reason ought you to wait. Let me hereby call you to reflect upon what Instances
of Impatience you have at any time discovered under the smarting Rod of God,
either private or public; and humble your selves this day for such Guilt.

5. As he was impatient under the Afflicting Hand of God; so, when by a
wonderful Deliverance it was removed, we do not find he was the better for the
Deliverance. Some kind of Sorrow, it is true, he professed during his Distress,
2 Kings 6.30. He rent his Clothes, and had Sackcloth within upon his Flesh: He
made some signs of Humiliation, as we do by appearing here this day; but after
his Deliverance he was as wicked as before.

Has it not been thus with us, my Brethren, formerly, when the Hand of God has
been against us, when we have been afflicted, chastened, crossed and
disappointed, especially when you have been laid on a Bed of Sickness, and
brought to the Gates of Death? But God has delivered you, and raised you up
again; wherein are you the better? Are you not as vain and proud as before? Are
you not as worldly and earthly-minded as before? as careless, negligent, and
remiss, and lukewarm as ever? Is it not so with particular Persons? And is it
not so as to the Nation in general, after all the late Wonders of Divine
Providence in delivering and saving us?

6. Another Sin in the History of Joram, was the mingling Worldly Policy with
Religion; pretending the Service of God, when there was something else designed
at the bottom: 2 Kings 3.2, 3. compared with 13th, we read that that he put
away the Image and Statue of Baal, it may be in Compliance with one of his
Allies, viz. to gratify King Jehosaphat, whose Assistance he needed against the
Moabites. But he still clave to the Calves of Dan and Bethel. Whereupon the
Prophet speaks sharply to him in the 13th Verse of that Chapter, What have I to
do with thee, thou King of Israel? Get thee to the Prophets of thy Father and
Mother: that is, do not come to me, thy Heart cleaves to Idolatry, tho for a
Trick of State thou have destroyed one of the Images of Baal.

Christians, if what we do in Religion, in public or private, be on any carnal
Motive, tho the Matter be good; if respect to Friends and Neighbors, or our
Credit, or secular Interest, etc. be the principal Inducement; if it be not
from the Hatred of Sin, and the Love of God, a Sense of his Authority, and in
Obedience to him, God will not accept it, but your Sin shall find you out.

7. Hypocritical Partiality in the Service of God, is another Sin to be
observed in this History; both Persons in this Text (both Joram and Jehu) are
Instances of it.

Joram destroyed one of the Images of Baal, Jehu was zealous to destroy the
House of Ahab, and the wicked Priests of Baal: But both followed the Sin of
Jeroboam as to the Worship of the Calves, 2 Kings 10.28, 29. where, after a
large Account of this new King Joram, and of his Zeal in destroying the Image
of Baal, and the House of Baal, and the Priests of Baal, it is added at the
29th Verse, Howbeit he departed not from the Sins of Jeroboam, who made Israel
to sin in the Calves of Dan and Bethel. He was loath to irritate and disoblige
his Nobles, and a great part of his new Subjects, who had been long inured to
the Worship of the Calves. He durst not trust God to keep the Kingdom safe to
him, tho he had had such Experience of his powerful Providence in bringing him
to it: He obeyed and followed God, so far as his apprehended Interest would
permit him, and no further.

O take heed of Partiality in Religion, of dealing deceitfully with God. You
may go a great way, and do many things; and yet if your Hearts are not right
with God, if you are not sound in his Statutes, and have respect to all his
Commandments, he will not accept you.

8. Instability, and Unsetledness in that which is good, is another Instance.
This was the Case of Joram. At one time he calls Elisha Father, at another time
he vows to have his Head, and to be the Death of him, whatever it cost, 2 Kings
6.21. compared with the 31st Verse. Has it not been so with some of you? Is it
not still thus with many? Now for God, and then for Baal; warm and cold, off
and on, up and down; now convinced, and seemingly resolved for serious
Religion; the next Week the World is on the Throne again, or some particular
Sin prevails, notwithstanding your Convictions. You ought this day to humble
your selves for these things.

III. The Exhortation which remains, shall be to three Duties. First, Mourn for
the want of Peace, and bewail the Desolations of War which are the Fruits of
Sin, and most of all that Sin, which is the Cause of War. Secondly, Pray
earnestly for the Peace of our Jerusalem, and the taking away Sin that hinders
all kind of Peace. Thirdly, Let your own Personal and Family Repentance and
Reformation, show that you are sincere in the two former.

1. Mourn and bewail the want of Peace, and the Desolations of War. There are
some of you who have felt the Smart of this War, so as to have reason to mourn
on your own Account; tho little comparatively to others abroad: But we may feel
more yet, and we have all reason to mourn for that which is so general a
Calamity; and to pity our Brethren whose Country is the Seat of War. We ought
to compassionate the thousands of Families that have been undone, and thousands
of Souls that have been sent to Hell, by dying in an impenitent State; who have
fallen in the high Places of the Field, or been killed at Sea, or died in
Garrisons, or in the Fleet. Let us look abroad into Neighboring Countries, and
we shall find a Roll like that of Ezekiel, written within and without, in
Capital Letters, Lamentation, Mourning and Woe. What Robberies, Spoils,
Sackings, Burnings, and Devastations! What Oaths, Blasphemies, Rapes, Cruelty!
Desperate Threatenings to stab or pistol those who will not confess their Riches
and Treasure, or the little they have hid, to make them accessory to their own
Spoils; and afterward forced to wander from their Habitations into Woods,
Mountains, Caves, or other places of Shelter, or are carried Captive by the
Enemy, and hardly fed with Bread and Water. And after such Miseries, how many
of our Brethren have been brought by cruel Usage, to bow down in the House of a
strange God, to make Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, and outwardly to
yield to Superstition and Idolatry against their Light and Conscience; or been
sent to Dungeons, and Galleys, or to more merciful Flames or Gibbets, if they
had the Courage to continue faithful. Let us mourn for these things, which I
shall represent more largely under another Head. Especially let us mourn for
our own, and our Brethrens Sins, that are the provoking Cause of these
Calamities; without which we should not feel such terrible Effects of God's
righteous Anger.

Let us mourn also for the Dishonor of the Christian Name by Bloody Wars, when
Christians should be Examples of Peace and Union to the whole World. But the
peaceful Name of Christ is blasphemed among Heathens and Infidels by the Wars
of Christendom: It Is become a Proverb among the Turks, What! fight and kill one
another as the Christians do.

2. Pray earnestly for the Peace of Jerusalem. Earnestly, as those that
apprehend the Divine Displeasure, fearing lest Wrath be gone out from the Lord
against us: Let us wrestle with him, and strive together in our Prayers, that
if it be possible, the Cup may pass from us, and we may turn back an Host of
Judgments that seem to be upon their march. Let us pray for Peace with God, for
the removal of Sin by Repentance, and pardoning Mercy; and then for Brotherly
Peace, and Unity, and Love; and for Civil Peace. But the taking away of Sin is
the great thing we should beg, as that which is an Enemy to all kind of Peace:
Without which, if God should make an end of this War, and give us Peace, and
Plenty, and Trade, and all that we could wish of that kind, if his Anger be not
turned away from us, but he only say, Why should you be smitten any more? I
will let you alone: such a Peace, without our Repentance and God's Pardon,
would be the most dreadful Judgment. A displeased God may sometimes deliver an
unpardoned People; but it proves not a Blessing but a Curse to them: For Peace
with God is the Foundation of all other Blessings, National or Personal. Let us
therefore pray especially for the Pardon of Sin, and Peace with God, and then
for Peace in the World, and in the Churches of Christ.

And when you pray for Peace, remember to pray for Truth with it. There can be
no firm, or durable Peace, that is not cemented with Truth. How amiable is it
to have Peace with Truth! to serve God with Purity and Safety, with Sincerity
and Security; to enjoy the Blessings of God's Right Hand and Left together.
Without Truth there may be Presumption instead of Peace with God; there may be
a Combination without Peace, the Color and Name of an Agreement without Union.
Beg that Christ may be advanced, by whom God has made Peace, and reconciled
all things in Heaven and Earth: Where his Truth, Interest, and Authority are
left out, or overlooked, there can be no valuable or lasting Peace.

It is God alone, can ordain and establish Peace for us; can sheath the Sword
that is drawn, and make Peace in Europe. Any rash or furious Hand can make a
Wound, or kindle a Fire; but God only can heal our Breaches, and extinguish the
Flames of a Church or State, and bless the World with a happy Peace.

3. Show that you are sincere in mourning and in praying, by your Personal and
Family Reformation. Without resolving and endeavoring this, our solemn Mockery
of God in these Solemnities will cost this Nation and City dear. If we confess
Sins that we yet love, and resolve not to forsake; if we pretend Desires in
Prayer that we have not; if we complain of Burdens that we do not feel; if we
spare and cherish any known Lust; if we continue in the neglect of any known
Duty, especially what we have been this day minded of; God will be so far from
accepting our Fasts and Humiliations, that he will abhor us the more. Is this
the Fast I have chosen? may God say: If there be no Reformation, no Divorce
between you and your Lusts promoted by it, I am no more pleased, than I should
be with your eating and drinking: You might as well have let it alone, and
bestowed your time otherwise. Your very Confession of Sins will witness against
you, if you do not forsake them. To what purpose is your Mourning and
Lamentation, and hanging down the Head for part of a day? Is it unto me? says
the Lord. It is not at all unto me except you repent, and turn from your evil
Ways. Your Sighs and sad Looks, your Confessions and Deprecations, all your
Complaints, and all your Expressions of Sorrow, Mourning, and Humiliation
without this, avail nothing; unless your Souls be humbled and broken, unless
you abhor your Sins, and loath them, and resolve against them, and henceforward
be watchful and diligent in earnest, to overcome and mortify your Lusts, and
turn to God, and live to him. O that some may be able to say, that from this
Fast Day I began to turn to the Lord with all my Heart, and put away the Evil
of my doings from before his Eyes. Believe it therefore and consider it, that
unless you put away the Evil of your Doings, the Evil that is in your
Tabernacles, in your Houses, in your Trades, in your Families, etc. you cannot
expect Peace. We may go on lamenting one Calamity after another, bewailing this
and the other Grievance, and be never the better while we neglect the Cause;
while those Lusts and Vices are still reigning, spreading and increasing, which
provoke God to plague and punish an unreformed People. If we would be rid of
Judgments, or prevent them, we must begin where the Judgment begins. Our Lord
knew this, when he says to the Paralytick who came for Cure of his Disease,
Thy Sins are forgiven thee.

Let me urge and enforce this, 1. By calling you to consider the Miseries of
War, and the Blessings of Peace. Most of us know little what it is to live in a
Country that for many Years is the Seat of War; to have a Bloody Enemy at your
Gates, or rude Soldiers domineering in your Houses, or to have them pillaged
every Week, or laid in Ashes at once; to have your Children wallowing in Blood
before your Eyes, Virgins perishing under the Lusts of profligate Villains,
Widows mourning for the dead, and hardly daring to show they mourn: To have no
Children left to the Father, or Husband to the Wife, or Money to the Rich, or
Clothing to the Delicate; and they that were brought up in Scarlet to embrace
Dunghils, weltering in their own Tears, or Blood. You would hardly have
Patience to hear the recital of what others have suffered. Look abroad, and
consider the Countries round about us; behold and see what sad Characters of
Misery and Ruin are engraven, or rather plowed on the Persons, Houses, Fields,
Vineyards, Cities, Churches, etc. of our Neighbors.

Yesterday, or a day or two ago, says one, I and my Family were in Peace and
Safety, and had Food and Raiment, Liberty and Plenty; I have now no House to
harbor me, no Food to nourish me, or Money to buy it, and hardly Clothes left
to cover my Shame and Nakedness. A few days ago I slept quietly in my own House
and Bed, but now I have no Place or Pillow, but Jacob's Pillow of Stone whereon
to lay my Head. My Father is killed, or taken Prisoner, says another, my dear
and tender Father, who nourished and sustained me; and now he is not, or is a
miserable Captive, and has hardly Bread to sustain himself. Or Parents bewail
the loss of a beloved Son: My Son, that was the Staff of my Age, the Joy of my
Heart, and Stay of my Family, the Comfort of my Life, he is imprisoned by a
cruel Oppressor, or he is mortally wounded, or he is dead. The Widow bemoans
the loss of a tender Husband, (made nearer by God than Father or Mother)
snatched away by an untimely Death, whom she shall see no more. So the Brother,
the Kinsman, the Neighbor, the Friend, each lamenting the Desolation the Sword
has made.

Let us mix Thankfulness to God for our selves, with our Pity and Compassion,
and Mourning, for the Calamities of others, who have hitherto suffered more
than we. We do not hear the Voice of the Spoiler in our Borders: We hear not
the murdering Pieces about our Ears. We see not our Houses, and Churches, and
Places of public Worship flaming over our Heads. We do not behold our pleasant
and beautiful Dwellings in Ashes, where we traded, feasted, and slept in Peace;
nor are turned out to the Streets or Fields for Shelter, not knowing where to
look for Security for our selves or nearest Relations; seeing some of them
slain before our Eyes, or not knowing where they are, whether alive or dead;
hearing the confused Outcries and Skrieks of our distressed Neighbors,
mingled with the Noise of French or Irish Soldiers killing, or encouraging to
kill. You have not seen tender Babes snatched from the Breasts of their Mothers,
bleeding on the Stones, or sprawling and struggling for Life on the Soldiers
Pikes, (and the distressed Mother ravished it may be, e're she have leave to
die.) You have not seen the ghastly Visage of Death, deformed with Wounds, and
Men and Horses wallowing in their mangled Blood; and the amazed helpless
People, running to and fro to escape, but know not how or whither. Others have
seen and known such tragical Effects of War; let us mourn for them, and let us
be thankful, that as yet we do not. Let us improve the Day of our Visitation,
our Civil and Religious Liberty, lest the things of our Peace should be hid
from our Eyes.

2. Consider, that it is God alone that can give Peace: Our Business is with
God in order to an happy Issue of this War. It is he must prevent, or conclude
and shorten the Miseries of War. He that is the Lord of Hosts, who makes Wars
to cease to the Ends of the Earth, He must make our Officers Peace: He that
works all our Works for us, must ordain Peace for us, Isa. 26.12.
that Violence shall no more be heard. It is He that strengthens the Bars of
our Gates, and makes Peace in our Borders, Psalm. 147.14, etc.
and feeds us with the finest of the Wheat. It is He who keeps our City, and
guards our Island, and can prosper our Fleet and Armies. He turns Swords into
Plow-shares, and Spears into Pruning Hooks, and sheaths the Sword when it has
done his Work. It is by the Restraint of his Providence, that the Inhabitants
of the Earth learn War no more.

He sits upon the Floods, and stills the Waves, and sets Bounds to the Raging
of the Sea, to the Lusts of Princes, and to the Tumults of the People. He can
take the Obstacles of Peace out of the way, when we expect it not. He hurles
Princes from their Thrones, and sets up others in their room. He breaks their
Scepters in pieces, as easily as you can a Venice-Glass. He overrules their
Designs; he can change their Counsels, break their Measures, blast their Power,
shame their Confidence, lessen their Numbers, and frustrate their Hopes. When
God was displeased with Israel for the accursed Thing in the time of Joshua,
three thousand Israelites shall flee, and be smitten before the Men of Ai,
though but thirty six in number. But if God be our Friend, though ten thousand
of the People set themselves against us, we need not fear. He is a sufficient
Defense; we need not fear all the Nations of the Earth, if we are at Peace with
God, and at Peace among our selves, which would follow upon it. He is the
Shield of our Help; and can be a Wall of Fire round about us. Tho the Enemy
come in like a Flood, he can lift up a Standard against him; and when he comes
one way, make him fly ten. He can show Strength with his Arm, and scatter the
Proud in the Imagination of their Hearts, and turn their Devices backward. What
deep Designs does he defeat? What mighty Projects does he disappoint, by taking
away Wisdom from the Wise, and Courage from the Valiant; cutting off the
Spirits of Princes by a surprising Stroke, altering their Minds and Purposes,
or ending their Lives? etc. Peace and War are in his Hand. All the Hosts of
Heaven are at his Command and Service; to fight his Battles, and accomplish his
Designs. The Stars in their Courses shall fight, and the Elements of Heaven
shall be mustered in his Quarrel. From the Air he can pour down Hailstones, as
on the Ammonites: or send an Angel to discomfit a mighty Army, as he did
Senacherib's: or by Fire consume an Enemy's Troops, as those which came against
Elijah. The Water shall bury the Egyptians; and rather than fail, the Dust of
the Earth shall start up into Armies of Flies and Lice and Frogs against
Pharaoh.

And he is the God of Peace, as well as the Lord of Hosts: As 'twas of the
Lord, that the Canaanites did not make Peace with Israel; and that Zedekiah
rebelled, and that Ahab went to War at Ramoth Gilead, etc. So it is he that
makes Peace; I make Peace, I create Evil, Isa. 45.7.
I the Lord do all these things He is said to make the Instruments of War, to
create the Smith that forms them, and to create the Waster to destroy. Isa.
54.16.
Therefore he can stop them, hinder them, destroy them when he pleases. To all
the Ends of the Earth, he is said to make Wars to cease; that is, Psalm. 46.8.
in all Places, in all Countries, in all Societies, in Families, in Churches,
in Cities, in Nations, in particular Souls. Every where it is his Work to make
Peace; and every kind of Peace is from the God of Peace.

3. If God be angry, and bring desolating War on a People, Human Help is all in
vain, and his Anger will make all the Calamities of War to be double. If Israel
become the People of God's Wrath, he lets loose the Rage of Man; and then every
base, proud, idolatrous Assyrian shall tread them down as Mire in the Streets.
Even Sampson shall fall by the uncircumcised Philistines, when God departs,
whereas before he was wont to slaughter them by Heaps. If God be angry, and
send this Judgment of Sword or Famine against a People, who can describe the
Dread and Horror of such a Calamity? Every Battle of the Warrior, says the
Prophet, is with confused Noise, and Garments rolled in Blood; Isa. 9.5.
but this shall be with Burning and with Fuel of Fire. The Wrath of God shall
put an unusual Terror on the very Countenances of an Enemy, and give an unusual
Edg to their Sword. The Anger of God will sharpen the Sting and Terror of
natural Death, it will invenom the Teeth of Famine, and make all the Calamities
of War unsufferably more grievous than can be expressed.

There is nothing so base, but the greatest Spirits shall stoop to; nothing so
unnatural, but the tenderest of you all may be brought to comply with. You
think you should part with your own Lives a thousand times over, rather than
eat the Flesh of your Children: I doubt not but the delicate Women in Jerusalem
thought so too; and yet in Famine, they boiled their Children, and were glad to
eat them. Pity shall perish from Parents, Courage from the Men of Might, Wisdom
from the Ancients, Flight from the Swift, and the Strong not be able to find
their Hands: For it is the Day of the Lord's Wrath, and who can abide it? You
may seek for Death at such a time, and not find it; and within an Hour, Death
may offer it self, and then you will flee from it; and within a few Moments
repent, and wish you had died. Such will be the Distress and Anguish of your
Souls, between vain Hope and tormenting Fear, that your very Lives will be a
burden. Think what the case would be, where the Sword without, and Torror
within shall destroy young and old, the Suckling, and the Man with gray Hairs.
When there is no Peace to him that goes out, or to him that comes in, but great
Vexation on all the Inhabitants; Nation destroyed of Nation, and City of City:
for God did vex them with all Adversity. Think of these things, and repent of
Sin, for that is the Cause of it.

4. We do not know what we may further experience and feel of the terrible
Effects and Miseries of War. The most are confident that all will quickly be
well, and the present Cloud vanish: There will speedily be an honorable Peace;
the French are impoverished and almost starved: Their Numbers are lessened, and
ours increased against this Campaign. They must e're long make Peace, or we
shall force them to it: Or if they should not, many flatter themselves, they
have this or the other Project to provide for themselves; they doubt not, for
their parts, but to escape well, let things be as they will. But may not all
such Confidence prove a Refuge of Lies? Consider what God says by the Prophet,
Jer. 37.9, 10.
Thus says the Lord to the King of Judah, Deceive not your selves, saying, The
Chaldeans shall depart: tho you had smitten the whole Army of the Chaldeans
that fight against you, and there remained but wounded Men among them, yet
should they rise up every Man from his Tent, and burn this City with Fire.

What is there for public Safety, or private Defense, that can be Proof
against the Anger of God? For certain, it is not the great Numbers or Riches of
a People, no advantageous Situation or Strength of Places, nor the best
prepared Armies and Navies, or any Confederacies abroad, or Fortifications at
home, can secure us. The best, the greatest, the most hopeful of all such
things have been frequently baffled, and shamed, and confounded by the Divine
Anger. Riches be sure profit not in the day of Evil; they rather expose to Envy
and Danger, than secure against it: They who have most to lose are likely to
suffer most, and commonly are least able to bear it. God has hitherto saved us
with a nevertheless, notwithstanding our Provocations; it may be He will be
entreated to do so still: But who can tell, but that except we Repent, we shall
drink the Dregs of the Cup? The Sins of Societies and Communities of Men, as
such, must be punished in this World, if at all; and therefore tho a single
wicked Man may escape the Judgment of God in this Life, it cannot be expected
for a sinful Nation without Repentance: And the Danger is proportionably great,
according to the heinous Nature and Aggravations of National Sins.

5. Unless by Repentance we make Peace with God, what a poor inconsiderable
thing is the Civil Peace of the Nation, as to us in particular? How little a
thing is it to have Peace round about, if we have not Peace above, and Peace
within? While thou art unreconciled to God, thou have greater Matters to be
concerned for, than what refer to the National Welfare. How little does it
signify to Thee, what Changes are made in the Thrones of Princes, or what are
the Successes of War; who is exalted and who brought down, while thy Sin is
unpardoned, while God is thine Enemy, while the Curses of his Law are in force
against thee, while his Wrath hangs over thy Head, and thou may drop into
Hell the next Night, or the next Hour? Thou must shortly die, Man, and be
damned, and perish for ever, if thou art not at Peace with God.

But I expect many will say, I hope I am at Peace with God, for I have inward
Peace; my Conscience is quiet, I hope all is well. Let me therefore ask you,

1. Are you willing to have the Grounds of your Peace tried and examined? or,
are you loath to bring it to the Touchstone? You may justly suspect that Peace
which is afraid of being examined, as to the Ground and Foundation of it. Since
therefore thou say thou have Peace, enquire seriously, Is it on a
Scripture-Bottom? Is it warranted by the Rule? Is it according to the
Infallible Word of God? Have thou Peace, by the Testimony of Conscience to
thine unfeigned Repentance, and Faith in Christ, and Obedience to him? Does the
Gospel speak Peace to thee, according to the Tenor and Terms of the new
Covenant?

2. Thou say thou have Peace, How came thou by it? Is it the Effect of deep
Repentance and Sorrow for Sin? Is it the Fruit of a Divine Faith, accepting
Christ in all his Offices? Is it the Answer of servent Prayer, after earnest
Supplications to Heaven? Is it the Result of serious Examination of thy Heart
and Life? If thou did not get it in the use of such Means, there is reason to
question the Truth of it. True wellgrounded Peace is the Fruit of holy
Diligence in the Exercise of Grace, and is neither got nor kept by Sloth and
Idleness. That Peace which grows upon us we know not how, and is kept by
Negligence, without Prayer and without Pains, is a dangerous Presumption.

3. Thou say thou have Peace; let me ask thee, how long have thou had it? It
may be thou have always had this Peace, but it is very suspicious, if it were
never preceded by any Trouble. Thou art pleased that thy Conscience is quiet,
but it was never otherwise; thou never had any true sight of Sin to trouble
thee. Thy Heart is whole, thou think, but it was never broken: Thou
believe thy Sins are pardoned; but if thou did always believe so, it is to
be feared thou were never Penitent. Consider how long thou have had this Peace,
and whether Godly (...) did ever precede.

4. What are the Effects of thy Peace of Conscience? Does it make (...) more
careful to avoid Sin? Does it quicken and enliven thee in the Way of the Lord?
A false Peace makes us more sluggish, and secure, and barren. Does thy Peace
engage thee to walk humbly with God, in a thankful Admiration of his Grace, and
a more entire Devotedness to him? Otherwise it is not of the right kind, and
will not last. Is thy Peace the same, tho thou have lately fallen into Sin, and
yielded to Temptation? Are the solemn Duties of Religion, Prayer, Word, and
Sacraments, as easy and delightful to thee, notwithstanding such Sins, as at
other times? A good Man has not the same Peace and Quiet, when Corruption
prevails, and he is overcome by Temptation, as at other times; till upon
renewed Repentance, and Faith in Christ, he can hope his Sin is forgiven, and
God reconciled. And the more hope he has of this, to pacify and quiet
Conscience, the more diligent, humble, watchful, careful he will be to please
God, and keep himself unspotted from the World.

To shut up all; Be persuaded to turn from Sin, which is the great Obstacle of
Peace. There is yet Hope, if you will do so. The Answer in this Text to the
Question, Is it Peace? does not destroy all Hope of it; What Peace, so long as
the Whoredoms? etc. does imply that there may be Peace, and there shall be, if
these be removed. Therefore tho our Dangers be great, and our Fears justly
great too, yet our Case is not desperate. Tho our Breaches be wide as the Sea,
and our Wounds are deep, and our Case doubtful, yet is there Hope in Israel
concerning us. The Course taken this Day, if seriously engaged in, and
generally so, may yet obtain National Mercy, a good Issue of this War, and the
Prevention of farther Judgments, the healing of our Breaches, and the
establishing of us on sure and lasting Foundations.

However, if we resolve and endeavor, every one for our own parts, as to our
selves and Families, to comply with our Duty, and obey this Call and Counsel of
God; I may then conclude with a Blessing, the comprehensive Blessing of Peace;
I may beg it of God in hope, saying, Peace be in your Families, Peace in your
Neighborhood, Peace in this City and Nation, and for the Nations round about
us, and among all the Reformed Churches, with an abundant Blessing of the
Gospel of Peace. And the Peace of God, which passes all Understanding,
establish and keep your Minds and Hearts in the Knowledge and Love of God, and
of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom be Glory throughout all the Churches
for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

