GOD's Thoughts and Ways Above Ours, especially in the Forgiveness of Sins IN
SEVERAL SERMONS UPON ISAIAH LV. 7, 8, 9.

By John Shower.

LONDON: Printed, by the Widow Astwood, John Lawrence, at the Angel in Poultry.
MDCXCIX.

THE PREFACE.
I Am Encouraged to think that the following Sermons did Good in the Preaching;
and with the Hope they may be of some further Use, they are now Published. It
has been desired that I would Transcribe them in the Words wherein they were
delivered, which with very little Variation, I have consented to, as to the
First Four. It may be, the peculiar Turn of Expression, though popular and less
exact in the Pulpit, which renders the plain Truths of Christianity Acceptable
to most Hearers, may be more Useful and more Affecting to several Readers, than
what is more Concise, and in more studied Words.

I can never reckon it a Fault, in a Sermon to a Numerous Auditory, that the
Style is different from what is expected, in a close and just Discourse: Or
that what might be said in two Words or Sentences, is expressed in three or four.
Perhaps the greatest Part of the Hearers, need such Enlargement and Repetition,
and their Capacity could not otherwise be reached, so as to Profit them, any
more then that Game may be taken by a Net Unspread.

Very Wise Men have Thought, that it is a Mistake in a Conscientious Preacher,
to endeavor to please only a few of the more Knowing and Judicious Hearers.
But that which is suited to do Good to the Generality of those we Preach to,
will ordinarily be best Thought of by Wise Men, whose Capacity and Judgment
could reach what was more Accurate: For they must needs know, that it would not
be Proper here. They themselves have Sins to be forgiven, and Corruptions to be
mortified, and Immortal Souls to be saved, and so have their Inferiors: And
there is but one Way, for the Learned and Unlearned, to get to Heaven, that I
know of.

It Is True, the Things treated of will be despised by Many, who do not Relish
what is contained in such Discourses. The Matter is out of their Way. They are
not Sensible of Sin, nor Solicitous about Forgiveness: And so think not
themselves concerned. And it is to be feared there are Many Others, who hear
and read Sermons, only to Judge of them, without any Desire of Advantage to
their Souls. They are not bettered for the Sermons they Commend, any more than
by those they Condemn. They may say perhaps it was an Excellent Discouse, He Is
a Good Orator, or a Judicious Preacher, and This Sermon exceeded, even his
Last: But their Consciences are not touched, they feel nothing that does them
any real Good.

However, there are Many I hope, in this City and Nation, who will be thankful
for any such Assistance, to prevent their Despair, when convinced of Sin; as
the Doctrine of God's Free Grace in Forgiveness, that is displayed in the First
Four Sermons. And Others, who meet with Objections, in Conversation, and in
Pamphlets, against the Christian Doctrine, of the Sacred Trinity, the
Incarnation of Christ, and God's Wise Government of the World, from the
Unaccountable Passages of Providence, (which are apt to stumble them,) may be
willing to consider, and improve this Argument of God's Thoughts not being as
Ours, but far above our Reach, which is the Subject of the Fifth Sermon.

Let me only add, that many Younger Ministers, as well as Elder, have Dyed of
Late: And though Few of us will be missed, when we Dye, (there being such Numbers
to Supply our Places,) yet Every One should endeavor, to be as Useful, as he
can while he lives, for the Night is hastening, wherein no Work can be done. If
Any Reader get Good, let him give God the Glory; I most earnestly beg His
Blessing, to that End.

J. S.

THE First Sermon.
ISAIAH, LV. 7, 8, 9. Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous Man
his Thoughts, and let him Return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon
him; and to our God, for he will abundantly Pardon.

For My Thoughts are not your Thoughts, neither are your Ways My Ways, says
the Lord.

For as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are My Ways higher than your
Ways, and My Thoughts than your Thoughts.


THere are Three Things Considerable in this Passage:

First, A Call to Repentance, by a Double Precept, or Injunction of Duty. The
Persons concerned in it are set forth under two Names, to take in all sorts of
Sinners; The Wicked, and the Unrighteous: And the Duty is doubly expressed; to
forsake their evil Ways, and Thoughts, and to Return to the Lord: Which are
the Two Parts of true Repentance, Turning from Sin, and Returning to God.

Secondly, Here Is an Encouraging Promise, that God will have Mercy on such
Penitents, and will abundantly Pardon 'em: That He will Interest them in the
sure Mercies of David, Ver. 3. or in all the Blessings of the Everlasting
Covenant by Christ: It Is of him you must understand, Ver. 4, 5, 6. of whom
David was only a Type: Behold I have given him for a Witness to the People, a
Leader and Commander to the People, etc.

Thirdly, The Ground and Reason, why we may believe this Promise shall be made
good: For my Thoughts are not as your Thoughts, says the Lord God, but as high
as the Heavens are above the Earth, etc. i. e. There is a vast Disparity
between my Thoughts and yours; and mine are Transcendently above yours, as far
as Heaven is above the Earth: And so are My Ways above your Ways. This is true
as to God's Thoughts and Purposes of Grace in Pardoning Sinners; and as to the
Effects of those kind Purposes in his Ways and Works. And the Highest Assurance
of the Truth of all this is added from a Divine Testimony annexed, Thus says
the Lord. He who best knows his own Gracious Designs, has told us this; and by
our believing it, we set to our Seals that God is true. Several things might be
Observed, as proper to be Discoursed of, from these Words:

First, That if ever Sinners find Mercy with God, they must forsake their
former Evil Ways and Course of Life.

Secondly, That it is not enough for such to to reform their outward Practice,
and forsake their Evil Ways, but they must be changed and sanctified in Heart,
their Evil Thoughts must be forsaken.

Thirdly, That it is not sufficient to turn from Sin and Wickedness in Heart and
Life, without returning unto God.

Fourthly, That the worst of Sinners, be they wicked, as to Sins against God,
or unrighteous, as to Iniquity against Men; yet if they turn from their Evil
Ways, and return to the Lord, they shall find Mercy. Though you have sinned (as
you think) so as never any did before, and condemn your selves as the chiefest
of Sinners; and have refused the pardoning Mercy of God formerly offered, etc.
All this may be forgiven. And it is implied, that it shall be, upon every New
Invitation and Call to Repentance, that Where Sin has abounded, Grave shall
much more abound.

Fifthly, He will have Mercy, and will abundantly pardon; let him consider the
Certainty of this, and thereupon Return. We may here Observe, That the great
Motive and Encouragement which puts Sinners on forsaking their Evil Ways, and
turning to God, is a sensible Apprehension, that there is Mercy and Forgiveness
to be had. There could be no Repentance without it, nor would it be required of
us as a Duty, to repent and return, if there were no Forgiveness with God.

Sixthly, Besides the General Encouragement of finding Mercy with God, here is
the special kind of Mercy, which the Sinner needs, and that is Pardon. I may
here Observe, That pardoning Mercy to returning Sinners, is Mercy indeed; of
all others, the most suitable, and most welcome.

Seventhly, That God will not only show Mercy to Returning Sinners, but he will
abundantly pardon 'em, he will multiply Pardons.

I. First, That if ever Sinners find Mercy with God, they must forsake their
Evil Ways. The ordinary Course of any Man's Life is very fitly called his Way,
that which is his ordinary Practice, his daily Walk. Accordingly we read of the
Way of a Sinner, and the Path of the Wicked, and the Way of Evil Men: This is
often called our own Way, in Opposition to the Way of Truth and Righteousness,
which is called the Way of the Lord, or God's Way: Because he directs and
approves it, and enables us to walk in it, and rewards us for so doing.

And this is the great difference between the Righteous and the Wicked: Their
Course and Way is different. A good Man may make a false Step, he may stumble
or step out of the way, in a particular Instance, but he does not work
Iniquity, does not walk in the way of the Ungodly, his Course and Conversation,
for the main of it, is otherwise. And it is not for one or two particular
Actions, good or bad, that a Man's to be denominated a good or wicked Man; but
from his ordinary Course of Life: If that be wicked, he must forsake it, or
never find Mercy with God. And this must be done heartily and unfeignedly,
speedily and without delay, impartially and universally, with full purpose of
Heart to persevere, and never again return to Folly. Without this, there can be
no Converse with God, nor Communion with him: Wash ye, make ye clean, put away
the Evil of your Doings, then come and let us reason together, Isa. I. 16, 17.
'Till this be resolved upon and begun, you are Impenitent, and so abominable in
the sight of God: For certainly God will lnto dishonor his Perfections,
contradict his Word, and prostitute his Grace, to justify the Ungodly, while
they continue such, without desiring, resolving and endeavoring to forsake
their Evil Ways. Wherever Christ is a Savior, to give Remission of Sin, he
does also give them Repentance, Acts V. 31.

II. Secondly, That it is not enough for one, who expects to find Mercy with
God, to reform his Practices, and forsake his Evil Ways, but he must be
inwardly sanctified, his Heat renewed, his very Thoughts changed; Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous Man his thoughts, etc. His
Thoughts, especially his False, Unjust, Unrighteous Thoughts of God, whereof
Sinners have very many: Here the Change must be, because the Heart is the
principal Seat of Sin or Grace, of Sincerity or Hypocrisy. It is in the inward
Thoughts and Affections of the Heart, that Sanctification or Carnality does
principally discover it self: 'Till the Fountain be cleansed, the Streams will
be polluted. The unsanctify'd Heart is the Source of Evil Thoughts, Words and
Actions: Wash thy Heart, O Jerusalem! how long shall vain Thoughts lodge in
thee? As a man thinks in his heart, so is he, Prove. XXIII. 7. The Thoughts of
the wicked, or wicked Thoughts, they are Abomination in the sight of God, Prove.
XV. 26. And it is the Design of the Gospel, and the Glory of it, beyond all the
Philosophy in the World, to bring our Thoughts into Obedience to Christ. While
any Wickedness is indulged, and allowed in the Heart and Thoughts, no outward
Reformation, as to our Behavior before the World, no Abstinence from gross
Pollutions and Disorders in the Life, will denominate us truly Penitent, or
give us Hopes of finding Mercy with God. While we regard Iniquity in our
Hearts, while the Heart goes after Covetousness, Filthiness, or any allowed
Lust. Uunless the Thoughts be changed, as well as the outward Course; unless
the Heart be sanctified, as well as the Conversation reformed; there is no
Forgiveness. You know the Woe which our Savior denounced against the Pharisees
on this Account, Mat. XXIII. 25. whom he uncharacterized as Hypocrites, because
they made clean the outside of the Cup and Platter, but within were full of
Extortion and Excess; that like whited Sepulchers, they appeared Beautiful
outward, but were within full of dead Men's Bones, and all Uncleanness.

III. Thirdly, Observe further, That it is not enough to turn from Sin and
Wickedness in Heart and Life, but if you would find Mercy with God, you must
return unto the Lord. To clear this, Consider, That we are departed and gone
off from God by Sin, both as he is our Chief Good and Sovereign Lord: We have
abandoned and forsaken him as our Portion and Felicity, and as he is our Lord
and Ruler. It Is necessary therefore that we return to him, so as to value his
Favor as our very Life, place all our Happiness in his Love and Likeness;
observe his Orders, and endeavor to please him; that we design his Honor, and
make it our Business to glorify him; and be entirely devoted to him as our
Ultimate End. Without resolving on this, there is no ground to expect Mercy in
the Pardon of the least Sin; and upon this we may hope for Forgiveness of the
greatest.

Men may break off a Course of Notorious, Open Wickedness, upon various and
different Motives, and then take up with a Negative Religion, without returning
to God. They may satisfy themselves, that now they don't commit the like
Crimes as formerly; they may think it enough, that they are not as bad as
others are, or as once they were themselves: But this is not sufficient, if
they are destitute of Love to God, if they are not careful to please him, if
his Glory be not their End, if they do not eye his Authority, if they are not
chiefly conconcern'd to be accepted with him, if they do not choose him as the
Portion of their Soul, and by an entire Resignation of themselves, make him
Lord of all; to govern their Actions by the Counsels of his Word, and to
dispose and order their Conditions, by his most Wise and Holy Providence. Such
a turning to the Lord must be joined with forsaking of Sin.

IV. Fourthly, Let the Wicked and Unrighteous forsake the Evil of his Heart and
Ways, and turn to the Lord, and he shall find Mercy. I Observe, That the
Vilest and most Heinous Transgressors, (let their Sins be what they will,) if
they penitently return to God, they may be assured of Pardon. Whatever
Wickedness against God, or Unrighteousness against Men, whatever Iniquity or
Sin, in Heart or Life, Open or Secret, they are charged with, yet is there
Mercy with God upon true Repentance. The Holy Scriptures are full of this
Doctrine. How large and general are the Invitations and Calls of God to all
sorts of Sinners? How Express and Positive are the Declarations of his Word?
that even Scarlet and Crimson Sins shall be as Snow and Wool; that All Sin and
Blasphemy shall be forgiven, except that against the Holy Ghost, which is
joined with Obstinate Impenitence, that our Lord Jesus Christ came to save the
chiefest of Sinners, and that his Blood cleanses from all Sin. What a large
and black Catalogue is there, of such as shall not enter into the Kingdom of
God, Fornicators, Adulterers, Idolaters, Sodomites, Drunkards, Revilers and
Extortioners? and yet it is added, Such were some of you, but ye are washed, 1
Cor. VI. 9, 10, 11. He is a God pardoning Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, Mic.
VII. 18. How affectionately does God expostulate with Sinners? even the Vilest
of them, and urge them to cast away their Transgressions, and assure them that
he has no pleasure in their Ruin? How earnestly does he beseech them to be
reconciled, and hearken to the Voice of his Mercy? With what Variety of
Arguments does he plead with them? from the Greatness of his Mercy offered,
from the Freeness and Riches of his Grace, from the Absolute Necessity of it,
and from the Hazard they run of being undone for ever, if they refuse it? What
Instances are there of the blackest Crimes forgiven? and the most Heinous
Offenders received to Favor? with an Assurance, that Others may be so too, if
they will return? Cease to do Evil, Learn to do Well: Come now and let us
reason together, Isa. I. 16. that is, there is nothing past shall be a Bar to
your Reconciliation, if you will Now return; no Sin that you have ever
committed shall be your undoing, if you will Now accept of Mercy. I may safely
say this to every Man and Woman in this Assembly: And should there be any that
think, that they have sinned with such peculiar Aggravations, as never any did
who were forgiven, (which I believe is not true): Yet suppose it true, the
Free Grace and Mercy of God has never yet been tried to the utmost: It can
outdo all it has ever done. The Aggravations of thy Guilt, can never be such
as to condemn thee, but the Virtue of the Blood of Christ is greater to pardon
thee, if thou return to God by Jesus Christ. As far as Heaven is above Earth,
God's Thoughts are above ours in this Matter.

There is an Instance of this in the beginning of the Bible, how different
God's Thoughts are from ours, and how much above them: I will not Curse the
ground any more for Man's sake, says God, Genesis VIII. because the imagination
of the Heart of Man is only evil, and continually evil. One would rather think,
that God for that reason should do nothing but Curse it; but it seems to
intimate, as if the kind Thoughts of God were to this purpose; If I should
never leave Cursing, 'till Man leaves Sinning, I should do nothing but Curse;
but I will not, etc.

I cannot hope to find Mercy, my Sin is so great, says a Convinced Sinner; not
considering, that it is the Glory of God to forgive a multitude of Sins; and
that where Sin has abounded, there is an Opportunity for Grace much more to
abound. The Psalmist uses it as an Argument in Prayer, Lord, forgive mine
Iniquity, for it is great, Psalm. XXV. 11. An Argument fit to be used no where
else. The greatness of his Sin made him fly to God for Pardon, but did not keep
him from Returning. This is the Scope and Tenor of the whole Gospel: To this
do all the Prophets and Apostles witness, That through the Name of Christ
whoever believes on him, (without distinction) shall receive the Forgiveness of
Sin. If you are weary and heavy laden, sensible of Sin, and desirous to forsake
it; if you see your need of Christ, and flee to the Refuge of Hope set before
you, you may, you ought to believe, that you shall find Mercy, Rest and
Forgiveness.

And for the Encouragement of the worst of Sinners to Repent, it is Observed in
all Ages, that many wicked People, who find Mercy with God, and are forgiven,
have been much more Vile, than several of those that are left to perish in
their Sins, and shall never be forgiven. How many that have been kept from
gross Polutions, and made a longer and fairer Profession of Religion than
others; who have abounded in outward Duties, who have been of more useful
Parts, Endowments and Qualifications, more considerable for their Wit,
Learning, and other Accomplishments, (more capable one would think, of doing
Service in the World, and the Church, and for the Glory of God, if Converted)
how many such are yet left to perish in their Impenitence and Unbelief? while
Others have been called, and turned, justified, sanctified and saved; who have
labored under many contrary Discouragements, and Disadvantages, as to all
these, etc. especially by the Hainousness of their former Guilt and Rebellion.

Therefore consider it seriously, if thou have been a great Sinner, God is a
gracious God, and Christ is a mighty Savior, able to save to the uttermost,
all that come to God by him. He can as easily forgive five Hundred Talents as
fifty Pence, though the Debtors are very different in the Parable; Luke VII.
41. He frankly forgave them both. Not only such who have sinned in some lesser
Degrees, may hope to find Mercy; but they who have run out into the grossest
Wickedness, Impiety, Unrighteousness and Iniquity; not only such who have
neglected one, or two, or ten Calls to Repentance by the Gospel, but if they
have done so, for many Years to this Hour, they may yet find Mercy Now, if
forsaking their Evil Ways, they return to God by Jesus Christ.

Let your Sins past be what they will, say as bad as you will or can of your
selves, and of the dreadful Aggravations of your Guilt, Cloth it with all the
Horror and Darkness possible; Yet, As high as the Heavens are above the Earth,
so is the Mercy of God, and the Merit and Virtue of the Blood of Christ above
your Guilt.

Object. But I have stood out so long, will some say, persisted in my
Wickedness so many years, stifled the Motions of God's Spirit so often, and
been deaf to the Voice of God's Word, and my own Conscience, that I fear he
will never accept of me, nor ever show Mercy to me, for he called and I would
not come, he knocked, and I would not open, and therefore if I call, I may
expect to find the Door shut.

But in Answer to this, Consider, That as long as His Word abides faithful, and
the Covenant of Grace is everlasting and unrepeal'd, and the Offers of God's
Grace are repeated; as long as there is a New Proclamation of Mercy made in the
Name of Christ, though all the former have been despised, you may Now come in,
and find Mercy, and be accepted Now. For every New Offer of God's Grace, does
carry in it the Offer, and Promise of the Pardon of all your former Refusals,
if you will Now consent. The Promise is as free, and the peformance of it as
sure, now as ever. You may come in Now, and be pardoned and saved, upon as free
and gracious Terms as several years ago. It Is still without Money and without
Price. Your Unbelief and Obstinacy so long, does not raise the Price, nor alter
the Terms. Therefore plead the Riches of his Free Grace, and do it the more
thankfully and humbly, the Viler you have been; saying, Lord, thy Mercy will be
the more honored, thy Free Grace will be the more magnified, and exalted in
the Conversion and Forgiveness of such a Wretch, in the purging such a defiled
Soul, in the healing such a Leper, in the pardoning so many and great
Transgressions.

And it is often Observed, that such Sinners when they return to God, have the
Advantage of others upon several Accounts, wherein God is more glorified by
them: As that usually they admire the Grace of God more than others, love God
and Christ more, walk more humbly with God, are more Charitable, Tender and
Compassionate to other Christians, and are usually more watchful and
circumspect for the Time to come, and more afraid of falling: And commonly they
are more abundant in Service, for the Honor of God; more entirely devoted to
him, more zealous for his Glory, more of a Public Spirit, more ready to do and
to suffer any thing for his sake. As this tends to the Honor of God, so it may
be pleaded in Prayer.

Object. But before I close this, I must obviate or answer an Objection or two
more: I may suppose some will say, That after all, there is no finding Mercy and
Forgiveness with God, without Faith in Jesus Christ; and I cannot for my Heart
believe in Christ, that he will receive me; I cannot persuade my self, that
such a one as I should be accepted: What, shall the Invaluable Purchase of the
Death of Christ belong to me? be bestowed on me? if you would give me all the
World, I cannot believe that such a Wretch as I have been shall find Mercy: You
don't know, how I have affronted, dishonored, despised and disobeyed him. I
have abused his Grace at that dreadful Rate, that you cannot imagine the
Aggravtion of my Sins, or the Sadness of my Case. I cannot believe that he will
ever forgive me, receive me, justify me, and glorify me: I cannot believe it,
and if I cannot believe in Christ, I cannot be saved by him.

Answ. I Answer, Don't mistake the Nature of saving Faith. You say, you cannot
believe, and you have no Faith. Whereas at the bottom, you mean no more than
this, that as yet, you are not certain of Salvation, you have no Assurance. But
are you willing to receive Christ Jesus, as offered in the Gospel? Has the
Spirit of God so far convinced you of your sinful, miserable state, that you
heartily consent to be saved by Christ, in his own Way, and upon his own Terms?
Are you willing to take him as your Teacher, Savior and Lord? Are you brought
to depend, and trust entirely upon the Mercy of God in Jesus Christ, as the
only Mediator between God and Man? To rely upon his Sacrifice, and meritorious
Righteousness, as your only Refuge and Hope? Desiring to be found in him alone,
to be accepted of God only in the Beloved? and are truly willing, and as far as
you know your own Hearts, are resolved to follow him as the Captain of your
Salvation, where ever he shall lead you; in hope of his purchased, and promised
Grace and Glory? This is Faith, and dare you say, that there is nothing of this
that appears in the Temper of your Spirits?

Secondly, If you cannot with any Confidence say this, yet the Case is hopeful,
if you are in the number of convinced, awakened, sensible Sinners. Are you
sensible of your Ignorance, Poverty, Guilt, Impurity, Bondage, Unrighteousness,
etc. and that you need Christ as a complete Savior, to be made of God unto us,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption? to expiate Sin by his
Blood, and to subdue it by his Spirit, to reconcile us to God, and begin that
blessed Union and Communion here, which shall be complete in Heaven? And this
comprehends our whole Salvation. Christ is the Savior of Sinners, and of such
who are lost, who apprehend themselves to be so without his help, that feel
their Sins and their Wants; he came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance. And is a Physician, not to the Whole, but to the Sick: He calls and
cures, not the Proud, but the Humble; not the Full, but the Hungry; not the
Rich, but the Poor; not the Free, but the Captive; who are sensible of their
Bonds; not the Righteous, but Sinners. And he makes you, by his Spirit, thus
humble, empty, hungry, and sensible of Sin; that you may look to him as the
great Reconciler, sensible of the need of Pardon. If it be thus, you may then
look for Redemption through the Blood of Jesus, even the Forgiveness of Sins:
Feeling your need of Sanctification, you may look to be washed and cleans'd,
and sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by his Spirit; feeling your
want of Strength to do and suffer the Will of God, you may look to Christ, to
enable you to do all things. Now one that is not fully satisfied and assured;
that Christ will save him, may yet be brought to this frame. How is it with you
as to this?

Thirdly, Let me ask you further, under the Sense of being Vile and Heinous
Sinners, are you brought earnestly to desire the Mercy of God in Christ, and
diligently to seek after him? Though you sometimes fear he will not accept you,
yet do you not neglect to pray to him? What would you not give, that you might
be interested in God's pardoning Mercy, and accepted in Christ? Are not your
greatest Fears, and Concern with respect to this, lest he should reject you?
Are not the strongest Desires of your Souls after this, that he would receive
you? And is it thus, not only at a Pinch; in Affliction and Trouble as to
Outward Affairs, or on a sick Bed, but in Health and Prosperity? Is this the
Language of your Souls? I have Health, and Friends, and Money, and Credit, and
many Outward Blessings beyond others; I want nothing for my Body, or for my
Comfortable Passage through this World: But I am yet a miserable Creature, if I
am under the Guilt of Sin; if God be not reconciled to me. O that I were clear
as to this! what would I give to be at peace with God, and to have an
Encouraging Sense of it, etc.

Fourthly, Are you sensible of your past Unkindness to this Merciful God, and
Gracious Savior, so as to bewail it? Is it now the ground of your Fear and
Trouble? not only that you have sinned against the Light of Nature, (though it
may be, you were first awakened by the sense of some such Transgression) but
now you are troubled for the Contempt of the Gospel, for your Neglect of
Christ, the Savior of Sinners, for refusing him, when he has called and
invited you? And are ready to say within your selves, O with what Earnestness
did he call me to accept his Mercy! How freely did he offer to forgive me! He
would have been my Savior, but I would not receive him; with what Folly and
Obstinacy did I harden my Heart, and stop my Ears, and turn my Back upon him?
and resisted him both in his Word and Spirit? Does this greive and trouble you,
as well as the gross Pollutions of the World, which Natural Light will condemn?

Fifthly, Your Case is hopeful, notwithstanding the sense of your Vileness and
Fears on that Account; if you yet resolve to follow on, in seeking Mercy and
Forgiveness of God by Jesus Christ, 'till you obtain it. Do you resolve you
will wait, and pray, and wrestle, and persevere therein; 'till it shall please
God to cast an Eye of Pity and Compassion on your miserable Souls? That you
will continue in the Use of God's appointed Means, where he communicates his
Spirit, and conveys Grace, and where he is wont to vouchsafe his Presence? That
you will enquire of every Body that may assist you, how you may be one of those
Happy Souls, whom God will abundantly pardon? Can you say this, That though I
fear and doubt, yet I seek, and strive, and will not give over: I will not
desist, I will not depart from his Door: I am undone if he refuse me; and if I
perish and dye in my Sins, and be damned for them; it shall be in seeking
Mercy, and begging Mercy for Christ's sake. And if you can say this truly, you
may be assured you shall not perish, but find Mercy. Can you say, and is it the
real Language of your Heart? Nothing in all the Word shall content and satisfy
you, or is ever like to do so, 'till you have some good hope through Grace, of
finding Mercy with God. You search the Scriptures, and search your Hearts, and
go to Ministers, consult Friends, and attend Ordinances, with this Desire and
Design; and you pray before you come to hear, that some seasonable, powerful
Word may drop, and reach your Case. Alas, I use to hear formerly after another
manner, and with other Thoughts; judging the Minister, passing Sentence on the
Sermon, or considering only, how it concerned others of my Acquaintance: But
now I apply all to my self, now I look for my own Portion, and watch for that
which principally concerns me. And by the Grace of God I will thus attend and
wait, and watch at the Posts of Wisdoms Door, that I may find Life, Prove. VIII.
34. Though I I have but a very little Hope, and a great many Fears, considering
what a Vile Sinner I have been, yet I do not utterly despair: I am told, I must
not despair, and that Despair is a Sin, and Hope, a Duty. And therefore I will
yet hold on, and wait upon the Lord, and seek his Mercy: Though I cannot pray with
Confidence, I will yet look up: though I cannot say I believe, yet I Will not
utterly despair: though I have sinned against the Grace of the Gospel, and the
Blood and Spirit of Christ, yet I hope, not above and beyond the Help and
Benefit of his Grace, and Gospel, and Blood, and Spirit. I Will therefore hold on,
and wait in Hope, in the diligent use of all the Means of Salvation.

V. Fifthly, I proceed to another thing observable from these Words; Let him
return, and he will have Mercy; and abundantly pardon: Let him think of that,
and return, believe that, be encouraged to return. I Observe, That the great
Motive and Encouragement to put a Sinner on forsaking his Evil Ways, and
returning to God, is the sensible Apprehension, that there is Mercy to be had;
viz. that God will forgive, and abundantly pardon the Penitent, Returning
Sinner. I confess, it is not an easy matter, to be persuaded of the Doctrine,
of the Forgiveness of Sin: Whatever Guess and Conjecture Men may have about it,
from the Divine Patience and Forbearance to a sinful World, in the Continuance
of his Forfeited Mercy: Yet See Mr. Nathanael Taylor's Preservative against
Deism. Octavo. Lately printed.
without the Gospel Revelation, we are at no Certainty about this. The Gentiles
had some Imaginations and Hopes, that their Gods were placable, and inclined to
pardon, and that was the Rise of their Expiations and Sacrifices; but they had
no assured Promise or Covenant to build upon. They knew not the Mediator
between God and Man, by his own Sacrifice of himself to make Atonement. It Is
the Language of the Law written on our Hearts, that The Soul that sins shall
dye: It Is the Voice of Natural Conscience, that Guilt and Punishment are
inseparable. And were there not somewhat known of the Doctrine of Forgiveness,
by the Revelation of it which God has made, this would be the common Sentiment
of Mankind. I need not consider, what particular Ways and Methods God may have,
to reveal this Pardoning Mercy unto any, who are Strangers to the Written Word;
or whether he has done so: It belongs not to us to be Curious in enquiring
about other Men, who shall be judged by a Righteous God, according to the Law
they were under, and the Light they had. It Is certain, that even among those to
whom the Gospel is preached, whoever they are, that are deeply convinced of
Sin, and Conscience awakened to apprehend the Holiness and Justice of God, it is
one of the most difficult things in the World, to persuade them, that God will
have Mercy, and abundantly pardon. It is one great Work of the Holy Spirit, to
satisfy the Soul of this. There Is no serious Minister of Christ, but has
abundant Experience of this, in those that are awakened to any Concern for
their Souls Salvation. There Is Evidence sufficient of this in David's Frame,
Psalm. CXXX. 3, 4. If thou, Lord, should mark Iniquities, O Lord, who should
stand? but there is forgiveness with thee, etc. If God should mark Sin, so as
to proceed to punish it according to his Righteous Law, who could stand? who
would escape Condemnation? or when accused, stand in the Judgment, so as to be
acquitted? i.e. It Is not my own Case alone, that if God should be strict and
severe with me, I am an undone and lost Creature: But it is true of all the
World. The Holiest Saint on Earth cannot be justified in his Sight, and what
then would become of me, who have such a Load of Guilt, and so many heinous
Crimes to acknowledge? In this sense we find the Expression of standing used,
Romans XIV. 4. To his own Master he stands or falls; that is, shall either be
acquitted or condemned of God. It Is of the same Import with Psalm. CXLIII. 2.
Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord, for in thy sight no flesh
living shall be justified.

Consider a little, with what a Frame of Spirit, does David use such Language;
he seems to cry out in the View of his Heinous Sins, as ready to Despair, if
not relieved by the Hope, that there is Forgiveness with God. Lord, who can
stand? that is, how justly may I be Condemned, if I am tried at thy Bar?
According to strict Justice, I must be cast; I cannot answer thee for one, much
less for all my Abominations: I cannot stand in the Judgment. This will be, and
is, the Case of all Convinced Sinners; of every one of us, when we View our
Sins; and the Majesty of Heaven, whom we have offended: When we consider, how
we have affronted God, and despised him, and how easily he can crush us into
Hell; and how justly he might. When we think, how we have preferred a Lust, a
Trifle, a Passion, an Humor, before him: How we have slighted his Authority,
abused his Goodness, defied his Power, weari'd his Patience, rejected his
Grace; and by numberless, aggravated Transgressions, incurred the Vengeance he
has threatened, and made our selves liable to his intolerable and everlasting
Wrath. Under such a Sight and Sense of Sin, what can relieve? but the
Consideration, that there is Mercy and Forgiveness with God, and that He Will
abundantly Pardon returning Sinners.

This, I say, we are backward to believe. There Is so much Ignorance and
Blindness in the Minds of Sinners; there is such a proneness in Men to Judge of
God by themselves; and of his Thoughts and Ways by their own; that because they
could not Pardon such and such heinous Provocations, so often repeated; they
imagine that God will not. And there are so many Fears and Jealousies in our
guilty Souls, concerning God; that without the Encouragement of such a
Declaration of Grace, as in this Text, there could be no Repentance; there
would be no Returning to God. You know what Benhadad's Servants told him, 1
Kings XX. 31. We have heard, that the Kings of Israel are Merciful Kings, let
us put Sackcloth on our Loins, and Ropes about our Necks, and go to the King
of Israel, peradventure he will save thy Life: This gracious Method God used
toward Israel, Jer. III. 12. Go, and proclaim these words toward the North,
saying, Return, O backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause my
anger to fall upon you; for I am Merciful, says the Lord, and will not keep
anger for ever. Only acknowledge thine Iniquity, that thou have Transgressed
against the Lord thy God: that is, Let them not cherish any such hard Thoughts
of me, as if there were no Forgiveness; let them not despair of my Mercy, as if
I would not receive them, when they return.

This gives the greatest Encouragement to Convinced Sinners, that here is a
Plank to save them from Shipwreck, a Remedy against Despair: Here Is a ground
for 'em to return to God with Hopes: Here Is a Motive to seek Mercy, that God
has proclaimed his Readiness to forgive, and abundantly to pardon. And
methinks it is very plain, that the Doctrine of Repentance would never have been
preached, if there were no Hope of Forgiveness: The fallen Angels having no
Mercy offered, were never called to repent; for let there be never so deep
Conviction of Sin, and Sorrow for it, there could be no Repenting and Returning
to God, without believing that Mercy might be had: All would end in Death and
Desparation. Repentance would never be commanded as a Duty, nor urged upon
Sinners as a Duty; (it could not, if we believe the Wisdom, Goodness and
Faithfulness of God) were it not for this Truth, that If the wicked forsake his
way, etc. But upon the Consideration of this, Sinners begin to have good
Thoughts of God, many of their Scruples are removed, many of their Objections
answered, and they are now encouraged to seek the Mercy of God, and prepare to
receive it.

USE. To Conclude therefore, Let the vilest and worst of Sinners receive these
glad Tidings of God's Grace, and not abuse them. Don't despise this Message,
don't neglect it; but consider how much you need this Mercy; and go home, and
earnestly beg it. Endeavor to welcome it, as it is offered in the Gospel; and
then plead it, and urge it for Christ's sake, according to the Promise, as it
is Free-Mercy: And stir up your Souls to hope in it; as knowing that God takes
pleasure in them that hope in his Mercy.

May I not therefore say, that it is from the Devil, (for whom there is no Mercy)
if there be any of you, to whom this Doctrine is preached, who will yet
Conclude, There Is no Mercy for you? Since God has told us, that If the Wicked
forsake his Evil Ways and Thoughts, and turn to the Lord; they may and ought in
that Case, most firmly believe, that He will have Mercy, and that He will
abundantly pardon.

THE Second Sermon.
ISAIAH, LV. 7. Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous Man his
Thoughts, and let him Return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him;
and to our God, for he will abundantly Pardon.


IT IS of the Sixth Observation from these Words that I would now speak,
(without so much as repeating the other five,) viz. That Pardoning Mercy to
Penitent Sinners, is Mercy indeed; the most valuable and seasonable Mercy. This
I shall endeavor to manifest by several Considerations, and then Apply it.

First, There Is nothing more suitable to the Case of a Guilty Sinner, who has
any Thoughts of returning to God. Consider the Perplexities of one that is
awakened to a Sense of Sin, and is under a Spirit of Conviction: His bitter
Complaints, and loud Cries tell us, that he knows not what to do, nor how to be
rid of his Burden: He apprehends his Danger from unpardoned Sin, and feels the
want of this Forgiveness: He is wounded, and nothing but the Voice of Pardoning
Mercy can heal him. I have greatly sinned, said David, and his Heart smote him,
2 Samuel XXIV. 10. And now, I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the Iniquity of thy
Servant: Nothing else could give him Ease and Quiet from an Accusing troubled
Conscience. The Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick, the People that dwell
therein shall be forgiven their Iniquity, Isa. XXXIII. 24. The mere Patience
and Forbearance of God, without Forgiveness, will not answer the Exigence of
his Case. Though he be yet out of Hell, he knows not how long it shall be so; or
how soon he may there have a Miserable Portion. It Is the Sense of Unpardoned
Sin that breaks his Bones, and dries up his Marrow; and sticks like an Arrow
in his flesh. Whereas Pardoning Mercy is as Health to the Navel, and Marrow to
the Bones, and a Cordial to his Heart; yea, even as Life from the Dead. And
dead he is in Law, as under a Sentence of Condemnation, 'till he be interested
in Forgiveness, by Faith in the Blood of Jesus. Then may he lift up his Head,
as one Alive from the Dead; and admit Consolation; when he can hope his Sins
are forgiven; and that God is reconciled. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my People, say
unto Jerusalem, her Warfare is Accomplished, her Iniquity is forgiven, Isa. XL.
1, 2. Blessed is the Man whose Iniquity is forgiven, and Sin covered, Psalm.
XXXII. 1. 'Till then, they are under the Curse of God on Record: A Curse, that
cuts off from God, and all gracious Communications from him; a Curse which
pierces deep, and spreads far, and makes the whole Creation at Enmity with
us: And this Curse is intolerable in the Effects of it, and unavoidable too.
There is no Relief or Remedy against it, but by the New Covenant, and Faith in
Jesus Christ. It Is only by the Redemption we have in Jesus Christ, through his
Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins: In which Forgiveness we can never be
interested, without Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
There is no Rest in my Bones, because of my Sin, says the Psalmist; Psalm.
XXXVIII. 3. My Sins are an heavy Burden, they are too heavy for me, v. 4. 'Till
this Burden be removed by Forgiveness, what Ease or Rest can a Sinner enjoy?

It Is true, the Deceit of sensual Pleasures, or the Hurry and Clatter of
Worldly Business, may hinder the Sense of this for a while; and keep all quiet:
Yet sooner or later, the sinful Soul will have Torment: Conscience will awake.
Men may laugh and be merry for a Time, make a shift to be confident and secure,
under the Wrath and Curse of God; they may take their Poison for their
Antidote, their Wound for their Plaster, their Plague for their Cure, their
Disease for their Remedy; and so make a hard shift to preserve a little false
Peace: But the End will be the most horrid Despair. And the more Jovial and
Airy, Careless and Presumptuous, they have been in Health and Prosperity, under
the Guilt of great Transgressions; the more disconsolate will such be, when
Conscience awakes, to set their Sins in order before them. Is there then any
Message like that of Forgiveness, that will suit the Case of such? They can
relish nothing else, think of nothing else, this is what they aim at. This is
the Subject of their great Enquiry, How they may be forgiven. They may try in
vain, what Company, Mirth, Sports, Business, or Superstition will do: They must
come to God for Pardon, or they cannot find Rest. Hos. V. 13. When Ephrahim saw
his sickness, and Judah saw his wound; then went Ephraim to the Assvrian, and
sent to King Jareb; yet could he not heal you, nor cure you of your wound.

Did you know the Misery and Danger of a sinful Soul, unreconciled to God,
bound over to his Eternal Wrath, every Moment exposed as a Guilty Wretch, to
his fiery Vengeance? Did you consider the Case of such a One? who has all the
Plagues and Curses in the Book of God, in force against him; and nothing but a
little Breath between him and Endless Ruin; that cannot tell but the next Day
or Minute, Death may open the Door, and let him fall into Damnation? Did any
one rightly understand this, believe it, consider it, and apply it as his own
Case? what Mercy will suit such a One, but Pardoning Mercy? What is all the
Pomp and Glory of this World to such a Man, without the Forgiveness of Sin? How
can he eat, drink or sleep, or trade, or do any thing, without some Hope of
Pardon? without seeking after it? without endeavoring it? without using means
in Order to it?

Secondly, Pardoning Mercy is Mercy indeed, as it is the Fruit of Covenant Love,
an Effect of the special, distinguishing Love of God: This is the great
Privilege of such whose God is the Lord. This is a Covenant Blessing, that is
never given in Anger: This is never bestowed, but as a Favor, peculiar to
God's People. This is always accompanied with Regeneration, and Adoption, Jer.
XXXI. 33. I will be their God, and will forgive their Iniquity. Happy is the
Man whose Iniquity is forgiven, Happy is the People whose God is the Lord.

Thirdly, This Mercy is the most Comprehensive Blessing, and the Foundation of
many other Mercies. This secures our State, sweetens our other Blessings, lays
the Foundation for Peace of Conscience, gives Freedom of Access to the Throne
of Grace, and makes way for Communion with God in all Ordinances: This clears
us from the Accusation of Satan, the Condemnation of the Law, and of our own
Hearts; for who shall lay any thing to his Charge, whom God forgives? We can
have no Right and Title to Eternal Life without this: For the Legal Bar must be
removed by the Pardon of Sin, as well as the Moral Incapacity by the
Sanctifying Spirit. The great Blessings of the Gospel, such as the Spirit of
Holiness, Communion with God, etc. they are promised to Accompany this of
Forgiveness, Heb. VIII. latter End. I will be merciful to their
Unrighteousness, and their Iniquities I will remember no more. By this we not
only escape the Punishment due to Sin, which would render us deeply miserable,
but are restored to the Favor of God, and accepted in the Beloved, and have
Grace to overcome the World, Flesh, and Devil. The sanctifying Spirit to purge
us from all Filthiness, is joined with this Pardon, which delivers from the
Condemning Guilt of Sin. We are translated into the Kingdom and Family of
Christ, as well as delivered from the Kingdom of Satan, and the Power of
Darkness. In a Word, the Acceptance of our Persons, Sanctification of our
Natures, the Answer of our Prayers, and a Title to Heaven and Eternal Life, are
connected with, and consequent to this Forgiveness of Sin, Psalm. XXXII. 1, 2,
3. Zac. I. 4. Isa. LIX. 2, 3. Psalm. CIII. 2, 3. Job VII. 21.

This also has respect to all the Comforts, and Afflictions of this present
Life. You ought to Consider, that if Sin be forgiven, all things shall work for
good. Take away all Iniquity, (says the Church) and receive us graciously, or
do us good, Hos. XIV. 2. Every Providence shall be sanctified, if Sin be
forgiven. For peace I had great bitterness, says Hezekiah, but in love to my
Soul, thou have delivered it from the Pit of Corruption; for thou have cast all
my sins behind thy Back, Isa. XXXVIII. 17. You have a like Instance, Jer.
XXXIII. 6, 8. But if you had all the Plenty, Peace, Health, Riches and Grandeur
of this World, yet the Guilt of one Sin on the Consclence, under the
Apprehension of God's deserved Wrath, will spoil the Relish of all. Where Sin
is forgiven, other Mercies will be sweet, and the Burden of Affliction
tolerable: But without this, and under the Apprehensions of the contrary, every
Temporal Calamity is double. For this is the Wormwood and the Gall in every
bitter Cup. We shall not under the Troubles and Disappointments of this World,
cry out we are undone, if we can think that God has forgiven us: No more than
a Man, who has just received his Prince's Pardon, (when he lay under a Sentence
of Condemnation to Death) can be thought, if he lose his Glove or Handkerchief
in the way home, that he will wring his Hands, and weep, and take on for such a
Loss, when he had so lately his Life graciously given him.

Besides, Hereby is a Foundation laid for a Life of Thankful Love and Obedience
to God. Conscience being purged from dead Works, we serve the Living God
without fear, in hope of his Acceptance; with the Promise of his hearing our
Prayers, and that he will be well pleased with our Services, and overlook our
Infirmities, etc. We may therefore well bear the Trials of this Life with
Patience and Resignation; and in a dying Hour, shall be able to commend our
Souls with Faith and Hope, into the Hands of Christ, who will take Care of us
as his own, when we leave the World; and at last publicly acknowledge and
absolve us in the great Day. Oh how many Mercies accompany this one, of the
Forgiveness of Sin!

Fourthly, This is Mercy indeed to a Returning Sinner; Peculiar Mercy, as it it
Irrevocable. Where Sin is forgiven, and Iniquity blotted out, it shall be
remembered no more. You are freely justified from all things, and shall never
come into Condemnation. This my Covenant of Peace shall never be removed, says
the Lord, who has mercy on thee, Isa. LIVE. 10. This is not only true of the
first Settlement of it, but is the Privilege of every one, who is under the
Bond and Blessing of the New Covenant. Though I visit his Transgression with a
Rod, and his Iniquity with Stripes, nevertheless my loving Kindness will I not
utterly take from him, nor suffer my Faithfulness to fail; my Covenant will I
not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my Lips. God may remember
the Sins of Pardoned Believers, so as to afflict them in this World, and
exercise the Discipline of his Family: Their share in National Sins, may
involve them in present Sufferings with others: And for particular
Transgressions, God may testify his Fatherly Displeasure against good Men, by
remarkable Afflictions; but will not reverse their Pardon, so as to punish them
Eternally. Ely, David, Jonah, and others are Instances. Your Peace with Heaven
shall never be so broken; none of your Afflictions will prove it. The
Reconciliation between God and Sinners, that is once accepted by a Real,
Active, Unfeigned, Obedient Faith, is Perpetual. It is promised, that our
Iniquities shall be blotted out, and remembered no more; that God will cast 'em
behind his Back; Cast 'em into the bottom of the Sea; Scatter 'em as a thick
Cloud, etc. Isa. XLIII. 25. Psalm. LI. 9. Isa. XXXVIII. 17. Mic. VII. 19. Isa.
XLIV. 22. And yet more expressly to assure us, that God will not enter into
Judgment with us, for the Sins he has once forgiven, we read, Jer. L. 20. In
that day shall the Iniquity of Israel be sought for, and there shall be none;
and the Sins of Judah, and they shall not be found.

Where God bestows Forgiveness, he communicates the Spirit of Grace, for the
Mortification of Sin. And though that Work be not perfect, it shall be
progressive; and the Remainders of Corruption in the Soul, will not prove that
your Sin is not forgiven. The Flesh will war against the Spirit, and the Spirit
will strive against the Flesh; but you cannot conclude, that you are not
forgiven, from the Opposition that Sin makes against the Grace of God in the
Soul. Would you judge of your selves? consider what Opposition you make against
Sin: Would you have Relief? Apply to the Fountain open, to the Blood and Spirit
of Christ, for new Strength from Day to Day, to Crucify the Flesh, to Continue
the Warfare, and Maintain the Conflict. That Sin yet remains in the Soul, is
consistent with your Reconciliation to God; and your Sense of this, with his
Acceptance of you. Yea, I am persuaded, there is never such a Discovery of
Corruption, as after Forgiveness; when the Grace of God has enlightened the
Soul. But which part do you side with? Do you Condemn, Bewail, Oppose, Resist,
Strive, Watch, Pray, Fight, and Endeavor the Mortification of Corruption, that
yet remains, after the Hopes of Pardon? You shall then by the Grace of Christ
hold on, and be more than Conquerors: You should Apply to him, and Exalt his
Power, as able to destroy the Works of the Devil. He has promised, and
undertaken it, that no Iniquity shall be charged to your Condemnation. No old
Stories shall be repeated, no latent Displeasure harbored, no former Quarrel
revived. If thou return to God with all thy Heart, he will never upbraid thee
with thy former Sins; though Men may. But if you can hope, that God forgives you,
you will easily bear that, and little mind it. Can you doubt of this Fullness of
Pardon, when God has said, he will hide and blot out our Sins, so as When
sought for they shall not be found: And that he will put them as far from us,
as the East is from the West; that None of them shall be mentioned again unto
us, Psalm. CIII. 10. Jer. XXXI. 34.

Fifthly, This Pardoning Mercy is Mercy indeed to a Returning Sinner, because
all his unknown and forgotten Sins shall be pardoned, as well as those he has
particularly confessed, agravated, and repented of. As he that breaks the Law
in one Point is guilty of all, by the wilful Contempt of Divine Authority; so
he that is absolved in one Point, is forgiven in all. It were otherwise in vain
to be forgiven, and absolved as to some Sins, that might damn us, if there is
any one left that would do it. He that is under Condemnation for one Sin, is
liable to Eternal Death: But Divine Forgiveness is entire and full. There are
Sins of Good Men, that arise from Humane Frailty, and not from any evil Purpose
of Heart; as Sins of Ignorance, which if we had known, we would not have
committed; or of sudden Surprise, that we did not Observe; or fell into by the
violent hurry of Temptation, before we had time to think what we were doing; of
such Sins we shall be often guilty, while we are in the World; and we are bid
to ask daily Pardon for 'em; and then they shall not break Covenant between God
and Us.

But there are Many Sins that we have forgotten, for which we were never
Humbled in Particular: And yet if we truly Repent of those we do know, and call
to mind, our forgotten Sins shall be forgiven. For God will Pardon us like
himself; Forgive us like a God; not according to our Knowledge, but His own.
And as He is greater than our Hearts, to know much more against us, than we can
remember against our selves; so He is greater than our Hearts, to forgive even
those Faults which our Hearts and Consciences do not Recollect. He knows the
Value of Christ's Blood and Merits, to Forgive all our Sins. And by unfeigned
Faith, we are interested in the Virtue of it. God has more Thoughts of Mercy
in him, than we have had of Rebellion against him: Psalm. XL. 5. Thy Thoughts to
usward, (speaking of his Thoughts of Mercy) are more than can be numbered. They
have been from Everlasting, and reach to Everlasting; whereas it is but as of
yesterday, that the oldest Sinner began to rebel against God. There is no
Comparison. And this leads to the Last Observation from those Words, He will
abundantly Pardon.

Last Obs. That God will not only show Mercy to Returning Sinners, so as to
Forgive them, but He will abundantly Pardon: He will Multiply Forgivenesses.

The Apostle speaks of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that it was
exceeding abundant toward him; (...), with Faith and Love, which is in Christ
Jesus; 1 Timothy I. 14. superlative, superabundant Grace; not only sufficient for
the Pardon of his Sins; but of multitudes more besides. And accordingly in
other places we read, not only of the Grace of God in Forgiveness, but of his
abounding Grace, of the Riches of his Grace; Yea, of the Exceeding Riches of
his Grace, Ephesians. I. 6, 7. and this joined with tender Mercies; with Loving
Kindness; and with Multitudes of Mercies. And here I may show,

First, In what Respects, God will abundantly Pardon Returning Sinners.

Secondly, Consider what Reason we have to believe it, and be firmly persuaded
of it.

Thirdly, What is the Abuse of this Blessed Doctrine.

Fourthly, I shall assist you to make a Right Improvement of it.

First, In what respects God promises Abundantly to Pardon, or to Multiply
Forgivenesses. And this I might show as to Persons, and as to Things.

First, If we Consider the Extent of Forgiveness as to Sins: With Reference to
Time, and Place, and Persons, etc. As to Time, from the first Promise of the
Seed of the Woman, made soon after the Fall, to the End of the World, this door
of Mercy is open for Returning Sinners. As to Places, The Gospel is appointed
to be Preached to every Creature, in every part of the World: Neither Jew, nor
Gentile, Bond, nor Free, Barbarian, or Scythian, are excepted. The Gospel of
Grace by Christ Jesus is every where the Power of God, to Pardon, and
Salvation, unto all that believe. As to Persons, none shall Perish for want of
a sufficient Price, for their Ransom; for want of a sufficient Satisfaction to
the Justice of God: But wherever the Everlasting Gospel is preached, He that
Believes shall be saved. Whoever will, may come, and take of the Waters of
Life freely. Whoever will Accept of the Mercy of Christ, upon the holy Terms of
the Gospel, shall receive Remission of Sins, Joh. III. 10. God has so Loved
the lost World, that Whosoever Believes on Christ shall not perish, but have
Everlasting Life, Joh. XII. 46, 47. I am come (says our Lord) a Light into the
World, that Whosoever Believes in me should not abide in darkness. If any Man
hear my Words, and believe not, I judge him not, for I came not to Judge the
World, but to save the World. 1 John II. 2. He is a Propitiation for our Sins,
and not for ours only, but for the Sins of the whole World. And when we
Consider what sort of Persons, (even the chiefest and vilest of Sinners,) many
of those have been, who have been Pardoned and received to Mercy; We must needs
say, there is no Respect of Persons with God, as to this Matter. And there are
a great Multitude of these, considered in themselves. For even of Martyrs and
Confessors, that came out of great Tribulation, and had washed their Robes, and
made them white in the Blood of the Lamb, there is a Vast Multitude, such as
none could number of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, Rev.
VII. 9, 14.

Secondly, He does abundantly Pardon, considering the Sins forgiven. He is a
God pardoning Iniquity, Transgression and Sin; i.e. Sins of all sorts. Let the
Kinds, Numbers, Repetitions, Aggravations be what they will. There is a
Multitude of tender Mercies to forgive, and abundant Virtue in the Blood of
Christ, to cleanse from all Sin. If the multitude of Transgressions could make
a Pile, as high as from Earth to Heaven, God's pardoning Mercy is above the
Heavens: His Thoughts are above ours in this matter of Forgiveness, as far as
the Heavens are above the Earth. No Sin but final Impenitence, Ungodliness, and
Unbelief, is shut out from Pardon; for the Sin against the Holy Ghost is
attended with that, and therefore never to be forgiven.

And as to Sins after Repentance and Pardon, God has promised to multiply
Forgivenesses, to heal Backslidings, and therefore invites Men to return, with a
Promise of Pardon. Return ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your
Backslidings. In some early Days of the Christian Church, the Novatian Doctrine
spread, that denies Repentance and Pardon to Sins after Baptism; upon which
Account it is thought, many good Men delayed their Baptism as long as they
could, that they might not defile their Garments after they were washed. It
seemed to have taken its Rise from the Misunderstanding of Heb. 6. the
Beginning. But any such Doctrine as would discourage Men's Repentance, and
return to God, after they have sinned, must needs be of very dangerous
Consequence to the Souls of Men. I confess, it is a dismal Symptom, to fall
often into wilful Sin, to repent and then sin again; to repent and sin in a
Circle. This rather argues an Intention of sinning again, than a Design of
leaving it. But for such as have returned to God, and been forgiven, and yet by
the Power of Temptation have afterward fallen, there is great Encouragement
for their Return, and Ground to hope for Forgiveness. For if any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the Righteous, who was a
Propitiation for our Sins. If any Man sin, it is not to encourage to sin, but to
prevent Despair after the Commission of it. And since we are to forgive one
another, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us, it would never have been
made our Duty to forgive our Offending Brother once and again. Yea, unto
seventy times seven, if there were no Mercy with God for Returning Backsliders.
You are allowed, and commanded in such a Case, to return to God, and to sue out
your Pardon; and you ought to believe you shall find Welcome, and that your
Backslidings shall be healed.

There is need of urging this, because Sins after Repentance, and after Vows
and Resolutions, and Sacraments, etc. not only defile, but disturb the
Conscience; and you cannot presently approach to God with Comfort? What then
should you do? Give up all for lost? Run into Excess of Riot? and say, There is
no Hope; therefore let us walk after the Imagination of our own Hearts? No, by
no Means. But by renewed Acts of Repentance toward God, and of Faith in the
Blood of Jesus, return to God, and seek Forgiveness. I grant in such Cases, it
is hard to do this with any Encouragement and Hope: Our Hearts misgive us, and
well they may; we shall have a thousand Jealousies and Fears: And it cannot be
otherwise. However, God's Thoughts are not as ours, He will abundantly pardon
Returning Sinners; though you have abused his Grace, though you have dishonored
his Name, revolted after Forgiveness, slighted the Redeemer Christ, grieved his
Spirit, given Advantage to the Devil, deserved to be cast out of his sight;
though you have broken your solemn Vows, and broken your Peace thereby; yet let
such remember, that God will show Mercy to Returning Sinners, and he will
abundantly pardon 'em. He will heal their Backslidings, and make them loath
themselves, and be confounded for all their Abominations, even After he is
pacified toward them, Ezekiel. XVI. the last. You know the kind Language God used
to Ephraim, Jer. XXXI. 18, 20. Surely I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself,
he is my dear Son, he is a pleasant Child, (or rather, is he not so?) though I
spoke aginst him, I remember him still, my Bowels are moved for him, I will
surely have mercy on him, says the Lord. Read with Thankfulness, Mic. VII. 18,
19. Who is a God like unto thee? that pardons Iniquity, and passes by the
Transgressions of his Remnant, and retains not his Anger for ever, because he
delights in mercy? He will turn again, and have compassion on us, and will
subdue our Iniquities, and cast our Sins into the Depths of the Sea. And how
sweet is the Repentance of such a Returning Backslider, that is kindly melted,
humbled, and broken, and brought to the Foot of God, with Hope of Mercy through
Christ? The Contrition of such a Soul, is made up like that of Mary Magdalen,
of Tears and of Kisses, of Sorrow and of Love, of Humility and Hope, of
Confusion and Confidence, of Shame and Joy. And how will such a Soul love much,
to whom much is thus forgiven?

In short, God does abundantly pardon, and multiply Pardons, as to the
Forgiveness of many Sins, in that never any one Sin was forgiven to any Man, to
whom this was not made good. Numberless Sins are forgiven wherever one is. They
are more than the Hairs of our Head, or the Sands on the Seashore. Well might
the Psalmist say, Have mercy on me, O Lord, according to thy loving Kindnesses,
and according to the multitude of thy tender Mercies, Psalm. LI. 1. I will
abundantly pardon, (says God here) and in another place, I will cleanse them
from all their Iniquities, whereby they have sinned against me, whereby they
have trespassed against me, (says the Lord) Jer. XXXII. 8. Who can understand
his Errors before Conversion and since? by Omission and Commission, in Thought,
in Word and Act? How long did God wait on some of us? What various Methods did
he use to bring us home? How graciously did he receive us at first? and after
many Provocations receive us again? Surely if we find Mercy with God, any of
us, he must abundantly pardon us, and multiply Forgivenesses. And because it is
not so easy a thing to believe this, I proceed to the Second Particular, to
Consider what Reason we have to be persuaded of this.

Secondly, Upon what Grounds may we be firmly persuaded of this Truth, That God
will thus multiply Pardons? It Is certain, to an humbl'd, awakened, convinced,
penitent Sinner, it must be glad Tidings of great Joy; that his Case will admit
of Hope. That he ought not to despair, that there is a possibility he may find
Mercy with God, if no more: But to have the Riches of God's Grace displayed, to
have a free and general Invitation made to all the Hungry and Thirsty, the
Weary and Heavy laden; to have a Promise of Mercy and of Forgiveness, whatever
thy Sins have been. What matter of Rejoicing is this? This will answer a
thousand Objections, which otherwise you could not tell what to say to. This is
proper to revive the most drooping Spirits, to make them adore God, and admire
his glorious Grace: This may cause them to think honorably of him, seek
earnestly to him, and thankfully accept his offered Mercy; as poor, wretched,
perishing, condemned, undone Creatures; toward whom the God of all Grace will
magnify his Rich and Undeserved Mercy. Therefore, be persuaded to believe it;
considering such things as these.

First, That there are large and express Promises, and most astonishing
Instances, in the Holy Scriptures, to Encourage your Faith, He that best
understands his own kind Thoughts to the Children of Men, to the chiefest of
Sinners, has assured you he will not only have Mercy, but abundantly pardon;
and that where Sin has abounded, Grace shall much more abound toward all of
them, who will accept of Mercy by Jesus Christ; so as God may not lose the
Glory of it. You think it very hard to be persuaded of this, but has not God
told you, that as far as the Heavens are above the Earth, so are his Thoughts
and Ways above yours? And though your Sins be as Crimson and Scarlet, that they
shall be as Snow and Wool; and that To the Lord our God, belong Mercies and
Forgiveness, though we have rebelled against him.

Have we not Instances of this, as to others? of the worst of Men and Women,
that have been washed and justified, through the Blood of Christ, and Spirit of
Christ? of Sinks of Sin, that have been made Vessels of Mercy? Many Examples in
the Old Testament and in the New, of Jews and Gentiles? What Folly, and what
aggravated Sin was David guilty of, after the Knowledge of God? and what great
Sins before Conversion was the Apostle Paul charged with? You have been
sometimes told, that it is an Instance of God's Wisdom and Kindness, to record
the the Example of David's Fall. Some it may be, think it were better left out,
lest it should encourage Sinners, but doubtless many a Man would have perished
in Despair, and made away himself, if it had not been for the Example of
David's Repentance; and God's Forgiveness of him, after such heinous
Transgressions.

Secondly, God has declared this to be his Nature and Delight. He proclaims it
as part of his Name, Exodus XXXIV. 5, 6. to be The Lord God, Gracious and
Merciful, Slow to Anger, and Abundant in Goodness and Truth, forgiving
Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. He is pleased in the Exercise of his Mercy, he
delights to be Gracious, and takes pleasure in them that hope in his Mercy. And
therefore what pleases him, and he delights to do, he will do abundantly. There
is an Inexhausted Treasure of Grace in God, Exceeding Riches of Grace, and
unsearchable Depths of Mercy and Grace. God, who is rich in mercy, (says the
Apostle) for the great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in
sins, has quickened us together with Christ, Ephesians. II. 4, 5. And all the
Saints are set forth, as studious and thoughtful about the Glorious Dimensions
of God's Grace, as endeavoring to comprehend the Breadth, Length, Height, and
Depth of this Grace, that passes Knowledge, Ephesians. I. 8. The Breadth of his
Love, in covering such a multitude of Sins, and pardoning such a multitude of
Sinners: The Depth of it, reaching us in the Depth of our Sin and Misery: The
Length of it, from Everlasting to Everlasting: The Height of it, in raising us
from a deserved Hell, to an infinitely Glorious Heaven. Love, Grace and Mercy,
are his Nature and Delight. It Is above our Thoughts, and past our
Comprehension. We read, that his Judgments are unsearchable, and his Ways past
finding out; it is as true of his Ways of Mercy, as of any. By that Name
Judgments, sometimes his Mercies are called, Psalm. XXXVI. 5, 6. Thy Judgments
are a great deep; to show the Meaning whereof, the Psalmist breaks out, O Lord,
how excellent is thy Loving Kindness to the Sons of Men, that put their trust
in thee? All the Merits of Christ are called the Mercies of God, the sure
Mercies of David. God is said to be Rich in Mercy, and no other Attribute of
God is called his Riches, but his Goodness, Grace and Love.

Thirdly, God uses variety of Arguments throughout the Scriptures, to persuade
us to believe this. He not only urges us from his own Example, and obliges us
to forgive our Trespassing Brother, (if he repent) unto seventy times seven,
but with the greatest Kindness, he bespeaks us to believe his Compassion, to be
persuaded of his Tenderness and Love. He employs a great deal of Rhetoric to
that purpose. Why say thou, O Jacob, and speak O Israel, my way is hid
from the Lord, and my Judgment is passed over from my God; have thou not known,
have thou not heard? that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the
ends of the Earth, faints not, neither is weary? Isa. XL. 7, 8. He appeals to
Heaven and Earth, to the Dumb and Insensible Creatures; that his Ways are
equal, that ours are unequal; he offers, he invites, he calls, and
expostulates, and complains of our Backwardness to believe him; he pleads, and
promises, and adds his Oath to his Word, As I live says the Lord, i. e. As I
am a Living God, I take no pleasure in the death of him that dies, but rather
that he return and live, than go on and dye. Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dye,
O House of Israel? He Is represented as with Sighs and Groans, bewailing the
Obstinacy of Sinners to their own Destruction. O that they were wise, and would
consider this! O that there were such a Heart in them? O that they knew the
things that belong to their peace, before they are hid from their Eyes! How
kind and encouraging are such Passages?

Fourthly, Consider, this is one great End of God's Patience, and Forbearance,
and of his continuing the Preaching of the Word, and the Ordinances of the
Gospel; that Sinners might be led to Repentance, by the Hopes of Forgiveness.
How many Years has God waited on some of you? Should not the Long-suffering of
God, that has a Tendency to Salvation, encourage you to believe, that there is
Mercy and Forgiveness with him? What quick Dispatch has he made with others,
while he has spared you? He has taken some, in the Act of their Vile
Abominations; many in the very height of their Wickedness; and has refused to
give them further time and space to repent: He has called some to Judgment in
their Youth, soon after they had broken the Fetters of their Education, cast
off the God of their Fathers, and begun to indulge themselves in youthful
Lusts: Many besure, (not greater Sinners than you) are gone to their place,
while he yet waits to be gracious to you. He offers you Pardon and Life, when
he might have condemned you to Remediless Wrath, and put it in Execution long
ago. He continues to exercise great Patience and Power in forbearing you. Is it
not with this kind Design, that it might lead you to Repentance, that you might
turn to him, seek after him, and entreat his Pity before it be too late? May
you not infer thus much from his Long-suffering? Did he bear with thee, when
thy Heart was hard as a Rock? and thou would not hearken to any Treaty of
Peace? and will he not accept thee now thy Heart begins to be contrite, and
broken with Sense of Sin, and Sorrow for it? Did he bear with thee while Sin
was thy Delight? and will he not be gracious if thou seek him, now Sin is
become thy Burden? Does he continue to call thee by his Word? and Commission
his Ministers to tell thee in his Name, that if thou return, he will abundantly
pardon? Does he order them to beseech thee for Christ's sake, and in his stead,
that thou would be reconciled to God? and can you suppose he is inexorable?
If a King should send one of his Attendants to a Condemned Prisoner, saying, Go
tell such a one, let him come to me for his Pardon, and he shall have it; my
Son has interceeded for him, and made his Peace, though he has forfeited his
Life, and deserved to dye, and I might put the Sentence in Execution to Morrow;
yet let him come, and confess his Sin, and ask Forgiveness, and I will pardon
him. Yea, tell him, I desire, I entreat, that he would come. I beg that he
would have pity on himself, and not refuse me: I earnestly pray, and beseech
him; I must take no Denial, he must come. What Kindness and Condescension were
this! You know how to apply it. It Is as certain unto all of you, by the
Preaching of the Gospel, as if you were spoken to by Name.

But if you reject the kind Offer of the Grace of the Gospel, and will not
return from your Evil Ways, but go on and put it to the venture; (after such a
Merciful Invitation, and that so often repeated) consider then, what a Hazard
you run, and if you hold on, how dreadful your Doom will be. All the Ministers
of Christ, instead of Blessing you in the Name of the Lord, must pronounce
against you all the Curses of the Law, and all the additional Curses, denounced
against the Despisers of the Gospel. And must say unto you, Anathema Maranatha,
Cursed in this World, 'till the Coming of Christ; and when he comes, Accursed
from his blessed Presence, into Everlasting Destruction. Yea, all the Angels of
God, all the Churches of Christ, all the Saints on Earth and in Heaven, will
adore Divine Justice, and can have no Compassion on you, if you go on to
despise the Grace of God, and will not be drawn with the Cords of his Love.

Fifthly, To persuade you, that God will abundantly pardon; Consider how
valuable a Price was paid for your Redemption, that you might have Forgiveness.
When you think of the Freeness of this Mercy to you, think also that it cost
the precious Blood of Jesus to Procure it. And by the great Propitiation for
Sin, which he has made, God has glorified his Holiness and Justice, and may
now glorify his Mercy and Grace, in pardoning and saving Sinners, without
lessening the Honor of his Authority and Government, or impeaching any of his
Attributes and Perfections. You may come, and beg Mercy for the sake of Jesus
Christ, saying, Lord, save me, for thy Mercy's sake, I am a Vile Sinner, a
Rebellious Creature, not only an unprofitable Servant, but a heinous Criminal:
I have nothing in my self, but Matter of Shame, and Humiliation; nothing of any
good, but what thou have given me. There Is nothing in any of my Services, but
need the Sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus, to make them accepted. But there is
Redemption, even the Forgiveness of Sin through the Blood of Jesus. Lord, Here
is the Blood shed for Expiation of my Sins: Lord, Here Is the Price paid for my
Reconciliation, here is a perfect Righteousness to cover me, here is a complete,
Attoning Sacrifice, Christ's Merit, Righteousness, and Intercession, and Grace
can save me. O let me be found in him, accepted in him! Did I dishonor God
formerly, by my aggravated Sins? Christ my Redeemer has honored him more by
his Death, than ever I dishonored him by my wicked Life.

Is it not a Trouble to you, to think with what Affection and Delight you
sinned, with what Deliberation you committed such and such Sins? Oh! remember
that Christ delighted to do the Mediatorial Will of his Father: He was
straightened 'till he drank of the bitter Cup, and was baptized with his own
Blood. He knew before hand, all that he was to do and suffer for our
Redemption, and yet willingly undertook it: Did you sin with much intenseness
of Spirit, so that your Heart was in it? Have your Crimes been (many of them)
Mental, Spiritual, Inward Sins? (like those of the Devil, which are worse than
Sensual, Carnal Ones) Remember, Christ's Sufferings lay much in his Soul also.
His Spirit, his Soul was heavy unto Death, etc.

And whatever Unworthiness you may apprehend of the Mercy offered you, remember
it is Free Mercy. You are called and invited to receive it, without Money and
without Price. If you are weary and heavy laden, and sensible of your
Unworthiness; if you see your need of his help, are desirous of it, and willing
to yield your selves to his Conduct; to be saved in a way of Free Grace, so as
to give him the entire Glory of your Salvation; you ought to believe that God
will show you Mercy, and abundantly pardon you. He has glorified his Mercy in
the purchase of Forgiveness by Christ, in the Publication of it in the Gospel,
and in the Application of it to particular Sinners upon Faith and Repentance,
or Repentance and Faith; (I scruple not to put either first.) since they are
inseparable, and are never parted: And both are absolutely needful. Repentance
toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, that at once we may give God
the Honor of his Authority and violated Law, by our Repentance; and of his
rich Grace in the Gospel, by our Faith in Christ. And can any thing be more
free to us, than to be forgiven, in this Method, on these Terms? to have all
our Transgressions blotted out for his Name's sake? and to be washed and
cleans'd in the Fountain of Christ's Blood, when we have nothing but our own
miserable, and wretched Case to move his Pity? He justisies us freely by his
Grace, and found a way to do it, with Honor to his own Name. What a strange
Passage is that of the Prophet? Isa. XLIII. 22, 23, 24. Thou have not called
upon me, O Jacob, but have been weary of me, O Israel, thou have not brought me
the small Cattle of thy burnt Offerings, neither have thou honored me with thy
Sacrifice; thou have bought me no sweet Cane with Money, neither have thou
filled me with the fat of thy Sacrifices, but thou have made me to serve with
thy sins, thou have wearied me with thine Iniquities. What might now be
expected, but that God should say, Therefore I will not hear thee when thou
call, I Will make thee a Sacrifice to my Wrath, I Will punish thee according to
thy Desert: But it is quite otherwise, for it follows in Verse 25. I, even I, am
he, that blotteh out thy Transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember
thy Sins. When the God whom we had offended by Sin, is become a God of
Forgiveness, in such a way and method of rich and glorious Grace, we need not
doubt but his Heart is in it, and therefore that he will abundantly pardon. He
might have exacted the Punishment of Sin, when he gave his only begotten Son,
to be a Propitiation for our Sin, and accepted his Suffering instead of ours.
There could be nothing move him to this, but his own Grace and Love: And
therefore we ought to believe, that he is ready to receive returning Sinners unto
Mercy for Christ's sake.

Sixthly, As consequent to this, Consider, that by believing, that God will
abundantly pardon returning Sinners, we give Honor and Glory to God. He is
pleased and honored by our giving Credit to his Word, and hoping in his Mercy.
Whereas if we distrust his Promises, and Declarations of Grace, we not only
disobey his Order, but refuse that which he delights in, and whereby he is
glorified. By not believing his Promises of Pardon, we do what we can to
frustrate the Command of Faith in Jesus Christ, and the Promse of Salvation by
him. Yea, to disappoint the great Design of Christ's Coming into the World,
which was to save Sinners. We undervalue the rich Provision he has made for
our Encouragement; we gratify the Devil, in keeping off from the only Remedy
which Christ has procured: We do in effect make God a Liar, by disbelieving
the Record he has given of his Son, not setting to our Seal that God is true,
1 John V. 10. John III. 33. If we honor and please God by our Faith and Hope,
more than by any thing else; we do as much dishonor and displease him by our
Unbelieving Despondency, and Despair. Yea, all the Sins of your past Life, that
make you fear God will never forgive you, are not clothed with higher
Aggravations of Guilt, than your doubting of the pardon of them, in Case you
unfeignedly return to God, and believe in Christ.

Lastly, You ought to believe it for the Reason added, Ver. 7. because God's
Thoughts are not as ours; but as far as the Heavens are above the Earth, etc.
We cannot think so kindly of any, who have injured us: as God thinks of us who
have offended him. Nor can we think to what degree God is able to forgive our
greatest Provocations, and show Mercy to the vilest Sinners, that will return.
We are prone to revenge, we are hardly reconciled; we are apt to return Evil
for Evil; we are not easily brought to Forgiveness. But My thoughts are not as
yours, (says God) You know not how far my Mercy can reach, I am God and not
Man. The distance between God and Man, between the Creature and Creator, is
infinitely more than between Heaven and Earth. What if you cannot imagine, that
ever I should have such Thoughts of Mercy for poor Sinners: Do you consider,
how high the Heavens are above the Earth? so are my Thoughts and Ways higher
than yours: They are like my self, infinite.

And how many, by their own Experience of God's kind and gracious Dealing with
them, who with holy Wonder and Thankfulness, have acknowledged and attested the
Truth of this: Many a time have I called my self a Prodigal, (to use the Words
of an Mr. Baxter of Conversing with God in Solitude, 4^^. page 363, 364.
Excellent Person) a Companion of Swine, a miserable, hard-hearted Sinner,
unworthy to be called his Son, when he has called me Child, and chid me for,
my questioning his Love, he has readily forgiven the Sins, which I thought
would have made my Soul the fuel of Hell; he has entertained me with Joy, with
Music and a Feast; when I better deserved to have been among the Dogs without
his Doors. He has embraced me in his sustaining, Consolatory Arms, when he
might have spurned my guilty Soul to Hell, and said, Depart from me thou Worker
of Iniquity, I know thee not. O little did I think, that he could ever have
forgotten the Vanity and Villainy of my Youth; yea, so easily have forgotten my
most aggravated Sins. When I had sinned against Light, when I had resisted
Conscience, when I had frequently and wilfully injured Love, I thought he would
never have forgotten it: But the greatness of his Love and Mercy, and the Blood
and Intercession of his Son has cancelled all. O how many Mercies have I
tasted, since I thought I had sinned away all Mercies! How patiently has he
born with me, since I thought he would never have put up more? -- Though I injure
and dishonor him by loving him no more, though I often forget him, and have been
out of the Way, when he has come or called me; though I have disobediently
turned away mine Ears, and unkindly refused the Entertainments of his Love; and
unfaithfully played with those, whose Company he forbad me; yet he has not
divorced me, or turned me out of Doors. O wonderful! that Heaven will be
familiar with Earth! and God with Man! the Highest with a Worm! and the most
Holy with an unconstant Sinner! Man refuses me, when God will entertain me:
Those whom I never wronged, reject me with Reproach; and God whom I have
unspeakably injured, does invite me, entreat me, and condescendeth to me, as if
he were beholden to me to be saved. Men that I have deserved well of, abhor me;
and God that I have deserved Hell of, does accept me. I upbraid my self with my
sins, but he does not upbraid me with them. I condemn my self for them, but he
condemns me not, I have Peace with him, before I can have Peace with my
Conscience.

Object. But after all these endearing Expressions of the Grace of God, (may
some say) we cannot tell how to believe, it is hard to be fully persuaded of
this. Consider therefore, the Verses following the Text, where there is this
Objection obviated. You say, you cannot have your Hearts duly affected with
these Declarations of God's Grace, you cannot be brought to accept this Mercy,
to close with this Offer, to be encouraged by such a Promise and trust in it:
It is therefore added, as directly suitable to such a Case, Verses 10, 11. As
the Rain comes down, and the Snow from Heaven, and returns not thither, but
waters the Earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give Seed to
the Sower, and Bread to the Eater. So shall my word be, that goes forth out of
my Mouth; it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which
I please, it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. That is, As the
Heavens do not give Light and Heat, and Snow in vain; but cause a promising
Spring, and a fruitful Harvest: So, says God, my Thoughts of Grace, manifested
by my Declarations of Mercy, and Promises of Forgiveness, shall have Efficacy
and Influence to make you believe; to enable you to hope and trust in my Mercy;
and so to be quiet and satisfied, that your great and heinous Sins shall be
forgiven. The very Publication of this Grace, shall be attended with a Power to
bring Souls to believe it. I know my Thoughts toward you, are Thoughts of
Peace, and not of Evil; to give you a gracious End, and raise your Expectations
of it, and they shall accordingly be fulfilled. The Declarations of this Mercy
shall be credited, my Word of Grace shall not be in vain; it shall take hold of
dejected, despairing Souls, and raise them to Faith and Hope. It Is with this
Encouragement we publish the glad Tidings of Salvation, and invite Sinners to
return to God by Jesus Christ, with an Assurance of finding Mercy. I say, it is
with this Encouragement, that we beseech them to be reconciled to God, and
assure 'em that he is ready to forgive: It Is in Hope, that by the Spirit
accompanying the Declaration of the Word, concerning this Forgiveness with God,
many Souls might be attracted and won, persuaded and overcome, and so prevailed
with to return to God, and believe the glorious Riches, Freeness and Abundance
of his Mercy. God grant we may find more and more, such fruits of preaching the
Gospel. On the other hand, I beseech you take heed, how you turn your Backs on
this Mercy of God, and the Offer of it: Beware how you shut your Ears against
his gracious Invitation, when he thus proclaims and publishes his Readiness to
forgive. Take heed how you go on in Sin, after God freely tenders you the
Forgiveness of all your Sins, if you will return. With the greatest Seriousness
I must tell you, that one such Sermon of God's forgiving Grace and Mercy,
rejected, slighted, and misimprov'd, may be of more dreadful Consequence to the
Souls of those that hear it, and make light of it, than I am able to express.

APPLICATION.
USE 1. Let this Mercy, Love and Grace, overcome your Hearts. Consider it again
and again: Apply it seriously to your selves. Is the Lord thus Gracious to me,
after so long a Rejection of him? Will he yet receive me, after so many
Refusals? Does he invite and call me again, after so much Contempt of his Mercy
and Grace? Will he yet show Mercy to me? What strange, astonishing Grace, what
endearing Kindness is this? What manner of Love is this? How true is it, that
God's Thoughts and Ways are not as ours? That God should speak such Language to
me as this. Though for lying Vanities, thou have forsaken thine own Mercies, yet
return to me: Though thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers, yet return:
Though thou have turned a deaf Ear to many Reproofs, yet thy Case is not
desperate. Though I offer my Son, and Life by him, (He that has the Son, has
Life) and ye would not: This Offer was repeated Sabbath after Sabbath, for many
Years, yet you would not hear it; you would not stoop to the Terms; yet return
unto me, I will pity and pardon you, I will abundantly pardon. Long since I
might have sworn in my Wrath, you shall never enter into my Rest. I might have
said, Let them alone, to be undone by their own Obstinate, Foolish Choice. I
might have resolved, never such an Offer should be made to you more. Never any
Sermon about it shall ever do you good more. But I am God and not Man, my
Thoughts and Ways are not as yours. I invite you again, I beseech you turn and
live, do not go on and dye. God speaks this Language to every one of you, the
worst of you, who hear me this Day.

Let none therefore think or say, it is too late for him or her; there is now no
more Mercy for me. For Christ yet stands at the Door and knocks, though you have
refused formerly, and shut the Door formerly, yet now if you will open the
Door, he will come in and sup with you, and you with him; Rev. III. 20. Nay,
though he has not taken Possession of thy Heart, he knocks at thy Door by his
Spirit, and is ready to enter; though you refuse him, he does not abandon you.
Though his Kindness and Love has been slighted, yet his Mercy is tendered still,
and his Patience prolonged. And will you resolve to go on thus? Will ye not
return? Are you content to perish, rather than come to Christ for Life? rather
than give him the Glory of your Salvation? Will you rather dye in your Sins,
than be beholden to him for your Forgiveness? rather than apply to God for it,
when he has provided an All-sufficient Savior, and offered you that Salvation
freely, which cost so dear to purchase? After this, for a poor, proud Sinner,
to turn his Back upon this Grace of God, to scorn this Savior, and disdain to
be saved by him; saying in Effect, I will have none of your Christ, none of his
Grace, none of his Mercy: I had rather enjoy my Lusts, continue in my Sin, and
put it to the Venture; how provoking is such Guilt? and how righteous will be
the Condemnation of such obstinate Sinners?

Secondly, Apply your self therefore to God in Christ, by Earnest Prayer. He
has the Words of Eternal Life, he is a Prince and a Savior, to give
Repentance as well as Pardon. The Spirit of Faith, is the Spirit of Jesus
Christ; he can open thy blind Eyes, and soften thy hard Heart; he that
commanded the Cripple to take up his Bed and walk, at the same time gave him
Power to obey. There is a Divine Spirit and Power, even the Spirit of Life and
Power in Christ Jesus, that accompanies the Preaching of the Gospel; this may
be hoped for, this ought to be valued, desired and begged. You ought never to
despair of God's Grace, to enable you to believe, when it continues to be your
Duty to believe on Christ; and it cannot but continue to be so, unless the
Gospel be repealed. Therefore beg with all your Hearts, that you may be enabled
to look to him, and be saved; to come to him, and find Rest to your Souls; to
believe on him, and receive Remission of Sins. For by beholding the Glory of
God in the Face of Christ, you may be changed into the same Image, from Glory
to Glory.

Beg an Understanding to know him that is true, and with all your Hearts to
believe on him, that you may assent to his Word, consent to his Covenant,
resign to his Will, and trust in his Promise, depending on his Readiness,
Willingness, Power and Faithfulness to save you: Saying, Lord, draw me, and I
will run after thee; Lord, thou art willing to receive Sinners, make me willing
to receive thee: Lord, thou have received Gifts for Men, even for the
Rebellious; O communicate of those Gifts of Grace to me! I see my need of
Christ, and what Reason I have to come to him; O lead me to him, and work in me
to will and to do of thine own good Pleasure!

Thirdly, If you begin to find the Spirit of Christ breathing on your Souls,
that have been yet unperswaded; if you have any Motions of the good Spirit of
God, by the preaching the Word, or by any other means, take heed you thankfully
cherish and entertain them. When you find your Souls begin to turn toward
Christ, if you find any Beams of Heavenly Light break in upon you; any
Inclinations started of applying to him, besure to obey the Voice of his
Spirit. Open every Door of your Souls to receive his Light. When he works any
Conviction of Sin, any sense of your need of a Savior, any Desires after him,
or Purposes of Heart to leave your Sins, and give up your selves to God, to be
saved by Christ, according to the Gospel; for your Souls sake encourage such
Thoughts, cherish such Suggestions. Beware how you turn them off, but presently
and thankfully strike in, saying, Lord, I yield, I am overcome; I have long
enough, and too long refused thy Grace, disobeyed thy Will, and resisted thy
Spirit. Thou have often knocked, and I would not open; O now enter thou Blessed
of the Lord, and take Possession of my Soul! Let Christ dwell in my Heart by
Faith, and his Spirit form a Temple there, and reside there as in his own
Dwelling for ever. Lord, art thou yet willing, (after all my Provocations) to
show Mercy, and abundantly to pardon? Willing to be my God and my Savior?
Blessed be God, I am now willing to be thy Servant. Thy powerful Grace has
made me willing: Thy Spirit opened my Eyes to see my self undone, to see that
Christ is able and willing to save me; I hope, I am now ready to receive him,
willing to embrace him as Christ Jesus my Lord. I come to thee, O God, as to
the Fountain of Life, to be quickened and cleans'd, to be washed, justified,
sanctified and saved from Sin and Hell, by the Blood and Spirit of Jesus,
through the Free Mercy and Grace of God.

But to Conclude, If after all, there be any Such here as are not, will not be
persuaded to forsake their Evil Ways, and turn to God in Christ; Let them
consider, that the longer they continue in their Obstinacy and Unbelief, under
the preaching of the glorious Grace and Mercy of God to Sinners, so much the
more Danger they are in of being lost for ever. For their Minds must needs be
more blinded by sinning against the Light: Their Hearts more hardened, by
misimproving that which should have softened them: The Power of Conscience is
weakened, after so many Struglings and Combats, that they must needs have had
with their own Consciences; after so many Contests between Corruption and
Conviction, between Truth in the Mind, and Corrupt Inclinations in the Heart.
Especially, if they have formerly been awakned, and there have been some Fears
and Hopes, with good Desires, and other Affections formerly stirred; if by the
Common Operations of the Holy Spirit, they have had some serious Concern about
their Salvation, and all this is worn off and gone; the Case of such is very
bad, and their Recovery the less hopeful; because their Repentance is the more
unlikely. And if they persist, their Doom will be intolerable. But it is to
prevent this, as to those who may be in such a dangerous Case, that I thus
speak. And therefore I most earnestly invite, beseech and entreat them; however
Wicked and Unrighteous they have been, not to make light of this further Offer
of the Grace of the Gospel: And that by no means, they would despair of finding
Mercy with God; even Now, if they will Return to him with all their Hearts,
whatever their past Sins have been. If Now they will return, God will
abundantly pardon: For his Thoughts are not as ours, etc.

THE Third Sermon.
ISAIAH, LV. 7, 8. Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous Man his
Thoughts, and let him Return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him;
and to our God, for he will abundantly Pardon.

For My Thoughts are not your Thoughts, neither are your Ways, My Ways, says
the Lord.


IN Two former Discourses, I have considered this double Precept, or Injunction
of Duty, which concerns Sinners of all sorts; under the two Names of Wicked and
Unrighteous, that they must forsake their Evil Ways and Thoughts; and return to
the Lord, which are the two parts of unfeigned Repentance. I have also
considered the encouraging Promise, that thereupon God will have Mercy, and
will abundantly Pardon. And I have now to consider, what Ground we have to
believe this: Because God's Thoughts are not as ours, nor his Ways as ours,
etc. But there remains something of the Application of the Second General, That
if the Wicked forsake their evil Ways and Thoughts, and return to God; he will
not only forgive, but He will abundantly pardon.

1. USE. Be thankful to Heaven for this good News; that God will thus
mercifully treat returning Sinners. He might have insisted on the Terms of the
violated, first Covenant, to the Ruin of all Mankind: He might have left us,
as the fallen Angels, without the Proposal, Promise, or Offer of a Redeemer:
But God so loved the World, that he gave his Son, that whoever believes on him
should not perish, but have Everlasting Life.

When we think of the Case of the fallen Angels, who are reserved in Chains of
Darkness to the Judgment of the Great Day, and compare it with our own, who
have a Proclamation of Mercy and Grace by the Gospel; we have Reason to adore
the distinguishing Goodness of God to us. If a few poor, inconsiderable People
in a Kingdom, of the meanest sort; should be found guilty of Treason against a
Prince; when there are Multitudes of the Nobility and Gentry, who have likewise
rebelled against him; and a Pardon should be offered to those of the poorer,
meaner sort; while the Nobles and Great Men are all Executed, and not a Man of
them received to Mercy; would not this be Astonishing Goodness to the others?
Especially if those Great Men, the Principal Subjects of the Kingdom, were
Condemned for one Offense, for one Act of Treason; and the others forgiven many
Transgressions, and received to Favor and Honor, after many Years of
Rebellion. You easily know how to apply it.

How thankful ought we to be, that we are not left in the remediless Condition
of Devils? that there is a Sacrifice offered for Sin, a full Atonement made, a
sufficient Price paid, a Fountain opened, a new and living Way, for God to be
glorified in the Forgiveness and Salvation of Returning Sinners, that believe
on his Son. It is matter of Continual Admiration, and Thankful Praise, that we
have Forgiveness this way. Can we have a fuller Evidence of the Evil and
Malignity of Sin, or of God's Displeasure against it? and consequently of the
Worth and Value of a Pardon; than by the Sufferings, Blood and Sacrifice of
Christ? And what stronger Proof, or clearer Evidence of God's Readiness to
forgive Sin, than the giving of his Son to dye for our Sins, to cleanse us from
all Sin; even the most heinous, grievous Offenses: Because his Mercy through
the Mediator is greater than the Sins of the whole World.

Let us with Hearty Thankfulness adore him, for this glorious Mystery of his
Love and Grace: And that we may be Thankful indeed, let us apply it to our
selves in particular. Let us think of our own miserable Case under the Guilt of
Sin, and the Curse of God. Let us think of the many thousand Talents we owe,
without being able to pay one Farthing; of the Innumerable Crimes we are guilty
of; and that the Wages of every one is Death: And that all the Creatures in
Heaven and Earth could not procure the Forgiveness of one sinful Thought. If
you think you have, or ever had any serious sense of the Evil of Sin, and your
lost undone Condition as Sinners, how thankfully should you receive these glad
Tidings of Mercy, by Jesus Christ? But if you have gone further, and have
actually received the Atonement; if you are brought under the Bond of the
Covenant; if you are united to Christ by Faith, and so interested in the sure
Mercies of David; and by Forgiveness delivered from Condemnation, what Special
Thankfulness is due from such? When there are comparatively so Few, to whom the
Gospel is preached, but do receive this Grace of God in vain? Lord, Who, and
what am I, that I should have good hope through Grace, of the Forgiveness of my
Sins? of mine, that have been more aggravated than the Sins of Others: When
Others, not greater Sinners, (it may be, not so bad) shall perish for ever; and
never be forgiven: When it may be, some of my Companions, and Accomplices in
Sin, are cut off by Death, without Repentance and Pardon! Were not Others
called, and invited as well as I? But he has opened mine Ears, and Heart, to
receive him; and so has pardoned me, while others are condemned. O Admirable,
and Astonishing Grace!

Secondly, Take heed of abusing this Declaration of Grace to the worst of
Sinners.

I. First, As any Countenance to Sin, or Encouragement to continue in it: Shall
we sin, because God is ready to forgive Sin; that his Grace may abound? God
forbid; Romans VI. 1. Far be it from us, let it be an abhorred Thought. It Is
needful to mention this, because in many Instances, the most pure and holy
Doctrine may be perverted to patronize Sin. We read, that the Continuance of
the Course of Nature, was made a ground of Trust by the Psalmist, as an
Adorable Evidence and Instance of his Faithfulness and Truth. Psalm CXIX. 89.
Thy Word is settled in the Heavens, and thy Faithfulness to all Generations.
And yet some Atheistically abused it; 2 Pet. III. 4. saying, All things
continue as they were: Where is the Promise of his Coming? The Apostle says,
The Time is short, and the Fashion of the World passes away; therefore, let
them that have such and such Relations, Possessions, and Employments in the
World, carry it as if they had none. Whilst others abuse this, and say; the
Time is short, Let us cat and drink, for to morrow we may dye. So here, God is
ready to show Mercy to returning Sinners, therefore, Let the wicked forsake his
way, etc. Others turn this Grace of God into Wantonness; and will venture the
more boldly upon Sin, because God is ready to forgive. These things (says the
Apostle John) I write unto you, that ye sin not. But if any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father. There Is a vast difference between the Remission of
Sins past, and an Allowance of Sin for the future. We may take Comfort in the
abounding Grace of God, and his Readiness to forgive; though we must dread the
Thought of venturing on Sin, that his Grace may abound in the Forgiveness of
it. This is contrary to all Gratitude and Ingenuity; and to the true Nature of
Faith and Repentance. And there can hardly be a more dangerous Symptom of
damnable Ungodliness, than for any to presume to sin upon this Consideration;
That they hope they shall be forgiven. The Apostle Jude, ver. 4. speaks of some
such, Who turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, denying the only Lord God, and
our Lord Jesus Christ; and he says of them, that They were ordained of old to
Condemnation: For the Grace of God that brings Salvation, ought to teach us to
deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, etc.

This sinning against God, because he will abundantly pardon, is in some
respects more Aggravated than the Sin of Devils, who will curse God, and fly in
his Face; because there is no hope of Pardon. But God offers Pardon to you, and
declares that he is ready to forgive. And will you dare to sin the more? If
ever you are awakened to a Sense of Sin, this of all others will be most likely
to sink you into Despair; that you ventured to sin in hopes of Pardon. For what
can relieve a convinced, awakned Soul, but the Freegrace of God in the
Forgiveness of Sin? Whereas such a One may say, Lord, this very Mercy I have
abused, I have sinned the more because of this Grace. And if we should mention
to such a one, the Instances of Manasseh, Paul, etc. who after great Sins were
pardoned; he will be ready to reply, that they never sinned in hope of
Forgiveness, or turned the Grace of God into Wantonness, as I have done.

There Is Forgiveness with God, that he may be feared, served, loved and obeyed.
But will any say, there is Forgiveness with God, that he may be slighted and
neglected, rebelled against, and disobeyed? His abused Goodness will turn to
the more intolerable Wrath, against all such as presume on his Mercy;
apprehending that they shall find an Easy Pardon, though they continue in their
Sins. It Is to sin against the very Nature and End of God's Grace; to cut off
their own Plea for it, and the general Ground of their Hope in it. It Is without
a Promise, and against a Threatening, for any to expect Forgiveness, if they
wilfully continue in sin: It Is to pervert the whole Gospel, to imagine that God
will justify the Ungodly, while they remain in their Unbelief and Ungodliness.
Is not Unbelief a part of Ungodliness, as contrary to the most express Command.
of God to believe on his Son? If ever God show Mercy unto any, and abundantly
pardon them; he always gives them Repentance unto Life, and Faith unfeigned.

And let such remember, that as God promises Mercy and Forgiveness to
Returning Sinners, and that his Thoughts are far above ours, as Heaven above
the Earth in this Matter; so his Thoughts of Anger, Wrath and Fury, against
Obstinate, Wilful, Presumptuous, Impenitent Sinners, are also above our
Thoughts, as far as the Heavens are above the Earth. He will tear in pieces,
and none shall deliver; he that made them will show them no mercy; and who
knows the power of his Anger? he will laugh at their Calamity, and mock when
their fear comes. He will wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy Scalp
of such a one that goes on still in his Trespasses, Psalm. LXVIII. 21. Prove. I.
latter end.

II. Secondly, Take heed of abusing this Doctrine of God's Grace, by admitting
slight Thoughts of Sin, so as to encourage you to delay seeking after
Forgiveness; or to seek and expect it any other way, but only through Faith in
Jesus Christ.

As to the Matter of Delay, the Uncertainty of Life, and the Uncertainty of
God's giving Grace hereafter, to them that refuse it now, is sufficient to be
said here, if duly considered. That which I now aim at, is to discourage any
Hopes of obtaining Forgiveness with God, but only through the Blood, Sacrifice,
and Righteousness of Christ: There is no other Savior, no other Mediator
between God and Man. If ever you are reconciled to God, and find Mercy with
him, it must be through Jesus Christ. The Way and Method is fixed, and
published, and declared to be unalterable: There is no other Name under Heaven,
but his, by which any Man can be saved: If God be gracious to any, and deliver
them from going down to the Pit, it is because he has found a Ransom, Job
XXXIII. 24.

The Absolute Mercy of God is not to be rested in; for he has told us in what
Way and Method he will dispense his Mercy; and how we shall partake of it: That
we must honor the Son, as we honor the Father; receive him as Christ Jesus
the Lord, the only Mediator between God and Man; and that If we believe not
that Jesus is he, we must dye in our Sins. It Is not enough to cease to do Evil,
and make Restitution where you have injured and wronged any, (which yet is a
necessary Fruit of Repentance;) It Is not a little outward Reformation, or the
Performance of some Duties of Religious Worship, that before were neglected,
that will be sufficient, if you overlook Jesus Christ, and lay the stress of
your Hope, for Acceptance with God, on any thing else.

If you should fast, and pray, and weep, and mourn, and wear Sackcloath, and
give all you have to the Poor, and continue a Life of Austerity and
Mortification for many Years; this will not avail, if you think to pacify God
herewith, and substitute this in the room of the Blood and Righteousness of
Christ, in order to Forgiveness. You will but provoke God, and dishonor the
Redeemer, and deceive your own Souls. It Is certain, we are naturally prone to
fix upon some other Bottom, inclined to establish a Righteousness of our own,
instead of Christ Jesus, and his Righteousness. But we can never be secure from
the Charge of the Condemning Law, and the Challenge of Divine Justice, but by
being united to Christ, interested in him, found in him, and accepted with God
on his Account.

USE III. Let me beseech you to pity those Sinners, who are not returned to
God, and interested in his pardoning Mercy; and to pity such, as desiring and
endeavoring to return, do yet apprehend and fear, that they shall never be
pardoned.

First, As to those as are yet under the Guilt of Sin, and are not returned to
God, nor interested in his pardoning Mercy: Consider their Miserable Case, and
pity them: For,

First, If they are not Partakers of ths abundant Pardon, there is no one sin
that they were ever guilty of, that is forgiven. Without Repentance, (which
includes forsaking our Evil Ways, and returning to God,) there is no Forgiveness
of any Sin: Though Temporal Judgments have sometimes been diverted upon External
Humiliation, no one Sin is blotted out, but through the Blood of Christ, who is
exalted to be a Prince and Savior, to give Repentance as well as Remission of
Sins: And these are never to be parted. Therefore if any have lived twenty,
thirty, or forty Years in the World, or longer, whenever God comes to enter
into Judgment with you, all the Sins of your past Life, with all their several
Aggravations, will be found in the Indictment, and charged against you: You are
under the Guilt of them all; as much as if they were committed yesterday. As
God's pardoning Mercy reaches to all the unknown, and forgotten Sins of true
Penitents, as well as those which they actually remember, and repent of, so
where he does not forgive all, he forgives none. And if the Guilt of one sin be
enough to sink thee into Hell; what is it to have Ten Thousand to answer for?
If you cannot stand in the Judgment, when accused but for one sinful Thought or
Word, what will become of you, when you have all the numberless Transgressions
of your past Lives to answer for?

Secondly, Consider, that 'till sin be forgiven, the Guilt of every unpardoned
Sinner increases every day. The longer he lives, he is still heaping up Wrath
against the Day of Wrath. Upon every failure of our Duty to God or Man, there is
a Debt of Punishment resulting from it; and every New Sin is a Figure added to
the Old Score. The longer therefore any one lives in an unpardoned State, the
more Guilt he contracts, and the more Crimes he has to Answer for.

Thirdly, Consider, that upon this Account, 'till we are interested in the
pardoning Mercy of God; we are under the Curse and Condemnation of the Law.
Whatever Advantages a Man may enjoy above Others, whatever Gifts, Reputation,
Prosperity, etc. he is still under a Divine Curse; he is condemned already; and
if he dye in this Condition, he must perish for ever. And how soon may Death
put a Period to all thy Hopes of Forgiveness? In the mean time you are under a
Divine Curse, that reaches to all you have, and all you enjoy: In Health and
Sickness, Prosperity and Adversity, wherever you go, and whatever you do. You
please God in nothing; but abuse his Mercy, and are liable every Moment to his
Wrath; and if you dye, that stroke of Death which separates thy Soul from thy
Body, will separate thee from God and Heaven for ever.

And this Curse of God will be found to be Intolerable, as well as unavoidable.
When God deals with Sinners, as a God of Vengeance, they shall not be so weak,
as to be annihilated by his Wrath; or so strong, as to resist or avoid his
Righteous Vengeance; and it is Everlasting Wrath likewise: Without being now
reconciled to God, and interested in his pardoning Mercy by Jesus Christ, the
Wrath of God abides on you; and will for ever abide.

Fourthly, Let me add one Consideration more, to raise your Pity to Unpardoned
Sinners, and that is, their present deplorable Case, by the Accusations of
their own Conscience. For sooner or later a guilty Conscience will speak:
Especially as to those that live under the Preaching of the Gospel. The Sinners
in Zion shall be afraid, Fearfulness shall surprise the Hypocrite: They may try
various Methods to stop the Mouth of Conscience, by the Noise and Clatter, and
Hurry of Worldly Business; they may think to forget their Misery, and patch up
a kind of Peace for a little while; but this is a false Peace, that if not
speedily broken, will end in Everlasting Anguish: And if it be, (as a thousand
to one but it will be,) what Trembling, Horror, and Despair must be expected?
How low will such sink; when they awake out of their Security? How will they
roar and cry out under the Terrors of the Lord? How bitterly will they complain
of the Burden of Sin, as a Mountain on their Backs? Of the Wounds of Sin, as so
many poisoned Arrows in their Hearts? How will their Joints tremble, their Lips
quiver, and their Hearts ache? When they shall see their Sins set in Order
before them, and cannot hope for Pardon? But whether they feel their Misery or
no, their Case is dismal, for they do but dance about the bottomless Pit, and
the next Hour may tumble in. Conscience may awake sooner than you believe, and
e're long it will. Conscience, I say, which is an Accuser, none can silence, a
Judge that none can bribe. And if they will but give themselves Time and
Leisure to think; a gloomy Darkness, like the Shadow of Death must now
overspread their Souls: They have no Relief, but by endeavoring not to think
of their Danger. Are not such to be pitied? O do what you can to awaken and
save them!

Secondly, There Is another sort, who need your Compassion, i. e. They who
desire and endeavor to return to God, and seek after Christ, but apprehend
there is no Forgiveness for them. Though God will abundantly Pardon Others; they
reckon they shall never be interested in his pardoning Mercy. They hear of
God's multiplying Forgivenesses to Others; but dare not think, they shall have
a Share in it. They read of a Savior, but believe they shall never be saved by
him; they hardly dare look into the Bible, lest they read their own
Condemnation. All the Terrible Things in the Scriptures against Impenitent
Unbelievers, against Apostates and Obstinate Sinners, they apply to themselves.
They dare not look into the Grave, nor think of dying, because of what follows,
in the sinal Judgment of Christ, and the Everlasting Destruction of Sinners. If
they had any former Peace, they reckon it was all Deceit, Mistake and
Presumption: For after all their Profession, and Hearing, and Reading, and
Praying, etc. they tell you, They shall perish, and be condemned as Hypocrites;
and There Is no Mercy for them.

O with what Bowels of Pity and Compassion, should we consider the Case of
such! And treat them with the Spirit of Meekness and Gentleness! Christ is the
Savior of Sinners, but He is none of mine, (they say) for I heard his Gospel
Grace declared, but did not accept it; I outstood my Day of Grace, and the
Things of my Peace are hid from mine Eyes; He called me, but I would not come;
and it is now too late. O it is now too late! He knocked, and I would not open;
and now the Door is shut against me. I am given up to a Hard Heart, etc. The
very Thought of Heaven, and the Happiness of the Saints, does but terrify
them, because they think they have lost it, and shall never come there: As well
as the Thoughts of Hell, which they reckon their Deserved Portion, and that
e're long it will be so. And that Word Everlasting, Everlasting Destruction,
cuts them to the Heart. And well it may, if they believe it belongs to them;
and that they shall fall under the condemning Sentence of the Judge, to pass
into Everlasting Fire. And in several such Cases, the Devil strikes in, and
aggravates their Distress: He insults over them; What think ye now of Sin?
Where Is the Pleasure and Advantage of it now? To what purpose has been all
your Praying, Hearing, attending on Ordinances, Coming to the Lord's Table,
etc. You are fit indeed to come to the Lord's Table; you have come Unworthily,
you have sealed your Damnation by it, you have eat and drank Judgment to your
selves by it again and again.

And such is their Darkness and Perplexity, they know not what to Answer, but
conclude They are lost, and the Gospel hid from them; that Christ is not their
Friend, and will not be their Savior. Some of them will tell you, they are as
sure of it, as if they were in Hell already. It Is as true, they say, as if they
had heard his Condemning Sentence: He has shut up his Bowels, and his Tender
Mercy for ever from them: And there is nothing remains, but a fearful Looking
for of Wrath, and Judgment, Tribulation, and Anguish: And that all their
present Darkness, is but the Forerunner of Eternal Darkness: And what they feel
now, is nothing to what they fear. And if they be in such Agonies now, O what
will it be to lie in the Flames of Hell? Wretched Miserable Creatures! they
know not how to live, and they dare not dye; lest Death should open the Door to
Eternal Damnation. And these Fears are heightened, when ever they meet with
those Christians, who have any Hopes of Heaven; because they say, Christ saves
Others, but will not save them. Do not such as these deserve our Compassion?
(And there be many such in this City.) Though Natural Melancholy, and Bodily
Indisposition give some Occasion, at least to heighten such Terrors and
Distress in several; yet the sense of past Guilt, and the Temptations of Satan
must not be overlookt. What I have to say on the Third General, of God's
Thoughts not being as ours, will be suitable to their Case.

But before I proceed to that, let me mention something for the Trial, and
Examination of our selves, whether we are interested in this Forgiveness or no?

Would you know whether your Sins are forgiven, whether you are interested in
this Promise of multiplied Pardon? Consider in the General, and Examine your
Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts II. 21. See
the Sermons of the Forgiveness of Sin, by the Reverend Dr. Bates, 8vo. Where
the whole Doctrine of Pardon is more accurately laid down.
The Essential Acts of Repentance are, Godly. Sorrow for all our known Sins;
and a sincere Purpose of Heart, to turn from all Sin to God; with Answerable
Endeavors of Universal Holiness. The three Acts of saving Faith in Christ are,
(1.) An Assent of the Mind to Scripture-Revelation, concerning Christ. (2.) The
Consent of the Soul, embracing and receiving him upon his own Terms. (3.) A
Relyance and Trust on him for Pardon of Sin, and Eternal Life. More
particularly,

I. You may Consider your Repentance, and enquire how you stand affected to
Sin? Have you been under any deep Conviction of the Evil of Sin, as to cause
not only some Sorrow but Hatred and Detestation of it? Have you seen your
selves lost and undone by reason of Guilt, so as absolutely to need pardoning
Mercy? Is the Heart of Stone taken away, and a Heart of Flesh given? What
Humiliation for Sin, and Self-abasement in the Apprehension of your Vileness,
have you ever had? Have you been disquieted and burdened under the Sense of
Sin, so as to condemn your selves; and see that you are lost without the
Free-Mercy of God in Christ? Owning the Righteousness of God, if he should cast
you off; and yet looking up to God through Jesus Christ with Hope? It Is true,
there is a great Difference in the Expressions of Sorrow and Humiliation for
Sin, which some make beyond others; but all are made to see the Evil of Sin, so
as to be cured of the Love of it; to humble themselves, and acknowledge their
Vileness.

Have you thereupon been brought to an Ingenuous Confession of Sin, Psalm.
XXXVIII. 18. with Earnest Prayers to God for Forgiveness, when you remember the
peculiar Aggravations of many of your Crimes? How long continued in, against
how many Helps, and Warnings, Calls, and Counsels, and Obligations to the
contrary? How small the Temptation, how frequent the Repetition; and yet how
much Wilfulness, notwithstanding the various Methods of God's Grace and
Providence to reclaim you? Such a Conviction cannot long be concealed and hid.
Enquire therefore, what Effects it has had, to bring you into the Presence of
God, there to confess and bewail your Folly? O what a Beast, what a Fool, what
a Wretch have I been, thus and thus have I sinned against Heaven? How low
should I abase my self in the Presence of God? How unworthy am I to lift up
mine Eyes to the Throne of his Glory? How wonderful is his Patience, that I am
yet alive?

If you have a serious Sense of Sin, you will not be able to keep Silence; for
that is contrary to the Confession of Sin, mentioned Psalm. XXXII. 5. I
acknowledged my Sin unto thee, and mine Iniquity have I not hid. While he kept
silence, or did not confess his Sin, his Bones were vexed, his Heart was
disquieted. But upon a free and full Confession to God, his Spirit was calmed,
and he could look through his Penitential Tears, with Hope to God's Mercy-Seat.
God requires this Confession in order to Forgiveness, Jer. III. 12, 13. Return,
O backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine Anger to fall
upon you, for I am merciful, says the Lord, only acknowledge thine Iniquity,
etc. And if we confess our sin, (the Apostle tells us) God is faithful and just
to forgive them, 1 John I. 9. And the more free and particular we are in our
Confession of Sin to God, so much the better. This cannot be without a Holy
Sorrow and Shame, in the Remembrance of your past Folly, your Sinfulness and
Pollution, your Ingratitude and Rebellion against God, and not merely upon the
Account of any Penal, Afflictive Consequences, by which you have smarted. For
Godly Sorrow will distinguish it self by the Principles and Motives of it, to
be another thing, than merely bowing down the Head under the Burden of
Affliction. There will be a Holy Shame and Confusion of Face, in the sense of
what you have done, and what you have deserved; so as to tremble at the Thought
of committing the like Sins again; and to fear the Temptations that might draw
you to it; and make you reckon every Burden of Affliction tolerable, in
comparison of the Burden of Sin. Considering what we have done, and against
whom we have sinned: Considering what a foolish Choice we have made, what Grace
we have slighted; what Mercies we have abused; and how unworthily we have
behaved our selves to God, our Owner, Maker and Sovereign; and unto Christ, our
Savior and Redeemer; and unto the Holy Spirit, who has been striving with us:
Hereupon we condemn our selves, and beg that God would not condemn us; we are
made sensible of our Unworthiness of the least Favor; and as the Prodigal or
Publican, beg free Mercy: Owning his Righteousness, if he should deny it. Thus
judging our selves, we justify God; and hereby give Glory to him.

This will make his Mercy the more welcome, and our Prayers the more Earnest.
Such a Sense of Sin we must carefully improve, to increase our Hatred of it,
Resolutions to forfake it, and Endeavors against it for the future: To promote
and preserve Humility, and a low Esteem of our selves, and entire Submission to
all the Word and Will of God: To help us to perform every Duty, and join in
every Ordinance, with more Meekness and Self-abasement; and to bear every
Affliction as deserving a thousand times worse than we ever yet suffered. This
will make us feel more our need of Christ for Pardon, and sanctifying Grace;
and make us have daily Recourse to him, for the Influence of his Blood and
Spirit: And it will make us ready upon any just Occasion, to confess our Sins
to Men also, if it appear to be for the Honor of God, that we do so; this will
make us more compassionate toward Others, who have fallen by Temptation. This
will raise our Thankfulness for every little Favor, for every beginning of
Mercy, for every thing of Grace, that we do, or may receive from God: And cause
us readily to embrace and welcome the Gospel Discovery, and Revelation of God's
Forgiveness of Sin.

This serious Conviction of our Guilt and Folly, will make us own our selves,
the Chiefest of Sinners, as knowing the special Aggravations of our own Sins
beyond what we know of Others. I do not know as to other Men, their Advantages
or Disadvantages, Helps or Hindrances by Education, Knowledge, Admonition,
Counsel, Afflictions, and special Obligations, as I do my own. I do not know
the Strength, the Urgency, the Importunity of their Temptations; whether if I
had the like, I might not have been as bad or worse. I do not know the Force
and Power of Bodily Constitution, inclining 'em strongly to some Sins. I do not
know whether their Sins have been committed upon such small Temptations, as
many of mine have been: Or whether against so many Motions of God's Spirit; or
whether they continued so long without Repentance; or against so many Helps to
repent. I do not know whether there was so much of Wilfulness and Deliberation
in Other Men's Sins; as I know there has been in my own. I cannot tell, but as
to other Men's Faults, there may be something to lessen, to extenuate, to
mitigate their Guilt, that does not appear: It may be, their Principles and
Intentions were not so bad; and there was more of Infirmity, more of Mistake
and Error, more of Weakness and Surprise in their Sins, than I know there was
in 'mine. I may hope they did it ignorantly, or but seldom; or that the
Consequence is not so bad, as to God's Dishonor, and the Mischief done to
others; I may hope a great deal of what I hear of their Crimes may be false, or
that God has given them Repentance, though I know it not. And have Reason to
consider as to several, that they have otherwise many Excellent Qualifications,
many Useful and Valuable Things in 'em, for which they ought to be esteemed.
And so judging charitably of others, with serious Scrutiny into our selves, we
shall see Reason to own our selves the Chiefest of Sinners. Such an humble
Sense of our sinful Vileness, is a part of true Repentance, and an Evidence of
Forgiveness.

II. We cannot suppose this, without Forsaking of Sin, to which the Promise of
Pardon is made. If God has forgiven you, he enables you by his Spirit to walk
in his Ways, to strive, and watch, and pray against those Sins, which with a
Godly Sorrow you have confessed and bewailed, so that you stand in Awe of God's
Authority; and allow your selves in no wilful known Sin; or in any Negligent
Omissions of positive, plain Duty; but endeavor to walk in all his
Commandments blameless.

However, because of the Imperfection of this in the Best, Examine what
Conflicts you have, what Opposition you make against Sin, by Renewed, Spiritual
Principles. Is it the Desire, Care and Endeavor of your Souls, to have the
Power of Indwelling Sin weakened, and the Habits of Grace strengthened, and your
Obedience more Uniform? Endeavoring to grow in Grace, especially in that Grace
which is contrary to your particular Sin and Corruption? Is there an Earnest
Desire, and Constant Resolution, and Endeavor to bring forth Fruits worthy of
Repentance? The Wicked must forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous Man his
Thoughts, if God does abundantly pardon: And to forsake it, is more than a bare
Refraining from Sin; he must give over all Acquaintance with it, and watch
continually against it. Whosoever retains any one Beloved, Darling Sin, cannot
be said to forsake Sin, though he refrain from all others. He must forsake it, so
as to return to God, and walk in a contrary Path. It must be forsaken as to the
Affection and Love of it, as well as the Outward Practice. Then we forsake Sin
indeed, when we loath it, and hate it, and carefully watch against it. As a Man
is said to forsake his Meat, (not when he cannot get it, or come by it) but
when he has no Stomach to it; so does he forsake his Lusts, (not when he has
no Opportunity) but when he has no Affection; when there is an Habitual Enmity
in his Heart against it, and a constant Care in the Life to avoid it.

Is there no Sin but you are desirous to know, and part with? Do you love the
Holy Image of God, wherever you discern it? and labor after a greater
Conformity to the Divine Life? Is it the daily Burden of your Hearts, that you
inwardly sanctify God no more, and glorify him so little in the World? Are
your Thoughts, Desires, Opinions, and and Designs changed? The Bent of your
Souls, and the Course of your Lives altered? Can you say, My Heart is inclined
to keep thy Statutes always, even to the end? Psalm. CXIX. 112. I esteem all his
Commandments concerning all things to be right? and am desirous to know the
whole Will of God, that I may do it? And if in particular Instances by
Temptation, you turn out of the Way, and contract Guilt; are you restless and
uneasy, 'till you return to God? Can you say with the Psalmist, I have kept
the Way of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from him; for all his
Judgments were before me, and I did not put away his Statutes from me; I was
also upright before him, and kept my self from mine Iniquity, Psalm. XVIII. 21,
22, 23. I confess, as to Sins that by the Temperament and Constitution of the
Body, we are more inclined and tempted to, than to other Sins, a Total Victory
is not to be expected, so as in no Degrees to fall into such Sins after
Repentance. Take heed in such Cases, that you rise again speedily by
Repentance; that you walk softly and humbly; and that the principal Tendency of
your Repentance and Prayer be against those Sins: And you will gradually get
Strength against 'em: So as to say, that no Iniquity has Dominion over you;
that you are not the willing Servants of Sin, so as to love it, and
deliberately to allow it; but the Desire of your Soul is to be freed from it,
to have Sin subdued, as well as forgiven?

III. What can you say, as to the Receiving, Loving, and Prizing of Christ, by
whom we have Forgiveness? Have you heartily Accepted of him in all his Offices,
as offered in the Gospel? Assenting to his Doctrine, as a Teacher sent from
God, and our great Prophet? Relying on his Sacrifice and Mediation; as our
great High Priest? And subjecting to him as Lord and Ruler? This is Receiving
him as Christ Jesus the Lord. This is an Honor due to him, for the Pardon and
Salvation he has procured for us: And God has made it necessary to our
Interest in the Benesits of his Death. Do we assent to the Doctrine of
Salvation, revealed and published by Christ, and attested from Heaven, as
certainly true? That Jesus is the Christ of God, and Whosoever believes on him
shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life? Hereupon are we brought to trust
to the Mercy of God in Christ, in Hopes of his Salvation, which is freely
tendered unto Sinners in the Gospel? Do we subject our selves entirely to him,
as one whom God has exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance
and Remission of Sins? Resolving to be swayed by his Authority, and ruled by
his Direction, and follow him as our Captain and Commander, Guide and Savior,
as long as we live? Endeavoring in Heart and Life, to be well pleasing in his
Sight, that whether we live or dye, we may be His?

If your Sins are forgiven, it is for Christ's sake. Consider what Application
have you ever made to him, for the cleansing Virtue of his Blood? Since if you
are washed, if you are pardoned, it must be through the Blood of the Lamb; have
you looked to him, whom you have pierced, and mourned, and been in Bitterness
for him, as one that is in Bitterness for his first born? Zac. XII. 10. Have
you looked upon a Crucified Savior, Bleeding, Groaning, Dying for Sin, to
reconcile us to God, and turn us from our Iniquities? Have you been answerably
affected with the Sufferings of Christ, and improved thereby in your Hatred of
Sin?

IV. What Thankfulness to God, and what Love to Jesus Christ the Redeemer, does
the Hope of Forgiveness excite in you? You read how the Penitent in the Gospel
Loved much, because much was forgiven, Luke VII. 47. How did St. Peter appeal
to Christ after the Forgiveness of his Sin; Lord, thou that know all things,
know that I love thee. Your Love to Christ, and every thing that relates to
him, will be a good Argument of the Forgiveness of Sin: For having Peace with
God, the Love of Christ is shed abroad in our Hearts. How have your Hearts been
affected with Thankfulness to God, for the Riches of his Grace in this
Forgiveness? For the Purchase of it, for the Offer of it; and for any good Hope
of your special Interest in it? What admiring Thoughts have you of the Height
and Depth, Length and Breadth of the Love of God in Christ to lost Sinners?
With what Thoughts do you Consider the Curse of the Law, the Terrors of Death,
the Power of Satan, and the Wrath of God? (From all which you are delivered by
Christ.) With what Affection do you Contemplate the Innumerable Glorious
Privileges, Benefits and Blessings, that accompany this Forgiveness? With what
Admiring Love to the Redeemer, do you from time to time review his
Condescension and Humiliation? How low he stoopt, and how readily? How great
things he suffered, and how willingly? Even to drink the Dregs of that bitter
Cup, (which but to taste of) would have made Men and Angels stagger into Hell.
With what Frame of Spirit, can you consider Christ offered upon the Cross for
you, making his Soul a Ransom for you? When you Consider with particular
Application to your selves, He gave himself for me, shed his precious Blood for
me. O my Soul, 'twas that I might escape Condemnation; that I might be
reconciled to God, that my Crimson and Scarlet Sins might be pardoned; that my
Guilty, Polluted, Miserable Soul, might be restored to the Image of God, and
Communion with him. What Affections, what Joy have you from such Thoughts?
Especially at the Lord's-Table, when you consider his Body broken for you, his
Blood shed for the Remission of your Sins, wounded for your Transgressions,
bruised for your Iniquities, that by his Stripes you might be healed?

V. Moreover, How are you affected with the Sins, that you hope God has
pardoned? Do your Souls melt with a Godly Sorrow for those Crimes, that you
hope are forgiven? What penitent Mourning does the Psalmist express in Psalm.
51. which was penned after God assured him, that his Adultery and Murder should
be forgiven; and after the Prophet had told him, The Lord has put away thy
Sin; O Lord have Mercy upon me, and wash me, and cleanse me, and blot out my
Transgression: Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this Evil in thy
Sight, etc.

What Influence has God's free Mercy in pardoning Sin, upon you, as to Shame
and Sorrow for it? Does the Thoughts, that after all thy Provocations God will
be reconciled, humble and shame thee the more? To this purpose, you know the
Holy Spirit is promised in the Times of the Gospel, Ezekiel. XVI. 63. That thou
may remember, and be confounded, and never open thy Mouth any more, because
of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done,
says the Lord. Is this the Language of your Hearts? He might have condemned me
to Hell long ago, but through the Precious Blood of Jesus, I have Hopes of
Forgiveness. O what an Ungrateful Wretch have I been! What Love have I
despised! Against whom have I sinned! How have I rebelled against the God of
Love and Grace, and grieved his good Spirit! Against what Bowels of Mercy have
I spurned? I am astonished at the Mercy of God in Christ, offered to such a
Rebel as I am: I am confounded at my own Vileness, that such Heinous Iniquities
should be blotted out, that such numberless Iniquities should be forgiven; that
after I had so often, and so long, and so wilfully turned my Back upon him, he
should yet call after me, and say, I am he, behold I am he, that bletteth out
thy Transgression for my own Name sake, and will remember thy sins no more.
That when God saw me, and might have punished me; might have made me an Example
of his Justice here, or might have sent me quick to Hell; or might have left me
unto Hardness of Heart, to treasure up Wrath against the Day of Wrath; that he
should freely forgive me all, and be graciously reconciled to me, and speak
Pardon and Peace to my Soul. O Wretch that I have been! O Abominable Sinner! I
abhor my self in Dust and Ashes.

We find this Exemplified in the Temper and Spirit of those, to whom the Mercy
and Grace of God is discovered, especially in the Apostle Paul. He aggravates
his Sin, and owns himself the Chiefest of Sinners; and never more so, than when
he is thinking, and speaking of Christ's Coming into the World to save Sinners;
and how wonderfully he called him, and showed Mercy to him. Read this at large,
1 Timothy I. 14, 15, 16, 17. And the sight of God's Mercy, and Sense of his
Pardon, is in it self proper to raise an Admiration of Free Grace; and to
humble the Soul before God. It is proper to increase our Detestation of Sin,
and make us loath our selves. That which raises our Love to God, must needs
raise our Hatred of Sin, and Sorrow for it. Now Faith will make us Love much,
in the Sense of having much Forgiven.

Besides, the Inseparable Connection between Faith and Repentance will evidence
this. We shall never adore the Love of Christ, as a Redeemer delivering us from
the Curse; if we are not burdened with the Weight of our Sins: Nor shall we
ever give God the Glory of his Justice, without judging and condemning our
selves by true Repentance. Yet the more we see, and apprehend of his Grace, and
Love in Forgiveness, the more broken and contrite, the more humbled, and
ashamed shall we be, of our Sins against him.

VI. Lastly, What can you say as to the Love of your Enemies, and forgiving
those who have injured and wronged you? There is no better Evidence of God's
forgiveness of your Trespasses, than that he has given you an Heart to forgive
Others, who have trespassed against you: If it be upon a right Principle,
because God for Christ's sake has pardoned you, and obliged you to forgive
Others. Lord, Was there ever such a Distance between my Brother and me, as my
Sins have made between God and me? Were the Injuries I resented from Others,
comparable to the Affronts I have offered to God? and has he freely for
Christ's sake forgiven me? What Influence has such a Thought, to cure and
overcome the Ruggedness, and Roughness of your Temper and Spirit toward
Others? If God has pardoned thee, go and do likewise as to thy Brother. For if
you forgive not Men their Trespasses, your Heavenly Father has not, and will
not forgive you yours, Mat. VI. 14. If you have a Rancorous, Bitter, Malicious,
Revengeful Spirit; and will not forgive those that have wronged you; how can
you expect Forgiveness from God? Do you then forgive those that have injured
you, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you? Heartily, and without
Dissembling; Speedily, and without Delay; Frequently and Often, without
Limitation; Even unto seventy times seven, if our Brother offend; that is, so
often as he does? And this Thoroughly, and without Reserve; without Exception,
or Equivocation; without Remembering past Offenses, so as to bear them a Grudge?
This, I grant, is hard and difficult Work; but the Spirit of Christ can enable
us to do this. It Is the manifest Duty of such as are forgiven, and it is a Sign
and Evidence that they are so. Has God forgiven me my Scarlet and Crimson
Sins? and shall not I put up an Injury, bear a Wrong, endure a Reproach, or an
ill Turn, from my Fellow Creature? Shall I not in Obedience to Christ, forgive
him, and pass it by?

By these things, if Conscience be faithful, you may be assisted to make a
Judgment of your selves, whether you are interested in this Forgiveness or no.
And if your Sins have been many and great, whether you may, on good Grounds
hope, and say, that God has Abundantly Pardoned.

THE Fourth Sermon.
ISAIAH, LV. 9. For My Thoughts are not your Thoughts, neither are your Ways,
My Ways, says the Lord.


III. I Proceed to the Third General in this Passage, viz. The annexed Reason,
Verse the 9th. why we ought to be fully satisfied and persuaded, that God will
thus receive Returning Sinners, and abundantly pardon them; because His
Thoughts are not as ours, nor his Ways as ours, etc. And here you may Consider,

First, How this is Discovered and Expressed, by a Double Comparison of God's
Thoughts with ours, and his Ways with ours.

Secondly, How it is strongly argued by a most significant Similitude; As far as
the Heavens are above the Earth, etc.

Thirdly, The express Assurance of the Truth of all this, from the Divine
Testimony that is added, Thus says the Lord. That no Doubt may be made about
it. The whole of this, may be comprised in these Three Particulars.

First, That the Thoughts of God, especially in the Dispensation of his Grace
and Mercy to Returning Sinners, are very different from our Thoughts; and
Transcendently above them, as far as the Heavens are above the Earth.

Secondly, That the Ways of God are unlike our Ways, and Transcendently above
them.

Thirdly, That God's Testimony concerning his Thoughts, and Ways of Grace and
Mercy to Sinners, ought to be credited and depended upon, and is a sufficient
Ground of Faith: Thus says the Lord being added.

It Is the first I principally design, that the Thoughts of God are not as ours,
but very unlike them, and Transcendently above them; as far as the Heavens are
above the Earth. This I shall Endeavor to Prove, Confirm, and Apply. And here
are two Things will need a little Explication.

First, How the Thoughts of God are Different from ours, not like them.

Secondly, How they are Transcendently above them, as far as the Heavens are
above the Earth. The First I shall consider more Generally. The Second with
more Particular Relation to God's pardoning Mercy.

I. First, They are Different and Unlike. My Thoughts are not as your Thoughts.
There Is an Expression to this purpose in the Book of Proverbs, to set out this
Difference in General, Prove. XIX. 21. There are many Devices in the Heart of
Man, but the Counsel of the Lord shall stand. What is said by the Prophet of
God's Thoughts, is affirmed by the Wise Man of God's Purposes; that they are
not as ours. Ours are vain and uncertain, his are certain, fixed, and stable. He
makes a Threefold Difference.

First, In the Name, Ours are but Devices; God's are Counsel.

Secondly, He expresses them in a different Number, ours are in the Plural
Number, with an Expression of Multiplicity, there are many Devices in the Heart
of Man, but God's Purposes are One Regular, Uniform Council.

Thirdly, A different manner of Existing is employed; our Purposes are conceived
in the Heart, we cannot bring them forth, nor give them a Being out of our own
Minds: We may contrive and plot, design and resolve, but still the Devices are
in our own Hearts: It Is not in our Power to accomplish and bring them to pass,
to make them firm and fast against Opposition. But the Counsel of the Lord, and
every part of it, shall stand. So great is the Difference between God's
Purposes and ours, God's Thoughts and Ours. But that which the Text refers to,
is the Dispensation of God's Grace and Mercy to Returning Sinners. We must not
measure God's Thoughts and Purposes by our own. The Holy Scriptures represent
them to be beyond our Fathom; such as cannot enter into our Hearts to conceive,
2 Cor. XI. 9.

And here I shall show the Difference bebetween God's Thoughts and Ours, as to
two remarkable Instances among others. (1.) As to other Men's Sins and Offenses
against us, and ours against God. (2.) As to our Afflictions and Sufferings
from the Hand of God. In both respects, our Thoughts are very Unlike God's,
very Different from his.

I. First, We must not judge of God's Pardoning Mercy to us, by our Thoughts
and Carriage toward Others, who have offended us. For,

First, We are easily, suddenly, quickly incensed and provoked to Anger. Upon
every little Affront and Injury, Thoughts of Revenge are apt to rise in our
Hearts. We can bear very little with one another. We must have other Thoughts
of the Patience, Forbearance, and Long-suffering of God. When the Disciples
would have called for Fire from Heaven upon the Samaritans, Luke IX. 54. Our
Lord told them, Ye know not what Spirit ye are of. It Is not a Divine Spirit,
it is not the Spirit of God; that appears being so easily, and presently
provoked. Though God be offended and affronted by the Wicked every day, and has
always Power to execute his Vengeance; yet he bears, with much Long-suffering
and Patience, even the Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction. His Thoughts
are not as ours in this Respect: He has revealed himself to be slow to Anger,
and of great Long-suffering and Patience: Let us not Conclude, that he cannot,
will not, bear with us; because we cannot bear with one another.

Secondly, When we are injured and offended by Others, we are not easily
reconciled; not ready to forgive, don't seek after Peace. Whereas the Blessed
God, whom we despise, and provoke by multiplied Crimes, he waits to be
Gracious, and invites us to Return; beseeches us to be reconciled: He freely
offers to forgive us, and assures us he will abundantly pardon. It Is true, the
Divine Spirit, so far as it obtains, and is communicated to any, makes them
easy to be entreated, forward to forgive, willing to be at peace with those
that have injured 'em, and not to return Evil, or refuse Terms of
Reconciliation. But ordinarily it is manifest, that our Temper, and Carriage to
other Men, is quite Different. And we should have very wrong Thoughts of God,
if we apprehend him to be as unwilling to forgive us, as we often are to pardon
those that have offended us. Let us think of it with shame, as to those that
may have trespassed against us. What though they did begin the Quarrel, and
gave us just Occasion of Anger; what though they have been unthankful, and we
have obliged them; and deserved to be otherwise treated; Shall we yet retain
Anger, let the Sun go down on our Wrath, and discover an implacable Spirit? How
Different is this from the Divine Spirit? and how unlike are our Thoughts to
God's Thoughts? You are not to think of God in this Particular, according to
what you find in your selves.

Thirdly, Our Thoughts toward Others, who have injured us, are straightened and
limited. Possibly we may pardon once or twice, pass by two or three Offenses;
but if the same Person trespass again and again several times, we think he has
no Right to be forgiven, nor are we obliged to pardon him; even though he should
repent. But our Lord has told us otherwise, Mat. XVIII. 21. that if we will be
like our Heavenly Father, we must not only forgive seven times, but seventy
times seven. We have but a little Pity, our Bowels are straightened, we can pardon
but a few Offenses; but God does abundantly pardon, and show Mercy to a
Thousand Generations, and forgive Ten thousand Sins. He has a multitude of
Mercies, Psalm. V. 7. A multitude of Loving Kindnesses, Isa. LXIII. 7. He is
Rich in Mercy, and Abundant in Goodness. He can, and does forgive, not only
Sins before Repentance, but Backslidings afterward. His Compassions do not
fail, his Mercy endures for ever; therefore we are not consumed. You must not
measure God by your selves, nor his Thoughts by your Thoughts, in this
Particular.

Fourthly, If we forgive those that Injure us, we are backward to do them Good,
to treat them with Kindness, and show them Favor. It may be, we will not revenge
our selves; we'll do them no Harm: But we avoid them, are shy toward them, we
will not be kind to them: But God's Thoughts are not as ours in this Respect.
He follows us Rebels, with continued Tokens of his Favor, loads us with his
Benefits every day of our Lives; though we load him with our Sins. He heaps Coals
of Fire upon our Heads; takes care of us, supports, supplies, provides for us;
and is constantly kind to us, even while we affront him. And after he has
forgiven us, he takes us to be his Friends, and Favorites, and Children: All
the Mercies of thy past Life, all thy present Enjoyments are from him, against
whom thou have sinned. Thou have depended on his Providence ever since thou
had a Being, for daily Breath, and daily Bread. He saves thee from a thousand
Deaths and Dangers; thy Estate, thy Health, thy Credit, thy Liberty, thy
Usefulness, thy Comfort in Relations, and whatever good thou have, he gave
thee: And he has offered to give thee his Son, his Spirit, his Grace, his
Glory, Himself to be thy All-sufficient Portion, and God in Covenant: And all
this, while thou have been in Rebellion against him; a Wretched Criminal
against the Lord of thy Life, and the God of thy Mercies. O how unlike are
God's Thoughts to ours in this Respect! Considering what our Thoughts are, to
those who have injured and offended us.

II. Secondly, Consider your selves under Affliction and Suffering from the
Hand of God; and how different God's Thoughts and yours are in that Respect
also.

First, We presently conclude, that it is all from Anger and Wrath, whereas God
says, Whom he loves he chastens; and that it is for our good, and that we are
dealt with as Sons, and not as Bastards, Heb. XII. 5, 6. Psalm. CXIX. 75.

Secondly, We are pettish and froward, peevish and perverse under the Rod of
Affliction, while God's Thoughts are Thoughts of Peace toward us. When For the
Iniquity of his Covetousness I was wroth, (because he had no Heart to do good
with what I lent him, says God concerning Ephraim) and I sote him, he went on
frowardly in the way of his own Heart: Nevertheless I have seen his ways, I
will heal him, I will lead him, and restore Comfort to him, Isa. LVII. 17, 18.

Thirdly, We often under Affliction take every hiding of God's Face, for an
utter Rejection of us, whereas God has no such Thoughts. He has us still in
his Eye, and bears us on his Heart, has our Names graven on the Palms of his
Hand, loves us still, though he rebuke us; and will convince us of it by
seasonable Comforts and Deliverance, Jer. XXXI. 18, 19, 20. Is Ephraim my dear
Son? I have heard him bemoaning himself, (says God) thou have chastised me,
and I was chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke; turn thou me, and I
shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God. Is he my dear Son, or rather is
he not so? is he a pleasant Child, is he not so still to me? For since I spoke
against him, I do remember him still; therefore my Bowels are turned for him, I
will surely have Mercy upon him, says the Lord.

Fourthly, God's Thoughts are not as ours in respect of Affliciton, as t oath
Continuance of the Rod. We are often ready to sink, and be dispirited and
overwhelmed in a Time of Darkness, as if it would never be Light: We are ready
to give up all for lost, and conclude that God is gone for ever, and will be
Merciful no more: Saying, Our Bones are dried up, our Hope is lost, we are cut
off for our parts, Ezekiel. XXXVII. 11. Whereas God's thoughts are otherwise,
he will make those dry Bones live, and fetch them out of the Grave of Affliction.
His Thoughts are Thoughts of Peace, to give us a Desired End, Jer. XXIX. 11.
How many have thought and said in their Despair, that God's Mercy was gone for
ever; concerning whom he has manifested, that his Thoughts are not as theirs.

Fifthly, God's Thoughts are not as ours, as to the End and Design, which he
aims at in our Affliction. We think he intends not to refine, but ruin; not to
purify, but destroy. Whereas in Faithfulness he afflicts, where he knows we
need it; to purge away our Dross, and take away our Tin; and to produce the
Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness: By this shall the Iniquity of Jacob be
purged, and this shall be the fruit of all, to take away sin, Isa. XXVII. 9. Do
but wait a little, and you will see, how you have been mistaken in your
Apprehensions of God; and how his Thoughts have been unlike to yours.

II. Let us consider in the Second Place, that God's Thoughts are not only
different from ours, but Transcendently above them; as far, and as high as the
Heavens are above the Earth.

First, as to the Kind and Nature of them.

First, His THoughts of Grace and Kindness are of an unsearchable Depth. O the
Depth of the Riches of the Wisdom and the Knowledge of God! whose Ways (of
Mercy as well as Judgment) are unsearchable, and past our finding out, Romans XI.
33. There is a Depth in them, beyond the Line of Men and Angels to measure,
Psalm. XCII. 5. O Lord, how great are thy Works! and thy Thoughts are very deep.
In the Revelation of God's Grace and Mercy to Sinners by the Gospel, we read of
the deep thigns of God, such as Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has
it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive; 1 Cor. XI. 1-. Such Depths that
amaze the very Angels to look into, 1 Pet. I. 12.

Secondly, God's Thoughts of Love and Mercy are Absolute, Sovereign, and
Independent. It Is all after the Counsel of his own Will, and from the mere Good
Pleasure of his Will. This is the Source and Spring of all his Mercy and
Forgiveness.

Thirdly, God's Thoughts of Mercy are Faithful and Effectual. ALl the
Declarations of his Mercy shall be made good; All the Promives of Grace shall
be fulfilled; All the Thoughts of his Love shall have their Effects. O Lord, I
will exalt thee, for thy Counsels of Old are Faithfulness and Truth, Isa. XXV.
1. All his Ways are Mercy and Truth, he keeps Covenant and Mercy for ever,
Psalm. LXXXIX. 28, 29. Though he visit their Iniquities with the Rod, yet his
Loving Kindness will he not take from them, nor suffer his Faithfulness to
fail. Therefore,

Fourthly, It may be added, that God's Thoughts are Unchangeable, but ours are
Variable: The Strength of Israel will not lie or repent. He is not a Man, that
he should lie, nor the Son of Man, that he should repent, 1 Samuel XV. 29. The
Medicator of the New Covenant lives for ever, to make Intercession for Sinners.

Fifthly, His Thoughts of Mercy are infinitely Pure, and infinitely Righteous.
We shall never fully understand the infinite Righteousness of God's Thoughts
and Ways, 'till the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God. He is
Righteous in all his Counsels, and in all his Works; all his Ways are equal.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee. The Psalmist tells us, that
God will carry on his Thoughts of Mercy, and perfect his Grace, and make it
thrive and grow: To show that he is upright, and there is no Unrighteousness in
him, Psalm. XCII. last.

Secondly, God's Thoughts of Grace and Mercy are transcendently above ours, in
the Way and Manner of his dispensing his Grace and Mercy. The Dispensation of
his Love and Grace to Sinners, is that which passes Knowledge, as to the
Manner of it: And when this Love is shed abroad in the Heart, there is a Peace
resulting from it, which is better felt than expressed. Something may be
conceived and spoken, but there is a great deal, which is above the reach of
Words, for we have no Line to measure it by, no Scale in all the World to weigh
it in: We have nothing to compare it unto, but falls unspeakably short. No
Kindness, no Love, no Charity or Affection of one Creature to another, by which
we can set it forth. The nearest and dearest among Men, is as much below this,
as Earth is below Heaven. The Riches of his Grace in Christ to Sinners, it is
called the unsearchable Riches of Christ. HOw admirable are the Dimensions of
Divine Grace and Love, mentioned by the Apostle, Ephesians. III. 19. where he speaks
of the Length, Breadeth, Height and Depth of the Love of God in Christ, which
passes Knowledge.

First, It Is Breadth, reaching unto Jew and Gentile, Circumcision and
Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond and Free, Poor and Rich. The Vilest
and Chiefest of Sinners are not exempted: Mercy is extended to all sorts of
Persons and Cases. It Is Grace and Love, wider than all our Necessities and
Miseries, Sins and Wants.

Secondly, The Length of it, from Everlasting to Everlasting; reaching to
Sinners that were at the greatest Distance; bringing those nigh that are afar
off, and calling those home who are wandering and gone off; so as one might
have thought, they should never return.

Thirdly, The Depth of that Love and Grace is unsearchable. Unless we
understood the Depth of that Misery and Ruin, into which we were sunk by our
Rebellion against God, and are delivered from, by his pardoning Mercy; unless
we understood the Horror of that Hell of Wrath, which our Sins deserve; and the
Extremity of those Agonies and Torments, which our Blessed Redeemer underwent,
for our Deliverance; unless we knew the Power of God's Wrath, and the
Intolerable, Endless Misery of lost Souls, we cannot fully understand the
Depth of this Love.

Fourthly, The Height of it is also unsearchable. It Is as high as Heaven, to
which it will bring us: And beyond our reach to understand, unless we knew the
infinite Blessedness of the Heavenly Glory, which it cannot now enter into our
Hearts to conceive; as well as the Infinite Misery of Condemned Sinners in the
Bottomless Pit. We can no more tell the Height, than the Depth, of this Grace
of God in thus pardoning Sinners.

But to help you a little to some more distinct Considerations of this, let me
name a few Things.

First, That none does or can so freely pardon and forgive, as God does.
Secondly, None so continually. Thirdly, So fully. FOurthly, So indifferently,
and without respect of Persons. Fifthly, None so tenderly and affectionately,
and with such Bowels of Compassion, and Tender Kindness, as God does.

First, None so freely: If we are brought to forgive those that have wronged
us, it is commonly on the Entreaty and Intercession of some Friends, who have
Interest in us, and Power over us; and this after great Submissions of the
Offender. So that it is rather from some External Motives and Inducements, than
from our own Kind and Generous Inclinations: But it is otherwise when we are
pardoned by God, Isa. XLIII. 23. I am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions,
for my own sake, I Will not remember thy Sins any more, Hos. XIV. 4. I will heal
their Backslidings, and love them freely. Nothing of our Prayers and Tears,
Submissions and Humiliations, nothing we can do or suffer, can make the least
Compensation to the Justice of God, for the Contempt and Dishonor we have cast
on him by Sin. There Is nothing but the Free Grace of God in Christ, to be eyed,
to be pleaded, to be trusted to, and depended upon. In this Case, there is no
Difference between such as are forgiven, and such as are left under Damning
Guilt, but what is made by the Free Grace of God.

Secondly, None so continually. He encourages and commands us to beg daily
Forgiveness, as well as daily Bread: He renews his pardoning Mercy every Day,
and every Hour. We soon come to the End of our Pity, and are quickly tired in
forgiving Injuries against our selves. But while we live, we shall stand in
need of Forgiveness from God. And this is our Comfort, that if we sin, we have
an Advocate with the Father, who makes continual Intercession for us; and so
we hope for continual, daily, renewed Pardon.

Thirdly, None does or can pardon so completely and fully. He blotteth out our
Transgressions, so as to remember them no more; he casts them behind his Back,
throws them into the Depths of the Sea. Many other Blessings he bestows, and
lends us for a time, and then calls for them again; but this Forgiveness of
Sin, is one of those Mercies that are Irrevocable, and without Repentance. We
may be without the Knowledge of an Interest in his pardoning Mercy, we may lose
the Sense of it, and forfeit the Comfort of it; but if we are reconciled to
God, united to Christ, and brought under the Bond of the Everlasting Covenant;
though he may chasten us as a Father, and visit our Iniquities with Stripes, he
will not disinherit us, or cast us out of his Family: His Covenant Favor and
Kindness shall never depart, his Covenant of Peace shall never be removed, Isa.
LIVE. 9. This is as the Waters of Noah, which shall never return to overflow the
Earth. Fatherly Love may be angry, but will not turn to Hatred.

Fourthly, None does or can pardon so Indifferently, without respect of
Persons. Not only lesser Sinners who repent, but the Vilest; not only of such a
Nation, but of any Nation; not only such as have sinned thus long, unto such a
Degree; but if beyond all ordinary Bounds and Measures. Let the Wickedness, and
Unrighteousness, Vileness, and Filthiness, and Aggravations of Sin be what they
will, If you return to God by Christ, he will abundantly pardon. This should
magnify the Riches of his Grace to some of you, who are interested in this
Forgiveness. Lord, How is it that my Sins are pardoned, when others (not
greater Sinners than I) have dyed in their Sins, and are undone for ever! How
is it that I am pardoned, and others that have not been so Vile, shall never be
forgiven! How is it that I have been forgiven, and Others that were my
Companions in Sin, were left to Impenitence and Hardness of Heart! That many of
better Parts, of more Wit, of more Learning, of larger Capacities, and bettter
accomplishd'd for Usefulness and Service, are left to go on in Sin, to their
own Destruction; and thy Grace has opened my Eyes, and softened my Heart, and
made me sensible of Sin, and so to value a Redeemer, to seek him, receive him,
accept him, etc.

Fifthly, None with such Tenderness and Compassion. All the Bowels of Parents
are Stone and Adamant, in comparison with his. We read of his Delighting in
Mercy, and of his Tender Mercies, and Loving Kindnesses; of his Rejoicing over
us to do us good, with his whole Heart, and whole Soul, Jer. XXXII. 41.
Goodness and Love is his very Nature, for God is Love. He pities us more, than
any, the most Tender Parent, ever did a Miserable Child. Who is a God like unto
thee, that pardons Iniquity, Transgression and Sin; and passes by the
Transgression of his Remnant, because he delights in Mercy? Micah VII. 19.

All the Application I shall make of this shall be, to endeavor to bring it
home to the Case of particular Persons, in Answer to some Objections. For
Instance,

Object. 1. Some may be ready to say notwithstanding all this, I have such a
sight of my own past Crimes, and their Aggravations, that none can judge of my
Case as I can, or know the worst of it as I do. I knew the Will of God, and yet
disobeyed him: I have sinned, when I knew God did forbid it, and threatened
with Eternal Death what I was doing: I have hearkened to Temptation, though I had
vowed, and promised, and resolved, and engaged against that very Sin I was
tempted to. And which was worse, I had some Thoughts of God's seeing me, some
Apprehensions that he would judge me for it; and yet I went on and sinned:
Surely God will never forgive me. If any of my Fellow Creatures had wilfully,
deliberately, ungratefully, frequently, and perfidiously, despised and
affronted, injured and offended me; I that am but a Worm, could have no
Patience with such a One: Much more may the Blessed God resent, remember, and
punish such Vile Iniquities as I have been guilty of.

Answ. Consider in Answer to this, how high the Heavens are above the Earth,
and (which is more) the difference between the Creature and the Creator: That
his Thoughts are not as ours; not like our misgiving, despairing Thoughts. He
does and will pardon like himself, like a God: Not after the Measures of a
finite, passionate, weak Man. All that you have said, or can say, shall be no
Impediment, if you return to God, and seek him in Christ for Forgiveness. He
will Abundantly pardon, beyond what you are able to think, or suppose in the
like Case. God complains of Israel, as prone and inclined to backslide, yet he
cannot find in his Heart to destroy 'em, but expresses a kind of Conflict
between Justice and Mercy; and at last resolves, I am God, and not Man,
therefore I will not execute the Fierceness of mine Anger, but I will cause 'em
to walk after the Lord, Hosea XI. 7, 10.

He does all things like himself, (as one Observes). If he build, he makes a
World: If he be angry with the World, he sends a Flood over the Face of all the
Earth. If he goes out with the Armies of his People, he makes the Sun stand
still, the Stars to fight, the Seas to swallow up the most dreadful Armadoes.
If he love, the precious Hearts Blood of his Beloved Son is not too dear: If
any become his Friend and Favorite through the Mediation of Christ, he will make
him a King, give him a Paradise, and set a Crown of Eternal Glory on his Head.
Let us not consider so much what is fit or likely for us to receive, as for so
Great a God to give and bestow. If we are contrite, humble, penitent, and fly
to Jesus Christ as our Refuge of Hope: He will think all the meritorious
Sufferings of his Son, all the Promises in his Book, all the Comforts of his
Holy Spirit, all the Pleasures and Blessedness of his Kingdom, little enough
for us.

Object. 2. But some will say further, I did once hope, that God had given me
true Repentance, and unfeigned Faith; and that I was hearty and sincere in my
Covenant with God: I had some good Hopes, that I was reconciled, and that I was
accepted: And I sealed my Covenant, and set my Name to it, and renewed it also
at the Lord's Table. And I thank God, I had some Quickening and Comfort, as I
thought, but Wretch as I am, I have revolted since. I have burst those Bonds
asunder, I have gone back with such abominable Backslidings, that I cannot think
God will ever pardon me; who after I have known the Way of Righteousness, have
turned from the Holy Commandment. After having been washed, I have returned
with the Dog to his Vomit, and the Swine to her wallowing in the Mire. I fear I
am among those who draw back to Perdition, of whom God may say, that his Soul
shall have no Pleasure in them.

Answ. Consider that God's Thoughts are not as yours, as to Returning
Backsliders. He calls you to return; O Israel, thou have fallen by thine
Iniquity, return unto the Lord thy God. He tells you, his Grace and Mercy can
outdo all that you can think. If you never heard of any, that have sinned as
you have, or with such aggravated Backslidings; he may yet forgive thee. Though
your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be white as Snow, though red like Crimson,
they shall be as Wool, Isa. I. 18. If he give you Grace to repent and return,
he will forgive. Sins after Baptism, Sins after unworthy receiving the Lord's
Supper, may be pardoned. There is a Fountain opened, there is a Ransom found,
there is a Propitiation made, there is an Advocate with the Father. You must
forgive an offending Brother if he repent, even unto seventy times seven. And
will not God forgive Returning Backsliders, and multiply Forgivenesses? This
Text is the most proper Scripture that can be, for such to consider; that they
may not think, that no Mercy shall be extended to them. They are invited to
return, with a Promise that God will heal their Backslidings, Hos. XIV. 3, 4.
Jer. III. beginning.; and afterward, Verse the 21st. Go and proclaim these
Words, saying, return ye backsliding Israel, (says the Lord) and I will not
cause my Anger to fall upon you; for I am merciful, (says the Lord) and will
not keep Anger for ever. You ought therefore, to add the following Words; Behold
we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. Return to him with all your
Hearts, he will receive you graciously, and love you freely. The Prodigal is
entertained upon his Return, more than the Firstborn, as soon as he repents,
and says, I am unworthy to be called thy Son. He will heal your Backslidings,
and take away all Iniquity; the Guilt, the Stain, the Power, the Punishment,
and the Anguish of Conscience. He will not impute thy Sin, he will purge thy
Conscience from dead works, and enable thee to serve and obey him. The Sun of
Righteousness shall arise on thee with healing in his Wings; the Influence of
his Holy Spirit shall by Grace and Comfort be restored to thee. And all this
from his Free Love and Mercy. Nothing is too hard for Love, Divine Love.

It is, I confess, a real Difficulty, when one is made sensible of great Sins
after Repentance, and I know of no Relief like that, which is offered from this
Scripture. I am unworthy, may such a Soul say, but the Lord is Gracious. I have
misimprov'd his Mercy, and abused his Goodness, and his Patience; what shall
relieve me in this Case? Why his Infinite Love, Condescension and Grace. Well,
but I have revolted and gone back, by many aggravated Backslidings, that stare
me in the Face: Yet God is Unchangeable, he is not only Merciful but Faithful to
his Covenant: And his Faithfulness was never engaged to the Angels that fell.
But here is the great Objection, that will be made to all this. This is true,
but I am unfaithful, and the Unfaithfulness of one Party, in all Covenants,
disobliges the other Party. In Answer to this, I say, He Is God, and not Man.
His Thoughts are not as ours. Among Men, in all Covenants this is true, but
God's Thoughts and Ways are above ours. Therefore if I yet return, and take hold
of his Covenant; I may argue I am within the Bond of it, and he will not
utterly cast me off, but forgive me upon Repentance. I have read of one in
Despair, whom the Devil persuaded it was in vain to pray to God, or serve him,
for he must perish; he should be damned, and go to Hell when he died; who yet
went to Prayer, and begged of God, that if he must go to Hell when he dyed, yet
that it would please him, to let him serve him while he lived: Upon which his
Terrors vanished, being clearly convinced, none could pray that Prayer, or make
such a Request, who was guilty of the Unpardonable Sin, or had sinned the Sin
against the Holy Ghost.

Object. 3. Some may say further, But I have had many Fears, and some Hopes for
a time; and I thought I was in Favor with God, and had an Interest in this
Forgiveneis. But I have often heard it, (and I believe it) that God never
pardons Sin, where he does not subdue it. Justification and Sanctification go
together: If the Guilt of Sin be forgiven, the Power of it is broken. But I
find Corruption is strong, evil Inclinations are still stirring and raging. I
never imagined, there was such a Hell of Wickedness in my Heart, as I now find.
There Is so much Impurity, Carnality, Pride, Worldliness, etc. yet remaining in
my Soul, that I cannot think my Sins are forgiven, and that God will abundantly
pardon me, or has done it; because Sin is not mortified and subdued.

Answ. God's Thoughts and yours are very different in this Matter. For he
attains Wise and Holy Ends, by suffering us to feel Corruption, and obliging us
to continual Conflicts with it; by sanctifying us gradually, and not all at
once; by letting us see and feel more of Corruption stirring, and striving,
after Conversion, than ever we knew before. Hereby he ingages us in constant
Warfare all our days; and makes it needful, that we may apply to Christ
continually, as the great Physician of Souls. And I beseech you, remember and
believe this, That No Sin, no Corruption that is your Burden, that you would
rather be rid of than keep, shall ever be damning to you. It may be a Sign of
more Grace, that you sensibly complain of Corruption more than formerly: If you
faithfully oppose it, it is an Evidence your Hearts are softer, Conscience more
tender, and you understand the Holy Law of God better.

Object. 4. But after all, some will say, All this is good News to several, but
not to me. I have nothing of the Spirit of Life and Power, that accompanies
Forgiveness. I am dead in all my Duties, I cannot pray. I have no such Liberty,
and Freedom, and Liveliness in Prayer, as others have. I come to the
Lord's-Table, but I have no such Sealing, no such Comfort, no such Assurance,
no such Joy, no such Foretasts of Heaven, as I believe others have. I keep on
in a round of Duty, but it is not with me, as with the Living Members of Christ.
Therefore I cannot apply all this to my self with Comfort.

Answ. God's Thoughts are not as yours in this Matter. You object, that you
cannot pray with such Life and Enlargement as others, and as formerly: But is it
not your Burden? Are you not dissatisfied with your selves about it? Do you not
beg the Spirit of Prayer, and to have this ill Frame cured? Do you not look up
to Heaven with daily Sighs and Groans? and beg Relief from Christ, as weary and
heavy laden under this Indisposition?

Let Conscience in the first place be faithful: Is there not some great Guilt
lately conctracted? some Sin you have not repented of, whereby you have grieved
the Holy Spirit of Christ, and this stops your Mouths in Prayer, and shames
your Faces? Or, have you not rested too much in the Outward Performance of
Duty, and Attendance on the Ordinances of the Gospel? You come to the Table of
the Lord, look upon it, it may be, as a Charm, (as too many make it on a
Deathbed) you expect it shall work like Physic, in a Natural, not in a Moral
Way: And by mere Coming, (whatever you have been, or done before, or however
negligent you have been in your Preparatory Work,) you expect that it should be
all one with you. If you can charge your selves with any thing of this, you
must renew your Repentance.

If Conscience does not accuse you in this Matter; Consider, God's Thoughts are
not as yours. He knows what is from the Weakness of the Flesh, and what from
the Willfulness of the Spirit. He knows what Deadness and Distraction may arise
from the Infirmity of the Body, and what is the Sin of the Soul.

If upon all these Accounts, you lose the Evidence of your Acceptance with God,
and fear the worst: Yet when a Man has lost his Acquittance for a Debt paid,
it is a Comfort to him to consider, that the Man he deals with is a merciful,
good Man, though he cannot find his Discharge. God is infinitely Gracious, and is
ready to restore what you complain you have lost. It was David's Case, Psalm
51. Yea, if thou fear thy Grace was never true, thy Heart never right with
God, thy State never good; there is Mercy enough in God to pardon all thy
former Hypocrisy: If now thou return, and seek him with thy whole Heart. There
are Promises of Grace in such a Case to be pleaded, that God will give an Heart
of Flesh, give a Spirit of Mourning, put his Fear within thee, and cause thee
to walk in his Statutes. Therefore do not fruitlessly bemoan thy self, and sit
down in Despondency, but consult the Word of God, and seek to the Throne of
Grace with Hope, whatever thy Objections and Temptations be. Whatever you do,
take heed of dishonorable Thoughts of the Grace and Mercy of God, and of the
Security he has given to perform every Word of Promise, wherein he has
commanded us to hope.

To Conclude, Since we are so near the End of this Year, and many design and
hope to renew their Covenant the next Lord's Day at his Table, I beg you to
consider, and remember it for your Encouragement; that God's Thoughts are not
as yours. Whatever Sins you have been guilty of the last Year; whatever you can
charge your selves with, as to Unworthy Receiving the Lord's Supper for the
time past; yet if now you will seriously Examine your selves, and humble your
Souls, and return to the Lord, and apply to Christ, and stir up your selves, to
be disposed as Penitent Believers, to renew your Covenant-Vow and Engagement to
be the Lord's, this next time, he will forgive the Sins of all your former
Sacraments; all the Sins of the last Year, and of your past Lives; and Seal to
you the Forgiveness of all Sin, through the Blood of Jesus. You need not, you
ought not to doubt it, for, As high as the Heavens are above the Earth, so are
God's Thoughts of Mercy above ours, and his Ways above ours.

THE Fifth Sermon.
ISAIAH, LV. 8, 9. For My Thoughts are not your Thoughts, neither are your
Ways, My Ways, says the Lord.

For as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are My Ways higher than your
Ways, and My Thoughts than your Thoughts.


THE Disparity between the Thoughts and Ways of God, and Ours here mentioned,
has special Reference to the Dispensation of his Grace and Mercy, in Pardoning
the Worst of Sinners, who forsake their Evil Ways, and return to God, by
unfeigned Repentance: But in this Discourse, I Design to Consider these Words
in a larger and more General Sense, and show, that The Ways of God are not as
Ours, but as far above 'em, as Heaven is above the Earth.

By the Ways of God we may either understand, First, Those he would direct us
to Walk in; what he would have us to Believe, and Do. Or, Secondly, His Ways
and Works toward us, in the Conduct and Management of Things by his
Providence. In the First Sense we read of the Way of Truth, the Way of his
Commandments; and of walking in the Way of the Lord, etc. that is, receiving as
true, the Doctrines he has Revealed, and Observing the Orders, and Obeying the
Commands which he has given us. In the latter Sense, by the Ways of God, I
Mean, his Works of Providence, according to his Word. In both these, in the
Declarations of his Word, as to what we are to Believe, and Do; and in the
Works of his Providence, what he does with us, there are many things far above
us. His Ways are not as Ours, as to Either.

BOTH may here be very well Comprehended. The Revelations of the Will of God by
his Word, as to Faith, Worship and Practice: And also his Providence, and
Dealings with the Children of Men, according to Scripture Revelation. Our Ways
are not as His, as to either. There is a vast Disparity between them. In this
Sense, His Ways are very unlike to Ours, and transcendently above them; both as
to Matters of Revelation and Providence.

I. First, In what Sense are God's Ways not like Ours, but vastly Different?

1. THEY are Different as to the Nature of 'em. All his Ways and Works are
Perfect; done with Infinite Wisdom and Judgment: And therefore when Moses
publishes the Name of God, he begins with this, Deuteronomy. XXXI. 4. He is a Rock,
His Work is perfect, all his Ways are Judgment: They are the Fruit of Infinite,
Unerring Council. But what Weakness and Imperfection, what Defect and Folly do
we discover in our Ways? All his Ways are Righteous and Holy, Psalm. CXLV. 17.
He is Holy in all his Ways, and Righteous in all his Works. But what Impurity
and Obliquity is there in ours? All His Ways are Just and Equal; He Challenges
all the World to prove the Contrary, in any one Particular: What does he
require of us, but in the strictest Justice is Due? whereas, how Unequal is our
Carriage toward Him, and one another? There is an Admirable Harmony, and
Agreement in the Ways of God, as to all the parts of them, connected one with
another: His Word is constant and abiding, steady and consistent, not Yea and
Nay; 2 Cor. I. 19, 20. All his Promises are Yea and Amen. The Strength of
Israel is not a Man, that he should lie; nor the Son of Man, that he should
repent: But we are Mutable, and often cross and contradict our Selves in our
Ways: And the Best Men do too often discover this Inconstancy in Principle and
Practice.

2. THERE is a further Difference between the Ways of God and Ours, in the
Methods and Means used and taken, and the Manner of his Proceeding, to effect
an End. His Way is to make Weak things confound the Mighty, and things base and
despised, and which are not, to bring to Naught things that are, 1 Cor. I. 27.
We cannot do so. God would not use the Wisdom and Power of the World for the
spreading of the Gospel; but by the Foolishness of Preaching it pleased God to
bring Men to believe, and make the Doctrine of the Cross of Christ, the Power
of God to their Eternal Salvation. The Instrument he employed, and the Methods
he used, to give Success to the Gospel, did plainly evidence this.

AND that Instance may serve instead of many other: Was it not an unlikely
Attempt, for a few Mean and Obscure Persons, such as Publicans and Fishermen,
and Tent-makers, without the Improvements of Education, or the Advantages of
Learning, Eloquence, Experience and Conversation in the World; without the
Assistance of Civil Power and Authority, or any Considerable Interest and
Reputation, to require all Mankind to believe in one Jesus, whom they own was
Crucified, that he was alive, and was Lord and King, and must be received and
obeyed as the Christ of God. To tell all the World, that all the established
Rights and Religion of their several Countries, must be laid aside, and their
wicked Customs and Courses forsaken, and this new Religion of Jesus be
embraced, that requires the Belief and Practice of so many things they must
need account very hard, considering the Prejudices and the Lusts of Men. Could
they hope that Kingdoms and Empires, Schools and Universities, would easily
submit to this Change? that they should be too hard for the Devil, and all the
Powers of Darkness, by preaching the Doctrine of a Crucified Savior?

And yet in the Space of about thirty Years, this new Doctrine and Religion was
not only diffused through the greatest part of the Roman Empire, but had reached
as far as Parthia and India: Even before the Destruction of Jerusalem, as our
Lord foretold, Mat. XXIV. 14. This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in
all the World, for a witness unto all Nations, and then shall the End come.
This Success was represented by an Angel flying through the midst of Heaven, and
preaching the Everlasting Gospel to every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and
People, Rev. XIV. 6.

And this was done without Force of Arms, and against all Opposition
imaginable: Their Message was entertained, their Doctrine credited, and Christ
believed on in the World. Many thousands were converted presently, and many
more afterward: Though the Messengers employed could not be sure of Success, any
further than certain of the Truth of their Doctrine, and of the Divine Presence
and Power to accompany them. But they might be almost sure of enduring
Torments, and losing their Lives for publishing such a Doctrine, and persisting
in it, in the manner they did. But the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God is
glorified, in succeeding such Weak Instruments to such Excellent Purposes.

IN all the Methods of his Providence we find, that by weak things he confounds
the Mighty, and by Foolish things, (as the World accounts 'em,) confounds the
Wise. There are Instances of it in the History of Moses, as to the Plagues of
Egypt: But it was more manifest in the whole Frame of Christianity, and in the
Success and Prevalency, of it. He defeated the Devil's Design, and overturned
his Empire by such Means, as could never be supposed by Reason to do it. By the
Seed of the Woman, whom he had seduced, by the Son of God in our Flesh,
suffering and dying for us, He wrested the Victory out of Satan's Hands, by
humbling himself to the Death of the Cross; and so by dying, destroyed him that
had the Power Death.

THERE are other Instances might be given, as where God strengthens the spoiled
against the strong, He brings down those that dwell on high, the lofty City he
lays it low: He lays it low even to the ground, he brings it even to the
dust: The Foot shall tread it down, even the Feet of the Poor, and the Steps of
the Needy, Isa. 26.6, 7. The Stone cut out out of the Mountain without hands,
shall dash in pieces great Mountaius, all the four great Monarchies of the
World, and fill the whole Earth.

HIS Ways are not as ours, in that he often prefers the Younger before the
Elder, and gives them the Precedence and Principal Blessing. Abel was preferred
before Cain, and his Offering accepted. Abraham the Younger, chosen to be God's
Favorite, before his Elder Brethren. Jacob before Esau, and He preferred
Ephraim before Manasseh, the Elder Son of Joseph. So it is observed by the
Spirit of God, of Noah's Children, Shem is preferred, and called the Brother of
Japhet the Elder, Genesis 10.21. And David, the Youngest Son of Jesse, is chosen
to be King, and the Man after God's own Heart. To manifest the Freedom of his
Counsels, and the Sovereignty of his Grace and Providence; Was not Esau Jacob's
Brother, yet Jacob have I loved?

3. HIS Ways and Ours differ also in this, that he is never frustrated or
disappointed in his Work, as to what he designs. He brings the Counsels of Men
to naught, and the Devices of the People to none Effect, but the Counsel of the
Lord shall stand, Psalm XXXIII. 10, 11. He speaks the word, and it shall stand:
He confirms the Word of his Servants, and performs the Counsel of his
Messengers, saying to Jerusalem, be thou inhabited, and to the Cities of Judah,
ye shall be built; that says to the Deep be dry, and I will dry up thy Rivers:
He says of Cyrus, he is my Shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure; even
saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to the Temple, thy Foundation
shall be laid, Isa. XLIV. latter end. Our Ways are not like his, he will always
overcome when he judges: He will fulfill all his Pleasure, and accomplish all
that is in his Heart, which we cannot pretend to do.

II. Secondly, GOD's Ways not only differ from ours, but do Transcendently
exceed 'em, are infinitely above them, as high as the Heavens are above the
Earth: There is an unsearchable Depth in the Ways of God, which we are called
to adore, but cannot comprehend. We may cry out with the Aopstle, O the Depth,
both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his Judgments,
and his Ways past finding out! Romans XI. His Judgments are a great Depth, Psalm.
XXXVI. 7. He is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in Working. His Wisdom is
unscarchable, and his Ways past finding out: Job V. 9. Chap. IX. 10. There are
many things in Divine Revelation and Providence, that transcend our Reach: If
we will not allow this, but must have a particular Reason for all that God
speaks and does, before we will believe it: What Is this, but to make his Wisdom
finite like ours; or ours Infinite like His! On this Account, the great Masters
of Philosophy in former Ages, were the worst Enemies to the Gospel of Christ;
because the Apostles nakedly represented their Doctrines without that Wisdom,
or Demonstration from Natural Principles, which they used, and therefore the
Gospel was Foolishness to them.

IT IS the not owning God's Ways to be above ours, but making our Reason the
Supreme Judge concerning Doctrines supernaturally revealed, which is the Spring
of the many Errors and Blasphemies that abound among us at this Day. Whereas we
may as well measure the Justice or Injustice of the Providential Works of God,
by our Will and Choice: Whether what he does be Just and Good, or not, because
it is what we like, or do not like; as by our finite Minds comprehend, whether
that can be true, which in a Divine Revelation is delivered as a true Doctrine.
We can no more conceive the Wisdom and Goodness of God in some Events of
Providence, than his Veracity in some Truths revealed. More particularly,

First, As to Scripture Revelation, what we are to believe. Let Us consider that
God's Ways and Thoughts are Above ours: And what is therein asserted, we must
receive and credit upon the Authority of a Divine Testimony, though the Doctrine
there laid down, may be such as has no Foundation in Nature; that is, it could
not be known but by Divine Revelation. It Is a sufficient Reason for us to
believe the Doctrine, because we find it in the Holy Scripture; and we have
Reason to acquiesce therein, because the Revelation, that is contained in this
Book, we have Ground to believe, is from GOD; and so infallibly true. If we
will own our Baptism, and take CHRIST for our Teacher, we must receive the
Truth of what HE has revealed upon a Divine Testimony; though we cannot
comprehend how such a Christian Doctrine may be reconciled to our common
Notions of things in other Cases.

I grant, the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, for Instance, carries a very great
Difficulty in it, and is more opposed, as Incredible, and Unintelligible, than
other Principles of Christian Religion: But this being Revealed from Heaven, as
we affirm, and make an Article of our Faith, if we find it contained in the
Holy Scriptures, God's Ways being so far above ours, will do much to answer the
Objection of its being Incomprehensible.

IF GOD be INCOMPREHENSIBLE, why should any thing he is pleased to say, seem
Incredible to us? Where he has interposed by his Definitive Sentence, our
Reason must submit, and has no Right to debate the Matter, but ought to approve
what God speaks, and subscribe to whatever he writes. The Testimony of God,
whatever Exceptions our Reason can make, should convince our Judgment, and does
oblige our Faith. Is not His Veracity a firm and sure Foundation for us to
rely upon, without the concurrent Testimony of Reason? Shall we not believe
Infinite Wisdom, and Truth upon his own Word, unless what he says be in it
self Credible, and so may be believed, without his Testimony? The more we
consider what God is, the more easily shall we be persuaded, that he is equally
to be believed, when he affirms what we cannot understand to be true, as when
he declares that, which by the common Principles of our Reason we know is so If
we own a Divine Revelation, we can no more Doubt of the one then the other;
unless a Divine Testimony must receive its force from the Evidence of our
Reason. Which is to destroy all the Testimony of Divine Revelation in
Supernatural Truths; where the Evidence of Reason fails. What! though we cannot
give an Account, how it is or can be so as we find it in the Scripture, is any
thing that God says the less Credible upon that Account? It Is the highest
Reason to believe every thing that God has said: His Authority has Strength
sufficient to secure my Faith against all such Objections, as arise only from
Ignorance, and want of Principles to Judge by, or from the Incomprehensibleness
of the Object.

IT seems plainly the Design of the Apostle, 1 Cor. II. Chap. to obviate the
great Objection, that is now brought by Infidels and Socinians, by granting it
to be true, That what we are taught to believe by the Gospel is Inconceivable,
and above the Reach of Humane Reason: That many Doctrines of the Gospel are
such as could neither be discovered; nor when they were, could be received, and
applauded by the Rational Part of Mankind. It was not the Wisdom of Men, nor of
this World, but the Wisdom of God, 5th and 6th Verses: The Apostle did not go
about to persuade the World of the Truth of them, in such a Manner, as the Wise
Men among the Gentiles made use of, to persuade the People of their Opinions.
But the Gospel being a Divine Revelation, they endeavored to prove the Truth
of it, by the Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power; i. e. by Supernatural
Proofs from Ancient Prophecies, by uncontested Miracles, and such like
Testimonies of God's owning the Gospel to be a Revelation from him. So that
their Faith did not stand in the Wisdom of Men but in the Power of God: And
therefore we should not be stumbled, nor think Strange, if Matters of Divine
Revelation should be Inconceivable by mere Reason.

HE let us them know, that even this was foretold by the Prophets, Verse 19. for
it is written by the Prophet, Eye has not seen nor Ear heard, nor has it
entered into the Heart of Man, etc. But God has revealed them to us by his
Spirit, by which Spirit, Christ and his Apostles made known this Doctrine. And
it follows, The Spirit searches all things; even the deep things of God: And
therefore though the Things be such as we never thought of before, and we cannot
well conceive, when they are told us, yet that is no such Wonder; for the
Nature of our own Souls cannot be conceived by any Inferior Being; nor our
secret Thoughts known by any other of our Fellow Creatures, Ver. 11. For what
Man knows the Things of a Man, but the Spirit of Man within him; and so the
things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. As we cannot know the
secret Purposes of other Men, 'till they themselves discover them; so the
Councils of God concerning our Salvation, which depend merely upon his own
Will, none can know, but the Spirit of God; and by some Revelation from that
Spirit, and not by Natural Reason. For the Spirit searches all things, yea,
the deep things of God; i. e. is acquainted with all his secret Counsels.

THE great Question therefore will be, Whether the Revelation that contains such
and such incredible Doctrines be Divine. And accordingly the Apostle adds in
the next Verse, that he built his Faith, not upon the Philosophy or Inventions
of Men; but upon the Revelation which God has made. We have not received the
Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God; that we may know the
things that are freely given us of God. These Things could never else have been
known, and therefore it should not offend any, that we do not endeavor to
prove these Doctrines by Philosophical Arguments: But by such as are proper to
prove them by, viz, from Divine Revelation. Which things also we speak, not in
the Words which Man's Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches,
comparing spiritual things with spiritual: That is, the Revelations of the Old
Testament with those of the New. And after all he he tells us in the 14th.
Verse, That the Natural Man, (who will believe nothing but according to his own
preconceived Notions from Natural Reason) He receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, they are Foolishness to him: He will not allow that to be
divinely revealed, which is above mere natural Reason. He considers only the
Difficulty in the Doctrine it self, how it can be true; not what Reason he has
to believe such a Revelation to be from God: And so he cannot know them,
because they are to be spiritually discerned; that is to be judged of, by the
Revelation and Testimony of the Holy Spirit; and not by the mere Light of
Reason: They are to be received upon the Account of a Divine Revelation.

THE the whole Tenor of the Apostles Discourse seems to obviate, or answer this
Objection of the Doctrines of the Gospel being Incredible and Unintelligible.
And if we apply it to the Doctrine of the Trinity and the Incarnation of
Christ, it will hold good, notwithstanding the Difficulty, how Three can be
one, or how our Blessed Savior can be God and Man. How there is one Divine
Nature or Essence, common unto Three Persons, united in Essential Attributes,
and yet distinguished from each other, in order and manner of Subsistence, and
by peculiar Idioms and Relations. These Notions may puzzle our Reason to
conceive, but should not stagger our Faith to believe, as Revealed in the Holy
Scripture.

Considering what God is, and what We are, it is unreasonable to reject any
Article of Faith, because we cannot fully conceive the Nature, and Manner of
its being True. Shall we compare our Darkness with his Incomprehensible Light?
Or equal our Understanding with his? Shall we refuse to believe what he has
declared for Truth, unless we can reconcile it with our Maxims? What room is
there left for Faith, at this rate? What Credit is given to Divine Testimony,
if we believe nothing to be True in Gods Word, except we can Fathom it, and
would otherwise believe, without his Testimony?

IF we consider the Imperfections of our Understandings, both as to the Finite
Nature of the Soul, and the Manifold Experience we have of it every Day, we
must be content to be Ignorant of many Things. What is well known in many
Civilized Countries, (as some have observed to illustrate this) may appear very
strange to a great Part of the Heathen World. The Fabric of a Watch; or the
mutual Communication of Thoughts by Writing, would it may be, be as
unconceivable to a Barbarous Indian, as the Mystery of the Trinity is to us;
yet the Truth of the Thing does not depend upon his Conception of it.

AND how short do the wisest and most knowing Men come of the infinite
Knowledge of God? Though we are certain of the Truth of his Being; how little do
we know of his Nature and Perfections? How far above our Apprehensions is the
Divine Eternity; How all Successions of Time are ever present to him and
subject to his View; His self Existence, Immensity, Omnipresence and Prescience
of the most contingent Events, etc. How far above us!

AND since we have not a perfect Knowledge of the Subject; we must hearken to
what GOD himself says of his own Nature, who knows it best. And we ought in
Reason to enquire, whether the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity be contained in
that Revelation which we receive, and can prove to be Divine; if we find it
there, let the Doctrine be never so Incredible and Unintelligible, GOD is so
far above us, and his Ways and Thoughts above ours, that we ought not to reject
it upon that Account. As the Heavens are higher than the Earth, His Wisdom is
as the Heavens, the highest and top of all Wisdom; Man's as the Earth, beneath
which there is no Degree, but that of Hell and Darkness, so that the Things are
two Great and Sublime for us to determine about.

WERE this duly considered we should find, that we cannot have so much Evidence
of a Doctrine's being False, because it is Inconceivable; as there is Evidence
of its being True, by being contained in Scripture Revelation. As to the Truth
of things concerning Finite Nature, we may judge by our Reason: But where the
Object is Infinite, it is no Argument against the Truth of a Thing, that we
cannot comprehend it, unless a Contradiction be proved, which there is none
here.

IT has often been proved that God might justly require of us in general, the
Belief of what we cannot comprehend; and that they who reject the Mysteries of
Christianity, run into greater Difficulties than those, who assert them. What
is Incomprehensible as to the Manner, may be a necessary Article of Faith, as
far as it is Revealed. See Bishop of Worster's Sermon, on 1 Timothy I. 15. Sermon.
VI. Vol. III. Octavo, and Orig. Sac. Book II. Chap. VIII. 5, 6, 7.
We don't assert Three Gods; and yet but One God, Three Persons and yet but One
Person: That would be contradictory; but the Scripture says, that these Three,
Father, Word, and Spirit, are One God: And we ought to distinguish between
Numbers, and the Natures of Things. For Three to be One, is a Contradiction in
Numbers; but whether an infinite Nature can communicate it self to three
different Subsistances, without such a Division as is among created Beings,
must not be determined by bare Number, but by the absolute Perfections of the
Divine Nature: Which mast be owned to be above our Comprehension. Therefore for
any to assert, that there cannot be a Plurality of Persons; without a Plurality
of Natures; or that there cannot be a Communication of Nature, without an
Indentity of Persons; is to pretend to know more of the Infinite Nature of God,
then any modest Man ought to pretend to.

IT IS certain the Objections from the Vnconceivableness of this Doctrine are
not so great, as the Evidence we have, that such a Doctrine is contained in the
Holy Scriptures; and that that this Scripture is of God.

And let me add, that to pay Adoration and Divine Worship to Christ, (as the
Christian Church has done in all Ages), and to Trust in him for Pardon and
Eternal Life, and yet believe him to be only a Man, destroys all the Reasons
and Arguments of giving Divine Worship to God only: For to do this, and not own
him to be Omnipresent, Omniscient, and Almighty, not own him to be the True,
and Eternal God, is a greater Absurdity and Contradiction, then all that can be
objected against the Doctrine of the Sacred Trinity. While they pay him Divine
Honor, they must needs consider him as the GOD (whom all the Angels worship),
and yet at the same time they deny him to be so: And that, because they cannot
conceive, how Father, Son, and Spirit should be One God. But let us remember
what GOD is, and what we are; and how his Ways and Thoughts are above ours. Let
no Man therefore deceive himself. If any Man among you seem to be Wise in this
World, let him be a Fool that he may be Wise; for the Things of God knows no
Man; but the Spirit of God who reveals them unto us.

Secondly, GOD's Ways are above ours, in the Dispensations of his Providence:
'Twere easy to show this, in a Multitude of Particulars. In his sparing and
forbearing us: In restraining and preventing us: In keeping and preserving us,
and disappointing our Enemies: Overuling our Affairs, directing our Conditions,
and governing all that befalls us, Good or Evil, Accidental or Premeditated,
and turning all to Wise and gracious Purposes, beyond our Thoughts.

With what perfect Wisdom is every Thing managed in the Government of this
World? That even the Wickedness of Men is made to serve the purposes of his
Glory? How wonderfully has God Honored his Mercy, and Power, Holiness,
Justice and Truth, in redeeming and saving Sinners by Jesus Christ, with
greater Advantage, then if our first Parents had continued Innocent.

HIS Ways are not as Ours, but above them, in governing the Minds of Men,
turning their Hearts, influencing their Counsels, and changing their Thoughts,
to bring about and fulfill his Own. His Ways are above ours, in making Use of
very unlikely Instruments, weak Means, yea such as in Appearance are Contrary,
to effect his own Purposes in the Government of Nations, of particular
Families, and Persons.

AND the Ways of his Providence on less above ours. In his disposing Crosses
and Afflictions Temptations and Hardships unto those he loves best, and
permitting others to live in Peace and Quiet.

HIS Ways are not as ours, but above them, in that the very Falls and Faults,
Crimes and Follies of good Men are overul'd for much Good; and great
Transgressions before Conversion, made servicable to excellent Purposes
afterward: What was Poison in Nature, becomes Medicinal by Divine Grace. He
that stumbles in the way, gets ground by it, if it help him to mend his Pace,
to walk faster, and more warily. How many can say, if it had not been for such
and such Fails, I had never known so much of my own Weakness, and Frailty; I
had never had such Experience of Temptation, and how unable of my self to
resist it; I should never have had so hearty a Detestation of Sin; such a
Tenderness of Conscience; such an Awe of offending God; so fervent a Zeal to
please him; so sweet a Sense of his Mercy; so Thankful an Acknowledgment of his
Grace in delivering and recovering me.

The very Remainders of Corruption in the Hearts of Men, which they bewail, and
pray, and strive against, I shall serve to convince them of their necessary
Dependence on Gods Grace; shall cause them to walk humbly with God; shall make
them more circumspect and watchful against Temptation; and raise their Esteem,
and Value of the Blood of Christ, and his constant Intercession in Heaven. God
hereby assists us to keep Conscience tender, excites our Diligence after
further Degrees of Mortification, quickens us to press on, by growth in Grace,
toward Perfection, etc.

Moreover, HIS Ways are above Ours in the Conversion of Sinners, as to the
Subjects he makes choice of, as to the Season and Time of their Change; as to
the Means and Method, by which it is Accomplished and brought about. The Wind
blows were it lists, and the Holy Spirit (by the Ministry oftentimes of weaker
Minsters) works powerfully and savingly in whom he will, both to will, and do,
of his own good Pleasure. One is awakened, convinced, pricked at the Heart by a
Sermon. Another in the same Seat, under the same Sermon, feels nothing.
Sometimes by a soft still Voice, at other times by Thunder. Sometimes the most
Unlikely are taken, and effectually called; when others are left: And this
after many years delay and discouragement, and no hopeful Prospect, but the
Contrary. Some out of wicked Families converted; others after strict and
religious Education, become and continue most Vile and Profligate. What
different Success has the Gospel in some Places? At some Times, and to some
Persons? And at different Times in the same Place? Though the same Messages and
the same Preacher? Sometimes on the weaker and more ignorant Sort, and
sometimes on the more Learned; sometimes on elder Persons, and often on
Younger: Who have discovered much of the Grace of God betimes, with less
Advantage of Education than others. And at the last Hour, some Malefactors,
under a Sentence of Death, it is hoped, have been truly Penitent, and Accepted,
as well as the Thief on the Cross. Some by their own Afflictions, some by the
warning of other Men's Examples, and byother Means, as well as by the plain
Preaching of the Word, the ordinary Means.

HIS Ways also are above Ours, in the Punishment of Men in this Life: In making
some Examples which were not greater Sinners then others, as our Lord has
expressly told us, Luke XIII. He would not spare Job's Ten Children upon the
Intercession and Prayer of their Righteous Father, though we don't read that they
were wicked; when he would have spared many Thousands, that were wicked, in
Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities of the Plain, if there had been but Ten
Righteous Persons among them.

HIS Ways are above Ours, in bringing Good out of the Evil of Punishment, and
using wicked Instruments to accomplish other Ends and Purposes, than they
designed. The like might be said of Gods Ways in saving and delivering his
People in extraordinary Dangers: Tarrying till their Enemies are at the very
height of their Wickedness; and when there is least Prospect, or Appearance
which way Deliverance should come, then to interpose by seasonable Salvation

APPLICATION.
USE, I.

NO wonder then if we so often mistake in our Thoughts, and Conceptions of the
Ways and Works of God. If they are so much above ours, as Heaven is high above
the Earth, if they are unsearchable, and beyond our reach, that we can see but
a little Part of his Ways, do not understand the Connection and Dependence of
one Part with the other, or the Design of the whole. His Way is in the
Whirlwind, the Clouds are the Dust of his Feet, and his Footsteps are not
known: He hides himself that we cannot see him. Job XXXIII. 7, 8, 9. Nah. I. 3.

AS to his Ways of Grace and Mercy, I have largely shown in the foregoing
Sermons, That he is more Gracious then we believe: He is able to do, he does,
and will do more then we are able to ask or think, Ephesians. III. 20. We think (it
may be) he will never receive us after such and such Transgressions, and yet he
does. We thought he would never Pardon us, and yet he has forgiven: We said in
our Despair, that he is gone, and will never Return; and yet the Light breaks
out again, and we have found it to our Comfort.

Secondly, ARE his Ways so much above Ours, what Reason have we to Reverence
and Adore God in all his Ways and Works. Believing his Wisdom, Goodness and
Truth, we glorify God: By crediting his Word, trusting his Practice, and
following his Counsel, and submitting to his Providence: Though the Doctrine be
very misterious, the Providence very dark, the Duty very Difficult, and what is
promised a great way off, and to Sense unlikely.

The more we contemplate the Wonders of his Providence and Grace, the higher
Veneration shall we have for Him; and Abase our Selves before his Glorious
Majesty; if we speak of Strength, he is Strong; if of Goodness, he is Love; if
of Wisdom, he is Wise, the only Wise God.

It Is unreasonable then to object against this Providence, because we cannot
comprehend the Wisdom and Justice of every Event: We may object our Selves into
Atheism, and Infidelity, if we will not adore his unsearchable Wisdom in the
Government of the World. His Judgments are a great Deep, Psalm. XXXVI. 6. It Is
in vain for us to pretend to go to the Bottom of them, when he himself has
declared that they are Unsearchable. We should rather admire God; and confess
our own Ignorance when the great Apostle himself declares, that Gods Ways are
past our finding out. Romans XI. 33.

We may be certain that all he does is agreeable to infinite Wisdom and
Righteousness. As long as we own him to be God, we are sure he will do nothing
Repugnant to those Perfections.

BESIDES he has appointed a Day, wherein he will satisfy all the World by the
Revelation of his Righteous Judgment. In the mean time, He does great Things
past our finding out; and wonderful Things without Number. XI. Job. 10. There
are Depths and Mysteries in Divine Providence, that we must acknowledge to be
Unsearchable: Let us not then Censure what we cannot Understand, what we cannot
Fathom. Is it strange, that incomprehensible Wisdom should do incomprehensible
Things? We should not therefore enquire too curiously into the Secrets of his
Providence, nor determine any thing, See Dr. J. Barrow, of the Unsearchableness
of God's Judgments. Romans XI. 33. Vol. III. Sermon 23.
Rashly concerningit, which is not revealed to us.

WE are well assured, that he made the World; and yet there are many
Questions about the Works of Creation that may puzzle the wisest and most
diligent Enquirer. So in the Government of the World, there are many things
above our reach, and yet we may be assured an unerring Wisdom governs all. We
are so Ignorant and short Sighted; and the Designs of God are so far beyond us,
and the Means he uses are oftentimes so Various, and their Connection with his
Design so much concealed from our weak Eyes, that no wonder if we are often at
a loss; especially when all the Particulars of his Works of Providence, that
make up the Beauty of the whole, are wonderfully interwoven together (one
Passage and one Action having a certain Reference to a Million of others, yea
unto all others, from first to last) so that it is not strange, if we
comprehend not the Reasons of all Events; and discern not the Wisdom and
Righteousness of God, as to many Particulars, while yet we believe him to be
Wise, and Holy in all his Ways, and Righteous in all his Works.

HEREAFTER, when he has finished his whole Design, from the Beginning to the
End, (whereof we now see but a small Part), the Difficulties that perplex and
shock us for the present, will be all solved. What is now covered with
Darkness shall appear in open Light: And what is now a Riddle, will cease to be
so: For all the Changes and Revolutions of the World, Public and Private, as
to Nations, Families and Persons, will all be found, to have been directed in
the wisest and best Manner; and to have been one complete and orderly Means, to
bring about his Wise and Holy Counselfor his own Glory.

LET us therefore adore him, considering that his Ways are above Ours, for if
we do not now, see a Reason for the Truth of all that God speaks, or the Wisdom
of all that he does, we may yet be assured, that GOD is True, and Wise, and
Good. And we ought to lay our hands on our Mouths, and Acquiesce, for this very
Reason, because his Ways are so much above ours.

Thirdly, WHAT Reason then have we, to put our Trust and Confidence in God? To
believe what he promises, and leave it to him, to fulfill his Word in his own
Time and Way? His Ways are so muth above Ours, that when we think him furthest
off, he may be nearest the doing that for us, which we desire. If God should
not choose our Condition for us, we should easily be undone by our own Choice.
But we may and ought to trust Him, who knows what is always, and upon all
Accounts, Best for us. Whereas there is no Man of the clearest Foresight, and
of the greatest Wariness, but may easily be deceived and Mistaken, as to what
is good for him in this Life. We find this was the Result of the Wise Man's
Thoughts, concerning the Affairs of this World. Eccles. VI. 11, 12. Seeing
there be many Things that increase Vanity, what is Man the better? For who
knows what is Good for Man in this Life; all the days of his vain Life, which
he spends as a shadow? For who can tell a Man, what shall be after him, under
the Sun.

WE often desire and choose such a Temporal Good, as proper to serve and promote
some Particular Interest and Design, but cannot tell, whether it will be
Prejudicial to our main and greatest Interest: If it would be so, it is a
kindness to be disappointed. Besides we are too apt to consider our selves, as
Single and Alone, in a private Capacity: God only knows what is best for us, as
we are Parts of the whole Community, Members of the Universe, and stand related
to other Men: It may be, we would desire to have, and be, and do that, which is
more for the public Good, should be enjoyed by Others, and done by Others.
Such a Condition of Life, such a Place of Employment, such a Station of
Service, we reckon to be very desirable for Us; when perhaps God knows, that We
shall do more good in another; and that some Other will be more useful, and
more a public Blessing in that Post. Accordingly we should leave it to his
Providence, who appoints us our Work, to Assign us our Station, and
Opportunity for it.

AND here it is most certain, our Spiritual and Eternal Good is greatly
concerned. It may be, what we wish for, as a Desirable, temporal Blessing,
would be to our Prejudice and Disadvantage, as to the VVelfare of our Souls.
How many, on this Account, have seen Reason to be thankful for Afflictive
Disappiontments, as to many things they endeavored, and desired, but God
ordered it otherwise, for their best Good. No Affliction for the present is
Joyous, but Grievous, but afterward it produces the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness. Heb. XII. 11. Uninterrupted Health and Peace, Plenty,
Reputation, Joy and Comfort in Relations, may be denied us in Faithfulness and
Kindness: For God only knows, whether it would not interfere with our Spiritual
Good?

IT IS an obvious, and daily Instance as to Riches, and the Increase of an
Estate: Many a poor Man (or suppose one in a middle Condition,) He fancies, if
he had a great Estate, what a great Deal of Good he would do: With what a
large Heart, he would supply the Necessities of the Poor; How many generous and
charitable Things he would undertake: He would fain Help and Relieve the Poor
(he tells you if he could,) and therefore his Desire of Riches, and Diligence in
seeking for them, is but that he may do Good: But when this Man succeeds, how
Common is it, that his Heart and Purposes are changed with his Condition? Or
his Desire, and Love of Money, grows with his Estate; so that He is as unable to
do the Good he desires to do, as before. The Poor is unreliev'd, and he thinks
himself, as far from an Ability to Relieve them now; as when he had but half of
that, which now he has. Besides that he is tempted to forget God, in other
Instances; and falls into Luxury and Vanity, Intemperance, and Pride; and
Consequently, it had been better for him, to have continued in a Lower Station.
He is really a Loser by his Gain of Riches, and it is well, if He be not finally
and for ever lost.

IT is therefore our Wisdom, as well as Duty, for us to leave all Events to GOD,
whose VVays are so far above ours. If we Reflect upon our own Ignorance, as to
what shall be on the Morrow: How easily may to Morrows Event, unravel our
Scheme of Thoughts, and frustrate the most probable Designs that can be laid?
And how Ignorant are we, of what the Train of Consequences may be, upon what we
Design. Unless we know, what will follow upon it, we cannot tell whether it
will prove a Mischief, or a Blessing. You thought Evil against me, says Joseph
to his Brethren, when they sold him into Egypt, but God meant it for Good, to
bring it to pass (as at this Day) to save much People alive, Genesis L. 20.

MANY have lamented with Impatience, that they came too late to such a Port, to
Sail with such a Convoy, or to Imbark in such a Ship; and yet within a little
while, have blessed God for the Disappointment; having heard that the Ship was
cast away, or taken by an Enemy; and all the Passengers drowned or made
Prisoners. VVheras GOD knows all the Consequences of Things; having all Causes
and Effects in View; and all the Links of the Chain in his own Hand; and
therefore can never be Mistaken in what is Best. Let us therefore trust him, to
dispose of Us and ours, according to his own good Pleasure.

Fourthly, HOW Reprovable then is it, to Limit and Prescribe to God, or to
Censure, him concerning his VVays and Works, which are so much above us? He is
not bound to give us an Account of all his Matters, or to utter all his Words,
for the Satisfaction of our curious and proud Enquiries. We are not to direct
him what to do, as if we would teach him Knowledge: As if he had not done every
thing for the best, in what befalls us, or Others. Shall he that contends with
the Almighty instruct him? he that reproves GOD let him answer it. Job XI. 2.
with this Elihu silenced Job, XXXIII. 12.13. Behold in this thou art not Just,
I will answer thee. God is greater then Man, That is, His ways are above ours.
Let us take heed of Censuring his Infinite and Eternal Wisdom. For we are but
of yester day, and know nothing. We cannot search his secret Counsels. Job XI.
6. It is as high as Heaven, what can thou do? Deeper then Hell, what eanst
thou know? His kind Designs, or faithful Gracious Purposes, may be concealed
from us; as our Lord told Peter, Joh. XIII. 7. What I do, thou know not now;
but thou shall know hereafter.

Fifthly, LABOR to submit to God in all his Ways, without Murmuring, or
Repining. It Is both our Duty, and Interest to do this, from what has been
discoursed. The Mind of God revealed in his Word; and the Will of God declared
in Providence, must both be submitted to, whatever Objections we may have
concerning Either. As to the latter, we know not what is fittest to desire, or
choose for our Selves, or Others. We often ask that, which God knows would be
Hurtful; and are Disatisfied with that, which he intends for our Good. We would
choose that, which it may be, would be Injurious to God, to our Selves; and to
the World: And as often Repine at that, as a Calamity, which God intends us, as
a Benefit; and afterward proves so. Let us not then complain of his
Government, or repine at his Providence. Let us not presume to demand a Reason,
why such a Cross befalls us; or why we are deprived of such a Comfort: Let us
not dare Arraign his Wisdom, and Sovereignty at our Bar; but patiently submit
to him, and wait for him, He is a God of Judgment; and his Thoughts and Ways
are above ours. Therefore.

Lastly, TAKE Comfort from this Consideration. He may, and can turn all for
Good, that we deprecate, or complain of as Evil. He may be bringing about That,
which we have long prayed for, by those very Means, which have a quite contrary
Appearance, for the present. He has a thousand Methods, that we cannot conceive
of, to effect his own Purposes; and he knows the fittest Time.

WHATEVER Difficulties we are under; Whatever Burdens we feel; Whatever
Temptations we meet with; Whatever Disappointments we have had, or may have;
Whatever inward or outward Distresses, we may be exercised with; Still
remember that Gods Ways are far above ours. Though he seem to neglect us, or to
hide himself from us; though he seem to shut out our Prayers; and not regard our
Cry; yet he knows what to do, and when to do it, and in the best Manner: And
has promised that all things shall work for our Good; and that he will never
leave us, nor forsake us. Therefore Resign your Selves to God, resolving
entirely to follow him; though like Abraham, you know not whither he will lead
you. Resolve you will submit your Understandings and Wills to him, and believe
whatever he declares to be True; and approve whatever he Appoints; and bear
whatsoever he imposes; and undertake, and do, all that he requires; and
patiently wait on the Lord, and keep his VVays, who is a God of Judgment. You
have sufficient Encouragement to hope in his Mercy, and trust Him to fulfill his
Word, in his own Method, because his Ways and Thoughts are not as Ours.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
I. SERMON.
WHAT most Observable in this Passage.

(1st.) That if ever Sinners find Mercy with God, they must forsake their Evil
Ways. Page, 4.

(2dly.) To Reform the Outward Practice is not sufficient, the Heart must be
renewed, and the Thoughts changed. p. 6.

(3dly.) They must Return to God as well as Turn from Sin. p. 7.

(4thly.) The Worst of Sinners, who Penitently Return to God, may be assured of
Pardon. p. 9.

Objections Answered. p. 13.

With whom the Case is very Hopeful, under Convictions of Sin. p. 16, -- 21.

(5thly.) The great Encouragement to a Sinner to forsake his Evil Ways, and
Return to God is the sensible Apprehension, that there is Mercy and Forgiveness
to be had. p. 22.

II. SERMON.
Observe. 6th. That Pardoning Mercy to Penitent Sinners is Mercy INDEED: proved
by several Considerations. p. 29.

Last Observe. That God will not only show Mercy to Returning Sinners, so as to
forgive 'em, but he will Abundantly Pardon; He will multiply Forgivenesses. p.
41.

In what Respects God will Abundantly Pardon, as to SINS and SINNERS. p. 42.

Upon what Grounds may we be persuaded of this Truth. p. 48, -- 63.

Objections Answered. Directions, and Counsel. p. 65.

III. SERMON.
Application, (1st.) To be Thankful for this Good News. p. 74.

(2dly.) Take heed of Abusing this Grace. p. 77.

(3dly.) Pity Those who are not Returned to God, and Interested in this
Forgiveness. p. 83.

Arguments to move our Compassion to Such. Let us also Pity Those, who are
Returning to God, but are Tempted to question, whether there be any Forgiveness
for THEM. p. 87.

How to Examine, and Try, whether onr Sins are Forgiven, and God has
abundantly pardoned Us. p. 90, -- 106.

IV. SERMON.
The Annexed Reason, why we ought to believe God will thus Forgive, because His
Thoughts are not as Ours, nor His VVays as Ours. p. 107.

(1st.) GOD'S Thoughts, (especially in the Dispensation of his Grace and
Mercy,) are Different from Ours, very unlike 'em. p. 109.

This manifest by our Thoughts, and Spirit toward Others, who have offended
us: And by our Thoughts of God, in a Time of Affliction. p. 114.

(2dly.) GOD'S Thoughts Transcendently above Ours. p. 116, -- 120.

In the Nature of 'em more generally: And in the Way and Manner of his
Forgiveness. None does, or can forgive, as GOD, so freely, continually,
completely, indifferently, without respect of Persons, or so tenderly and
affectionatly. p. 120.

Objections answered against God's Forgiveing us. p. 124.

V. SERMON.
God's Ways not as Ours, but as far above 'em, as Heaven above the Earth. p.
136.

As to Doctrines to be Believed, Orders to be obeyed; and Providence to be
submitted to.

(1st.) God's VVays not like Ours, but vastly Different, in several Instances.
p. 137.

(2dly.) God's VVays Transcendently above Ours. p. 142.

(1st.) As to Scripture Revelation, what we are to believe. No Scripture
Doctrine to be rejected, because Incomprehensible. p. 143, -- 152.

(2dly.) As to God's VVays of Providence. p. 153

The practical Application of the whole. p. 157

The End.
Books Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey.
Folio.
MR. Pools Annotations, in Two Volumes.

The Works of the Reverend Mr. Stephen Charnock, B. D. in Two Volumes.

The Life of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter, with the History of the Times he
lived in, Written by Himself, and Published by Mr. Sylvester.

Quarto.
Mr. Shower's Winter Meditations, or a Sermon concerning Frost, and Snow, and
Winds, etc. and the Wonders of God therein.

-- His Thanksgiving Sermon, April the 16. 1696.

Mr. Nathaniel Vincents Funeral Sermon, Preached by Mr. N. Tailor.

Mr. Lorimer's Apology for the Ministers, who Subscribed only unto the stating
of the Truths and Errors in Mr. William's Book, in Answer to Mr. Trail's Letter
to a Minister in the Country.

-- His Remarks on Mr. Goodwin's Discourse of the Gospel, proving that the
Gospel Covenant is a Law of Grace, and Answering the Objections to the Contrary.

Mr. Stephen's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of London, at St.
Mary-Le-Bow, Jan. 30. 1693.

-- His Thanksgiving Sermon, April 16th. 1696.

Mr. Slater's Thanksgiving Sermon, October. 27. 1692.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. John Reynolds. and Mr. Fincher, Ministers
of the Gospel.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. George Day, Minister of the Gospel at
Ratcliff, 1697.

The Jesuits Catechism.

A Sermon Preached at a Public Ordination in a Country Congregation, by Mr. S.
Clark.

Mr. Gibbons Sermon of Justification.

Comfort in Death a Funeral Sermon Preached upon the Death of Mr. Timothy Cruso
late Pastor of a Church in London, who Died November. 36. 1697. by Matthew Mead.

Mr. John Howard's Assize Sermon at Buckingham, July 5. 1692.

The Evil of our Days with the Remedy of it. A Sermon Preached at a Visitation
at Rothwel in Northamptonshire, October. 12. 1697. by the same Author:

An Effort against Bigottry: And for Christian Catholicism; by Henry Chandler.

Octavo.
Dr. Burtons Discourses of Purity, Charity, Repentance, and seeking first the
Kingdom of God, Published with a Preface, by Dr. John Tillotson, late
Archbishop of Canterbury.

Remarks on a late Discourse of William Lord-bishop of Derry, concerning the
Inventions of Men in the Worship of God. Also a Defense of the said Remarks
against his Lorships Admonition. by J. Boyse.

Bishop VVilkins Discourses of the Gift of Prayer, and Preaching; the latter
much enlarged by the bishop of Norwich, and bishop Williams.

Mr. Samuel Slater's Earnest Call to Family Religion; being the Substance of
Eighteen Sermons.

Mr. Addy's Stenographia: Or the Art of Short Writing completed, in a far more
Compendious Way then any yet Extant.

Cambridge Phrases, by A. Robinson.

History of the Conquest of Florida.

Mr. William Scoffin's Help to true Spelling and Reading: Or, A very easy
Method for the Teaching Children, or elder Persons rightly to Spell, and
exactly to read English.

A Preservative against Deism: Sewing the great Advantage of Revelation above
Reason, in the Two Great Points, Pardon of Sin, and a Future State of
Happiness. With an Appendix in Answer to a Letter of A. VV. against Revealed
Religion in the Oracles of Reason, by Mr. Nath. Tailor.

A Practical Discourse concerning Vows: With a special Reference to Baptism and
the Lords Supper, by Mr. Edmund Calamy.

Monro's Institutio Grammaticae.

Dr. Pack's Praxis Catholica: Or the Country man's Universal Remedy; wherein is
plainly and briefly laid down, the Nature, Matter and Manner, place and Cure of
most Diseases incident to the body of Men.

English Military Discipline, or, The way and method of exercising Horse and
Foot, according to the practice of this present Time, with a Treatise of all
Sorts of Arms, and Engines of War.

Orbis Imperantis Tabellae Geographico Historico Genealogico Chronoiogicae,
Curiously engraven on Copper Plates.

Clavis Grammatica: Or, the ready way to the Latin Tongue; containing most
plain demostrations for the regular translating English into Latin.

Mr. Alsop's Faithful Rebuke to a False Report.

-- His Vindication of the Faithful Rebuke, etc.

Mr. Shower's Sermon on the Death of Mr. Not. Oldfield, who departed this Life,
Decmb. 31. 1696.

Mr. Hamond's Sermon at Mr. Steel's Funeral.

Mr. Alkin's English Grammar: Or, the English Tongue reduced to Grammatical
Rules, composed for the use of the English Schools.

Mr. John Mason's little Catechism, with little Verses, and little Sayings for
little Children.

Mr. Addy's Shorthand Bible.

A Free Discourse wherein the Doctrines that make for Tyranny are Displayed;
the Title of our Rightful and Lawful King William Vindicated. And the
Unreasonableness and Mischievous Tendency of the Odious Distinction of a King
de Facto, and de Jure, Discovered; by the Honorable Sir Robert Howard.

Mr. Woodhouses's Sermon preached to the Societies for Reformation of Manners,
in the City of London.

Mr. Shower's Sermon to the same Societies.

Mr. VVilliams's Sermon to the same Societies.

Mr. Alsop's Sermon to the same Societies.

Mr. Calamy's Sermon to the same Societies.

Mr. Shower's Mourners Companion; being Funeral Discourses on many Occasions.
In Two Volumes.

A plea for the late Accurate and Excellent Mr. Baxter, and those that speak of
the Sufferings of Christ as he does. In Answer to Mr. Lobb's insinuated Charge
of Socinianism against 'em, in his late Appeal to the Bishop of Worcester, and
Dr. Edwards. With a Preface directed to Persons of all Persuasions, to call 'em
from Frivolous and Over-eager Coutentions obout Words on all sides.

A Funeral Sermon occasioned by the Death of Mrs. Jane Papillon, late Wife of
Thomas Papillon Esquire Preached July 24. School. and now published at his Request;
by John VVoodhouse.

Twelves.
A Brief Concordance to the Holy Bible, of the most Useful and Usual Places
which one may have Occasion to seek for. In a new Method; by Samuel Clark, M. A.

London-Dispensatory, reduced to the Practice of the London Physicians: Wherein
are contained the Medicines, both Galenical and Chemical, that are now in use:
Those out of use omitted, and those in use, and not in the Latin Copy, here
added. By John Peachy, of the College of Physicians in London.

Mr. John Shower's Discourse of Tempting Christ.

-- His Discourse of Family Religion, in 3 Letters.

-- His Life of Mr. Henry Gearing.

Mr. Dan. Burgess's Discourse of the Death, Rest, Resurrection and blessed
Portion of the Saints.

-- His Man's whole Duty, and God's wonderful Entreaty of him thereunto.

-- His Advice to Parents and Children.

Mr. George Hamond's and Mr. Matthew Barker's Discourses of Family Worship.
Written at the Request of the United Ministers of London.

FINIS.

