A SERMON PREACHED to the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of MANNERS, IN THE Cities
of London and Westminster, Nov. 15. 1697. By JOHN SHOWER. Published at the
Desire of the said SOCIETIES.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel, in the Poultry, over against
the Compter. School.

ISAIAH LiX. 4. None calls for Justice.


IT IS certain, that the Principles and Duties of Natural Religion are supposed,
confirmed, and enforced by the Christian. The Grace of God, which brings
Salvation, teaches and obliges us, to live soberly and righteously, as well
as Godly. But how astonishing is the Kindness and Condescension? that God has
shown such regard to those parts of Morality, which relate to the Good of
Mankind, as to prefer them before his own Worship? That the Duties of the Law
of Nature, are to take place of those of positive Institution; That he had
rather we should express our Love to one another, and by Charity and Mercy do
good in the World, than be honored himself by Sacrifice, when that cannot be
without Prejudice to our Neigbour. It must therefore be a very mistaken Notion
of Religion, to imagine that any can be a very good Christian, that is not a
very good Man. For Religion is not designed only for the Happiness of
particular Souls in another Life, but for the Welfare of Mankind, as united in
Societies in this World. And for that purpose God has appointed Magistrates as
his Ordinance, and required our Obedience for Conscience sake. He has
commanded us to pray for Kings, and all in Authority under them, and to assist
them to our utmost, that they may not bear the Sword in vain. We are to rise up
for them against the Evildoers, and stand up for them against the Workers of
Iniquity. Psalm. cxvi. 9.
We are to forward and promote the Administration of Justice, and even to call
for it, where that is needful, and may serve a public Good.

THE Neglect of this, and the general Indifferency and Remisness of private
Persons, as to the Execution of Justice, is here complained of, as one of those
things that made the Jews in danger of public Judgments. For when National
Calamity is here threatened, this is assigned as one of those things that
procured it, That there was none called for Justice, i. e. very Few amongst
them did concern themselves, as private Persons, to have Public Justice duly
administered. And it is further added, or pleads for Truth; or, as some render
the Words, Judges truly. That is, Private Persons, are careless and
indifferent as to all such Matters; and Public Magistrates, are negligent and
faulty as to what belongs to them.

IT IS the former Expression, None calls for Justice, that I am now to consider,
with respect to Private Persons: For, thanks be to God, there are Faithful
Magistrates in and about the City, who are ready to do their Duty in the
Administration of Justice, if Private Persons will but do theirs in calling for
it.

MY Design from this Passage, is, First, To manifest that this is the Duty of
Private Persons, which will at once vindicate your worthy Undertaking, and
encourage you to proceed, and persuade others to join with you. Secondly, To
consider some of the Objections, that may dishearten others from doing so, and
weaken your own Hands. Thirdly, I shall take the Liberty to advise some things,
that may help to attain your great End, the Reformation of Manners, and may
render your Endeavors herein accepted with God, and all good Men. And, Lastly,
From several Considerations, I shall endeavor to stir you up to call for
Justice.

I. FOR the Proof, That this is a Duty in Private Persons, we need but Consider
how it is here complained of in the Jews, as one of those Iniquities which
separated between God and them, and caused him to hide his Face, that he would
not hear their Prayers, Ver. 2. It is joined with Lying and Cheating, with
Violence and Murder, and other Abominations, that few or none had the Zeal and
Courage, the Honesty and Integrity, to excite and assist the Magistrate in the
Administration of Justice, whereby the Honor of God might be asserted, and the
Authority of his Laws maintained, by the Punishment of Transgressors. To make
you the more sensible that this is part of your Duty, I shall bespeak you.
First, As Men, and Members of a public Society, and so argue from the
Principles of Natural Religion. Secondly, As Christians, who acknowledge the
Holy Scriptures, and profess to own Revealed Religion. And, Thirdly, Considered
as in a private Capacity, with reference to your own Families and Relations;
where I shall manifest it to be, not only your Duty, but your Interest, to be
concerned for the Administration of Justice.

1. AS MEN. Our general Obligations to Mankind, as we are Men, are more
ancient, and more indispensible, than any particular ones that can be
superadded; so that by the Law of Nature we are bound to do good to all Men, as
we have Opportunity, and to promote the Good of the Place where we live, and of
the Community whereof we are Members. From a Principle of Love to the Society
and to our selves also: for I my self and mine shall be involved in the Common
Ruin. This is so Evident, that many an honest Heathen would have condemned him
as unworthy the Name of a Man, who should prefer his Estate, his Reputation, or
Life, before the Common Good. Now when the Laws of God, and the Land, have
provided for the Punishment of such Offenses as manifestly tend to the Ruin of
the Society, whereof I am a Member, it must needs be my Duty, by the Law of
Nature, to do what I can to prevent it. For if such and such Laws are for the
Public Good, and the Peace and Happiness of a Nation is promoted by observing
them; and the Transgressors of such Laws be not punished, the Laws themselves
are insignificant, and the public Mischiefs, they were designed to prevent,
cannot be kept off, for want of Execution.

EVERY one reckons by the Light of Nature, it is his Duty to assist his
Neighbor, as a Witness or otherwise, that Right may take place, and Justice be
administered in Civil Matters; that in case his Person be assaulted, or his
Goods stolen, or what is his just Due be detained, etc. he may have the
Satisfaction of the Law; There is the same, or greater Reason, in Criminal
Matters, where the Punishment of the Offense is for the Honor of GOD, and for
the Public Good; and where a Reparation can no otherwise be made, but by the
Suffering of the Offender, which in Matters of Property may be done by the
Payment of so much Money.

AND how can an honest Magistrate, for want of Legal Conviction, punish the
Guilty, if he never so much desire it? Let him be never so well qualified for
his Office, and resolved to be faithful, yet if none will complain of the
Breach of the Laws, and give him an Account by whom they are broken, and bear
Witness in order to Legal Conviction, what can he do as a Terror to evil Doers?
It will signify little to have never so many good Laws, or good Magistrates:
For Offenders will be as no Offenders, if there be none to witness against
them: And the wisest and best Laws will be as none if they be not executed. And
how can they be put in Execution by the Magistrate, if there be none to
acquaint him by whom they are transgressed, i. e. if none will call for
Justice? In many cases, where the Number, Interest, and Character of the
Offenders is considerable, a Magistrate may not have the Courage to do it, if
he had the Opportunity, without the Countenance and Encouragement of other Men.
And yet most usually, the Punishment of one Great Criminal might do more good,
than of twenty meaner ones, as his Example and Influence did more hurt. This
must needs hearten and encourage a good Magistrate to do his Duty, when,
besides the Authority of his Office, and the Power of the Law, and his own
particular Inclination, he is backed and assisted by his Fellow Citizens: For
hereby his Reputatation will be the better secured, if he be faithful: In all
Conversations and public Meetings, there will be some of his Neighbors and
Acquaintance, ready to abet his Cause, if he should be reflected on. And this
will facilitate the Administration of Justice by succeeding Magistrates: And if
any of you be hereafter called to serve your Country in a public Station, what
you do now in a private Capacity will enable you to do more Good hereafter in a
public one.

AS to Treasons, and Murders, and Thefts, Men do not reckon themselves at
liberty to be Neuters, but these lesser Crimes make way for greater. And it is
the Interest of any Government, and even of the Supreme Magistrate himself,
that ill Manners be corrected, and lesser Criminals punished; because it is by
the Commission of lesser Crimes, that Men are prepared and hardened to venture
upon greater. If the Laws, that threaten only Correction, Imprisonment, or a
Fine, be neglected and despised; such as threaten Death, will in time have
little Power: For he that will Swear and Curse, and be Drunk, and commit
Adultery, and matters not the Hazard of his Health and Life, by a Course of
Debauchery, will in a little time be hardened, so as to despise Death by the
Sword of Justice. It Is therefore the Interest of any Government, to have ill
Manners corrected, as a proper Means to prevent greater Crimes, where the
Punishment is Capital.

IT ought likewise to be considered, that there is the same Contempt of
Authority, if not greater, in transgressing those Laws, to which lesser
Punishments are annexed, as where the Offender must die for it; the Difference
of the Punishment, is not because there is less Contempt of the Law, and of the
Lawgiver, in the one case, than in the other; but because the evil
Consequences are not the same: For the Voluntary allowed Neglect or Breach of
any part of the Law, renders us guilty of the Violation of the whole, which was
enacted by the same Authority. You must therefore remember, that though such
Instances of Immorality, as you endeavor to punish, have not such an immediate
Tendency, as Murder and Treason, to bring public Confusion and Ruin; yet not
only does the one prepare for the other, but there is as manifest a Contempt of
Divine and Humane Authority in these, as in the most Capital Offenses.

BUT whether the Crimes be greater or smaller, the Ends of Punishment are such
as cannot be attained, without the Assistance of private Persons, that the Laws
made for the common Good be put in Execution.

THE Three great Ends of Punishment, are either, First, The Amendment of the
particular guilty Person. Secondly, The making Others better, or preventing the
like Sin in others by the Warning given. Or, Thirdly, The Public Security,
promoted, by upholding the Honor of the Law, and vindicating the Authority of
the Lawgiver.

1. ONE End of Punishment, annexed to good and righteous Laws, is the Amendment
of the guilty Person. Though Punishment alone will not teach him how to amend his
Life; it may convince him that it needs to be reformed. He knows by what he
suffers, that he has not done as he should, and so may next consider how to do
better, and resolve upon it. Many Men, by their Calamities in the World, by
Sickness, and Poverty, and Shame, and the like, have been brought to consider
their evil Ways, and, we hope, to amend them. Much more may we hope it, when
the Suffering is the immediate direct Punishment, inflicted by the Laws of the
Country for such a Crime. In that case, the Offender cannot turn his Eyes from
the Occasion and Cause of his Suffering, or impute it to any thing else, as Men
commonly do in other cases. For Instance, If a common Swearer be punished in
his Purse, or a lewd Person sent to the House of Correction; they cannot impute
their Sufferings to any other Cause, than to the Faults for which they have
been punished. And who knows, but that God, who delights not in the Death of
Sinners, may give them Repentance, and their present Sufferings help to save
them from Eternal ones? There have doubtless been many, who have sinned
themselves within a Step of Hell, who have run into the vilest Debaucheries,
and so to the very Brink of Ruin, that the very Flames of the bottomless Pit
have even singed their Garments, and taken hold of the Hair of their Heads; who
have yet been plucked as Firebrands out of the Burning, and have unfeignedly
repented, and turned to God even in Newgate. Concerning diverse such, we may
hope, that though they fell under the Sword of the Civil Magistrate; yet, by
Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, they escaped
Eternal Condemnation. And there might be more Instances of this kind, were
there more care taken to assist condemned Prisoners before their Execution; our
Charity in preparing them for another World, might be more successful, than
usually it is upon Persons on a sick Bed.

BUT while I mention Charity to the Souls of Condemned Malefactors, I am
persuaded there would be fewer such, if better Provision were made of Work and
Workhouses for the Poor: Because Idleness and Poverty are the great
Temptations to many of those Vices that fill the Prisons and Houses of
Correction. There is more hope however, where the Punishment is short of Death,
and the guilty Person it may be comes from a good Family, and had Religious
Parents, and has but lately cast off the Fetters of his Education, when it is
not long that he has been taken in the snare of the Devil, there is the more
hope that such a one may be brought to consider himself, by such lesser
Punishment, and so reform.

2. ANOTHER End of Punishment, is to warn others not to transgress in the like
kind. And so it is rather an Act of Mercy, than Revenge; the End of it not
being so much to retaliate the Evil on the Offender, as to do good to Others,
and to keep them from the like Offenses. Smite a Scorner, says the Wise Man,
one that is an obstinate and insolent Offender, 19 Prove. 25.
and the Simple will beware. Such as were like to sin by Inadvertency or ill
Example, will take warning. 25 Chap. 11.
When the Scorners are Punished, the Simple are made Wise. If one Sinner
destroy much good, if one root of Bitterness may defile many; the Impunity of
Criminals upon this account must needs be a great Mischief, as likely to spread
the Infection through the whole Neighborhood, Street, and City: And so it is
every Man's concern, to have his Neighbors Child or Servant Punished for such
Faults, from which he would preserve his own: And I need not tell you how much
greater Influence bad Examples have, than good ones; you know that Health is
not communicated, as Diseases are.

3. PUNISHMENT is an Act of Government, and has relation to the Law; and so
one End of it is to preserve the Authority of the Laws, and the Honor of the
Magistrate, who is concerned for the Public Good. See the Bishop of
Worcester's Discourse of the Sufferings of Christ. Chap. 1. Grotius de Satisf.
Cap. 2.
The reason, here, of Punishment, is not so much because a Law is broken, as
because, if it be not punished, the Authority of the Law, and Lawgiver, can
never be upheld; and that is necessary, or the Community can never be
preserved. And where the Offense to be punished, is against GOD and the Public
Laws; the Punishment is due to the Honor of GOD, and to the Common Good; and
it is not in a Private Man's Power to forgive the Injury to the Public, as he
may do a pecuniary Debt that is owing to himself. Vengeance, says God, is mine;
i. e. the inflicting of Punishment belongs to me. In him all manner of Right is
primarily and originally lodged, as the great Lord and Proprietor of all. And
every Injury and Injustice to another, either private, or public, redounds
upon Him as the Governor of the World. The decision of Right and Wrong, the
distribution of Rewards and Punishments, appertains to him. Vengeance,as taken
for the inflicting of Punishment, is his undoubted Prerogative, his unalienable
Right: It belongs to him, and to those only whom he appoints to be his
Ministers to execute WRATH on such as do evil. And we are not only, to suppose
the reason of this to be the Danger that may accrue to Society by the Impunity
of Crimes, but because of the Dishonor and Affront that is offered to GOD, as
the Governor of the World. He assumes Anger, Wrath, and Jealousy, to show he
minds his own Glory, and will not bear Contempt, but avenge it. And to make
Transgressors suffer, is for the Reparation of God's injured Honor, as well as
for the Happiness of Society. It cannot therefore unbecome a good Man to call
for Justice, it being his Duty on all these accounts to further and promote it.

THESE things will concern us as we are Men, under the Obligation of the Law of
Nature.

2. LET me bespeak you, as you are Christians, and profess to own Revealed
Religion, and the Authority of the Holy Scriptures. It Is not the duty of
Magistrates and Ministers only, but of all the Followers of Christ, to be the
Salt of the Earth, and the Lights of the World, in their several places. Every
Member is bound to promote the welfare of the whole Body, according to his
Capacity. Every Christian must imitate his Master, who went about doing good.
He is created, and redeemed, and sanctified, for it, as the Tree is made for
the Fruit. Many devout Persons may think, if they were Rich enough to live
without bodily Labor, and could spend all their time in Meditation, and
Prayer, and hearing Sermons, etc. That this were the happiest Life in the
World. The Popish Nuns and Friars are under this mistake. But no Man is made
for himself alone, we are Members of Society: We must do good to Others, and in
doing so, we take Care of our own Salvation. Our Lord has taught us to pray,
that the Name of God may be Sanctified, and shall we silently suffer it to be
profaned? And his Kingdom come, and shall we do nothing that it may take place?
And his Will be done on Earth, as in Heaven; without endeavoring this, we
contradict our own Prayers. And when we desire the Will of God may be done, we
mean it by Others, as well as our selves. And is it not the Will of God, that
such Offenses should be Punished? We beg Forgiveness of our own Sins, and the
Sins of the Nation; Can we do it uprightly, and not endeavor Reformation? We
may not suffer Sin upon Others, any more than allow it in our selves. The
Scripture Examples, of Zerubbabel, Nehemiah, Ezra, etc. may be urged to this
purpose, as you have heard in some former Sermons, and I hope with very good
Effect.

BUT let me here reason with you a little. Is it fit for Christians to be
concerned, that Justice be done between Man and Man, as to their Lives,
Estates, and Civil Rights; and shall we be more indifferent as to those Laws,
where the Honor of GOD, and of our Blessed Redeemer, are more immediately
concerned? If a notorious Cheat or Thief be discovered and taken, what general
Rejoicing is there in the City! What Crowds will attend him to the Justice of
Peace, to the Prison, to the Sessions House, to the Pillory! Is it only,
because your selves may one time or other be injured by such a Crime, or have
been so? Doubtless, in Criminal Cases, there is more reason to assist, and more
reason to rejoice, as these Offenders are the Pests of Humane Society; and as
their Crimes do carry an open Affront to Heaven. Is the cheating of you of a
little Money so great a matter, the defrauding you in a Bill of Exchange, or a
Bank Note, so very considerable, that every one is ready to assist to have such
a Fellow punished? And is there not more reason in the other Case? Is the value
of Ten or Twenty Pounds more to be regarded, than the Virtue, Honor, Safety,
Health, Life, and Soul, of your Relations and Neighbors, which may be
corrupted and destroyed by unpunished Vice, and Examples of Debauchery?

YOU know, you are not to entice and tempt Others to Sin; but are you not
likewise to prevent others from being tempted? You may not lay a stumbling
block in another way, to make him fall; but if you see him ready to cast
himself down a Precipice, will you do nothing to prevent it? Nehemiah charges
the Rulers for breaking the Sabbath, because they did not restrain others from
bearing Burdens. How dear did it cost Ely, and his House, that, when his Sons
made themselves vile, he restrained them not! Though Pilate spoke to the Jews on
the behalf of Christ as Innocent; yet is he charged with his Murder, for not
doing all that he could to hinder it. We may many ways partake of other Men's
Sins, and this doubtless is one, If we do not what we may and ought to prevent
them. In which Case we likewise share in all the ill Consequences of their
Iniquity, in all the Mischiefs that follow upon the City and Nation, by such
Impunity. Let me express this in the better words of Sermon. 1. ad Magistratum.
29 Job. 14.
Bishop Sanderson, You countenance, says he, the Disorders, that by Justice may
be suppressed; You disarm Innocence, that Justice would protect; You banish
Peace, which by Justice is maintained; You are Traitors to the King and his
Throne, which by Justice is established; and you pull down on the City and the
Nation the public Plagues and Judgments of God, which the Execution of Justice
would avert. Is it not then your duty, as Christians, to promote and forward
the Execution of Justice, when thereby you contribute to suppress Disorders, to
protect Innocence, to maintain Peace, to secure the King and State, and to turn
away public Judgments from the Land?

SIRS, We are all Christians, the Duty is common to us all, the Obligation is
equal. It Is what we are all concerned in, and agree in; because by our Baptism
we are all engaged to fight under the Banner of Christ, in a constant Warfare
against the Devil and his Angels. And it is observable, that when our Savior
was charged as a Confederate with Satan in working Miracles, he tells us, (and
it is repeated by three Evangelists) that he was so far from that, that he
looked upon that Man for his Enemy, who would not serve him in opposition to
the Devils Kingdom and Interest. He that is not with me, is against me; and he
that gathers not with me, scatters abroad, Matthew. 12.30. Christ has his
Kingdom to carry on in the World, and Satan has his: You must either be for
advancing the Kingdom of Christ against the Devil, or you join in Confederacy
with the Devil against the Son of God and his Kingdom. I remember what Jehu
said in another case, but not very different, (when he was to Execute Judgment,
by Gods command, on the whole House of Ahab,) Who is on my side? cried Jehu,
Who is on my side? I may put the like Question this day, or rather beg that you
would to your selves, Which side will you take? For you cannot be Newters.
Which side will you take; For Reformation? Or for Profaneness? For suppressing
Vice, or for letting it alone? That is, Will you be for Christ, or for the
Devil? You must be Treacherous to your Lord, and unfaithful to your Baptismal
Vow, if you do not join heartily against the Interest of the Devil, in so plain
and public a Case as this.

AND among all sorts of Christians, that have written against Persecution, and
about the Power of the Magistrate as to Matters of Religion, we find that the
greatest Sticklers for the most unlimited Toleration, as to different
Sentiments about Matters of Faith, and Worship; do yet all agree, that these
Instances of Immorality do properly come under the Cognizance of the Civil
Magistrate, as having a mighty Influence upon Public Societies, being very
prejudicial to the Welfare of it. So that no Man can complain of Persecution
for his Opinions, when he is punished for such gross Immoralities against the
Laws of God and the Land. No Christians, no Protestants, who differ in lesser
Matters as to Faith and Worship, will plead for the Allowance of such
Corruption of Manners, and Debauchery of Life, as you endeavor to suppress.

IF it should be said, that I am mistaken here: For all Christians do not agree
about the Morality of the Sabbath, and therefore it is hard to punish Men for
the Profanation of it. I answer, that granting some good Men may have given
Directions about the Observation of the Lord's Day, that cannot be warranted
from the Word of God, as reducing it too much to a wearisome bodily Exercise,
yet have we enough to confirm our Opinion and Practice as to the Lord's Day, by
considering the first Original and Institution of the Sabbath, and the Matter
of the Fourth Commandment; (And when all the other Nine are granted to be of
universal and perpetual Obligation, it is hard to conceive, that one of the ten
should concern only the Jews;) And considering the Practice of the Christian
Church in all Ages, and the Experience of a special Presence and Blessing of
God on the Public Christian Worship on such a Weekly Day of Rest; and that
serious Religion was never observed to thrive and flourish, or be long
preserved, in any City, Family, or particular Soul, where this was neglected;
These, and the like things, are sufficient for our Justification. But you my
Brethren, that are Members of the Church of England, are peculiarly obliged to
suppress the Profanation of the Weekly Sabbath; because every Lord's Day, and
oft'ner, you beg of God, to incline your Hearts to keep the Fourth Commandment,
and that the Fourth, as well as the other Nine, may be written upon your
Hearts, and obeyed in your Lives. Besides what might be quoted out of the
Homilies.

3. HAVING mentioned this of the Sabbath, I proceed, to consider you in your
Families, and Shops, and private Relations, and so to manifest it to be your
Duty and Interest, on that account, to have the Laws put in Execution, and
particularly against the Profanation of the Lord's Day. For while your Children
and Servants are employed in Civil Business, and Secular Affairs, on the
Weekdays, they are freed from many Temptations: But if they be not employed in
Religious Exercises on the Lord's Day, if they are left to themselves, to do
nothing, or to do what they please; to stay at home, or go abroad; to attend
the public Worship, or not attend it, you expose them to such Temptations, as
many ways may be Injurious to your selves, and in the end Destructive to them.
There are Few, that come to a miserable shameful Death in this World, but
acknowledge this, and date their Wickedness and their Ruin from their
neglecting to keep holy the Lord's Day.

DO but Consider how much the Peace and Safety of your Families, the Trade, the
Riches and Prosperity of the City, (which consists of particular Families,) is
owing to good Laws, and to the Terror of the annexed Punishments; and you will
hereby discern your own Interest so wrapped up in the Public, as to infer your
Duty to promote the Administration of Justice. Murders would be more frequently
committed, were it not for the Terror of the Law. Robberies and Burglaries
would be more common, were it not for the Severity of the Punishment. And that
lesser Thefts and Frauds, in buying and selling, are more common, is because
the Penalty is small if discovered, and the Means of Prosecution chargeable,
There is very much reason to think, that it is not Conscience, so much as the
Dread of Temporal Punishment, that makes you safe in your Houses, and quiet in
the Possession of what you enjoy.

AS to the Suppression of Profaneness and Debauchery, let Parents and Masters
consider it, that it is more than possible, that some of those Offenders, (who
might be reclaimed by seasonable Correction, but for want of it go on, and are
hardened in Sin;) may be related hereafter to some of your Families, by the
Marriage of a Son or Daughter, or other Relation: And so you and yours may
smart by the ill Effects of that Wickedness, which Faithfulness and Zeal in
your present Undertaking might restrain and prevent.

NEED I mind you of the Routs and Riots, the Quarrels, and Contentions, and
Murders, occasioned by Drunkeness; of the Poverty and Ruin of a Multitude of
Families, by that, and other expensive Vices: Whereby Men not only undo
themselves, but rob those for whom they ought to make Provision. Can you be
ignorant of the horrid Confusion in Families, and the sad Train of other ill
Consequences, as to Health, and Life, and Honor, and Estate, which is the
Fruit of Lewdness and Uncleanness? Are you not sensible of the Advantage to
your Families, by Purity, and Chastity, and keeping the Marriage Bed undefiled?
and that by Drunkenness and Uncleanness Men are prepared for any other Villainy
they may be tempted to commit?

CAN you be safe, as to your Persons or Estates, good Name, or Life, while, by
common and customary Swearing, the Reverence and Awe of an Oath is lost, and
the Obligation of it forgotten? What Trust or Dependence can there rationally
be given to the Testimony of such a one, as a Witness or Juryman, who daily
takes the Name of God in vain in his ordinary Discourse? To this is owing very
much the dreadful Guilt of Perjury and Subornation, that is more complained of
in this Age, than it may be in any other.

AS to the Business of Trade, let me reason with you, Would you not sooner
trust a sober honest Man, that has but half the Estate of a lewd Debauchee? As
knowing, in a little while the latter may be brought to a Morsel of Bread; and
that many have been so, who once fared deliciously every Day; but by their
Vices have squandred away great Estates, and been reduced to that Poverty, as
to want a Dinner? Not only disabled from paying their Debts, if they had a Mind
to it, but knew not how to get Bread. (I say, paying their Debts, if they had a
Mind to it, because usually they that will not pay their just Debts when able,
afterward would do it, and have it not.) But there is nothing is the undoing
of Tradesmen, like the Lusts and Debauchery of their Partners, and
Correspondents, their Customers, and their Debtors. How many a worthy Citizen
has been bankrupt by other Men's Crimes, and not by his own? which, if they had
been suppressed and punished formerly, the Cries, and Tears, and Ruin of many
a poor Orphan, and helpless Widow in this City, might have been prevented.

I hope you can feel the Weight and Force of these Things, your own Thoughts
may enlarge them. And even such Arguments may have some good Effect, where the
Men persuaded by them to do good, may not act out of a good Principle, but only
as wise in their Generation: For a covetous Father would be against the Gaming
and Prodigality of his Son, without any regard to God, or the public Good. (As
many that had Abbey Lands, were against Popery:) But God often uses Vice against
Vice, otherwise Kingdoms and Churches must suffer more, or be saved by Miracle.

BUT after all that I have said, there is no Duty so plain, (though Interest be
connected with it,) against which something will not be said, to discourage and
hinder the Practice, I therefore come to answer an Objection or two, by which
your Hands may be weakened, or others hindered from joining with you in this
worthy Design. And,

First, It may be said, That it is not so very Honorable and Genteel, to inform
against other Men for their ill Manners; it is more than we need, to be thus
busy in other Men's Matters; There is a certain Obloquy and Reproach
inseparable from such Work, and by the Generality of the World fastened upon
all that will meddle in it, who will not live quietly by their Neighbors, though
they be not so good as they should be.

1. AS to the Matter of Reproach. This is the more necessary to be taken notice
of, not only as the most obvious; but because many, who knew not the Methods
that you observe, and the Caution and Care you take in your Proceedings, and
the very good Effect it has already had, and how exactly you endeavor to keep
to the Laws of God and the Land; many, I say, that knew not this, had not so
good Thoughts of your Undertaking at first, as now, and as many others we hope
will, upon further Acquaintance with your Design, and not think it a Reproach
to join with you therein. As to the Persons themselves that are obnoxious to
the Law, it would be very great Weakness, to neglect your Duty, and Wound your
Conscience, for fear of being ill spoken of by Such, whose good Word could gain
you no Credit and Reputation.

YOU have been told, how some of the Princes themselves, of the first Rank and
Dignity amongst the Jews, did not think it beneath them, to inform against
those who transgressed the Law of God, though some of their own Rank and Quality
were of that Number. Ezra ix. There have been many wise Lawgivers, who have
propounded and promised Rewards, to Encourage Men to give true and faithful
Information against Criminals: Especially for such Crimes as greatly tend to
the Prejudice of the Public. As the one hand they had severe Punishments for
false Accusers out of Malice, Revenge, etc. so on the other hand Public
Rewards have been promised, and public Honors have been bestowed, in such
Cases of Information, by the Romans.

But I hope I need not use such Topics to You, to venture your Reputation in
this Case; when you own your selves Christians, and I have minded you of your
Baptism: You will not think it a Reproach to be true to that. You know the
Example and Precepts of Christ, of doing good to the Evil, and blessing those
that curse you, and praying for those that despitefully use you. I therefore
hope, you will not be discouraged, if you have not more Acceptance and Success
in the Discharge of your Duty, than God has promised. If you can honor Him,
and promote a public Good; the more you are reviled and scorned upon that
account, the more praiseworthy: There will be the more Virtue and Grace to
despise your Reputation in that case. Let it perish, should you say, if I may
but do good; But it is in God's Hand, as much as my Life. And will not He bear
me out, if I honestly and sincerely desire to promote his Glory? Am I a
Christian, and can I doubt it? And have I not found, as well as others, that I
never consult my own Reputation so much, as when I most heartily endeavor to
be faithful to God and Conscience? For they that honor God, shall be honored;
and they that play the Hypocrite, shall be found out, and Lightly esteemed.
Thanks be to God, you have many Excellent Persons of all Persuasions to unite
with. But if you had not, you should not scruple to be God's Witnesses in the
World against Profaness; and to do all the Good you can, whether Others will,
or will not, join with you. If this be to be vile, you must resolve to be more
vile. But you need not fear your Reputation: For God has said it, Isa. 54.17.
Every Tongue that shall rise in Judgment against thee, thou shall condemn, and
this is the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord. When may you apply it, and
hope for its Accomplishment, if not in your Case?

DO but Argue with your selves a little. Can it be a Dishonor, to appear for
the Blessed God, and your Redeemer, when the very Persons you would restrain
and punish, (very few excepted,) inwardly condemn Themselves, and acquit You?
for they know you are in the Right, and themselves in the Wrong. Most of them
know the Bible, and the Christian Religion, and the Laws of God, and that you
do but act according to your Duty. And, sooner or later, they will all Justify
your Proceedings. Your Reputation will be cleared, if you hold on; as the
eclipsed Moon, by keeping and continuing her Motion, recovers her Splendour.
Your Righteousness will break forth as the Light, to the Shame of all that have
thought, or spoken hardly of your Undertaking.

IT cannot be dishonorable for Gentlemen of the best Character or Quality, to
engage in this Design, if they consider the Nature and Use of the Grand Juries
in England, which are chosen out of the best Families, Men of the best Sense,
of the best Estates, and of the best Figure in their Country; and they come
under an Oath, to make Enquiry of all Offenses committed within their County,
that shall come to their Knowledge: They are bound to inform the Court against
Criminals. Now if it be reckoned a very Honorable thing to serve as a Grand
Juryman, at the Call of a Magistrate; it can never be faulty and scandalous, to
do this voluntarily at the Call of GOD, for the Service of the public
Interest, and with the Countenance of Authority, as is your Case. And neither
Grand Juries, nor Petty Juries, will signify much, if GOD do not give you
Success in your Worthy Design and Undertaking.

I would fain have it seriously Considered, whether there be any thing that you
unite for, that is in it self Dishonorable: And if there be not, your inward
Peace, by the Testimony of a good Conscience, that you endeavor to honor and
obey GOD, will over-balance the Censures of Men. If you can help to reform, and
so save a sinful and polluted City and Nation from Ruin, (and your Example has
already begun to influence other Nations, as well as other Parts of this;) you
shall not then have need to be ashamed of it. Let them be ashamed, that
transgress without Cause. Let them be ashamed, that do such things, that can
have no other Fruit and Consequence, without Repentance, but Everlasting Shame.
What little things, to a Man of Conscience, should be a few hard Words,
reproachful Epithets, ill Names, dirty Language, to your Face, or behind your
Back? If you cannot bear this for doing well, may not Christ be ashamed of you
before his Father and his holy Angels? The Proud have had me greatly in
Derision, Psalm. 119.51.
says the Psalmist, yet I have not declined from thy Law. If Men revile you,
and speak all manner of Evil against you, for Christ's sake, for Obedience to
him, for advancing his Interest, and seeking his Honor; Happy are ye, the
Spirit of God, and of Glory, will rest upon you. Was not Elias taken for the
Troubler of Israel; and the Apostles reviled as those that turned the World
upside down; and the most unsufferable of Men; and S. Paul himself for a
pestilent, seditious Fellow? Did not many of the Holy Martyrs die in the
Flames, for endeavoring to save Men from the Fire of Hell? But I hope I need
not say more to this Objection; your very Profession of Christianity is enough
to Answer it.

2. ANOTHER Objection may be started, That you would not be served so your
selves: It is unjust for one Neighbor to accuse another, one Gentleman, one
Tradesman or Acquaintance to accuse another, and bear Witness against him: If
you were the faulty Person, you would not be willing to be so dealt with; You
must do to others, as you would be done by, for this is the Law and the
Prophets.

How plausible soever this may appear, I shall show, First, That it does not
reach the Case that I am speaking of. Secondly, I shall turn it upon you, to
enforce that which I design in this Discourse.

1. THIS Passage of our Savior does not reach the Case. For it is not a
complete and primary Rule of all Humane Actions toward other Men; nor an
absolute unlimited one: But is to be considered as a Relief in other Cases,
where we are at a loss, for want of a particular Rule. As if a Man fail in the
World, and afterward get an Estate, whether he should not pay the whole, doing
as he would be done by. But it must be used only in things first Lawful by some
other Rule; otherwise I may be obliged by the Authority of GOD in some other
Law, to do that to Others, which it may be I would not be very willing to
receive: But the Matter is not left to my Liberty, as being determined already.
And there are many Cases, where our own Will and Desire of others treating us,
would be a wrong Guide, a very imperfect and defective Rule. Especially if the
Matter be determined before, by any particular Divine and Humane Laws. If a Man
be indebted to you, you would not think much if you Arrest him, if he will not
pay: Whereas, it may be, you would not be very willing he should serve you so.
So for a Magistrate, if he offends, it may be he would not care to be punished.
But think a little what is Just, and Reasonable, and fit in this Case: And in
such Points only this Rule holds. He that is to inflict the Punishment, is
doubtless under less Prejudice, and supposed to be a more Impartial Judge, than
the Offender that is to be punished. And if you were in his Case, you would
think and act, as he does; and therefore cannot reasonably expect to escape
now: For it would be Cruelty to the greater, and far better part of the
Society, if such Offenses should go unpunished.

2. I shall turn it upon you, to enforce that which I design in this Discourse,
from this very Rule, of doing to Others as you would be done by. Is there any
of you, that is willing to be defrauded, in his Person, Estate, Name, etc.
howeever unwilling to be punished, when guilty? Were any of you a Magistrate?
(and many of you may live to be so) Would you not desire the Concurrence, the
Countenance and Assistance of your Neighbors and Fellow-Citizens, in the
Execution of your Office? Whatever you would reasonably desire and approve from
Others in that case, you are now to render to them. And as to your Selves too,
you will do well to keep this Rule in your Eye, in the pursuit of your great
Design. And therefore to Compassionate the offending Persons, charitably to
desire and seek their Repentance and Amendment: Not to magnify or multiply
their Faults, without Reason; but to put the fairest Construction upon their
Words and Actions: If their Fault will admit of any Plea, Diminution or Excuse,
not to reject it, but to make the same Allowance to others, as, in the same
Circumstances, you would reasonably desire from any Honest Man.

IN a Word, not to transgress the Bounds of Charity and Mercy, even in the
Administration of Justice, because you your selves would desire it in the like
Case. And on this Account, unless the Criminals be obstinate and impudent, you
will do well to treat them with Meekness, and Gentleness of Speech and
Behavior: For bitter and upbraiding Words, and a morose sour Carriage, will
but help to make them Obstinate. And the Faults and Follies of Mankind, as well
as their Sufferings in the World, are Objects of Pity. Hard Words, rude and
unkind Speeches, will do harm to young Sinners; and Mankind is so made, that
they will hardly do good to any Body. However, remember to do as you would be
done by. And so I am led to give you some Advice before I was aware, with
reference to your Proceedings, which is the Third Thing I proposed.

AND that which I have now said, directs me to begin with this Counsel, First,
That though you ought to be Impartial, yet you must have Compassion, making a
difference between some sorts of Criminals and others. It is the Apostle's
Advice, Jude 22. Though that may relate to the Governors of the Church, yet it is
very applicable here. As there is a Difference in Crimes, and the Law makes a
Difference in Punishment; so there is in Criminals. If it be the first or
second Fault, it is not all one Case, as with a hardened habituated Sinner. You
will easily Apprehend, that a green Wound, and an old Ulcer, are not to be
cured by the same Application. A sharp Reproof, a serious Admonition, or a
severe Threatening, may do more good on Some, than the severest Punishment on
Others, who are past Shame. There are some who fall by Surprise, and not by
Deliberation and customary Wickedness; and such ought to be pitied, and
restored in the Spirit of Meekness: There is not so much of vicious Habit, and
Stubbornness of Will, in such Cases, as of the Frailty of Humane Nature.

2. HOWEVER, you must be so far Impartial, notwithstanding this Compassion, as
not to spare any Man, because he is of your Party and Persuasion in Matters of
Religion: Nor to seek for Crimes and Offenses in those of one Party, rather
than another. For such Transgressions of the Law are equally faulty in all. Let
Men pretend to what Strictness they will in Matters of positive Institution and
Worship, these Immoralities are heinous, and to be punished by the Judges. Your
Partiality in this Case, would discover, that you do not hate the Sin, so much,
as seek an Advantage against the Party you do not like. And it may give an
Occasion to others to raise the old Scandal, That you believe God sees no Sin
in his People, and therefore Men should not: And that the Saints cannot Sin,
nor Believers do themselves any harm by Sin: And being assured of escaping
Eternal Punishment, they ought to be saved from Temporal. This would be the
greatest Reproach, on the Profession of Religion that can be.

AND withal take heed, not to prosecute any Man that is Faulty in this Matter,
because he is your particular Enemy, or has disobliged, or injured you. For
whatever he suffers in this Case, though he never so much deserves it, what you
do can never be pleasing to GOD, as being from a wrong Principle, nor is it
likely to reclaim the Offender.

NEITHER must you neglect Justice, because the Offender is your Friend, or
Acquaintance. Not that I would be thought to encourage you to betray
Conversation, to be false to your Friend, and if an Offense be Committed only
in your Presence, to go presently to a Magistrate, as an Accuser. I should
think a faithful, friendly, and sharp Reproof in that case, for the first or
second time at least, may be sufficient; if there be hopes of their Repentance.
You will find Cases enough, where is no such Confidence arising from
Conversation, and no danger of such a Charge of Treachery to be objected
against your Proceedings.

3. LET me beseech you to beware how you Tempt others to Sin, on a Supopsition
that their Character is bad, and their Inclinations naught, and then Accuse
them for Complying with the Temptation which you offered, it may be with
Artifice and Cunning, and the promise of Secrecy. It Is possible there may be
Persons of very ill Inclinations, who would have stopped there, if they had not
been actually tempted. And there is an unspeakable Hazard, lest the Persons
that tempt in order to Conviction, should enter into the Temptation, and fall
into the snare of the Devil, and be overcome Themselves. Take heed therefore of
catching the Infection you would cure: Lest, by endeavoring to snatch others
out of the Fire, they pull you into it. God grant it never may be so.

4. THERE is another thing as to Impartiality, wherein your work may be
difficult; and that is, that many are guilty of the same Crimes, who are above
your reach: Persons of that Quality and Figure, Character and Interest in the
World, that you dare not meddle with them. For Drunkenness and Whoredom,
Profane Swearing and Cursing, etc. are not the Vices only of Servants, but
Masters; not of meaner People only, but of your Equals and Superiors; not of
those that wear Liveries, but of the Gentlemen whom they follow. I Answer, A
little Courage and Resolution, with Wisdom and Prudence, may assist you to do
your Duty as to this. Doubtless you will not think that you ought to keep the
Favor and good Opinion of any such, by conniving at their Faults, when it is
in your power to punish, For what is an Offense against the Law of God and the
Land in one Man, is so in another. But in some Cases, as matters now are, where
it would be likely to do more hurt than good, I think you may forbear: And
believe, and hope that the Punishment of meaner Persons, will so far influence
the Greater Sort, as to bring them to be more private, and less scandalous in
their Crimes. And sometimes the best Rebuke that can be given some great Men
and Superiors, is to let them see what is the just and deserved Punishment of
their own Faults, by the Punishment of Inferiors, for the same things which
they know themselves to be guilty of.

AND thus I have, faithfully and plainly told you your Duty, with the principal
Objections against it, and with the proper Limitations and Cautions. What
remains, is to Exhort and Urge you to the Practice.

SHALL I set before you the Public Interest of the Kingdom? Or the Kindness to
the particular Persons who offend? Or the Honor of our Nation and City? Or the
just Expectations of GOD and all the World, after this Public Peace? Or the
Consideration of the Union of so many Worthy Members of the National Church
with Protestant Dissenters in this Undertaking? There are many things may be
urged under all these Heads, suitable to our present purpose: I will name a
few, and so Conclude.

I. THE public Interest of the Community is maintained by the Execution of
good Laws. The Welfare of Society, and its Public Peace, cannot else be
preserved. The very Constitution, by which you enjoy your many Blessings in a
private Capacity, must otherwise sink. Gouts, and Palsies, and Consumptions,
and other Diseases of the Body, are not more certainly destructive to the
Health and Life of a particular Person, than the Impunity of Profane and Wicked
People to the Peace and Happiness of a State and Nation.

THE Divine Presence and Favor, (which is the Strength and Stability of a
People,) cannot otherwise be secured, or his threatened Judgments diverted.
Wicked Cities and Societies God will punish in this World, and, as such, they
cannot otherwise be punished at all; though particular Persons shall be
accountable in another. The Crimes you endeavor to punish, you know, are such,
for which the Wrath of God comes upon the Children of Disobedience: For which
a flying Roll of Written-Curses is declared to be sent: For which other Lands
have been made to mourn. And on the contrary, by executing Judgment for such
Offenses, we read of Divine Judgments removed, and his Plagues stayed. A few,
that would publicly and resolutely own God and Religion, might have saved a
City. If you can find a Man that executes Judgment, and seeks Truth, I will
pardon Jerusalem, says God by one Prophet, Jer. 5.5. I sought for a Man, and
found none to stand in the Gap, therefore I poured out mine Indignation upon
them, says another, Ezekiel. 22. Though at the same time there was a Remnant, it
may be, of Seven Thousand unknown Persons, that did secretly fear and worship
God in their Hearts: But they did not preserve the Nation from Captivity, and
the City from Destruction, as a Few, openly and resolutely owning God and
Religion, would have done.

BUT if GOD had not threatened Judgment, such a People would soon undo
themselves by their own Vices: Which must necessarily weaken, divide,
dishonor, impoverish, and destroy them. Great Numbers of Subjects, that in a
time of War, might defend their Country, are effeminated, debauched, diseased,
and made incapable of bearing Arms; fitter for an Hospital, than an Army; to be
under a Physician, or Chyrurgeon, rather than a General; who instead of being
able to use a Sword or Musket, need a Crutch. By unrestrained, unpunished Vice
and Wickedness, the very Genius of a Nation is changed, a generous and brave
People dispirited: By Luxury and Debauchery they are softened and dissolved
into Cowardice: They lose their Reputation abroad, and have no Strength at
home; and are an easy Prey to Foreign Enemies: But, without that, must sink
under their own Burden, and in a little time will undo themselves.

II. IT will be Kindness to the Particular Persons, whose Manners are so
corrupt as to come under the Lash of the Law: For it is not of Capital
Punishments we now speak. He that sins against God, wrongeth his own Soul.
And is it no Kindness to preserve them from wounding, and hurting, and
destroying themselves; from deforming the Beauty, darkning the Glory, debasing
the Purity, weakening the Strength, disturbing the Peace, undermining the Life
and Happiness of their own Souls. It Is to hinder them from laying violent Hands
on themselves, who like mad Men would thrust a Sword into their own Hearts. And
yet how many such Spectacles of Compassion are there, where Vice is not
restrained and punished? The Sight of a Wreck at Sea by a Tempest, or the
Desolations of a Country by War, (where their Cities have been plundered, and
Houses burnt, and dead Carcasses lay exposed in the Field and Streets;) This
would affect you with Compassion: But the unrestrained Wickedness of the World,
is a worse Sight. To see a Man weltering in his own Blood, and gasping for
Breath, after he has wounded and stabbed himself, is a doleful Sight; But the
Sinfulness, and Misery of Mankind by Reason of Sin, should much rather move our
Compassion.

ARE you not kind to them? to save them from Beggary, from Ignominy, from
Sickness, from Death, and from the Wrath of God for ever? Is it not kindness,
to save them from languishing, painful Sickness? from Fevers and Dropsies,
from Gouts and Cholicks, Consumptions, and worse Distempers, that are the
Consequents of their particular Vices, and of a disorderly Life? and withal to
save them from an untimely Death by the Sword of Justice?

IT IS impossible to tell from what Mischiefs you preserve a Man, who is
reclaimed but from that one Vice of Drunkenness: For who knows what Mischiefs
and Destruction he may run into, by running into that Excess; when once the
Wine has filled him with more Spirits than he is able to govern? To be sure,
you save them from a great deal of Anguish and Trouble of Conscience: For even
they that laugh, and sport, and drink away their Fears and Remorse; yet when
the Company is broken up, and the Heat of the Wine is over, their gloomy
misgiving Thoughts return upon them, and they care not to be alone, or in the
dark, for fear of their own guilty Selves.

HOW many of these need to be pitied, especially who have had a good Education;
to whom it was more difficult to run into an excess of Riot: For they must
stifle many more Convictions, and be at a great deal of Pains, to silence the
Clamours of Conscience; They must lay aside Consideration and serious Thoughts,
forsake the Public Assemblies for Divine Worship, neglect the Reading of the
Bible, avoid the serious Company of those that would reprove them; They must
leave off secret Prayer, they must accustom themselves to loose Conversation,
and admit Principles of Atheism and Infidelity, before they can adventure to
commit some great Crimes. And it may be for a good while Conscience will speak
louder in their Ears, and the Flames of Hell flash oftener, and more terribly
in their Eyes, because of their Education. They have much ado to hold on; and
if they be sick, or like to die, how ready are they to Despair: Unless they
leave the World like stupefied Brutes, they are usually in most dreadful
Agonies. Is it not kind, to pity 'em, and endeavor to save them from all this,
and from Eternal Damnation after all?

ARE you not kind to them, when you consider they cannot be undone for ever by
a sinful Course, without being miserable now, and you would fain preserve them
from both? Every Week's Experience will confirm the Truth of this. If Men
reflect, and consider what they have got by a vicious disorderly Life: What
Fruit have they had in the Way of Sin? Let them bring in their Account, and let
us view the Sum Total. What Fruit have they had? but so much Shame and Fear, so
much Care and Trouble, so much Disgrace and Disapointment, Dissatisfaction and
Disquiet; so many Sorrows and Calamities; an ill Name, an empty Purse, a
decayed Fortune, a diseased Body, an accusing Conscience, etc. And all these by
such Sins as you would restrain, punish, and prevent. And is it not Kindness,
thus to convince them, that if they will perish for ever, they must purchase
Eternal Misery by present Punishment; and run the Hazard at least of being
Undone in this World, that they may be Damned in the next?

III. IS not the Honor of the City, and of the Nation, concerned in this? To
revive those Virtues which were anciently the Glory of England, and to check
and reform those Disorders which the Licentiousness of the latter Reigns has
introduced? Is Reverence for the Blessed God, his Name, his Word, his Day, his
Institutions; Is Honesty, Truth and Justice, Sobriety, Temperance, and
Chastity, less a Duty in our Age, than heretofore? Were these things only fit
to be admired in former Times, without being practiced in ours? It Is certainly
for the Honor of London, (which is one of the most considerable Cities in the
World on other Accounts,) that base Assassinations, Murders, and Robberies, are
not so common every Day and Night, here, as in many Cities of Spain and Italy:
That a Man may walk safely, upon a lawful Occasion, at any time of the Night,
from one end of the City to the other, without hazard of his Life by Pistol or
Stilletto. Would it not be a greater Honor to this City, (and the Protestant
Religion professed here,) to be able to walk up and down, and not meet a
Drunkard reeling in the Streets, or hear the GOD of Heaven blasphemed, or a
profane Oath sworn in the Places of public Concourse? not to hear Men curse
and swear, and pray to GOD to damn them? (which is, and should be the Business
of their their Lives to escape and prevent.) On which account also common
Conversation, and public Converse is uneasy to a Serious Christian: For the
Company of many witty and ingenious Persons must be declined, and avoided by a
Man of Conscience, by Reason of their Oaths and Curses, and impious Language,
which otherwise would be both pleasing and profitable. However, If we cannot go
so far in such a Reformation, as to hope to live to see all this; let us do
what we can, and beg that the next Generation may carry it further.

IV. SHALL I urge you to these joint Endeavors for suppressing Profneness,
from the Seasonableness of them, after the Public Peace which GOD has
mercifully given us? Many Penal Laws, in a time of War, are more faintly
executed, because the Government may stand in need of the Assistance of the
Bad, as well as the Good: But when the Sword of War abroad is sheathed, that of
Civil Justice should be drawn against Profaneness, because the Government has
occasion only for the Service of Good Men in a time of Peace: And has not so
much other Business to divert them from executing the Laws. So that not to
punish Vice in a time of Peace, will be a greater Reflection on the Government,
than if the War had continued. And alas, how little Security can we have of the
Continuance of Peace, or of any of the Blessings of it, without Reformation? Is
it Peace, Jehu? Is there, can there be a lasting well-grounded Peace, while
Whoredoms and Adulteries, Perjuries and Blasphemies, profane Oaths and Curses,
and other Abominations, unpunished, are so many?

Lastly, Consider, These are Things that we All Agree in. The visible
Countenance of so many worthy Persons, of different Persuasions in lesser
Things, thus to abet the Cause of Religion, and to discourage Profaneness, is a
Great Thing. It may help to bring Sobriety and Serious Godliness into request.
Whereas if good Men be timorous and bashful, if they be afraid, or ashamed to
take the Part of Religion, (though the Laws of GOD are seconded by those of the
Nation;) the Profligate and Profane will be more hardened, more numerous and
insolent. For there is hardly any thing does more embolden Men in Sin, than to
see Others commit the like with Impunity. And we may justly apprehend, that the
spreading of Debauchery in City and Country, is very much owing to this: That
Good Men, who are inwardly Friends to Religion, stand Neuters, and will not
concern themselves to appear against Profaneness, and help to stem the Tide.
It Is in this Case, as one says of a Plague, If the Sound and Healthy will
withdraw themselves in a time of Infection, and do nothing to stop the
Pestilence; if only the Sick and Infected do walk abroad, and appear in
public; how unavoidably must the Contagion spread, and the Plague reign, even
to Desolation, in such a place?

I AM not without hope, that this laudable and Christian Undertaking will
promote a better Understanding between the Protestants of the National Church,
and Those who in some things dissent from it. As far as we have attained, let
us agree to mind the same thing. And to suppress Immorality and Profaneness, I
am sure, is one of those things, wherein we ought, and may, and do Agree. And
by more familiar Acquaintance with one another, you may find so many Persons,
of both sorts, worthy of your Esteem and Love, as will take off many
Prejudices, destroy Bitterness and Rancor, and cure that Evil speaking and
Detraction, which has been complained of on all sides; It may tend to heal
that Moroseness, and Reservedness, and Distrust of one another, which has kept
us at such a Distance: And let us see, that there was no sufficient reason for
such an Estrangment. I promise my self, that Dissenters will be so wise and
charitable, as to be of Luther's mind; When so much was done at Marpurg,
toward an Agreement between him and the Helvetians, he said on that Occasion,
that he would not allow that Praise to the other Party, to be more desirous of
Peace and Concord than he. There is the more ground to hope for this, in the
present Age, because we agree in the Mystery of GOD, even of the Father, and
the Lord JESUS CHRIST, I mean in the Doctrinal Articles of The Church of
England; and thereupon we have sufficient ground, that our Hearts be knit
together in Love, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Coll. 2.

IT IS high time, My Brethren, to lay aside our paltry Quarrels, and Contentions
with one another, and seek the Common Good; and mutually to make Allowance for
the different Complexions of Men's Minds, and their different degrees of Light,
for the Variety of their Tempers and Educations, for different Growths, and
Measures, and Seize in Christianity, in order to mutual Forbearance of
one another in Love. For it can never be denied, that, amongst Those of
different Persuasions among Christians, there may be, and is, the same desire
and diligence in searching after Truth, the same Love to GOD and Devotedness to
him, and desire to please him, the same Integrity and Purity of Intention, the
same Holiness of Heart and Life, which is accepted of God. And shall any of us
be so disingenuous and uncharitable, as to think none can get to Heaven, but
Christians just of our size, form, and way? Or shall I be so peevish and
absurd, as to be angry with another Man, because he is not of my Opinion, when
he has every whit as much Reason, (that is, none at all,) to be angry with me
for not being of his? The want of considering these things, and thereupon
holding the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, has more wounded
Religion, and hindered the Progress of it, and been more prejudicial to its
National Interest, than all the Opposition of Infidels and Heretics, that have
openly attacked the Reformed Doctrine. If all Good Men, amongst Protestants,
would resolve to love one another, and bear with one another in their lesser
Differences; you would quickly see that Truth would more prevail, and Holiness
with it. For unfeigned Love to all Men, and a special Love to good Men,
according to their several degrees of Worth and Goodness; is so agreeable to
Reason, to the Social Nature, and common Interest of Mankind, and to the Rule
and Pattern of our Blessed Savior; that it must needs not only be generally
approved, but have a mighty Influence to make the World better, and to recover
the Beauty and Glory, of the Christian Reformed Religion in these Nations.

IT may therefore humble and shame us, to think we have been so little able to
bear with one another in our lesser Differences; when we take a View of the
miserable Condition of the World, and of the Christian Churches, in other Parts
of the Earth. Has not Paganism and Mahometanism overrun a great part, which
was once a Christian, but has now lost the very Name? And is not a great part
of Christendom overrun with Popish Tyranny and Superstition, and thereby has
little left of Christianity, but the Name? Is there any part of God's Earth,
where Christian Religion does flourish, more than in England, Scotland and
Ireland? And shall we not at last be so wise and happy, as to know the Things
that belong to our common Interest? Are we not Members of the same Mystical
Body, and Servants of the same Lord, Professors of the same Faith, Partakers of
the same Hope, and Heirs of the same Promise of Eternal Life, by Jesus Christ?
And besides this, united by a National Interest, at this Day, to hold together
against the common Enemies of our Christian Faith on the one hand, and the
common Enemies of our Country, and Civil Liberties on the other?

To Conclude, Let me beseech and entreat you, from all that has been said, to
go on with Courage, under the Banner of Christ, and with the Prayers of all
good Men: Continue in the Love of GOD, and Zeal for his Glory, in Love and
Loyalty to the King's Majesty, and in Peace and Concord one with another. Let
us join with united Hearts for the Public Good; and, forgetting all that is
past, resolve to look forward. Fear not to displease Men, if you may but honor
God. Be as diligent to check and restrain Vice, as others are to spread it; as
knowing how much better a Master you serve, and how much better Work it is, to
endeavor to save the Church and State, the Souls and Bodies of Men, than to be
employed in hurting and destroying them. And be sure begin at home, at your own
Souls, and Lives, and then as to your Families, and Relations of several sorts
in this City. And on that account, where you have a Vote, omit not your Duty in
the Choice of good Magistrates; as knowing where the Righteous bear Rule, the
People rejoice. They who are negligent in this, and other Instances of Public
Service, which their Place and Station in this City call them to, they betray
their Country, are unfaithful to their Trust, and shall answer to God for their
omissive Treachery.

YOU have begun well, remember the Reward of being faithful. Let not your
Hearts fail; for he that follows after Righteousness and Mercy, he shall find
Life, Righteousness and Honor. And though you should fail of the desired Success
of your Endeavors, (which you have no Reason to think, by the excellent
Service that has been done already,) so as to lose your Labor and your Cost;
you will not lose your Charity and your Zeal: For GOD will Accept you. To his
gracious Providence, Promise, and Spirit, I commend you, for your Assistance,
Encouragement, and Reward.

To the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, be Everlasting Glory. Amen.

ERRATA.
PAge 23. l. 4. for Societies r. Society. Page 56. l. 6. dele their.

FINIS.
Books Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel, in the Poultrey.
MR. Shower's Winter Meditations: Or, a Sermon, concerning Frost, and Snow, and
Winds, etc. and the Wonders of God therein. 4o. -- His Thanksgiving Sermon,
April 16. 1696. 4o -- His Account of the LIFE of Mr. Henry Gearing. 12o -- His
Discourse of Tempting CHRIST. 12o -- His Discourse of Family Religion. In Three
Letters. 12o -- His Sermon on the Death of Mr. Nathanael Oldfeild, who departed
Dec. 21. 1696. -- His Sermon to the Societies for the Reformation of Manners.
8o Mr. Pool's English Annotations, with the Addition of Contents, and a
Concordance by Mr. Clark. In 2 Vol. Fol. The Life of the Reverend Mr. Richard
Baxter, written by himself. Fol. Mr. Lorimer's Apology for the Ministers, who
subscribed only unto the Stating of the Truth and Errors in Mr. William's Book,
in Answer to Mr. Trail's Letter to a Minister in the Country. 4o Mr. Lorimer's
Remarks on Mr. Goodwin's Answer to the Apology, and proving that the
Gospel Covenant is a Law of Grace. 4o Mr. Slater's Thanksgiving Sermon, October.
27. 1692. 4o -- His Sermons at the Funerals of Mr. John Reynolds, and Mr.
Fincher, Ministers of the Gospel. 4o Dr. Burton's Discourses of Purity,
Charity, Repentance, and seeking first the Kingdom of God. Published with a
Preface by Dr. John Tillotson, late Archbishop of Canterbury. 8o Bishop
Wilkin's Discourse of the Gift of Prayer and Preaching, the latter much
enlarged by the Bishop of Norwich and Chichester. 8o Mr. Samuel Slater's
Earnest Call to Family Religion; being the Substance of Eighteen Sermons. 8o
Mr. Addy's Stenograpia: Or, the Art of Short-writing, completed in a far more
Compendious way than any yet extant, etc. In which Character is also Printed
the whole Bible, by Mr. Addy. Cambridge Phrases; being a full and large
Phrase-Book for the use of Schools. By Will. Robertson. 8o Mr. Gibbon's Sermon
of Justification. 4o Mr. Not. Vincent's Funeral Sermon, Preached by Mr. Not.
Tailor. 4o Mr. Woodhouse's Sermon, to the Societies for Reformation of Manners.
8o A faithful Rebuke to a false Report, lately written and dispersed (by
Stephen Lob) in a Letter to a Friend in the Country. Concerning several
Differences in Doctrinals, between some Dissenting Ministers in London. By a
Learned Divine. 8o Mr. Geo. Hammond's and Mr. Math. Barker's Discourses of
Family Worship. Written at the Request of the United Ministers of London. 12o
Remarks on a late Discourse of William, Lord Bishop of Londonderry, concerning
the Inventions of Men in the Worship of God. Also a Defense of the said Remarks
against his Lordship's Admonition. By T. Boyse. 8o The London Dispensatory
reduced to the Practice of the London Physicians. By John Peachey, of the
College of Physicians, London. 12o The Dying Man's Assistant: Or, short
Instructions for those who are concerned in preparing sick Persons for Death.
12o Mr. Samuel Clark's brief Concordance to the whole Bible, in a new Method.
12o Sir Robert Howard's Free Discourse; wherein the Doctrines that make for
Tyranny are displayed, and the Title of our Lawful and Rightful King William
Vindicated, etc. 8o Hystrostaticks: Or, Instructions concerning Waterworks.
Collected out of the Papers of Sir Sam. Morland. 12o

