St. Peter's SIN, And True Repentance, Amplified and Improved IN A DISCOURSE
Occasioned by the Public Profession of Repentance made by T. W. who after
Eleven Years Slavery in Turkey, Renounced his Baptism and Christianity there,
and within a Year made his Escape, and returning first into Holland, desired
Solemnly to Acknowledge his Sin, and Profess his Repentance, which he did in
the English Church at Rotterdam, December the 3d 1687. where the following
Sermon was then Preached.

By JOHN SHOWER.

London, Printed for Samuel Wade at the Bible under the Royal Exchange in
Cornhil, 1692.

St. PETER's SIN, And True REPENTANCE.
Luke 22.60, 61, 62. And Peter said, Man, I know not what thou say. And
immediately while he yet spoke, the Cock crew. And the Lord turned, and looked
upon Peter; and Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said unto him,
Before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. And Peter went out, and wept
bitterly.


THere is some little Difference among the Evangelists, in the Historical
Account of this Passage, of the Sin and Repentance of Saint Peter. But because
they give the same Account in Substance, though with a little variation one
from the other, the one not knowing what the other had writ; it is an Argument
that their Writings were not contrived by any Agreement with one another, and
that there was no Design among them to cheat the World with a false Story,
their Testimony is thereby Distinct, and of the more Authority. Now though two
of the Evangelists make mention of the Apostle Peter's weeping bitterly; yet
Saint Mark, who was the Companion, and Scholar, and Amanuensis of Peter, and in
whose Gospel the primitive Church agree that he had a hand, when he speaks of
his Repentance, he only says, He wept; But when he speaks of his Sin, he
aggravates the Circumstances of his Denial more than all the other Evangelists,
He began to curse, and to swear, I know not this Man of whom ye speak, Mark
14.71. but gives the most modest Account of his Repentance, says not, that he
wept bitterly, but that when He thought thereon, He wept.

I would now, upon this Occasion, speak a little both to the Sin, and
Repentance of this Apostle.

First, Let us consider his Sin with its Aggravations.

Secondly, The Truth and Evidence of his Repentance. That from both we may
learn, for our Instruction and Practice, what such a Discourse is proper to
teach us.

First, Concerning this Sin of the Apostle Peter, We may consider both the
History of it according to the Evangelists, And the special Aggravations
wherewith his Sin was clothed.

1. We find an Account of this by the Apostle Peter himself, Mark 14.54. as
dictating to the Evangelist Mark the substance of his Gospel, He tells us, that
when our Lord was apprehended, and bound, and led away to Judgment, Peter
followed him afar off, or at some Distance, to learn the Consequence, and see
the Issue of his Trial; and that he followed him to the High Priests Palace, or
the High Priests Hall; that is, of Caiaphas, not his Father in Law Annas, who
was the Sagan or Vicegerent under him, to supply his Place if there were
Occasion. The High Priests Hall, not the Room where the Sanhedrim met, but some
outer Room through which they passed, situated somewhat higher, so that the
Company above might look down upon the Servants and Officers below.

The First Denial of Christ that the Apostle Peter is guilty of, was upon the
Question of a Damsel that kept the Door, saying, Art not thou one of his
Disciples? Were not Thou with Jesus of Galilee? To whom he replies, I know him
not, so one Evangelist has it. I know not, neither understand I what thou
say, says another Evangelist. And then he went out in the Court, and heard
the Cock Crow, but takes no notice of that Warning.

As to the Second Denial of Peter, After a little while another says unto him,
Thou also art One of them, and he denied With an Oath, I do not know the Man.
At first he only disowned his Discipleship, but now he adds an Oath to confirm
his lie.

About an hour after he is challenged again, Verily Thou wast with Jesus of
Galilee, Thou art a Galilean, and thy speech be wrayeth thee. The Dialect of
the Galileans comes nearer to that of the Samaritan or Syrian Idiom, than that
of the Jews dwelling at Jerusalem. There is some Difference in all Nations in
pronouncing the same Language, by those who dwell in the chief Cities, and
those who inhabit in the remoter Provinces. They call him Jesus of Galilee, as
a Term of reproach, thereby denying him to be the true Messiah, who was to be
born in Judea and not in Galilee: For out of Galilee arises no Prophet, John
7.52. That is, There is no Record of any Prophet that ever did arise from
thence. The Christians were usually reviled by Julian the Apostate, under the
Name of Galileans. But Peter denis that he appertains to Jesus of Galilee, or
of Nazareth. And then the whole Company join with Him who first suspected him:
For we read, That they that stood by said; surely thou art One of them. And
among the rest, there happened to be One there, who was related to Malchus,
whose ear Peter had smote off, and Christ had healed, as the Evangelist John
relates it: And says, Did I not see thee in the Garden with him? But he denis
it, and adds Cursing and Imprecation to gain credit to his perjury.

He began to Curse and to Swear, (...). Some think that he cursed Christ, but
it is more likely he Anathematized himself, that is, wished himself excluded
from the Synagogue and the Church, if it were not true. Or, as others, that he
wished himself an Eternal Sepaartion from the Presence of God; or, in the
Jewish Phrase, Let God do so to me, and more, if I am not a perfect stranger to
the Man you talk of. He wished in effect, that the Devil might take him, that
God would destroy and damn him, if he were a Disciple of Jesus, or any way
acquainted with Him. But our Lord looked back upon Peter, and the Cock crew a
second time, and then he remembered the words of Jesus, saying, Before the Cock
crow twice thou shall deny me thrice; And he went out, and wept bitterly.

2. But before I speak of his Repentance, Let us consider a little of the
Aggravation of his Sin.

First, from the Person who is thus guilty of denying Christ, In what Rank he
stood, What Character he bore, and under what Obligations he was to have acted
otherwise. It was Peter's; Not an ordinary Disciple, but an Apostle, One of the
twelve, yea One of the chiefest of the Apostles, unto whom our Lord does often
address his Discourse, as to the First and Principal of them. Peter, who had
preached and Prophesied in the Name of Christ, who had wrought Miracles by his
Power, cast out Devils by virtue of his Commission, yet He denis him. Peter,
who was admitted to more than ordinary familiarity and Friendship with our
Lord; who was not only of his own House and Family, but had been favored to be
one of the three present at our Lords Transfiguration. Peter, who had hitherto
forsaken all for the Interest of his Master, and hazarded his Life in his
service; who had vowed, protested, so lately, so solemnly, that though all
should deny him, yet he would not, but rather dye upon the spot than quit his
Cause, or forsake his Company; Yet he denies him. Peter, who was so fully
satisfied that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of the living God, that he asserts
and declares it in the Name of all the Disciples, Math. 16. So that it might
have been expected from him, that he should have been an Example of courage and
Constancy to all the rest; Yet he denis and forswears him, as if he had never
seen him.

Secondly, Consider the Aggravations of his Sin, from the Person whom he denis.
He disowns any Relation to Christ the true Messiah, whom to know is eternal
Life. He denis any Acquaintance with him, who had obliged him so particularly,
and by so many Instances of his kindness, who called him so strangely from his
Nets to be a Fisher of Men; who had honored him with a Commission to preach
the Gospel, and confirmed it by Miracles; Who took him with James and John, to
Mount Tabor, when he appeared in his Glory; who condescended to let him walk
upon the waters, and when he was sinking, to stretch forth his hand to secure
him; Yet this kind and merciful Savior he denis and disowns, who had stooped
but a little before to wash Peter's feet, who permitted him to sit down with him
at Table, to eat the Passover, and take of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper;
And but a few hours before he permitted him to see part of his Agony in the
Garden, and charged him to watch and pray lest he enter into Temptation, and
awaked him three several times out of Sleep, with a Repetition of that command;
Watch and Pray: Yea, but a little before he made the Multitude fall to the
Ground by the force of a mild Expression, I am He; and wrought a Miracle in his
Sight, in the sudden Restitution of Malchus Ear by a touch, which Peter had
unadvisedly cut off: And yet after all this, he denies his Lord and Savior,
who had given such proofs of his Divinity before his Eyes.

Thirdly, Consider before whom he denies him, in what Company, before what
Witnesses: The Scribes, and Pharisees, and Chief Priests, and Elders of the
Jews, could not but rejoice, That One Disciple of Christ should betray him for
money, and Another deny, and forswear him through fear. The High Priests
Servants, and the common People of the Jews, could not but be hardened and
prejudiced against Christ and his Doctrine, by such an Instance. And if there
were any secret, hidden, half Disciples, such who were almost persuaded to be
Christians; it must needs shake and stagger their Faith, to find such a One, as
Peter, revolt so shamefully.

Fourthly, Consider the smalness of the Temptation, especially to his first
Denial. A Damsel only asked him the Question, whether he was not one of Christ's
Disciples; and some think, rather out of Pity, than Reproach: And yet he fears
to own it. Had the fight of Armed Soldiers, come to apprehend and seize him,
put him into a fright; Had he been examined before the Sanhedrim, or terrified
by the threatenings of the High Priest; Had he been bound, and led away to
Judgment, before the Roman Deputy; Had there been a Prospect of an ignominious
painful Death, from the Roman Soldiers, As the Consequence of his owning his
Relation to Christ; something might be pleaded on his Behalf. But to disown his
Acquaintance with him, and Relation to him, at the question of an
inconsiderable Servant to the High Priest, that only kept the Door, the
smalness of the Temptation was an Aggravation of the Fault.

Fifthly, The Repetition of his Denial was another Aggravation of it. He not
only denis him, but swears to it that he knows him not, he confirms it by an
Oath, calls the God of Truth to bear witness to his Lie, That he knew not
Christ, with whom he had conversed so long and so familiarly, and from whom he
so lately parted. And again he denies him with the Imprecation of a dreadful
Anathema on himself, in case he asserted a Falsehood.

Sixthly, How many other complicated Sins were employed in this Fault of Peter?
The highest Ingratitude to his Master, unpardonable Rashness, in venturing into
such Company, and tarring there so long, and without a call making bold with
Temptation: For our Lord had not appointed his Disciples to follow him, but bad
them Watch and Pray; He had dismissed them, and appointed a Place to meet after
his Resurrection. There was likewise shameful Unbelief, in distrusting the
Knowledge, or the Power of Christ, to have assisted him. There was a base
Cowardice, To disown him in such a manner. And for a time, there was
Impenitence and hardness of Heart, so as not to take the first Warning by the
Crovving of the Cock, But when the Cock crew a second time, Our Lord looked
upon Peter, and he remembered the words of Jesus, and went out, and wept
bitterly.

1. He went out. Though Calvin and Others condemn him for going out, and think
he had done better to have tarried, and owned his Master, in the presence of
that Company before whom he had denied him; Yet when we know that his
Repentance was unfeigned, and accepted with God, We ought to put the best
Construction upon such a Passage: And therefore I would rather consider it as
a proof of his Repentance: For,

1. We may impute it to his Zeal, and Affection to Christ. Could he love him as
he did, and be sensible of his guilt in having denied him, and yet bear to see
the outrage and Violence that was offered to his Master? How can we suppose,
that he could endure to tarry in so detestable a Place, to be a Witness to the
Affronts offered to his Lord! to hear him scorned, and reviled, and reproached,
and blasphemed? This might make him retire from that wicked Crew, to mourn in
secret.

2. We may ascribe it to the greatness of his Remorse and sorrow, and penitent
shame, for his late Apostasy. He could not but be greatly ashamed of his
Ingratitude to so good a Master, and blush to look him in the Face, Considering
that he so lately denied to have ever seen him. What else could be expected,
but that shame and sorrow would make him choose Retirement, to vent his Grief
by Tears, and pour out his Soul before the Lord in secret? Solitariness is
certainly most agreeable to an afflicted Spirit, Isay. 22.4. Look away from me,
I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the
Daughter of my People. John 20.11. Mary stood without, at the Sepulcher,
weeping. Unobserved Privacy is most eligible under any great Passion of Grief
or shame: But here is a Conjunction of both. It is an Argument of his
Sincerity, to retire in secret to mourn. He cannot well be thought to dissemble
his Grief, who chooses no other Witness but the Omnipresent God.

3. It may be attributed to his Prudence, and Discretion. Considering the
Malice and Fury with which they proceeded against Christ, he could not
rationally expect if he were known to be a Disciple of Christ by an open
declaration of him, to meet with much better Entertainment than his Master had;
and thereby he might lose the opportunity of testifying his sincere Repentance,
by his future Diligence and Resolution in preaching the Gospel.

Besides, what Service could he render his Master by so bold an Action? What
Obligation was he under to hazard his Life, when there was no apparent
Necessity to warrant his doing so? Especially having such late experience or
his own Weakness, notwithstanding his former Resolutions of Constancy. He was
bound both in Prudence, and in Conscience to avoid Temptation, and therefore to
quit the Place and Company, where he had met with the Temptation that
occasioned his Fall. He did well therefore, that he went out. But that is not
all, For,

Secondly, There is a second proof of the sincerity of his Repentance, Which,
is his Bitter weeping; He went out, and wept bitterly. Not only is the secrecy
and retirement that He chose for his sorrow, an Argument of his Sincerity; But
we are likewise to consider, That this his Grief was extraordinary, and his
Tears abundant, As the Phrase of weeping bitterly does import, and is so used
in other Places, Isay. 22.14. Chap. 33.7. You that are come here to testify
your Repentance for having denied Christ, and renounced your Faith in Turkey,
ought to take notice of this, and imitate the repentance of Peter as I hope you
do.
Doubtless with his Tears, was joined a free and hearty confession of his Sin,
Bewailing his Folly, Acknowledging his offense, Earnestly imploring Pardon and
Forgiveness For if his Grief was too big for words, we may well perceive the
inward Remorse of his Conscience, and smart Reflections he made on himself, to
some such purpose as this,

O my Soul! What have I done? Have I denied and abjured the Author of Eternal
Life, for fear of a temporal Death? Did I not once acknowledge Christ to be the
Son of the living God? And have I since denied him with Oaths, and Curses, and
Imprecations? Did I not promise to lay down my Life for his sake, and though
all should forsake him, yet I would not; And have I yet disowned and denied
him, at the voice of a Damsel? O what Unfaithfulness; what Weakness! what
Wickedness! Thus to deny and forswear my Lord! Have I denied thee, O my
Savior! before the wicked And you may say so as to the Mahometans and Turks.
Jews? and may not thou justly deny me before thy Father and his Holy
Angels? Did I disown that I ever knew thee? And may not Thou, at the great
Day, bid me depart amongst the Workers of Iniquity; saying, I know you not. Did
I join my self in Company with thy Haters, and Despisers, and Murderers? And
may I not be rejected, condemned, and punished with them? O that my Head were a
Fountain, that I might weep continually! That the Fault of one Night might be
Lamented by me all the days of my Life. Lord, was I not warned, and cautioned,
and expressly foretold, that my Confidence would betray me, and let me fall? And
yet so foolish was I and ignorant, so heedless and unwary, so unmindful of thy
Friendly Admonitions, so forgetful of thy Monitory Prediction, as thus
literally to fulfill it by my Triple Denial.

To this purpose we may suppose he did accuse and condemn himself, and that
with the deepest Remorse and Anguish of Spirit, which his Tears do more than
intimate; owning himself an Apostate Wretch, a Condemned Malefactor, unworthy
to live, a Son of Death; To whom the common Light of the World was too great a
Favor, and outer, everlasting Darkness a deserved Portion.

Thirdly, But this is not all: For he further testified his Repentance by his
Carriage and Behavior And you that now profess your Repentance here, for
having renounced Christ and Christianity, ought to take notice of this.
afterward. That in two Particulars. 1. By the lively Remembrance of that Sin,
and Humble Confession of it upon all Occasions. 2. By more than ordinary
forwardness and zeal, to testify his Love to Christ and propagate the Faith of
the Gospel.

1. By the lively Remembrance of that Sin, and humble Confession of it. It is
reported in Ecclesiastical History, that ever after, when this Apostle heard
the Crowing of a Cock, he would either fall upon his knees, or in some other
manner express his Repentance, and bless God for his Recovery. Others say, that
he was wont to rise at Midnight, and spend the time between Cock-crowing and
Daylight, in penitent Devotion. We find something agreeable to this in the
Instance of David, after his Adultery and Murder, Psalm. 6.6. I made my bed to
swim, and watered my Couch all night with my Tears. His Bed brought to
Remembrance his Adultery with Bathsheba; and his Couch revived the Thoughts of
his Murder of Uriah, For we find him on his Couch when he Signed the Order for
the Death of Uriah. The Romanists, who are apt to turn every thing into
Superstition, began that practice of placing a Cock upon the top of Towers and
Steeples, to put people in mind of this Sin of Peter, and his Repentance, by
that Signal.

2. The truth of his Repentance was confirmed, by his extraordinary Zeal and
Forwardness afterward, to express his Love to Christ, and propagate the
Christian Faith. It is true, we do not find that after he went out from the
High Priests Hall, that ever he saw his Master again, till he was risen from
the Dead: But we find that he came early in the Morning on the Third day unto
the Sepulcher, and was the First that went down into it, John 20.6. And we find
him desirous to testify a peculiar Affection to his Master, John 21. begin.
For when Peter and the other Disciples were fishing at the Sea of Tiberias, our
Lord appears on the shore. The Apostle John said unto Peter, It is the Lord,
ver. 7. Then Peter, to make haste to meet him, only girts his Coat about him,
and casts himself into the Sea; while the other Disciples, not above Two
Hundred Cubits from Land, come by Ship to meet him. After a short Dinner, it
may be past in Silence; for we read in the Twelfth Verse, that when Jesus said
unto him, Come and Dine, yet none of the Disciples durst ask him, Who art thou?
seeing they knew he was the Lord. But Jesus says unto Simon Peter, Love thou
me more than these? He answered, Yea Lord, thou know that I love thee. And
being asked again, he replies, Thou know that I love thee. And being asked a
third time, he answers, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love
thee. Professing his Love three several times, as he had been guilty of a
Triple Denial.

Whereupon our Lord minds him of what he had formerly said, That when he was
converted he should strengthen his Brethren; and therefore puts him upon this
Evidence of his sincere Repentance and Love to Christ, Feed my Lambs, Feed my
Sheep. Though thou have denied and disowned the Shepherd of thy Soul, yet feed
my Sheep: Let this be the first Testimony of thy Love, which afterward thou
must confirm with the loss of thy Life, and seal with thy Blood. And by the
History of the Acts of the Apostles, we find his extraordinary Diligence to
spread the Gospel: For the Travels of this Apostle in his Ministerial work, are
computed to be above Nine Hundred and Fifty Miles.

It Is an Instance of the Wisdom of Divine Providence, that this Apostle should
be sent principally to Preach the Gospel to the Jews, and be the Minister of
the Circumcision, who had thus joined with the Jews in disowning Christ; that
he should endeavor to persuade them to join with him in Repentance, as he had
joined with them in Sin. Dr. Jackson.
And the Parallel may be carried further, As the Nation of the Jews had known
the Lord above all other People, had seen his Wonders, and been favored by
peculiar Instances of his Kindness, stood in special Relation to Him, and made
the highest Profession of Love and Obedience, and expected the coming of the
Son of God; Yet when he came amongst them, they disowned his Authority, and
protested against him, We have no King but Caesar, etc. So the Apostle Peter,
though he had seen our Savior, and lived in his Family, and been Witness to
his Miracles; was nearly related to him, and professed more than ordinary
Affection and Obedience; Yet he basely disowned him, when it came to the Trial.
His Sin was in some respect like Theirs, and therefore he is the fittest Person
to Preach the Gospel to them. His Diligence therein is another Argument of the
Sincerity of his Repentance.

The Application follows; For Instruction, and Practice.

1. From the very Relation of this Passage of the Scandalous Fall of one of the
Apostles, and the particular Description of it by the Apostles themselves, We
may learn one Argument to confirm the Truth of the Gospel History. Had it been
a Forgery, or Humane Contrivance, these things would have been concealed: But
the Spirit of God has left this upon Record, to warn us against the like Sins,
and to encourage the Repentance of those that have fallen in an Hour of
Temptation. We may observe farther

From the Sin and Fall of this Apostle, What little Reason the Church of Rome
has to boast of the pretended Succession of their Popes to the Apostle Peter.
They are his Successors in denying Christ the Glory due to him as Mediator, but
in vain do they pretend to be the universal Bishops of the universal Church as
his Successors. We read of no such Superiority that Peter had over the rest of
the Apostles; Not till Christ's Ascension to be sure, for then there would have
been two heads of the Church. Nor afterward: For he was only the Apostle of the
Circumcision. And St. Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles, withstood him to the
Face, and ordained Pastors without him, Gal. 2. and 2 Cor. 11.5.
and tells us he was not inferior to the chiefest Apostles. And Peter was sent
as a Messenger from the rest of the Apostles, Acts 8.14. And when he was
accused, he pleads his own Cause before the other Disciples, and submits to the
Judgment of the Council, Acts 11. Moreover when there were Divisions in the
Church of Corinth, that some were for Paul, and some for Apollos, and some for
Cephas, or Peter; We do not find the Apostle Paul directs them to Center all in
Peter; He owns no such Authority and Supremacy in him above others, as the
Church of Rome have invested him and his Successors in. The Bishops of Rome
have imitated Peter too much in the Denial of Christ, but in little else that
we know of. Again,

From the Sin and Fall of Peter, We may observe the Subtlety of the Devil, to
suit his Temptations to the particular Tempers of Men; and so to season and
time his Temptations, as to have the greatest probability of Success. He takes
confident Peter in a fit of Fear at the Apprehension and Arraignment of his
Master; who at another time would have replied to the Devil, as Christ did to
him when he acted the Devils Part, Get thee behind me Satan. Our great
Adversary the Devil knows how to assault us with suitable Temptations, and in
what Circumstances we are most likely to yield; we had therefore need to watch
and stand upon our guard.

We may also observe the Justice of God, in permitting the strongest Confidence
to be shamed and baffled. Let us therefore remember, that none are so likely to
enter into Temptation, and be overcome, as those who are least afraid of it.
None are more likely to fall, than those who are most confident of their own
standing. None more ready to yield to Temptation, than such as presume they
shall never yield. Moreover,

In that after Peter's first Denial he heard the Cock crow, and did not take
warning, we may learn, That whoever sins against the Light of his own Mind and
Conscience, may be so far hardened and stupefied by it, as that the plainest
warnings, for a time at least, shall be disregarged, and have no influence. One
would wonder, after what Christ had told him concerning his Denial before the
Crowing of the Cock, that he did not recollect it when he first heard the Cock
to Crow.

We may further learn, That there is a Mixture of Flesh and Spirit, of
Corruption and Grace, in the best Saints. I doubt not, but Peter's Resolution
to dye with Christ, rather than deny him, proceeded from a Principle of Grace
and true Affection to his Lord. I question not, but he verily thought he should
do as he said; but his Confidence of himself, whereby he presumed on his own
strength, had a sinful mixture with it, which occasioned his Fall. It therefore
concerns all, even the best men, that they watch and pray, lest they enter into
Temptation.

But considering, That though the Sin of Peter was great, yet his Repentance
was not long delayed; We may compare it with some other Instances in Scripture,
and observe, That Sins, by the surprizal of a sudden Temptation, are much
sooner repented of, than where the Sin is presumptuous, deliberate and
contrived. Let us take the Instance of David, in the matter of Bathsheba and
Uriah, and compare it with this Example of Peter.

Peter knew so well that he should not deny his Lord, that he was confident he
never should. He honored his Master in his Heart, and came to the Highpriests
Hall with a Resolution of Constancy; Bishop Sanderson.
but denied him, to decline a present apprehended Danger, under a violent
Passion of Fear; Which was not so deliberate and presumptuous a Sin, as David's
Adultery and Murder: For he continued in his Adultery with Bathsheba for a
long Time; and in order to the secrecy of it, gave command concerning the Death
of Uriah the Husband; and that not in an hasty Passion, or in a sudden
surprise; but in cool blood, with many a deliberate thought about it. Now as
there was a great difference in their Sin, so as to the time of their Recovery.
St. Peter took the warning of the second Crowing of the Cock, and immediately
goes forth to express his Repentance; but David continued almost a Twelvemonth
without any solemn Repentance, that we read of, after such a Fault, and till
the Prophet Nathan comes to him, and is forced to tell him, Thou art the Man.
Again,

From Peter's taking the Warning of the second Crowing of the Cock, when he was
not awakened by the first, We may observe, That the same Means, which men have
had for a time and not profited by, may yet, through the Blessing of God, be
afterward effectual, if they be continued or vouchsafed again. Let such as
have long enjoyed the Means of Grace, and have not profited, bless God that
they are yet continued, and beg the Influence of the Spirit, that at length
they may be effectual. You that for many years have sat under the Preaching of
the Word, that every Lords Day, and frequently on the Week Days, are called to
Repentance, and yet have been unprofitable Hearers hitherto; you ought not to
forbear your Attendance on the Public Worship, because the same Truths which
have been heard at one Time with little Profit, at another may come with Power
and Efficacy to your Souls.

Lastly. You may take notice of the Mercy and Love of Christ to his poor
Disciple, and of his Faithfulness to his Promise.

1. His Mercy and Love to his poor Disciple. He forgets not Peter, when He
himself was apprehended and brought to Judgment, amidst the Calumnies and false
Accusations, the Injuries and Indignities which our Lord met with, yet he
remembers Peter, and turns about, and gives him a gracious Look, that melted
his Heart, and recals him to Repentance. Certainly he has not less Kindness
for his Followers now he is in Heaven, than he had while he was upon Earth.

2. Observe his Faithfulness to his Promise, and the Prevalency of his Prayer
for Peter. Satan, says our Lord, has desired to have thee, and to sift thee as
wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not, Ver. 31. of this
Chapter. And therefore though he was permitted to Fall, to humble him for his
Confidence, and to warn us by his Example, and to teach more Watchfulness and
Circumspection; yet his Faith did not finally fail, but he is recovered again
by a speedy and deep Repentance. And there is no true Christian but is
interested in this Promise, and shall share in the Prevalency of the
Intercession of Christ: His Faith shall not finally fail; He that has begun a
good Work, will carry it on: He that is the Author of Divine Faith, will be the
Rewarder and Finisher of it.

For Direction as to Practice. From what has been said, we may learn

1. To take heed of the Beginnings of Sin. If the Devil have once got the
advantage of Peter, by his first Denial of Christ, he shall quickly be tempted
to deny him again; If he yield to one Temptation, he shall soon meet with more
and stronger. At first only a Damsel asks the Question, but afterward the
whole Company accuse him as a Follower of Christ. He that will venture upon a
Lie, shall be tempted to tell another to conceal the first, and to add Perjury
and Imprecation to prevent discovery. The breaking of our good Purposes and
Resolutions in one Instance, will make way for our doing so in many others. As
David from Adultery proceeded to Murder, and Lot from Drunkenness to Incest;
and Peter here from a bare Denial to Perjury, and Cursing, and Imprecation. The
admission of one Link of a Chain will make way for more. And without watching
against the beginnings of Sin, they will soon multiply; as one curling Circle
in the Water produces a second, and so a third, of a larger size and figure
than it self. When you yield to any Temptation of the Devil, you know not where
you shall stop, you give him an advantage against you, you Weaken and Harden
your own Hearts, stifle Conscience, and lay your selves more open unto
Temptation, and your Resistance will still be weaker.

2. Let us heartily pity those, who by the surprise of a great Temptation have
sinned like Peter, in denying their We have a sad Instance of one of our
Countrymen, now before us, who renounced his Baptism and Christianity in an
hour of Temptation.
Lord. Let us not presently censure and condemn them of the Sin against the
Holy Ghost, or of sinning wilfully after the Knowledge of the Truth, in such a
manner, as that it should be impossible for them to be renewed again to
Repentance. Let us rather pray for them, that it be not a Sin unto Death,
Especially when we have any Instance of their As we have in the present Case.
Repentance: For the Sin unto Death, and the Sin against the Holy Ghost,
exclude Repentance, such as are guilty do never repent.

3. Let us not be high-minded, but fear; and while we stand, take heed lest we
fall. Did an Apostle, and so great an Apostle, Deny and Forswear his Lord? and
that so soon after he had been at the Lords Table, which was but the Night
before, or but some few hours before? And shall any of us be confident of our
own Courage and Constancy? How many Instances are there of those who have
shamefully fallen in an hour of Temptation, of such as have renounced their
Christianity in Turkey and received the Impostures of Mahomet; Of many more in
Popish Countries, that have abjured the Reformed Religion, to comply with the
Superstitions and Impurities of Rome? Many such there are, who once thought
themselves as unlikely to do so, as any of us can now think that we are: And
shall we be Positive and Certain, Confident and Presumptuous, that, though we
had all their Temptations, we should not do as they? Had not Peter, think you,
more Reason to think and hope well of himself, and to believe that he should
rather Dye with Christ, than Deny him; than any of us have? Thanks be to God,
you do not yet meet with the Temptations that others have experienced, and that
there is no near prospect that you shall meet with such Temptations; yea I
rejoice in the hope that many of us would be assisted and enabled by God,
rather to dye for Christ, than deliberately to abjure, and deny him; But let us
not be confident in our selves; The Instance of this Text should make us humble
and cautious, and fill us with a Holy Fear, because they who are able to stand
their ground against some sorts of Temptation, may yield and be overcome by
others.

4. Let us all reflect with shame and sorrow upon our selves, That in too great
a degree we have imitated the Sin of Peter. We have denied our Lord as well as
he; though not after the same manner, yet with as high Aggravations, and
sometimes more criminal ones. Have we not denied Christ by our Actions, though
not by our Words? By having a form of Godliness, but denying the Power of it:
Tit. 1.16. By professing to know God and Christ, when in Works we deny and
dishonor him, 2 Timothy 3.5. We have not been scared from the Profession of his
Name and Truth, by threatening Dangers, and the fear of Suffering; yet have we
not forsaken and disowned him, by the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the
Eyes, and the Pride of Life, contrary to our Baptismal Covenant? Though we are
not Apostates by a formal Abjuration of his Holy Religion, as to Doctrine and
Worship; yet do we not practically contradict the Principles and Rules of it?

Do you not deny him to be King, by not kissing his Scepter, submitting to his
Authority, and keeping his Commandments; by not walking as his Servants and
Subjects, in universal Faithful Obedience, according to the Oath and Covenant
we are under. Do you not deny him to be the Great High Priest, by not depending
on his Meritorious Righteousness, and prevailing Intercession, as the Ground of
your Acceptance with God, for Pardon of Sin and Eternal Life? Do you not Deny
him to be the Great Prophet, by chosen Ignorance, and wilful unbelief, under
all the Teachings of his Word, and Spirit? Notwithstanding the bright
Revelation of his Gospel that we enjoy, and have so long enjoyed? Do we not
deny and disown him to be our Lord, and Head, and Captain, and Savior, by
thwarting his Example, and refusing to walk in his Steps? For Instance, by
Drunkenness and Gluttony, when He was the greatest Example of Temperance and
exact Sobriety: By Haughtiness and Pride, when he has left us a Pattern of the
deepest Humility: By Covetousness and Uncharitableness, and want of Compassion
to the Poor; when Charity, and Love, and Kindness toward all was exemplified
in his whole Course.

Yea there are many who profess themselves Christians, who not only Deny
Christ, as Peter; but betray him, as Judas. Who sell their Consciences for
Temporal Profit, and the gain of a little Money; Who undervalue the Blood of
the Redeemer, and all the Riches of his Grace, for thirty pieces of Silver;
preferring their Ease, and Honor, and Wealth, before his Presence and Favor,
etc. Who is there, my Brethren, that has not in some sense sinned like Peter,
with the like Aggravations as his Fault was attended with? Have we not sinned
after the knowledge of the Truth, after we have confessed that Jesus is the
Lord, after we have owned him to be our Lord, and our Jesus; after we have
promised and protested by Baptism, and frequently since by the repetition of
that Covenant at the Lords Table, that we would obey and serve him as long as
we live? Have we not denied and dishonored him, after we have been adopted
into the Family of God, and enjoyed the Privileges of his House; after eminent
and special Mercies, and peculiar Favors, as well as Peter; after we have been
convinced, and awakened, and resolved, and begun well, and held out against
Temptation for a little while? Have none of us after this revolted from Christ,
and returned to folly? Have you not retracted your vow, contradicted your
Experience, dishonored the Holy Name by which you are called, and denied the
Lord of Glory, that so willingly was a Sacrifice for you? Yea have you not been
called to Repentance again and again, by the Preaching of the Word, as well as
Peter by the crowing of the Cock, and yet remain impenitent to this Day?

Nay further, Many of our Sins are more aggravated than the Sin of Peter, Peter
denied Christ, it is true; but it was in the House of Caiaphas: But some of us
deny him even in his own House and Temple. Peter denied him, but it was in the
midst of Enemies; But we do so in his own Family, amongst his Disciples, and
Children, which is an higher Aggravation of our Sin, than his And this poor Man
in Turkish Slavery, under great and sore Temptations, which he long resisted.
. Peter denied him, but it was when his Spirit was overwhelmed with fear, and
surprising Trouble; Whereas we deny and disobey him, in the midst of Peace and
Plenty. Peter denied him, but it was under the Apprehension of a Temporal and
cruel Death, that might be the Consequence of Owning him; But blessed be God we
have no such Temptation: On the contrary, if we deny him, it is in despite of
the threatening of temporal and eternal Death. So that our Apostasy from
Christ, and practical denial of him, is more criminal in several respects, than
the Fault of Peter.

Lastly. Therefore as we have imitated his Sin, let us imitate him in his
Repentance too. We have heard that the Second Call awakened him to Repentance,
when our Lord looked upon him; But how many Calls from God have some of us had?
how often has Christ looked upon and spoke to us? and knocked at the Door of
our Hearts by his Spirit? Shall we not then obey his Voice to repent? As soon
as Peter remembered his Sin, you have heard that he left the Place where he
contracted his guilt, he avoided the Company that had been a snare to him. Oh
imitate him in this, continue not to frequent such Places, and such Company,
where you have been ensnared, and defiled, and met with prevailing Temptations
to sin.

Concerning Peter you have heard, that he expressed his Repentance by bitter
Weeping; Oh imitate him in this, and not only say you are sorry, but give some
convictive Sign and Evidence of it, that you do in earnest Repent, and bring
forth fruits meet for Repentance. Concerning Peter, you have heard that he
manifested the truth of his Repentance, by his future zeal and Diligence, by
his extraordinary Love to Christ, and Concern for his Honor, and Fidelity in
his Service: O follow his Example, if you would ever have the Comfort and
Reward of unfeigned Repentance; and not only sin no more, but be doubly
diligent in circumspect, and holy walking.

It Is sad to consider, how much formal, superficial, counterfeit Repentance
there is in the World. Men say they are sorry they have done amiss, they
acknowledge their Faults, and it may be fetch a sigh, or mutter a Groan, or
drop a Tear, in a serious mood, or upon some solemn occasion; But in a few
Days, it may be sooner, are the same again; The Convictions, and serious
Impressions, they had upon the Lord's Day, are very often lost and gone before
the return of the next Sabbath; The Vows and Resolutions they make at the Lords
Table, are not remembered and observed for an entire Month, but there is sad
work for a new Repentance, before the monthly Season comes about. After solemn
Professions of Repentance, they are as bold and venturous upon Temptation as
ever, as unmindful of their holy vows as ever; as careless and fearless, and so
as easy a Prey to the Devil, as before. Have you not reason to reflect upon
this? and therefore to go home, and weep bitterly, as Peter did? This would be
a happy improvement of this Example. The Lord grant it may have such Effects.
Amen.

FINIS

