A SERMON PREACHED Upon the DEATH OF Mrs ANNE BARNARDISTON, (DAUGHTER of
NATHANAEL BARNARDISTON Esquire late of Hackney:) Who departed this Life the 30th
day of December. 1681. at the Age of Seventeen.

With a brief Account of some Remarkable Passages of her LIFE and DEATH.

Published at the Desire of her Relations.

Psalm. 103.15. As for man his days are as grass: as a flower of the field so
he flourishes.

V. 16. For the wind passes over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof
shall know it no more.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for Benjamin Alsop at the Angel and Bible, and John
Dunton at the Black Raven, in the Poultrey. 1682.

TO The Much Honored, MADAM ELIZABETH BARNARDISTON.
MADAM,
THE sad Occasion of the Sermon, and your Relation to Her, whose dying request
was fulfilled in my preaching it, does style the Dedication yours. Though what
I have mentioned of your excellent Daughter, is less than others would have
said on the same subject, yet having given an account of her preparedness and
willingness to dye, methinks that should be considered as a sufficient Argument
to mitigate your Sorrow, and prevent its excess. 1 Thessalonians. 13.
It Is the Apostles Instruction concerning them who sleep in Jesus, that we
ought not to sorrow as do others, who have no hope. Such were the Egyptians;
and it is observed of them, that they mourned longer for the death of old Jacob,
Genesis 50.3
than his own Son Joseph did. I know the Time of Her Death gives an Accent to
the Calamity: That before your Mourning Weeds were laid aside for one of the
best of Husbands, who has a good Report of all men, and of the Truth it self;
you should be forced to continue the same, or put on more, for the Loss of such
a Child, in the Prime of her Youth, and Strength, and Beauty: A Loss for which
you do not mourn alone, since many others are partners of your grief; not by
sympathy only as pitying you, but from a due Respect and Affection to her, and
their own Concern at her departure.

But as your Afflictions abound, God can make your Consolations by Christ
abound much more: And such Losses as these, (though some of the smartest and
most afflictive to humane Nature) may turn to your Spiritual Gain: And even
this Rod, like that of Aaron, may blossom, and produce the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness: If in the want of their Company, God himself be more depended on
as your All in all: If their removal out of this World, promote your
Mortification to it: if their being taken up to Heaven, assist your
Preparations, and excite your desires to follow: God has already made good his
Covenant Promise, in a very peculiar manner, to those whom he gave, and has
taken from you; and I trust will do so as to those who remain: that they may
know and serve the God of their Fathers with a perfect heart, and see the
Felicity of his Chosen: That they may tread in the steps of their departed
Relatives, and bear up the Name of God in their respective stations; to his
Glory, and your Comfort, and their Salvation. And if God should not make your
house to grow, 2 Samuel 2 5.
yet he has made an Everlasting Covenant with you, well ordered in all things,
and sure.

I wish the following Discourse may contribute any thing to your Support: or at
least be accepted, as an Expression of my Obedience in complying with your
request thus to make it public: And as a Testimony of my unfeigned Respect to
the memory of the deceased: with a serious desire of some benefit to others
also, by such a remarkable Instance of an Early Piety, of an Exemplary Life, of
a peaceable Death: Which God grant, who alone can bring Good out of Evil; all
whose Works are perfect, and whose Ways are Judgment. I am

MADAM, Your most Affectionate Humble Servant, John Shower.
London, Jan. 25. 1681/2
TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Being Earnestly desired, both by the Relations of the Deceased Gentlewoman,
and by the Preacher of the following Funeral Sermon, to Testify what I knew of
the Gracious and wonderful workings of the holy Spirit upon the Heart of this
Person during Her Life; I could not but yield to their Importunate requests.

And upon this occasion I must declare; That having Known her from her
Childhood; and having very much observed her Conversation of late, and being
called to give her several visits in her sickness, I do believe (upon the
whole) that God did give her a sound Repentance for, and a Full Remission of
all her sins, through the mediation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

I can assure thee, Reader, who ever thou art: that she had an awakened sight
of her sins, accompanied with a great measure of Godly Sorrow for them; I
discerned also in her a deep Humiliation, and I heard her open
self-Condemnation thereupon. I found in her also a clear Knowledge of the
Nature of the New Covenant; together with a Right Apprehension of the Nature of
that Faith, which is Required of all men (and is through Grace bestowed upon
some penitents) whereby the Soul does attain to an Interest in that Covenant:
It being, thereby, united unto Christ; and consequently, does partake of the
Benefits of his Merits: and does receive the Fruits of his Atonement with the
Inhabitation of his Spirit.

Saving Faith and True Repentance are always inseparable; and their
Conjunction does evidence and speak them to be true and saving: both These (I
do believe) were united in the Soul of this deceased person. And therefore I
have very great Hopes of her State: All Faith which is pretended to, where
Repentance is wanting, I account to be nothing but a presumptuous Confidence;
and all seeming Repentance, which is not Accompanied with some Faith in the
Divine Goodness, and in the promises made thereof (by our Lord Jesus) is no
other than the Repentance of a Cain, or a Judas his despair.

Our Lord Jesus did (as it were) Epitomize the whole Gospel, and comprehended
the whole Duty of man in two words: viz. Repent and Believe: and it is to be
observed; that these two are set in the very Front, as the Text to all his
Ministry, Mark 1.15. And by reason of the Import of them, they may be accounted
as the Contents of the whole.

Where these two Graces are not conjoined, Guilt Remains, and Sin Reigns: But
where they are united in any Soul, as that person is Justified, so that Heart
is savingly changed; and that Nature is in measure Sanctified; and the life of
that man (for the Future) will be proportionably, universally Holy. Would the
Genius of the present Age allow me to use Metaphors in Soul-concernments; I
should think that I did then best explicate to vulgar capacities the nature of
saving Faith: as when I did call Faith the Daughter of Knowledge, the Sister of
Repentance, and the Mother of Love; for the Holy Ghost tells us, that Faith
comes in by Hearing: To. 10.17. That it Purifies the Heart, Acts 15.9. and
works by Love, Gal. 5.6.

That God had given this person, the True Seed of such a Faith, was evident by
it is Fruits: the Apostle tells us, that he that has not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his, To. 8.9. And also he tells us, that as many as are led by
the Spirit are the Children of God, To. 8.16. Now I must profess that (so far
as I was able to Judge) I have seldom seen a dying person, manifest more of a
Christ-like Spirit than she did; That is, I never saw more of a Spirit
Thirsting after communion with God, of a Spirit more contemning the World, of a
Spirit more deeply bowing unto the will of God, or a Spirit more patient under
the Cross; and more Submitting to the Rod of God.

Indeed I knew once a person, that did exceed her herein; and it was her
Renowned Father: a man of the greatest and most deserved name, for Piety and
Sincerity, for Humility and Patience, of all men, In or Near the City, that I
have known: Who Feared no Pain or Torture upon any other account, but this
only, viz. Least they should tempt him to the Least unbecomeing Groan, in some
great paroxisme of the Stone.

The Submitting of our wills to divine will and pleasure in all things, is the
sum and substance of all practical Religion here, and the full conforming of
our wills to the divine will, and mind, is the height and Top of all man's
Happiness hereafter: to enjoy this privilege, of full conformity to God, is
the Portion of None in this World; and to perform that Duty of submission to
him, is the Attainment of but very Few; yet this deceased person was so great a
Favorite, as that God was pleased to bestow this rare Jewel to be worn in her
Bosom, who did seem with John to Lie very near the Heart of her Savior.

Very signal and Conspicuous is the discriminatng Grace of God, toward some
persons more than toward others: it is true, that God is not wanting to the
Happiness of any of his Creatures: and his absolute Sovereignty seems in all
things to be governed by his Infinite goodness; so that, he is both Just, and
good to all: yet there is nothing more notable, or more evident, than that
there are some objects of his Love, who are his Segullahs; his peculiar ones:
in whom God does especially delight; and unto whom God does do good with his
whole Heart, Jer. 32.41.

As God does suffer most men to make their own choice, and does bestow upon
them what they do fully and Finally choose: so he will himself choose as he
will, and he will do with his own gratuitous favor as he himself pleases; and
he will give no account to any of his own matters.

A great Instance hereof was this now blessed person, of whom I may say, that
her whole Life was full of Gods goodness: and that Mercy and Truth did follow
her even all her days; which days, the favor of Heaven would not suffer to
be many; because it did ordain, that her Sorrows and her Temptations should be
but Few.

Time being nothing but a dressing Room to Eternity; the shorter it is, the
sooner do Holy Souls enter into the more immediate presence of the Glorious
Majesty.

It is Reckoned in holy Writ, as an act of very Great kindness shown by Hegai
(the Kings Chamberlain) unto Esther, that all things necessary for her
Purification, and for her due preparation, for the love of her designed Husband
(The great King Ahashuerus,) were given to her more speedily than to others:
whereby a Quicker access to the King was afforded her; and the Crown was so
much the sooner set upon her Head.

The good Spirit of God did deal something after the same manner, with this
young Virgin: For the work of Sanctification was hastened in her, that she
might the more early receive the Crown of Glory, from the King of Kings: and
might be presented holy and without spot, or blemish, or wrinkle or any such
thing.

Few pages, and fewer hours allotted me for this work, will not permit me to
enumerate the many special favors that were shoured down upon this person
while she lived.

I shall not therefore take notice of the privileges of her Birth, or the
Honor of her Family, which were great; neither will I mention her Natural
endowments, of parts, or Beauty, or any such thing; Blessed be God, that she
her self (though young) had learned before her death, to Reckon such enjoyments
as these, to be very mean and poor, when compared with the Joys that were set
before her.

They are Love Tokens of a greater value, which I did observe to be conferred
upon her; and these were such and so many; That I may say that she was one of
those that God had blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ: and I may add with the Apostle, that God having chosen her in him from
before the Foundation of the world, to be holy and without Blame. And the same
God having decreed the end, did also ordain the Means.

Accordingly, in the First place the kindness of God appeared in ordering, that
she should be born of, and brought up by very pious, and Religious Parents; and
few persons did ever enjoy more Spiritual Nurtriture, and Admonition, or had a
greater stock of Prayers laid up for them, than this Gentlewoman, and the rest
of that Offspring.

Another singular Mercy, which did promote her Salvation, was the excellent
pattern, of modesty, virtue, and piety which was afforded her by her elder
Sisters. The Influence of a Good example is always greatly Advantageous: but
when it is found in near Relations, it is much more obliging and efficacious.

Another great Blessing, much conducing to her Eternal Happiness, was this,
that in her youth, she enjoyed the privilege of Attending upon such an eminent
Ministry; that the very Enemies thereof, have been heard to Confess, that it is
very Learned, and most Rational, and further they know not: but such as are
Taught of God, and have their spiritual senses exercised, so as to be
acquainted, not only with the form of Godliness, but also with the power
thereof, these men do say, that the Characters which the others do give of this
eminent persons teaching, are most true; and they do further also say, that it
is extraordinary Clear and convincing, most Evangelical and Scriptural; greatly
practical and profitable, and yet very Sublime and Spiritual.

Now Reader consider, whether many (if any) such have finally miscarried; whose
Natures were gentle, and easy to be entreated; whose hearts were Soft and
Tender; who had the Benefits of such Education, and such Example; who enjoyed
such Teaching abroad, as well as such Counsel at home; and all, accompanied
with servent Prayer unto God for a Blessing, which I am sure that she did not
want: it being reported of her Father, that his Custom was (with the Psalmist,
119.164.) Seven times a day to pray unto the Lord, and to praise him. Moreover,
I am informed, that this deceased Gentlewoman was observed to spend much time
in Closet-Prayer of late; consider then, I say, whether we may not hope
confidently, that the Grace of God had savingly and effectually wrought upon
her; who was both visibly in Covenant with God; and whose heart also God had
disposed and prepared, by such special Means of Grace which he had bestowed
upon her.

And this is yet more evident, if we reflect upon Gods dealing with her in her
last Sickness; whereby God did seem to seal Instruction deeply upon her Soul.
Her distemper was one of the worst sort of Small Pox: At her first being taken,
she had strong apprehensions that she should dye; she therefore did fall
closely upon the work of Examination, desiring the assistance of some Ministers
therein; and she was visited by many: she opened her case to us all, and God
was pleased to make her to suspect and be jealous of the worst; and to confess,
and condemn her self for, her Sins, both of Omission, as well as Commission;
and humbly to inquire after the only way of Pardon: And it pleased God so to
bless these last helps, as that none of us, who visited her, do doubt; but the
same Spirit who convinced her of Sin and of Righteousness, did at length seal
her up to the day of Redemption.

The Alpha, the first Beginning and Foundation of all practical Religion, is
that act whereby a Soul does deliberately, resolvedly, freely, and expressly
dedicate and devote it self unto God, and his Service: Thus the Saints in 2
Cor. 8.5. The Omega, the last, concluding, and consummating work of a devout
Soul, is to commit and commend its Spirit into the hands of God, as to a
faithful Creator: thus did Stephen, Acts 17.59. Yea thus did our Lord Jesus
himself: Luke 23.46.

Thus also did this blessed Person: she did, I hope, begin well, in an early
Consecration of her self to God; I am sure she did end well: and it is the end
that Crowns the work: she did reckon, that she had not fully Finished her
course; nor rightly laid the Top-stone of her spiritual Building, so as to cry
Grace, Grace unto it; until she had most devoutly and humbly offered up her
Soul to God in Prayer, by the assistance of some Friend and Minister.

Accordingly, although it were midnight, and although my Habita^^^^ (...) did
send for me: and with the clearest use of her Reason, and the most fervent
desires of her Soul; she did entreat me, that I would in her Name, solemnly and
expressly surrender and Give up her Soul into the Arms and Bosom of her
Savior, in whose precious Blood, she did hope, that all her sins were now
fully washed away.

I did readily obey the Call, and did comply with her desire: for I did, and do
judge, that this desire of hers proceeded from some extraordinary Impulse, and
work of the Holy Ghost: And Reader, thou will think, as I do, if thou shall
read and observe the effect and consequence hereof; as it is related to thee,
in the close of the following discourse.

Almost such another extraordinary Impress (as it may be thought) was made upon
her Spirit, on occasion of this Author's presenting her with a Funeral Sermon,
which he had preached but a little while before she was taken sick: which
Sermon she having received, and read, and diligently considered; she was heard
to say, That she did think, that her own change would not be far off; and that
she could wish, that the Author might preach her Funeral Sermon also: and she
then named the Text (now insisted upon;) and said, That she hoped, that God
would make her Funeral Sermon as profitable to other young ones, as the Former
Sermon had been to her self.

Her Prognostics were too true, as to the shortness of the time which she
lived after those words were spoken by her; God grant, that her hopes be not
frustrated; but that all her dying words may prove truly Prophetical; and
especially those, which related to the profitable success of the Sermon here
before thee.

The Author has done his part like himself, as well in this, as in the former
Discourse; Oh that he might find as diligent, and as considering Readers as she
was; many excellent Considerations, very subservient, and conducing to thy
Conviction and Salvation, are proposed herein: but all will be in vain, and to
no purpose, without thine own Meditation, and the Spirits application:
Concerning the Discourse, I must say no more, and I can do no less; than to
allude to the words of the holy Ghost, Eccl. 12.9. And moreover, because the
Preacher was wise, therefore, in this Discourse, he has Taught the people
Knowledge; and has given good heed, and sought and set in order many Arguments
for thy preparing for Death, and moreover for preferring of Death before Life:
The Lord convince thee by them; and also carry thee comfortably through all
Time to Eternity. My Paper is short, and my Time shorter, I must therefore
conclude; for the Sermon is wholly Printed, and stops only until I have told
thee that I am

Thy Friend and Souls Servant, (...)

A Funeral Sermon:
PHIL. I. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and
to be with Christ, which is far better.


SAint Paul writing from Rome to the Church at Philippi, in this Chapter
acquaints them with his Bonds and other Discouragements; which he tells them by
their Prayers and the Assistance of the Spirit of Christ obtained thereby, V.
12.
would turn to his Salvation and the furtherance of the Gospel, 13.
and had already been attended with some considerable success in that kind; 14.
to fortify and confirm the Professors of the Christian Faith, 19.
and to propagate and promote it even in the Court of Caesar, and in other
places; and if Christ might be magnified, 20.
he was perfectly indifferent to Live or Dye: For to me to live is Christ, and
to dye is gain, v. 21. His Life he hoped might advance the Honor of Christ;
and his Death would be subservient to the same design: by his further service
if he live, and by his sufferings if he dye; by his Ministry supposing his
Life, and by his Martyrdom in case of his death.

V. 22.
But if I live in the flesh, this, says he, is the fruit of my labor; or, it
is worth my Labor to glorify the Redeemer by continuing in this World. Yet
what I shall choose I wot not. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a
desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better.

To Depart or be dissolved, the Original word is used both by Christian and
Heathen Writers for a departure from any place to return home. Luke 12.36
And when the same Apostle speaks of his approaching death, he tells us, ^.
Tim. 4.6.
that the Time of his departure was at hand.

Having a desire to depart, a vehement and earnest desire, as the word imports;
and to be with Christ, to be absent from the Body, ^. Cor. 5.8.
and present with the Lord; with that merciful Savior, who had compassion on
me, when as an ignorant Blasphemer I persecuted his Members; who called me to
be an Apostle, and enabled me by his Grace to own his Truth in the face of
Dangers, and has hitherto comforted me in all my Tribulation. I desire to
depart, that I may be with him. With him, not with the blessed Angels or
departed Saints, though their Society will make a part of the heavenly Joy: Not
the former, they are but ministering Spirits and menial Servants employed under
him; and though they shine as Stars, yet he is the enlivening Sun, from whom
they derive their Luster and borrow all their glory. Not the latter; they have
no Blessedness but by his Donation and Purchase, no Crowns of Life but what he
puts on. Therefore it is not to be with them only or chiefly, that made him thus
groan to be dissolved, thus earnestly desire to depart, but to be with Christ:
Which is far better, simply and in it self more desirable, by much more better,
the Comparative being double in the Greek Text; and yet I wot not what to
choose, for I am in a strait betwixt two. On the one hand, his Love to the
Philippians who needed his prefence, (many false Teachers being at that time
crept in among them, V. 24.
) made him willing to abide in the flesh, and deferr his own felicity for a
time upon their account: But the Glory of Christ's presence on the other, and
his own unspeakable advantage by it, made him desirous of a Departure; and
therefore, though he determines for the former, and was content to Live, and
it is probable had some secret intimation from Heaven, that all his work in this
World was not yet finished; yet he grants the latter to be simply more eligible:
having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far Better. Which
words are not more suitable to a Funeral Solemnity, than expressive of the
dying Thoughts and Temper of our deceased Friend, and were chosen by her as the
Subject of my present Discourse. And that I may comprehend the Substance and
Design of the Text, according to the desire of the Dead, for the Benefit and
Instruction of the Living; let us consider,

1. When and how far it is warrantable for a Christian to desire death?

2. In what respects to depart and to be with Christ is far Better than to
abide in the Flesh.

3. On what Grounds and Principles a Christian may expect a future Blessedness
with Christ after his departure, so as to encourage and excite his desires
after it?

4. Whence it comes to pass, that even those who acknowledge it Far Better to
be with Christ, than to continue in the body, are yet unwilling to depart in
order to it? and what Remedies are proper to the case of such?

5. The Application of the whole, particularly with respect to the sad Occasion
of our present Meeting.

1. When and how far is it warrantable for a Christian to desire to be
dissolved? This Inquiry may be answered in the following Propositions.

1. Our dissolution and departure as a natural or penal evil, as contrary to
Nature, or as the Punishment of Sin, cannot possibly be the Object of a
rational desire: If God has promised a long Life as the Encouragement and
Reward of our Obedience, and threatened an hasty death as the punishment of
Impiety: If it be universally true, that the Soul of man desires Union with the
Body, and unavoidably dreads a separation from it: If Torturing pains and
loathsome Diseases are the usual Antecedents of dying: If the Corruption of the
Body, and its Imprisonment in the Grave till the general Resurrection be the
certain Consequent of our dissolution: We cannot but think of Death as a
natural Evil; and as such decline and fear it.

Much less desirable will it appear, if considered as the Wages of Sin, and the
Fruit of Gods displeasure, and the Just Sentence of his Vindictive Justice: but
how far our dissolution in this latter Notion of it is changed by the death of
Christ in reference to Believers, is another question, and will more properly
be considered under the third Inquiry.

2. Our dissolution and departure ought not to be desired, Only as a freedom
from Temporal Evil; as preventive of present suffering, or delivering us from
it. The Apostle does not mention the uneasy Circumstances of a Prison, or the
continual hardships to which he was exposed from the malice of his adversaries,
as the ground of his desire to depart, but to be with Christ: he knew very well
that a Christian may serve the ends of God's glory, and be useful to others in
a state of suffering: and therefore when he says in another place, We that are
in this Tabernacle do groan being burdened, 2 Cor. 5.3.4.
he adds the limitation in the following words, not to be unclothed but clothed
upon, that mortality may be swallowed up of Life: not merely to avoid the
inconveniences of our abode in so poor a dwelling, but to come to the
possession of the building not made with hands eternal in the Heavens. Not
merely to find relief and deliverance from our present burdens, Job 7.13 Jon.
4.3.
when through melancholy or discontent we are weary of Life: when we have set
our Hearts on somewhat we cannot obtain, or struggle with some difficulties we
cannot master: or are impatient under bodily pains, or quite dispirited by the
sad prospect of approaching Calamities; in such a case to wish for Death, and
desire to depart, is unbecoming the Character, the encouragement and hopes of a
Soldier of Christ: much less will the Gallantry of a Roman or a Philosopher
legitimate the desire of Death, only to prevent Slavery, or avoid Disgrace, or
miss the sight of an unwelcome object. As Cato resolved to dye that he might
not behold Victorious Caesar, whom by all means possible he had endeavored to
ruin: ^icero in ^uscul. ^est. lib. 1.
and Cicero says expressly of him, that the reason of his choice was just, and
that Cato ought to dye rather then see the face of a Tyrant. But we have not so
learned Christ, for

3. We must not designedly precipitate or hasten our own departure; nor
wilfully neglect any probable means to preserve our Lives, how desirous so ever
we are to be with Christ: we acknowldge God as the Author and Owner of our
lives, and shall we presume to dispose of what is his, without a declaration of
his consent and order to authorize us? Are we bound by the sixth commandment to
preserve the Life of our neighbor, and may we be negligent and careless of our
own? is not every man nearer to himself than any other can be? and is not
self-murder a violation of the Law of nature and condemned by a general
suffrage? and can we suppose it a sufficient Justification of our selves, that
we profess a desire to be with Christ? whereas we may not do this or any other
evil, though the greatest good may come of it: he that hastes to be rich,
Prove. 28.^6.
even in this sense, shall not be innocent. We must be entirely devoted to
serve and glorify the Redeemer as long as we live; and rather dye upon the
Spot, than quit our Station without the order of our General: and yet we must
not shipwreck our health, or expose our Lives to hazard, without a Warrant from
Heaven.

4. A Sincere desire to be with Christ is consistent with some fear of Death,
and a reproveable unwillingness to depart and be dissolved. The example of
Christ himself is usually urged in vindication of a natural sensitive fear of
Death, viz. the discovery thereof which he made by his Agony and prayer in the
Garden. But a Socinian only will assert, that therefore he was more affected
with the fear of Death than many of the Martyrs have been, because of the
exquisite Temper and tender constitution of his body; and that there was
nothing but what was natural and ordinary in his case: whereas he was to
conflict with the wrath of God, and bear the curse, and be wounded for our
Transgressions, etc, otherwise his own innocence and perfect resignation to the
will of his Father, and the prospect and assurance of victory and reward, would
certainly have prevented his Terrible agony and bloody sweat and importunate
cries, that if possible the Cup might pass from him. However I doubt not, but a
Timorous Temper may render some persons extremely apprehensive of the pains of
death, and on that account unwilling to depart, though they are truly desirous
to be with Christ.

Others through the weakness of Faith or overmuch concern in the affairs of
this Life, etc. though they grant it unspeakably better to be present with the
Lord, and have chosen it as their portion and final Happiness; may yet be loath
to pass through the dark valley: they cannot join with the Apostle in desiring
to be dissolved, though they can speak it from their very hearts, that they
desire to be with Christ; and that desire is so far prevailing as to keep them
upright, and yet not efficacious, so as to conquer the fears or interposing
death. How unwelcome was the message of Death to an upright Hezekiah, even then
when he could plead his Integrity before the Lord? he turned his face to the
wall, and wept, and besought the Lord that he might not dye, as is evident by
Isa. 38.3, 5, v. compared: but I dare not say, his unwillingness to dye at that
Time was a sinful weakness, because he might well be concerned for the Kingdom
after his decease, least the faithful should be staggered, and the people
revolt to Idolatry, there being no visible Successor to advance the Reformation
so hopefully begun; for Manasses was not then born, being but twelve years old
when he began to reign, and we know that Hezekiah had fifteen years added to
his Life. 2 King. 20.6.

5. Though we desire to be with Christ, we must not be peremptory as to any
determinate Time; but refer our selves to God's good pleasure for the season of
our departure: though with Job we should be ready to answer, Job 14.15
when God does call, yet with humility and resignation we must expect his
summons, and wait till our change come: though the days of our appointed Time
should be longer than ordinary. Though in a dutiful observance to our Heavenly
Father we should be willing to return home as soon as he shall please to call
us, and the felicity of his presence should render it desirable; yet his
Sovereign will and unerring wisdom must be practically acknowledged in
reference to the Season: he alone, of whom and to whom are all things, is fit
to determine how long we shall tarry, or how soon we shall depart: even the
Light of nature may teach us this: Seneca Epist. 24.^1.
And therefore, when ever we pray Thy Kingdom come, we must not limit the holy
one of Israel by prescribing the Time; but immediately subjoyn, with respect to
that, Thy will be done.

6. Not the Time only, but the Kind and Manner, of our dissolution must be
referred to God. Some have wished for a sudden death, and others have prayed
against it. Some have desired to dye by one disease, and others by another.

Some holy persons of a timorous Temper and a tender Body, would choose to
depart by a Consumption; not only as allowing them a longer Time to prepare for
death, but as an easier kind of Death than several others: Whereas, besides the
uncertainty and deceitfulness of that disease, it is more than possible, that
the Languishment of a pining sickness may be as irksome and insupportable, as
the shorter pains of more violent distempers. But God is the only Judge (to
whom we must Submit, as the wise disposer of all events) not only of the Time
but the Manner of our departure: not only how long we shall sojourn in this
earthly Tabernacle, but what shall dissolve and pull it down.

7. Our desire to depart and to be with Christ, must not be rash and hasty; but
the result of many Serious and deliberate thoughts, comparing both States
together, and understanding the difference. The Apostle knew his duty in
compliance with the Will of God, and therefore for the service of his Master,
and the advantage of the Philippians, was willing to Live: but he knew withal,
it was far better in it self to depart that he might be with Christ, and as
such he desired it. And a due comparison between our present and our future
Life, our inconveniences and sufferings in this world, and our Felicity in the
next, is proper to regulate and quicken our desire to be absent from the body,
and present with the Lord. Therefore,

2. In what respects is it far better to be with Christ, than to abide in the
flesh? what is the vast difference between What we are, and What we shall be?
that the expectation of the Latter should even make Death and dissolution
desirable in order to it. And here it will be necessary to consider,

1. The Expression of our Felicity after death here used by the Apostle, Being
with Christ.

2. In what respects it is far better to depart, and be absent from the body,
that we may be present with him.

1. The Expression of our future blessedness, by being with Christ. Till we are
present with the Lord, and see him face to face, and know as we are known, we
must content our selves with such sensible representations of it, as God is
pleased to reveal in his Word; such as our ignorant earthly minds can bear, and
may be most affected with. But when once the vail of darkness is removed by
death, we shall see him as he is, and all our Faculties be purified and
enlarged, and suited to the blessed company and work above. We shall see him
whom our Souls love, and reap a Happiness by doing so, bigger than our present
Hopes, and far above our highest Thoughts about it: For in his presence is
fullness of Joy, and at his right hand are Everlasting pleasures. And can we
imagine, that a blessedness, purchased by infinite Merit, contrived by infinite
Wisdom, and prepared by infinite Power, and bestowed at length through infinite
Grace, will in any thing be defective? Does not our Apostle describe it best,
by assuring us it cannot be described; that it is greater than we ever saw,
beyond what we ever heard, and far above what we can ever think? Does not the
very hopes of seeing him, revive our drooping hearts? Oh what will be the Glory
of that blessed sight! is not the pledge and assurance of it by the Harbinger
of his holy Spirit exceeding comfortable? Oh what transcendent Satisfaction
will his presence give us! We now comfort our selves with the Contemplation,
and one another with the Discourse of it: and if our dark Faith and our faint
Hopes, can give us such a Joyful prospect of what shall be consequent to our
dissolution; into what ravishing Joy shall we enter by the open Vision and full
enjoyment? Is the encouragement and support of a Christian now, from his
presence with us here; and will it not be far better to be present with him
above, to be for ever with the Lord? When we shall never question his Love to
us, or doubt of ours to him, but have a full assurance of the one, and a
glorious exercise of the other?

And because our knowledge will be still increasing, our flames of Love shall
still rise higher. But what additional Bliss the Soul shall have by the
Resurrection of the body, and the great Transactions of the Judgment Day, we
know but in part. Blessed God, we know so much in this imperfect state, enough
to excite our desires, and quicken our preparations, and encourage our
Perseverance. And let us bless him more, that he has prepared such a glory for
us in the presence of the Redeemer, as we cannot fully understand, till death
convey us to him.

But to be with Christ, is not only eligible in it self, as expressive of our
future Glory; but much rather to be desired, if considered comparatively:
Therefore,

2. In what respects is it preferrable to an abode in the flesh, so as to make
us rather choose to depart, that we may be with him; than Continue in the Body,
and be absent from the Lord?

1. Is not a state of Rest and Joy much more desirable, than to be continually
harrass'd with Trouble and Sorrow? We ordinarily begin this World in Tears, and
solemnize our own Nativity as we do the Funerals of our dearest Friends: as if
we were then sensible of that universal Curse which has afflicted Mankind
since the first Transgression; and had a clear prospect of the miseries we are
born to, and must afterward suffer: And in all the Portions of our little time,
what and how many do we every where encounter! How many things are there which
we find are wanting both as to our Accomplishments and Enjoyments? and how much
are we disappointed, if we look for satisfaction from the lusts of the flesh, 1 John 2.16
the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life? which, says the Apostle, is all
that is in the world: Earthly Pleasures, Wealth and Honor.

Do we not find, that what does rejoice and please us one day, appears with
another Face when we view it next? or if we think it would please us still,
it is gone e're we are aware, and with all our skill and power we cannot
protract its duration. Do not evil accidents overtake us on a sudden, and our
most probable designs miscarry in the birth? as if all things were governed by
Chance, and there were no Intelligent Director to oversee and regulate the
Affairs of the World, and the Actions and Conditions of men: Insomuch, that the
Race is not to the swift, Eccl. 11.^
nor the Battle to the strong, nor Bread to the wise, nor Riches to men of
understanding, nor Favor to men of skill, but Time and Chance happens to them
all. Our Pleasures flatter and deceive us, and our Afflictions trouble and
disquiet us: We are imposed upon by our Senses, and misguided by our Passions:
Crossed in our Desires, and frustrated in our Hopes: grieved by present evils,
or perplexed with the fears of future: and our Spirits for the most part
discomposed either by personal or relative Calamities. Some rueful Spectacle is
ever now and then presented before our Eyes; some evil tidings or unpleasant
sound does grate our Ears. We bewail the wants of the Poor, which we cannot
supply; or envy the prosperity of the Wicked, which we cannot hinder; or grieve
at the Afflictions of the Righteous, which we cannot remedy.

We have some suffering Friend with whom to sympathize, some distressed or
deceased Relation to lament: some unhappiness of our own, or of those we love,
to be concerned for. Besides the Treachery and unfaithfulness of our seeming
Friends; the Hatred and Malice of our open Enemies; the scandalous Actions of
professing Christians; their Divisions and Animosities among themselves, and
their despiteful usage and entertainment from the World; the Complaints of the
Miserable, the Groans of the Sick, the Cries of the Oppressed, and our own
bodily Infirmities, weaknesses and pains, etc. enough one would think to make
us defire to depart, and render us extremely willing to lay down and dye, (if
God think fit,) that we may be at rest; especially having the expectation of
being for ever with the Lord. For otherwise even M. Anton. ^ib. 3. 4. ^rr.
Epict. ^ib. 4. c. ^0. Boeth Conul. Philos. 1.
Heathens have spoken excellently of the Advantages of Death, as the period of
our present Sorrows.

2. Is not a state of holiness and perfect purity, far better than a Life of
Temptation, Corruption and Sin? How are we now buffeted by Satan? by his Sinful
suggestions, his subtle devices and snares, and his fiery darts? and by that
means our Integrity assaulted, our peace of Conscience unsettled, and our
Perseverance endangered?

Our Conflict with him is so difficult, and the issue of the battle as to what
depends on us, so very uncertain; that we are often ready to throw down our
Arms, and give up all as Lost. For though he be a conquered and baffled
Adversary, through the victory which our Captain has obtained against him; yet
we cannot now Triumph over him, as hereafter we shall. And is it not far better
to abandon this world, Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.
of which he is the God, and get above that Air of which he is the Prince, that
we may be with Christ?

Moreover, how does our depraved Nature continually cast forth mire and dirt?
what remaining filthiness is there yet to be purged? what powerful Lusts to be
mortified and subdued? which indispose us for Spiritual duties, and derive a
damp and deadness upon all our Religious Exercises; which cool our Zeal, and
abate the fervor of our Spirits in the service of our Redeemer; which weaken
our Confidence in Prayer, and shame our faces before the Lord in secret. And is
it not far better to part with the body of flesh, that thereby we may be rid of
this body of sin and death, Romans 7.2
and be like our Savior in perfect purity?

Do we not complain of our Ignorance of Divine Truths, and the blessed
Mysteries of the Gospel, notwithstanding all our means of knowledge? of our
Earthliness and unbelief? of unbecoming Thoughts of God and holy things? of
proud Imaginations and carnal reasonings against his Works and Word? of
languishing and imperfect Graces to be recovered and perfected, etc? And is it
not better be with Christ, where that which is imperfect shall be done away?

Is not God dishonored and provoked, by our frequent Omissions and slight
Performances of duty? do we not resist and quench and sadden his holy Spirit?
and are we not often grieved by God's rebukes and frowns? by the wounds and
smart regrets of our own Conscience? so that we remember God and are troubled,
and cry out in the bitterness of our Souls, Has he forgotten to be gracious,
and will he be merciful no more? Are not our holy Purposes inconstant, and our
best Resolutions wavering and unsteddy, and very quickly, very easily shattered
by the breath of a small Temptation?

Have we not a constant Watch to keep over our Hearts and ways? a perpetual
War to manage with the Infernal Trinity, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil?
and do we know his rage, and malice, and serpentine policy, with the Multitude,
Strength and Power of his Temptations? How often we have been foiled already,
and how soon we may be so again? and shall we not be desirous of a sinless
state in the presence of Christ; where no Tempter, no Temptation shall ever be
admitted?

Yea, had we no corruption or Sin of our own to be delivered from, yet our
concern at God's dishonor by the sins of others, should make us willing to
depart; as much more desirable than our abode on earth: Job 24.9. (...). 24.4.
Which is given into the hands of the wicked, and defiled by its Inhabitants:
Where the very Air is infected with Oaths and Blasphemies, profane discourse
and filthy Talk: Where the very Being of a God is questioned, his Providence
denied, and his Authority mocked: Where the Gospel of Christ is disparaged and
despised, his Laws contradicted, his Worship polluted, his Institutions
subverted, and his holy Name made a cloak for Licentiousness, and his faithful
Servants trampled on by the foot of Pride, and scorned by men at ease, and
forced to own his Truth with the peril of their Lives. And can we say, It is
good to be here? or is it not far better to forsake such a Place and Company,
that we may be with Christ?

3. Let us consider what are the grounds and Principles by which a Christian is
assured of this Blessedness in the presence of Christ after his dissolution.
This Inquiry is necessary, because the discourse of our future Bliss with
Christ cannot be supposed to have any effect or influence upon us, to make us
desire our departure, while we disbelieve or make a doubt of the matter.

I hope it were needless to prove the Possibility of the Souls existence in a
state of separation from the Body.

Whether in the body or out of the body, 2 Cor. 12*2.
would not have been a doubt to this great Apostle, if he could not possibly
have lived but in it: neither could he desire to depart that he might be with
Christ, if after his departure he should not be at all. And supposing the
existence of the Soul notwithstanding the dissolution of the Body, we have as
full an assurance as the nature of the thing is capable of, that holy Souls
shall be present with the Lord in glory, when absent from the body: 1 Thessalonians.
4.17. Joh. 17.24. Matthew. 25.23. Rev. 3.21, etc.

But because the Text has a special relation to Christ and to be with him, is
the Blessedness on the account whereof it is desirable to depart; I shall only
mention his Death and Resurrection, as a sufficient ground to confirm our Faith
in the certainty of being with him, and to excite our Desires of a departure in
order to it.

1. The Death of Christ. He has cancelled the Handwriting against us, and put
away Sin, Ephesians. 1.7.
which is the sting of Death, by the Death of the Cross: a way is now open for
us into the holy of holies by his blood, not for our Prayers only but our
Persons. Heb. 10.19
He has wounded the Head of the old Serpent, even by permitting him to bruise
his Heel, by crucifying his humane Nature, (which was only Vestigium Deitatis.
2 Samuel 23 21. Heb. 2.15
) As Benaiah slew the Egyptian with his own Spear. Having destroyed death and
him that had the power of it, and delivered those who were all their Life time
subject to bondage, through the fear of death.

He has set his foot on the neck of this Adversary, disarmed it of it is
weapon, and robbed it of it is sting, and abolisht the ugliness and poison of it.
He has dismounted Hell and Damnation from behind him who Sat on the
Pale-horse. Rev. 6.8.
Whether the first Adam were buried in Calvary, where the second was crucified,
as some affirm, I need not enquire; we know that his Death was our Victory, and
his Cross may be our Triumph, since the Devil is conquered, and death
Sanctified, and the Grave perfumed by his burial, so that we need not be afraid
to lodge in a Sepulcher where our Lord himself has slept.

Yea since the effusion of his Blood, there is an amiable ruddiness in the Face
of death; for that which was the Instrument of Justice, is now the messenger of
Peace and Joy, that which was the gate of Hell, is the way to Life. He has
brought sweetness out of the Strong, and meat out of the Eater; 1 Cor. 3.21.
and therefore Death as well as Life is reckoned in the Inventory of the riches
of the Saints. All things are yours, because you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods.

2. His Resurrection and Exaltation; his rising from the Dead not only
discovers the possibility of our Resurrection, and gives us a pledge and
assurance of it, as declaring the sufficiency and acceptance of his Sacrifice;
Romans 8.11. Is. 26.19.
that therefore the Dead in Christ shall live, and with his Dead Body arise:
But being punctually effected according to his prediction and promise, it
confirms the Truth of all his Word, and seals the promise of eternal Life unto
all Believers. He has opened the Prison doors, and loosed the bands of Death,
1 Cor. 15.^0.
and rolled away the heavy Stone from the Graves of his people; he is now
become the first fruits of them that Sleep in Jesus: And has the Keys of
Death and Hell; Rev. 1.
even the two most formidable enemies are under his Dominion: who though once
he were dead, does now live, yea live for evermore. And for this very end did
God raise him up, 1 Pet. 1.2*
that our faith and hope might be in him, in reference to the Blessedness of
another Life.

Yea, says the Apostle, concerning that, Act. 13.3
he raised him from the dead, no more to see corruption. God said, I will give
you the sure mercies of David; Is. 55.3
or an Everlasting Covenant, which Death shall not dissolve: and his being
risen is the ground of our Faith and Hope that the promise shall be fulfilled.
For the Resurrection of Christ is the evidence of the validity and Efficacy of
his Death and Sacrifice, and a sufficient proof, that his Precious Blood shed
upon the Cross, Heb. 13.^
was the blood of an Everlasting Covenant. Establishing a Covenant of Grace,
and making it truly Everlasting; for we know that he is a Priest for ever,
after the Power of an endless Life. And therefore know, Heb. 7.^
to our unspeakable Satisfaction, Encouragement and Joy, in whom we have
believed, and that he is able to keep unto that day, what we have committed to
him; 2 Timothy 12. Phil. 1. Jude 2. Col. 3.3.
to perfect what he has begun; and at last present us blameless before the
presence of his glory with exceeding Joy. For our Life being hid with him in
God, we are fully assured, that when he who is our Life shall appear, 1 John 3.
we shall appear with him in glory; and because he lives, we shall live also;
and when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

4. Let us consider, Whence it comes to pass, that notwithstanding the
Blessedness of being with Christ, and our assurance of it by his Death and
Resurrection, that yet we are so backward and unwilling to depart? What is the
true reason why so many of those who acknowledge it far better to be with
Christ, yet cannot say with the Apostle, That they desire to be dissolved, that
they may be with him?

1. The weakness of Faith concerning the Invisible World, and the future Glory
of the Saints, is the reason why so many Christians are unwilling to dye. They
are very sensible of the inconveniences of their present abode; they complain
to God and men of Corruption, Temptation and Sin, and they hear of a blessed
Deliverance from all these by Death, and a perfect Felicity in the presence of
the Redeemer after their dissolution; but unbelief makes them stagger at the
Promise: They are not fully satisfied that such a transcendent Glory will be
Consequent to Dying. Did they but soundly believe the Testimony and Revelation
which God has given in his Word concerning it, they would choose to be absent
from the body. Some of the Ignorant Heathens have been desperate in their
Choice of death, only as the Period of present Calamities: but others who were
doubtful of the Consequence, have yet entertained it with an hearty Welcome: As
Socrates for instance, who professed, That he ought not to fear death because
he could not tell whether it were good or evil: And shall not we who understand
the Grounds and Principles, the greatness and certainty of a future Blessedness
after Death, be as willing to depart? A confirmed Faith is therefore necessary
and advisable in the present case: and the rather, that thereby we may quench
the fiery darts of Satan; who if he cannot hinder us of our Crown, would rob us
of our Joyful Prospect of it: if he cannot prevent our future Glory, would
render us dejected in our passage thither: if he cannot prevail to exclude and
banish us for ever from the Presence of Christ, would darken our present
comfort by the desire and Hope of it: but more especially at the prospect and
approach of Death, for that is his hour, and the power of darkness.

But by this shield of Faith, Ephesians. 6.11.16.
we may be able to stand even in that evil day of our dissolution.

2. The Pains of Death. They pray that God would hasten his Glorious Kingdom,
and bring them to it; and believe it to be most eligible to be with Christ; yet
are loath their own Prayers should be answered, and the end and object of their
Faith obtained, through the discouraging apprehensions they admit of a dying
hour.

Would we not be with the Lord, and know him better, and Love him more, and
enjoy him fully? and shall we stick at a little pain, as introductory to so
great a Happiness? A Pain that will speedily convey us to Eternal ease and
rest; which thousands of Holy Souls in Glory have endured more of, than we can
fear.

But suppose the Agonies of Death are never so frightful to Flesh and Blood,
has not Our Redeemer a Rod and Staff to comfort us in the dark Valley? Ps.
23.4.
Does he not know what it is to dye, and how much we dread it? does he not
understand our weakness, remember our frailty, pity our infirmities, and bid us
ask for support and Strength? Ps. 73.2
yea has he not promised, that when Heart and Flesh shall fail, that he will
be the Strength of our Hearts, and our Portion for ever? Shall Ignorant
hopeless Heathens, without God in this world, without the expectation of being
with Christ in the next, be so desirous of Immortality, as to dispatch
themselves, and be their own Executioners, to force an escape from the Body?
and shall we resist and struggle, draw back and fear, object and be unwilling,
when our Savior calls us to endless and unspeakable Felicity? Is not this the
last Experiment of our Faith, and Patience, and holy Resolution? the last essay
of our Christian Courage? Are not the antecedent pains of dying the fruit of
sin, no less than the throws and pangs of Traveling Women? and are the Latter
tolerable in hopes of Children and their own deliverance; and may we not
support the Former by the assistance of a greater and better Hope? Are they at
all considerable and worthy our fear, if put in the balance with the promised
Salvation to follow on our departure? Are they comparable in the nature of
evil, to the blessed Life they lead us to in the nature of good? or comparable
to the gripes of Conscience which unpardoned sinners meet with in Life and
Death? yea do we not think them greater, and make them worse by our foolish
fears, than most do find them? Is not the sting of Death removed, and the
Heavenly Mansions prepared and promised? and is it a reasonable request, that
God should vary from his settled course and fixed Law, upon our Sole account?
will nothing else content and please us, but that Heaven must descend to Earth,
or we be in a moment translated thither; to prevent our pain, and supersede the
necessity of our dissolution, which we fear will be so attended?

As a proper Remedy in the present case, let us familiarize the Thoughts of
Death by frequent serious Meditation. Let us view it oftener in our way, that it
may not meet us with so much Terror at our Journeys end. Let us admit the
Thoughts of a departure with particular application to our selves, and improve
the Funerals of our Friends as a seasonable memento that our own is near. Let
us lay open the Picture of Death naked to our view, and urge it to our Hearts,
with the Infinite Glory that immediately succeeds, and take in the Death and
Promise of Christ, as our assurance of it. And this will reconcile us more to a
Departure, and help to overcome our unreasonable fears of pain and sickness
antecedent to it.

3. The weakness and declension of our Love to Christ, is another ground of our
unwillingness to depart and to be with him. To a degenerate Soul, that is
destitute of the Love of Christ, an Everlasting distance would be more
desirable than a Local Presence. For that could not make him happy, he would
still be as far removed from Bliss by being with the Lord, as the Center of a
Millstone in the bottom of the Sea would be from moisture. But the company and
converse of those we Love, must needs be eligible: and the more we Love them,
the stronger still will be our desire of being with them; and the more
impatient shall we be of every delay. And is it not the sense and secret
language of our Hearts, Whom have we in Heaven but Christ? And are we not
desirous to forsake this Earth to enjoy his presence? Certainly the growth, and
strength, and exercise of Holy Love to Christ, would even render our
dissolution grateful in order to it; and make our Hearts rejoice at the
approach of Death, as it did old Jacobs, to see the Wagons that are sent to
fetch us to our beloved Jesus, who is Lord of that Country whither we are going.

4. Immoderate Love to this present World, and our Temporal Life. Were we
crucified to fleshly Pleasures and sensual Joys, to worldly Honors and
earthly Riches; we should less regret the thoughts of dying, and more heartily
desire to be with Christ. For as the pangs of Death are not ordinarily so
violent and intolerable to one whose strength is wasted by a pining Sickness,
as to him who is arrested suddenly in his full strength and vigor; so will he
more easily leave this World, who for some time past has been dying to it.
Gal. 6.14.
Were we more crucified to the World, and the World to us by the Cross of
Christ, we should not so affectionately hug the Carcass of a dead Enemy, whom
we our selves have crucified and slain; but wait for the Time, and long for the
happy hour when we shall leave it, and be gone to our Eternal Rest. Let us
therefore make use of all the Christian methods of Mortification, and look on
this world as a strange place, and our selves as Pilgrims and Strangers here;
as Exiles from our own Country, and hastening to it: And we cannot but wish our
selves at home, and desire a departure as necessary thereto; and in the Interim
sigh to think of the vast disproportion and difference between the slender
entertainments of our Inn, and the plentiful Provisions of our Father's house.

5. Blotted Evidences, and the want of Assurance, concerning our Title to the
Heavenly Glory. And this we all pretend as the reason of our unwillingness to
dye: A Sadducee is loath to dye, least he should not be at all; an unprepared
sinner, for fear of being miserable; and a doubting Christian, because he knows
not whether Happiness or Misery shall be his portion after his departure. For
were we well assured we should be with Christ for ever, we could not be so
backward and unwilling to be dissolved. Had we any better grounds to hope, that
sin was pardoned, and God our Covenant Father; that Heaven would be our
Inheritance, and we should not come into Condemnation; we might rejoice to
think of our departure, when and how it shall please God to call us. When the
Psalmist could say, The Lord is my Shepherd; Ps. 23 4, 6
he could boldly venture upon death, and walk through the valley of darkness
without fear of evil: But when distress had brought his sin to remembrance, and
made him doubt of his condition, he cries, Ps. 39.13.
Oh spare me a little longer, that I may recover strength, before I go hence,
and be no more seen. Could you say with the Spouse of Christ in the Canticles,
Cant. 6.3
My Beloved is mine, and I am his; you might cheerfully join your Amen, when
you hear the Spirit and the Bride say in the Revelations, Come Lord Jesus, Rev.
20.2
Come quickly.

Therefore Try your State, and examine your selves afresh; and endeavor with
your utmost care and diligence to obtain a well grounded Assurance; founded on
the Testimony of a good Conscience, by comparing the Promises of Remission and
Eternal Life with the requisite qualifications and Conditions of them. For if
our hearts condemn us not, we shall have confidence toward God, Joh. 3.21
even in a dying hour. To which end, let us endeavor by daily acts of
Repentance to obtain a daily pardon. Let us sum up our accounts at the foot
of every page; I mean reflect every Night on the passages of the preceding Day:
That we may rest on our Beds with the sense of a daily pardon; and be as fit to
dye, as we are to sleep.

6. Our fond affections to our Friends on Earth, may make us loath to dye,
though we hope to be with Christ in Heaven. But is not his Bosom more
desirable, than the arms and embraces of our dearest Friends and nearest
Relations? must we not abandon and hate them all for his sake? Luke 14.26
i. e. use them as contemptible and hated things, if they keep us from him.
Have we not solemnly engaged to do so, by our Covenant with God? and shall we
not stand to our agreement? Is there no difference between our Friends on
Earth, and our beloved Savior? How often is an unactive pity vouchsafed in the
room of succor; when they need our assistance, or we intercede for theirs! We
know if they are unholy, they shall forever be banished from the presence of
Christ; and we may well be ashamed to be unwilling to dye on their account: and
if they are holy, though we shall not return to them, yet we know that they
shall shortly come to us. And cannot God instruct them in his fear, order their
Conditions, dispose of their affairs, provide for their comfort, and answer all
our prayers in reference to them, after our departure? yea has he not often
done so?

Have we any Friends on Earth, that are every way so accomplished, as always to
delight and please us? or are we so perfectly wise and good, as never to
disgust and disoblige them? Is there not some selfishness, design, and private
interest; some hypocrysie, flattery, and dissimulation; some inequality,
unsuitableness, or inconstancy in our friendships here? Are not the best of
those we love, Ignorant and mistaken, erroneous, deceived, weak and impotent:
and as likely to defile and grieve us by their Corruption, as to edify and
rejoice us by their Grace? but hereafter, when that which is imperfect is done
away, they shall all have suitable qualifications to recommend them to our most
sincere and constant Affection, and be every way more fit for our Content and
Joy. We shall then be never weary of each others company: we shall fully
understand one another mind: we shall live in perfect harmony, and full
Satisfaction; without the dread of Absence or fear of Separation. Now if we
have some Friends, we have many Enemies; but in the presence of Christ there
shall be none but Friends, and such as shall for ever be so: their Persons
being more amiable, and their Society more desirable than now it can be. Now if
we are pleased with their Converse, we may quickly lose it, Exek. 24.16.
and the desire of our eyes be taken from us by a sudden stroke; that we know
not how to value or use them, till it is too late. And shall we be unwilling, on
their account, to depart and be with Christ? since they are hastening after us,
and after a few days absence we shall meet them again, and dwell with them for
ever.

5. The Application remains, which shall be only in four particulars, as
Inferences from what has been said.

1. We may hence take notice of the great Efficacy and Power of the Christian
Faith and Hope. That notwithstanding our fondness and affection to the Body,
and the contrariety of death to our sensitive Inclinations; that yet this Faith
and Hope can urge us to desire a dissolution in order to it.

2. We may hence infer, that the Soul does not sleep in the grave with it is
companion the Body until the Resurrection; but immediately pass into a state
of bliss. For the Apostle to abide in the flesh, was more expedient for the
Philipians; for him to Live, Ver. 21.
would be Christ, i. e. For the advancement of his glory; how then was it
better to depart? or in what strait could he be, whether he should choose a
longer Life, or a present departure; if no Blessedness were expected till the
final Judgment? And why does he mention his being with Christ, as that which
made death desirable? Is not the presence of Christ with us on Earth, and our
serving the ends of his Glory in this world, much more eligible than to Sleep
in the grave till dooms day?

3. Is it better to depart, and be with Christ, than abide in the Body? then
the Fable of Purgatory is hereby exploded. Were we to be transported by our
dissolution, only from Lesser pains to Greater, or from a Life of Sorrow to a
state of Suffering, (such as the Romanists imagine their Purgatory to be,
equivalent to the Torments of Hell in the extremity of them, though different
in duration:) How were it far better to depart, that we may be with Christ?

4. Is it the object of a Christians desire to depart, and be with Christ? and
is that far better than to continue in the body? Then let us not Grieve
immoderately at the departure of those, who have obtained their wish, and enjoy
their desire.

Did they long to be with Christ, and choose to be dissolved in order to it?
and is it their unspeakable Satisfaction that they are so? and do we express
our Love and Kindness to them, by repining at their Felicity? shall their
desired Repose, and Rest, and Happiness; be our Torment, Grief, and Sorrow?
would we, that contrary to their own welgrounded Inclinations, they should
continue longer here on Earth, or return back again from Heaven, merely to
gratify our fond Affections? Have they obtained a speedy Victory after a short
Conflict; and received the Crown of Life as soon almost as they begun their
Christian race; the glorious recompense of Reward, though they had wrought but
one hour in the Vineyard, when others must Labor twelve? and shall we mourn
like utter Strangers to the Christan Faith and Hope? Would we delay the Glory
of God in their Salvation, and deferr their Felicity in the blessed presence of
the Redeemer; and be content that a Voice should be wanting in the Heavenly
Quire, rather than we be Sadned by their departure?

Would Parents have their Children continue always in their Swadling-cloaths;
or when advanced to riper years, wish them back again to Infancy, and hinder
their possession of that Inheritance, which they are born to, and disposed to
enter on and enjoy?

Are not you your selves hastening to the Grave, and Hope e're long to be with
Christ? and is it not a refreshing Thought, to consider, that your Treasure is
there before you; with their Father and your Father, with their God and Savior
and yours; I mean your Holy Children and Friends whom you dearly Love?

The Primitive Church was wont to Solemnize the Funerals of Holy Persons, with
singing Psalms and Hymns of Praise to God, for their deliverance and felicity
obtained by dying: And shall we refuse to be comforted, for the death of those
who sleep in Jesus, and desired to do so; as if in this Life only we had Hope
in Christ?

Something it is true, of Grief and Sorrow must be allowed to Nature, Duty,
Custom, and contracted Friendship, and the Honor of the deceased: for they are
reckoned to dye miserable, who are hurled into the Grave without the attendance
of a Sigh, or Tear, or Funeral Lamentation. But our assurance of the future
Glory they possess with Christ, (which they themselves preferred to a longer
abode on Earth) should wipe our Eyes, and prevent excess. We mourn that they
are gone, and desire their company; but we know, they do not wish themselves
back again for the sake of ours; no, they are gone to better Friends above,
than those they have left below. And were it not for the weakness of our Faith
and Hope, in reference to the invisible world; were it not for the remaining
Power of unmortified Selfishness, and our immoderate Love of this present Life;
were it not for the remisness of our Love to Christ, and the blessed Saints; we
could not but desire to be with them, rather than wish that they should be
longer with us.

Therefore instead of an intemperate Mourning at their departure, let us
imitate their Examples, and propound their holy Lives and Deaths as our Pattern
and Encouragement.

. 1. SInce the Honor of Gods Grace may be very much advanced by our taking
notice of the Influence and power of it in Believers: Since to praise and
imitate the holy actions of our departed Friends, is the only Communion we can
now have with them; and their Example, though they are dead, may yet speak to
the Instruction and comfort of the Living; I shall conclude with some brief
Account of that Excellent Person, whose decease gave occasion to our present
Meeting.

. 2. And knowing the usual Flattery of Funeral Orations, I shall pass over the
Advantages of her Birth, the Credit of her Family, the Sweetness of her Temper,
(the best Soil for the Fruits of the Spirit;) and the many other natural and
acquired Accomplishments, which rendered her Amiable to all that knew her; and
only mention some Passages, that may either magnify the Grace of God, or be
proper for our imitation and encouragement: And therein shall deliver nothing,
but either upon my own knowledge, or from the particular Account I have
received from her nearest Relations, and those Reverend Ministers, who assisted
with their Prayers and Counsel during her Sickness.

. 3. Through the Blessing of God on a pious Education, and other means of
Grace, and in answer to the fervent Prayers of her holy Parents, for the
fulfilling of God's Covenant Promise to them and to their seed; we have great
reason to believe that she had chosen the Favor of God as her Felicity and
End, almost as soon as she was capable of making a deliberate choice.

. 4. And a Life of Seventeen years, (whereof so great a part is lost by Infancy
and Childhood) is certainly very short for the growth and ripening of such
fruits of the Spirit as she discovered. A Time and Age, when Vice and Vanity
are wont to blossom and sprout forth in others. When the Thoughts of Death and
Judgment are usually rejected as unwelcome Intruders before their Time; and
serious preparation for it deferred to a reputed more Convenient Season.

. 5. But before that Age, her diligent and delightful reading of the Holy
Scripture, and valuation of it above other Books, was very admirable and
exemplary. Making this Bread of Life her daily food, and tasting such
sweetness, and reaping such benefit by it, that even at midnight, while others
slept, she would often spend several hours in reading the Bible: Lamenting on
her deathbed the Loss of Time by other Books; which could not assist her to a
better understanding of her duty, and the mind of God, or take off her
Affections from the Love of this World, and prepare her Soul for the Heavenly
Glory.

. 6. Notwithstanding this secret serious Piety, her Humility and Modesty was
such, as not to make a great noise and show to others, as if the Form of
Godliness were the principal or only thing to be regarded.

. 7. For several weeks before her last Sickness, she was observed less to
regard the World than formerly; more Seriously to be devoted to God; and more
to dislike vain Company, and idle Talk, especially if it carried with it a
Tendency and design to disparage others: and in all respects so to demean her
self, as if she had received some secret Revelation from God, that her Time
would be but short, and her change was near.

. 8. Though before she fell sick, she was fearful enough of that The small Pox.
Disease, whereof she dyed, yet having taken her Bed, and knowing the
Distemper, she professed her self entirely willing to acquiesce in the will of
God. And was displeased with any who would have tampered with her Face, or
discoursed to that purpose.

. 9. Yea during the whole three weeks of her Sickness, she continued in such a
frame; notwithstanding the loathsomeness of the Disease; notwithstanding the
Troublesome Prescriptions of Physicians; notwithstanding her own Pains, of
which, her Constitution, Breeding and Age considered, she could not but be very
apprehensive. And with an admirable Patience and resignation to the will of
God, with a great contempt of the Vanities of this World, and an holy
Indifference even to Life it self, she desired to Depart: And that not merely
to be eased of her Pain, but to be with Christ, and the blessed Society above:
or to use her own words, To be with her Heavenly and her Natural Father: And
gave this excellent reason for her desire; Least if restored to health, she
should meet with some prevailing Temptations, that might turn away her Heart
from God and Heaven: and therefore she had rather be with Christ than put it to
the Venture.

. 10. Her Victory over this World was likewise evident by the particular charge
she gave to those about her, to let some young Gentlewomen of her Acquaintance
know from her, how Contemptible the best of this World will be, when they come
to dye: and entreat them in her Name, (as her last request, and the Expression
of her special kindness to their Souls) that they would not overvalue it.

. 11. As an instance of her submission to the good pleasure of God, and
satisfaction in his order: she desired, that her Mother, and the whole Family
might join with her in singing the latter part of the 39 Psalm: I was dumb,
Ver. 9.
and opened not my mouth, because Lord thou did it. When thou with rebukes
do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume away like a
Moth. Surely every man is Vanity. Selah, etc. Which she repeated by heart
according to the Meter.

. 12. As an instance of her joyful Hope of Glory in the presence of Christ
after death, she made those who attended in her Sickness, frequently to read
over the 1 Thessalonians. 4. cap. in the close whereof, the glorious Appearance of
Christ to Judgment is set forth; and the Happiness of the Saints described,
Ver. 17, 18
by being ever with the Lord; with this addition, Wherefore comfort one another
with these words.

. 13. With the free use of her Reason, to the very last, God was pleased to
give her the great Blessing of a Tender Conscience; and therefore she did not
slightly overlook even little Failings without a penitent observation: and some
of them such as no man in a judgment of Charity would reckon sinful. Every
thing that looked like undutifulness to her Mother, she heartily begged her
Pardon for; though nothing considerable of that kind can be remembered to make
her need forgiveness: thankfully owning the strictness of her Education, the
seasonable Reproofs of a discreet Parent, and even the abridgement of that
Liberty which other young persons take, (very often to their prejudice and
ruin) as a singular advantage and favor from Heaven.

. 14. In some part of her Sickness, she had some humble becoming doubts and
fears of her own state; but having imparted them to a Reverend Person well
acquainted in the Family, and heard his Resolutions and Answers; she was better
satisfied, and expressed her hopes of Pardon and Salvation through the
Righteousness of Christ; who loved her and washed her from her Sins in his own
Blood. Yea so far was she from questioning the goodness of God, and the truth
of his Promise; so far from doubting of the alsufficiency of Christ's Mediation,
the Merit of his Sacrifice, and his willingness to receive returning Sinners:
that the believing thoughts of it were her greatest support and joy; saying
often in the time of her Sickness, That though her sins were as Scarlet, Is.
1.18.
God could make them Snow: though red like Crimson, they should be as Wool.

. 15. Moreover, she did thankfully acknowledge the Mercies of God to her in the
former part of her Life: whereof she had very many, both Personal and Relative.
And particularly desired, that Thanks might be returned to God for his singular
goodness to her during her Sickness.

. 16. She was very desirous of Prayer to God on her behalf; and very joyful
and well pleased when she had it: and being at any time ask't what particular
request she desired should be made to God for her: she mentioned not her
Recovery and the lengthening of her days; but the forgiveness of Sin through
the Merit of her Redeemer; an humble submission to Gods disposal; and a
prepared heart to acquiesce in his appointment. And so in one sense she was
full of days, though she dyed very young: being satiated with the Time she had
lived on Earth; and not importunate for a longer stay.

. 17. Within a few hours before her dissolution, (of the approach whereof she
was more apprehensive than those about her) she was very desirous that a worthy
Minister whom she named, Mr. S. F.
might immediately be sent for, to commend her Soul to God: Who accordingly
came, though at Midnight. She her self joined in that last Office with great
seriousness and affection; and afterward returned him her hearty thanks for his
great kindness therein, saying, Now I have nothing more to do, but to dye: Only
requested him not to leave the house that night, as knowing, that his Company
and Counsel might administer to the support of her Affectionate Mother, and
other Relations, whom she should leave in sorrow, though she her self was
passing to Eternal Joy.

. 18. After which she composed her self to rest, and refused every thing that
was offered her to take, making Signs with her hand, of her unwillingness to be
disturbed.

. 19. In that short space of her Continuance, which was not an hour, she was
heard to say, Be gone, Satan! Be gone! Thou art a Liar from the Beginning, and
the Father of Lies. O come Lord Jesus. And soon after she said, He is Come, he
is Come: And so fell asleep, as in the Arms of her dearest Savior, or as the
Jews Report of Moses, That he dyed with the Kiss of God.

O Death! where is now thy Sting? O Grave! where is now thy Victory? The sting
of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law: But thanks be to God, who
has given us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ: And Blessed are the
Dead, that Thus dye in the Lord.

. 20. Would to God, that the Account here given, might effectually convince us,
of the great difference between the Death of the Holy and the Unholy, of the
Righteous and the Sinner: Might convince us, of the great Blessing of holy
Parents, and a good Education; and encourage Parents to be diligent and
faithful, to be serious, prudent and affectionate, in the Education of their
Children; because such a deportment is most likely to be owned by God with the
desired Success.

And Convince us likewise of the Vanity of Youth, the shortness of our Lives,
the uncertainty of our Time, the nearness of our Change, the necessity,
reasonableness and manifold advantages of Remembering our Creator in our younger
Years: And withal might hasten our Preparations, and spirit our Desires to
depart and be dissolved, whenever God shall call us. That following their
Example who by Faith and Patience are gone to inherit the Promises, We may at
length meet those Precious Souls above, who are gone before us; that with them,
and all the Children of the Kingdom, we may be for ever with the Lord, which is
Best of all.

FINIS.

