THE Mourners Companion: OR, Funeral DISCOURSES ON Several Texts.

BY JOHN SHOWER.

ECCL. vii. 2. It is better to go the House of Mourning, than to go to the
House of Feasting, for that is the End of all Men, and the Living will lay it
to heart.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for J. Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey, and A.
Chandler at the Chyrurgeons Arms at the Entrance into Bartholomews-Close in
Aldersgate Street, 1692.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
'TWill be generally granted that Funeral Discourses are more like to affect
than ordinary Sermons, because of the fresh Instances and Examples, which give
occasion to 'em. If the matter be Instructive and Awakening, Practical, and
Serious, they may be of singular Advantage to the Relations and Acquaintance of
the Deceased; and of some unto other Reders, because the Living know that they
shall dye. I am not without Hope that these may be of some use to the Friends
and Relatives, at least, of the Deceased Persons. This is sufficient to
satisfy me, whatever Censures I may incurr, that I do well to publish 'em.

I know this Nation abounds with good Books of practical Divinity, beyond any
other in the World, and I rejoice in it. Methinks it ought to be a real
Pleasure to a Good Man, to see the various Editions of some plain, practical
useful Books, because we may conclude that there are many thousands in England
who relish and read such Books, or so many would never sell.

It might be expected, that I should have said somewhat more particular of the
Person, whose Death occasioned the first Discourse. Her Acquaintance may think
many things Praiseworthy in her Character, and Conversation, will accuse my
silence. But my Relation and Affection, according to the common Custom and
Usage of the Word, made it unfit for me: (and my Brother Spademan by his
Funeral Sermon, which is here added, has made it now less needful;) tho I must
say, that Custom has this Inconvenience attending it, that the only way almost
by which we can attain to the true Knowledge of any Persons Character, is
thereby become an Argument against the publishing it.

I shall only request of him that Reads, as a Friend who desires thy Salvation,
as ever thou hopest for the Comforts of a Dying man, or wilt answer it to God
and Conscience at last, that thou learn by these Discourses, to Retire now and
then, seriously to bethink thy self of thy own Death; which is as certain as
the Death of any of those, whose Funeral thou have attended, or whose Funeral
Sermon thou have heard or read: And beg of God the Wisdom to consider thy
Latter End, and Prepare to follow: And then be true to God, and thy own
Conscience, resolvedly to Act and Live in that manner, that such thoughts shall
suggest to be wisest and most necessary. Do not refuse or deny me this, as thou will answer it to thy Judge, who may summon thee before his Bar in an hour
which thou think not of. Farewell.

J. S.

THE CONTENTS.
Disc. 1. OF Mourning for the Dead, from Ezekiel. 24.16. Son of Man, I will take
away the Desire of thine Eyes with a stroke, and thou shall not mourn, or weep,
neither shall thy tears run down -- Since enlarged. Disc. 2. Prepare to Follow,
from Mat. 24.44. Therefore, Be you also Ready -- In two Sermons. Disc. 3. The
Saints Desire to be with Christ, from Phil. 1.23. I desire to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ, which is far Better. Disc. 4. Sickness and Death for the
Glory of Christ, from John 11.4. This Sickness is not unto Death, but for the
Glory of God, that the Son of Man may be glorified thereby.
The Reader is desired to correct a few of the most considerable Errata.
PAge 8. l. ult. t. (...). p. 91. l. 21. after have r. or. p. 40. l. 7. (...)
reckon r. upon. p. 45. l. 24. for Change r. Chance, (...). p. 46. l. 28. for
Disease r. Decease, p. 61. l. ult. for deca r. decima, p. 63. l. ult. for
Knowledge of God r. Divine Life.

OF MOURNING FOR THE DEAD: OR, A DISCOURSE

FROM EZEKIEL. 24.16, 17, 18. Son of Man, behold, I take away from thee the desire
of thine eyes with a stroke; yet neither shall thou mourn nor weep, neither
shall thy tears run down: Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind
the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover
not thy lips, and eat not the bread of Men: So I spoke unto the people in the
morning, and at even my Wife dyed: --

By JOHN SHOWER.

Being the first Sermon he Preached after the death of his Wife, Mrs. Elizabeth
Shower: Who departed this Life Aug. 24. 1691.

LONDON, Printed for J. Dunton and A. Chandler. 1691.

Of Mourning for the Dead. How far allowable, etc.
FROM EZEKIEL. 24.16, 17, 18. Son of Man, behold, I take away from thee the Desire
of thine Eyes with a stroke: yet neither shall thou mourn nor weep, neither
shall thy Tears run down. Forbear to cry, make no Mourning for the Dead, bind
the Tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy Shoes upon thy Feet, and cover
not thy Lips, and eat not the bread of Men. So I spoke unto the People in the
Morning, and at Even my Wife dyed. --


COnsidering what I have Formerly preached and published for the Assistance of
other Mourners, you will easily believe, that since the late Providence which
occasions this Discourse, that passage of Eliphaz to Job has often been
suggested to me, Chap. 4. v. 3, 4, 5. Behold thou have instructed many, and
have strengthened the weak hands. Thy words have upholden him that was falling,
and thou have strengthened the feeble knees: But now it is come upon thee, and
thou faintest; it touches thee, and thou art troubled. Through the Mercy of God,
I hope, I do not murmur or faint; but should it be thought strange, that I am
Troubled, when the Desire of mine Eyes is removed by a sudden stroke? Would it
not be faulty and provoking to be otherwise affected? to disregard the Hand of
God? despise his Chastening? or be unconcerned at the Voice of his Rod? How
far, and how long, and to what degree to mourn, I confess, is a matter of some
Difficulty; to keep within the Christian limits, so as neither to offend God,
nor lay a Stumbling Block before the less judicious, or less candid Observers.
And of like difficulty is it, rightly to understand and use the proper grounds
of support under such an Exercise. For Experience will attest, that diverse
things are wont to be offered for our Relief in such cases, that will by no
means administer it, but are weak and ineffectual to any such Purpose. Tho
thanks be to God the Gospel does not leave us destitute of sufficient
Instructions, to direct our Mourning, to regulate our Funeral Sorrows, and
sustain our Souls in an humble submissive Adoration of the Divine Good
Pleasure. Some of these I shall endeavor to recollect, after I have considered
the extraordinary Instance of this Text; where we find the Prophet Ezekiel is
forbidden by God to mourn for the death of his Wife; having received an express
order not to testify his Affection by any of the Funeral Rites, and Customs of
Mourning, used among the Jews on the like Occasion. Also the Word of the Lord
came unto me, saying, Son of Man, behold, I take away from thee the Desire of
thine Eyes with a stroke, yet neither shall thou mourn nor weep, neither shall
thy Tears run down: --

For the better understanding of this Passage, you must know, that this Prophet
had for several years published the orders of God, and denounced Judgments in
his Name unto Judah and Jerusalem; but without the desired fruit of his
Ministry, without the success of his important Messages and Commission. The
generality of the People applauded his Rhetoric, but continued to do after the
Lusts of their Hearts, and the sight of their Eyes; and would not hearken to
his repeated Calls to Repentance; or be awakened by the most awful Threatenings
of approaching Calamity. Hereupon God resolves to take another Method, and try
if his Sufferings would not be instructive unto those to whom his Preaching had
been little so. The Prophet himself should be a Sign unto 'em: and the
surprising Death of his Wife be made a Warning of what God would do against
that Nation. And his not being permitted to mourn for her, should signify the
Uxcrem nolo lugeas, ut signisices in maximis malis con vacaturum Ipsis ut
lugeant. Grotius.
Extremity of that Judgment, which would quickly overtake them: and represent
the Horror of their Distress, that they should not have leave, or opportunity
to perform Funeral Rites, or make a regular mourning for their Dead Relations.
The following part of the Chapter declares this to be the general scope and
meaning of this Passage.

Wherein we may consider, First, The Literal Sense of the words, in relation to
this Prophet. Secondly, The Parabolical meaning of them in relation to the
People of the Jews. Thirdly, The Practical Improvement of this Instance, as to
Ordinary Cases of the Death of Relations, and Mourning for 'em. The former will
tell us what these Expressions signify in themselves: the Second what they
were designed by God to represent to the Jews; which will make way for what may
be instructive from both, whenever God takes away the Desire of our Eyes, by
Sickness, or any other stroke.

Under the First Enquiry we may take notice of three things. 1. The Title here
given to the Prophet, Son of Man. 2. The Calamity threatened, Behold, I take
away the Desire of thine Eyes with a stroke. 3. The Prohibition in that case,
not to mourn or weep, or use the ordinary Expressions of Funeral Sorrow.

First, This Title, of Son of Man, we find given him almost an hundred times in
this Prophecy. That it should be given him as a Type of Christ, who is so often
called the Son of Man, I know no sufficient reason to prove, for that
Appellation seems to have respect to his Mediatory Office, as that true Son of
Man, or promised Seed, who was to bruise the Serpents head; and not only to be
the Savior of Israel, but a light to the Gentiles, and allied unto all
Mankind: Unto whom all Power and Authority is given, and all Judgment
Committed, because he is the Son of Man, Joh. 5. It may either referr to his
mean Original and frailty, as a Son of Adam; (whose Body was formed out of the
dust of the ground, and must return to it; which might help to prevent his
being lifted up by the extraordinary Visions and Revelations God had favored
him with:) that he might not think of himself above what was meet; 2 Cor. 12.7.
or count it strange, that he should be called to so difficult a Service, and
proved by such an afflicting Stroke, since he was but a Son of Adam. Or the
expression may Cameronis Prelect. ad 16 Matthew. 27.
import no more but simply O man, which is usual in all Languages, when a
Superior directs his discourse to an Inferior. So Romans 9.20.

Secondly, N. The Calamity threatened by God, I take away the Desire of thine
eyes with a stroke. By a Plague, or Apoplexy, or some very surprising more
immediate Hand of God; such as the Firstborn of the Egyptians were smitten
with, Exodus 12.29. where the word is used, The Desire, or (...).
Desires of thine Eyes, as the Septuagint Translation renders it; who this was
the eighteenth verse tells us. So I spoke unto the people in the morning, and
at Even my Wife dyed. It Is manifestly supposed that she had many qualifications
to render her Desirable, and make the loss exceedingly afflictive: otherwise
the dreadful Calamity that was coming upon the Jews would not have been
properly represented by it. If the Spirit of God had not reckoned this Instance
to have been one of the most smarting and afflictive of all private and
particular losses, it could not have been fitly made use of here. If the loss
of a tender Parent, or of a beloved Child, or any other Relation, had been
superior or equal to this, the death of some or other of those Relations would
rather have been mentioned instead of this.

It may therefore be thought reasonable, that when the Inferior Priests were
forbidden under the Law to defile themselves for the Dead, save only for their
nearest kindred, Levit. 21.3, 4. that the Wife must be comprehended, tho not
expressed. Allowance being given them to mourn for a Father or Mother, a
Brother or Sister, a Son or Daughter, this Relation is much more supposed, for
whose sake a Man is to leave all others. It were needless to tell him, he might
afflict himself in that case, when it is granted as to the lesser, and more
remote Relatives. The Margin of some Bibles would intimate it was forbidden
unto a Priest, being an Husband among his People, to defile himself by Funeral
Mourning for his Wife; but it may better be read, He shall not defile himself
for a Chief man or Magistrate, among his People, therefore much less might he
do so for any other, save his nearest Kindred and Relations. The general reason
of such Dr. Spencer de Riti^us Jud. lib. 1. cap. 7.. 2.
a Prohibition seems to have been, to keep up the Reputation and Respect due to
the Sacred Office and Ministry, which by being ordinarily present at Funeral
Solemnities, might have been lessened: that he might not, (being a public
person, and employed about the worship of God) by any sorrowful indecorous
Ceremonies disparage his Office, or lessen his Dignity, and esteem among the
people; for it follows, v. 6. They shall be holy unto their God, and not
profane the Name of God. i. e. They are peculiarly separated for the service of
God, and the Offices of Religion, and obliged to greater strictness and Purity
than others; it does not therefore become them to do as others on the like
occasions, lest the honor of God's Name and Worship should by that means be
abated. For all that were employed about, or assisted at Funerals, by the
Ceremonial Law must needs be Unclean; not only by touching a dead Body, but
abiding in the same House, or eating of the Funeral Banquet, etc. Number. 19 So
that if the Priests had been allowed to be ordinarily present at Funerals, and
comply with the usual Rites and Customs of Mourning, they must either neglect
their Sacred Work, or perform some part of it with polluted hands. And because
the Unclean were not to converse with others, till after their purification,
this would have been a public Inconvenience to the People, unto whom by their
Office they were to be serviceable on all occasions. Upon the like reason it is
required of the Nazarites, or such as separated themselves to the Lord by a
Vow, Number. 6.6, 7. He should not make himself unclean, no not for his kindred,
if they dye. The Service of God to which he was so particularly devoted, was to
be preferred before any Expressions of his Affection to his own Relations. And
doubtless so far as these Testimonies of our Love to deceased Relatives would
hinder us from, or in, our Sacred work, even Ministers under the Gospel are
obliged to endeavor to deny themselves. Which is the principal ground of my
not desisting from preaching as formerly, any longer than my imperfect health
obliged me to.

Thirdly, Here is a Prohibition of Mourning, according to the usual expressions
of Funeral Sorrow. First, It is more generally laid down. Secondly, by an
Enumeration of some of the most solemn Rites used by the Jews on such
occasions. Bind the Tire of thine head upon thee, put on thy Shoes upon thy
feet, cover not thy Lips, and eat not the bread of Mourners.

First, The Prohibition is expressed in more general Terms: Thou shall not
mourn, or weep, or let thy Tears run down: forbear to cry, make no mourning for
the Dead. Though some of the Valor. Max. l. 2. c 6.
Heathens refused to make solemn Mourning for their Dead, yet many of them in
the Neighborhood of Judea, were very extravagant and Superstitious in such
things. And the Jews, too apt to imitate the Pagan Rites, are often reproved on
that account, and have many particular Institutions of their Law to prevent
their symbolizing with the Gentiles, Lev. 19.27. Chap. 21.5. Deuteronomy. 14.1, 2.
etc. And some of the Heathen being immoderate in their Sorrow for the Dead, may
probably be referred to, in those Laws of God by Moses, which make the persons
to be unclean, who touched a dead Body, or came into the House, etc. God would
put such a note upon it, the better to keep up their Faith, and Hope of the
Resurrection of the Dead, which the Custom of excessive Mourning might by
degrees have lessened.

The time of Mourning among the Jews was sometimes longer, sometimes shorter,
according to the Dignity and Quality of the Person deceased. We read of
Mourning for the Dead, ordinarily seven days, and sometimes for a month, or
thirty days. Among the Diod. Sic. l. 2. c. 3. 5. Genesis 50. c. 3.
Egyptians for seventy days, Genesis 50.10. Deuteronomy. 21.13. Number. 20.29. Deuteronomy. 34.8. 1 Samuel 31. ult.
among the Herberts Travels. l. 2. p. 238. For the time and manner of Mourning
among the Jews, see Buxtorf. of Synag. Jud. c. 29. Steph. Menochio, Economia
Christiana. l. 8. c. 2. Schickardi Jus Regium Hebr. c. 6. theor. 19. Joseph.
Antiq. Jud. l. 4. c. 8. Dr. Lightfoot in Math. 19.23. and Joh. 11.19. 2d. Vol.
Persians seven. Among the Romans the time of Mourning ordinarily lasted but
Nine Days; as appears by their Novendial, or Nine Days Sacrifices; which they
offered to the Manes or Ghosts of the Dead: Though Rosin. Antiq. Romans l. 5. c.
39. Polyd Virgil, de Justis Parental. l. 6. c. 9, 10.
some of them continued it longer, for Ten Months, or a Year; which time, on
many particular Occasions, was to be contracted, and afterward was left to
Discretion and Inclination.

But says God, Thou shall not Mourn, or WEEP. The word signifies Weeping with
lifting up the Voice. He must not vent his Sorrow, or ease his Heart by Tears,
or Sighs, or Cries: For it follows, Forbear to Cry, make no Mourning for the
Dead. i. e. Do not Lament, and Sigh, or lift up thy Voice; but restrain and
curb thy Sorrows, and all the ordinary Expressions of them. There were solemn
mourning Lamentations among the Jews: Thus for Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35.24. It is
threatened against Jehojachim, That they should not lament for him, when he
died, Jer. 22.18. saying, Ah! my Brother! And the contrary promised as a Favor
to Zedekiah, Jer. 34.5. The first solemn Lamentation, or Cry, was at the
Closing of the Eyes, by those who had assisted the Deceased, during that last
Sickness: And then by those Relations, unto whom the first News came of such a
Person's Death. They lift up their Voice, and with Cries and Tears repeated
several times the Name of the Deceased. Thus did David, when he received the
Tidings of Absalom's Death: O my Son, Absalom! my Son, my Son Absalom! would to
God I had died for thee, O Absalom my Son, my Son! 2 Samuel 18.33. There was
likewise a Solemn Lamentation before the Burial, in the presence of the dead
Body, or before the Effigies of it, exposed in a public place: Which is
called, Mourning over the Dead. This the Jews should not be allowed, says God,
concerning their own Children slain by the Sword, Ver. 23. of this Chapter.

It was also Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 3. c. 15. Bellonius de Mendicato bectu.
Such Women hired to lament at Funerals the Geeeks also had. Plato de Leg. Dial.
7.
customary to hire Persons on purpose, who were to act the part of Mourners,
artificially to express, and to excite to Sorrow; to provoke and assist Grief,
by their Lamentations, and Funeral Songs. Such we read of, Jer. 9.17. under the
Name of the Mourning Women, and Cunning Women, and such as are skilful of
Lamentation, Amos 5.16. By mournful Postures and Actions, tearing their Hair,
and beating their Breasts, forcing Tears, and by doleful Tunes assisting the
Sorrow of the Mourning Relations. These Lamentations were often in Verse;
insomuch that what we translate to Lament and Wail, in diverse Passages may be
rendered to Sing, Ezekiel. 32.18. Mic. 2.4. etc. So David wept over Jonathan and
Saul, and lamented over them, 2 Samuel 1.18. and bad them teach the Children of
Israel the Use of the Bow: Which some will have to be a Musical Instrument,
used on such Occasions; though it is more probable, that by the Use of the Bow,
he meant to match the Philistines in Archery, and so to be avenged for Readiness
Death; for by their Archery he was slain: Or in general, the Use of the
Philistines Arms, whereof the Bow was one of the Chief: and in that Song
Jonathan is commended for his Dexterity in it: Because in the Old Testament we
read of no Musical Instruments made use of in Mourning; but 'twas ordinary
among the Gentiles, of whom the Jews did afterward learn it. See Dr. Lighfoot
in Loc.
Accordingly we read of Minstrels in the Ruler's House, on the Death of his
Daughter, Mat. 9.23. Which Custom it is supposed the Jews had not, till after
Palestine was subject to the Roman Empire.

Secondly, After the general Prohibition, there is an Enumeration of some
particular Rites, which, among many others, were wont to be used in such Cases.
Several of these are mentioned in Chap. 27.29, 30, 31. One of the ancient
(...), etc. Non comam laniabo; non vestes scindam; non carnes ungaibus
lacerabo; non luctus excitabo; non luctus socias accersam; non tenebras
concluda^^, ut ipse quoque aer mecum lugeat; non Consolatores expectabo; non
Panem Lugubrem apponam. Greg. Nazianzen. 22 Orat. in Macchab. laudem.
Writers of the Church, in an Oration concerning the Macchabees, brings in
their Mother refusing and disclaiming all the ordinary methods of Mourning for
her Sons; among which, these in the Text are particularly named.

I. Bind the tire of thine head upon thee. The Expression of Grief and Sorrow,
by the Hair, was different, according to what was the Custom of wearing it at
other times. And therefore the Jews, who were accustomed to long Hair, and used
to tie it up in the Form of a Crown or Mitre; not only for Ornament, but
Covering, Sopranis in Davidem Commentar. Digress. 1. de r^ Vestiaria Jud. Disp.
2. Et Digr. 2. de publ. and priv. Luctu. Mercer. in Job 1.20.
either let it hang loose, in a time of Mourning, after a careless neglected
manner; or plucked off a good part of it, or caused it to be shaven. And having
made their Heads bare in deep Mourning, did sometimes throw Job. 2.12. Josh.
7.6. 2 Samuel 1.2. Nehem. 9.1. Lam. 2.10.
Ashes upon their Heads; which, mingling with their Tears, dissigur'd their
Countenance, and gave it a rueful Aspect. Thus Job, upon the News of his
Childrens Death, shaved his Head, or caused his Hair to be cut off, Chap. 1.20.
But because the Jews were forbidden to imitate the Heathen Spencer. Ib. l. 2.
c. 12, 13. de lege Tonsuram Orbic. probibente.
in rounding the corners of their Heads, etc. Ezra, as a Testimony of his
Sorrow, only plucked off some of the Hair of his Head, and of his Beard, Chap.
9.3. Thus the Leper was obliged to make bare his Head, Lev. 13.45. Hence is
Lev. 10.6. Ezekiel. 7.18. Jer. 16.6. Chap. 41.5.
Baldness so often joined with Mourning and Weeping. Cut off thine Hair, O
Jerusalem! cast it away, and take up a Lamentation -- Jer. 7.29. for the Lord
has rejected, and forsaken thee. The like Amos 8.10. I will turn your Songs
into Lamentations: I will bring Baldness upon every Head, and will make it as
the mourning for an only Son. So Mic. 1.16. O Judea, and Israel! make thee
Bald, and poll thee, for thy delicate Children: enlarge thy Baldness as the
Eagle, for they are gone into Captivity. Tear off thy Hair, or shave it, and
make thy Baldness greater than usual. As the Eagle, when she has lost her
Feathers, as at certain times they do, Bochart. de Animal. part. 2. l. 2. c. 1.
See more of this Gustom, Geier, de Ebraorum luctu. c. 8. sect. 8.
unless some particular Kind of 'em, that is naturally Bald, be alluded to. But
the Prophet is here forbidden to make himself Bald, or shave his Hair: Bind the
tire of thine head upon thee.

II. Put on thy Shoes upon thy Feet. It was a Token of Sorrow to walk
barefoot: As David, when he fled from Absalom, and went up the afcent of Mount
Olivet, 2 Samuel 15.30. It was used at Funeral Geir. Ib. c. 15.
Solemnities: And it is the Custom of the Cerem. and Cout. des Juiss
d'aujourdhuy, p. 5. c. 9.
Modern Jews, when they return from the Funeral of a near Relation, after
having taken off their Shoes, to sit down on the Ground for Seven Days: But
says God to the Prophet, Put on thy shoes upon thy feet.

III. And cover not thy Lips. They were wont in deep Mourning to cover the Lip,
the Mouth, and the Chin; but especially the Upper-Lip. Sometimes the whole
Head; as when David wept, and went barefoot, he also covered his Head. The
covering of the Face may be meant by such an Expression. Thus we read, Mic.
3.7. The Seers shall be ashamed, and the Diviners shall be confounded; they
shall all Cover their Lips, because there is no Answer from God: because his
Providence contradicted their lying Predictions. So the Lepers were to cover
their Lips; not only to prevent the Contagion of their infectious Breath, but
as a Sign of Mourning, Lev. 13.45. But cover not thy Lips, says God to Ezekiel.

IV. Nor eat the Bread of Men, or the Bread of Mourners, of afflicted,
sorrowful Men, as the word signifies. It was customary among the Jews, to send
in provisions to eat with the nearest Kindred and Relations of the deceased. It
was designed for the solace and refreshment of the Mourners, who concerned not
themselves to get their own sood, but had it thus sent home to 'em. Of this we
read Jer. 16.7. Neither shall men tear themselves for them in Mourning, or (it
may be better rendered) neither shall men break Bread for them in Mourning, to
comfort them; neither shall men give them the Cup of Consolation to drink, for
their Father, or Mother. All manner of Food is expressed by Bread, and both the
Food, and the Guests were all Unclean in such a case, Lev. 19.11, 14. which the
Prophet alludes to Hos. 9.4. Their Sacrisices shall be unto them, as the Bread
of Mourners, all that eat thereof shall be polluted. The Cerem. etc. des Juifs,
etc. Ib. du Datil.
Jews in the Levant, and other places, do observe the like Custom to this day:
and send in provisions to the House of Mourning, every Morning and Evening, for
seven days together, and sometimes come and eat with them. Almost such a Tho.
Gatakeri Adversaria. c. 6.
Banquet is described Job 42.11. when Job's Kindred and Acquaintance came to
eat bread with him, and to bemoan him. But says God to this Prophet, Thou
shall not eat the Bread of Men, not taste of a Funeral Banquet, or the bread of
Mourners, as is usual for others to do.

Accordingly, we find he did not Mourn, or weep, or shed a Tear, or lift up a
Mourning cry, or cover his head, or put off his Shoes, or cover his Lips, or
eat the Bread of Mourners, or drink the Wine of Consolation for the deceased,
or express any token of Grief. But as he had acquainted the people, that this
Calamity should befall him, and this should be his Deportment, the next
morning, he tells them, it was actually come to pass, and that God had thus
forbad him to mourn. Which being so unexpected and surprising, could not but
put them upon considering, what should be the meaning of so extraordinary a
passage, v. 18.19, 25, 26. So I spoke unto the people in the Morning, and at
Even my Wise dyed, and I did as I was commanded. And the People said unto me,
Will thou not tell us, what these things are to us, that thou do so? And
then he tells them, what God would do against 'em, and how they should not be
able to use the customary Rites of Mourning, no more than he: Thus Ezekiel is
unto you a sign, v. 25. According to all that he has done, shall you do: And
when it comes to pass, you shall know that I am the Lord: for I will take from
them their strength, the Joy of their Glory, the desire of their Eyes, and that
whereupon they set their minds, their Sons and Daughters, etc.

II. Having considered the literal meaning of this passage, as to the Prophet,
you must know, that how severe soever this stroke was to him, thus to lose the
Desire of his Eyes, in that sudden and surprising manner, it has a Typical,
Parabolical meaning; and was designed by God, not so much (if at all) as a
Token of his Displeasure against the Prophet, as a sign of approaching
Judgments on the Jewish Nation. It was usual with God to instruct this People,
and the Ten Tribes, by parabolical. Actions, and Examples, as well as by Verbal
Messages, Hos. 12.10. I have spoken by my Prophets, I have multiplied Visions,
and I have used Similtudes by the Hands of the Prophets, i. e. various Emblems,
and Representations of my Mind, I have formerly given them: Instructive
warnings of several sorts I have sent unto them. Thus the Prophet Isaiah, and
his Sons were given for a Sign and Wonder to the House of Israel, from the Lord
of Hosts, Isa. 8.8. their very Names were Prophetical, and significative of
future events, Chapter 7.3. and 8. Chapter 3, 4. Thus Isaiah walked barefoot three
years for a sign and a wonder to Egypt and Ethiopia, to represent the Captive
miserable condition they should be brought into, Isa. 20.3. He went abroad
without his upper Garments, after the manner of 1 Samuel 19.24. 2 Samuel 6.20,
Prisoners and Slaves, for men are said to be naked when they are ill clad, Job
22.6. we read of stripping the naked of their clothing. Captives and Mourners
are likewise wont to put off their upper Garments, 2 Samuel 15.30. Jer. 2.25.
thus was he to walk for three years, to denote the duration of that Calamity.

This Prophet Ezekiel was likewise to give an Emblem of that Judgment the Text
referrs to, by the removal of his stuff, etc. Chap. 12.15, 16, 17. digging
through a Wall, as if a Watch had been set at the door, and all ordinary
Passages blocked up: to signify the extremity of their distress, when every
one will be willing to put a helping hand. He was to bear it on his shoulders,
as Servants that carry Burdens, to represent the Servitude and Slavery to which
the Jews should be reduced. And this in the Evening, or Twilight, to denote the
stealing away of the King, Nobles, and Men of War, by Night, 2 Kings 25.4. He
was to cover his face, that he should not see the ground, as filled with shame,
and unwilling to be known: thus was he to be a Sign unto the house of Israel:
for the signification of this refers to them of Jerusalem, whose Desolation and
Captivity was now at hand. Which Calamity, they, who were already Captives in
Babylon, had escaped, v. 9. This Burden concerned the Prince of Jerusalm, and
of all the house of Israel, that were among them. As the Prophet had done, so
should it be done unto them. And accordingly it came to pass, for the King
Zedekiah escaped out of Jerusalem with a burden on his Shoulders, as if he were
some common and ordinary Person, digging through a Wall, and escaping in the
Twilight, but is taken by his Enemies, his Sons slain before his face, and his
own eyes put out, and he is led into Captivity, and there remains a Prisoner
till he Dies. In this was Ezekiel unto them a Sign.

He was so likewise by this passage in the Text, which was one of the last
Prophetic warnings before the destruction of Jerusalem, and the last great
Captivity of Judah and Benjamin by Nebuchadnezzar See Jos. Antiq. Jud. l. 10.
c. 10. Jac. Vssiri Cronol. Sacra, etc.
. It was within two years of it. And it is observable, that the tenth month, 2
King 25.1. Jer. 50.3. chapter 52.4. and 5.
and the tenth day of the month, when this Prophet, (a Captive then in
Babylon,) received this Message from God, at the same time, the same day of the
month, Nebuchadnezzar began to lay siege to Jerusalem. Within two years after
this, is the last great Captivity and Destruction of Jerusalem: the three
hundred ninety days for the house of See Contin of Mr. Pool's Annot. upon the
place.
Israel, mentioned Ezekiel. 4.5. some think now to be Accomplished. See Derodon,
Lumieres dela Raison, trait. 2. Chapter 7.
This was above a hundred and thirty years after the Destruction of Samaria,
and the Ten Tribes, by Salmanasser King of Assyria. At the very time when the
Seige began, he is told of it by God; and by the Parable of the death of his
Beloved Wife, he informs the People of the approaching destruction of their
City, and Temple, which was the Desire and Delight of their Eyes: For then God
suffered the Chaldeans to desile and destroy the Temple, the Holy and Beautiful
House, where their Fathers praised God, was burnt with Fire, and all their
pleasant things laid waste. As it is lamented by the Prophet Jeremy, Lam. 2.7.
And your Sons and your Daughters, says God, who are the Desire of your Eyes,
shall fall by the Sword, and shall perish with my polluted Sanctuary: For thus
he explains this passage in the 24, 25, verses of this Chapter. Thus Ezekiel is
unto you a Sign: according to all that he has done shall you do, and when this
comes, ye shall know that I am the Lord God. Also thou Son of Man, shall it
not be in the day, when I take from them their strength, the joy of their
glory, the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, their
Sons and their Daughters? You shall do as I have done, you shall not be able to
make a regular Mourning, you shall not cover your lips, nor eat the bread of
Men, you shall not make any solemn Lamentations, or Funeral Solemnities for
your dead Relations: So perplexing will be your distress, and so great the
multitude of the slain: but you shall pine away in your Iniquities, and though
you shall mourn inwardly, (and have cause enough to do so) you shall not dare
to show it, for fear of the Chaldeans. As is foretold by another Prophet, Jer.
16.6, 7. Both the great and the small shall dye in this Land, they shall not be
buried, neither shall men lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor make
themselves bald for them. Neither shall men tear themselves for them in
Mourning, to comfort them for the Dead, neither shall men give them the Cup of
Consolation to drink, for their Father, or for their Mother.

Thus Ezekiel was to be a Sign unto them; for tho God removed from him one of
the most valuable Blessings that could be, yet the stroke was not so severe and
afflictive unto the Prophet, but the Calamity signified by it, to come upon the
Jews, was much more dreadful.

God had long and often admonished them to repent, but they slighted his
Messages, and hated and persecuted those that brought them, despising the
Remedies, and Physicians too; so that at length he resolves to spare them no
longer, and forbids his Prophet to pray for them any more, Jer. 7.16. Therefore
pray not thou for this people, neither lift up a cry, nor pray for them,
neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee. He had charged them
at the 4. verse not to trust in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these: not to put confidence
in the Flatteries of the false Prophets, who told them that this City should
not be destroyed, nor this people go into Captivity, because of their
particular relation unto God, above all other Nations of the Earth, and because
of his special presence in the Temple; these were but lying words, which would
deceive them. For since they had polluted his Sanctuary, turned the House of
Prayer into a Den of Thieves, God would even consume his own house, and See Mr.
Lets Solomon's Temple, chap. 10.
suffer it to be burnt with fire, its Walls to be broken down, and the Vessels
of Gold and Silver, and Brass, with all its Treasure and costly Furniture, to
be carried to Babylon: Their Feast-days, and New Mons, Sabbaths, and
Solemnities, all to cease, and the very place where the Temple once stood in
it is Beauty and Glory, to become the Sterquilium Vrcis novae. Hieronym. in Isa.
64. whereof Jerome was an Eyewitness.
Dunghill of another City, called Elia. And to render this probable, he bids
them consider the ruin of Shilo, ver. 12. Go unto my place in Shilo, and see
what I have done to my house there, for the wickedness of my people Israel, 1 Samuel 4.11. Psalm. 78.61. How God forsook his Tabernacle, and delivered his
strength into Captivity; how he gave his people to the Sword, and was wroth
with his Inheritance, etc. Shilo was a City belonging to the Tribe of Ephraim;
where, before the building of Solomon's Temple, the Ark had it is usual
residence, though occasionally removed sometimes. The Ark of the Testament, which
contained the two Tables of the Law, and so testified their Covenant relation:
The Ark, which was the Glory, and the strength of Israel, the Symbol of Gods
presence with them, and the Terror of their Enemies; for the Seat of God was
between the Cherubims, which was over the Ark, where he promised to meet, and
commune with his people, Exodus 25.21. before it Sacrifices were offered; 1 Samuel
6.14. and when it set forward in the Wilderness, Moses said, Arise, O Lord, and
let thy Enemies be scattered; and when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord, to
the many thousands of Israel, Numb. 10.35. But after the Land of Canaan was
subdued, the Ark was lodged in Shilo, being removed from thence into the
Israelites Camp, 1 Samuel 4. When in the Fight against the Philistines, Ely's
Sons were slain, the Ark was taken, and Israel routed: And afterward it was
removed to another Tribe, for the wickedness of Israel, (viz.) from Ephraim to
Judah, from Shilo to the Temple at Mount Sion: which very Temple, with the Ark
it self, God here resolves to destroy, for the Iniquity of the House of Judah.
And to assure the Prophet that he would not alter his purpose, he forbids him
to pray against it. Now least the people should take it ill, that he did not
use his utmost endeavors to hinder this Calamity, or least the Prophet himself
should be discouraged, by praying to no purpose; God condescends to double and
treble the prohibition: Not to pray, not to lift up a cry, not to make
Intercession; for, says he, I will not hear. q. d. I will not repent of my
denounced Vengeance: I will not be diverted from that destruction, I have
resolved to inflict; neither shall the intercession of any others for them be
prevalent and effectual. There are six eminent Persons mentioned by name,
Jeremiah, Moses, Samuel, Noah, Job and Daniel, yet neither of them singly nor
all of them together, should prevail, by their Intercessions, to preserve
Jerusalem, or deliver the Jews from this Captivity into Babylon, Jer. 15.1.
Ezekiel. 14.16, 18, 20.

A few Verses before this Text will manifest this resolved Purpose of God,
concerning this Matter. Ver. 13, 14. In thy filthiness is lewdness: because I
have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy
filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee: I the Lord
have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do it: I will not go back,
neither will I spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and
according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, says the Lord God. q. d. Think
not that my Prophets have invented a sad Story of their own, and denounced
Judgment without my warrant; for it is I the Lord have said it. They did only
reveal my Purpose, and declare my Counsel; I will do according to their
Prediction: I that sent them, will most assuredly bring it to pass. And think
not that this Judgment is a great way off, and you need not be concerned for
any thing at such a distance; for it shall shortly come to pass, it is even at
hand. And think not that your Fortresses, and Strongholds shall be your
defense; that your City is impregnable against the force of the Chaldeans Army;
that the King of Babylon is too weak and impotent to prevail against Jerusalem;
for I my self will do it: I have Commissioned him to perform my Pleasure, and I
will assist him to execute my Threatening: And flatter not your selves, that my
Purpose may alter, and I may be entreated to delay for some time, for I will
not go back, or spare you any longer: Do not imagine, that because I have
formerly been entreated to repent, I may now be so again; for it is added, I
will not Repent: And it is but just and equal I should thus resolve; for
according to thy ways and doings thou shall be judged, says the Lord. And then
in the Text he has a Sign of all this, by the Death of his nearest Relation,
the taking away the desire of his Eyes with a stroke.

III. Having considered this Passage, as to the Literal and Parabolical sense
of it, what the Expressions signify in themselves, and what they are designed
to represent to the Jews; let us now consider how far they are Applicable to us
in ordinary Cases. For when God removed from the Prophet Ezekiel the desire of
his eyes, he forbids him to mourn or weep: But from such an extraordinary Case,
which had so plain a design, and direct reference to the Jewish Nation, we
cannot argue against all Mourning for the Dead, or Expressions of Sorrow, when
a Delightful and Beloved Relation is taken from us. No, Mournings and
Lamentations are allowed, and commendable, if we keep within the Bounds of
Reason and Religion. It is a piece of Justice to the Deceased, to Bewail them.
It is threatened as a Judgment, Jer. 21. when any Die without being Lamented:
Yea, it is said to be the Portion of the wicked from God, and the Heritage of
the Oppressor, that they are cut off, and their Widows shall not weep, Job
27.13, 14, 15.

Holy Abraham we find Lamenting and Weeping when Sarah died; (who is the first
Woman whole Burial is mentioned in Scripture, and the only Woman, the number of
whose Years are accounted there.) Though he had passed many Difficulties before,
and met with many Temptations, and been tried with many Conflicts, as leaving
his Country, hazarding his Life, obliged to Banish one beloved Son out of his
House, and commanded to Sacrifice another with his own Hands; yet we do not
read of his mourning and weeping till the Death of his beloved Sarah, Genesis
23.1, 2. neither is he here any where condemned for dropping a Tear upon this
Occasion.

But our great concern, in such Cases, is to keep within Bounds; as upright
Job, who rent his Clothes, and shaved his Head, and fell upon his Face to the
ground, when he heard the News of his Childrens Death; and yet even there he
worshipped God, and had this Testimony, That in all this he sinned not, or
charged God foolishly, Job. 1.22. For Mourn we may, and Weep we may, and Lament
we may, but not with an undue Violence, as David for Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.33. Nor
as Rachel for her Children, who refused to be comforted: Or as Rizpah, who
attended the Carcasses of her Sons, and would not be parted from them, 2 Samuel
21.10. Or as Jacob, when Joseph was missing, who will go down to the Grave to
his Son mourning, Genesis 37.35. Or as Jonah, when GOd smote his Goard, and made
it wither, Jonah. 4.8. His Spirit droopt, and he resolves to die too.

If God takes away the Joy of our Heart, and Delight of our Eyes; (such
Relations as he made so, one that from him, and by him, and in Subordination to
him, was so;) we must not yet forget our Relation to God; we must not overlook
the Designs of his Providence, or the Encouragements of his Word; we must not
Mourn as Ignorant, Hopeless Heathens, that never saw the Bible, or heard of
Christ.

I shall therefore comprize what I have to say as to this Occasion, under Two
Generals: The one of Duty, the other of Support, whenever God takes away the
desire of our Eyes with a stroke.

First, We are called, in such a Case, to consider upon what Grounds, and with
what Design, and for what Ends, it pleases God thus to Afflict and make a
Trial of his Servants. And thereby we may learn, in what manner we ought to
Regard and Improve such Dispensations. This will concern the Duty of those who
are thus exercised.

Secondly, As to Support and Comfort, for the Prevention of immodoerate Sorrow
and Mourning; I shall consider what is proper and sufficient to bear up a
Christian Spirit in such Cases; and withal take notice how vain and ineffectual
are all the little Considerations which some are wont to offer, and others to
have recourse to, for Encouragement under such Trials, without going into the
Sanctuary, and consulting the Holy Oracles.

First, When the like Case does happen, as it may to the best of Men, we are to
consider upon what Righteous Grounds, and with what Merciful Designs God does
thus afflict and prove any of us; or may do so, if as yet he has not. Though
God had imparted his secret Counsels to this Prophet, and employed him in the
most Honorable, Noble and Excellent Work, though he had been true to his
Commission, and faithfully delivered the Messages he received; pleading the
Cause of God with undaunted Courage and Resolution, notwithstanding the Hatred,
and Persecution, and Hazard of his Life, whereunto his Fidelity exposed him;
yet God thinks fit by such a stroke as this, to Afflict and Prove him, and make
him a Sign and a Warning to others.

We should not therefore wonder, as if some strange and new thing has happened
to us, when God takes from us our most desirable Relations: If he remove our
dearest Comforts, and that with very little warning: If he wound and smite us
in the Apple of our Eye; and pluck from our Embraces that which of all Earthly
Blessings our Heart is most set upon: We ought not in such Cases to say, with
Gideon, Judge. 6.13. If the Lord be with us, if he accerpt us, if he favors us,
how is it, and why is it, that this evil has befallen us? As if God were
obliged to gratify us in all our Wishes: As if he were bound to take nothing
from us that we are unwilling to part with, though it be his own, more than
ours.

My Brethren, I find it to be no such easy matter, in practical Instances, to
reconcile the belief of God's gracious Presence with smart and pressing
Afflictions. We are ready to say with the Sisters of Lazarus, Lord, if thou
had been here, my Brother had not died.

If the Lord were with us, it would have been otherwise; we are all too prone
to think and say so. Such are our mistaken Apprehensions concerning God, under
the darkness of our present state: Such is our inordinate Esteem and Affection
for Temporal Blessings: So Ignorant or Inconsiderate are we about the Design
and End of God in Afflicting us: So little do we understand, or consider that
great Revenue of Glory which God may bring to himself by our smartest Trials:
So apt are we to look back on the Comforts we have lost, and let our Thoughts
loose to aggravate our present Wants, by reviewing the Advantages we once
enjoyed, and are now deprived of: So partially, so slightly, so seldom do we
contemplate the Nature and Tenure of the Covenant of Grace, which does suppose,
and make allowance for such Visitations, and has provided for our Relief under
them: And so it comes to pass, that we are too ready to question his Fatherly
Love, by reason of such Rebukes: Not considering that whom the Lord loves, he
chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives, Heb. 12.6. But the
Usefulness and Necessity of such Providence, and the Wisdom and Faithfulness
of God therein, may be made conspicuous to a considering Mind: And it is
frequently acknowledged by the Experience of those who are exercised in this
kind, That it is no more than is needful, that we should sometimes be in
heaviness by such Dispensations: As will appear by considering a few things.

First, Such Providence are proper to Awaken Repentance, for our many
Omissions and Failings, in the Relation we stood to them whom God has taken
from us. How seriously should we reflect, Did I discharge the Duty of my Place
to such, or such a deceased Relative? Did I value and prize such a Mercy as I
ought? Did I thankfully Improve such a Blessing as I might? It is our fault and
folly, as well as our unhappiness, that we seldom know how to prize and use
such Mercies, till God has deprived us of them. And that neglect is no way to
be retrieved, but by a penitent sense of our Error, in compliance with the Call
of God: That Call of God, I mean, which he gives us by their Removal. And it is
part of the Wisdom of God's Government, to order our Trials and Afflictions,
for the kind, for the manner, and for the season of them, as may best serve to
convince us of our Sin, and promote our Repentance.

For Example, Children should consider upon the Death of Holy Parents, in what
Instances they failed of harkening to their Counsels, and following their
Instructions, Admonitions, and Examples; of paying that Honor, Reverence,
Duty, and Obedience which God commands. They should then remember, consider,
and mourn, to think how often their Miscarriages against God, and them, was a
Grief and Burden to their Souls, and made them walk softly: They should recall
the Vanity of their Childhood, and review the Stubbornness, and Frowardness,
and Intractableness of Youth; and the many particular provocations they were
guilty of while their Parents lived; against their frequent Reproofs, against
the cry of their prayers, and the meaning of their Tears, against their many
Warnings, and Compassionate Calls to Repentance, against all the methods God
used to awaken, humble, and reform them: Is not this the voice of such a Rod to
many Children, when their godly Parents are taken away by Death? And the like
Reflections should Parents make, when God removes their grown Children; whether
they have answered their Trust, and been faithful to their Souls; solemnly
dedicating them to God, endeavoring to instruct them in the Principles of
Religion, and Educating them in the Christian Faith, and saving them from the
Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; endeavoring by all means
to make Religion amiable, and Sin odious, and practical Godliness lovely, by
their own Circumspect walking, by keeping up the Authority of God, and his
daily Worship in their houses, by faithful Instructions, and prudent seasonable
Reproofs, and fervent Holy Prayer to God for them, and with them, etc.

The like for other Relations, when the Desire of our Eyes is removed, as a
Dear Husband, or a beloved Wife. God expects we should reflect, and consider,
whether we entered into such a Relation, as becomes CHristians, marrying in the
Lord: Whether we did walk as Heirs of the Grace of Life together: whether by
tenderness and Affection, by Meekness and Wisdom, by Watchfulness and Prayer,
by Counsel and other Assistance, we faithfully performed the Duty of that
Relation. We ought to reflect in such cases, How much more good we might have
received, and done with reference to the Deceased? How much more we might have
contributed than we did, to the furtherance of their Grace and Holiness, their
Knowledge and Comfort, their peace of Conscience, and meetness for Heaven? or
what Advantage and Increase of our own, we might have had by their means, and
did not improve. You that are now Happy in one another Affection, remember
this, before a parting time do come: for such thoughts as these will be apt to
follow us, under such providence, and it is fit they should.

And if we have the warning of their Approaching Change by Sickness; it may
then be proper to reflect, how we then demeaned our selves? whether we were
duly sensible of it? what was the Temper of our Spirits in prayer for them? and
what our carriage and deportment toward them, and toward God, with relation to
their case: How far we expected and prepared for a Separation by Death? what
solemn acts of Resignation of them, and of our selves, to the Will of God, our
Spirits were formed to? what impressions their Sickbed Discourses, their Dying
Speeches, Comforts, or Counsels, with their last Agonies, had upon us? what
Duty lies upon us at such a time, in reference to these things, is sufficiently
obvious: But how far we then comported with it, ought seriously to be inquired,
when God has removed them by Death; that wherein we have failed, we may be
awakened to Repent, which is one Design of God by such a stroke.

Secondly, To testify his Displeasure for our fond Inordinate Affections to
those Relatives he snatcheth from us, and to prevent the like as to those that
survive.

God is Jealous of his Honor, and he will not bear a Rival: and if the Desire
of our Eyes lay too near our Hearts, and rob him of our Delight, and Love, and
Time, no wonder if he make a Separation. When Jacob's Affection to his Joseph
and Benjamin were so excessive, that his Life was bound up in theirs, he and
his must then be parted: And the good Old Man be brought to say with a doleful
accent, and aching Heart, Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and must Benjamin go
too? all these things are against me. A Husband, a Wife, a Mother, a Father, a
Child, a Friend which is as thy own Soul; Any of them, All of them must go, if
we Love them too well. i. e. if we value them too highly; if we delight in them
excessively; if we rejoice in them more than in the presence of God; if we
place the satisfaction of our Minds, the solace of our Lives, too much in their
Company; if we love them not only in the Lord, or in subordination to him; if
we reckon too much content in their Continuance; if we are too unwilling to
part with them at the Call of God, etc.

This we may be sure of, God will break that from us, from which we would not
be broken, or turn it to our Cross. And that stroke which makes the breach,
should teach us to moderate our Affections to surviving Friends; to Possess,
Enjoy and Use all things and persons in this World, as if we used them not,
because the time is short, and the fashion of the World passes away, 1 Cor.
7.31. That we may be brought to speak it as the inward sense of our very
Hearts: Lord, I see all Earthly Comforts are withering Gourds, how quickly, how
easily, how suddenly are they gone! O let me henceforward, make thee my only
Portion and Treasure; let me seek thy Favor, value thy Love, prize thy
presence, in and above all things: thou art the only Fountain of Living Water,
all Creatures are but broken Cisterns, that can hold little or none; and how
unexpectedly may they be dried up! Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and who or
what is there desirable on Earth besides thee? Happy is that Soul who Answers
this design of God, and is brought to this frame by such a stroke.

Thirdly, God may sometimes intend to Try our Sincerity, and Improve our Trust
in him alone. To know what is in our Hearts, i. e. To let it be known unto our
selves and others, whether we can love him as a Father, though we feel his Rod:
whether we can stoop to his Disposing Authority, and submit to his Hand, when
it is most heavy: and acquiesce in his Orders, when they are most severe. To
try whether we can receive Evil from God, as well as Good: and bless him for
Taking, as well as Giving: to try whether we can trust him, though he slay us;
and say with Hezekiah, Good is the Word of the Lord, even when he calls for the
Desire of our Eyes. To try whether we can believe his Word, trust his
Providence, and depend upon his Care, and hope for his Salvation when the
Helps, and Asistances, and Instruments of his Mercy, which we formerly had, are
withdrawn. In a word, whether God alone he enough for our Souls to live upon;
and be reckoned sufficient for our Stay, Suport, and Strength, whatsoever
Disappointments, Losses, and Difficulties we meet with. Whether we will abide
by our Agreement, when we first yielded our selves to the Lord, to be
absolutely disposed of, as well as ruled by him. And how often have we since
renewed that Covenant, and given up our selves and ours to the Lord: He will
try by such providence, whether we are satisfied he shall take us at our word.

Fourthly, Sometimes he does it as a Preparative for Patience under further
Trials, either Personal and particular, or public and National. God in wisdom
inures our Spirits to a suffering State, and brings us off by degrees from the
Love of this World. He trains us up in Self-denying-Exercises, that we may be
the better prepared to meet him in the way of his Judgments: That by Suffering,
we may learn to suffer. He takes away somewhat which we dearly loved, that it
may be less difficult for us to part with the Remainder: That our proud Hearts
being humbled, and our stubborn Wills bowed, we may be more ready to bear, and
suffer, and lose, as he shall think fit. We need be instructed a good while in
the School of Affliction, perfectly to learn Patience, and Resignation to the
Will of God. So difficult a Lesson as that of Self-denial, will not be learned
all at one time. One Instance of a calm Submission to the Divine Will, may
dispose us for another that is more difficult; for if we cannot give up our
Relations to the Will of God, how shall we be able to resign our Selves? If the
Footmen tire us, how shall we contend with Horses? If we cannot part with the
Life of a Friend we love, how shall we surrender our Own, if he shall call us
to do so? If we send up our impatient Murmurs to Heaven, when any of them die,
(though it be peaceably on their Beds,) how shall we be able to resist unto
Blood? or to die at a Stake, if that should ever become our Duty? If the
Calamities common to Men be so heavy for our Shoulders, what shall we do in a
Fiery Trial? Therefore God in Wisdom remembers our Ignorance and Frailty, and
considers our Weakness, and accordingly he trains up and prepares us by degrees.

Fifthly, The Last and General Reason of all such Strokes, is to mind surviving
Relations and Acquaintance, and all that hear of it, to prepare to follow. All
the frequent Warnings of God, which you have lately had of this kind, speak
very loudly the Language of our blessed Lord, Mat. 24.44. Be ye also ready.
Consider your Latter End; Number your Days; Know that you hasten to an Eternal
State. Some of us especially should take the Warning, unto whom the Blow comes
nearer home. When Death enters into the very House where we sojourn; and
lessens or dissolves our Families; when God draws away the Veil, and exposes
the Picture of Death naked to our view, and holds it before our Eyes; he bids
us, of all others, make haste with our Work, and be ready; and not foolishly
slatter our selves, that we have many Years to come in this World. Do we not
see our own Friends and Relations, that were more likely to live than we, Month
after Month, drop into the Grave? And is it not the House appointed for all the
Living? Shall we not think our own turn is coming? May not Thine be next, or
Mine next? Does not every deceased Friend tell us, we are living-dying Persons,
who shall shortly follow them, but they not return to us: Their Seats and
Places, here and at home, shall henceforth know them no more: And will it not
e're long be as certainly true of us, of every one of us, as true as if our
Breath were gone, and our Eyes closed, and our Teeth set, and our Friends had
left us as if, we were laid in the Graves, and the Funeral Ceremonies were
over, and our Bodies covered with the Bones and Earth that must be our Company
in, the house of Darkness? Oh that we were wise to understand, and believe
this, and consider our Latter End! Thus concerning the Duty of Mourners.

II. For the prevention of Immoderate Sorrow, and Irregular Mourning, which is
next to be considered: I desire it may be observed, that many persons seek for
Comfort in such Cases, where it is not to be had; and hope to encourage and
support themselves from weak, mistaken, or deceitful Principles: we are apt to
lean on some broken Reed, that will not sustain but pierce us. Under this and
the other leaf we seek for Consolation, and find a Serpent lurking there; but
all our turnings of devices proves but like the Potters Clay, which breaks and
moulders between our Fingers: We would fain draw the Water of Comfort out of
this Brook, or the other Puddle, instead of going to Jacob's Well, the true and
only Fountain: I mean, instead of consulting the Holy Scriptures. We disquiet
our Minds in vain, stretch our Imaginations, and busy our inquiring thoughts,
to find out Remedies against the Evils we suffer, but till we go into the
Sanctuary, we search in vain.

All the Precepts and Instructions of Philosophers are weak and ineffectual to
a Christian. To change the Nature of Afflictive Evils, or wholly to extirpate
our own Affections, will be found impossible: Fatal Necessity asserted by some,
and the Doctrine of Contingency and Chance, explained by others, will not quiet
or satisfy an Afflicted Mourner. To say we should have constantly expected
this, and the like Calamity beforehand, is in some sense true; but does not
that inflict as much of the Evil before, as it takes off afterward? For such
Parker's Demonst. of the Law of Not. part 1.. 28.
a fore. sight and Expectation cannot be without Anxiety, and many sad and
melancholy thoughts: I mean, upon Principles merely Philosophical, it cannot.
And therefore it is a Disputable point among that fort of men, whether it be
best to be surprised by an Evil, or to pre-meditate and foresee it is approach.
Both grant we are condemned to be miserable. Think upon it beforehand, says
the one sort, that you may feel it the less: Never think of it before, says the
other, with equal reason, that you may not feel it twice.

But others more plausibly, and with some Weight, will be ready to say, You
knew a Parting Time must come: You knew the Matrimonial Union might easily, and
suddenly, be dissolved and broken by Death. What did you not know, that you and
your Relations must Die? or did you not live together with this design, to help
and prepare one another for Death? And the Providence of God continued such a
suitable Relation to you for so many years: might he not have made this breach
sooner? you ought to be thankful for such a blessing so long.

Besides, it may be added as to the manner of their Disease, they had what Art
and Care could do to preserve their Lives; and earnest prayer to God was added,
if it did consist but with his Holy Pleasure, that they might be longer spared.
And after all, they Died quietly on their Beds, and went to the Grave in peace,
and died Lamented, and the last Offices of Friendship were performed at their
Funerals, etc.

Moreover, you know not but they are taken away from the evil to come; for
notwithstanding the beginning and progress of National Deliverances thus far,
some of us may live to see the Cup of Trembling, that our Neighbors and
Brethren have drank of, come round to us, so that the dead may be accounted
more happy than the Living: As the Prophet speaks, Jer. 22.10. Weep not for the
Dead, but weep for him that goes forth, and escapes Death. You know not but
such a Calamity may befall this Land, this City, or their own Family, or
Dearest Friends, as would have made their Lives bitter, and miserable, if they
had been prolonged.

And were nothing of all this to be considered, it might yet be said, It is in
vain to weep and mourn, you cannot call back the Desire of your Eyes to Life
again. You only torment and hurt your self, for heaviness in the Heart of Man
makes it stoop, it dries the bones, and deadens the Spirit, and very much
unfits for the Duties and Comforts of Life. Yea, which is worse, Immoderate
sorrow for your departed Friends, does but prove that you love this World too
well; it shows too plainly, that your Faith concerning the Invisible Future
World is very weak; that you your selves as yet are too unprepared to die; or
count upon tarrying longer here, than it may be God intends you shall. These
and such like considerations have all their influence and use, in their proper
place, to contribute somewhat to our support, but of themselves are not
sufficient.

There are four things, (among others,) that a Christian Mourner ought to
consider for his Relief.

1. Whose Hand it is that gives the stroke, who it is that does it.

2. The Faithfulness of God to his Covenant Promise, notwithstanding any such
Providence.

3. The Gain of those who Die in the Lord, by our loss of their Company.

4. Our Belief and Hope of meeting them again, with all the Children of the
Kingdom, and being with them for ever with the Lord in Glory. And let me add,
our Expectation of knowing them there; for that to me is more than probable.

First, We should not Grieve immoderately, when Dear Relations are removed by
Death, because it is the Lord that does it; he who has a Sovereign Authority
and unquestionable Right to dispose of us and them, as seems him good. I take
away the Desire of thine Eyes with a stroke; I have done it, says the Lord. We
mistake our Tenure, if we think he may not call for for his own, whenever he
pleases. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, we must adore and bless his Holy
Name in both: He is not responsible at our Bar, or Accountable to us, for every
thing he does: He has not given us an account of all his matters: He does not
think fit to answer all our Questions, or say all he can, to vindicate the
Righteousness, and Wisdom of his present proceedings, -- therefore, why do
thou strive with him? Job 33.13. Asa Ruler, it is true he has showed us reason
enough in the general for such Providence, but as our absolute Lord and Owner,
he need not.

It may be we importunately prayed for their Recovery, that God would spare
them longer: But if we did not pray with a humble submission to his holy Will,
our very Prayer was a Provocation, and we need to repent, and mourn for our
selves. And do not all holy Parents, pray more earnestly for the Salvation of
their Children, and yet you know they are not all answered in kind: if they
were, all the World would be saved; for doubtless holy Noah prayed for all his
Children; and they, if they were holy, would do so for them, etc. But do we not
daily supplicate for the honor of Gods Government, for the Glory of his Name,
the accomplishment of his Councels, and the fulfilling of his unerring Will?
and shall we Repine and Murmur, when our prayers are answered?

Consider then, whose Hand it is: It is He has taken who gave thee that, and
all thy other Mercies, and prolongs innumerable ones, which thou have
forfeited: And shall we not receive evil at the hand of God, as well as good?
Job 2.10. Especially since he may have the same kind, and merciful design in
taking as he had in giving, and has promised that all things (this not
excepted) shall work for good: It is He has done it, who is Infinitely Wise
and Gracious, who loves, and pities, and spares us as a Father does a Child.
And shall we not drink of that Cup which our Heavenly Father has put into our
hands? His Sovereignty might justly silence us, but his Goodness,
Righteousness, and Wisdom, should calm and settle our Hearts, and make us
resign our Will to his. It is He has done it, who has purchased a people out
of the World, and is collecting them one after another, so soon as they are
ready, and have served the ends of his Glory upon Earth: And how shall the many
Sons and Daughters be brought to Heaven, (for which end the Son of God was
incarnate and dyed) if we and others should have our wish, that God should take
whom he would, and when he pleased, but our Relations should be excepted? It is
He has done it, who told us, that whosoever loves Father, or Mother, Wife, or
Child, more than Christ, cannot be his Disciple, Luke 14.26. It is He, unto
whom our Relation is nearer, sweeter, and more indissoluble, than that unto any
of our Friends on Earth can be. It is He has done it, who said, Father, I
will, that those whom thou have given me shall be where I am, to behold my
Glory, John 17.14. And when he would remove any of such a Character, how dear
soever unto us, shall our Reluctant will oppose and gainsay his Wife and Just,
and Holy Pleasure? Shall any of us dare say in such a case, that he is mine, or
she is mine, I cannot yield to let them go? would we insinuate that they are
more ours, than his? did he not make them? did he not renew them? and make them
meet for Heaven? and ought he not rather to dispose of them according to His
Will, than ours? ought not ours to subscribe to his?

Secondly, Consider the Faithfulness of God to his Covenant promises,
notwithstanding such Providential Trials. Whatsoever change He makes in our
Families, and conditions, the Blessed God is still the same, what, and where he
was, tho our Relations and Friends are not what they were, or where they were.
Tho a House be broken up, and a Family dissolved, tho one or more of the
principal Members of it be snatched away, we who are left, may yet with David
encourage our selves in the Lord our God, 2 Samuel 23.5. saying, Though my house be
not so with God, yet has he made with me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in
all things, and sure, and this is all my Salvation, and all my Desire: And is
not this All enough? Ought we not so to reckon it? that though we should be
forsaken of all Creatures, God will never leave us, nor forsake us; that we
shall not be left alone, he will still be with us; the Husband of the Widow,
and the Father of the Fatherless; showing Mercy to them that sear him, and to
their Seed after them, and his Righteousness (or promised Mercy) to their
Childrens Children, Psalm. 103.7.

Can he not be better than all Relations? could any one of them be a Blessing
or a Comfort to us without him? Was it not from God, if any of them were so?
how easily might he have embittered their Company, who were the Delight of our
Eyes? And can he not supply that Loss out of his own fullness? Was he the Author
of all the Comfort we enjoyed in, and by them, and cannot he make amends for
their Absence? Is not the Presence of the God of all Consolation, equivalent to
theirs? May he not make us Gainers? and oblige us to own by Comfortable
Experience, that in very faithfulness he has thus afflicted? Did we better
clear up our Covenant Interest in the Alsufficiency of God, it would be a
special Means of our Support, in this, and all other afflicting Cases.

Thirdly, Let us look from our selves to Them, whom God has taken from us, and
compare their Gain with our Loss; and that will infer a Defect, either in our
Faith, or in our Friendship, if we Mourn immoderately for those who Dye in the
Lord, and sleep in Jesus.

I Confess the Death of Wicked Relations is a very perplexing, and humbling
Case. But yet we must remember, God is Wiser and more Merciful than we, and
does all things for his own Glory: And we cannot doubt, but when we come to
Heaven, our Minds and Wills shall be entirely Conformed to his. And for the
present it cannot well be Answered, Why one or two of our particular Kindred,
that Dyed in Sin, should be so much more lamented, than the many Hundreds and
Thousands, that every Week or Month are cut off under Damning Guilt. Let us
thank God for his distinguishing Grace, if He have brought us to Repent, and
Believe, and Obey the Gospel; and do what we can that others also may,
especially those of our Kindred and Acquaintance: with unfeigned Sorrow that we
have done no more to further their Conversion and Salvation; and then we may
rejoice in the Glory of God, and our Blessed Redeemer, by the Faith and
Holiness of those that are or shall be saved.

Were this our Temper, as it ought to be, we should not be apt to grieve
excessively at the Death of our Holy Friends: For they are delivered from the
Guilt and Power of Sin, and have received the End of their Faith, and Patience,
and Hope: They have overcome the difficulties that we must longer Conflict
with, and have safely passed those Changes we must yet be proved by. We have
many Dangers yet to escape, many hazardous Temptations yet to resist; a
difficult Warfare yet to manage, against the Enemy of our Souls; many weary
Days and Hours to pass, under the troublesome Effects of Sin, and the Assaults
of the Devil: We must yet tarry in the Wilderness, and know the Trials of a
sojourning State, while they are got safe to the Promised Rest: We must yet
toil, and labor, and strive under the Cares, and Fears, and Wants, and
Difficulties of many kinds, inward and outward, Personal and Relative, public
and private, but they are beyond the reach of either; they shall be allured, or
disquieted, by the suggestions of the Devil no more; they shall be in fear of
Hell, and under Apprehensions of Gods Displeasure no more; they shall be in
hazard of infection by bad Company, or grieved by the scandals and ill Examples
of the Ungodly no more, for they are joined to the Holy Society above, in the
blessed Visions, Services, and Rejoycings of that better World.

Not only are they delivered from what is now afflictive to us, but bountifully
rewarded, and Happy in the Knowledge, and Love of God. Not only have they their
iron Fetters knocked off from their feet, but a Crown of Grory put upon their
Heads: Not only stripped of their filthy Garments, but clothed with the pure and
immortal Light: Not only all their Sorrows vanished, but their Souls filled with
unutterable Joy, waiting for the Completion of it, at the Resurrection of the
Dead.

We think, it may be, we stand in need of their Company; we are certain they
need not ours, having left an Imperfect, Dark, Desiling, Tempting, Troublesome,
Miserable World, and are gone to a Blessed Society, and State of Holiness and
Peace; from Doubts, and Darkness, and Complaints, to the Bosom of Insinite
Love, where they shall Complain and Weep no more for ever. And therefore tho
our Savior Wept when Lazarus dyed, because it is said he loved him, the reason
seems to be, because our Lord knew that Isid. Pelus. L. 2. Epist. 173.
Lazarus was to return to be upon the Earth again; he knew that it was for the
Glory of God, that he should be raised from the Dead, and return to be Tried,
and Tempted, and Troubled again. But it is not so with our departed Friends: Oh
let us believingly look upward, where they are, and think what they are doing,
and remember how much otherwise it was with them not long ago: And can we wish
them back again? while we sigh, and weep, and mourn, we know all Tears are
wiped away from their Eyes, and they are singing the Song of the Lamb. They are
now seeding on the pleasant Fruits of Paradise, and would we have them back
again to eat the Bread of Affliction, and drink the Waters of Affliction? Would
we, they should return from the state of Triumph, after Victory, to engage
again in new Combats? From the Port and Haven of Eternal Rest, to be tossed again
upon a Tempeltuous Sea? And this, because they were (...) Kindred, and our
Relations; for you do not mourn, that the Prophets, and Apostles, (...) all the
Faithful mentioned in Holy Scripture, or since in former Ages, that they are
gone to He^^^n. The ancient Christians kept Days of Thanksgiving for the safe
Departure of such. But how dear soever they were to us, we shall go to them,
they shall not come to us: We are very unkind if we desire they should have
Tarryed longer, when God has made them ready; they are gone to better Friends
than those they have lest behind. And if you Loved me, said Christ, you would
rejoice that It said, I go to my Father and your Father, to my God, and your
God.

The Friends they have left are imperfect, Sinning, Sorrowing, troublesome and
unsuitable, compared with those they meet above. And there only our Friendship,
and Affections to one another, will be without any mixture of Grief, or Sin,
without any Infirmity, Suspicion, Discontent, or other allay, by their
Weaknesses, Sins, or Sufferings: There shall we have all our Wishes, and
Desires, for our Friends, as well as for our Selves; and converse continually
together, without being weary of one another Company: they had once such a
vile Body as we have, and such disorderly Passions, such Errors, and Mistakes,
and Actual Sins as we are guilty of; they were troubled with such Temptations,
Doubts, and Descrtions, as we complain of: but their probationarry State is now
over, their Warfare is accomplished, their Work done, their Race ended, their
Course finished, and they are entered into the Joy of the Lord: Oh let us
remember that they are so, while we Weep and Mourn, partly for their Departure,
and more (it should be) for our unfitness as yet to be with them But we have
the same God and Savior, the same Way and Rule, the same blessed Recompense of
Reward, proposed and promised, and prepared; the same Grace and Assistance,
offered to enable us to Persevere and Overcome. It is but a little while, since
they had as malicious Enemies to oppose and conquer, and as difficult a work to
mind as we, and were as unlikely to hold out, as some of us; their inward and
outward Troubles were like to ours; their bodily Weaknesses, and Spiritual
Distresses like to ours, but they have overcome them; yet a little while, and
we hope we may do so too. And it is but a little while; let us not then grieve
immoderately, being our selves to follow so soon after, to partake (we hope) in
that Blessedness with them for ever, which we have often joined together in
Prayer, to ask of God for them, and for our selves. And this we need not
question, if we choose the same Felicity Mr. Baxters Life of Faith, chapter 26.
as our End, and Christ as the Captain of our Salvation, to direct and lead us
in the way thither; if we build on the same Word of Promise, and follow the
Conduct of the same Spirit of Holiness; if we live in the exercise of the like
Grace, and are conformed to Christ our Head in Spirit, Purpose, and Behavior,
and hold on in doing and suffering his Will, with constancy to the Death. If we
do thus, we shall shortly be with them; and because we were wont to mourn with
them, when they mourned, and to take part in their Afflictions, let us do so in
their Joys also; Thanking God for their Deliverance, and Rejoicing in their
Felicity.

Fourthly, The last Argument for our Support, is the Belief and Hope of the
Resurrection of the Dead, when we shall meet them, and all the Children of the
Kingdom, in the presence of the Lord. We know that those who sleep in Jesus; he
will bring with him, and openly absolve, and own them before all the World, and
give them the full possession of the promised Inheritance. We are bid to
Comfort our selves, and one another, with such joyful words. It Is Comfort that
there is a Redeemer, and that he is their Redeemer, as well as ours; that he
Lives, and will come again; and that we know this, on certain and infallible
grounds; and that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, by seeing him as
he is. It is Comfort, that even these Bodies that must be buried out of sight,
and putrify in a silent Grave, shall be raised, and enlivened, and made like
the glorious Body of our Redeemer. Tho Death devour their Beauty, and the Grave
hold them Prisoners for some thousands of years; tho they should be burnt to
Ashes, or devoured by Worms, Beasts, or Fishes, however crumbled and divided
into little parts, and these scattered and dispersed into a thousand distant
places; yet he will raise, and reunite, and restore them, fresh and spritely,
beautiful and glorious. That Power which at first did form, and fashion them in
the Womb, has engaged to do it. This Corruptible shall put on Incorruption;
and this Mortal put on Immortality; and Death be swallowed up in Victory. What
was sown in Weakness shall then be raised in Power: our Bodies shall then be
Active and Nimble, quick and free, easily passing in a little space to a great
distance, and readily obeying the Motions of our Glorified Spirits. What was
sown a Natural, Earthly Body, shall be raised Spiritual; suited to the
spiritual State, and Life, and work of Heaven; not needing the supplies of Food
or Physic, or any of those things which now employ so much of our Time and
Care, in reference to the Body. In a word, they shall be raised in Glory,
however vile they now are, as the Bodies of our Humiliation: And shall shine
brighter than the Sun in it is Meridian Splendour, with a Glory suitable to the
Excellency of that Power exerted in their Resurrection, suitable to the Dignity
of our Glorified Souls, suitable to the Glory of that Place, where they are to
inhabit; and of the Noble Services, wherein they are to be employed; and
especially suitable to their Excellent Exemplar, the Glorious Body of Christ,
whose Resurrection and Exaltation is the Cause, Pattern, and Pledge of ours.

And this we may depend upon, for our Lord has not only left us the Earnest of
his Spirit, to assure us of the Resurrection, that our Mortal Bodies shall be
quickened by the same Spirit, that raised him from the Dead; but he has
carried the Earnest of our Flesh into Heaven with him, to assure us, that all
his Friends, Favorites, and Followers, shall one day be with him, to behold
his Glory.

Let this then be remembered as the matter of our Christian Hope, that we may
not mourn, See Cyprian de Mortalitate ad sinem. Greg. Narianz. Orat. deca. in
laudem Caesarii Fratris Fun.
as strangers to the Gospel, for such as dye in the Lord. We sind the Egyptians
mourned longer for Jacob than Joseph did, even threescore and ten days. They
that have little Knowledge, and Expectation concerning another Life, and the
Resurrection of the Dead, may more excusably extend their Funeral Sorrows, and
grieve for the loss of this, and equal the Days of their Mourning to the number
of the years of the Life of Man: but so tedious a Funeral Solemnity would have
been unsuitable to Joseph's Faith. Had he shown himself more a Son, by such a
Testimony of his Natural Affection, in Mourning longer, he had shown himself
less a Patriarch.

When God restored to Job, after his long Trials, double for all his Cattle and
Goods which he had lost, as Fourteen thousand Sheep for Seven thousand, etc. he
gave him but the same number of Children again: for they were not really lost,
though Death removed 'em; they were Alive in another State: And if they were
Holy Persons, he had the like number in Heaven, as God gave him on Earth. It Is
a great Relief to a Christian Mourner to consider, that his Deceased Friends
are not Lost, but Live. I know very well that the Holy Will of God must take
place of mine: I know that I ought to love God and Christ above all, and
absolutely resign my self, and All that is mine, or cannot hope to see his Face:
I know that I shall shortly follow the Desire of mine Eyes: I hope I shall be
silent, and adore, and not charge God foolishly. But methinks I know (with
sensible supporting Insluence from such a Thought) that She is not Dead, but
Sleeps; She is not Lost, but Lives: And if I get to Heaven, shall meet her
there, in the presence of the Lord our Redeemer. And then the Company of our
Holy Relatives will be more Sweet than ever it was on Earth.

For though the Blessed Vision of God be our Chiefest Hope and Joy, yet the
Presence of all the Blessed Spirits will make a Real, though Subordinate, part
of our Happiness, and Delight. I am so far from doubting whether we shall Know
and Love one another in the Heavenly State, that the Belief and Expectation of
it, is, or should be, one great Motive why we love 'em so well now. If we
thought we should not Know and Love them after Death, we ought to Love 'em but
as Earthly, Transitory things, and not as Heirs of Heaven, with such a Love as
shall be perfected, and last for ever.

Neither can it well be imagined how the Process and Proceedings of the
Judgment-Day, according to the Scripture Account of it, can be managed by the
Man Christ Jesus, (or the Lord Redeemer clothed with Humane Nature,) without
our Knowledge of One Another in the other World, who were acquainted, and
conversed together in this. It Is true, the present Relations by Marriages and
Blood will then cease; but there is no reason to think, that the Remembrance of
those Relations must also cease: Yea, their Knowledge and Remembrance of us,
and their Affection to us, whom we knew, and loved in the Lord, is not like to
be abolished, but perfected by Dying.

Doubtless the Angels who rejoice at the Conversion of a Particular Sinner, and
the Departed Saints too, do know more even of the State of this World, than we
do, who are Mr. Baxter, Of the Knowledge of God, part 3. p. 331.
acquainted with so very little a part and spot of it. Which, by the way,
should check an^ inordinate fond Desire, of living to see Glorious Times on
Earth: For if we get to Heaven, we are like to know much more of those Happy
Times, than if we remained alive in a Corner of the Isles of the Gentiles.

But as to our Mutual Knowledge in the Heavenly state: Shall those whom we
Relieved on Earth, Welcome us to Heaven? And are therefore said to receive us
into Everlasting Habitations, Luke 16. And shall not the departed Saints know
one another in Glory? Shall we then know, as we are known? And shall the
Thessalontans be the Joy, and Crown, and Glory, and Rejoicing of the Apostle
Paul, in the Day of Christ? And shall he not know them, or they him, who
prosited by his Ministry? Did the Rich Man in Hell know Abraham afar off in
Heaven, and can we think a blessed Lazarus shall not? For though that be a
Parable, there is some Truth as the Foundation of it. Shall it aggravate the
Misery of lost Souls, to meet their wicked Companions in the place of Torment?
as few deny, or doubt: And shall it not Rejoice the Blessed, to meet their Holy
Friends whom they knew in this World? Did Peter, James, and John know Moses and
Elias in the Transsignration, whom they never saw before? (and we read not that
Christ told em 'who they were:) And shall those who were acquainted upon Earth,
and helped one another to Heaven; utterly forget, and lose the remembrance of
any such thing?

It is a pleasant Thought, (and proper to support under the Death of those we
have honored, and loved, and profited by, on Earth,) to think that hereafter
we shall meet, and know, several Ministers of Christ, whose Preaching, and
Converse, and Writings, have been useful to us: That we shall then meet, and
know, several of our Holy Relations and Acquaintance, with whom we were wont to
walk together to the House of God, and meet often at the Table of the Lord;
with whom we conferred about the Mysteries and and Promises of the Gospel, and
many a time discoursed together of the Heavenly Inheritance; believingly to
foresee, and consider, that though they are gone before, we shall meet 'em
again, at the last great Supper of the Lamb, in the Celestial Kingdom.

And why may not I suppose such a distinct and personal Knowledge, and
Remembrance of one another, as to be able to say, This was the Person, whom God
employed to bring me into the World, and educate me in his Fear; who instructed
my tender Years, and taught me early to Know the Lord. Or, This was the Person,
who was at so much pains to convince me of my Sin, and reclaim me from the
Error of my Ways: This was He, or She, who tendered my Salvation as their own;
who watched over me, and prayed for me, and with me; and often told me of the
Evil of Sin, of the Excellency and Pleasantness of Wisdom's Ways, of the
Freeness of the Love and Grace of Christ, and his Willingness to receive
Returning Penitents at first, and even Backsliders afterward. This was the
Person, who was assisted by God to encourage, strengthen, revive, and comfort
my desponding, my doubting, my unbelieving Heart; and establish me in the way
of Truth: Yea, to be able to say, This was the Person, with whom I lived, and
so journed in yonder World; whose sincere Affection I so much valued; whose
delightful, useful Company, I so much prized, whose Sickness and Removal I so
much lamented, etc. -- But lest I run too far, let me draw to a Close.

Let us therefore, after what has been said, resolve to have Communion with
them, though they are Departed; by Contemplating what they are, and where they
are, and what they do, and what they possess; and by Rejoicing in their
Blessedness, more than we would have done for their Temporal Advancement in any
kind on Earth. Let us desire and endeavor to be as like 'em as we can, by
imitating their Temper and Work above, in the Love of God, and the delighful
thankful Praises of the Redeemer. When we look up to Heaven, let us think they
are there. When we think of Christ in Heaven, let us remember they are part of
his Family above. When we think with hope of entering into Heaven our Selves,
let us think with Joy of meeting them there. Oh welcome, welcome, happy meeting
with Christ, and them; Never more to Part, never more to Mourn, never more to
Sin. O Happy Change! O Blessed Society! (shall we then cry out,) with whom we
shall live for ever, to Know, and Love, Admire, and Praise, and Serve our
Common Lord! We formerly Sinned together, and Suffered together. But this is
not like our old Work or State: Our former Darkness, Complaints, and Sorrows
are now vanished. This Body, this Soul, this Life, this Place, this Company,
these Visions, these Fruitions, these Services and Employments, are not like
what we had in the former World. And yet, which is the Quintessence and Spirit
of all, this Happiness shall last to all Eternity, and after Millions of Ages
be as far from ending, as when at first began. Fit us, Lord! for such a Day,
and Come, Lord Jesus! Come quickly. Amen.

THE END.
Prepare to Follow. OR THE SECOND DISCOURSE FROM MATTHEW. XXIV. 44. Occasioned by
the DEATH OF Mrs. Eliz. Gearing.

Prepare to Follow.

A Funeral Sermon Occasioned by the DEATH OF Mrs. Elizabeth Gearing, (Late Wife
of Mr. Henry Gearing,) who Departed this Life the second of July, 1691.

By JOHN SHOWER.

2 SAMUEL 12.23. But now he is Dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him
back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not come to me.

LONDON, Printed for J. Dunton and A. Chandler. 1691.

Prepare to Follow. OR A DISCOURSE
FROM MATTHEW. 24.44. Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think
not of, the Son of Man comes.


UPON a like Exhortation of our Blessed Lord to Watchfulness, and Prayer, to
Faithfulness, and Diligence, in Expectation of his Coming, the Apostle Peter
makes bold to ask the Question, whether it concerned only the Apostles, or was
spoken to all, Luke 12.41. The answer whereto does sufficiently express the
Universal Obligation of such a Duty. For our Lord replies, Blessed is that wise
and faithful Servant, who when his Lord comes shall be found doing his Masters
Work. And yet more expressly by another Evangelist, where the like Parable is
applied with this addition, What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch; Mark
13. last. which Watching is the general Comprehensive word for being Ready.
This is the repeated Voice of Christ in his Word, wherever he speaks of his
Second Coming: This is the distinct and loud call of his Providence unto this
Congregation by the Death and Funerals of one of our number; you know, I mean
our Friend Mrs. Gearing, which speaks the same language to all of us, Be ye
also ready. And being desired on this Occasion, to preach from these words; I
shall reserve the mention of some things, that were Instructive and exemplary
in the Deceased, for the close of my Discourse, and in the mean time consider
this seasonable Admonition of our Blessed Lord, Therefore be ye also Ready; for
the Son of Man comes in such an hour, as ye think not of.

This and the foregoing Verses are part of the Answer, which our Savior made
to the Disciples question, in the beginning of the Chapter, v. 3. Tell us, when
shall these things be, and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end
of the World? According to the common Apprehensions which the Jews had of the
alteration of the present state of things among them, by the coming of the
Messiah, and that general destruction of the World, and the State of Eternity
which would thereupon follow, they enquire of both to gether: as reckoning his
Coming and the End of the World, would be at once. And throughout this Chapter,
we find our Lord's Answer to both Questions are intermixed; some whereof referr
to the destruction of the Jewish State, and his coming to execute judgment upon
that Nation: and others, to the end of the World, whereof the former was but a
figure.

It is plain that some passages referr to the Jewish State, several of the
signs of his coming were literally fulfilled, a little before their destruction
by the Romans, as Josephus, and Tacitus, and others mention; particularly the
15. and 16. verses: When ye therefore shall see the Abomination of Desolation,
spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, stand in the Holy place, (whosoever reads let
him understand) then let them which be in Judea, flee into the Mountains.

And again 34. v. he says: This Generation shall not pass away, till all these
things be fulfilled. There is yet no reason to confine the whole of this
Chapter, to the Calamities which befell the Jewish Nation, which was but as a
Type and Representation of the general Judgment, preceding the final Doom of
the World; for some passages do as plainly referr to the end of the World. As
when he speaks, of ^^s coming in the Clouds with power and great glory, and of
the Angels sounding the Trumpet, and of two men in the Field, and of two Women
grinding at the Mill, one taken, and the other left; referring to the great
Discrimination of persons, that shall be made at the end of the World, as when
it is said in the 36. verse, Of that day and hour no man knows, no not the
Angels of Heaven, but my Father only. And by another Evangelist, the Son
himself is excluded from knowing that hour, Mark 13.33. But did not Christ know
the time of the destruction of the Jews, their Temple, City, and Nation? when
he himself foretells the time, when it should be? And therefore those words in
the 35. v. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away,
seem to be a transition from answering the first Question, concerning the
Destruction of the Jews, to answer the other question, about the End of the
World: whereupon follows the Exhortation in the 42. v. Watch, for you know not
what hour your Lord will come. But know this, (or you do know this, as the
Original word will bear, and may better be rendered;) You do know this, That if
the good man of the house had known, in what Watch of the night the Thief world
come, he would have watched, and not suffered his house to be broken up:
Therefore be ye also Ready, for the Son of Man comes in an hour that you think
not of.

I hope none will be so weak, as to be stumbled at the Comparison in this
passage of the coming of Christ unto that of a Thief, because the all (...) is
only as to the unexpectedness of the time, and season of his coming. It is a
comparison, or allusion, as one says, Non personae ad personam, non negotii ad
negotium, sed temporis ad tempus. q. d. The parallel does not hold between
Person and Person, between Business and Business, but only between the Time of
the ones coming, and that of the other, (viz.) The Suddenness and
Unexpectedness of it. In which sense the Apostle mentions the coming of Christ
as of a Thief in the Night, at a time when he is not expected, 1 These. 5.2. 2
Pet. 3.10. Therefore be ye also ready, for He comes in a time when you think
not of it. His last Coming, at the end of the World will be surprising; and so
is his other Coming to summon us out of the World by Death, which will transmit
us over to his sinal Judgment. For nothing can be done to make us Ready, and
prepared to meet him as our Judge, but on this side the Grave. Our readiness
therefore for Death, and for the Coming of our Lord to Judgment, is all one.

In the words we have three parts. 1. The Certainty of Christ's Coming again
supposed. 2. The Suddenness and Unexpectedness of it asserted, it will be in an
Hour that you think not of. 3. The Necessity and Obligation that results from
thence, of endeavoring to be Ready. Accordingly I shall, I. Explain the Nature
of this Readiness, for the Coming of Christ. II. Show the force of the
Argument, in several Considerations, from the suddenness and unexpectedness of
his Coming, and our uncertainty of the time thereof, therefore to be Ready.
III. Shall assist you to make the Application.

1. The Certainty of his second Coming is supposed: The Son of man comes in an
hour you think not of. It supposes then that he will come again. The Son of
man is a title very often given to Christ, and assumed by himself, particularly
with relation to the Final Judgment; for we read, that the Father has
committed all Judgment to the Son, and given him Authority to execute Judgment,
as the Son of man, (or because he is the Son of man) and it follows, For the
hour shall come, that all they who are in their Graves shall hear his Voice,
and shall come out of their Graves, they that have done good to the
Refurrection of Life, and they that have done evil to the Resurrection of
Damnation, John 5.27, 28. And with particular relation to this, he himself
speaks, Mat. 25.31. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the
Holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory. And when
the High Priest adjured him, to tell whether he were indeed the Christ, the Son
of God, Mat. 26.63, 64. observe what he answered, Hereafter shall you see the
Son of Man, sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the Clouds of
Heaven. Some would have it an instance of his Humility to assume this Title, as
reserring to the meaness of his present condition in the World; but that does
not seem to reach the sense of the Expression, For all Judgment is committed to
him, because he is the Son of Man, or because He is Mediator; because He is the
true Seed of the Woman, promised to bruise the Serpents head; The true Son of
Man, to whom Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom was given by the Ancient of
days, Dan. 7.13, 14. So that this Title is a Name of Office. All Supremacy,
Authority and Power that belongs to the Office of Mediator, is given to him:
And the Gentiles, as well as the Seed of Abraham, may by him be justified, and
obtain everlasting Life. The Jews would appropriate the Messiah to themselves,
as the Son of David, and the King of Israel, forgetting that he is the Son of
man, promised from the beginning to be the Desire of all Nations, and the Hope
of all the Ends of the Earth; to redeem us unto God, out of all Nations,
Tongues, Kindreds, and People.

The coming again of this Son of Man is here supposed. He came once as the
promised Redeemer, to be incarnate in our Nature, and to offer himself a
willing Sacrifice for the expiation of Sin: But he is to come again as the
Judge of Quick and Dead; even this same Jesus who after his Resurrection
conversed forty days upon Earth, and then ascended in Triumph and Glory to
Heaven; This same Jesus, said the Angels to the two Witnesses of his Ascension,
who is taken up into heaven, shall so come again as you have seen him go into
it, Acts 1.11. This was prophesied by Enoch the seventh from Adam, Jude 14.
This was foretold, and prefigur'd variously in the Old Testament; this was
expressly promised by our Lord, in the days of his Flesh; especially for the
encouragement of his Disciples, when he was about to leave them, and speaks of
his departure. This is insisted upon by the Apostles, in their several
Epistles, as a Motive to Humility, to Patience, to Perseverance,
notwithstanding the many difficulties, and discouragements, which they met with
for their Fidelity to Christ, and the Gospel.

But I need not insist on the proof of this, among those who own it as a
fundamental Article of their Creed; That He who dyed on the Cross, and rose
again, though he now sits at the right Hand of God, and the Heavens shall contain
him 'till the Restitution of all things, yet He shall come again to judge the
World, and determine the sinal Everlasting State of all Mankind. But because he
is not yet come, men are ready to conclude he never will; because things
continue as they were, one Generation passing, and another coming; men that
walk after their own Lusts, (whose interest it is to have it true, that he
shall not come, are ready to cry out in scorn, Where is the Promise of his
Coming? 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. But for us to be ignorant that he will come again, must
be a wilful, willing, chosen Ignorance: Because the Lord is not slack, as Men
count slackness; but a thousand years are to him as one day: It is not
Slackness, but Longsuffering, which should lead Men to Repentance, and to
Prepare for his Coming: And so would be Salvation. For so it is called, from
the tendency of it, ver. 15. And if it be not so to us, it is our own fault.

So unquestionably Certain is this Appearance, and Second Coming of Christ,
that the Apostle Paul adjures Timothy, in the most solemn and affecting manner,
to the faithful discharge of his Duty, by that Consideration, I charge thee
before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and
dead at his Appearance, and his Kingdom: or when he shall appear in his
Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1.

The Jews knew and granted, that the Messiah was to come as a Judge, by the
Traditional Prophecy of Enoch, which began with those words, The Lord shall
come. This they understood long before the Incarnation of our Savior: So that
they were wont to begin their Writs, or Instruments of the Greatest
Excommunication, with those words of the Prophecy of Enoch, The Lord shall
come. As if, besides all other Punishments, they Bound over the Excommunicated
Person to the last great Assize, to be Judged by the Messiah. And the Apostle
seems to allude to this, 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha: i.e. Accursed with that great and
terrible Excommunication, The Lord shall come. For so they call it from the
first words, as we often give Names to Writs, and other Instruments, by
reciting the first words of them: He shall come again: he shall be revealed
from Heaven, in slaming sire, with his mighty Angels, to render vengeance to
them which know not God, and obey not the Gospel, etc. 2 These. 1.7, 9. We shall
all be made to stand before his Judgment Seat, 2 Cor. 5.10, 14. Romans 14.10. And
every one shall then give an account of himself to God, and receive according
to what he has done in the body, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. He
is delegated and appointed by God for this Work, and every way fitted and
qualified to undertake it, Acts 17.31.

II. The Suddenness and Vnexpectedness of his Coming again: The hour of it no
man knows, no, not the Angels of God in Heaven. It will surprise Mankind, as
the Deluge did the Old World in the days of Noah. The time of it is locked up
in the Treasuries of Heaven, and we have no Key that will open it. Neither the
time of Christ's coming to Judge the World, or the time of his calling us by
Death to come to him, is certainly known. Behold! I know not the day of my
death, we may every one say with Isaac, Genesis 27.2. The Knowledge of this time
and Season he has reserved in his own power; it belongs not to us, it is no
part of our Privilege to know it, Acts 1.7.

If it had been fit and becoming, advisable and expedient for us to understand
it; if it had been for our Advantage, to know the precise time of our own
Death, or of the Final Judgment; if it would have added any whit to our
Spiritual Stature, and Growth in Grace; if it would not have much better
promoted our Watchfulness, and serious Diligence, and forwarded our
Preparations, to have remained Ignorant, he would not have drawn such a Veil
over that Day and Hour: But would have left it written in fair Characters. But
he every way consulted our Interest, and the general Good of the World, by
hiding this Knowledge from us. God's Government of the World, and the
Magistrates influence under God for the Good of Men, would very much be
weakened, if every Man did certainly know beforehand the time of his Death. Our
Usefulness to others would be very much checked, and the necessary Preparation
for being so, if we knew we should not outlive such a Year, or such a Stage of
our Lives. Our Joys and Sorrows, with respect to our Relations and Friends,
would then be immoderate; our Carriage, in Prosperity and Adversity, would be
more unbecoming; our Dependence upon God and his Providence, the Redemption of
our Time, the Contempt of this World, and the Preparation for another, would
all be very much hindered by the certain knowledge of the time of Christ's
Coming to call us to Judgment. Therefore he tells us, That in an hour we think
not of, the Son of Man comes. It shall be suddenly, when he is not expected;
and therefore All should be Ready.

It is sometimes represented by the travailing Pangs of a Woman with Child,
which may over-take her at a distance from her own House, when she looks not
for it, 1 These. 5.3. It Is set forth by the surprise of a Thief entering the
Window of a House by Night, when the good Man of the House little expected him,
Rev. 16.15. Behold I come as a Thief; blessed is he that watches. And again we
are told, As a snare, shall it come upon all that dwell upon the face of the
earth, Luke 21.35. When Men are careless, and secure, and confident of
Long-life; when they are busy in pursuit of great things for themselves in
this World, when they are big with mighty Projects and Designs for hereafter,
when they enlarge their Imaginations to contrive the Satisfactions, they shall
have for many years to come, in the Pleasures, and Dignities, and Wealth, which
they count upon beforehand: when they say in their Hearts, Our Lord delays his
Coming; I have yet time enough to get ready; Then shall this day overtake them,
when they think not of it: The Lord of that Servant will come in a day that he
looked not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware, Luke 12.46.

III. The Necessity, and Obligation of being Ready, because of the Certainty
and Suddenness of the Coming of Christ. Where I shall, First, Consider the
Nature of this Readiness, and Explain something of it. Secondly, Show the Force
of the Argument, and amplify it in several Considerations, to urge it the more
effectually upon All to make Ready.

I. What is the Nature of this Readiness? In the general, it is expressed by
Two or Three Evangelists, under the term of Watching: Which, as the summary
Preparation for the Coming of Christ, takes in all the Duties of a Christian,
with respect to the Affairs of his Soul, and the Everlasting World; as awaking
out of Security, foreseeing our Danger, providing against it, carrying it
suitable to the Expectation of the Appearance of Christ from Heaven; Looking
for, Waiting for, Praying for, Hastening to, or hastening of, the Coming of the
Day of God: It comprehends an awakened Heart, an active Faith, a lively Hope, a
diffusive Charity, and persevering Diligence in all the Fruits of
Righteousness: That we may perfect Holiness in the Fear of God, lay up a good
Foundation against the time to come, and at last lay hold of Eternal Life: That
we may have Confidence at Christ's Appearance, and be able to stand before the
Son of Man, with exceeding Joy. This in general under the Name of Watching, and
being Ready, is the Duty of all.

2. Besides this General Account, we may consider some of the Particular
Metaphors, under which our Lord represents himself, (or is set forth in
Scripture,) when he comes again.

First, As a Bridegroom. And so our Readiness consists, in our Accepting him,
and Choosing him in such a Relation: I have espoused you to one Husband, even
Christ, 2 Cor. 11.7. And we read of the Marriage of the Lamb, and the Readiness
of the Wife, clothed in fine Linen, which is the Righteousness of the Saints,
Rev. 19.8, 9.

Now if you think you are ready for the Coming of Christ, under this Notion,
ask your selves, Has there been any such Agreement between Christ and your
Souls, which the Scripture represents by a Marriage-Covenant? Have you
penitently and thankfully Accepted him for Yours? and given up your selves
entirely to be his? To as many as have thus Accepted and Received him, He gives
Power and Privilege to become the Sons of God. Do you renounce all other
Lovers? Do you prefer Him alone, abandoning all Competitors and Rivals? so as
not to be for another, but for him, Hos. 3.3. The like we read, Psalm. 45.10,
11. Hearken, O Daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine
own people, and thy Father's house. So shall the King greatly desire thy
beauty; for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him. Is there a Supreme
Superlative Correspondent Affection, on your part to him, who has said, That
as a Bridegroom rejoices over a Bride, so will He rejoice over Thee? Isa.
62.5. Is this expressed by an entire Subjection to him, as the Head of his
Church, and the Savior of his Body? Ephesians. 3.23. And this not for a time only,
but for ever, Hos. 2.19. And I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I will
betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in lovsng-kindness,
and in mercies.

The public Solemnity of this Marriage will be at the Resurrection of the
Dead, when he shall come again to conduct his Spouse to his Father's House, and
more fully to evidence his Love, by the Manifestation of his own Glory. Our
Readiness therefore for the Coming of Christ, implies our hearty Choice of him,
and Consent to be his; to Love, Serve, Honor, and Obey him with Faithfulness,
Diligence, and Perseverance to the end.

Secondly, Christ is represented as a Householder, and Lord; who is gone into a
far Country, and has entrusted his Servants with various Talents, which they
are to employ according to his Order, and trade with for his Service, expecting
to be accountable to him at his Return, Luke 19.23. Though our Lord be gone to
Heaven, he has left a Family upon Earth, and committed a Trust to every of his
Servants. Now our Fidelity and Care in the Improvement and Use of our Talents,
will be our Readiness for the Coming of Christ; under these Considerations we
are to be Responsible to him for all the Blessings, Natural or Spiritual, that
he has committed to our Trust, and we have no Right in them any other way: We
are but Stewards, He is the Proprietor, and Absolute Lord. And according to the
number and kind of our Talents, he expects proportionable Care and Diligence,
as good Stewards to manage and improve them. For to whom much is given, of them
much will be required. Every one has some Talents, some Trust; our Reason, and
our Health, our Time, our Parts, Reputation, Estate, Interest, Authority,
Power: All the Blessings of any kind that we have, are Talents, to be used for
the Service of our Lord: And Blessed is that wise and faithful Servant, who at
his Lords Coming shall be found to have done so. Our Faithfulness and Care
herein, is our Readiness for his Coming. For he may demand an Account of our
Stewardship, when we expect it not, Luke 16.2. Therefore if we would be Ready,
we must be Diligent in his Work, and not bury our Talents in a Napkin, or waste
our Lords Goods; but be sound faithfully doing his Business in the Places and
Relations he has set us. In this consists that Readiness for his Coming, that
will entitle us to the Blessing, Luke 12.43.

But lest it should be said, Who can come up to this? Who is able to be always
thus diligently Employed? Who then can be Ready? Let us therefore,

Thirdly, Distinguish concerning this Readiness. There is an Habitual
Readiness, and Actual: The one of our State, and the other of our Frame.

1. An Habitual Readiness, which concerns our State: When our Peace is made
with God, so that she shall be found with him in peace, at the Coming of
Christ, 2 Pet. 3.14. When we have so put on the Lord Jesus, as at the Great Day
we shall not be found naked, 2 Cor. 5.3. When we are interested in the attoning
Sacrifice of Christ, so as to be reconciled to God, and shall find Mercy of the
Lord in the Great Day, Rev. 3.17. Persons of this Character will manifest in
their Course and Carriage, that they expect the Coming of Christ, by walking in
all holy Conversation and Godliness, 2 Pet. 3.10. Denying all Ungodliness, and
worldly Lusts, they will live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this World, as
those that look for the blessed Hope, and glorious Appearance of the great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.12, 13.

But because all that are Ready as to their State, and as to their general
Course, are not so as to their Frame, therefore Consider,

2. There is an Actual Readiness, as to the Disposition of the Heart; which
upon the near Prospect and Approach of any Messenger of Christ, to call us out
of the World, is a Christian Duty. This Actual Readiness we should all
endeavor after: That we may have greater degrees of that Readiness of Mind,
and Preparedness of Spirit, to Obey the Summons and Call of Christ, though it
should be with very little Warning; being Prepared, and Willing to go to him
whenever he shall call: I am ready (says the Apostle) to be bound at
Jerusalem; yea, to Die there for the Name of Christ, Acts 21.13.

All holy Persons (though Habitually ready) do not reach this: Some cry out
with David, Lord remove thy stroke from me! spare me a little longer! Psalm. 39.
Or as Hezekiah, when he received the Message of Death, turned his face to the
wall, and wept, Isa. 38. But if we have Warning of the Approach of Death, we
ought to stir up our selves actually to Prepare, to trim our Lamps, and set our
Souls in Order, reviewing our Lives, renewing our Repentance, exercising our
Graces, exciting our Hopes, recollecting our past Experiences, getting our
Evidences ready, and the Promises on which we may venture our Souls in a dying
Hour; that we may say with old Simeon, Now let thy Servant depart in peace: And
with the Apostle Paul, I have finished my course, henceforth a Crown of
Righteousness is laid up for me: And with our Lord himself, Father, into thy
hands I commend my Spirit: Or with Holy Stephen, Lord Jesus receive it.

Christians! Are we not too Unready, the best of us, as to Frame and Actual
Preparation? Do we sit as loose from this World, and all the Personal and
Relative Comforts of it, that accommodate the bodily Lise as we should? Have we
conquered the Fears of Death, and familiarized the Thoughts of the Grave, to
that degree as we ought? Is our Love to Christ so sprightly and vigorous, that
we could heartily welcome any Messenger to call us to him? Be the Instrument
what i^ will, and the Manner and Circumstances of our Departure as God shall
please, and the Warning never so short and sudden? Are we ready to go
presently, at the first Call? That were it not for doing Service in our Places,
(which God, who needs not our Help, can do by other ways,) we should rather
choose to be with Christ, as far better. Could we Answer to such a Call of God,
as Samuel, Lord, here I am, thoudidst call me? O let me pass through the dark
Valley! that nothing may keep me longer at such an uncomfortable distance from
my Lord and Savior, that where he is, I may be, to behold his Glory. This
Readiness, Habitual and Actual, we have need to look after; because the Son of
Man comes in a time when we think not of him. And therefore,

II. To urge your Diligence and Care to be Ready for the Coming of Christ, let
me amplify and enforce the Argument in this Text, by several Considerations.
As,

I. That whether Ready, or not Ready, e're long our Lord will come. Our
particular Judgment by Death, which shall confine us to the eternal and final
one, is at no great distance. We are hastening to this Day of God, whether we
believe, and mind it, or no: As Passengers in a Ship, to the end of their
Voyage, whether they sleep or wake: whether we be wise Servants, or foolish;
faithful Stewards, or unfaithful; whether we expect the Coming of our Lord, and
Prepare for it, or do not: He will shortly come, and call us to an Account. O
how soon shall you and I be gone! What a Change will a few days make in this
City, and in this Congregation? We may judge of it, by what it has made in few
years past? In less than Twenty Years, what Changes in Families, and Churches,
and Cities, and Nations? Husbands and Wives parted, Parents and Children,
Friends snatched away out of the Bosom of their Friends: Those we loved, and
lived familiarly with, Called before us, and gone home: And we are hastening
after a pace, whether our Readiness and Preparation do, or do not, answerably
hasten. One Relation, and another Acquaintance drops into the Grave: Some are
ready, and some unready: One Pastor after another is removed to Heaven, and the
Pulpits where they preach know them no more; and others will start up in our
rooms, and are preparing to fill our Places, who succeed any of those, whose
Funerals you Remember. And after a sew Lords's-Days more, and at most after a
few Summers and Winters more, you and I shall be called likewise, whether we be
Ready, or not Ready.

2. When once thou art called to thy particular Judgment by Death, nothing more
can be done to get Ready for the Coming of Christ, Eccl. 9.10. John 9.4. What,
if you were now leaving this World? and how near and sure is such an hour! You
would then be sensible, that now or never is the time to prepare, and get
Ready. Awake therefore, and Mind it without delay, that you may not cry for
more Time, when time is gone; and for the mercy of God, when it is too late. O
how shall my unprepared Soul Appear before my God! How shall I pass into
Eternity unready! What shall I do, to meet my Lord with Comfort! as if you had
never heard till that time, that you must dye, and come to Judgment. O what
Hearts of stone have Sinners, that can hear these things so often, and not
resolve without delay to get Ready! That will not consider the Judge is at the
Door, his Vengeance at their back, his Wrath pursues their sins, and woe be to
them if it overtake them. Before their Friends have laid their Bodies in their
Graves, or wrapped them in their Burying clothes, their Souls shall feel, that
God is in earnest, and that now is the only time to get ready for Judgment.

3. When men think not of it, and least expect his Summons, the Lord does often
come. When thou art most regardless of Death, thy Head and Heart taken up with
other things, the Handwriting on the Wall may appear, and strike thee into a
sit of trembling; a Voice from God may be heard, Come away Man, or Woman! Come
away, thy Time shall be no more; this Evening, or the next Morning, this Night,
or the next Day thy Soul shall be required of thee. Believe it, no Place, no
Age, no Time, no Portion of thy Life, is certainly exempted. Do not then put
off thy being Ready, lest thy Resolutions for hereafter should bare longer date
than the time of thy Life.

4. All the Time of our Lives is little enough, to get Ready for the Coming of
Christ. It Is little enough to learn to Live, says the Moralist, it is short
enough be sure to learn to Dye. Ask those who have taken most Pains, and spent
most of their Time to get Ready: Yet after all their Prayers, and Tears, after
all their Watching Striving, Running, and Preparedness, they complain they are
Unready still; unready for the Spiritual Coming of Christ, when they are to
meet him at his Table; much more Unready for his last Coming. Therefore let us
give Diligence, that we may be found of him in Peace, without spot, and
blameless.

And if the question be seriously asked of all of you, one after another, ARe
you prepared for Death? are you Ready for the Coming of Christ? or are you not?
How few will have the Heart, or Face, to say they are? The best will say, they
need further Preparation: But what must they think, and say of themselves, who
own they are habitually, as to their State unready; no way sit to Dye? I cannot
say my peace is made with God: I have not yet entered into Covenant with him: I
have not subjected and yielded my self to Christ: I have not taken on his Yoke,
or I have cast it off, after I took it on: I am yet a Stranger to him, or I
have shamefully left him after some Acquaintance? And will you put it any
longer to the venture, when your Lord may call within an hour?

5. God is now ready to Assist you by his Grace, if you will awake, and Mind
your Work; but if you delay, he may justly refuse, and withdraw it. And if once
the case comes to that, you can no more make Ready for Death and Judgment, than
if you were already dead; it being as possible for us to Repent without life,
or after we are dead, as to Repent without Gods Grace, while we are living.
Therefore they that promise for themselves, that they shall Repent, and Prepare
for the coming of Christ, (some time hereafter they resolve they will) they
must not only promise for themselves, but for God too; that he will wait their
leisure, and dance attendance after them through all the Stages of their
Delays; and yet be as ready to assist them hereafter as now; otherwise it is as
uncertain, whether you shall Repent hereafter if you live, as whether you shall
live to that hereafter, wherein you say you intend to Repent.

6. Consider, How great and Important a thing it is to Dye, and to meet the
Lord our Judge. It is so even for good men that are habitually Ready, after
such a life of sense, and the deep Impressions we are under by sensible
Objects, after our many Backslidings, and actual Sins; to look into the House
of darkness, and think of lodging there; to lay down these Bodies, to corrupt
and Putrify there; to bid adien to all our Relations, and take a solemn leave
of all our Friends; to think of passing through this dark Entry, through which as
we go right or wrong, we are made or undone for ever; to think of the Majesty,
and Holiness of God, his Truth, and Justico; to consider the strictness, and
Spirituality of his Holy Law, and the awful Solemnity of the Trial and
Judgment, that all Mankind must come under: These and such things considered,
which are obvious to any considering man, make it no easy matter to dye, even
for the best. But for an unprepared Soul, that is Unready as to his State, who
has done little or nothing, ever in his whole Life of such Work, no
Expressions can describe the Terrors of that man's case; especially for
careless, carnal Professors, that attend the preaching of the Word, and are
deceived by the Devil, to think they are in the way to Heaven, while yet they
live in secret Sin, and are Enemies to God; what killing disappointment will
they meet with, one moment after Death? when they expect with the foolish
Virgins, to enter Heaven, and find the door to be shut.

Sirs, believe and tremble! If you are not ready for the Coming of Christ, you
are ready for his condemning Sentence, and ripe for Ruin. If you are not
ready, as Vessels of Mercy prepared for Glory, you are ready, as Vessels of
Wrath, fitted for Destruction. That Place and Portion which you are fit for,
you shall have at Death. If you are not fit to be with Christ, if you are not
made meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Life, if you are not formed, and
wrought by the Spirit of Christ, for this self-same thing, you shall have
another Place, and Company, and Portion, with the Devil and his Angels, in
unquenchable Fire, where is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth for ever.

7. You need not fear that you shall hasten your Death, by Thinking of it, and
being Ready. Christ's Summons will not be hastened, though thy Preparation be. The
stroke of Death will not be sooner, but the easier, and make Life, and Death it
self sweeter, by now endeavoring to be Ready. You will not then be afraid of
every Sickness, and threatening Danger that brings you to the borders of the
Grave. They were the foolish Virgins, who were affrighted at the Midnight cry,
The Bridegroom comes, because their Lamps were out, and they had no Oil; they
were struck to the Heart, their Hopes dyed, and they presently sunk into
Despair. But of such as are Ready, we find them speak of Dying as of an easy
sleep; I must put off this Earthly Tabernacle shortly, says one Apostle; The
time of my Departure is at hand, and I am ready to be offered up, says
another, 2 Pet. 1.14. 2 Timothy 4.6. But as Christ will not delay his Coming, tho
thou be unprepared, so neither is thy Readiness for Death, a likely means to
shorten thy Life.

8. Consider, It is for this end, that our Lives are continued, and all the
mercies of our Lives, that we may be ready. What have you Life given you for?
why were not you cut off many years ago? but that you might have Time and space
to Repent, and Prepare for the Coming of Christ? How many years have some of
you been spared? It may be twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years? and yet after
all you are not ready. What have you been busy about all this while? How have
you employed your Time? What is the end of God, do you think, in all the
merciful helps He concinues you? Such as Ministers, and Books, Ordinances and
Providence, your own Sickness, and others Funerals? You lose the benefit and
use of all your Mercies of Life, Health, and Time, and some of you of Wealth
and Honor, etc. of all the Sermons you have heard, of all the Providential
warnings of God to Awaken you: you have lost them all, if they have not
furthered your Readiness, for the Coming of Christ: And if you shall live many
years to come, you must say it was all lost Time, and wish you had never had an
hour of it, while this preparation for Death and Judgment is neglected.

9. Consider the unspeakable Difference between a prepared and unprepared Soul,
in a dying Hour. The one is going to see the things he has Believed, and
possess that which he hoped for, and has the promise of God, that he shall
enjoy. The other is going to feel, what he would not in time believe; to endure
the threatened Wrath, he would not Fear, so as to escape. The one is come to the
end of all his Prayers, and Patience, Labors, and Sufferings: The other, to
the end of all his Ease, and Pleasure, Mirth and Joy. The one has the promised
Felicity, with God, and Christ, and all the blessed Spirits above, in view
before him; the other has Death and Hell, the Judgment of Christ, and an
Eternity of Misery before him, ready to overwhelm his Soul. The one can look
back with Comfort, and reflect upon his upright Holy persevering Obedience,
mixed with Repentance for many Sins and Failings, and yet can hope in God for
his acceptance through Christ; the other must review his Heart and Life with
horror and regret, and read over the black Items of his careless Impenitent
Course, with Bitterness and Torment, and the fears of greater. The one is
leaving this World, where he spent his days in preparing for Eternity, (tho he
heartily laments, that he began no sooner, and minded it no more;) the other is
passing into the invisible Eternal World, for which he has made no provision.
The one by Death shall be translated to a blessed State of Holinefs, Love, and
Peace, in the everlasting joyful Praises of God, his Maker, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier; the other sort are passing into the Regions of Darkness and
Despair, among Devils, and unholy miserable Souls, with whom they must dwell,
under the Hatred and Curse of God, and the unspeakable Terrors of his Wrath for
ever: O the difference between one that is ready, and one that is unready! when
the Summons from Christ shall come to call them both away. Consider this,
endeavor to be Ready; for the difference between one man's Death and another,
depends on the difference between Heart and Heart, Life and Life, Preparation
and Unpreparedness.

10. Consider, that all the Readiness you now can get, will be little enough to
support your Souls, when Christ shall call. Our utmost Diligence to Prepare
will not be too much, to enable us cheerfully to commend our Souls into the
Hands of Christ, in expectation of all the great and glorious things, which he
has Purchased, Revealed, and Promised. Then all the Grace you have treasured
up, will be little enough, for that is a time to use it, not to get it. Our
strongest Faith will hardly be sufficient; the clearest Evidences of our
Acceptance with God, will be no more than needs; the most apropriating,
particular, applicatory Faith, saying, I know that my Redeemer lives, will be
little enough to give us confidence in a dying Hour. You know of none can help
you, if then you cannot look to Christ with hope. If the Devil say, this sinful
Soul is mine, and Christ disown thee, and say so too, what shall overcome the
fears of Death? No wonder if Doubts and Fears arise, from the weakness of our
Grace, our Negligence and Remisness in the service of God, our Folly and
Offenses, and manifold Backslidings, our familiarity with this World, and
natural Love of Life, no wonder if it be difficult to conquer all these. And
how can that be done, if we be not now diligent to get Ready?

11. Consider for your Encouragement, that Vprightness and Sincerity shall be
acceptted, as your habitual Readiness. We are under a merciful Covenant, and
serve a gracious Redeemer: we find by the parable of the wise and foolish
Virgins, that tho the former, who had Oil in their Vessels, had many faults;
(for they slumber'd as well as the Foolish, when they should have been actually
waking, and Watching,) yet they were not shut out of Heaven: and then your
conformity to Christ shall be complete, and your weak imperfect Graces shall be
perfected.

12. Remember this also, that if your diligent Preparation be a difficult Work,
it is but for a little while. The allotted season to Watch, and Work, and
Wrestle, to strive and run, and use all Diligence to be Ready, is not long. And
Christ may say, Will you not watch with me one hour? that you may lift up your
heads with Joy at my appearing, and then dwell with me for ever? O how soon
will the labor of Repentance, and humble self-denying Diligence in our
preparatory Work be all over!

Soon will all the Affairs of humane Life be over; all these little things
which men call Business, be past and gone; those, I mean, of Trade and Money,
of Farms and Merchandise, they will all be over e're it be long: So will the
Difficulties and Trouble of holy serious Diligence, in making ready for the
Coming of Christ be over too. Now we must Fight and Wrestle, and hold on unto
Victory, but the time of Triumph is approaching: Now we must watch, and stand
upon our guard, but the promised everlasting Reward, and Rest, is not far off:
Now our Life is, or should be, a Life of Prayer, e're long we shall receive the
full Answer of all our Prayers, and all our Enemies be under our feet, never to
Disturb, or Tempt, or Disquiet, or Indauger us more for ever. It all depends
upon our sincere and persevering Diligence, to get ready for the Coming of
Christ.

The Improvement, which may be made of this, shall be, First, To Lament our
great and manifest unpreparedness for this Coming of Christ.

1. Many such as are truly sanctified, and have Oil in their Vessels, are yet
too Unready, for want of frequent believing Consideration, concerning this
Coming of Christ, and for want of Actual Preparation for it. How many are
entangled with the Cares, and Hurry of worldly Affairs, to that degree, that
they do not take Time enough, to retire and bethink themselves of the glorious
Appearance, and Revelation of Christ from Heaven, and so their Faith is weak,
and their Preparation flow. Alas! we are but too unready, our unmortified
Affections to earthly things, and unbecoming Fears of our lust Enemy, do
plainly prove it. The many breaches between God and our Souls, by particular
backslidings, tell us we are Unready. The vanity of our Minds and Spirits,
discovered by an undue conformity to this World, shows that we are Unready. The
excess of our Passions, upon Worldly Losses and Disappointments, attest it too
plainly. The declension of lively Hope, unto which we are begotten and born by
Regeneration, the grieving and quenching of the Holy Spirit, as the Spirit of
Adoption, and Earnest of our Inheritance, show that we are yet too unready.

The Promises, on which we must venture our Everlasting Hopes, are not studied,
and understood, digested, and applied, as they should be, and therefore we are
not Ready. Our Desires of the Coming of Christ, our Prayers for the hastening of
it, our anticipated Joy in the fore-thoughts of it, are so low, and so
imperfect, to what they ought to be, that they prove we are Unready. We do not
Labor and Watch, Pray, and Hope, with a resolved persevering Zeal, and
Constancy, for the Grace that is to be brought to us, at the Revelation of
Christ, as those that are Ready for his Coming.

2. It Is further to be bewailed, that multitudes fancy, and suppose they are
ready, when indeed they are not. O how great is the number of such! who imagine
themselves to be too well prepared already, to learn to Prepare. And therefore
all the Warnings and Exhortations of the Word, make no impression on them,
because they think themselves not concerned, tho they have never accepted
Christ, as the Bridegroom of their Souls, by an humble, penitent, unfeigned
Dedication of themselves to him, to love, please, and obey him above all. And
their own Consciences (if they would consider, reflect, and search) must tell
them, that they are not Faithful Stewards of their many Talents, as expecting
to be called to an Account.

3. The general Vnconcernedness of the most, about any such thing as this being
Ready, ought greatly to be Lamented. The most reckon it at that distance, they
will not trouble themselves to enquire whether they be prepared, or no. Others
are conscious of their own Unreadiness, and therefore do not care to think of
Dying: Tho they know not how soon they may be called; for many younger, and
more likely to live, have dyed this last Year. Parents may survive their
Children, and lay those little parts of themselves in the Grave, before they
make their own Beds there: Yet such is the powerful craft of Satan to befool
the Sinner, and such the deceitfulness of Sin to harden the Heart, that some of
the most unprepared, make a shift to live in peace, tho they cannot tell but
Death may open the Door into Eternity the next moment. They will not yet
consider it, and apply it to their own case; they will not know, that their
Judge is at the Door, that their Day of Reckoning is at hand, that they are
hastening to the Tribunal of Christ, that their Judgment lingereth not, and
their Damnation slumbereth not. One would wonder, what Apprehensions, and
Thoughts of these things, such careless Christians have, who durst not say they
disbelieve, or deny the Scripture Revelation, and yet feel no correspondent
Impressions answerable to the Nature, Weight, and Tendency of such things.

Let me ask thee, O man, that have neglected hitherto to make Ready: Do thou
think, that Christ will receive thy departing Soul at Death, or no? Will he
acquit and own thee in the Judgment, or no? What say thou, have thou
enquired, and examined, and made it thy business to know this? and to make sure
of it? How is it, that thy Mind is filled with other Thoughts? thy mouth with
other Talk? and thy Time employed about other things? when thou art so near to
the final Judgment of Christ, and see so many Souls daily passing into
another World; and yet wilt not consider what shall become of them, and of thy
self: but wilt continue to pursue some transitory Pleasure, or Profit, while
God and Heaven are neglected, and Christ despised, his Favor lost, and thy own
Soul lost, or in the extremest danger of being so, because thou art not Ready.
Can thou think that Christ will then accept thee, if thou now neglect him?
Can thou hope, that he will prove himself a Liar, by owning such as he has
often declared he never will? O pity your selves in Time! that you may not be
denied his pity at last. The door of Grace is yet open, but how soon, how
speedily may it be shut! if now you will not enter. O what an unspeakable Mercy
is the offer from God, that yet you may enter! what would departed Souls, that
dyed Unready, give for such a Call of God? Hold a little, Tremble, and Believe,
and delay no longer.

For Direction, in the general, Since the Bridegreom will come, and it may be
in an hour when you do not look for him, see that you have Oil in your Vessels,
and Lamps, as those that wait for the Coming of their Lord. If thou have no
Oil, buy it; if thou have, burn it; if thou have no Wedding Garment, get one;
if thou have, put it on; if thou have no true Love to God, never leave till the
Holy Flame be kindled; if thou have any in truth, exercise and use it, as one
that expects the Coming of Christ. More particularly,

1. Seek Reconciliation to God, by a Covenant Dedication of your selves to God
in Christ, accepting him as offered in the Gospel, and resigning, and yielding
your selves unfeignedly, and without reserve, to be his.

2. Let the Work of Mortification, both as to Sin and the World, be
progressive, and constantly carried on, that you may be found of him in Peace,
as to your State; and without Spot, as to your Frame, as well as blameless, as
to your Conversation, 2 Pet. 3.14. Sit loose in your Affections from Earthly
things, that Death may not rend and tear you from that, which has the chiefest
possession of your Hearts, for then you cannot meet the Summons of Death, but
with an excessive Sorrow.

3. Be much in Self-Examination, that you may get over your Doubts and fears,
concerning your Adoption, and attain to a more well-grounded Hope, and
Assurance of the special Love of Christ. What will it avail us, to think we are
Pardoned, and shall be saved, and e're long to find our selves mistaken when
there can be no Remedy? You must now understand your danger, if ever you will
be saved from it. And we have the same Rule and Law given to judge our selves
by, that God will judge us by at last. Therefore retire, and examine your
selves, whether you can observe the Seal and Earnest of the Spirit of Grace
upon your Hearts; whether you can review your Conversation and Course, as
transacted in simplicity and godly Sincerity, as in the sight of God, under the
conduct of the same Spirit? whether this sanctifying Spirit has drawn out your
Desires after Holiness, and your Love to God, his Word, his Worship, and his
Servants, so as to wean you from the World, and make you place your Hopes and
Happiness above, choosing God for your only Portion and Christ for your
Teacher, Savior and Lord; enabling you to live with sincere Desires, and
Endeavors to please and honor him, in the believing expectation of what he
has purchased and promised, preferring the Hopes of it before all the
Pleasures, and Advantages of Sin, and the present Life. And if upon serious
search, your Hearts condemn you not, you may have confidence toward God: But
how can you know these things without Examining? and how can you have this
confidence, without such a Knowledge? and how can you think of the Second
Coming of Christ with comfort, without some such good Hopes through Grace.

4. You should likewise, Endeavor to carry it in every Relation and Condition,
as expecting to be called to an Account, when your Lord shall come. Do nothing
now, but you would be willing to hear of then; nothing that you would be
ashamed, or afraid to have ripped up, opened, and discovered in that Day. Think
with your selves often, Is this that I am now doing, the Life which I now lead,
the Designs that I now pursue, such as will be sweet, or bitter to be
remembered, when Christ shall come? will it be to my Shame or Honor, to my Joy
or my Confusion, in the Day of Reckoning, when I must stand before my Judge?
How many Temptations to sin might this repel? How many necessary Duties might
this awaken us to perform, especially toward Relations?

It may now be a terrible thought to some of us, to consider and foresee that
those of our Relations whom we most tenderly Love, are like to fall under the
condemning Sentence of Christ, and perish Eternally. You can hardly bear up now
under the weight of such a thought: will you not then awake, to Counsel, Warn,
Reprove, Exhort, Admonish, and Entreat them, and do all you can to prevent it?
But if they will not hearken, your Faithfulness shall be your Comfort, and
their Condemnation shall not diminish your Happiness, though it will aggravate
their Doom if you have done your Duty. I will instance in one Relation.

Suppose a Wicked Child, to behold his Parents on the Right Hand of the Judge,
(one or both of them) owned by Christ, rejoicing in his Love, and taking part
with him, so as to be pleased with the Execution of his Righteous Sentence,
without any such Bowels of Pity toward them, as now they feel: And if we could
imagine them to discourse together, how might Holy Parents mind them of the
various Methods they used to prevent their Ruin; and of all the Counsels,
Reproofs, and Prayers, with which they followed them from year to year. I begot
thee, or brought thee forth; I laid thee in my Bosom, I carried thee in my
Arms; I took care of thee in Infancy; I instructed thee in Childhood; I looked
after thy Education; I brought thee to the public Assemblies; I put thee upon
Secret Prayer; I warned thee of thy Danger by bad Company; I urged thee to flee
youthful Lusts; I told thee what would be the End and Issue; I forewarned thee
of this day; and of the Everlasting Destruction that Christ had Threatened; and
of thy too late Repentance in the other World; and that hereafter I should see
thee condemned to Hell, without being able to pity thee. And now the Case is
thus, I cannot but approve the Righteous Sentence of the glorious Judge; for
thou would not prepare, and get Ready for this Day, notwithstanding thy many
Warnings and Calls from God and Man to do it.

Moreover, 5. Labor to strengthen Faith concerning the Certainty and Glory of
Christ's Appearing, and the most important awful; Consequences of it, both to
the Righteous, and to the Wicked.

1. As to the Certainty of his Coming. Unbelief is at the bottom of our neglect
to make Ready. We do not consider the confirming Reasons of the Truth of the
Gospel, and beg the Light and Influence of the Spirit, to persuade us fully of
this foundation Article. We take up with the name of Faith, and do not Believe;
with a notional weak, ineffectual Faith, that may dwell in the Hearts of
Hypocrites, or Devils; and therefore feel no influence by it to excite our
Hopes, or Fears, or Preparation.

Did we indeed believe it, as an unquestionable Truth, that Christ shall come
again to judge the World, we could not but Fear to be found Unready: For
whatever the distance be between this and that, Our Faith would represent it
near, as if the thing were present; as if we saw the Redeemer in the Clouds,
with the glorious Retinue of Blessed Angles, and ten thousand of his Saints: It
would realize the Solemnity of his Tribunal, the Books being opened, and the
Wicked trembling before their Judge, and the Righteous justified, and rejoicing
in the Approbation of their Savior.

Did we believe it Certain, we should often put the Question, How shall I
appear and stand in the Judgment? How shall I give an account of all my
Talents? What shall I answer when I am called to his Bar? what shall I do to be
befriended, when I am tried for my Life? Therefore beg that God would fix a
believing sense of this upon your Hearts, that your Faith may be the Evidence
of things not seen: That you may believe it as firmly, as if Doomsday were
already come, as if you heard the Trump to sound, and that Amazing voice, Arise
ye Dead, and come to Judgment.

2. Strengthen and increase Faith, concerning the Glory of the Second Coming of
Christ, as well as the Certainty of it. He shall be revealed from Heaven, with
visible Glory in flaming Fire, with his mighty Angels, so that every Eye shall
see him, and they also that pierced him. He shall come again with Power and
great Glory, and the voice of the Archangel shall awaken the World, and fill
them with an awful Reverence of their Glorious Judge. He that stoopt so low at
first, to be clothed with a mean disguise, and to glorify the Father in the
form of a Servant, by the Sacrifice of himself for our Redemption, shall be
publicly Honored in the view of all Mankind. At his first Appearance he was a
Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, he made himself of no Reputation,
was despised and rejected of men; but he shall come again, openly to vindicate
himself from the Contempt of his Enemies: Every knee shall bow before him, and
every Tongue confess him to be Lord: And they who affronted his Throne, and
lift up the Heel against him, shall be made his Footstool. At first he appeared
with all the sinless Infirmities of Humane Nature, but shall a second time with
all the Demonstrations of the Divine Power, and Godhead.

3. How awful and important will be the Consequences of his Coming to all
Mankind?

1. To the Wicked. With what Amazement and Confusion, with what Fear and
Horror, with what Dread and Trembling, shall they, as guilty Prisoners, be made
to stand before his Judgment Seat? What killing despair will seize their
Hearts? what Paleness and shadow of Death will cover their Faces? what
Convulsions, and gripes of Conscience will then torment them? Where can they
go? where can they hide? How can they appear? How can they avoid appearing?
What can they say? How can they answer the Charge? or deny the Accusation? or
evade the Sentence? or put off the Execution for a day? or bear it for a
Moment? Since they can never escape the Trial, or corrupt the Judge, or be
pardoned after Judgment, or get the Sentence to be reprieved, or the Execution
deferred. It will then be in vain to cry for Mercy, for now the Day of
Vengeance without Pity, and of Judgment without Mercy, is come: what Friend
will thou go to then? where are they? who can plead for thee, or save thee, but
he that will not? I would not for ten thousand Worlds, appear in thy Case,
among those that shall then be found Naked, and Unready. And are not these
things sit to be now considered, believed, and prepared for? What is all the
Business and Affairs of this World? What but a Play, a Game, a Trifle, to these
things?

2. To the Righteous. The Bridegrooms departure is not upon a Divorce: He shall
come again, to be glorified in his Saints, and be admired of all them that
believe. They shall see him and meet him in the Air, and say, Yonder is He whom
our Souls Love; yonder is the blessed Jesus, who once came from Heaven, to dye
for us, and now comes to bring us to Heaven: we believed his Word, and behold
now he comes to make it good. They shall hear his absolving Sentence; their
Persons shall be justified; their Cause shall be pleaded; their Sins shall be
blotted out; their Sufferings, and Sorrows shall all be ended. They may
therefore rejoice in hope, and lift up their Heads in expectation of that Day;
for the blessed Sentence shall ravish their Hearts, when they shall be bid to
Enter into their Lords Joy: And hear those endearing Words, from the great
Redeemer, Come ye blessed Children of my Father, take Possession of the
Inheritance prepared for you.

Let us therefore pray for the Second Coming of Christ, and the hastening of it,
as all Believers under the Old Testament and New, have done. And in this
posture, Watching, Praying, Waiting, and preparing for his last Appearance to
Judgment, we should be Ready for his particular Coming to us by Death.

Lastly, Let us improve every Warning of Divine Providence, every Death and
Funeral of our Relations, and Acquaintance, to promote our own Readiness to
follow. This is the Language of the late Providence that occasions this
Discourse. This is the voice of God, by every breach he makes in our own, or
our Neighbors Family. Be you also Ready: for you know not the Hour, when the
Son of Man comes. We lose the Examples, and Holy Lives of our deceased Friends,
for want of Imitation; and we lose their Deaths too, if we be not awakened to
prepare for our own. But alas? How soon do the Impressions wear off, of such
awakening Spectacles? It may be the ghastly looks, or dying groans of dear
Friends, or departing Relatives, gasping out their last breath, and just
passing into the other World, for the present may affect us a little: It may be
when we see an open Coffin in our own House, or a Grave gaping to receive the
Body of one we knew, and loved, and lately conversed with, this may move and
startle us a little: It may be when we behold the mournful Looks, and Habit,
the Funeral Pomp and Solemnity, that attends them to the House of Darkness,
some serious Thoughts are excited; our Minds are awed into some reflections
upon our own Mortality. But when the Ceremony is over, and we are gone from
such a Spectacle; when the Dead are buried out of our sight, and we engaged
among the living World again, how soon alas! is all this forgotten? and how few
are Gainers by such a Loss, in the manner they should be, i. e. To take the
Warning, to be Ready, and Prepared for the Coming of Christ to us, which is as
sure, as if we were already dead.

One Help to get Ready our Selves for Death and Judgment, is to consider and
improve the Death of Others. Either of such, who were called, and not Ready,
whose case speaks loudly to us not to delay, and trifle as they did: or of such
as were Prepared, and fit to Dye, their Death has also the like voice of that
in the Text, Be you also Ready. Our Deceased Friend, Mrs. Gearing, I am
persuaded was of this latter sort.

. 1. I Know very well, that the praising of the Dead has been scandalously
abused, as a more close way of flattering the living Relations, and therefore
would be cautious what I speak on such Occasions: But the Honor of Gods Grace
is not a little concerned in the Honor of those, in whom it did remarkably
appear: and he has promised, that they who serve, and follow him, shall be
honored. To mention what was really imitable and praiseworthy, needs no
Apology, or Excuse; the matter carries its own Justification.

2. You of this Congregation could not but observe her Diligence and Constancy
in attending on the Public Worship of the Lords Day, and to show forth the
Lords Death every Month, in the other Solemnity of the Supper. Her early
Attendance here, before the public Worship began, tho she lived at a more
remote distance than many of you, is not unworthy of your Imitation.

. 3. Her strict Seriousness in Family Worship, and Closet Duties, by which the
Life and Vigor of practical Godliness is to be kept up, they who knew her
best, were well acquainted with.

. 4. There was one thing in her daily Course, which should shame and awaken
most Professors, viz. the Conscientious daily practice of Self-reflection, and
Examination; reviewing and calling over the passages of every Day in the
Evening. She made Conscience every Night, to look back on the Duties she had
performed, and the Manner of 'em; on the Mercies she had received; on the
Errors, Weaknesses, and Omissions, she had been guilty of, etc. in order to
Repentance, or Thanksgiving. Oh that there were more of such, concerning whom
this may be truly said! We should be more Ready for the Table of the Lord every
Month, and more Ready for the presence of Christ at the Hour of Death, if we
did thus review the Actions of every Day, at the close of it.

. 5. Not to insist upon her Faithfulness, and Prudence, Tenderness and
Affection, Affability, and Friendly Carriage in every Relation, with diverse
other things very Commendable in her Life. I shall only take notice of a few
things concerning her last Sickness, which after ten days determined in Death.

. 6. Her Patience, Submission, and Resignation was answerable to the other part
of her Character and Deportment; that is, truly Christian. When sometimes (by
intervals) her Distemper did affect her Head, as soon as she recovered the use
of her Understanding, and a composed mind, very pertinent and earnest
Supplications to Heaven, discovered the holy Seriousness of her Heart and
Frame. When she could hardly speak more than Yes, or No, yet she did
sufficiently signify her Assent, and cordial Approbation of any seasonable
Religious Discourse, that was made to her.

. 7. She owned her Hope and Trust in the Mercy of God, through Jesus Christ, for
Pardon and Eternal Life; and under the disorders of so painful and violent a
Fever, yet acknowledged she had Peace within.

. 8. The day before she dyed, she told a near Relation, that she had a great
work to do on the morrow: And when it was replied, that it is true, It is a
great and difficult Work to dye; yet one moments Enjoyment of God in Heaven
will make amends for all: She very affectionately cries out, I, so it will: I
know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall go to him, and be with him.

. 9. The Evening before her Departure, after I had prayed for her, in the
presence of several Relations and Friends, and seriously endeavored to commend
her Soul into the hands of Christ; I asked her, Whether Jesus Christ were not
the Chiefest of ten thousands to Her; whether she did not desire and prize him
above all; whether she had not given up her self to him, again and again, with
all her Heart and Soul, entirely, and without reserve; and endeavored (humane
Infirmities, and Backslidings repented of, excepted) to walk and live as a
Follower of Christ, under the Conduct of his Spirit, and according to the Rule
of his Word, and some other such Questions, that might assist her to discern
the Truth of her Grace, etc. She answered in the Affirmative, with
extraordinary Modesty, Humility, Thankfulness and Affection: And gave me her
hand at Parting, with thanks for my Prayers and Assistance, begging of God the
best of Blessings for me and mine, which were her own words.

. 10. After which, in a difficult struggle with the King of Terrors, we hope
and trust she was supported by the Everlasting Arms of that Powerful Grace of
Christ, who has conquered Death, and him that had the Power of it, the Devil.
So that we may now say, O Death where is thy Sting, etc. God grant those lively
impressions of Death, and another World, which the Relations then present
seemed to have on that occasion, may not easily wear off, or lose their proper
Influence!

And now, Christians, let us mix our Sorrows for our Deceased Friend, with the
Joys of Faith, on the account of her being made meet and ready for the Presence
of Christ. Some Sorrow is allowable, were it but as Death enters into the
World, as the fruit of Sin: But she being Prepared for Death, and made meet for
the Promised Blessedness, beyond the Grave, that ought to be the matter of our
Joy, which we believe is so of hers. And do we not our selves Hope, (and have
we any better, greater Thing we hope for, than) to possess that Happiness with
Christ, which we believe she is possessed of? Is it not then unreasonable, to
make that the Subject of immoderate Mourning, and excessive Lamentation, as to
our departed Friends, which is the principal matter of Hope and Comfort, as to
our own Souls? And shall we for the sake of a lesser good, which we suppose to
our selves by their living longer, desire to deprive them of a Greater, which
they cannot attain but by dying? Let us rather be awakened, edifi'd, and
encouraged by their Examples, who by Faith and Patience, and Perseverance, are
gone to inherit the Promises: and by their Funerals be excited to foresee and
make Ready for our own. Oh that the Call of God, by this Breach among us, may
be understood and obeyed! For this it speaks to every one in particular, Be you
also Ready. Amen.

THE END.
The SAINTS Desire to be with CHRIST.

A SERMON PREACHED Upon the DEATH OF Mrs. Ann Barnardiston, (DAUGHTER of
Nathanael Barnardiston, Esquire late of Hackney.)

A SERMON PREACHED Upon the DEATH OF Mrs. Ann Barnardiston, (DAUGHTER of
Nathanael Barnardiston, Esquire late of Hackney:) Who Departed this Life the 30th.
of December. 1681. at the Age of Seventeen.

With a brief Account of some Remarkable Passages of her LIFE and DEATH.

By John Shower, Minister of the Gospel.

Psalm. 103.15. As for man his days are as grass: as a flower of the field so
he flourishes.

V. 16. For the wind passes over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof
shall know it no more.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for J. Dunton and A. Chandler. 1691

TO The much Honored, Mrs. Elizabeth Barnardiston.
MADAM,
THe sad Occasion of the Sermon, and your Relation to Her, whose Dying Request
was fulfilled in my Preaching it, does style the Dedication yours. Though what
I have mentioned of your Excellent Daughter, is less than others would have
said on the same Subject, yet having given an Account of her Preparedness and
Willingness to Dye, methinks that should be considered as a sufficient Argument
to mitigate your Sorrow, and prevent its Excess. It Is the Apostles Instruction
concerning them who sleep in Jesus, that we ought not to sorrow as do others,
who have no hope. Such were the Egyptians; and it is observed of them, that
they mourned longer for the death of old Jacob, than his own Son Joseph did. I
know the Time of her Death gives an Accent to the Calamity: That before your
Mourning Weeds were laid aside for one of the best of Husbands, who has a good
Report of all Men, and of the Truth it self; you should be forced to continue
the same, or put on more, for the Loss of such a Child, in the Prime of her
Youth, and Strength, and Beauty: A Loss for which you do not mourn alone, since
many others are partners of your Grief; not by sympathy only, as pitying you,
but from a due Respect and Affection to her, and their own Concern at her
Departure.

But as your Afflictions abound, God can make your Consolations by Christ
abound much more: And such Losses as these, (though some of the smartest and
most afflictive to humane Nature) may turn to your Spiritual Gain: And even
this Rod, like that of Aaron, may blossom, and produce the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness: If in the want of their Company, God himself be more depended on
as your All in all: If their removal out of this World promote your
Mortification to it; if their being taken up to Heaven, assist your
Preparations, and excite your Desires to follow: God has already made good his
Covenant Promise, in a very peculiar manner, to those whom he gave, and has
taken from you; and I trust will do so as to those who remain: that they may
know and serve the God of their Fathers with a perfect Heart, and see the
Felicity of his Chosen; That they may tread in the steps of their departed
Relatives, and bear up the Name of God in their respective Stations; to his
Glory, and your Comfort, and their Salvation. And if God should not make your
House to grow, yet he has made an Everlasting Covenant with you, well ordered
in all things, and sure, 2 Samuel 23.5.

I wish the following Discourse may contribute any thing to your Support: or at
least be accepted, as an Expression of my Obedience, in complying with your
request thus to make it public: And as a Testimony of my unfeigned Respect to
the Memory of the Deceased with a serious desire of some benefit to others
also, by such a remarkable Instance of an Early Piety, of an Exemplary Life, of
a peaceable Death: Which God grant, who alone can bring Good out of Evil; all
whose Works are perfect, and whose Ways are Judgment. I am,

London, Jan. 25. 1681/2. MADAM, Your most Affectionate Humble Servant, John
Shower.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Being Earnestly desired, both by the Relations of the Deceased Gentlewoman,
and by the Preacher of the following Funeral Sermon, to Testify what I knew of
the Gracious and wonderful workings of the Holy Spirit upon the Heart of this
Person during Her Life; I could not but yield to their Importunate Requests.

And upon this Occasion I must declare, That having Known her from her
Childhood, and having very much observed her Conversation of late, and being
called to give her several Visits in her sickness, I do believe (upon the
whole) that God did give her a sound Repentance for, and a Full Remission of
all her sins, through the Mediation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

I can assure thee, Reader, who ever thou art: that she had an awakened sight
of her sins, accompanied with a great measure of Godly Sorrow for them: I
discerned also in her a deep Humiliation, and I heard her open her
self-Condemnation thereupon. I found in her also a clear Knowledge of the
Nature of the Now Covenant, together with a Right Apprehensionof the Nature of
that Faith, which is required of all men, (and is through Grace bestowed upan
some Penitents) whereby the Soul does attain to an Interest in that Covenant:
It being, thereby, united unto Christ; and consequently, does partake of the
Benefits of his Merits, and does receive the Fruits of his Atonement, with the
Inhabitation of his Spirit.

Saving Faith and True Repentance are always inseparable; and their
Conjunction does evidence and speak them to be true and saving; both These (I
do believe) were united in the Soul of this deceased Person: And therefore I
have very great Hopes of her State. All Faith which is pretended to, where
Repentance is wanting, I account to be nothing but a presumptuous Confidence:
and all seeming Repentance, which is not Accompanied with some Faith in the
Divine Goodness, and in the promises made thereof (by our Lord Jesus) is no
other than the Repentance of a Cain, or a Judas his despair.

Our Lord Jesus did (as it were) Epitomize the whole Gospel, and comprehended
the whole Duty of Man in two words, viz. Repent and Believe: and it is to be
observed, that these two are set in the very Front, as the Text to all his
Ministry, Mark 1.15. And by reason of the Import of them, they may be accounted
as the Contents of the whole.

Where these two Graces are not conjoined, Guilt Remains, and Sin Reigns: But
where they are united in any Soul, as that Person is Justified, so that Heart
is savingly changed, and that Nature is in measure Sanctisied; and the Life of
that Man (for the future) will be proportionably, universally Holy. Would the
Genius of the present Age allow me to use Metaphors in Soul-concernments, I
should think that I did then best explicate to vulgar Capacities the Nature of
saving Faith, when I did call Faith the Daughter of Knowledge, the Sister of
Repentance, and the Mother of Love; for the Holy Ghost tells us, that Faith
comes in by Hearing, To. 10.17. That it Purifies the Heart, Acts 15.9. and
works by Love, Gal. 5.6.

That God had given this Person the True Seed of such a Faith, was evident by
its Fruits: The Apostle tells us, that he that has not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his, To. 8.9. And also he tells us, that as many are led by the
Spirit are the Children of God, To. 8.16. Now I must profess that (so far as I
was able to Judge) I have seldom seen a dying person, manifest more of a
Christ-like Spirit than she did: That is, I never saw more of a Spirit
Thirsting after Communion with God, of a Spirit more contemning the World, of a
Spirit more deeply bowing unto the Will of God, or a Spirit more patient under
the Cross; and more Submitting to the Rod of God.

Indeed I knew once a Person that did exceed her herein, and it was her
Renowned Father: A Man of the greatest and most deserved Name, for Piety and
Sincerity, for Humility and Patience, of all Men, in or Near the City, that I
have known: Who Feared no Pain or Torture upon any other account, but this
only, viz. Least they should tempe him to the least unbecoming Groan, in some
great paroxisme of the Stone.

The Submitting of our Wills to Divine Will and Pleasure in all things, is the
sum and substance of all Practical Religion here; and the full consorming of
our wills to the divine will and mind, is the height and Top of all man's
Happiness hereafter: To enjoy this Privilege of full Conformity to God, is the
Portion of None in this World; and to perform that Duty of submission to him,
is the Attainment of but very Few; yet this deceased Person was so great a
Favorite, as that God was pleased to bestow this rare Jewel to be worn in her
Bosom, who did seem with John to Lie very near the Heart of her Savior.

Very signal and Conspicuous is the discriminating Grace of God, toward some
Persons more than toward others: It Is true, that God is not wanting to the
Happiness of any of his Creatures': and his absolute Sovereignty seems in all
things to be governed by his Infinite goodness; so that, he is both Just, and
good to all: yet there is nothing more notable, or more evident, than that
there are some objects of his Love, who are his Segulahs, his peculiar ones: in
whom God does especially delight; and unto whom God does do good with his whole
Heart, Jer. 32.41.

As God does suffer most men to make their own choice, and does bestow upon
them what they do fully and Finally choose: so he will himself choose as he
will, and he will do with his own gratuitous favor as he himself pleases; and
he will give no account to any of his own matters.

A great Instance hereof was this now blessed person, of whom I may say, that
her whole Life was full of Gods goodness: and that Mercy and Truth did follow
her even all her days; which days, the favor of Heaven would not suffer to
be many; because it did ordain, that her Sorrows and her Temptations should be
but Few.

Time being nothing but a dressing Room to Eternity; the shorter it is, the
sooner do Holy Souls enter into the more immemediate presence of the Glorious
Majesty.

It is Reckoned in holy Writ, as an act of very Great kindness shown by Hegai
(the Kings Chamberlain) unto Esther, that all things necessary for her
Purisication, and for her due preparation, for the love of her designed Husband
(The great King Ahashuerus,) were given to her more speedily than to others:
whereby a Quicker access to the King was afforded her; and the Crown was so
much the sooner set upon her Head.

The good Spirit of God did deal something after the same manner, with this
young Virgin: For the work of Sanctisication was hastened in her, that she
might the more early receive the Crown of Glory, from the King of Kings: and
might be presented holy and without spot, or blemish, or wrinkle, or any such
thing.

Few pages, and fewer hours allotted me for this work, will not permit me to
enumerate the many special favors that were shoured down upon this person
while she lived.

I shall not therefore take notice of the privileges of her Birth, or the
Honor of her Family, which were great; neither will I mention her Natural
endowments, of parts, or Beauty, or any such thing: Blessed be God, that she
her self (though young) had learned before her death, to reckon such enjoyments
as these, to be very mean and poor, when compared with the Joys that were set
before her.

They are Love tokens of a greater value, which I did observe to be conferred
upon her; and these were such and so many, That I may say that she was one of
those that God had blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ: and I may add with the Apostle, that God having chosen her in him
before the Foundation of the World, to be holy and without Blame. And the same
God having decreed the End, did also ordain the Means.

Accordingly, in the First place the kindness of God appeared in ordering, that
she should be born of, and brought up by very Pious and Religious Parents; and
few persons did ever enjoy more Spiritual Nurture and Admonition, or had a
greater stock of Prayers laid up for them, than this Gentle voin in and the
rest of that Ossspring.

Another singular Mercy, which did promote her Salvation, was the excellent
pattern, of modesty, virtue, and piety which was afforded her by her elder
Sisters. The Instluence of a Good Example is always greatly Advantageous: but
when it is found in near Relations, it is much more obliging and efficactous.

Another great Blessing, much conducing to her Eternal Happiness, was this,
that in her youth, she enjoyed the privilege of Attending upon such an eminent
Mimstry; that the very Enemies thereof, have been heard to Confess, that it is
very Learned, and most Rational, and further they knew not: but such as are
Taught of God, and have their spiritual senses exercised, so as to be
acquainted, not only with the form of Godliness, but also with the Power
thereof, these men do say, that the Character which the others do give of this
eminent persons teaching, are most true; and they do further also say, that it
is extraordinary Clear and convincing, most Evangelical and Scriptural; greatly
practical and profitable, and yet very Sublime and Spiritual.

Now Reader consider, whether many (if any) such have finally miscarryed; whose
Natures were gentle, and easy to be entreated; whose hearts were Soft and
Tender; who had the Benesits of such Education, and such Example; who enjoyed
such Teaching abroad, as well as such Counsel at home; and all, accompanied
with fervent Prayer unto God for a Blessing, which I am sure that she did not
want: it being reported of her Father, that his Custom was (with the Psalmist,
119.164.) Seven times a day to pray unto the Lord, and to praise him. Moreover,
I am informed, that this deceased Gentlewoman was observed to spend much time
in Closet Prayer of late; consider then, I say, whether we may not hope
considently, that the Grace of God had savingly and effectually wrought upon
her; who was both visibly in Covenant with God; and whose heart also God had
disposed and prepared, by such special Means of Grace which he had bestowed
upon her.

And this is yet more evident, if we reflect upon God's dealing with her in her
last Sickness; whereby God did seem to seal Instruction deeply upon her Soul.
Her distemper was one of the worst sort of Small Pox: At her first being taken,
she had strong apprehensions that she should dye; she therefore did fall
closely upon the work of Examination, desiring the assistance of some Ministers
therein; and she was visited by many; she opened her case to us all, and God
was pleased to make her to suspect and be jealous of the worst; and to confess,
and condemn herself for, her Sins, both of Omission, as well as Commission; and
humbly to inquire after the only way of Pardon: And it pleased God so to bless
these last helps, as that none of us, who visited her, do doubt, but the same
Spirit who convinced her of Sin and of Righteousness, did at length seal her up
to the day of Redemption.

The Alpha, the first Beginning and Foundation of all practical Religion, is
that act whereby a Soul does deliberately, resolvedly, freely, and expressly
dedicate and devote it self unto God, and his Service: Thus the Saints in 2
Cor. 8.5. The Omega, the last, concluding, and consummating work of a devout
Soul, is to commit and commend its Spirit into the hands of God, as to a
faithful Creator: thus did Stephen, Acts 17.59. Yea thus did our Lord Jesus
himself: Luke 23.46.

Thus also did this blessed Person: she did, I hope, begin well, in an early
Consecration of her self to God: I am sure she did end well: and it is the end
that Crowns the work: she did reckon, that she had not fully Finished her
Course; nor rightly laid the Top-stone of her spiritual Building, so as to cry
Grace, Grace unto it; until she had most devoutly and humbly offered up her
Soul to God in Prayer, by the assistance of some Friend and Minister.

Accordingly, although it were midnight, and although my Habitation was far
from hers; yet in the very last Agonies of her Death, she did send for me: and
with the clearest use of her Reason, and the most servent desires of her Soul,
she did entreat me, that I would in her Name, solemnly and expressly furrender
and give up her Soul into the Arms and Bosom of her Savior, in whose precious
Blood, she did hope that all her sins were now fully washed away.

I did readily obey the Call, and did comply with her desire: for I did, and do
judge that this desire of hers proceeded from some extraordinary Impulse, and
work of the Holy Ghost: And Reader, thou walt think as I do, if thou shall read
and observe the effect and consequence hereof, as it is related to thee, in the
close of the following discourse.

Almost such another extraordinary Impress (as it may be thought) was made upon
her Spirit, on occasion of this Author 's presenting her with a Exhortation to
Touth to prepare for Judgment, 11 Eccl. 9.
Funeral Sermon, which he had preached but a little kefore she was taken sick:
which Sermon she having received, and read, and diligently considered; she was
heard to say, That she did think, that her own change would not be far off; and
that she could wish, that the Author might preach her Funeral Sermon also: and
she then named the Text (now insisted upon;) and said, That she hoped, that God
would make her Funeral Sermon as profitable to other young Ones, as the Former
Sermon had been to her self.

Her Prognostics were too true, as to the shortness of the time which she
lived after those words were spoken by her; God grant, that her hopes be not
frustrated, but that all her dying words may prove truly prophetical: and
especially those, which related to the profitable success of the Sermon here
before thee.

The Author has done his part like himself, as well in this, as in the former
Discourse: Oh that he might find as diligent, and as considering Readers, as
she was: many excellent Considerations, very subservient, and conducing to thy
Conviction and Salvation, are proposed herein: but all will be in vain, and to
no purpose, without thine own Meditation, and the Spirits application:
Concerning the Discourse, I must say no more, and I can do no less; than to
allude to the words of the Holy Ghost, Eccl. 12.9. And moreover, because the
Preacher was wise, therefore in this Discourse, he has Taught the People
Knowledge; and has given good heed, and sought and set in order many Arguments
for thy preparing for Death, and moreover for preferring of Death before Life:
The Lord convince thee by them; and also carry thee comfortably through all
Time to Eternity. My Paper is short, and my Time shorter, I must therefore
conclude; for the Sermon is wholly Printed, and stops only until I have told
thee that I am

Thy Friend, and Souls Servant, S. Fairclough.

THE SAINTS DESIRE TO Be with Christ.
PHIL. I. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and
to be with Christ, which is far better.


SAint Paul writing from Rome to the Church at Philippi, in this Chapter
acquaints them with his Bonds and other Discouragements; which he tells them by
their Prayers and the Assistance of the Spirit of Christ obtained thereby,
would turn to his Salvation and the furtherance of the Gospel, and had already
been attended with some considerable success in that kind; ( V. 12, 13, 14.) to
fortify and confirm the Professors of the Christian Faith, and to propagate
and promote it even in the Court of Caesar, and in other places. And if Christ
might be magnified, he was perfectly indifferent to Live or Dye; ( v. 19, 20.)
For to me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain, v. 21. His Life, he hoped,
might advance the Honor of Christ; and his Death would be subservient to the
same design: By his further service if he live, and by his sufferings if he
dye; by his Ministry supposing his Life, and by his Martyrdom in case of his
death.

But if I live in the flesh, this, says he, is the fruit of my labor, v. 22.
or, it is worth my Labor to glorsie the Redeemer by continuing in this World.
Yet what I shall choose I wot not. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a
desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better.

To Depart, or be dissolved: The Original word is used both by Christian and
Heathen Writers for a departure from any place to return home, Luke 12.36. And
when the same Apostle speaks of his approaching death, he tells us, that the
Time of his departure was at hand, 2 Timothy 4.6.

Having a desire to depart, a vehement and earnest desire, as the word imports;
and to be with Christ, to be absent from the Body, and present with the Lord, 2
Cor. 5.8. with that merciful Savior, who had compassion on me, when as an
ignorant Blasphemer, I persecuted his Members; who called me to be an Apostle,
and enabled me by his Grace to own his Truth in the face of Dangers, and has
hitherto comforted me in all my Tribulation. I desire to depart, that I may be
with him. With him, not with the blessed Angels or departed Saints, though
their Society will make a part of the heavenly Joy: Not the former, they are
but ministering Spirits and menial Servants employed under him; and though they
shine as Stars, yet he is the enlivening Sun, from whom they derive their
Luster, and borrow their glory. Not the latter; they have no Blessedness but by
his Donation and Purchase, no Crowns of Life but what He puts on. Therefore
it is not to be with them only or chiefly, that made them thus groan to be
dissolved, thus earnestly desire to depart, but to be with Christ: Which is far
better, simply and in it self more desirable, by much more better, the
Comparative being double in the Greek Text; and yet I wot not what to choose,
for I am in a strait betwixt two. On the one hand, his Love to the Philippians
who needed his presence, (many false Teachers being at that time crept in among
them,) made him willing to abide in the Flesh, and deferr his own Felicity for
a time upon their account, v. 24. But the Glory of Christ's presence on the
other^ and his own unspeakale advantage by it, made him desirous of a
Departure; and therefore though he determines for the former, and was content
to live, and it is probable had some secret intimation from Heaven, that all his
Work in this World was not yet sinish't; yet he grants the latter to be simply
more eligible: having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far
Better. Which words are not more suitable to a Funeral Solemnity, than
expressive of the dying Thoughts and Temper of our deceased Friend, and were
chosen by her as the Subject of my present Discourse. That I may comprehend the
Substance of the Text, according to the desire of the Dead, for the Benefit and
Instruction of the Living; let us consider,

1. When, and how far, it is Warrantable for a Christian to desire Death?

2. In what respects to depart and to be with Christ is far better than to
abide in the Flesh.

3. On what Grounds and Principles a Christian may expect a future Blessedness
with Christ, after his departure, so as to encourage and excite his desires
after it?

4. Whence it comes to pass, that even those who acknowledge it far Better to
be with Christ, than to continue in the Body, are yet Unwilling to depart in
order to it? and what Remedies are proper to the case of such?

5. The Application of the whole, particularly with respect to the sad Occasion
of our present Meeting.

1. When and how far is it Warrantable for a Christian to desire to be
dissolved? This Inquiry may be answered in the following Propositions.

1. Our Dissolution and Departure as a natural or penal evil, as contrary to
Nature, or as the Punishment of Sin, cannot possibly be the Object of a
rational Desire: If God has promised a long Life as the Encouragement and
Reward of our Obedience, and threatened an hasty death as the punishment of
Impiety; If it be universally true, that the Soul of Man desires Union with the
Body, and unavoidably dreads a separation from it; If torturing pains, and
loathsome Diseases are the usual Antecedents of dying: If the Corruption of the
Body, and it is Imprisonment in the Grave till the general Resurrection be the
certain Consequent of our dissolution; We cannot but think of Death as a
matural Evil, and as such decline and fear it.

Much less desirable will it appear, if considered as the Wages of Sin, and the
fruit of Gods Displeasure, and the Just Sentence of his Vindictive Justice: but
how far our dissolution in this latter Notion of it is changed by the death of
Christ in reference to Believers, is another question, and will more properly
be considered under the third Inquiry.

2. Our dissolution and departure ought not to be desired, Only as a freedom
from Temporal Evil; as preventive of present suffering, or delivering us from
it. The Apostle does not mention the uneasy Circumstances of a Prison, or the
continual hardships to which he was exposed from the malice of his Adversaries,
as the ground of his desire to depart, but to be with Christ. He knew very well
that a Christian may serve the end of Gods glory, and be useful to others in a
state of suffering: and therefore when he says in another place, We that are
in this Tabernacle do groan being burdened, he adds the limitation in the
following words, not to be unclothed but clothed upon, that Mortality may be
swallowed up of Life: not merely to avoid the inconveniences of our abode in
so poor a dwelling, but to come to the possession of the Building not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.3, 4. Not merely to find relief and
deliverance from our present burdens, when through melancholy or discontent we
are weary of Life: Job 7.13. Jon. 4.3. when we have set our Hearts on somewhat
we cannot obtain, or struggle with some Difficulties we cannot master: or are
impatient under bodily Pains, or quite dispirited by the sad prospect of
approaching Calamities; in such a case to wish for Death, and desire to depart,
is unbecoming the Character, the Encouragement and Hopes of a Soldier of
Christ. Much Iess will the Gallantry of a Roman, or a Philosopher legitimate
the desire of Death, only to prevent Slavery, or avoid Disgrace, or miss the
sight of an unwelcome object. As Cato resolved to dye, that he might not behold
Victorious Caesar, whom by all means possible he had endeavored to ruin. And
Cicero in Tuscul. quest. lib. 1.
Cicero says expressly of him, that the reason of his Choice was just, and that
Cato ought to dye rather than see the face of a Tyrant. But we have not so
learned Christ, for

3. We must not designedly precipitate or hasten our Departure; nor wilfully
neglect any probable means to preserve our Lives, how desirous soever we are to
be with Christ. We acknowledge God as the Author and Owner of our Lives, and
shall we presume to dispose of what is his, without a declaration of his
consent and order to authorize us? Are we bound by the sixth commandment to
preserve the life of our Neighbor, and may we be negligent and careless of our
own? Is not every man nearer to himself than any other can be? And is not
self-murder a violation of the Law of Nature, and condemned by a general
suffrage? And can we suppose it a sufficient Justification of our selves, that
we profess a desire to be with Christ? whereas we may not do this or any other
evil, though the greatest good may come of it: He that hastes to be rich, even
in this sense, shall not be innocent, Prove. 28.16. We must be entirely devoted
to serve and glorisie the Redeemer as long as we live; and rather dye upon the
Spot, than quit our Station without the order of our General: and yet we must
not shipwreck our Health, or expose our Lives to hazard, without a Warrant from
Heaven.

4. A Sincere Desire to be with Christ, is consistent with some Fear of Death,
and a reproveable Unwillingness to depart and be dissolved. The Example of
Christ himself is usually urged in vindication of a natutal sensitive fear of
Death, viz. the discovery thereof which he made in his Agony and Prayer in the
Garden. A Socinian only will assert, that therefore he was more affected with
the fear of Death than many of the Martyrs have been, because of the exquisite
Temper and tender constitution of his Body; and that there was nothing but what
was natural and ordinary in his case. Whereas he was to conflict with the Wrath
of God, and bear the Curse, and be wounded for our Transgressions, etc.
otherwise his own Innocence and perfect Resignation to the will of his Father,
and the prospect and assurance of Victory and Reward, would certainly have
prevented his Terrible Agony, and bloody Sweat, and importunate Cries, that if
possible the Cup might pass from him. However I doubt not, but a Timorous
Temper may render some Persons extremely apprehensive of the pains of Death,
and on that account unwilling to depurt, though they are truly desirous to be
with Christ.

Others through the weakness of Faith or overmuch concern in the Affairs of
this Life, etc. though they grant it unspekably better to be present with the
Lord, and have chosen it as their Portion and sinal Happiness, may yet be loath
to pass through the dark Valley. They cannot join with the Apostle in desiring
to be dissolved, though they can speak it from their very hearts, that they
desire to be with Christ: And that desire is so far prevailing as to keep them
upright, and yet not efficacious, so as to conquer the fears of interposing
Death. How unwelcom was the message of Death to an upright Hezekiah, even then
when he could plead his Integrity before the Lord! he turned his face to the
wall, and wept, and besought the Lord that he might not dye, as is evident by
Isa. 38.3. 5, v. compared. But I dare not say, his unwillingness to dye at that
Time, was a sinful weakness, because he might well be concerned for the
Kingdom after his decease, least the faithful should be staggered, and the
People revolt to Idolatry, there being no visible Successor to advance the
Reformation so hopefully begun; for Manasses was not then born, being but
twelve years old when he began to reign, and we know that Hezekiah had fifteen
years added to his Life, 2 Kings 20.6.

5. Though we desire to be with Christ, we must not be Peremptory as to any
determinate Time; but referr our selves to Gods good pleasure for the season of
our departure. Though with Job we should be ready to answer, when God does
call, yet with humility and Resignation we must expect his summons, and wait
till our change come: Job 14.15. though the days of our appointed Time should
be longer than ordinary. Although in a dutiful observance to our Heavenly
Father we should be willing to return home as soon as he shall please to call
us, and the felicity of his Presence should render it desirable; yet his
Sovereign will, and unerring wisdom must be practically acknowledged in
reference to the Season. He alone, of whom and to whom are all things, is fit
to determine how long we shall tarry, or how soon we shall depart: even the
Light of Nature may teach us this. And therefore, when ever we pray Thy Kingdom
come, we must not limit the Holy One of Israel by prescribing the Time; Seneca
Epist. 24, 61.
but immediately subjoyn, with respect to that, Thy will be done.

6. Not the Time only, but the Kind and Manner, of our Dissolution must be
referred to God. Some have wished for a Sudden Death, and others have prayed
against it. Some have desired to dye by one disease, and others by another.

Some holy persons of a timorous Temper and a tender Body, would choose to
depart by a Consumption; not only as allowing them a longer Time to prepare for
Death, but as an easier kind of Death than several others: Whereas, besides the
uncertainty and deceitfulness of that disease, it is more than possible, that
the Languishment of that pining sickness may be as irksome and insupportable,
as the shorter pains of more violent distempers. But God is the Judge (to whom
we must submit, as the wise disposer of all events) not only of the Time, but
the Manner of our departure: not only how long we shall sojourn in this earthly
Tabernacle, but what shall dissolve and pull it down.

7. Our Desire to depart, and to be with Christ, must not be Rash and hasty,
but the result of many Serious and deliberate thoughts, comparing both states
together, and understanding the difference. The Apostle knew his duty in
compliance with the Will of God, and therefore for the service of his Master,
and the advantage of the Philippians, was willing to Live: But he knew withal,
it was far better in it self to depart that he might be with Christ, and as
such he desired it. And a due Comparison between our present and our future
life, our inconveniences and sufferings in this world, and our Felicity in the
next, is proper to regulate and quicken our desires to be absent from the body,
and present with the Lord. Therefore,

2. In what respects is it far Better to be with Christ, than to abide in the
flesh? what is the difference between What we are, and What we shall be? that
the expectation of the Latter should even make Death and dissolution desirable
in order to it. And here it will be necessary to consider,

1. The Expression of our Felicity after death here used by the Apostle, Being
with Christ.

2. In what respects it is far better to Depart, and be absent from the Body,
that we may be present with him.

1. The Expression of our future blessedness, by being with Christ. Till we are
present with the Lord, and see him face to face, and know as we are known, we
must content our selves with such Representations of it, as God is pleased to
reveal in his Word: Such as our ignorant earthly minds can bear, and may be
most affected with. But when once the vail of darkness is removed by death, we
shall see him as he is, and all our Faculties be purified and enlarged, and
suited to the blessed company and work above. We shall see him whom our Souls
love, and reap a Happiness by doing so, bigger than our present Hopes, and far
above our highest thoughts about it: For in his presence is fullness of Joy, and
at his right hand are Everlasting pleasures. And can we imagine, that a
Blessedness, purchased by infinite Merit, contrived by infinite Wisdom, and
prepared by infinite Power, and bestowed at length through infinite Grace, will
in any thing be defective? Does not our Apostle describe it best, by assuring
us it cannot be described; that it is greater than we ever saw, beyond what we
ever heard, and far above what we can ever think? Does not the very hopes of
seeing him, revive our drooping hearts? Oh what will be the Glory of that
blessed sight! is not the pledge and Assurance of it by the Harbinger of his
holy Spirit exceeding comfortable? Oh what transcendent Satisfaction will his
presence give us! We now comfort our selves with the Contemplation, and one
another with the Discourse of it: and if our dark Faith and our faint Hopes,
can give us such a Joyful prospect of what shall be consequent to our
dissolution; into what ravishing Joy shall we enter, by the open Vision and
full enjoyment? Is the encouragement and support of a Christian now, from his
presence with us here; and will it not be far better, to to be present with him
above, to be for ever with the Lord? When we shall never question his Love to
us, or doubt of ours to him, but have a full assurance of the one, and a
glorious exercise of the other?

And because our knowledge will be still increasing, our flames of Love shall
still rise higher. But what additional bliss the Soul shall have by the
Resurrection of the body, and the great Transactions of the Judgment Day, we
know but in part. Blessed be God we know so much in this imperfect state,
enough to excite our desires, and quicken our preparations, and encourage our
Perseverance. And let us bless him more, that he has prepared such a glory for
us in the presence of the Redeemer, as we cannot fully understand, till death
convey us to him.

But to be with Christ, is not only eligible in it self, as expressive of our
future Glory; but much rather to be desired, if considered comparatively:
Therefore,

2. In what respects is it preferrable to an abode in the flesh, so as to make
us rather choose to depart, that we may be with him; than continue in the Body,
and be absent from the Lord?

1. Is not a state of Rest and Joy much more desirable, than to be continually
harrass'd with Trouble and Sorrow? We ordinarily begin this World in Tears, and
solemnize our own Nativity as we do the Funerals of our dearest Friends: as if
we were then sensible of that universal Curse which has afflicted Mankind
since the first Transgression; and had a clear prospect of the miseries we are
born to, and must afterward suffer: And in all the Portions of our little time,
what and how many do we every where encounter! How many things are there which
we find are wanting, both as to our Accomplishments and Enjoyments? and how
much are we disappointed, if we look for satisfaction from the lusts of the
flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life? which, says the Apostle,
is all that is in the world: 1 John 2.16. Earthly Pleasures, Wealth, and Honor.

Do we not find, that what does rejoice and please us one day, appears with
another Face when we view it next? or if we think it would please us still,
it is gone e're we are aware, and with all our skill and power we cannot
protract it is duration. Do not evil accidents overtake us on a sudden? and our
most probable designs miscarry in the birth? as if all things were governed by
Chance, and there were no Intelligent Director to oversee and regulate the
Affairs of the World, and the Actions and Conditions of men: Insomuch, that the
Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong, nor Bread to the wise,
nor Riches to men of understanding, nor Favor to men of skill, but time and
chance happens to them all, Eccl. 11.9. Our Pleasures flatter and deceive us,
and our Afflictions trouble and disquiet us: We are imposed upon by our Senses,
and misguided by our Passions; crossed in our Desires, and frustrated in our
Hopes; grieved by present evils, or perplexed with the sears of future; and our
Spirits for the most part discomposed either by personal or relative
Calamities. Some rueful Spectacle is ever now and then presented before our
Eyes; some evil tidings or unpleasant sound does grate our Ears. We bewail the
wants of the poor, which we cannot supply; or envy the prosperity of the
Wicked, which we cannot hinder; or grieve at the Afflictions of the Righteous,
which we cannot remedy.

We have some suffering Friend with whom to sympathize, some distressed or
deceased Relation to lament; some unhappiness of our own, or of those we love,
to be concerned for. Besides the Treachery and unfaithfulness of our seeming
Friends; the Hatred and Malice of our open Enemies; the scandalous Actions of
professing Christians; their Divisions and Animosities among themselves, and
their despiteful usage and entertainment from the World; the Complaints of the
miserable, the Groans of the Sick, the Cries of the Oppressed, and our own
bodily infirmities, weaknesses and pains, etc. enough one would think to make
us desire to depart, and render us extremely willing to lay down and dye, (if
God think sit,) that we may be at rest; especially having the expectation of
being for ever with the Lord. For otherwise even M. Anton. lib. Arr. Epict.
lib. 4. c. 10. Bo^th. Consol. Philos^^
Heathens have spoken excellently of the Advantages of Death, as the period of
our present Sorrows.

2. Is not a state of Holiness and Perfect purity, far better than a Life of
Temptation, Corruption and Sin? How are we now buffeted by Satan? by his Sinful
suggestions, his subtle devices and snares, and his siery darts? and by that
means our Integrity assaulted, our peace of Conscience unsettled, and our
Perseverance endangered?

Our Conflict with him is so difficult, and the issue of the Battle, as to what
depends on us, so very uncertain; that we are often ready to throw down our
Arms, and give up all as Lost. For though he be a conquered and baffled
Adversary, through the Victory which our Captain has obtained against him; yet
we cannot now Triumph over him, as hereafter we shall. And is it not far better
to abandon this world, of which he is the God, 1 Cor. 4.4. and get above that
Air of which he is the Prince, Ephesians. 2.2. that we may be with Christ?

Moreover, how does our depraved Nature continually cast forth mire and dirt?
what remaining Filthiness is there yet to be purged? what powerful Lusts to be
mortified and subdued? which indispose us for Spiritual duties, and derive a
damp and deadness upon all our Religious Exercises; which cool our Zeal, and
abate the servour of our Spirits in the service of our Redeemer; which weaken
our Considence in Prayer, and shame our faces before the Lord in secret. And is
it not far better to part with the body of Flesh, that thereby we may be rid of
this body of sin and death, Romans 7.24. and be like our Savior in perfect
purity?

Do we not complain of our Ignorance of Divine Truths, and the blessed
Mysteries of the Gospel, notwithstanding all our means of knowledge? of our
earthliness and unbelief? of unbecoming Thoughts of God and holy things? of
proud Imaginations and carnal reasonings against his Works and Word? of
languishing and imperfect Graces to be recovered and perfected, etc? And is it
not better to be with Christ, where that which is imperfect shall be done away?

Is not God dishonored and provoked, by our frequent Omissions and slight
Performances of Duty? do we not resist and quench and sadden his Holy Spirit?
and are we not often grieved by God's rebukes and frowns, by the wounds and
smart regrets of our own Conscience? so that we remember God, and are troubled,
and cry out in the bitterness of our Souls, Has he forgotten to be gracious,
and will he be merciful no more? Are not our holy Purposes inconstant, and our
best Resolutions wavering and unstedy, and very quickly, very easily shattered
by the breath of a small Temptation?

Have we not a constant Watch to keep over our Hearts and ways? a perpetual
War to manage with the infernal Trinity, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil?
and do we know his rage, and malice, and serpentine policy, with the Multitude,
Strength and Power of his Temptations? How often we have been foiled already,
and how soon we we may be so again? and shall we not be desirous of a sinless
state in the presence of Christ; where no Tempter, no Temptation shall ever be
admitted?

Yea, had we no corruption, or Sin, of our own to be delivered from, yet our
concern at God's dishonor by the sins of others, should make us willing to
depart; as much more desirable than our abode on earth: Job. 24.9. Which is
given into the hands of the wicked, and defiled by it is Inhabitants, Isa. 24.4:
Where the very Air is infected with Oaths and Blasphemies, profane discourse,
and filthy talk: Where the very Being of a God is questioned, his Providence
denied, and his Authority mocked: Where the Gospel of Christ is disparaged and
despised, his Laws contradicted, his Worship polluted, his Institutions
subverted, and his holy Name made a cloak for Licentiousness, and his faithful
Servants trampled on by the soot of Pride, and scorned by men at ease, and
forced to own his Truth with the peril of their Lives. And can we say, It is
good to be here? or is it not not far better to forsake such a Place and
Company, that we may be with Christ.

3. Let us consider what are the grounds and Principles by which a Christian is
assured of this Blessedness in the presence of Christ after his dissolution.
This Inquiry is necessary, because the discourse of our future bliss with
Christ cannot be supposed to have any effect or influence upon us, to make us
desire our departure, while we disbelieve or make a doubt of the matter.

I hope it were needless to prove the Possibility of the Souls existence in a
state of separation from the Body.

Whether in the Body or out of the Body, 2 Cor. 12.2. would not have been a
doubt to this great Apostle, if he could not possibly have lived but in it:
neither could he desire to depart that he might be with Christ, if after his
departure he should not be at all. And supposing the existence of the Soul
notwithstanding the dissolution of the Body, we have as full an assurance as
the nature of the thing is capable of, that holy Souls shall be present with
the Lord in glory, when absent from the body: 1 These. 4.17. Joh. 17.24. Mat.
24.25. Rev. 3.22, etc.

But because the Text has a special relation to Christ and to be with him, is
that Blessedness, on the account whereof it is desirable to depart; I shall
only mention his Death and Resurrection, as a sufficient ground to confirm our
Faith in the certainty of being with him, and to excite our Desires of a
departure in order to it.

1. The Death of Christ. He has cancelled the Handwriting against us, and put
away Sin, which is the sting of Death, by the Death of the Cross: Ephesians. 1.7. A
way is now open for us into the holy of holies by his blood, Heb. 10.19. not
for our Prayers, only but our Persons. He has wounded the Head of the old
Serpent, even by permitting him to bruise his Heel, by crucifying his humane
Nature, (which was only Vestigium Deitatis.) As Benaiah slew the Egyptian with
his own Spear, 2 Samuel 23.21. Having destroyed death and him that had the power
of it, and delivered those who were all their Lifetime subject to bondage,
through the fear of death, Heb. 2.15.

He has set his foot on the neck of this Adversary, disarmed it of it is
weapon, and robbed it of it is sting, and abolish't the ugliness and poison of
it. He has dismounted Hell and Damnation from behind him that sat on the
Pale-horse, Rev. 6.8. Whether the first Adam were buried in Calvary, where the
second was crucified, as some affirm, I need not enquire; we know that his
Death was our Victory, and his Cross may be our Triumph; since the Devil is
conquered, and death Sanctified, and the Grave perfumed by his burial, so that
we need not be afraid to lodge in a Sepulcher where our Lord himself has slept.

Yea since the effusion of his Blood, there is an amiable ruddiness in the Face
of Death; for that which was the Instrument of Justice, is now the messenger of
Peace and Joy, that which was the gate of Hell, is the way to Life. He has
brought sweetness out of the Strong, and meat out of the Eater; 1 Cor. 3.21.
and therefore Death as well as Lise is reckoned in the Inventory of the riches
of the Saints. All things are yours, because you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods.

2. His Resurrection and Exaltation; his rising from the Dead not only
discovers the possibility of our Resurrection, and gives us a pledge and
assurance of it, as declaring the sufficiency and acceptance of his Sacrifice;
that therefore the Dead in Christ shall live, and with his Dead Body arise:
Romans 8.14. Isa. 26.19. But being punctually effected according to his
prediction and promise, it confirms the Truth of all his Word, and seals the
promise of eternal Life unto all Believers. He has opened the Prison doors,
and loosed the bands of Death, and rolled away the heavy Stones from the Graves
of his people; he is now become the first fruits of them that sleep in Jesus:
And has the Keys of Death and Hell; Rev. 1.18. even the two most formidable
enemies are under his Dominion: who though once he were dead, does now live for
evermore. And for this very end did God raise him up, that our faith and hope
might be in him, in reference to the Blessedness of another Life, 1 Pet. 1.21.

Yea, says the Apostle, concerning that, he raised him from the dead, no more
to see corruption, Act. 13.34. God said, I will give you the sure mercies of
David; or an Everlasting Covenant, which Death shall not dissolve, Isa. 55.3.
And his being risen, is the Ground of our Faith and Hope that the Promise shall
be fulfilled. For the Resurrection of Christ is the evidence of the validity
and efficacy of his Death and Sacrifice, and a sufficient proof, that his
precious Blood shed upon the Cross, was the blood of an Everlasting Covenant,
Heb. 13.20. Establishing a Covenant of Grace, and making it truly Everlasting;
for we know that he is a Priest for ever, after the power of an endless Life,
Heb. 7.16. And therefore know, to our unspeakable Satisfaction, Encouragement,
and Joy, in whom we have believed, and that he is able to keep unto that day,
what we have committed to him; 2 Timothy 1.12. to perfect what he has begun;
Phil. 1.6. and at last present us blameless before the presence of his glory
with exceeding Joy, Jude 24. v. For our Life being hid with him in God, we are
fully assured, that when he who is our Life shall appear, we shall appear with
him in glory; Col. 3.3, 4. and because he lives, we shall live also; and when
he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John
3.2.

4. Let us consider, Whence it comes to pass, that notwithstanding the
Blessedness of being with Christ, and our assurance of it by his Death and
Resurrection, that yet we are so backward and unwilling to depart? What is the
true reason why so many of those who acknowledge it far better to be with
Christ, yet cannot say with the Apostle, That they desire to be dissolved, that
they may be with him?

1. The weakness of Faith concerning the Invisible World, and the future Glory
of the Saints, is the reason why so many Christians are unwilling to dye. They
are very sensible of the inconveniences of their present abode; they complain
to God and men of Corruption, Temptation, and Sin, and they hear of a blessed
Deliverance from all these by Death, and a perfect Felicity in the presence of
the Redeemer after their dissolution; but unbelief makes them stagger at the
Promise: They are not fully satisfied that such a transcendent Glory will be
consequent to Dying. Did they but soundly believe the Testimony and Revelation
which God has given in his Word concerning it, they would choose to be absent
from the body. Some of the Ignorant Heathens have been desperate in their
Choice of death, only as the Period of present Calamities: but others who were
doubtful of the Consequence, have yet entertained it with an hearty Welcome: As
Socrates for instance, who professed, That he ought not to fear death because
he could not tell whether it were good or evil: And shall not we who understand
the Grounds and Principles, the greatness, and certainty of a future
Blessedness after Death, be as willing to depart? A confirmed Faith is
therefore necessary and advisable in the present case: and the rather, that
thereby we may quench the fiery darts of Satan; who if he cannot hinder us of
our Crown, would rob us of our Joyful Prospect of it; if he cannot prevent out
future Glory, would render us dejected in our passage thither; if he cannot
prevail to exclude and banish us for ever from the Presence of Christ, would
darken our present comfort by the desire and Hope of it; but more especially at
the prospect and approach of Death, for that is his hour, and the power of
darkness.

But by this shield of Faith, we may be able to stand even in that evil day of
our dissolution, Ephesians. 6.11.16.

2. The Pains of Death. They pray that God would hasten his Glorious Kingdom,
and bring them to it; and believe it to be most eligible to be with Christ; yet
are loath their own Prayers should be answered, and the end and object of their
Faith obtained, through the discouraging apprehensions they admit of a dying
hour.

Would we not be with the the Lord, and know him better, and Love him more, and
enjoy him fully? and shall we stick at a little pain, as introductory to so
great a Happiness? A Pain that will speedily convey us to Eternal ease and
rest; which thousands of Holy Souls in Glory have endured more of, than we can
fear.

But suppose the Agonies of Death are never so frightful to Flesh and Blood,
has not our Redeemer a Rod and Staff to comfort us in the dark Valley? Ps.
23.4. Does he not know what it is to dye, and how much we dread it? does he not
understand our weakness, remember our frailty, pity our infirmities, and bid us
ask for support and Strength? yea, has he not promised, that when Heart and
Flesh shall fail, that he will be the Strength of our Hearts, and our Portion
for ever, Psalm. 73.26. Shall ignorant hopeless Heathens, without God in this
world, without the expectation of being with Christ in the next, be so desirous
of Immortality, as to dispatch themselves, and be their own Executioners, to
force an escape from the Body? And shall we resist and struggle, draw back and
fear, object, and be unwilling, when our Savior calls us to endless and
unspeakable Felicity? Is not this the last Experiment of our Faith, and
Patience, and holy Resolution? the last essay of our Christian Courage? Are not
the antecedent pains of dying the fruit of sin, no less than the throws and
pangs of Traveling Women? and are the latter tolerable in hopes of Children,
and their own deliverance; and may we not support the Former by the assistance
of a greater and better Hope? Are they at all considerable and worthy our fear,
if put in the balance with the promised Salvation to sollow on our departure?
Are they comparable in the Nature of Evil, to the blessed Life they lead us to
in the Nature of Good? or comparable to the gripes of Conscience, which
unpardoned Sinners meet with in Life and Death? yea, do we not think them
greater, and make them worse by our foolish fears, than most do find them? Is
not the Sting of Death removed, and the Heavenly Mansions prepared and
promised? And is it a reasonable Request, that God should vary from his settled
Course, and sixed Law, upon our sole Account? Will nothing else content and
please us, but that Heaven must descend to Earth, or we be in a moment
translated thither, to prevent our Pain, and supersede the necessity of our
Dissolution, which we fear will be so attended?

As a proper Remedy in the present Case, let us samiliarize the Thoughts of
Death, by frequent, serious Meditation: Let us view it oftener in our way, that
it may not meet us with so much Terror at our Journeys end: Let us admit the
Thoughts of a Departure with particular Application to our selves, and improve
the Funerals of our Friends, as a seasonable memento that our own is near: Let
us lay open the Picture of Death naked to our view, and urge it to our Hearts
with the infinite Glory that immediately succeeds, and take in the Death and
Promise of Christ, as our assurance of it. And this will reconcile us more to a
Departure, and help to overcome our unreasonable fears of Pain and Sickness
antecedent to it.

3. The weakness and declension of our Love to Christ, is another ground of our
Unwillingness to depart, and to be with him. To a degenerate Soul, that is
destitute of the Love of Christ, an Everlasting Distance would be more
desirable than a Local Presence: For that could not make him happy, he would
still be as far removed from Bliss, by being with the Lord, as the Center of a
Millstone in the bottom of the Sea would be from moisture. But the Company and
Converse of those we Love, must needs be Eligible; and the more we love them,
the stronger will still be our desire of being with them, and the more
impatient shall we be of every delay. And is it not the sease and secret
language of our Hearts, Whom have we in Heaven but Christ? And are we not
desirous to forsake this Earth, to enjoy his Presence? Certainly, the growth,
and strength, and exercise of Holy Love to Christ, would even render our
Dissolution grateful in order to it; and make our Hearts rejoice at the
approach of Death, as it did old Jacob's, to see the Wagons that are sent to
fetch us to our beloved Jesus, who is Lord of that Country whither we are
going.

4. Immoderate Love to this present World, and our Temporal Life. Were we
crucified to fleshly Pleasures, and sensual Joys, to worldly Honors and
earthly Riches; we should less regret the Thoughts of Dying, and more heartily
desire to be with Christ. For as the Pangs of Death are not ordinarily so
violent and intolerable to one whose strength is wasted by a pining Sickness,
as to him who is Arrested suddenly in his full strength and vigor; so will he
more easily leave this World, who for some time past has been dying to it.
Were we more crucified to the World, and the World to us by the Cross of
Christ, Gal. 6.14. we should not so affectionately hug the Carcass of a dead
Enemy, whom we our selves have crucified and slain; but wait for the Time, and
long for the happy Hour when we shall leave it, and be gone to our Eternal
Rest. Let us therefore make use of all the Christian methods of Mortification,
and look on this World as a strange place, and our selves as Pilgrims and
Strangers here; as Exiles from our own Country, and hastening to it: And we
cannot but wish our selves at home, and desire a departure as necessary
thereto; and in the interim, sigh to think of the vast disproportion and
difference between the slender Entertainments of our Inn, and the plentiful
Provisions of our Father's House.

5. Blotted Evidences, and the want of Assurance, concerning our Title to the
Heavenly Glory. And this we all pretend, as the reason of our Unwillingness to
Die: A Sadducee is loath to die, lest he should not be at all; an Unprepared
Sinner, for fear of being Miserable; and a Doubting Christian, because he knows
not whether Happiness or Misery shall be his Portion after his Departure: For
were we well assured we should be with Christ for ever, we could not be so
backward and unwilling to be dissolved. Had we any better grounds to hope that
Sin was pardoned, and God our Covenant-Father; that Heaven would be our
Inheritance, and we should not come into Condemnation; we might rejoice to
think of our departure, when and how it shall please God to call us. When the
Psalmist could say, The Lord is my Shepherd; he could boldly venture upon
Death, and walk through the Valley of Darkness without fear of evil, Psalm.
23.4, 6. But when Distress had brought his Sin to remembrance, and made him
doubt of his Condition, he cries, O spare me a little longer, that I may
recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more seen, Psalm. 39.13. Could
you say with the Spouse of Christ in the Canticles, My Beloved is mine, and I
am his, Cant. 6.3. you might cheerfully join your Amen, when you hear the
Spirit and the Bride say in the Revelations, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly,
Rev. 20.22.

Therefore Try your State, and Examine your selves a-fresh; and endeavor with
your utmost Care and Diligence to obtain a well grounded Assurance, founded on
the Testimony of a good Conscience, by comparing the Promises of Remission, and
Eternal Life, with the requisite Qualifications and Conditions of them: For if
our hearts condemn us not, we shall have considence toward God, 1 John 3.21.
even in a dying hour. To which end, let us endeavor, by daily Acts of
Repentance, to obtain a daily Pardon. Let us sum up our Accounts at the foot of
every Page; I mean, reflect every Night, on the Passages of the preceding Day;
that we may rest on our Beds with the sense of a daily Pardon, and be as sit to
die as we are to sleep.

6. Our fond Affections to our Friends on Earth, may make us loath to die,
though we hope to be with Christ in Heaven. But is not his Bosom more
desirable, than the Arms and Embraces of our dearest Friends, and nearest
Relations? Must we not abandon and hate them all for his sake? Luke 14.26. i.
e. use them as contemptible and hated things, if they keep us from him. Have we
not solemnly engaged to do so by our Covenant with God? and shall we not stand
to our Agreement? Is there no difference between our Friends on Earth, and our
beloved Savior? How often is an unactive Pity vouchsafed in the room of
Succor, when they need our Assistance, or we intercede for theirs! We know, if
they are unholy, they shall for ever be banished from the Presence of Christ;
and we may well be ashamed to be unwilling to die on their account: And if they
are holy, though we shall not return to them, yet we know that they shall shortly
come to us. And cannot God instruct them in his Fear, order their Conditions,
dispose of their Affairs, provide for their Comfort, and answer all our Prayers
in reference to them, after our departure? yea, has he not often done so?

Have we any Friends on Earth, that are every way so accomplished, as always to
delight and please us? Or are we so perfectly wise and good, as never to
disgust and disoblige them? Is there not some Selfishness, Design, and private
Interest; some Hypocrisy, Flattery, and Dissimulation; some Inequality,
Unsuitableness, or Inconstancy in our Friendships here? Are not the Best of
those we love, Ignorant and Mistaken, Erroneous, Deceived, Weak and Impotent;
and as likely to desile and grieve us by their Corruption, as to edify and
rejoice us by their Grace? But hereafter, when that which is imperfect is done
away, they shall all have suitable Qualifications to recommend them to our most
sincere and constant Affection, and be every way more fit for our Content and
Joy. We shall then be never weary of each others Company; we shall fully
understand one another Mind; we shall live in perfect Harmony, and full
Satisfaction, without the dread of Absence, or fear of Separation. Now if we
have some Friends, we have many Enemies; but in the presence of Christ there
shall be none but Friends, and such as shall for ever be so; their Persons
being more amiable, and their Society more desirable than now it can be. Now if
we are pleased with their Converse, we may quickly lose it, and the desire of
our eyes be taken from us, by a sudden stroke, Ezekiel. 24.16. that we know not
how to value or love them, till it is too late. And shall we be unwilling, on
their account, to depart, and be with Christ, since they are hastening after us,
and after a few days absence, we shall meet them again, and dwell with them for
ever?

5. The Application remains, which shall be only in Four Particulars, as
Inferences from what has been said.

1. We may hence take notice of the great Efficacy and Power of the Christian
Faith and Hope. That notwitstanding our fondness and affection to the Body, and
the contrariety of Death to our sensitive Inclinations; that yet this Faith and
Hope can urge us to desire a Dissolution in order to it.

2. We may hence infer, That the Soul does not sleep in the Grave with its
Companion the Body, until the Resurrection, but immediately pass into a state
of Bliss. For the Apostle to abide in the Flesh, was more expedient for the
Philippians: For him to live, would be Christ, Ver. 21. i.e. For the
advancement of his Glory: How then was it better to depart? or in what strait
could he be, whether he should choose a longer Life, or a present departure, if
no Blessedness were expected till the Final Judgment? And why does he mention
his being with Christ, as that which made Death desirable? Is not the Presence
of Christ with us on Earth, and our serving the Ends of his Glory in this
World, much more eligible than to sleep in the Grave till dooms day?

3. Is it better to depart, and be with Christ, than abide in the Body? Then
the Fable of Purgatory is hereby Exploded. Were we to be transported by our
Dissolution, only from lesser Pains to greater, or from a Life of Sorrow, to a
State of Suffering, (such as the Romanists imagine their Purgatory to be,
equivalent to the Torments of Hell in the Extremity of them, though different
in Duration,) how were it far better to depart, that we may be with Christ?

4. Is it the Object of a Christians desire, to depart, and be with Christ? And
is that far better than to continue in the Body? Then let us not Grieve
immoderately at the departure of those who have obtained their wish, and enjoy
their desire.

Did they long to be with Christ, and choose to be dissolved in order to it?
And is it their unspeakable Satisfaction that they are so? And do we express
our Love and Kindness to them, by repining at their Felicity? Shall their
desired Repose, and Rest, and Happiness, be our Torment, Grief, and Sorrow?
Would we, that contrary to their own wellgrounded Inclinations, they should
continue longer here on Earth, or return back again from Heaven, merely to
gratify our fond Affections? Have they obtained a speedy Victory after a short
Conflict? and received the Crown of Life, as soon almost as they begun their
Christian Race; the glorious Recompense of Reward, though they had wrought but
one hour in the Vineyard, when others must labor twelve? And shall we mourn
like utter Strangers to the Christian Faith and Hope? Would we delay the Glory
of God in their Salvation, and deser their Felicity in the blessed Presence of
the Redeemer; and be content that a Voice should be wanting in the Heavenly
Quire, rather than we be Sadned by their departure?

Would Parents have their Children continue in their Swadling-Cloaths? Or when
advanced to riper Years, wish them back again to Infancy, and hinder their
Possession of that Inheritance which they are born to, and disposed to enter
on, and enjoy?

Are not you your selves hastening to the Grave, and hope e're long to be with
Christ? And is it not a refreshing Thought, to consider, that your Treasure is
there before you; with their Father and your Father, with their God and Savior
and yours; I mean, your Holy Clidren and Friends whom you dearly Love?

The Primitive Church was wont to Solemnize the Funerals of Holy Persons, with
singing Psalms and Hymns of Praise to God, for their Deliverance and Felicity
obtained by Dying: And shall we refuse to be comforted, for the Death of those
who sleep in Jesus, and desired to do so; as if in this Life only we had Hope
in Christ?

Something, it is true, of Grief and Sorrow, must be allowed to Nature, Duty,
Custom, and Contracted Friendship, and the Honor of the Deceased; for they are
reckoned to die miserable, who are hurled into the Grave without the attendance
of a Sigh, or Tear, or Funeral Lamentation. But our Assurance of the future
Glory they possess with Christ, (which they themselves preferred to a longer
abode on Earth,) should wipe our Eyes, and prevent Excess. We mourn that they
are gone, and desire their Company; but we know, they do not wish themselves
back again for the sake of ours; no, they are gone to better Friends above,
than those they have left below. And were it not for the weakness of our Faith
and Hope, in reference to the Invisible World; were it not for the remaining
Power of unmortified Selfishness, and our immoderate Love of this present Life;
were it not for the remisness of our Love to Christ, and the blessed Saints; we
could not but desire to be with them, rather than wish that they should be
longer with us.

Therefore instead of an intemperate Mourning at their departure, let us
imitate their Examples, and propound their holy Lives and Deaths as our Pattern
and Encouragement.

. 1. SInce the Honor of Gods Grace may be very much advanced by our taking
notice of the Influence and power of it in Believers: Since to praise and
imitate the holy actions of our departed Friends, is almost the only Communion
we can now have with them; and their Example, though they are dead, may yet
speak to the Instruction and Comfort of the Living; I shall conclude with some
brief account of that Excellent Person, whose decease gave occasion to our
present Meeting.

. 2. And knowing the usual Flattery of Funeral Orations, I shall pass over the
Advantages of her Birth, the Credit of her Family, the Sweetness of her Temper,
(the best Soil for the Fruits of the Spirit;) and the many other natural and
acquired Accomplishments, which rendered her Amiable to all that knew her; and
only mention some Passages, that may either magnify the Grace of God, or be
proper for our imitation and encouragement: And therein shall deliver nothing,
but either upon my own knowledge, or from the particular Account I have
received from her nearest Relations, and those Reverend Ministers, who assisted
with their Prayers, and Counsel during her Sickness.

. 3. Through the Blessing of God on a Pious Education, and other means of
Grace, and in answer to the fervent Prayers of her Holy Parents, for the
fulfilling of Gods Covenant Promise to them and to their seed; we have great
reason to believe that she had chosen the Favor of God as her Felicity and
End, almost as soon as she was capable of making a deliverate choice.

. 4. And a Life of Seventeen years, (whereof so great a part is lost by Infancy
and Childhood) is certainly very short for the growth and ripening of such
fruits of the Spirit as she discovered. A Time and Age, when Vice and Vanity
are wont to blossom and sprout forth in others; When the Thoughts of Death and
Judgment are usually rejected, as unwelcome Intruders before their Time; and
serious preparation for it deferred to a reputed more Convenient Season.

. 5. But before that Age, her diligent and delightful reading of the Holy
Scripture, and valuation of it above other Books, was very admirable and
exemplary. Making this Bread of Life her daily food, and tasting such
sweetness, and reaping such benefit by it, that even at midnight, while others
slept, she would often spend several hours in reading the Bible: Lamenting on
her deathbed the loss of Time by other Books; which could not assist her to a
better understanding of her duty, and the Mind of God, or take off her
Affections from the Love of this World, and prepare her Soul for the Heavenly
Glory.

. 6. Notwithstanding this secret serious Piety, her Humility and Modesty was
such, as not to make a great noise and show to others, as if the Form of
Godliness were the principal, or only thing to be regarded.

. 7. For several weeks before her last Sickness, she was observed less to
regard the World than formerly; more Seriously to be devoted to God; and more
to dislike vain Company, and idle Talk, especially if it carried with it a
Tendency and design to disparage others: and in all respects so to demean her
self, as if she had received some secret Revelation from God, that her Time
would be but short, and her change was near.

. 8. Though before she fell sick, she was fearful enough of that The small Pox.
Disease, whereof she dyed, yet having taken her Bed, and knowing the
Distemper, she professed her self entirely willing to acquiesce in the Will of
God. And was displeased with any who would have tampered with her Face, or
discoursed to that purpose.

. 9. Yea during the whole three weeks of her Sickness, she continued in such a
frame; notwithstanding the loathsomness of the Disease; notwithstanding the
Troublesome Prescriptions of Physicians; notwithstanding her own Pains, of
which her Constitution, Breeding and Age considered, she could not but be very
apprehensive. And with an admirable Patience and Resignation to the Will of
God, with a great contempt of the Vanities of the World, and an holy
Indifference even to Life it self, she desired to Depart: And that not merely
to be eased of her Pain, but to be with Christ, and the blessed Society above:
or to use her own words, To be with her Heavenly, and her Natural Father: And
gave this excellent reason for her desire; Lest if restored to health, she
should meet with some prevailing Temptations, that might turn away her Heart
from God and Heaven: and therefore she had rather be with Christ, than put it
to the Venture.

. 10. Her Victory over this World was likewise evident by the particular charge
she gave to those about her, to let some young Gentlewomen of her Acquaintance
know from her, how contemptible the best of this World will be, when they come
to dye: and entreat them in her Name, (as her last request, and the expression
of her special kindness to their Souls) that they would not overvasue it.

. 11. As an instance of her submission to the good pleasure of God, and
satisfaction in his order; she desired, that her Mother, and the whole Family
might join with her in singing the latter part of the 39 Psalm: Ver. 9. I was
dumb, and opened not my mouth, because Lord thou did it. When thou with
rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume away
like a Moth. Surely every man is Vanity. Selah, etc. Which she repeated by
heart according to the Meter.

. 12. As an instance of her joyful Hope of Glory in the presence of Christ
after death, she made those who attended in her Sickness, frequently to read
over the 1 These. 4. chap. in the close whereof, the glorious Appearance of
Christ to Judgment is set forth; and the Happiness of the Saints described, by
being ever with the Lord, with this addition, Wherefore comfort one another
with these words. ver. 17, 18.

. 13. With the free use of her Reason, to the very last, God was pleased to
give her the great Blessing of a Tender Conscience; and therefore she did not
slightly overlook even little Failings without a penitent observation: and some
of them such as no man in a judgment of Charity would reckon sinful. Every
thing that looked like undutifulness to her Mother, she heartily begged her
Pardon for; though nothing considerable of that kind can be remembered, to make
her need forgiveness: thankfully owning the strictness of her Education, the
seasonable Reproofs of a discreet Parent, and even the abridgment of that
Liberty which other young persons take, (very often to their prejudice and
ruin) as a singular advantage and favor from Heaven.

. 14. In some part of her Sickness, she had some humble becoming doubts and
fears of her own state; but having imparted them to a Reverend Person well
acquainted in the Family, and heard his Resolutions and Answers; she was better
satisfied, and expressed her hopes of Pardon and Salvation through the
Righteousness of Christ; who loved her and washed her from her Sins in his own
Blood. Yea so far was she from questioning the goodness of God, and the Truth
of his Promise; so far from doubting of the alsufficiency of Christ's Mediation,
the Merit of his Sacrifice, and his willingness to receive returning Sinners:
that the believing thoughts of it were her greatest support and joy; saying
often in the time of her Sickness, That though her Sins were as Scarlet, God
could make them as Snow: though red like Crimson, they should be as Wool. Isa.
1.18.

. 15. Moreover, she did thankfully acknowledge the Mercies of God to her, in
the former part of her Life: whereof she had very many, both Personal and
Relative. And particularly desired, that Thanks might be returned to God for
his singular goodness to her during her Sickness.

. 16. She was very desirous of Prayer to God on her behalf; and very joyful and
well pleased when she had it: and being at any time ask't what particular
request she desired should be made to God for her; she mentioned not her
Recovery and the lengthening of her days; but the forgiveness of Sin through
the Merit of her Redeemer; an humble submission to Gods disposal; and a
prepared heart to acquiesce in his appointment. And so in one sense she was
full of days, though she dyed very young: being satiated with the Time she had
lived on Earth; and not importunate for a longer stay.

. 17. Within a few hours before her dissolution, (of the approach whereof she
was more apprehensive than those about her) she was very desirous that a worthy
Minister whom she named, might immediately be sent for, Mr. S. F.
to commend her Soul to God: Who accordingly came, tho at Midnight. She her
self joined in that last Office, with great seriousness and affection; and
afterward returned him her hearty thanks for his great kindness therein,
saying, Now I have nothing more to do, but to dye: Only requested him not to
leave the house that night, as knowing, that his Company and Counsel might
administer to the support of her Affectionate Mother, and other Relations, whom
she should leave in sorrow, tho she her self was passing to Eternal Joy.

. 18. After which she composed her self to rest, and refused every thing that
was offered her to take, making Signs with her hands of her unwillingness to be
disturbed.

. 19. In that short space of her Continuance, which was not an hour, she was
heard to say, Be gone, Satan! Be gone! Thou art a Liar from the Beginning, and
the Father of Lies. O come Lord Jesus. And soon after she said, He is come, he
is come: and so fell asleep, as in the Arms of her dearest Savior, or as the
Jews report of Moses, That he dyed with the Kiss of God.

O Death! where is now thy Sting? O Grave! where is now thy Victory? The sting
of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law: But thanks be to God, who
has given us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ: And blessed are the
Dead that Thus dye in the Lord.

. 20. Would to God, that the Account here given, might effectually convince us,
of the great difference between the Death of the Holy and the Unholy, of the
Righteous and the Sinner! Might convince us of the great Blessing of holy
Parents, and a good Education; and encourage Parents to be diligent and
faithfal, to be serious, prudent, and affectionate, in the Education of their
Children; because such a deportment is most likely to be owned by God with the
desired Success.

And Oh that it might Convince us likewise of the Vanity of Youth, the
shortness of our Lives, the uncertainty of our Time, the nearness of our
Change, the necessity, reasonableness, and manifold advantages of Remembering
our Creator in our younger Years! And withal might hasten our Preparations, and
spirit our Desires, to depart and be dissolved, whenever God shall call us!
That following their Example, who by Faith and Patience are gone to inherit the
Promises, We may at length meet those Precious Souls above, who are gone before
us; that with them, and all the Children of the Kingdom, we may be for ever
with the Lord, which is Best of all.

THE END.
Mrs. SHOWER's Funeral Sermon.

BY Mr. JOHN SPADEMAN, of Rotterdam.

Sickness and Death for the Glory of CHRIST.

A Funeral Sermon ON THE DECEASE OF Mrs. ELIZ. SHOWER.

Who Dyed the 24th. of Aug. 1691.

By JOHN SPADEMAN, Minister of the English Church at Rotterdam.

LONDON, Printed for J. Dunton and A. Chandler. 1691.

TO My Honored Friend, Mr. SHOWER.
SIR,
WHen after an unpleasing separation, the Providence of God gave Opportunity of
renewing our Converse, in your Habitation; I promised my self an unmixed
satisfaction, during my stay with you: And as none is more obliged to rejoice
in all the Good, which you, or yours, are partakers of; so none could be more
heartily disposed to do it. Indeed the hopes of enjoying your Society sweetened
the fatigues of a Voyage, which (after many Years absence) I lately made unto
my own Country: In which I was truly delighted to find, that not only your
Person and Ministry were acceptable and useful, but that there was a prospect
that God would make your House to grow. But when I was preparing to return, I
perceived that God had brought me to mourn with you, under a most afflictive
Providence: In which though my Character had made me unfit to present Comfort
to you; yet few of your Friends had more light to discern the deepness of your
Wound, and greatness of your Loss. For the intimate Friendship between us, and
our cohabitation in Holland, gave me opportunity of understanding the worth of
Her, whom now you lament. Though this Consideration, as it makes your Trial
greater, renders your Resignation more acceptable to God, and useful to Men.

To part with an ordinary Possession with willingness, is a kin to that
Patience which is exercised under merited Punishment, which in the Apostles
judgment has no Glory or Commendation in it: (1 Pet. 1.20.) But it is an
Heroic Spirit, a resemblance of that Faith which dignified the Father of all
who believe, to give up a rare and endearing Treasure: And if any Consideration
has strength to work this Noble Disposition in our Souls, that which is taken
from the Glory of God, and the Redeemer, has: 'Twas this which led my thoughts
unto the Meditations in the following Discourse, which though much below the
dignity of the Subject, am willing to make thus public, that they may be a
lasting Monument of the Gratitude and Respect I owe unto your Deceased Consort,
and with the Divine Blessing may be useful to those who may be called unto like
Trials.

Many of your Brethren would have performed this Service with far more justice
unto both the Subjects of the Discourse, than one who is in a journeying State:
But when your self, and some near Relatives desired this last Office, I was not
unwilling to comply; especially having the advantage of knowing by how singular
a Providence your Marriage-Vnion was brought about, and how happy it was to you
both.

I need not tell you how this sorrowful Event makes the thoughts of my intended
Voyage much more uneasy to me, who must leave so dear a Friend deprived of his
delightful Half: But an Interest in the whole Deity, (who cannot dye) will
abundantly compensate this loss, which together with your long continuance in
Temple Service, and the desirable success of your Labors, is with utmost
earnestness prayed for, by

London, Sept. 1. 1691. SIR, Your Affectionate Faithful Servant, J. Spademan.

Sickness and Death for the Glory of Christ. A Funeral Sermon, etc.
JOHN XI. 4. When Jesus heard that, he said, This Sickness is not unto Death,
but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby.


THE first hearing of these Words, which speak of Sickness and Death, may give
some Indication of the sorrowful Occasion, that has drawn more than usual
Numbers unto this Place: From which it has pleased the All-wise God to remove
One, who was a principal Ornament of it; One whose constant Attendance, and
Christian Deportment in it, carried an exciting Influence unto all who were
Witnesses of 'em. And therefore it is no small loss unto this whole Society,
that they shall no longer enjoy the advantage of such an Example; but even the
privation of such, whose Lives were exemplary, is capable of affording very
considerable advantage: As we know that not only the Light of the Heavenly
Bodies, is useful unto this lower World, their Eclipse, have their advantages
too, which are therefore thought worthy of peculiar Observation. It has been a
received Opinion, that the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon have an Instructive
signification, by which the Inhabitants of the Earth are warned and admonished.
The Truth of that Opinion has been questioned, but it is certain that the Death
of a Christian, who did shine as a Light in the World, has an Instructive
Language, and is proper to teach very profitable Lessons unto them who survive.
Such Providence do indeed call unto mourning and sorrow, but this is not the
principal intention of them: there is something of far greater importance to
employ our minds, on such sad occasions, and that is, to receive the Spiritual
Instruction that is then presented unto us. It has been counted an instance of
the folly of some superstitious Heathens, that they would make a hideous noise
whenever they saw the Sun, or Moon darkened, and variously expressed their fears
of losing those Luminaries, but made no useful enquiries into the Causes and
Nature of those Phenomenon. And it is very reproachful unto professing
Christians, when they imagine that a passionate sorrow is the only, or chief
business that the Death of Christian Friends calls 'em to: Our deportment on
such occasions, should correspond with our Christian Hope, which assures us,
that they who are fallen asleep in Christ are not lost, (which in the Apostles
Judgment is a self-evident absurdity, 1 Cor. 15.18.) A deceased Christian is
not only more safe, but far more happy and honorable than he or she was in
this World: so that they need not our tears; which yet on other accounts are
just and reasonable, but they must not hinder our serious enquiries into the
Nature and Uses of such a Sorrowful object. When therefore we have lost a
living Example in the Deceased Mrs. Shower, we are obliged to make such
enquiries, with relation unto her Death, that we may get some considerable and
lasting advantage from it; and in order unto this, I have thought these words
of the Redeemer, spoken upon a like occasion, would afford seasonable
Meditations, that may assist us to improve the late sorrowful Providence. And
when I have laid down the general Instructions contained in 'em, I shall
endeavor to apply 'em unto the particular subject of our Sorrow.

To understand the grounds and occasion of the words read to you, we need only
look back to the few Verses which precede the Text; and in the first verse we
find, that a Friend and Favorite of Christ, Lazarus the Brother of Martha and
Mary, is arrested by a threatening Sickness. The favor and friendship of Christ
do not exempt from Sickness and Death. A Lazarus whom Jesus loved, is sick and
dies. His Sisters seem to have concluded, that the affection which Christ had
for their Brother, should have secured him from these Calamities; and (it is
probable) they thought, that nothing but the distance of place could hinder
Christ from relieving their Brothers Case, which therefore they take care to
acquaint him with, and send this sorrowful Message unto the Redeemer, Lord,
behold he whom thou love is sick, ver. 3. They choose indeed the fittest
Argument to plead on this occasion with Christ, when they represent to him the
Interest that their Brother had in his peculiar Affection. They don't say, He
who is our Brother, and Beloved by us, or he who loves thy Person, and
Service, is sick: They knew, that such Considerations (tho very forcible among
men) could have but little weight upon him, who cannot be made a Debtor by all
the Kindness and Service that any can express toward him. No, they rightly
conclude, that the Redeemers Love is free, and without any Obligation, and must
be the only Original of all that Relief, which he at any time bestows. Thus
far, I say, these Sisters were in the right; but the particle Behold! (which is
a Note of Admiration) intimates the Mistake which they were guilty of, and that
they were surpised at the sickness and danger of their Brother, because he was
one whom Jesus loved. Had this been the Case of a Scribe, or a Pharisee (two
Orders which Christ had no kindness for) this would not have appeared strange
unto them, as it did, that one whom Christ loved, should languish under a
painful and threatening Disease. No question they had often seen and heard the
Redeemer expressing a peculiar kindness unto their Brother, whose sickness and
danger made him now a Spectacle of Pity: And they knew not how to reconcile
these two together, and therefore were inclined to hope, that his love unto
their Brother (as soon as he had an account of his danger) would induce him to
make the greatest haste to visit, and heal him, (both which he had done unto
others who were strangers.) But he intended to do neither, he determined to
delay his visit unto Lazarus, until he had been four days dead: But tho he
would not heal and recover sick Lazarus, he sends a most excellent Remedy unto
his Sisters, to cure their mistakes, to ease and heal their minds, which was
the intention of this Reply unto their Importunate Message. This sickness is
not unto Death, but for the Glory of God, etc.

In which we are called to consider, 1. The Manner. 2. The Design. 3. The
Import of this Answer.

I would make a few Reflections upon the two former, and then shall insist upon
the last, as most suitable to our present Affair.

I. As to the Manner of this Answer: It Is easy to perceive the obscurity and
dubiousness of the former part; This Sickness is not unto Death: For the Event
did (at least) seem to contradict the literal meaning of this Declaration,
which expressly denies that the sickness of Lazarus was unto Death, and yet
Laxarus dies: This seeming contradiction, must render this part of the Answer
dubious and dark, unto those to whom it was sent. Indeed notwithstanding this
obscurity, there was a most certain Truth in this part of the Answer, which
speaks of such a Death, as truly answers that Character, viz. Such a Privation
of Life, as puts a final Period unto it; on which account it can truly be said
of the Dead, That their places know 'em no more, and that they go the way
whence they shall not return: Job 8.10. c. 16.22. As also, That they see
corruption, Acts 13.36. The Body quite losing that Organization, that makes it
a fit Habitation for a humane Soul: This is the primary and proper notion of
Death, and under which the Spirit of God speaks of it: (See Romans 5.12, 14. 1
Cor. 15.21, 26, 54, 56. Not to mention several other places.) Unto such a Death
the sickness of Lazarus was not; his Death was not a final Period, but only a
short interruption or cessation of Life, which (like some Rivers which run
under ground for a space) only for a while disappeared, and then was again
brought to light. This being granted, we cannot deny, that there is some
darkness in the manner of expression. Had it so pleased the Redeemer, he could
have spoken in a much plainer Language, he could have said, Tho this sickness
shall deprive Lazarus of his Life, yet it shall soon be restored to him again;
though he shall truly die, yet he shall not long remain under the power of Death;
for I design to work a Miracle to raise him from the dead: Thus could the
Redeemer have expressed himself, had it so pleased him, but he chooses to
speak obscurely not only to these Sisters, but afterward to his Apostles, when
he said, Our friend Lazarus sleeps, v. 11. Which Metaphorical and dark way of
speaking led them into a mistake, as we read v. 13. Many other instances of
this kind might be produced, as that which this Evangelist relates Chapter 16.16,
17, 18. And as the Language, so the Carriage of Christ has obscurity in it;
his ways are unsearchable, and his footsteps are not known, both with respect
unto visible Providence, and invisible dealings with the Soul.

Many there are whom Christ really loves, who walk in darkness, are brought
into a kind of a Labyrinth, where they are strangely perplexed, and are tempted
to conclude, that their Lord has quite forsaken, and cast 'em off, when he
retains the kindest and most gracious purposes toward 'em. As God did toward
Abraham when he commanded him to go out of his Country, and yet did not
acquaint him with the Place which was designed to be his Inheritance, Heb.
11.8. Thus was Abraham tried, and so are the Children of Abraham; as indeed
this conduct of God is admirably suited unto the state of Probation in which we
now are. All that darkness and perplexity which at any time we are brought
into, are designed by God, to try and discover the sincerity and constancy of
our obedience. And it is our grand concern to stand out this Trial, to undergo
this Probation aright; and then whatever darkness there is now in the dealings
of Christ, he will after a while scatter every Cloud, and will be an
everlasting Light unto us. 'Twere easy to make large Reflections upon this
Subject, but your own Meditation can supply this defect; Nor may I dwell long
upon the

II. Observable in the Text: The Design of this Answer made by Christ, which
was to afford present Support unto the dejected Sisters of Lazarus. He whose
Eye discerns the most hidden and distant Objects, knows how their tender Hearts
were disquieted; and that such a Spectacle as a deceased dying Brother must
wound and afflict their Souls; and the more, when their Expectations were
disappointed, as to the speedy visit of Christ. What! (might they be apt to
argue) not make so charitable, so seasonable a Visit, to one whom he loves, to
one who needs his help, and must perish without it? Is this Kindness, to
neglect a distressed Friend, till Life and all be gone? Such disquieting
Thoughts would begin to rush into, and disorder their Minds: Now 'twas to still
this Tempest, that the Redeemer sends this Reply to 'em. This Sickness is not
unto Death, but for the Glory of God, etc. q. d. Though the Danger and Progress
of this Sickness, joined with my seeming Neglect of their Brother, will be an
Occasion of Trouble unto them; Sorrow and Fear will take hold of their Spirits,
yet let not their Hearts be troubled, there is no just ground of disquieting
Fear; notwithstanding the dismal Appearances, this Matter will have a happy and
honorable Issue. When our Lord Jesus does not grant the expected Relief, yet
he always provides Support and Consolation for his faithful Followers. When He
determined to send away the Multitudes who had followed him into the
Wilderness, he resolves that he will not send 'em away fasting, lest they
should faint by the way, Mat. 16.32. Though they must for a time be deprived of
his Presence, yet he takes care, that they might not faint and perish. This was
his Carriage toward his Apostles in general, and more particularly toward the
Apostle Paul, who when he besought the Lord thrice that the Messenger of Satan
might depart from him; though this Request was not granted, though the Thorn in the
Flesh was not removed, yet this most supporting Answer was given to him, My
grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. Sometimes the Carriage of Christ
bears an Aspect of Unkindness and Neglect; but even at such a time, his Heart
is filled with Love, and his Hand is employed to Support. It Is worthy our
notice, what care the Spirit of God has taken to remove the Suspicion of
Unkindness in the Redeemer, toward his Friend Lazarus, whom he refused to Visit
and Recover, as his Sisters requested and expected; for in the Verse which
immediately follows this Answer of Christ, the Evangelist adds this cautioning
Remark, Now Jesus loved Martha, and her Sister, and Lazarus. His not complying
with their intimated Desire (of having their Brother speedily Recovered) did
not proceed from Unkindness, or want of Affection (though there was appearance of
them.) No, he bore the same Love unto a sick and dying Lazarus, as if he had
wrought a Miracle to prevent his Sickness and Death. 'Twere easy to enlarge
upon this Head, but I must proceed unto the

III. And Principal Observable in the Text, The Import and Sense of this
Answer: And if it be remembered that the Sickness of Lazarus was Mortal, there
will be found these two General Propositions contained in it.

I. The Sickness and Death of those who are the Friends of Christ do bring a
peculiar Glory unto God, and the Redeemer.

II. This one Consideration is sufficient to quiet and support the Followers of
Christ under those sorrowful Providence.

I need not spend time to prove how evidently these Truths are contained in
this Answer of Christ: which though given in a particular Case, yet carries
such a general Instruction, as reaches unto Christians in all Ages of the
World. It Is granted, that there were singular Circumstances that attended the
Sickness and Death of Lazarus, and a most glorious Miracle was wrought in
raising him from the Dead: But notwithstanding there are other grounds which
justify the general Conclusions which are drawn from the words. In which it is
manifest (as has been observed) our Lord designed to quiet and ease the
troubled Minds of Lazarus's Sisters, who had now a sorrowful Prospect of losing
a beloved Brother. And in order to this, he thought it enough (without
mentioning his miraculous Raising from the Dead) only to inform them, That the
threatening Sickness of their Brother was for the glory of God, and that the Son
of God might be glorified thereby. This one Consideration, when it sinds due
Entertainment in, and has a right Operation upon a believing Soul, is able to
still all the disquieting Motions that Sorrow and Fear have raised there.

I have not designed a distinct handling of these Two Propositions; 'twill be
as useful to join both together in a plain and instructive Method: And
therefore shall,

1. Give a short Account of the Glory of God and Christ.

2. Show how the Sickness and Death of those who are the Friends of Christ does
contribute unto it.

3. On what Accounts the Consideration of this has such a quieting and
supporting Insluence upon a Christian; and after ward draw some instructive
Inferences from these memorable words. As to the

1. The Nature of that Glory which belongs unto God and Christ: On which I
shall only make a very few Remarks, because it may be hoped that few Christians
are unacquainted with this common Subject.

Glory, in its general Idea, or Notion, is nothing but some great Excellence
manisested and acknowledged; whence it is that it makes so very strong an
Impression upon Intelligent Creatures, and the desire of it, has so universal
an Influence. More particularly,

1. The Glory of God is the Manifestation of the great and adorable
Excellencies which are in the Deity, both absolutely and relatively considered.
When the Virtues (as the Greek Expression is, 1 Pet. 2.10.) of God are shown
forth, so as to be acknowledged and esteemed by his Creatures: When his
inflexible Justice, and spotless Purity, his unsearchable Wisdom, and
infallible Truth, his Almighty Power, and inexhaustible Goodness do shine
forth, and are set in a just Light, then the Glory of God appears in open view,
Numb. 14.21. God swears that all the Earth should be filled with the Glory of
the Lord; because he intended to display his Justice and Holiness, in punishing
and consuming the murmuring Israelites. Thus it is said, Psalm. 102.16. When the
Lord builds up Zion, he shall appear in his Glory, because that Work would
manifest the Power and Veracity of God.

2. The Glory of Christ, is, the showing forth that Excellence which belongs
unto his Mediatory Office; accordingly, when he wrought his first Miracle at
Cana, he is said to have manifested forth his Glory, Joh. 2.11. All the
Evidences which bear Witness unto his Priestly, or Regal, or Teaching Offices,
do glorisie the Redeemer, 2 Pet. 1.17.

3. It must be remembered, that the Glory of the Deity, is distinct from that of
the Redeemer; yet they are never separated from, much less opposed unto each
other. It Is otherwise, as to the Glory of God, and of a Creature; these do
often disagree and clash against each other. When Herod accepted an undue
Honor from a flattering Crowd; this took away the Honor that was due unto
God, Acts 12.23. but the Honor that is given unto Christ, does bring Glory
unto God, Joh. 17.1. These two are so inseparably joined together, that they
can never be put asunder. Let us now enquire,

2. How the Sickness and Death of those who are the Friends of Christ, do bring
Glory unto God and the Redeemer: While our Eye is sixth only upon the dark side
(or Supersicies) of this Object, we shall be tempted to put such a Question as
once Nathanael did concerning Nazareth, Joh 1.46. Can any good thing come from
such Evil? Can so barren a Soil produce such precious Fruit as the Glory of
God? Can this dark and dismal Cloud send forth such a refreshing Light? At the
first view it seems dishonorable unto God, when these Bodies, which are his
Temples, are demolished and laid in the Dust: This, I say, seems a
disparagement unto him who raised and dwelt in 'em. When these pleasant Plants
which stood in the Courts of God are overturned, this seems a damage unto the
Heavenly Husbandman: But notwithstanding these Objections of Sense, it is
undeniably true, that the Sickness and Dissolution of Christians, do really
contribute unto the Glory of God and Christ: The Evidences which confirm this,
do relate both unto those Christians who are removed by Death, and unto those
who survive.

1. With respect unto the Dying Friends of Christ themselves: Their Sickness
and Death do many ways bring Glory unto God and the Redeemer.

1. The Divine Veracity or Truth is glorified by executing the Primitive
Sentence, which has been given against all the Posterity of fallen Adam, Genesis
3.19. Dust thou art, and unto Dust thou shall return. A peculiar Glory redounds
unto God, when these Declarations which signify his Council and Purpose are
punctually accomplished. (As on the contrary, nothing is more dishonorable in
its own Nature than Falsehood, which is counted, even by Liars themselves, an
intolerable Reproach.) Compare Number. 14. ver. 21. with ver. 35. The Death of
every Christian does seal unto the Truth of God.

2. The Divine Holiness, and hatred of Sin, are honored by the Sickness and
Death of those Christians who have provoked the Anger of God, though they die
in Peace. We have memorable Instances in Moses, in Josiah, and the Corinthian
Christians; some of whom were cut off by Death, though not Condemned with the
World, 1 Cor. 11.30, 32. Concerning Moses, we read, that by his unadvised
Language he offended God: At one time he complained of his Service and Burden,
and desired rather to die, than bear it any longer, Number. 11.14, 15. At another
time he spoke with indecent Passion unto the Israeltes; and then God pronounced
the Arrest which you read, Number. 20.12. That he should not bring the Israelites
into the Promised Land. Now the executing of that Sentence did glorify God,
because it manifested his Holiness, which could not behold the desiling
Blemishes that were in Moses, who was one of the most eminent Favorites of God.

3. The Divine Sovereignty and Dominion are honored by the Obedience and
Resignation of Sick and Dying Believers; When a Christian exercises that
Submission unto the Orders of God, that he willingly drinks the bitterest Cup
which his Father gives him; how Honorable must this be unto God I This last
act of Obedience Crowns the whole Christian course: certainly there is no
Spectacle more grateful unto God, than a Christian cheerfully yielding back his
Soul unto him who gave it: 'Twas a resigning Obedience that rendered the Death
of Christ a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God, who was in a most
eminent manner glorified by it: Though a Dying Christian cannot offer an
Attoning Sacrifice, yet he is a kind of Holocaust, when his Death is perfumed
with a chosen Submission unto the disposing Will of God. On this Account the
Death of the Saints, (or as the Hebrew word imports) the Favorites, is
precious in the sight of the Lord, Psalm. 116.15.

4. The Powerful Grace of Christ is honored by the inward support and
refreshment which sick and dying Christians receive from him; at a time when
the Daughters of Music are brought low, and all the Pleasures of Life are
without relish; then to feel an invigorating strength which renews the inner
Man, when the outer decays, and is salling down; this magnifieth the powerful
Grace of God, who gives power to the Faint; and to them that have no Might,
increases Strength, Isa. 40.29. A Principle of Natural Courage will afford
some Support; but it is Divine Grace alone which can enable a Christian to
triumph over the Pain and Danger of a Mortal Sickness, 2 Cor. 5.6.

5. Especially God and Christ are glorified in the Victory which a Christian
gains over Death: This last Enemy is a very Formidable one. An Alexander, who
could Encounter the vast Armies of Asian Monarchs, who had despised the Terror
of Battles, in his last Sickness was so afraid of Death, that his Court was
sill'd with Diviners and Victims, and all imaginable Methods were tried to
preserve his Life. When therefore a Christian, though of the tender, fearful
Sex, is raised above the Fear of Death, is confident, and willing rather to be
absent from the Body, and present with the Lord, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor.
6.5. This does highly Honor the Grace and Power of the Redeemer, through whom
alone it is that a Christian is more than a Conqueror, Romans 8.36, 37.

6. The Redeemer is glorified in that Blessedness which he immediately confers
upon the Souls of his deceased Friends. No sooner had the Israelites passed the
Red Sea, and got upon free Land, but they send up their joyful Praises, and
mention how gloriously God had Triumphed over their Enemies: What Heart can
conceive the Songs of Praise which Celebrate the Lamb, and him who sits upon
the Throne, when one believing Soul is set free from the House of Bondage, and
transplanted into the Heavenly Country? when a Soul that is Imprisoned and
Fettered in a House of Clay, is received into the heavenly Habitations which
the Redeemer has prepared? Surely, if those who heard of the Conversion of
Paul, glorified God in him, or on his account; those who were Witnesses and
Spectators of a far more surprising Change, could not be wanting in their
Admiration and Praises of that God who Crowns with unfading Glory.

7. The Death of a Christian brings glory unto the Redeemer, as it is the
Occasion of that astonishing Operation, which will raise the dissolved Body,
and transform it into the likeness of his own most glorious Body. The sinal
Conquering of the last Enemy, must be exceeding glorious unto that Power which
effects it. The Raising of Lazarus, and reinstating his Body in a perishing
Life, did glorify the Redeemer; and this he had his Eye upon in making this
Answer: What then must be the Raising of a Corrupted Body unto a blessed
Immortality? By which the Children of the Resurrection are made like the Angels
of God: Read and consider that memorable passage, 2 These. 1.10. Let us now
briesly reflect upon the

2. Evidence which I propounded, viz. How the Sickness and Death of Christians
glorify God, with respect unto them who survive, whether they be more nearly
or distantly related. And

1. God is thus glorified on such Occasions, because he manifests his Divine
Power in compensating and supplying that Loss. When useful and serviceable
Christians are removed by Death, nothing but Almighty Power can fill up such a
void empty space, and raise up others to carry on his Work; so that the Church
resembles that Poetical Tree, in which as fast as one Branch was broken off,
another did spring in the same place: Thus when Moses dies, God finds a Joshua
who was qualified to succeed him: When a David is laid unto his Father's, and
sees Corruption, God sills his Throne with a Solomon.

2. The Exercises of Graces in surviving Relatives or Acquaintance, does
glorify God on such Occasions. When holy Job, upon the surprising Death of all
his Children (at the same time) does Adore the Sovereignty of God, and blesses
his Name, when he took his dearest Comforts away; this did effectually refute
the reproaching Accusation of Satan, and brought a singular Honor to God; who
is also

3. Glorified in the Comforting of those who are troubled and cast down by such
Providence: This is one glorious Character of the blessed God, That he
comfort those who are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. Did not his Hand bind up the
Wound, no other could do it; all the Consolations which a Creature can present,
are weak and ineffectual things; but the supports of the heavenly Comforter are
never more sensible than under the sense of afflictive Providence, 2 Cor. 1.3,
4. In the

4. And Last place, The Sickness and Death of Christians bring Glory unto God,
as they are serviceable unto the Souls of them who survive: As those Fruits
that fall from the Tree, and lie about it, make the Soil more fruitful; such
sorrowful Providence being excellent Instructions about our Duty, and powerful
Arguments to excite us unto our great Work: What the Apostle says concerning
his Bonds, was equally true concerning his Death: They were for the furtherance
of the Gospel, Phil. 1. How many have owed their Conversion and Establishment
unto the Counsels and Examples of dying Christians? The Histories of every
Church abound with such Instances. I should now have showed,

3. On what accounts this Consideration is sufficient to Quiet and Support a
Christian under such sorrowsul Providence: Of this I shall give this Threefold
Account.

1. That Love which a Christian bears unto God and Christ, makes their Honor
dearer unto him than any Interest of his own; and consequently, the advancing
of that will sweeten all the Crosses that can oppress him. When Jeptha's
Victory over the Amonites had got him more than ordinary Honor; this was so
pleasing to his Daughter, that she was willing to endure the harsh Effects of
her Father's Vow, Judge. 10.36. Such a temper there was in the Apostle, when he
could declare that his chief Expectation and Design was, that Christ might be
magnisied in his Body, whether by Life or Death, Phil. 1.20.

2. A Christian knows that when God and Christ are glorified, then the grand
Purpose and End of God are attained: We are sure that the blessed God cannot
design any Gain or Prosit to himself in his Actings, but his design is to get
himself Glory; and it must be very delightful unto God, when this Council of
God is accomplished.

3. A Christian obtains his own chief Request when God is glorified; all his
other Petitions are subordinate unto this: He remembers that the Hallowing or
Glorifying of God's Name stands in the very first place in that Exemplar Prayer
which Christ has left unto the Church; and therefore when God does glorify
himself, though in a way that is grievous unto the Humane Nature, yet a
Christian Rejoices. And now it were easy to draw many instructive Inferences
from this Answer made by Christ: As,

1. It will follow from hence, that the surprising Death of the most holy and
useful Persons, Applicat.
is no Objection against the Providence and Government of God. 'Twas usual
among the Heathens to Accuse their Gods; yea, some of 'em proceeded to deny the
Existence and Providence of a Deity, because some excellent and virtuous
Persons were taken away by a surprising Death. The Epicurean, who disputes
against Providence, thought his Queries unanswerable, when he asked, Why (if
there was a Providence) the two brave Scipio's were Routed and Slain by the
Carthaginians, Cicer. de N. D. l. 3.
with several such like Questions, which were more tolerable in the Gentiles
who knew not God; but it is inexcusable in those who have the Oracles of God
committed unto them, to think or speak at such a rate.

2. What adorable Wisdom belongs unto the blessed God, who can glorify himself
by those very events that seem most dishonorable unto him: It Is observed by
the Apostle, that the foolishness of God is wiser than men, 1 Cor. 1.25. i. e.
In those very events which seem inconsistent with Wisdom, wherein God seems to
act foolishly, yet in them he (infinitely) surpasses all the skill and Wisdom
that are in men. The Divine Wisdom can build Trophies upon those very places
which seem to swallow it up: The cutting off the natural Branches, the casting
away the Body of the Jewish Nation, at the first view appeared dishonorable
unto the Truth and Fidelity of God; but the consideration of this event draws
from the Apostle that admiring Exclamation, Romans 11. v. 33. O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!

3. How vast is the distance between the Thoughts of God, and those of Men!
Isa. 55.8. The subject of the Text gives a memorable instance: The Sisters of
Lazarus might be apt to conclude that their Brothers Sickness and Death would
be on various accounts dishonorable unto Christ: 1. As they seemed to import
Unkindness, or Impotence in Christ, who on this occasion carried it, as if he
either neglected his Friend, or was unable to help him: And 2. As they seemed
to argue the unprofitableness of Christ's Service. When Lazarus was Dead and
laid in his Grave, those who knew the Friendship of the Redeemer unto him,
would be tempted to speak on this manner: How little advantage has poor
Lazarus got by his Acquaintance with, and service unto Christ, who if he had
Power to Recover and prevent the Death of his Sick Friend, has been guilty of
strange unkindness. But in the conclusion, the Sickness and Death of Lazarus
did bring a far greater Honor unto Christ, than his recovering would have
done: That Miracle which was wrought in raising him from the Dead, did exalt
the Name of Christ, and increased the number of his Followers; take heed
therefore of leaning unto your own understanding, but whenever the ways of God
have a perplexing obscurity in them, imitate the Practice of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 73.17. Go into the Sanctuary, and view them in Scripture light; this will
discover a refreshing brightness in those Events which have the most horror in
them.

4. How real and great a difference does Converting Grace make between a
Christian, and the unbelieving World! The latter are wholly insensible unto the
consideration used in the Text; the glory of God and Christ have no efficacy to
quiet and support their minds; Arguments taken from their own Reputation or
Interest, have some force to moderate Sorrow and keep it from excess; but the
glorifying of God by their Crosses, is an Argument which has no strength with
them; whereas it has the greatest with a Christian, to whom nothing else need
be represented: Our Savior well understood to whom he made the Answer in the
Text; they were his sincere Disciples, who were capable of perceiving the force
of this Consideration; which afterward our Savior repeats unto Martha, v. 40.
Thou should see the glory of God: Unto a Martha this would be a grateful and
transporting spectacle, when a Judas had far rather see thirty pieces of
Silver* (than this glory of God.) Let us try our selves by this Rule; this will
discover our State and our Character, and whether our Patience under Trials be
a Christian Grace, or but a Philosophic Virtue; this latter grows from other
Principles; when therefore our Minds are quieted under dejecting Providence,
without having recourse unto the support of the Text, it is a sad evidence that
we are alienated from the Life of God: If the consideration of his Glory cannot
overbalance the Pain and Loss that we are exposed to, we are very unlike to
our Redeemer, whose troubled Soul was composed with this Thought, that his
Fathers Name would be glorified by his accursed Death, John 12.27, 28.

5. Let us whom this sorrowful occasion has drawn together (and all who but
hear of it) give diligence to correspond with the design that God has in this
severe Providence: Surely he has not made this breach, only to open a passage
unto Sorrow and Compassion, much less to furnish us with new matter of
discourse: No, he designs that we should glorify him in our Hearts and Lives,
more than we have formerly done: And this leads me unto that particular
Application which I propounded to spend some time in, and which will assist us
in making that Improvement of this Providence as will bring glory unto God. All
that I shall add will fall under these following Directions.

1. Let us justify this severe Providence of God: It Is highly dishonorable
unto him when we blame and accuse his ways, as if they were not equal; as on
the other hand it is Honorable to God, when we subscribe every Arrest that our
Heavenly Judge has pronounced. It Is related concerning Aaron, that when his
two Sons were cut off, he held his peace, Lev. 10.2, 3. He made no Objections
against that tremendous severity of God, when he understood that He had
glorified himself by that Act. Blessed be God who enableth the Relict of the
Deceased thus to glorify God: May this Instance of his Resignation very much
exalt the Name of God, and bring Reputation unto strict and serious Religion.
Let this conclusion be deeply fixed in all our Souls, that however severe the
dealings of God are, they are always Righteous and Equal.

2. Let us Honor and Imitate the Holy Example of the Deceased Friend of
Christ, the worthy Mrs. Shower. None I hope will expect a large Historical
account of her Life, or a Funeral Encomiastick; this latter she needs not, for
her own Works praise her in the gate, and are a more valuable Monument, than
any made by Art.

Her Parentage and Beauty, her Wit and Charms of Conversation (though even those
were Gifts from above) must now be passed over in silence; for all these are
Praeda Mortis, a Prey unto Death and the Grave; which consideration ought to
cure the undue Esteem of them, that many professing Christians discover; and
perhaps, few places are more guilty of this Unchristian Error, than this City,
where it seems to be the chief Ambition of many, to out-vye others in every
thing, rather than in real Holiness, which is the only Ornament that Death
cannot spoil us of; accordingly I shall only take notice of those Excellencies
which do fit the dignifying Character of Lazarus unto her, One whom Jesus
loved: (And however useful and honorable the Love of our Acquaintance and
Fellow Creatures may be unto us, yet at last this Character of Sick and Dying
Lazarus will be more valued, than any the most admired Titles of Honor.) To
make good this Character, it will not be necessary to Describe her in her
Personal and Relative Capacities; in both which, those who knew Her will
acknowledge that she had not many Equals, 'Twill be enough to draw the few
following Lineaments.

1. The Holy Wisdom which did shine in her Conduct, and which she discovered,
both in leaving her Native Land, to enjoy the advantages of Living in a
Religious Family (to which she was related,) and in the Choice that she made
when she changed her Condition: Neither the prejudices of the Age, or the
Advantage of other offers, could hinder from accepting One, as the Partner of
her Life, from whom she could expect the best assistance in the Service of God,
and the concerns of her Soul; and this she did at a time when there was no
prospect of that Tranquillity, which now encourages Persons of his Character
and Profession.

2. Her Conscientious Attendance upon the Public Worship: Of this I am capable
to give Witness, having had the opportunity of Living a considerable time under
the same Roof; and have observed how Her Love unto the Solomn Assemblies, made
Her overcome many difficulties, which are pleaded by others in excuse of their
neglect; neither the Heat or Cold of the Season, nor the hazard to her Health,
(especially when great with Child) could induce her to lose any Opportunity of
waiting at the Gates of Wisdom; such Advantages were pleasant, and such Seasons
were refreshing unto her Soul.

3. The Acquaintance she had with Secret Religion: She was not one of those
Professors who shut up their Religion within the Temple Walls, where they take
it up, and leave it at their departure: No, she made many secret Visits unto
her Heavenly Bridegroom, and from him obtained that Wisdom and Modesty, and
other Virtues which adorned her Conversation.

4. Her submission unto the disposing Will of God, and the comforting hopes she
had, do complete the Character of one whom Jesus Loved in this World, and has
now received in the other, where she is placed out of the reach of Sin and
Sorrow, of Childbearing Pains, and Childbed Sickness, and where no Clouds
shall ever interrupt the Light of God, and of the Lamb: But if we desire to
meet her there, we must imitate her Faith and Holiness: And

3. Lastly, Let us glorify God by receiving the Instruction which this
sorrowful Providence presents to us.

1. Concerning the Uncertainty of Life: when so bright and Vigorous a Flame is
suddenly Extinguished, who can entertain a just expectation of a long Life? What
folly must it be to reckon upon many years, when our Lives are in so perpetual
hazard? Let us number our days aright, and fix upon our Hearts that Conclusion
which David made, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. Our days on the Earth are as a shadow, and
there is no abiding; which consideration had no question a strong influence
upon that famous Liberality toward the Service of God, which is related in that
Chapter; and it would make us more active in his Service.

2. Learn the Vanity of Creature-assistances; could the Love of a Husband, or
the Counsels of Physicians, or the Service of Friends have been Effectual,
there had not been an occasion for this sorrowful Solemnity. It Is become
Natural to us, to place an undue confidence in Created helps; exceeding apt we
are to trust in Riches or Wisdom, and in the means of Health, when in
themselves they are empty and broken Cisterns, which will send us away
disappointed and ashamed.

3. The necessity of speedy Preparation for Death and Judgment; every Funeral
presses this upon those who are witnesses of it. Many of you have lately heard
From my Br. S. on those words, Matt. 24.44. Be you also ready.
the Nature and Importance of this great work, and so many have discoursed
concerning it, that I need not enlarge: It has not been without a design
worthy of the Wisdom of God, that our Deceased Friend should not be called out
of the World by Death, until she was known unto two Societies in this City,
whereby her Death is rendered more Instructive. And now that a Funeral Sermon
has drawn Multitudes to attend here, you will receive no advantage from it,
yea 'twill prove very hurtful to you, if you do not seriously engage, that you
will give all diligence to prepare for Death and Eternity. This work is never
unseasonable, and nothing can be pleaded to excuse the neglect of it.

You who are Young, and in the Flower of your days, do not put off this Affair;
say not as the negligent Jews once did concerning the Rebuilding of their
Temple, The time is not come, Hag. 1.2. The approach of Death will make you of
another mind, when you hear the sound of that Messengers Feet, who will bring
you to Judgment; you will then conclude that this is the one Thing necessary,
that all the Concerns of Trade, and Offices of Civility are mere Trifles in
comparison with this work, upon which your everlasting Welfare depends. What
meanest thou then, O Sleeper! arise and call upon God, and stir up thy self
that thou perish not; look often down into the Chambers of the Grave; dwell (by
solemn Thoughts) in the Valley of the Shadow of Death: Be not afraid lest this
should make thee Melancholy or Distracted, for this path leads unto the most
desirable Joy. Tho no Distractedness is to be feared, in comparison of the
Madness which unrepenting careless Sinners are guilty of, and whom Death will
find unprepared. And when a view of your Latter End has composed and awakened
your Souls, then put the Question to your selves, which you find 2 Pet. 3.2.
Seeing that all these things shall be Dissolved, (or are Dissolving,) what
manner of Persons ought we to be, in all manner of Conversation and Godliness*

FINIS.
Books lately Printed.
PRactical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery in several Sermons, as they were
lately preached in a Congregation in London: by Timothy Rogers, M. A. after his
Recovery from a Sickness of near two years Continuance.

Early Religion, or a Discourse of the Duty and Interest of Youth, by the same
Author. Both Printed for J. Dunton.


