THE Master of the Temple A bad a LAWYER, AS THE Dean of Paul's Is a DIVINE.

IN A Letter from a Gentleman of the Temple, to his (quondam) Tutor in Oxford.

About the Law-Part of Dr. Sherlock's modest Examination of the Oxford Decree.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1696.

A Letter from a Lawyer in the Temple, to his (quondam) Tutor in Oxford.
SIR,
THough it be some time since I left the University, yet my Obligations to it
continue fresh upon me. I have still (and ever shall have) the same Concern for
its Honor and Interest, that I had when I was actually a Member there. In
Truth, the Socinians, the Tritheists, and Latitudinarians both in Opinion and
Practice, increase so fast in this Town, that they frequently provoke a Wish
for my Return thither. For, notwithstanding the Calumny and Reproach which
Heretics and Dissenters have cast upon that Seminary of Learning and Virtue,
in Contempt of the Public Opinion of the greatest part of the Christian World;
yet I must declare, that I observed Probity, Good manners, and Religion, more
Visible and Exemplary in that Place, than they can be pretended to be amongst
Us here.

SIR,
I cannot but with great Concern Acknowledge, that Your Pulpits are more
earnest in Recommending Practical Piety than Ours, notwithstanding the Youth of
those who generally fill 'em. Our Master entertains us of late with such
Arguments and Concessions about Christianity, that Infidels seem rather
encouraged than convinced by his Reasonings. One while he confesses the Souls
of Brutes to be Immaterial, and anon he supposes some hidden unreveal'd Decree
of the Deity for their Annihilation at Death; and yet again argues from the
Immateriality of an Human Soul, that the same is necessarily Immortal, and must
endure to Eternity. These, and such like Discourses from the Pulpit, fill the
Coffee-houses about Us, upon Sunday Evenings, with many Wild Disputes
concerning a future state: And in truth, the Deans Sermons, together with three
of his Old Friend's, viz. One, concerning the Temporary Duration of
Hell Torments; and to prove, that God is not obliged to fulfill his
Threatenings, but that, on the contrary, it may be for his Honor to be better
than his Word: A Second, concerning the Concealment of a Man's Christianity
under a Mohammedan or Pagan Government, rather than disturb it: And a Third,
concerning the Perfection of True Wisdom (if a Man can hit it) in the Practice
of an appearing freedom and openness, with a Resolute Reservedness, as little
appearing as is possible: These, I say, have given such Subjects of Discourse
to the Youth of this Place, that it is scarce Imaginable how much the Number of
the Pretended Wits and Atheists is of late increased.

But Sir, the informing you in these Particulars was not the Design of this
Letter; tho I could not forbear Complaining of the Decay of Religion, to You,
whose Prayers may assist to stop it, and to beg of God the Forgiveness and
Reformation of those, who occasion or promote it. What I intend by this Paper,
is, to show my Duty and Filial Regards to my Mother University, by making a
short Observation, or two, upon the 7th Page of our Dean's Satyr, on the
Proceedings about Mr. Bingham's Sermon.

I shall not presume to venture upon any Argument about the Opinion Censured.
My Reverence for your Knowledge in these Matters, and the Application of my
Studies another way, do expressly forbid it.

That which I here offer to your Consideration must be agreed proper to the
Profession I am now engaged in, viz. An Essay, to prove, that the
Vice-Chancelour, Bp. of Oxford, and Heads of Houses there, have not incurred
any Praemunire, or other danger, to themselves, or the University, in their late
procedure about the Sermon abovementioned: And (to tell you my Opinion freely
in this matter) if the Dean's Divinity be no better than his Law, I think him
deeply engaged to the Legislative Power, which took away the Writ de Haeretico
Comburendo. He is pleased to insinuate, That you ought to have advised with men
of Skill, how far your Irregular and Unstatutable Proceeding might affect you.
I take the thing to be so very plain, that you needed no Consultation with
Lawyers beforehand, nor afterward neither. But, since the menaces pronounced
have proceeded from a Person, whose Station and Converse suppose him advised by
men of Skill, Some, on your behalf, have considered the matter; and I find the
Templars to smile at the Deans Presumption, in pretending to impose on the
World (especially on his Neighbors, the men of the Law) a Proviso, in an Act
of Parliament, which stands repealed by a subsequent Act; and upon which Repeal
the greatest miscarriages of the Last Reign are Founded. For, in truth, the
Suspension of the B. of London, and the Business of Magdalen-Colledge were no
miscarriages, but upon that supposal, viz. That the Act in the First of
Elizabeth, erecting an High-Commission-Court, was a New Law; and that therefore
being repealed, any the like Commission was Illegal. Thus, I am sure, the
Opinions and Complaints ran, before, and at the Arrival of his Present Majesty.

It is not easy to imagine from whence he could have received this Notion,
unless it were from Bp. Cartwright's Book, who for his own Justification,
maintained that Law to be but Affirmative of the Old Common Law of England. And
yet even that Supposition, were it true, would not answer the Deans Purpose, as
will appear by and by.

I believe, You Sir, who are a good man, will be apt to think, that it Savors
strongly of Prevarication to Print part of a Clause, and omit the most material
words in it, which are placed in the midst of the Paragraph, and could not well
be overlooked, but by one that was resolved to overlook 'em, because it was for
his purpose to do so. Yet this little Piece of Art the Dean has stooped to, as
you shall see presently: which is the more remarkable, because he has Printed
the Words of the Act in a different Character; which, amongst ingenuous
Persons, I think, supposes a Literal Recital.

This way of Dealing I confess, as odd as it is, is not wholly without a
Precedent, (whether it will warrant or justify our Master I shall leave you to
determine,) but he has the Honor of following the example of a Reverend
Prelate, who upon a certain occasion thought fit to launch out of his
Profession, and argue a Law-Point: to prove his Argument he quoted a Charter,
but was pleased to repeat only half the words of the sentence, and then stopped
short, omitting these, Salva Persona nostra, Regina nostra, and Liberis
nostris, donec emendatum fuerit; and quandocunque Emendatum esset, intendent
nobis sicut prius: Matthew Paris can give you the whole in King John's Reign;
but the mischief is, the latter words, if inserted, would have spoiled the
force of that inference for which the Quotation was used, and we are not to
expect from either of 'em that they should every day answer their own
Arguments. This Practice is too often observable in the Discourses of Those,
who, to show their Reading, endeavor to fetch Arguments from Professions, in
which they were never Educated, or not sufficiently Studied.

Sir, I must beg you, not to construe this Reflection as general: For it must
be acknowledged, that Your Gown does afford many instances to the contrary; and
particularly, the Universal Learning, and apparent Sincerity of the great
Bishop of Worcester, is a notorious exception to these Remarks. He must be
owned to have read more of our Law Books than, perhaps, any man that is not a
Lawyer; and to have employed what he has read Knowingly and Fairly. But as it is
plain our Dean has no pretense to the First Part of this Character, so whether
he has any to the Latter, or not, you are to judge upon what follows.

The Case is thus.
A Sermon is Preached at Oxford, in which there is a Passage complained of, as
giving occasion of Offense. The Vice Chancellor Convenes several Heads of
Houses, amongst which were more than six Doctors of Divinity. They Judge,
Declare and Determine these Propositions (that there are Three Infinite
Distinct Minds and Substances in the Trinity; and that the Three Persons in the
Trinity are Three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits, and Three Individual
Substances) to be False, Impious, and Heretical, dissonant, and contrary to the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church; and especially to the Doctrine of the Church
of England publicly received. Wherefore they do Command and publicly Enjoin
all and singular, the Persons committed to their Care, not to publish for the
future any such Tenet in their Sermons, or otherwise.

The Question now, upon this Case, is, Whether the Vice Chancellor and Heads of
Houses have been guilty of any Crime, according to the Laws of this Realm,
either Ecclesiastical or Civil, or by the Statutes of the University?

I say, that the Negative is plain. For, first, this is not a Judicial
Proceeding, in order to punish the Person who had publicly maintained these
Propositions, but a Declaration rather of their Opinion by way of Caution, to
the Members of the University under their Care: The Wherefore, in he Close,
does plainly show their honest and justifiable intent and design. And no man
can have the Forehead to assert, that Twenty Men may not deny the Notion in
Debate to be true, with as much Freedom, by our Law, as Two or Three may affirm
it. Nay, if it was their Judgment and Opinion, as undoubtedly it was, the
Morals even of a Lawyer will assure the Dean, that it was their Duty to declare
so, in order to prevent the Growth of the supposed Error, or Heresy among those
committed to their Charge. The Judgment of Universities has been Frequently
and Legally declared upon Less Occasions, even upon the Printing of Pamphlets,
tho out of their Precincts, and by Persons not under their Care. Their Power
has, with Allowance, been extended to forbid the Reading of Erroneous
Treatises; and how comes it to be a Crime in them then to Censure, what is
publicly Preached before them, by One of their Own Members?

But suposing it to be a Judicial Proceeding; yet their Statutes are their
Warrant for it. The plain words of which are, Haeretici, Schismatici, and
quicunque alii minus recte de Fide Catholica and Doctrina vel Disciplina
Ecclesiae Anglicanae sentientes, usque tam Conciones quam Libri quibus
malesanae opiniones propagantur cohibeantur. And this is entrusted Judicio
Vicecancellarii, assidentibus Ipsi Praefectis in Ordinario suo Conventu. Thus
runs the Statute, de Authoritate and Officio Vice-Cancellarii. There is another
Statute as to Sermons, and that runs thus, Siquis pro Concione aliqua, intra
Vniversitatem ejusve Praecinctum habita quicquam doctrinae vel disciplinae
Ecclesiae Anglicanae public receptae dissonum aut contrarium protuerit, sive
protulisse ab ipso Vice-Cancellario suspectus, vel alio aliquo rationabilem
suspicionis Causam afferentedelatus fuerit; the Vicechancellor may thereupon
proceed, adhibito Consilio Sex aliorum Stae. Theologiae Doctorum (quorum Vnus
sit Stae. Theologiae Professor Regius, si concioni interfuerit.) There is not a
step they have taken in this Affair, which is not according to the Power
granted to 'em in these words. And I wonder therefore what the Dean means by
reproaching their Proceedings as Irregular and Vnstatutable. There seems to be
a Fate upon him in misunderstanding and mis-representing every thing that
carries the Name of a Law; for he deals just as skilfully, and fairly with
these Local Statutes, as he does afterward with those of the Realm.

If then these Statutes of theirs are valid, they are an Ample Warrant for what
they have done: And Valid they are, unless they are contrary to the express
known Laws of the Realm, which I shall prove 'em not to be immediately. In the
mean Time, supposing there were an Error in their Proceedings, it is but the
Error of a Judge at most, which is never Criminal by any Law in the World
(unless Corruption attend the Senrence) where the Person and the subject Matter
are within his Jurisdiction. Now, in both Respects, That is the Case here.
'Twas a Member of the University that maintained the Proposition censured,
'twas in a Sermon preached before the University. The subject matter of the
Words relates not to the Temporal Government, but merely to an Opinion in
Religion, to an Article of Faith: And it must be agreed, that Sermons before
them, and the Doctrines delivered in those Sermons, are under their Cognizance.
Now supposing the Censure to be a Mistake, no Man of sense but the Dean, will
pretend that this mistake is a Crime: It only gives Cause of Appeal to some
Superior Judge, in Case the Constitution allows one; as Ours, both in Civil and
Ecclesiastical matter, does in most Particulars.

There are but few Cases of any kind or Nature whatsoever, where the Law has
empowered a Final Determination in the first Instance: Even in Colleges and
Universities there are Visitors, and in most Cases, Appeals from the first
Order or Sentence. Mankind does so generally agree this to be reasonable, in
consideration of our obnoxiousness to Error, that Appeals are deemed Remedies
approved by the Law of Nature; and in this, Divines, Canonists, Civilians, and
Common-Lawyers do all agree: And, if so, with what Color can the Dean
insinuate, that this Proceeding has brought either the Persons concerned, of
the University, into any danger, supping if contrary to the Laws of the Realm.

The next thing to be considered, is, whether any Law of the Realm does
control or overruled this matter?

The Dean says, that such Declarations are not fit to be entrusted with any
Body of Men less than a National Synod. I shall not dispute about Convenience;
tho, with submission to better Judgments, Our Constitution can hardly admit of
any Alteration, but for the worse. But the question is how the Law stands?

The Objection is from the 1st of Eliz. Cap. 1. Upon which the Dean says. We
find the power to order, determine, or adjudge any matter or Cause to be
Heresy, restrained only to such as heretofore have been determined, ordered or
adjudg'd to be Heresy by the Authority of the Canonical Scriptures, or by the
first Four General Councils, or by any other General Council, wherein the same
was declared Heresy by the Express and plain Words of the said Canonical
Scriptures; or such as hereafter shall be ordered, judged, or determined to be
Heresy, by the High Court of Parliament of this Realm, with the assent of the
Clergy in their Convocation. This is his Quotation: Then he goes on thus, And
if the King could not grant a greater Authority than this to his High
Commissioner for Ecclesiastical Affairs, it is not likely that any other Body
of Men have it. And my Lord Coke says, That this is a direction to others,
especially to Bishops, in their adjudging Heresy, 3 Instit. page 40. And how
they have obsery'd this Law in their Decree, they had best consider.

To which I answer; That, were this Law in force, and did it concern them, yet
for the Reasons above mentioned, it is no more than an Erroneous Judgment, as we
have seen many on the 25 E. 3. and reversed with abhorrence; and yet the Judges
not deemed offenders, because they were not so Wise as their Superiors, who
were of another Opinion. But his Emphafis lies on the last words, They had best
consider how they have observed that Law. You, Sir, know best, whether the
Position be declared Heresy by any of those Councils: But, I Am sure, I know,
that there is no such Law in force; and, if there were, yet it concerns not
this matter. First, It no ways concerns this Procedure, but only a Legal
Process upon a Person for Heresy, in order to his being condmn'd, and delivered
over to the Secular Power, to be burned. In the next place, it concerns only
the High-Commissioners, and none else; it was not intended to oblige even the
Bishop of a Diocese in his Ordinary Proceeding. It Is true, Coke says, That it
may serve for a good Direction to Others, more especially to a Diocesan, being
sole Judge in so weighty a Cause; but he does not say it obliges him, nor can
He, or any body else pretend it does: much less does Coke say, that it extends
to a Vice-Chancellor's Government of the University, with the Assistance of the
Heads of Houses, or Doctors of Divinity: Neither Diocesans nor Universities are
mentioned or intended, as appears by the whole Contexture of the Act.

But suppose the Act were Directory, nay, Compulsive upon a Diocesan (which
it is not) does it follow that the Direction extends to Universities also? The
meaning of a Law is, to be extended no further than the Words of it, and not
strained, to take in Parallel-Cases and Remote Consequences. Then, consider the
Reason of the thing; May not the University be allowed to censure a Member for
Heretical Words, tho they should not be such as contained Heresy condemnable by
the Ordinary? May they not caution against a Doctrine as Heretical, for which
the Ordinary cannot Sentence in order to Death? The Punishment of Heresy at the
Time, when this Statute was in force, was Fire: Suppose the Bishop obliged by
this Law now, yet he could not punish such Heresy as was within it, but upon a
contumacious Adherence of the Offending Party to his Opinion. Does it follow
from thence, that the University may not Censure other Words, which do not
strictly come within the Statute, as Impious and Heretical? Nor reprimand one
of her own Members for using 'em?

But this is a Debate upon Suppositions only, and those utterly false. For Coke
himself tells us, in the First words of the very Sentence quoted by the Dean,
that the Act extended only to the High-Commissioners, which were appointed by
the King in pursuance of it. So that if the Dean had Printed the whole
sentence, as it lies in my Lord Coke, he would not have been capable of raising
so much as the shadow of an Argument from it. How this agrees with the Common
Rules of sincerity; the Dean, who understands how to reconcile every thing to
every thing, may please to tell us; for I dare say, no body else can.

However, take it again as he would have it; and let us see what follows.
Because this is a Direction to Bishops in their Dioceses (whereas Coke only
says, It may serve for a good Direction to 'em, in so weighty a Cause; and so,
That Is not very fairly quoted neither) because this is a Direction to the
Ordinary; therefore, What! Therefore, you had best consider, how You have
observed that Law, which does not concern You! O the Power of No-Logic and
No-Law, met together!

As he clips Coke's Opinion, so he maims the very Paragraph of the Act of
Parliament, upon which he founds his implied Menace. For, as it lies in the
Act, it is a Restraint of the Power, which the High-Commissioners were to have,
by Virtue of the King's Letters Patents, and of that Act. The words are, by
Virtue of this Act, and these he omits. Now this Proviso implies, that, if the
Proviso had not been added, the General Purview had given them a greater
Latitude and Power; for otherwise the Proviso had been useless. The General
Purview, giving a Power to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, it must be
supposed, that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction might declare and punish other
Heresys, than what are mentioned in the Proviso; and the Proviso's being
restrained only to those Commissioners, shows, that the Lawmakers thought
other Heresys might be declared and punished, than what are there mentioned:
Tho they would not permit These Commissioners to declare any other.

But further, If there be a Repeal of the Clause which enacts the
High-Commission-Court, (as there is by the 17 Car. 1. Cap. 11.) the Proviso, in
restraint of these Commissioners, is, and must be Repealed too. This Natural
Reason and Common sense might have taught the Dean, without his resorting to
the Temple Library, or consulting his Men of Skill about the matter. For either
that power of Erecting an High-Commission-Court was in affirmance of the
Common Law, or introductive of a New Law. If the former, as was Argued in the
last Reign; yet, even then, this proviso being restrained to such Exercise of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by Letters Patents by Virtue of that Act; the same
can never extend to other Ordinary Acts, or Exercise of Jurisdiction, without a
special Commission, because the words have so restrained it. And if the Power
of that Court were New, and Created by that Act, as all the Dean's Lawyers do,
and must contend; then the Court being gone, the Proviso in restraint of it is
vanished too. So that at last here is no 1 Eliz. cap. 1. left for the
University to consider; and the Dean has dealt with Them, as the World often
has with Him; has thrown away his Advice upon 'em to no purpose.

It is News to Me, Sir, and will be so to the World, I believe, what you tell
me, with regard to the Reprimand, supposed to have been given lately to the
University. It has been talked very confidently of here in Town, as a thing
past Dispute, and the Dean, I assure you, has taken Heart upon it, and
(according to his way) defied all the World more than once from the Pulpit in
the strength of it. And (...) send me word, That it does not at all (...) the
Meeting of the Heads of Houses, or of the University, that any such Reprimand,
so much talked of here, has been sent: And this, you say, I may depend upon, as
certain.

You surprise me, Sir, and I believe what I am going to say, will as much
surprise You. You tell me, that it is taken for granted at Oxford, that the
Judges of England have given their Opinions in Prejudice of the Vniversicy, and
their Proceedings.

You may be aftured, that this Report, as loud and as largely spread as it is,
is scandalous and groundless. You may be assured of it, I say, both from the
known Law of the Realm, and from the known Honor and Probity also of the
Persons filling those Places. For by our Law, the Judges are not to give any
Opinion out of Court, upon any Matter, that may possibly come before 'em in
Judgment; and if they do, it is an Irregularity in their Behavior; an
Indecency, seldom committed, but never owned. For such Opinions, being
Extrajudicial, are not upon their Oaths; and are neither obligatory to
themselves, nor valued by others. It Is a Reproach upon the King to suppose
their Opinion asked in this case. Many of 'em, I am sure, when requested by
Ministers, upon greater occasions than this, have refused to give it, as in
Justice and Honor it became 'em; and would therefore, if they should have been
ask't upon this, have certainly denied it. Shipmony, and Non-obstante's, and
Quowarranto's had some such Preliminary Interrogatories about Opinions; but
Experience tells us, that the Nation would not bear it: Besides, These
Gentlemen now on the Bench are not quite so Dependent on the Crown, as the
Beneplacito Men were.

It Is true, they are bound to advise the King, when required: But that cannot
be concerning an Act already done by the Subject, whether Lawful or Criminal?
For in these Cases the King has his Sergeant, his Attorney, Solicitor, and
other Counsel, Learned in the Law, to advise w^^^.

You may depend upon it therefore, that nothing of that Nature can have been
done or attempted, as peremptory as the Dean's Creatures have been upon (...)
^ccasion.

So that, upon the whole, think you need not sneak to any Socinian, Tritheist,
or Latitudinarian whatever, upon the account of the evil Consequences that may
attend your Conduct in this matter. Fools and Cowards may blame you for having
gone so far; but with Wife and Honest Men, your only Fault will be, if you go
no farther.

Sir, I might enlarge upon the Powers and Privileges of the University, in
respect of declaring Doctrines to be Erroneous; and I could find Materials
enough from good Histories, Reports, and Journals, and those approved by
Lawyers, for that purpose: But at present, I think it enough to have answered
the Dean, till he shall be pleased to give further occasion by Writing about
Law Points again.

I am, Sir, Your most humble Servant.
Feb. 3. 1695.

