PRACTICAL REFLECTIONS On the Late Earthquakes IN Jamaica, England, Sicily,
Malta, etc. Anno 1692.

With a Particular, Historical Account of those, and diverse other EARTHQUAKES.

By JOHN SHOWER.

London, Printed for John Salusbury at the Rising Sun in Cornhill, and Abraham
Chandler at the Chirurgion's Arms in Aldersgate Street. MDCXCIII.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE late Earthquakes abroad in America, and Sicily, with that we had here last
September, made so much Discourse amongst all sorts of People, that I
endeavored the serious Improvement of 'em, in a Sermon on that Occasion; which
at the Desire of many, is now enlarged, with many Historical Passages of other
Earthquakes, and moral Reflections relating to our own Country.

As to the Authors I have cited, I have consulted the Originals as to the most
of 'em; and am well satisfied of the Truth of those few Others, which I had not
the Leisure, or Opportunity to look into. In some Chronological Differences
between Historians, I have mentioned that Year, which I thought the most
Probable: but if the Matter of Fact be truly related, though I should mistake
the Year, the Reader is not much concerned. Philosophically to discuss the
Nature of Earthquakes, many Others (whom I need not name) have attempted: Such
a Narration concerning the late Extraordinary one in Sicily, I am informed we
may expect shortly from the Learned Malpighius.

We cannot wonder if the Concernedness of the Heathen World, upon any such
violent Motions of the Earth, did degenerate into Superstition. Owning a
Multiplicity of Gods, they knew not to which of 'em to ascribe such Events; and
therefore we read of the Ancient Romans, that upon those Occasions, they never
addressed their Prayers and Vows to any one particular Deity, as in other Cases
they were wont to do, lest (says Quoniam and qua vi, and per quem Deorum,
Dearumve Terra tremuit, incertum esset. Aul. Gell. Noct. Art. l. 2. c. 28.
Varro) they should mistake; because they knew not by whose Influence the Earth
was shaken. To that Modesty or Ignorance of the Romans, we may oppose the
Vanity of the Greeks; who boasted they could foretell Earthquakes, as is
pretended to have been done by Diog. Laert. in Vit. Pherec. See more Instances:
La Mothe le Vayer, Let. LXXV. des Trembl. de Terre.
Pherecydes, the Master of Pythagoras. But when Earthquakes happened, they were
all wont to quit their Anno 3861. Crebris Terrae motibus undique nunciatis, tam
multae sunt indictae Feriae Romae, ad placandos Coelestes, ut nec Senatus
haberi, nec administrari Respublica posset, Consulibus Sacrificando,
Expiandoque occupatis. Lefcoloper in Ciceron. p. 229. Imperante Gordiano
tertio, fuit Terrae motus eousque gravis, ut Civitates etiam Terrae hiatu cum
Populis deperitent: ob quae Sacrificia per totam Urbem totumque orbem Terrarum
ingentia celebrata sunt. Histor. August. Scriptores. Jul. Capitol. Gordianus
tertius, Tom. 2. 8o.
Civil and Common Affairs, and betake themselves to their Devotions, and by
Prayers, and Sacrifices, endeavor to appease the Anger of the Gods.

Concerning the late Earthquakes in Sicily, it has been observed, that Present
State of Europe, March 1693. p. 86.
Messina received less Damage than some other Cities. The People in that
Country being very superstitious, the Monks made advantage of their Simplicity,
and spread abroad a Report at the time of the Earthquake, that the B. Virgin
had revealed to a young Girl of nine Years old, (her particular Favorite) that
by means of her Intercession, she had obtained, that the City of Messina, which
is under her Protection, should not be swallowed up: This for a little while
somewhat revived their Spirits. But the Intercession of S. Agatha could not
procure the same Favor for the City of Catanea, whereof she is Patroness. For
when the Earthquake began, the People flew to the Cathedral, where one of the
Canons carried about the Relics of the Saint: But neither the Relics, nor the
Prayers of the Saint, could stop the Thunderbolt which fell upon that City; but
it was overturned as in a Moment, and not one House left standing. And besides
wounded and maimed that were dug out of the Ruins, eighteen Thousand are
supposed to have perished there. The Kingdom of Naples has had a Share in that
Earthquake, as well as the Island of Malta.

Our great Difficulty in reflecting on such Providence, will be to avoid the
two Extremes, of Atheism on the one hand, and Superstition on the other; not to
make too little, or too much of such Events; not to overlook the Divine Agency,
and Warning thereby, as if they had no meaning; nor on the other hand, to be
bold, and positive, and particular in determining what they signify, and what
we may expect to follow. I have given diverse Instances of other public
Calamities which have been preceded by Earthquakes. If National Repentance, and
Reformation do not prevent it, we have reason to expect such, from moral
Prognostications, had we no such Call, as by the late Earthquakes, to consider
our Ways.

Few, we may fear, do practically Acknowledge God's Government, and own his
Agency in these things. The most are Confident, and Careless, as if they
carried nothing in them either of Presage, or Admonition; or at least nothing
but good News. We have been told in Philosophical Discourse of Earthquakes, by
C. H. 4o.
Print, That if any thing can be collected from the late Earthquake here,
September the 8th, it is this, That as we had a long and calm Serenity of
Weather after it, so a lasting Peace and Tranquillity will be settled in the
World by the Conduct and Victorious Arms of King WILLIAM, whom God long
preserve. How little Ground we have to expect this without Reformation, I leave
to the Consideration of all who seriously believe God's Government of the
World, and know what he has done to other Nations, and People.

I may promise my self the Concurrence of all Good Men in our Improvement of
the late Earthquakes, which I endeavor to persuade to, viz. Thankfully to own
our public National Mercies, while other Countries are made Desolate. That
Trembling of the Earth in England, it is true, was not a Prodigy in one sense,
because we were not destroyed by it: But then it had not been a Warning, but an
Execution, as to Us; not the Signal, but the Judgment. Upon the Account of a
Deliverance from a threatening Earthquake, Anno Christi 365. we find the City of
Sozomen, l. 6. c. 2. Amm. Marcell. Le Sieur.
Alexandria observed an Annual Feast, in Commemoration of it.

When some are made Examples, and Signs to us, God expects we should own his
Goodness that we are spared; and take heed that we provoke not his Anger, by
the like and further Transgressions. When our Savior exhorts us to remember
Lot 's Wife, we may suppose it was not the Miracle, so much as the Moral he
intended. God's Judgments on Jerusalem, he said, shall be Ezekiel. 5.15.
an Instruction, and an Astonishment unto the Nations round about. So was
Pharaoh warned by what had been done to the Proud Assyrian; Ezekiel. 31.3.
Speak unto Pharaoh, and to his Multitude, Who art thou like in thy Greatness?
Behold the Assyrian was a Cedar in Lebanon with fair Branches, etc. In like
manner he argues with Ninive, from his Severity on No, or Alexandria; Nahum.
3.5, 8.
Behold I am against thee; Art thou better than populous No, that was situate
among the Rivers? The Punishment of One People, or Person, should be a Warning
unto All. The Greek (...), Matthew. 1.19.
word for Punishment, does signify Example. With what Terror does God threaten
not to spare Israel, because they continued in their Security and Rebellion,
Amos 2.6, 9. See Jerem. 44.2, 7, 9. Ezekiel. 23.5, -- 31.
though he had destroyed the Amorite before them? May we not fear, lest he say
of us, as Jer. 49.12, 13. For thus says the Lord, Behold, they whose Judgment
was not to drink of the Cup, have assuredly drunken, and art thou he that shall
altogether go unpunished? Thou shall not go unpunished, but thou shall surely
drink of it. For I have sworn by my self, says the Lord, that Bozrah shall
become a Desolation, a Reproach, a Waste, and a Curse, and all the Cities
thereof shall be perpetual Wastes? God has favored us hitherto, and we
consider it not; he has loved Us, and hated Others, as he loved Jacob, and
hated Esau; and yet we are ready to say, Wherein has he loved us Malachi 1.2,
3.
? Behold, says the Lord, was not Esau Jacob 's Brother? Yet I loved Jacob, and
hated Esau; I laid his Mountains, and his Heritage waste, etc.

But however God may in Sovereignty deal with us, as to public Deliverance,
and Preservation, and a Good and Speedy Issue of the present War, (whereas we
hear of Another Earthquake in Sicily, the last Month;) yet I have shown in the
last Chapter, that no particular Person, without Repentance, shall long escape
his Justice. 1 Kings 10.17. They that escape the Sword of Hazael, shall Jehu
slay; and they that escape the Sword of Jehu, shall Elisha slay: That is, they
shall perish in another World; for the Prophet Elisha denounced Eternal
Judgments on those who escap^d a Temporal Ruin, if they continued in their
Sins.

London, May 26. 1693. J. S.

THE CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION. AN Historical, particular Account of the late Earthquakes, which
gave Occasion to this Discourse. The Design thereof proposed from that Passage
of the Psalmist, My Flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments. page 1.

CHAP. I. The Method of the following Discourse. Instances of Divine Severity
on Others are not to be overlooked; whether in former Times, or of later Date;
on Strangers, Neighbors, Friends or Enemies. They are proper to affect us with
an awful Fear of God: Earthquakes especially of all other Judgments. The Terror
of such a Judgment in part described: that it is the Effect of Sin. p. 35.

CHAP. II. Such Instances of Divine Severity should teach us to reverence and
adore the Divine Power, and Providence; should awaken us to Repentance, excite
most earnest Prayer, occasion Thankfulness for our Preservation hitherto, and
call upon us to trust in God as our only Refuge, and to secure his Favor. p.
62.

CHAP. III. We ought not to censure Others, because of such Calamities, as
greater Sinners than those who escape: much less should we pass a Judgment on
their Eternal State, because they are cut off suddenly by a temporal Judgment.
p. 84.

CHAP. IV. What Fear of Evils to come is lawful, how far a Duty, and when
sinful. Of the Penal Fear of future Calamity: Instances of it as a Divine
Punishment. What little Ground we have to expect a much longer Reprieve; we
have none for Security, and Confidence. The Doubtfulness of our Case should
awaken our utmost Concern, and Care to prevent Destruction p. 92.

CHAP. V. Of God's Unwillingness to destroy a People. Hosea 11.8, 9. explained,
paraphrased, and applied to our Nation and City: How shall I give thee up,
Ephraim? etc. Abraham 's pleading with God for Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 18.
Moral Causes why we may expect, and fear National and Public Calamities. p.
103.

CHAP. VI. Earthquakes usually reckoned the Forerunners of other Calamities. We
have had many Signs and Warnings; and a long Season of Divine Forbearance; tho
we are guilty of the like Sins, as have brought destructive Judgments on other
People. The Land full of Sin. Public Societies only punished in this World. p.
117.

CHAP. VII. Most slight such Warnings. What was done in Jamaica, had special
Relation to us in this Island. We in England have had diverse Earthquakes
formerly. Their Wickedness was great, so is ours. Several Earthquakes have
extended as far as ours, Sept. 8th, tho felt beyond the Seas near the same
Time. Other Instances of Earthquakes in Europe. p. 128.

CHAP. VIII. Many Examples of Terrible Earthquakes in other Parts of the World,
formerly, and of late. p. 156.

CHAP. IX. God will yet preserve his Church, and enlarge the Kingdom of Christ;
tho Particular Churches and Countries may be destroyed. The Accomplishment of
Scripture-Prophecies and Promises, ushered in by great Commotions, and by
Earthquakes. Some Instances thereof. p. 166.

CHAP. X. Concerning the Fear of Divine Judgments, and the Regulation of it.
What Fear of Evil God has promised, and we may expect to be delivered from,
and what not. Counsels proper to obtain an Interest in those Promises, and to
experience the fulfilling of them. p. 188.

CHAP. XI. Security a Presage of Temporal and Eternal Ruin, to particular
Persons, whatever God may do as to the Nation in general. p. 199.

Practical Reflections ON THE Late Earthquakes In Jamaica, England, Sicily,
Malta, etc. Anno 1692.
INTRODUCTION.
An Historical, particular Account of the late Earthquakes, which gave Occasion
to this Discourse. The Design thereof proposed from that Passage of the
Psalmist, My Flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.

THAT the late Earthquakes may be considered, and improved to the best
Purposes, it will be proper to premise a short Narrative, or Historical Account
of them, according to the order of Time wherein they happened. And therefore I
begin with that at Jamaica.

The last Year, 1692. on the 7th of June, there happened a dreadful Earthquake
in the Island of Jamaica, which made great Ruins and Devastations throughout
the whole Country; but especially in the Capital Town of Port Royal, which was
almost swallowed up and overflowed by the sinking of the Earth, and Irruption
of the Sea. Two Letters from the Minister of the Place (published by Authority)
give a particular Account of it; that it threw down most of the Houses,
Churches, Sugar and Indigo-Works, Mills and Bridges, throughout the whole
Island, that it tore the Rocks and Mountains, (others tell us that it levelled
some Mountains, and reduced them to Plains) that it destroyed some whole
Plantations, and threw them into the Sea; but Port Royal had much the greatest
share in this terrible Judgment.

It is added by a farther Account in the Gazette of Thursday, August 18. that
on the Harbour-side the Houses all sunk down in a Minute's time, from the Depth
of three to five Fathom Water, in the Streets next the Wharf: the Earth opened
it self wide and deep, and instantly gushed out an Inundation of Water, so that
Multitudes were drowned. Among other Accidents of the Earthquake, the Swan
Frigate lying at the Wharf for Careening, was driven in among the Houses, and
there lost.

The Minister in his Letter says farther, That such was the desperate
Wickedness of the People there, that he was afraid to continue among them. That
on the same Day of the Earthquake, as soon as Night came on, some lewd Rogues,
whom they call Privateers, fell to breaking open Warehouses, and Houses
deserted, to rob and rifle their Neighbors, whilst the Earth trembled under
them, and some of the Houses fell upon them in the Act. And those audacious
Whores who remained still upon the Place, were as impudent and drunken as ever.
And that since the Earthquake, when he was on shore to pray with the bruised
and dying People, and to christen Children, he met with too many drunk and
swearing.

The Day when this Calamity befell the Town and Island, was very clear,
affording not any Suspicion of the least Evil; but in the Space of three
Minutes, about half an Hour after eleven in the Morning, Port Royal, the
fairest Town of all the English Plantations, the best Emporium and Mart of this
part of the World, exceeding in Riches, and abounding in all good things, was
shaken and shattered to pieces, and covered for the greatest part by the Sea;
the Wharf, and two whole Streets beyond it, entirely swallowed by the Sea.

He, with the President of the Council, running to save themselves, made
toward Morgan's Fort, because a wide open Place; he thought to be there
securest from the falling Houses: but as he was going, he saw the Earth open,
and swallow up a Multitude of People, and the Sea mounting in upon them over
the Fortifications. He tells us further, that their large and famous
Burying-place, called the Pallisado's, was destroyed by the Earthquake; and
that the Sea washed away the Carcases of those that were buried out of their
Graves; their Tombs being dashed to pieces by the Motion and Concussion: That
the whole Harbor, one of the fairest he ever saw, was covered with the dead
Bodies of People of all Conditions, floating up and down without Burial. That
in the opening of the Earth, the Houses and Inhabitants sinking down together,
some of these were driven up again by the Sea, which arose in those Breaches,
and so did wonderfully escape. Some were swallowed up to the Neck, and then the
Earth shut upon them, and squeezed them to Death: And in that manner several
were left buried with their Heads above Ground, only some Heads the Dogs have
eaten; others are covered with Dust and Earth by the People, which yet remain
in the Place, to avoid the Stench. So that by the opening of the Earth, and the
Fall of the Houses, and the Inundation of the Waters, it is thought fifteen
hundred Persons are lost, and many of good Note.

After he was escaped in a Ship, he says, he could not sleep all Night for the
Returns of the Earthquake almost every Hour, which made all the Guns in the
Ship to jar and rattle; and he supposes the whole Town of Port Royal will
shortly be swallowed up of the Sea, the Houses falling, and the Sea encroaching
daily. That there were sad Accounts of Mischiefs done by the Earthquake in
other Parts of the Island: As from St. Ann's, they heard of above a thousand
Acres of Woodland changed into Sea, carrying with it whole Plantations.

His own Preservation was very remarkable and unexpected: after he had prayed
with the People, and given them ferious Exhortations to Repentance, (in which
Exercises he spent near an Hour and half) he was desired by some Merchants to
retire to some Ship in the Harbor, whom he accompanied, passing over the Tops
of some Houses, which lay levelled with the Surface of the Water, got first
into a Canoe, and then into a Longboat, which put him on board a Ship.

Of the Earthquake in England.
ON the 8th of September following, 1692. an Earthquake was felt at London, and
in several Parts of Essex, Kent, Sussex, Hampshire, etc. as Sheerness,
Sandwich, Deal, Maidstone, Portsmouth, etc. the People leaving their Houses in
many Places, lest they should fall on their Heads; but it lasted not above See
Mr. Ray 's Physico-Theol. Discourse of the Dr luge. Disc. 2. p. 209.
two Minutes: It was about two a Clock; some reckoned at London it was about
four Minutes past two. It was felt in most parts of the Dutch and Spanish
Netherlands; as also in Germany and France. It affected Places most on the
Seacoasts, and near great Rivers. It went not beyond 52 Degrees and 40 Minutes
of Northern Latitude: How far it reached to the South and East is not yet
certainly known for want of good Intelligence: we have already traced it beyond
Paris, to the 48th Degree of North Latitude: and beyond the Rhine, on the East,
to Francfort; so that we know at present of 260 Miles square shaken by it. The
Time of its happening here in England, and beyond the Seas, seems to vary some
Minutes; but that may easily be accounted for by the Difference of Thus Dr. T.
Robinson in a Letter to Mr. Ray, dated September. 22. 1692.
Meridians. So that the inflamed Damp, says Mr. Ray, which caused this
Earthquake, was lodged deep in the Earth, the Caverns that contained it,
passing under the bottom of the Sea.

Of the Earthquakes in Sicily, and Malta.
THE following Account of the Earthquakes in Sicily, was published by Authority
here, viz. from Messina. January 20, 1692/3;, they write, that several
Earthquakes had happened in that Island, which were most violent in the
Southern Parts of it, and have laid in heaps many Cities and Villages. Catanea
was shaken on the 9th instant, and on the 11th quite destroyed, not one House
left standing; and near twenty thousand Persons perished in that City alone.

Augusta was almost destroyed at the same time: and 400 Barrels of Powder that
were in the Castle, took Fire at the same time, by Lightning, or some other
Accident, and blew up about a thousand People, who were got in there for their
Security.

The Ancient Saragossa has fared no better: and the Cities of Modica, Jaci and
Noto, and all the Villages from Mount Aetna to Cape Passaro have suffered
extremely. It Is computed that above an hundred thousand Persons have been
destroyed by these Earthquakes. Palermo felt the Shock on the 11th: and the
Vice-King retired with all his Family on board the Galleys in that Port. Most
of the Inhabitants of this City lay now in the Fields without the Gates, etc.

A Letter from Naples, Feb. 3. mentions, that by the Shock on the 11th of the
last Month, 37 Cities and Towns and large Villages were quite destroyed, and
one hundred and thirty thousand Persons.

By other Letters (in the Gazette of Thursday March 16.) we have this Account
from Messina, Feb. 3. That they hear every day of the lamentable Effects of the
late Earthquakes, and give the following List of Places, and Persons destroyed,
viz.

Calatagirone, about a fourth part of the City ruined, and 1500 Persons killed.

Luochuela, quite destroyed, with most of the Inhabitants, the number not known.

Mineo, a Royal City, most of it fallen, and 3000 killed.

Militello, quite destroyed, with many of the Inhabitants, the number not known.

Palaonia, very much shattered, but few Persons killed.

Scordia, the Palace fallen down, and 20 killed.

Francofome, much shattered.

Sentini, quite ruined, and 3000 killed.

Carlontini, quite destroyed, with many of the Inhabitants, the number not
known.

Augusta, quite destroyed, and 5000 killed.

Siragosa, above half ruined, and 6000 killed.

Noto, quite ruined, and 7000 killed.

Specasurno, quite ruined, and 3000 killed.

Scichilo, quite ruined, and 8000 killed.

Santa Croce, 100 killed.

Modica, quite destroyed, and 1000 killed.

Ragusa, greatest part of it ruined, and 7000 killed.

Cefomaro, 200 killed.

Biscuti, 100 killed.

Chiuramonte, wholly destroyed, and 300 killed.

Monterusso, 200 killed.

Giamantano, 300 killed.

Bucchin, 160 killed.

Patuzzolo, quite ruined, and 1000 killed.

Scodia, 100 killed.

Pasceni, quite ruined, and 600 killed.

Furla, quite ruined, and 800 killed.

Sciorti, quite ruined, and 2000 killed.

Vizzini, quite ruined, and 3000 killed.

Licodia, 400 killed.

Catanea, wholly destroyed, and 18000 killed.

Jaci, much ruined, and 1800 killed.

In all, 73680 Persons killed.

In another Letter from Naples, dated March 3. published in the Gazette of the
3d of April, there is an Account from Palermo, that the Viceroy of Sicily had
sent Commissioners to take an exact Account of the Damage occasioned by the
late Earthquakes in that Island; and they had found that the Ruin of the Towns
and Villages, as well as Loss of People, was greater and more deplorable, than
was at first reported; and that there had perished above one hundred thousand
Persons.

A more particular Account of this terrible Earthquake in Sicily, was printed
at Rome, and since printed here from the Italian Copy; part whereof I shall
here insert. The Author professes he cannot give himself nor others, all the
Satisfaction he could wish, there being so many little Places, and even some
considerable Towns so utterly destroyed, that there are no Inhabitants left, to
give us an account of the manner how these Places were swallowed up. So that of
these we can have no other Narrative, but what People at a Distance, and in a
Hurry themselves, for fear of sinking into the same Ruin, have been able to
give us.

The Earthquake diffused it self into all the three Districts, or Divisions,
into which the Island of Sicily is usually divided; Valli di Noto, Mazaro, and
Mono. The greatest Shake of all was from Mount Aetna to Cape Passaro, the
Pachmus of the Ancients. In all this vast Tract of Land, nothing stood the
shock, but all fell under the Weight of a General Ruin.

It was on the 7th of January, 1692/3, about 10 at Night, that Mount Aetna
began to utter those hideous Roarings, which seldom but usher in some Tragedy
of the Nature of what followed. Those loud Bellowings continued till the 9th,
and about 12 a Clock began to cease. Within an hour after, the Inhabitants of
Catanea, which is the next Town to the Mountain, began to perceive a shaking
under 'em, about three Minutes together. This did little Hurt, other than to
afright the People, and give them fears of some further Hurt. During this
Shake, and for an hour before, there was not the least Noise heard from Mount
Aetna, but within less than a minute after the Shake was over, not only did the
Noise redouble, infinitely more terrible than before, but the whole Top of the
Mountain appeared all in Flames.

All this was but the Forerunner of the horridest Shake of all, which fell out
on the 11th, which affected the whole Island, tho not equally. And by the
exactest Computation can be made, the whole Period of it lasted not above six
Minutes, from Messina Northwards to Cape Coio, the farthest Point of Sicily to
the South.

Catanea is thought to be the first that fell under the Weight of this heavy
Calamity. This City is as ancient as most in Sicily, seated in a pleasant and
rich Soil, inhabited by several of the Gentry thereabouts, endowed with an an
University, and containing about 24000 Souls, was sunk out of sight in a
moment. There happened to be some Fisher-boats at that time in the Bay that
lies South of the Town, and within a League's distance, who give an Account,
that they saw the City sink down, with the Noise as it were of some thousand
Pieces of great Ordnance discharged all at once. After it was thus vanished out
of their sight, the Fishermen say, That some minutes after, to the Eastward,
near where the City stood, there rose up a little Mountain, which lifting it
self several times a considerable Height, above the ordinary Level of the
Ground thereabouts, sunk at last likewise out of their sight. They declare
also, that during all this horrid Tragedy, they expected every moment to be
swallowed up in the Bay, by reason of the strange violent Agitations of the
Sea. And scarce was this heaving up of the imaginary Mountain on the South Side
of Catanea over, but they felt the Sea calm.

It is thought there has not escaped of the Inhabitants of Catanea above two
thousand in all, some of those escaping after the first Shake on the 9th,
others on the Morning of the 11th, who took the Warning. But they were the
better sort of People only that had the opportunity to make so happy an Escape,
the rest falling under the Universal Ruin. In the Place where Catanea stood,
appears now at a distance a great Lake, with some great heaps of Rubbish,
appearing here and there above Water.

The same Shake that utterly destroyed Catanea, did lay in heaps more than half
of Saragosa, the Ancient Syracusa, once the greatest City of Sicily; and if we
will believe Strabo and others, the largest once in the World, and may contend
with any in Europe for Antiquity. The least Computation that can be made of the
Loss of the Inhabitants of it, is above seven thousand: And some hundreds were
dug out of the Ruins alive, but lame and bruised; so that few of them it is
thought will recover. Most of the Magistrates and People of best Fashion, ran
into the great Church for shelter, where they met with Death by the fall of the
Stone Roof, and the Steeple both together.

The City of Noto (which once contended for the Pre-eminence with Syracusa it
self) had yet a worse Fate: scarce any part of it is now standing; tho situate
on an high Rock, almost inaccessible on all sides, but by one narrow Passage.
The mighty Hardness of the Rock seemed to have secured it from the Hazard of
Earthquakes; but it felt the Shake of the 9th; and on the 11th of January it
was in a moment laid in heaps: the number of the Inhabitants is computed about
seven thousand, and very few are escaped.

Augusta, a City well situated, and adorned with large and safe Harbors; a
Place of good Trade for Corn. The Inhabitants reckoned near six thousand, of
whom we have account of none left; many killed on the 9th, more on the 10th,
and the rest buried by the overturning of the Town on the 11th.

Lentini, the ancient Leontium, famous for a beautiful Lake on which it stood;
a Place of about three thousand Families, and a Place of tolerable Trade by
Fishing, and Salt Mines, was reduced to Ashes on the 11th; and it is not known
if any of the Inhabitants be saved. The Water of the Lake is now become
brackish, and of a salt and bituminous Taste; and vast numbers of Fish are
every day found dead on the Shore.

Calatgirone, a pretty Town, containing about 7000 People, and well built, most
of hewn Stone; on the 11th a fifth part of the Town was overturned, and two
Monasteries; and it is thought, no fewer than two thousand Souls were destroyed.

Mineo felt both the Shake of the 9th and 11th; on the former, the Heavens were
serene, scarce a Cloud appearing above the Horizon; but on the 11th, there was
a Storm of Thunder and Lightning for six Hours. At both times several Houses,
and a large Church were overturned, and it is thought near four thousand of the
Inhabitants are perished.

Monreal, or Morreal, was shaken and shattered; and Palermo, the Seat of the
Viceroy, but not above 100 People killed. Pasceni, consisting of about 200
Families, the richest of any little Town in Sicily, has not one single House
left standing, nor one single Person saved. Patuzolo, a bigger Town, underwent
the same Fate; the number of Inhabitants about 1000 at least: It is not known
that any are saved.

So for Furla, whose Inhabitants we reckoned to be near a thousand Souls. The
like for Sciorti, which by the Shake of the 11th is a vast Heap of Ruins; only
a Church belonging to a Benedictine Nunnery, is entire: we know of none of the
Inhabitants saved, and they are reckoned to amount to two thousand Souls.

The same Fate befell Militello, no inconsiderable Town, probably containing
about six thousand People, whereof no one is left to give tidings how its
Calamity came about.

Luochela fared somewhat better: many, about half of the People, left the Town
on the Shake of the 9th of January, when a great part of the Houses fell. The
Castle was swallowed up in a moment in sight of the People; and a considerable
Lake is in the place where the Castle stood. The rest of the Town and
Inhabitants were utterterly destroyed on the 11th. Of two thousand People, one
half perished.

There was little Damage done in Palonia, another well built Town, but that
besides feeling the Shake on the 9th, and the Church shattered, the Dome was
thrown down on the 11th, which broke the high Altar to pieces, and crushed to
Death some 300 People, with the Priest that was saying Mass. The like almost
for Buchino, a considerable Village.

Scodia, a Burgh about the bigness of the other, was greatly shaken on the
11th, and about 150 People killed by the fall of the Church in the time of
Mass. In a deep Lake within 2 miles of it (2 miles about) by the Shake of the
11th, there opened a large Casma near the midst of the Lake, which swallowed up
the Water, (which by that of the 9th was lessened) and left the whole Channel
dry Land, which continues so.

Another Village, called Chivramonte, had its Houses shattered by the Shake of
the 9th, but overturned altogether on the 11th, and the Inhabitants buried in
the Ruins, computed between 3 and 400.

Monterusso was considerably shaken on the 9th; and on the 11th, 200 People who
fled into the Castle, were with it buried in the Ground; and the Place where it
stood, is now a Pool of Water, of a brinish Taste.

The beautiful Town of Vizzini, containing about 3500 Souls, though it lay on a
rising Hill, made up of nothing but hardest Stones, of the nature of Marble,
was yet shaken on the 9th, and swallowed up with the Inhabitants on the 11th,
who thought the Danger had then been over.

The large Village of Modica, containing about 1400 People, was so suddenly
swallowed up on the 9th, that no one Person escaped. Since this hundred Years,
this Village has twice changed its Seat by Earthquakes, the People till now
saving themselves. Several Rivers and Rivulets near this and other Places in
Sicily, are covered by Hills, in the form of a Vault, or natural Bridge, thrown
over them by the Earthquake.

This Earthquake caused the fall of some Houses at Bisenti, and the bruising to
death of about 100 Persons. Francofonte suffered more by Lightning and Thunder
for three days, than by the shake of the Earthquake.

Carlontini, a Town of good Trade, and well inhabited, containing about 4000
People; a sixth part of 'em perished in the Earthquake on the 11th; the rest
escaped by the warning on the 9th.

Ragusa, a beautiful Town; its Situation, Buildings, Churches, Monasteries, and
Territories about it, combine to make it a sort of Terrestrial Paradise; felt
many Shakings on the 8th, with Lightning and Thunder: but on the 11th, the
biggest Street in the Town, the Townhouse, two Churches, and many Houses were
overturned, or swallowed up. The least Calculation of People that perished, is
eight thousand, of whom the Citizens of the best Quality make up a great part
of that Number.

Specafurno, a Town of considerable Bigness, on the Side of a Hill, all planted
with Vineyards, and well inhabited, fell under the same Calamity; partly by
Lightning and Thunder on the 10th; and the whole Town in a Moment's time on the
11th. About a Mile from the Town was a pleasant fresh Water Lake on the South
side, which is now almost all dry Land; the Fish dead on the Shore, and the
Water of a brinish Taste, and now of a black Color. The People that perished
there are computed to be at least three thousand five hundred: about three
hundred only saved themselves the Day before.

The Town Scichilo, that has within 50 Years been eight times in hazard of an
Earthquake, felt this on the 8th of January, and within 24 Hours there
succeeded above 20 Shakes, the last still exceeding the first in Violence; but
on the 11th the whole Town, in less than two Moments vanished out of Sight: in
the room of it is now a stinking Pool of Water: And of six or seven thousand
Inhabitants of this pleasant Town, it is thought there is no one saved. Besides
a strong Castle on the East side of the Town, which is now all in Heaps, and
above 30 People buried alive in them.

In Cefamero, a Village of above two hundred Houses, near two hundred People
perished in the Church, whither they fled for Shelter, to implore the Aid of
St. Katherine of Sienne; and some twenty in the Village. In Santa Croce,
another Village, about one hundred of the Inhabitants perished, the rest having
fled to the Fields without the Town. In the little Town of Giamontano, in the
Quarter nearest the River, about three hundred and fifty Persons perished, and
about forty more. The Tower of Lacodia underwent near the same Fate; all the
Houses of Timber were overwhelmed by the Shake of the 11th, and in them about
three hundred of the Inhabitants.

Jaci, a very big Town, was greatly shattered, especially in the Fall of two
Churches on the 9th, in the time of Divine Service. Many of the Houses of the
Town were overturned on the 11th, together with two Convents, particularly that
of the Minimes, where was kept St. Peter's Net, in which he took that vast
quantity of Fish mentioned in the Gospel. By the Fall of the Houses and
Churches there perished in all above two thousand People, more than half died
by the Fall of the two Churches.

La-motta, a Village of about two hundred Inhabitants, famous for the
Retirement of the Citizens of Palermo there in the Summertime, was totally
overturned on the 9th, a salt Pool succeeding in its Place.

Messina, a City of great Trade, lofty Buildings, and great Riches, felt the
Shake on the 9th, and more than half the Inhabitants fled to the Fields; the
rest betook themselves to their Devotions in the several Churches: the
Archbishop ordered forty eight Hours of Prayer, and several Processions, to
appease the Wrath of Heaven. On the 11th, twenty six Palaces were overturned,
and many Timber-Houses: every body expected immediate Death, and in vast
Multitudes ran to the Cathedral, where the Archbishop of Messina preached, and
said Mass, and there after gave Absolution, as did all the Priests through the
rest of the City by the Archbishop's Command. After this every one made the
best of the ways they could, to escape the common Danger, and betook themselves
to the Fields, where they were not out of Hazard, through the Violence of the
Thunder, Lightning, and Rain, that continued three Days together: The Chapel
of the Archbishop's Palace is overturned, most of the Churches shattered, but
few People killed.

The Tide was higher on the 10th by three Foot than ever was known, and such a
violent Agitation of the Water, that several Ships and smaller Vessels were
drowned all along the Coast of the Island, and some even in the Harbors.

In short, a more astonishing, a more universal, or a more swift Destruction
was never known. And Sicily that was one of the most beautiful, rich, and
fruitful Islands in the World, is now an Heap of Rubbish, and a continued
Desolation. The Loss of Money, Merchandise, Houses, and Lands, may modestly be
computed to six Millions of Ducats: And it will take an Age to repair the
Damages it has made. The number of Inhabitants perished, may be safely
reckoned to an hundred and twenty thousand Souls; and the bruised, and like to
die, twenty thousand more.

Of the Earthquake at Malta.
ALL the Account we have yet of the further Effects of this Earthquake, and the
Extent of it to the Island of Malta, is in a Letter from thence, dated January
16. published by Authority. On the 9th Instant about ten at Night happened here
an Earthquake, and another on the 11th at three in the Afternoon: The last was
so violent, and lasted so long, that every body thought this City would have
been quite destroyed. The Roof of the Church of our Lady de Pelay was thrown
down, with part of that of St. Laurence: The Church and College of the Jesuits
also suffered very much: but the Cathedral and the Church of la Gusmane
received the greatest Damage, and are so ruined, that they can hardly be
repaired. Most of the Houses are extremely shattered, and deserted by the
Inhabitants, who lie now in Grotto's, and under Tents in the Fields. The great
Master of the Order was then abroad a hunting, and he and all his Company were
in great Danger by the falling of a Mountain near them. We cannot yet tell the
Particulars of the Loss this Island has sustained, but only in general, that
it is very great, and the Consternation of the Inhabitants inexpressible, which
has received a new Addition by the sad Accounts we have from Sicily, of the
same Calamity that has befallen their Island, in a more terrible manner. --
Whereof I have given the most particular Account yet extant.

And now upon the Perusal of this sad History, who that will consider it as a
Christian, but may use the Psalmist's Expression, Psalm. 119.120. My Flesh
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments?
GOD expects we should be affected and awed by such Providence.

Some Duties of Religion are always seasonable, and of constant Obligation,
that must mix with all our Actions, and be regarded in every step of our daily
Walk: There are others which the Providence of God does particularly call us
to, at one time more than at another: There is a time to weep, and a time to
laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to rejoice: and every thing is beautiful in
its Season. Accordingly when God arises to shake terribly the Earth, and
punish the Inhabitants thereof for their Iniquities; when he girds on his Sword
to ride his Circuit by national Judgments; when other Countries and People are
made Examples and Warnings, and the growing Atheism and Profaneness amongst us,
may make us justly apprehend the like Severity; he expects that our Temper and
Carriage should somewhat correspond and agree to his Works of Providence; that
when the Lion roars, we should tremble; when he stretches out his Hand, and
shakes his glittering Sword, we should observe it, and fear. He expects that we
should take the Warning he gives us, by the Calamities of others; that we
should lie in the Dust, throw off our Ornaments, put on Sackcloth, and prepare
to meet him in the way of his Judgments.

We are many Ways obliged to this; in Conformity to the best Examples of holy
Men in the like Case; and by our Love to God, and Duty to him, who is
displeased, and provoked. Our Sense of his Dishonor, and due Apprehensions of
his Displeasure, require this: Our Relation to those Places and Persons, who
have been already made Examples of Divine Severity; our Love to our selves, and
to our Brethren in this part of the World, who are yet preserved, do all
require this; and call upon us to be found in such a Frame, as the Psalmist
here expresses upon the like Occasion, My Flesh trembles for fear of thee,
and I am afraid of thy Judgments.

In the former Verse he endeavors to excite his Love to God, and resolved
Adherence to his Precepts, by the Consideration of the Judgments executed on
the Wicked; Thou put away the Wicked of the Earth like Dross, therefore I
love thy Testimonies. And in this he makes another Improvement of such
Instances of Divine Justice, to awaken an holy Fear, and Awe of God, My Flesh
trembles, etc.

An extraordinary Fear is often described in Scripture, as having this Effect
of Trembling: Fear came upon me, and Trembling, which made all my Bones to
shake, and the Hair of my Flesh stood up, Job 4.14, 15. The like you have
expressed by the Prophet, upon God's Denunciation of Judgment; Hab. 3.16. When
I heard this, my Belly trembled, my Lips quivered, Rottenness entered into my
Bones, and I trembled in my Flesh.

When God lifts up his Voice in threatening of Judgment, and roars like a Lion,
ready to tear in pieces, Who will not fear? Amos 3.8. Or when he displays his
Power, and manifests his Justice, and appears with terrible Majesty, in the
Execution of Judgment upon others; who that hears of it will not tremble before
him, and be afraid of his Judgments?

CHAP. I.
The Method of the following Discourse. Instances of Divine Severity on others
are not to be overlooked; whether in former times, or of later Date; on
Strangers, Neighbors, Friends or Enemies. They are proper to affect us with an
awful Fear of God: Earthquakes especially of all other Judgments. The Terror of
such a Judgment in part described: that it is the Effect of Sin.

THE Ground of my following Discourse will therefore be this, That the
Instances of Divine Severity upon Others, should affect the serious Observers
of them, with an awful Fear of God and his Judgments.

First; It is here implied, that we are not slightly to overlook the Examples
of God's Severity upon others, but seriously to observe and consider them.

Secondly; That such Instances are proper to affect us with an awful Fear of
God: especially the Desolations that are made by terrible Earthquakes.

Thirdly; That this Awe of God, and Fear of his Judgments, upon such Examples
of Divine Severity, is matter of Duty unto all, that do observe and consider
them.

Fourthly; How this may be applied, and improved by us, with reference to this
City and Nation.

First; It is here implied, That we are not slightly to overlook the Examples
of God's Severity upon Others. How often has God threatened, and punished the
secure and careless Frame of such, as regard not the Works of the Lord, nor the
Operation of his Hands? Isa. 5.11. Psalm. 28.5. He shall, for this Reason,
destroy them, and not build them up. We are bid to remember, consider, and
improve the ancient Judgments of God upon the old World, and upon Sodom and
Gomorrah: And 2 Pet. 2.4, 5. to remember the Example of Lot's Wife, and the
several Calamities that befell the Jews in the Wilderness, and after their
Settlement in Canaan: The Instances of God's Justice upon them for their
several Provocations, are recorded as Types and Warnings unto us, on whom the
Ends of the World are come, who live in these latter Days, under the
Gospel Dispensation, 1 Cor. 10.6, 11. that we should not lust as they lusted,
and murmur as they, tempt Christ as they. It is said of them whose Carcases
fell in the Wilderness for their many repeated Provocations, that they are our
Examples. God's Severity against them is recorded for our Use, Heb. 3.18. Chap.
4.11. God made them (...), an express Example, and Representation of what
should be done in others. Some shall smart, that others may fear. God has
further Ends in the Execution of Judgments than we imagine: He intends them not
only for Acts, but Patterns: Every Judgment is a new Lesson; and God does not
intend to punish only, but to teach, and warn, and instruct: He warns when he
wounds, and strikes some, that others may be spared by taking Warning. When a
Scorner is punished, says Solomon, the Simple is made wise, Prove. 2.11. And we
are more apt to be impressed by what we see executed, than by what is only
pronounced in a Threatening.

The Judgments of God on neighboring Countries and People are mentioned to
this purpose for our Improvement; Zeph. 3.6, 7, 8. I have cut off Nations, says
God, (I have hanged them up as on a Gibbet, to instruct and warn you by their
Ruin.) Their Towers are desolate, their Streets are waste; so that no Man
passes by; their Cities are destroyed, that there is no Inhabitant. Hereupon I
said, Surely thou will fear me, surely thou will receive Instruction.

This therefore does suppose the observing, and laying such things to Heart.

We ought not easily to pass over, and forget the Works of God, especially when
by the Terribleness and Severity of them, he has made them fit to be remembered,
Psalm. 111.4. They are Testimonies to a Divine Providence, and as such should be
recorded. It is taken notice of to this purpose by Verulam de Augment. Scient.
l. 2. c. 11.
a learned and great Man, as a Defect among Christians, that there is not yet
extant an Historia Nemesews, a Judicious, Impartial, and well-attested History
of the Divine Vengeance, containing the most remarkable Monuments of God's
Justice in the World.

When he afflicts and plagues any of our Neighbors or Brethren, or but
Strangers, in an eminent manner, we are called to consider his Doings, that we
may learn Righteousness, when the Judgments of God are abroad in the Earth,
Isa. 26.9. It is but fit that the Punishment of some should make other Sinners
tremble. As when Ananias and Saphira were struck dead, it is said, Great Fear
fell upon all that heard these things, Acts 5.11. It is mentioned as a Fault,
that when the Hand of God is lifted up, Men will not see and consider it: And
for this Stupidity God often expresses his Displeasure, Psalm. 10.5. Psalm.
28.4, 5. Isa. 5.12, 13. Job 34.26. Micah 6.9. We are commanded to take notice
of his powerful Justice in such Examples; Rev. 6.1. Psalm. 66.3. Come and see
the Works of God, he is terrible in his Doings toward the Children of Men. He
is said to visit us, and come nigh to us in Judgment as well as in Mercy: And
shall he visit us, and we not take notice of it, or observe him? We cannot
otherwise make a due Improvement of them, in order to suitable Duty.

Especially should it be thus, when any of our Brethren, of the same Nation
with us, meet with any more than ordinary Rebuke of Providence, as is the case
of Jamaica: Not but that we ought to eye and own God, tho the Instances of his
Severity be more remote, as in the late extraordinary Earthquakes in Sicily.
Yea, the Execution of God's righteous Judgments on the Wicked, will make the
Righteous that see it, to fear and tremble, Psalm. 52.6. The Righteous does
wisely consider the House of the Wicked, how God overthrows the Wicked for
their Wickedness, Prove. 21.12. All the great Displays of God's Justice in the
World, are fit to be registered and remembered by us, as Testimonies to us of his
Being, Holiness, and Righteous Government. Come hither, says God, and behold
the Works of the Lord, what Desolation he has made in the Earth, Psalm. 46.8.

Secondly; As we must observe, and consider these Instances of God's Severity
upon others, so they are very proper to affect us with an holy Awe and Fear of
God. He owns himself the Author of all the Desolations wrought in the Earth.
Earthly Princes will have Matters of Favor derived from themselves, but all
Acts of Severity they put off to subordinate Agents. But God will not stand on
such Points, he rather professes to lay claim to all the memorable Acts of
Vengeance upon sinful Nations and People. It is He that shakes terribly the
Earth, and rends the Rocks, and makes the Mountains tremble; who overturns
Cities and Countries, as in an Instant; who swallows up many hundreds and
thousands of Persons, and Families at once: And shall not we who hear of it,
stand in a we of him? We should say on such an Occasion, Who has an Arm like
God? We should consider, Who can stand before him, when he is angry? Who can
contend with him? Who would not tremble in his Presence? He who can cast Soul
and Body into Hell in a moment, can as soon cause his Earth to open, and
swallow up the strongest, the largest, the most populous City upon Earth, and
turn it into a Heap of Ashes, or a Pool of Water: Ought not this God to be
feared?

When his right Hand does teach him terrible things, shall not the Question
then be put, as Job 12.9. Who knows not that the Hand of the Lord has wrought
this? When he shakes the Heavens, and melts the Mountains, and cleaves the
Valleys, as Wax before the Fire, and as Waters poured down a steep Place,
Mich. 1.4. he seems to say, I will work, and who shall let? I will destroy,
and who shall save? I will lay my Hand, says God, upon Egypt, and I will bring
my People thence by my great Judgments. And it follows, The Egyptians shall
know that I am the Lord, Exodus 7.4, 5. The Greatness and Terribleness of the
Calamity, in such cases, bespeaks God to be the Author of it. Man cannot but
take notice of His Hand, and inquire, Wherefore has the Lord done this, and
what means the Heat of this great Anger? Deuteronomy. 29.24. With God is terrible
Majesty; he is Almighty, we cannot find him out. -- Men do therefore fear him,
Job 37.22, 23, 24.

When he makes the Mountains tremble, and the Earth shake, our Hearts should
tremble too. Fear ye not me, says the Lord? and will ye not tremble at my
Presence? Jer. 5.22. Will ye not fear me, who can open the Cataracts of Heaven
above, or break up the Fountains of the great Deep below, and pour forth whole
Floods of Vengeance when I please; who can rain Hell out of Heaven, or kindle
those Exhalations and Steams that are in the Bowels and Caverns of the Earth,
(as I cause Thunder by giving Fire to those in the Clouds) and make them force
their way, to the Overthrow and Destruction of Villages, and Towns, and Cities,
and Countries, whenever I will; who can thus suddenly turn a fruitful populous
Land, into an amazing Spectacle of Desolation and Ruin?

If God but write bitter things upon the Wall against Belshazzar, his Loins are
loosed, and his Knees knock one against another. The great Emperor Caligula
runs under the Bed at the noise of God's Tabernacle, his thundering Voice. And
certainly God's shaking the Earth, in so terrible a manner as of late, may much
more make us tremble. To this purpose it is elegantly described by the Prophet,
Isa. 24.17, 18, 19, 20. Fear, and the Pit, and the Snare are upon thee, O
Inhabitant of the Earth. And it shall come to pass, that he who flees from the
noise of the Fear, shall fall into the Pit; and he that comes up out of the
midst of the Pit, shall be taken in the Snare: for the Windows from on high are
open, and the Foundations of the Earth do shake. The Earth is utterly broken
down, the Earth is clean dissolved, the Earth is moved exceedingly; the Earth
shall reel to and fro like a Drunkard, and shall be removed like a Cottage; and
the Transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it; and it shall fall, and not
rise again. Upon such Manifestations of Divine Power and Justice, we may well
cry out, Great and mavelous are thy Works, O Lord God Almighty! Who would
not fear thee, and glorify thy Name, when thy Judgments are thus manifest? Rev.
15.3, 4.

Such a Judgment as this of Earthquakes, is especially proper to affect us with
an awful Fear of God, of his Majesty and Power, his Greatness and Dominion, his
Sovereignty and Justice. He caused the Mountain to quake at the Delivery of the
Law, when he would prove to the Jews that he was their Lord and Sovereign. When
the Centurion observed the Earthquake, at the Death of Christ, He, and others
feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.

To this purpose we may consider the Earthquake that did hinder the Attempt of
rebuilding the Amm. Marcell. Hist. l. 23. Chrysostom. Orat. 2. c. Jud. Socrates,
l. 3. c. 17. Sozomen, l. 5. c. 21.
Jewish Temple, which the Emperor Julian set afoot to spite the Christians,
and to contradict the Prophecy of our Savior, and to oppose Moses unto Christ.
He gave all Encouragement to the Jews, he provided them with all Materials at
his own charge. They with great Joy and Readiness set about it. But when they
began to search the Ground, in order to the laying of the Foundation, the Earth
round about trembles with a horrible Earthquake, and the Flames on a sudden
break out, which not only consumed the Undertakers, but a multitude of
Spectators too, and the Materials prepared for the Building. This made an
universal Astonishment, and struck Julian himself with some Fear; so that he
gave over the Attempt, and many of the Jews were persuaded to receive the Faith
of Christ. About the same time, the Pagan Temple at Delphos was destroyed by
Earthquakes, Thunder and Lightning. Such Manifestations of his Power challenge
our Fear. He looks on the Earth, and it trembles; he touches the Hills, and
they smoke, Nahum 1.5. The Mountains quake before him, and the Hills melt; he
removes the Mountains, and overturneth them in his Anger; he shakes the Earth
out of its place, and the Pillars thereof tremble, Job 9.5.

And the rather should we fear in such Cases, because they are often set forth
as God's Judicial Act. These fiery Meteors are turned by God's Counsel, for
Correction and Judgment, Job 37. The Earth shook and trembled, the Foundations
of the Hills were moved and shaken, See more of this in the following Chapters.
BECAUSE HE WAS WROTH. There went up a Smoke out of his Nostrils, and Fire out
of his Mouth devoured; Coals were kindled by it; Psalm. 18.7, 8. I will shake
the Heavens, and the Earth shall remove out of its place, in the Wrath of the
Lord of Hosts, and in the Day of his fierce Anger; Isa. 13.13. This is brought
in, after God had said, ver. 11. I will punish the World for their Evil, and
the Wicked for their Inquity. I will cause the Arrogance of the Proud to
cease, and will lay low the Haughtiness of the Terrible. Again, Tremble thou
Earth at the Presence of the Lord, at the Presence of the God of Jacob, Psalm.
114.7. Who can stand before his Indignation, or abide the Fierceness of his
Anger? His Fury burns like Fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him, Nahum
1.6. Thou shall be visited by the Lord of Hosts, with Thunder and with
Earthquakes, Isa. 29.6. that is, penally, and judicially visited.

There are other Considerations, that should make this Judgment of Earthquakes
the more affecting: As, the little Warning they are commonly attended with; and
the surprising Effects that follow, able to astonish the most valiant Men of
War, and make the most courageous Spirits sink and fall: For so they are
represented, as trembling on this Account, 1 Samuel 14.15.

When the Judgment comes unexpectedly, as a Thief in the Night: When God visits
a People by terrible things in Righteousness, and such as they looked not for:
When, to use the Prophet's words, Isa. 5.14. Hell has enlarged it self, and
opened her Mouth without measure; and their Glory, and their Multitude, and
their Pomp, and he that rejoiceth descends into it. When there is no Time to
flee, or Method to escape, or Possibility to resist; when no Sanctuary, or
Refuge remains; no Shelter is to be found in the highest Towers, or the lowest
Cellars; when the Earth opens on a sudden, and becomes the Grave of whole
Families, Streets, and Cities; and effects this in less time than you are able
to tell the story of it; either sending out a Flood of Waters to drown, or
vomiting out Flames of Fire to consume them; or closing again upon them, that
they die by Suffocation, or Famine, if not by the Ruins of their own Dwelling.
When Parents and Children, Husbands and Wives, Masters and Servants,
Magistrates, and Ministers, and People, without difference or distinction, in
the midst of Health, and Peace, and Business, are buried in a Common Ruin, and
pass All together into the Eternal World; and there is only the difference of a
few Hours or Minutes between a famous City and none at all; They that have been
in the Neighborhood of such Tragedies, and beheld the dismal Effects of such a
Judgment on Others, and yet have been preserved, cannot but consider it with
trembling. Our own serious Thoughts may help to affect us in like manner. Thus
the late Earthquake at Jamaica happened in a clear Day, without Warning or
Suspicion; and in the space of three minutes, the Town of Port Royal was shaken
and shattered to pieces, and sunk into the Sea, and the greatest part of it
under Water.

Now if it be dreadful to have our Country the Seat of War, as they, whose
Case that is, will tell us, and we must presently grant; this is yet more
dismal, that in the midst of Peace brings a worse Ruin than the Extremity of
War. If a raging Pestilence be dreadful, that sweeps away thousands in a Day,
and ten thousands in a Night, as some of you can remember; If a consuming Fire
be an amazing Judgment, which you of this City have experienced; an Earthquake
is not less, but more so; when Houses and Inhabitants, Towns and Cities, and
Countries are all destroyed at one Stroke, in a few Minutes. Dat signum Ruina;
Death is the only Presage of such a Judgment; without giving Leisure to prepare
for another World, or Opportunity to look for any Shelter in this.

Who does not start at the thought of such a Trembling of the Earth? The more a
Man knows, the more is his Astonishment. He hangs the Earth upon nothing, Job
26.7. For a Man to feel the Earth, which hangs upon nothing, (but as some
vast Ball in the midst of a thin yielding Air) totter under him, how can his
Soul choose but be possessed with a secret Fright and Confusion? Methinks I
tremble but to think of such a Trembling. -- I design not, says Bishop Hall
Sermon on Psalm 60.2.
, to astonish you with the Relation of the fearful Effects which Earthquakes
have produced in all Ages, as it were easy to do out of Histories, and
Philosophical Discourses, where you may see Rocks torn in pieces, Mountains not
cast down only but removed; Hills raised not out of Valleys only, but out of
Seas; Fires breaking out of Waters, Stones and Cinders belched up, Rivers
changed, Seas dislodged, Earth opening, Towns swallowed up, and many other such
hideous Events. Of which kind our own Memory can furnish us with maany at home,
although these colder Climates are more rarely infested with such frightful
Accidents.

In what Condition can a Man be safe, says Seneca Epist. 23. Not. Quaest. lib.
5. c. 1.
, speaking of Earthquakes, when the World it self is shaken; and the only thing
that passes for fixed and unmovable in the Universe, trembles, and deceives us?
Whither shall we fly for Security, if wheresoever we are, the Danger be still
under our Feet? Upon the cracking of an House, every Man takes himself to his
Heels, and leaves all to save himself. But what Retreat is there, where that
which should support us, fails us; when the Foundation not only of Cities, but
even of the World it self, opens and wavers? What Help, or what Comfort, where
Fear it self can never carry us off? An Enemy may be kept at a distance with a
Wall; a Castle may put a stop to an Army; a Port may protect us from the Fury
of a Tempest; Fire it self does not follow him that runs away from it; a Vault
may defend us against Thunder; and we may quit the Place in a Pestilence: There
is some Remedy in all these Evils. Or however, no Man ever knew a whole Nation
destroyed by Lightning. A Plague may unpeople a Town, but it will not carry it
away. There is no Evil of such an Extent, so Inevitable, so Greedy, and so
publicly Calamitous, as an Earthquake: For it does not only devour Houses,
Families, and single Towns, but ruins whole Countries and Nations; either
overturning, or swallowing them up, without so much as leaving any Footstep or
Mark of what they were. Some People have a greater Horror for this Death than
any other: To be taken away Alive, out of the number of the Living; as if all
Mortals by what Means soever were not to come to the same End, Death. -- And
it is not a Pin matter, whether I am crushed to pieces by one Stone, or by a
whole Mountain; whether I perish by the fall of an House, or under the Burden
of the whole Earth; whether I be swallowed up alone, or with a thousand more
for company.

We should therefore arm our selves against that Blow, that can neither be
avoided or foreseen. And it is not the forswearing those Places that we find
infested with Earthquakes, that will do our business; for there is no Place
that can be warranted against them. What if the Earth be not yet moved? It is
still movable; for the whole Body of it lies under the same Law, and exposed to
Danger; only some part at one time, and some at another. As it is in Great
Cities, where all the Houses are subject to Ruin, tho they do not all fall
together: So in the Body of the Earth; now this Part fails, and then that. Tire
was formerly subject to Earthquakes: In Asia twelve Cities were swallowed up in
a Night: Achaid and Macedonia have had their turns, and now Campagnia. The Fate
goes round, and strikes at last where it has a great while passed by. It falls
out oftener, it is true, in some Places than in others: But no Place is totally
free and exempt. And it is not only Men, but Cities, Coasts, nay the Shores,
and the very Sea it self, that suffer under the Dominion of Fate. And yet we
are so vain as to promise our selves some sort of Assurance in the Goods of
Fortune; never considering that the very Ground we stand upon, is unstable. And
it is not the Frailty of this or that Place, but the Quality of every Spot of
it; for not one Inch of it is so compacted, as not to admit many Causes of its
Resolution. And tho the Bulk of the Earth remain entire, the Parts of it may
yet be broken.

Thus the Pagan Philosophers prepared themselves, and others, for these
Accidents, as for Disorders that were Inevitable; and did not trouble
themselves with the Thought of Divine Justice, which chastises Men by these
dreadful Punishments. But the Common People, whose Opinions were not so
corrupted, reverenced the Anger of Heaven in these Calamities; and seeking for
Safety in Superstition, endeavored to appease the Evil Spirits by Sacrifice,
and so provoked the Indignation of God the more. Christians who are instructed
in a better School, own these Disasters as the Punishment of Sin.

And of all the Animadversions that Divine Justice gives Men, there is none
more Horrid, or less Evitable than this of Senault, of the Corruption of Nature
by Sin, Treat. 6th, Disc. 7th.
Earthquakes. For what Assurance can we hope for here below, if the Earth quake
under our Feet? Where can we think to escape Danger, if the most solid thing of
all the World do shake? if that which sustains all other Things about us,
threaten us with sinking under our Feet? What Sanctuary shall we find to defend
us from an Evil, that does encompass us round? And whither can we withdraw, if
the Gulphs, which open themselves, shut up our Passages on all sides? With what
Horror are Men struck, when they hear the Earth groan? when her Trembling
succeeds her Complaints, when Houses are loosned from their Foundations, when
the Roofs fall upon their Heads, and the Pavement sinks under their Feet? What
Hope is there to be had in so General a Disorder, when Fear cannot be fenced by
Flight? In other Cases there is some Outlet whereby to escape an Evil: An Enemy
is beaten from the Bulwark he had possessed himself of; Earthworks are opposed
to the thundering Canon; Winds which raise Tempests, deliver us from 'em, and
after having a long time tossed us to and fro, they cast us on the Shore:
Houses serve us for Sanctuaries against the Injuries of the Air and Weather. --
If a Man will resign his Goods to the Fire, he may secure his Person. Thunder
hurts not those who hide themselves in Caverns. When the Pestilence infects
whole Cities, we may shun the Contagion by going into the Country; and if it
dispeople Towns, it does not throw down the Houses. But an Earthquake incloseth
what it overthrows; and wages War, not with some few Houses only, but whole
Provinces; and sometimes leaves nothing behind it, to inform Posterity of its
Outrages: more insolent than Fire, which spares Rocks; more greedy than the
Sea, which vomits up Shipwracks; more cruel than the Conqueror, who spares
Walls: it swallows and devours whatsoever it overturns. -- The Sea is subject
to its Empire; and Mariners confess, that those Storms are most dangerous,
which are occasioned by Earthquakes. --

This Misfortune is common to all Kingdoms, since Man became Criminal: all
Parts of the Earth are become moveable; and Stedfastness must no longer be
looked for in the World, since Innocence is banished thence by Injustice. This
Disorder is the Punishment of our Sin; and Reason as well as Faith, does
sufficiently assure us, that the Universe would never have been agitated with
these furious Accidents, during the State of Original Righteousness. Wherefore
should God's Anger have armed the Elements against his faithful and obedient
Subjects? Wherefore should he have overthrown all his Works, to destroy
Innocent Men? Why should it have overwhelmed the Inhabitants of the Earth with
the Ruins thereof, if they had not been sinful? Why should it have buried
those in the Bowels of the Earth, who were not to die? Let us then conclude
that Earthquakes are the Effects of Sin.

Such sudden Instances of Divine Judgment are threatened in Scripture as some of
the most terrible; and therefore the highest Severity is expressed by such
unexpected and sudden Strokes: They are set forth sometimes by the Breach of a
Wall, that catches a Man 'ere he be aware, and crusheth him in pieces, Isa.
30.12, 13. Sometimes resembled to a Whirlwind, that comes suddenly, and carries
all before it. And therefore God threatens, that obstinate and incurable
Sinners shall be destroyed at once, or shall be suddenly destroyed, and that
without Remedy, Prove. 29.1.

CHAP. II.
Such Instances of Divine Severity should teach us to reverence and adore the
Divine Power, and Providence; should awaken us to Repentance, excite most
earnest Prayer, occasion Thankfulness for our Preservation hitherto, and call
upon us to trust in God as our only Refuge, and to secure his Favor.

LET us further consider, that under such Appearances of God, it becomes us to
be thus affected, as matter of Duty. If we have any becoming Apprehensions of
the Divine Power, and the Terrors of his Wrath; If we have any Concern at his
Displeasure, and the Manifestations of it; If we have any thing of that
Tenderness of Spirit, that Heart of Flesh, which is the great Blessing of the
New Covenant, we ought to evidence it on such Occasions, by suitable Affections,
in order to the Improvement of these Providence for our own Advantage. For
instance,

1. To reverence the Divine Power, and Providence; to confirm our Minds in the
Belief of it; That verily there is a God that judges in the Earth; That we may
see, and know, and understand together, that the Hand of the Lord has done
this, and the Holy One of Israel has created it: That God has not forsaken
the Earth, but makes himself known by the Judgments that he executes. And when
they are thus manifest, it is said, All Nations shall worship before thee, O
Lord, Rev. 15.4. and 19.2. So when God executes Judgment on the Wicked, by
sudden Calamity, Psalm. 58.7, 8, 9. it is added at the 11th Verse, that
thereupon a Man shall say, Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous, verily
there is a God that judges in the Earth. If he did not sometimes appear in
such Acts of Justice, Men would be ready to say, Where is the God of Judgment?
Mal. 2.17. or with them, Job 9.24. The Earth is given into the Hand of the
Wicked; if not, where, or who is he? Where is he, who should punish them? Who
is he, that calls them to an Account? And the wise Man has told us, that
because Sentence against an evil Doer is not speedily executed, therefore the
Heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do Evil, Eccles. 8.11.

But when he looks on the Earth, and makes it tremble; when he touches the
Hills, and they smoke, Psalm. 104.32. When he shows himself to be wise in Heart,
and mighty in Strength, he removes Mountains, and they know it not; he
overturneth them in his Anger. Who would not then reverence his Power, and
Providence? Read Numb. 16. for an Instance of it.

Even the Heathens have condemned those for mad Men, and distracted, who would
fear nothing, no not an Earthquake, as it is Petri Victor. Comment. in Arist.
de Moribus, lib. 3. p. 160.
observed by Aristotle concerning the Celtae, a barbarous People: Which makes
it the more strange that Seneca Seneca Quaest. not. lib. 6. cap. 3.
should be so much at a loss, about the Divine Agency in such things, and
ascribe them only to natural Causes. Whereas Cicero Cicero de Not. Deorum, l.
2.. 13. mentions Cleanthes, and other of the Stoics to be of the same Opinion.
See Lescoloper, in Cic. de Not. Deorum, p. 227.
reckons Earthquakes, with Thunder, Tempests, etc. to be one of the four Ways
by which the Notion of a God is preserved in the World, and the Minds of Men
awed with the Apprehension of the Divine Being.

By such Acts of Judgment and Vengeance God is said to show himself, Psalm.
94.1, 2. to confute the Atheism of the World, and make Men acknowledge his Being
and Providence. By such things Men are made to know, that God rules in Jacob,
unto the Ends of the Earth, Psalm. 58.13. Thus was Pharaoh brought to acknowledge
God, who at first despised him, saying, Who is the Lord, that I should obey
him?

2. Let us take heed of the like Sins, that others have been guilty of, with
whom God has dealt in such Severity. Let us remember, He is a holy God, and
jealous of his Honor, and will not suffer high Provocations always to go
unpunished. Others have smarted, who were guilty of such and such
Transgressions, as are found amongst us: Why should we expect to escape, if we
continue under the like Guilt? By Judgments upon one Nation, God warns Another,
that except they repent, they may expect to perish. Thus Tyrus shall be
devoured with Fire, Ashkelon (says God) shall see it and fear; Gaza and Ekron
shall be very sorrowful, Zech. 9.3, 4, 5. When Jonah was thrown overboard, and
the Storm quelled, the Men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered Sacrifices,
in the sense of their own Sins. Much more, when God executes Remarkable
Judgments on such as are notoriously wicked. All Men will fear, and declare
these Works of God, if they wisely consider of his Doings, Psalm. 64.9. If we
will not be warned by the Examples of Others, we may expect to be made Examples
our selves. Sodom, and Gomorrah, and the Cities of the Plain, are set forth as
an Example unto us, Jud. 7. The Man that will do presumptuously, even that Man
shall die, Deuteronomy. 17.12, 13. And all the People shall hear, and fear, and do no
more presumptuously. God singled out the Galileans, whose Blood Pilate mingled
with their Sacrifices, and those on whom the Tower of Siloam fell, to tell the
Jews, except they did repent, they should also perish: And within a few Years,
upon their neglect of these instructive Examples, Thousands and ten Thousands
of them had their Blood, as it were, mingled with their Sacrifices; being slain
by Multitudes in the Temple, the Place of their Offerings; and no less Number
perishing in the Fall and Ruin of their Walls, and Buildings battered down by
the Romans. When the Israelites round about saw Corah and his Company devoured
of the Earth, they ran away at the Cry of them, and said, Lest the Earth
swallow us also.

By what we have seen of God's Severity on Others, we should run away trembling
from the Gulf of God's deserved Judgments, by running from those Sins, which
may bring the like on us, which Others have felt. 'Twas the great Aggravation
of Belshazzar's Pride, that he humbled not himself, tho he knew the Judgment
God had executed on his Father for that very Sin. He that will run into a Bog,
wherein Others have plunged themselves in his view, is guilty of double Folly,
of adventuring rashly, and of not taking warning. Herodotus tells us, that upon
the Statue of Zenacherib, after the Angel of the Lord had slain an hundred and
eighty five thousand of his Army, Isa. 37.36. it was engraven, Discite
Justitiam moniti, and non temnere Divos: Let him that looks on me, learn to
fear God. He has a thousand other Judgments in reserve, if the same we see
inflicted on Others, do not overtake Us. Not only stormy Winds and Tempests are
in his Treasury, that he can rain Snares, and Fire and Brimstone, and an
horrible Tempest on the Wicked; but he has Arrows of Judgment in his Quiver of
various sorts, or is able to repeat the same, when he pleases. God will never
want Ways and Methods to punish a wicked People. All Creatures in the Earth,
and Air, and Sea, are his Servants. He has Hosts and Armies of them, above and
under Ground, to be the Instruments of his Justice.

3. Let it excite our more earnest Prayers for Preservation, and Deliverance
from such Judgments, as others have suffered by. We see, if God be not for us,
but against us, how suddenly, how dreadfully he can punish, and destroy any
People. How earnestly should we pray, Lord, spare thy People, and deliver us
from sudden Death. The louder, and the more repeated our Warnings are, and the
juster our Fears of approaching Calamity, the more importunately should we
pray, as that Captain, 2 Kings 1.13, 14. When two before him, with their
Fifties, had been destroyed, fell upon his Knees before the Prophet, saying, O
Man of God, let my Life, and the Lives of these fifty of thy Servants be
precious in thy sight: Behold, there came Fire from Heaven, and burnt up the
two Captains with the former Fifties; O let my Life be precious in thy sight.

Let us pray for the Diversion of such Judgments, but endeavor to form our
Spirits to a Preparedness for the whole good Pleasure of God; and bring them to
a conditional Submission to the Divine Will, as to our own Share in any
National Deliverance we pray for. We must own that we deserve, that the
overflowing Scourge should not pass away from us, and that we know not whether
it shall or no; but we ought to pray always, Father, glorify thine own Name, and
help us to glorify it; and let us be pleased that thou should do so, in thine
own Way; which we are not competent Judges of. We lie at thy Foot, and own that
thou art Just, and Wise, and Holy, and infinitely so: Lord, save us, if it be
consistent with thy Glory to save such a People: And help us to adore thee in
the way of thy unsearchable Judgments, if by that Method thou will glorify thy
self. We are not fit to judge of God's Works of Providence; nor can we
comprehend how far his Glory, in the Accomplishment of his Great and Eternal
Purposes, may be subserv'd, and promoted by such Temporal Calamities, as we
would deprecate.

4. Let us thankfully own our present Safety, our Preservation hitherto, that
when others have been destroyed, we are yet spared. God manifested glorious
Power in making the Earth to shake; but it was free Mercy that it did but shake
and tremble in our Island. His sovereign Mercy has hitherto made a Difference
between Us and other People: we are spared, when other Countries are destroyed.
Let us stand, and behold the Severity of God on them; but adore his Goodness
unto us, that we are not surprised in our Sins. He is Righteous in all his
Ways, and Holy in all his Works. He is a God of Truth, and without Iniquity;
Just and Right is he. So we must own him in his most terrible Judgments on
Others. But to Us he is a God of Patience and Long-suffering, and so we must
acknowledge and adore him. How did the Israelites triumph in the God of their
Salvation, when they escaped, and the Egyptians were drowned? Why might not
those of Jamaica and Sicily, have been warned by our Example, as we are
admonished by theirs? How is it, that God has not enlarged, or repeated the
Commission of the Earthquake amongst us, that did but gently give us notice of
what he might have done? Let us bless God, that he did not shake the Earth, so
as to open and swallow us up quick; and that he has not repeated it, because of
our provoking Security since: Let us be thankful, that when our Houses rolled,
they did not tumble.

To some Countries, and some People, he is known by the Judgments that he
executes; but to us and ours by the Judgments that he diverts. To us he is
known by his adorable Long-suffering, by his manifold Deliverances,
notwithstanding our repeated, aggravated Crimes, so as to make us even the
Wonder of the World: for so we are, in that, having such Enemies, and such
National Guilt, we have yet so many National Blessings, to commemorate from
time to time; and the Liberty of doing so in public Assemblies. God makes
himself known to our Neighbors round about, by the Calamities of War, by the
Barbarity of Soldiers, and the Fury of the Oppressor; and to others in remote
Countries, by desolating Earthquakes: But to Us, by merciful Preservations, and
many of the Blessings of Peace. To Amalek, and Edom, and Babylon, he is known
by destructive Judgments; but in Judah, and in Jerusalem, and in Sion his
Dewlling Place, he makes himself known in another manner. Tho the Profession of
the Truth, and the Knowledge and Worship of the True God in any Place, is no
sufficient Security against such a Judgment: for how terribly was Antioch
(where the Disciples were first called Christians) afflicted with Earthquakes;
and some of the famous seven Cities, whence the Asian Churches are denominated,
destroyed by Earthquakes?

As to Antioch, we read, that in the Emperor Howel 's General Hist. Vol. 2. p.
883. Dion. Cass. Trajan. cap. 18. Dio Xiphilin. Le Sieur Hist. del' Eglise, An.
de N. S. 115.
Trajan's time, A. D. 115. or according to others, An. 111. who succeeded Nerva
in the Roman Empire, after his Conquests in Armenia, and his obtaining the
Title of Optimus, he returned to Antioch, and there made some stay, but was
affrighted with a most terrible Earthquake, which afflicted other Cities, but
especially this, in an unheard of manner. By the Fall of Houses, and Rubbish,
and other means, a vast number of People perished; so that the Town being full
of Strangers, who came thither for Lawsuits, upon Messages, or other Business,
the Court being then there all the Winter; there was no Nation that received
not Loss from so great a Calamity. Trajan himself escaped out of a Window,
being it is said, drawn out by one of a more than humane Proportion. And though
the Earthquakes ceased, he continued in the open Air for many Days. The Hill
Corasius was so shaken, that its higher Parts fell down, and it looked as if it
would tumble on the City. Other Mountains were levelled: Waters broke out where
none before appeared; and Fountains which formerly poured out Water, were
stopped up.

About the same time, in Trajan's time, Orosius P. Orosii Hist. l. 7. cap. 12.
mentions 103 Cities of Asia overturned by Earthquakes. And afterward, in
Justinian's time, Cluverius ad An. Dom. 528.
Cluverius mentions another Earthquake at Antioch, that destroyed above forty
thousand. And by Ib. ad An. Dom. 602.
another Earthquake there, 61 Years after the former, in the time of the
Emperor Mauritius, sixty thousand perished.

The Preservation of our City and Nation, while others are destroyed by this
Judgment formerly, and of late, should make us thankful. The like may be
amplified as to particular Families and Persons: the bright Side of the Cloud
is to thee, while the dark one is to others: As a God of Justice and Severity
he appears to others, as a God of Grace and Compassion to thee.

How many Salvations has God wrought for us of late, for this Nation, and for
this City; prolonging our Tranquillity and Peace, and keeping off public
Calamities from us! How often has he disappointed and defeated our Enemies
Designs and Attempts against us! It is well if our Ingratitude do not at last
provoke him to say, as to his ancient People; Judge. 10.11, 12, 13. Did I not
deliver you from the Egyptians? etc. Yet you have forsaken me, therefore will I
deliver you no more.

5. Let it awaken us, to clear up our Interest in God, as our only Refuge and
Shelter. If he be our God in Covenant, we need not fear, though the Earth be
removed, and the Mountains be cast into the Sea; though the Waters thereof
roar and be troubled, though the Mountains shake with the swelling thereof,
Psalm. 46.1. Our Hearts may be established and fixed, trusting in the Lord, so
as not to fear any evil Tidings, Psalm. 112.7, 8. We may possess our Souls in
Peace; for God will keep them in perfect Peace, whose Minds are stayed on the
Lord, Isa. 26.3. They may say when it thunders, It is the Voice of my Father;
and when the Earth trembles, It is the Tread of his Foot: or with David, The
Lord is my Refuge, the Lord is my Habitation, what need I be afraid? Psalm.
91.9. A Refuge is a Place of Retreat and Safety in a time of War: An
Habitation is a Place of Abode in a time of Peace: At all Times and in all
Conditions such are provided for: The Lord is my Hiding Place and my Shield,
therefore will I hope in his Word, Psalm. 119.114. He will either keep me out
of Danger, or defend me when I am exposed to it: either what I fear shall not
overtake me, God will be my Hiding Place; or if it do come, it shall not hurt
me, God will be my Shield.

He has promised to be with me in the Fire, and in the Water: He has bid me
not to be dismayed; for I am with thee, I am thy God, I will strengthen and
help thee, and uphold thee with the right Hand of my Righteousness, Isa. 41.10.
and 42.2. He will cover me with his Feathers, and under his VVings I shall be
safe: I may abide under his Shadow, and dwell safely from the Fear of Evil. Now
it is one great End of such extraordinary Appearances of God, to bring Men to
adore and seek after God: Joel 2.30. I will show Wonders in the Heavens, and
in the Earth, etc. before the great and terrible Day of the Lord; and whosoever
shall call on his Name, shall be saved.

Our Business therefore is to make Peace with God; to acquaint our selves with
God, and be at Peace with him; and then Good shall come unto us, and the
Almighty himself shall be our Defense, so as we need not fear, Job 22.21. Let
what will come to pass, such shall be safe who are under the Covenant-Love and
Care of God. And it is his Presence alone is able to secure us. Good Men have
always thought so, even when they had the greatest Assistance for outward
Security: O Lord, we rest on thee alone, says Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.8. When he had
an Army that bare Targets and Spears out of Judah, to the number of three
hundred thousand, and near as many out of Benjamin, that bare Shields and drew
Bows, viz. two hundred and fourscore thousand; yet he overlooks all this, and
rests on God alone. So did Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.14, 15, 16. with an Army of
eleven hundred and threescore thousand fighting Men, besides his Garrisons; and
yet Chap. 20.12. he says, We have no Might against those that come against us,
but our Eyes are unto thee. Eleven hundred and threescore thousand fighting Men
in the Field, and yet had no Might but what he expected from the Presence of
God. All our Stability and Safety depends upon God as our Keeper. If it be
asked, Is it in your Armies, and Officers, and Commanders? they must say, No,
it is not in us. Is it in your Fleets, and Navies, and Admirals? It must be
said, It is not in them. Is it in your Allies and Confederates? It must be said
still, It is not in them. In your Castles, and Garrisons, and Fortifications, in
the Situation of your Country, or the Numbers of your People? etc. It is not in
them. In no humane Power, Policy, Cunning, Correspondencies abroad, or Councils
at home; nothing but in God, who is the Keeper of Israel: and therefore to be
at Peace with him is our only Safety.

If he be our Rock and Refuge, we may depend on him, and find Security; all
other Foundations and Buildings are weak and tottering; but the Foundation of
God stands sure: The Lord knows who are his, and he can and will take Care of
them, though the Earth tremble under your Feet, or you sink into the Bowels of
it. He can own and distinguish you even in such a Calamity, by a temporal
Salvation, as An. 1584. when a certain Hill near Berne in Switzerland, was
violently removed by an Earthquake, and covered a whole Village that had ninety
Families in it, one half House only excepted, wherein the Master of the Family
was praying, with his Wife and Children: Polani Syntagma, p. 841.
Polanus relates it, who lived in those Parts. By an Earthquake at
Constantinople, wherein thirteen thousand Men perished, An. 1509. many of the
Turkish Mosques fell, but the Christian Temples stood firm. An. 1663. in Insula
Canada horrendi Terrae motus sentiuntur. Haec Tempestas ingentem Terrarum
tractum infestavit: and Barbaros, Christianis interim incolumibus, gravi damno
affecit. Cluverius, p. 868.
And other Instances may be given of the like.

God is an unchangeable Refuge, and by Interest in him we are sure of a
Building not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens. Though our earthly
Dwellings should be swallowed up, our Souls are safe, our Portion is secure:
for when this earthly Tabernacle is dissolved into Dust, by that or any other
Calamity, yet shall we not miss of eternal Blessedness in the Heavenly
Mansions: And there are no Storms or Tempests, no Commotions or Tremblings
there.

CHAP. III.
We ought not to Censure others, because of such Calamities, as greater Sinners
than those who escape: much less should we pass a Judgment on their Eternal
State, because they are cut off suddenly by a temporal Judgment.

TO apply this: 1. Let us not then excuse or encourage our selves, by censuring
others, as greater Sinners than we, on whom more terrible Judgments have been
inflicted: For except we repent, we must also perish. This is the express
Declaration of Christ, upon the Account given him of those on whom the Tower of
Siloam fell, and of the Galileans, whose Blood Pilate had mingled with their
Sacrifices, Luke 13.5. As to these Galileans their Crime is not certain: some
think they brought this Judgment upon themselves by their Sedition, as
conspiring against the Roman Government; intermixing some Acts of Religion as
the Bond of their Conspiracy; which Pilate hearing of, surprised them in the
Act, and put them to Death: Others think they were the Followers of Judas of
Galilee, mentioned Acts 5. who seduced many from their Obedience to the Roman
Emperor; and that they were Jews coming up to the Passover to sacrifice, and
there he fell upon upon. Others suppose them to be Samaritans, and that they
were slain, worshipping in their Temple on Mount Gerizim; but called Galileans,
from Judas the Head of the Faction: and the Hatred of the Jews against the
Samaritans might occasion that severe and bitter Censure. Whatever the Occasion
was of their Sufferings, our Lord condemns the Censure of them as greater
Sinners on that Account; for tho sometimes Men guilty of provoking Sins, are
followed with such remarkable Judgments, that it would be stupid Impiety not to
observe the Hand of God therein, as in the Case of Herod, Acts 12, etc. yet God
may choose out some to be Examples and Warnings to others, who are not greater
Sinners than they. It Is true, some Men's Sins are so visible, as to be open
before hand, going before to Judgment, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 5.24.
(They are (...), manifest to the Judgment of all Men, before they come to be
laid open at the last Day: they go to Judgment before the Sinners themselves
are brought thither.) When such notorious Crimes are followed with
extraordinary Punishments, the Connection and Relation between them must not be
denied: But otherwise we should judge charitably of the Sufferers.

We must not make a rash and hasty Judgment of the Providence of God, or
interpret the Voice of his Rod by uncertain Guesses of our own. We may easily
be too curious in prying into the Secrets of Providence; for his Judgments are
a great Deep; and of many of them we may say with Asaph, When I thought to
know this, it was too wonderful for me. He has not thought fit to give us a
full Account of all his Designs and Ends, why such who are not greater Sinners
than others, are sometimes punished more. In such Enquiries we shall soon get
out of our Depth, so as to swim in Dissatisfaction, or sink into Distrust, if
we suffer our Curiosity to stretch it self too far.

Therefore after Solomon had told us, Eccles. 7.15. that there is a just Man
who perishes in his Righteousness, and a wicked Man on the contrary who
prolongeth his Life in his Wickedness; he adds in the next Verse, Be not
righteous overmuch, nor make thy self over-wise: that is, do not think thy
self more righteous than the Person to whom such a Judgment befalls; nor make
thy self over-wise, i.e. do not pretend to be able infallibly to expound this
Riddle, and to know the meaning of Divine Providence in such a Dispensation;
for one Event may befall the Righteous and the Wicked, Eccl. 9.11. The great
Apostle may have his Hand arrested with a Viper; and yet none but Barbarians
would conclude, upon that Account, that he is followed with Divine Vengeance,
Acts 28.4.

We read of twenty seven thousand killed by the Fall of a Wall at Aphek, 1
Kings 20.30. As sometimes Appeals have been made to God in the high Places of
the Field, and yet the Success of the War has not always been on the juster
Side. The Benjamites were engaged in an ill Cause, and yet were victorious over
the other Tribes, Judge. 20. The Ark of God has been taken by the Philistines.
Children are sometimes cut off for the Sins of Parents, as 1 Kings 15.30. Chapter
16, and 17.

God acts as a Sovereign, in these things. The sucking Infants of Babylon must
perish by the Sword, and their Brains be dashed out: And the little Children of
Sodom and Gomorrah were burnt with their Parents, by Fire from Heaven:
Concerning which God says, Ezekiel. 16.20. I took away Young and Old, as I saw
good. He does what he pleases; and who can say unto him, What do thou? He
does not think fit to give us now a full Account of all his Matters, or to say
all that he can in justification of his present Providence; Job 33.13. Isa.
46.9. Dan. 4.34. But the Great Day of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment
of God, will unriddle all these things, and scatter all those Clouds, and
remove all those Difficulties that now puzzle us.

Much less should we conclude concerning their Eternal State, who are cut off
by some temporal Judgment. We have no Warrant, or Authority to sit as Coroners
on the Souls of deceased Persons. It would be very uncharitable to conclude,
that all the Israelites were shut out of Heaven, who died in the Wilderness,
and by the righteous Judgment of God were not permitted to enter into Canaan:
Or that the inquisitive Bethshemites, or Vzza, and others that have been struck
dead for unwarrantable Actions, did perish to Eternity. There is a Vail of
Darkness upon many such Works of Providence: but what we know not now, we shall
know hereafter, John 13.7. Good Josiah may die in a Battle as well as wicked
Ahab; and Nebuchadnezzar may have a prosperous Reign of forty Years, as well as
David. Eternal Love and Hatred are not known by these things. We must not
conclude a Man to be certainly wicked, because he is cut off by a sudden Death,
or does not go to his Grave in Peace.

Think not, says Christ, that they were greater Sinners than others, who were
thus suddenly and exemplarily cut off; That is, you cannot for that Reason, and
barely on that Account, so suppose, and judge of them. He does not deny that
they were greater Sinners, but only asserts that their greater Sufferings will
not prove that they were so: For it is agreeable enough to the Wisdom of Divine
Government, (or of any Government) that, when many Persons are equally guilty,
some may be selected to be Examples, and Warnings to others, when others no
less criminal are spared. Other Nations, as bad as Sodom and Gomorrah, have not
been destroyed by Fire from Heaven. We must Adore Divine Justice in the
Punishment of a wicked People, but his Sovereignty must be owned in the Choice
of Subjects. We should be very partial to our selves, and uncharitable to our
Neighbors and Brethren, if we conclude them to be greater Sinners than we,
because they have suffered more. I repeat this, as knowing that we are very apt
to condemn such Persons, who are thus Examples in suffering; and to hug our
selves, as more righteous than they, because we are spared.

But as to our selves, and our own Case, we ought to know that God will not
always bear to have his merciful Warnings contemned, to have numberless
extraordinary Mercies abused, to have lesser Judgments upon us, and his more
remarkable Severity upon others, disregarded. We ought still to remember and
consider it, that, Except we repent, we are like to perish.

CHAP. IV.
What Fear of Evils to come is lawful, how far a Duty, and when sinful. Of the
Penal Fear of future Calamity: Instances of it as a Divine Punishment. What
little Ground we have to expect a much longer Reprieve; we have none for
Security, and Considence. The Doubtfulness of our Case should awaken our utmost
Concern, and Care to prevent Destruction.

2. LET us therefore apprehend the Case to be exceeding hazardous, as to our
City and Nation; when we have had so many Warnings, and are not awakened to
Repentance, and Reformation. Besides the natural Fear of approaching Evil,
which is not to be condemned as a Fault, because inevitable, there is a sinful
Fear of Evils to come, and of the Tidings of them; proceeding either from
Ignorance of God, Forgetfulness of his Care, or Distrust of his Providence, or
as unsuitable to the Nature, Kind, and Degree, and Duration of the Evils we
apprehend: Such a Fear, as hinders us in the performance of our present Duty,
that infeebles our Spirits, and weakens our Hands as to the use of lawful
Means; or puts us upon the use of prohibited unlawful ones: Such a Fear, as
takes off the Sweetness of our present Mercies, by the Apprehension and Fear of
future Evil; whereby we reflect upon God's Government, and overlook his
Promises of Support and Deliverance, and become unprepared to encounter the
Evils, that we may be called to suffer.

However, there is a Fear of probable, threatened, and approaching Calamity,
that is both Allowable, and Commendable; a Fear of Caution, and Circumspection,
to excite us to prepare for the Worst; to put on our Armor, and make Provision
for an evil Day. David wanted such a Fear, when he said within himself, that
his Mountain was so strong, that it could not be moved, Psalm. 30.6. It is such
a Fear, as is opposite to sinful Presumption, and Hardness of Heart. And
therefore Blessed is the Man that fears always, in this sense, Prove. 28.14.
But he that is fearless, and hardneth his Heart, shall fall into Mischief. We
may and ought so far to fear, and apprehend the Possibility, and sometimes the
Likelihood, of bearing our Share in the like Sufferings, as our Brethren feel,
so as may prevent our Security, and settling on our Lees, and a foolish
Confidence, that the Cup of Trembling, which our Brethren have drunk so deep
of, shall never be put into our Hands.

It may farther be considered, that there is also a Penal Fear of future Evils,
which God inflicts as a Punishment on such with whom he is displeased: Deuteronomy.
28.64, 65. The Lord shall scatter thee among all People, from the one End of
the Earth even to the other; and there thou shall serve other Gods, which
neither thou, nor thy Fathers have known, even Wood and Stone. And among these
Nations shall thou find no Ease, neither shall the Sole of thy Foot have Rest:
but the Lord shall give thee there a Trembling Heart, and Failing of Eyes, and
Sorrow of Mind. The wicked Nations which inhabited the Promised Land, were
driven out by such Fears: for these seem to be the Hornets, that God sent
amongst the Canaanites, and Amorites, to drive them out of the Land, Josh.
24.11, 12. Exodus 23.27, 28. There are many Expressions to this purpose in the
Book of Job, chap. 15.21, 22, 24. and 18.5. Jer. 6.25. and 20.2. and 49.29.
Isa. 28.2. compared with 2 Kings 16. begin. Jer. 22.1. Ezekiel. 32.9, 10.

But this is quite another thing from what I am persuading to: for we have
probable Grounds to fear, what God may do as to this Nation and City: We have
looked for Peace, that great comprehensive Blessing, and as yet no Good comes:
We are engaged in a War, that none can tell how, or when it shall be
determined. We look for a Time of Healing, but our Physicians hitherto have
been of little Value: Our Wounds are not healed, and we know not when they
will: Though we have much to be thankful for, we have cause enough to be
humbled, and to fear: Rejoice we may on some Accounts, but yet rejoice with
Trembling.

Though God be long before he comes to take Vengeance; though he may reprieve
us for a little while longer; though he have done so wonderfully hitherto,
beyond what we could expect; yet we cannot thence conclude, that he will always
spare, that he will not strike. The Confidence of some in our Forces, and
Confederates, and Fleets, and Armies; so many tried Soldiers, and such
accomplished Officers, and experienced Generals, and mighty Preparations by Sea
and Land; and the Confidence of Others, upon bold Interpretations of Scripture
Prophecies, with particular Application of them to our Island, are not of
Weight enough, to hinder our Fears from being just. God may suddenly cover the
Heavens with Darkness, and confute all our vain Presumptions in a Month or two,
when we expect it not.

What God has done against Others, he may as righteously do against Us, if we
despise his Judgments, and go on in the like Sins. Behold, ye Despisers,
wonder, and perish, Acts 13.41. Behold what I have done in other Places, and
can do against you: For I work a Work in your Days, a Work which you shall in
no wise believe, though a Man declare it unto you. Men little thought that
Jerusalem should have been destroyed, as it was, as little as we expect
England, or London, to be a Scene of Calamity. But we may live to see such
Effects of it, as may make our Eyes, and Hearts fail, before God has completed
his Work, Lam. 2.18, 19.

If the Prophet cried, My Bowels, my Bowels, I am pained at the Heart, my Heart
makes a Noise within me; I cannot hold my Peace, because thou have heard, O my
Soul, the Sound of the Trumpet, the Alarm of War, Jer. 4.19. Much more may we
say so of the Fear of an Earthquake, which is unspeakably more terrible; when
every Man sinks with his own House, as his Sepulchral Monument; when the Roofs
fall upon our Heads, and the Floors cleave under our Feet; and, whether by Day
or Night, Tables, and Beds are suddenly crushed into the Disorders of a Grave,
and the Inhabitants perish at once with their Habitations.

I know the Most do not love to hear of such things, but Peace and Plenty,
Victory and Success, Liberty and Prosperity; and they are ready to say, you
discourage, and dishearten Men. But if a City or a Town be on Fire, or like to
be so, must we not discourage Men by telling of it? It is true, God may save us
by Prerogative; but if he proceed by Common Law, according to the common Rules
by which he has acted toward other Nations, we must repent, or may expect to
be destroyed.

God now seems to call us to Weeping, and Mourning, and Sackcloth, and Ashes;
but how little of such a Spirit is found amongst us? Behold Joy and Gladness,
slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating Flesh and drinking Wine, saying, Let us
eat and drink, for to Morrow we shall die, Isa. 22.12, 13. But what follows in
ver. 14. It was revealed in mine Ears by the Lord of Hosts, says the Prophet,
Surely this Iniquity shall not be purged from you till you die, says the Lord
of Hosts.

If the Matter be doubtful, whether God will preserve and save us or no, the
very possible Supposition that he may not, should awaken a most serious
Concern. Is there but an it may be that the Lord will be gracious and spare us?
Is it uncertain? Is there but a peradventure? Cannot we tell whether the Lord
will turn from his fierce Anger against us, or no? How should we be concerned
to look about us! What if our Unthankfulness, and Profaneness, and Formality,
and Divisions, our Unwillingness to be healed, after all the Overtures and
Opportunities that have been before us; What if our Infidelity, and Sadducism,
gross Impurities, and more provoking Gospel-Sins, should make God resolve to
cast us off, and call this Island, that has been Immanuel's Land so long,
Lo-ammi, Lo-ruamah, a People forsaken of the Lord? What if England, Scotland,
and Ireland should be a Seat of War, and a Field of Blood, as well as other
Parts of Europe, that never sinned against such Light, such Warnings, and such
Obligations as we have? What if a sudden Earthquake should swallow up a great
part of these Countries, as it has of others? Why may not the very Dregs of
the Cup be reserved for us, who have been incorrigible under all the Methods of
Divine Providence to reform us? What Certainty have we that it shall not be so?
Where is the Ground of our Confidence? What Assurance have we that God will
spare much longer? What strong Reasons can we produce for the Entail of
Liberty, Peace, and Plenty? There needs no Spirit of Prophecy to declare our
Danger, considering our Guilt; but a more serious, and more general Spirit of
Humiliation, Prayer and Reformation, to be poured out, to prevent it.

God has waited long, and tried us by various Methods of Mercy and Judgment; he
has manifested how loath he is to destroy us, and therefore gives us many
Admonitions and Items, formerly, and of late. He calls loud and often, by
manifold Warnings; he lifts up his Hand on high, as if he would strike, that we
might turn to the Lord, and prevent it: he shakes the City, and threatens the
Nation, but has not yet delivered us over to utter Ruin. He tells us by the
Examples of others, what he can do with us, and what we may expect if we will
go on. He doubles and trebles his Messages by the Voice of his Prophets, and by
the Voice of his Providence. He calls us by what he has done abroad, and by
what he has done at home, to repent and turn to the Lord, lest Iniquity prove
our Ruin: But have we not reason to fear that all his Kindness and Patience
has but hardened us the more, and rendered us the more incorrigible, and ripe for
Ruin? We continue our Rebellions against him, as if we were sure he would
never be weary of Repenting.

Being often reproved, and warned, and delivered, and yet Impenitent, ought we
not to fear, lest we be suddenly destroyed, and that without Remedy? How many
Countries and Cities have been so? How many former Instances, and later ones,
may be mentioned? And if we are spared, it is mere Sovereignty, and Prerogative.

CHAP. V.
Of God's Unwillingness to destroy a People. Hosea 11.8, 9. explained,
paraphrased, and applied to our Nation and City: How shall I give thee up,
Ephraim? etc. Abraham 's Pleading with God for Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 18.
Moral Causes why we may expect, and fear National and Public Calamities.

IT is the Language of Divine Providence to us, as to his ancient People, Hos.
11.8, 9. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel?
How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine Heart is
turned within me, my Repentings are kindled together. I will not execute the
Fierceness of mine Anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim; for I am God
and not Man, the Holy One of Israel, in the midst of thee. He denounced
dreadful Judgments for their Ingratitude, ver. 5, 6, 7. but when it comes to
the Execution, he is loath to destroy; How shall I give thee up? To which it is
answered, My Heart is turned within me, my Heart is turned against that
Determination of Judgment I seemed to resolve on; or my Heart is returned to
Pity and Compassion, that I cannot execute my threatened Vengeance. How shall I
deliver thee up, O Israel?To which it is answered, My Repentings are kindled
together, that is, my Bowels yearn toward you still: As little as you deserve
any Favor, or Compassion at my Hands, I am inclined to reprieve and spare you
a while longer, to give you space and time to repent. How shall I make thee as
Admah, one of the Cities of the Plain, that was utterly destroyed with Fire and
Brimstone from Heaven, with Sodom and Gomorrah? Unto which it is answered, I
will not execute the Fierceness of mine Anger, as I did against that wicked
City. How shall I set thee as Zeboim? another of those wicked Cities, which the
Lord overthrew in his Anger and his Wrath, Genesis 19.24. To which it is answered,
I will not return to destroy Ephraim, I will not make a full end of him, for I
am God and not Man; not of an hasty, passionate, revengeful Temper, as Men who
are injured and affronted, and provoked by one another. I delight in Mercy, I
have the Patience of a God as well as the Power; and therefore you are not
consumed, Mal. 3.6. I am the Holy One of Israel, a God in Covenant with your
Fathers, and have promised to be so with their Posterity: I am the Holy One of
Israel, in the midst of thee: You are called by my Name, and I am yet amongst
you by the Tokens of my Presence; I am therefore loath to leave you, utterly to
leave you to Destruction.

You have the like Expression, Hos. 6.4. O Israel, what shall I do unto thee? O
Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your Goodness is as the Morning-Cloud,
and the early Dew, that passes away: that is, I am loath to punish you with
destructive Judgments, but what shall I do to prevent it? O Israel, O Judah,
what would you have me to do? Would you have me neglect the Honor of my
Government, and be an idle Spectator of all the Affronts that you have offered
me? Must I repeal my Law, and throw aside my Scepter, and tamely suffer the
Rights of my Throne to be incroached on, and trampled under Foot? Must I
resolve to suffer you to go on in your Hypocrisy, and Idolatry, and shameful
Backslidings, without testifying my Displeasure? I have done much to warn you,
to awaken you, to reform you, to prevent your Ruin. I am inclined to Pity, I
am unwilling to destroy: But, O Israel, what shall I do unto thee? You will not
be purged, you will not be healed, you will not be gathered, you will die. And
yet Mercy interposes again, before the Stroke is given; How shall I give thee
up, O Ephraim? Must I, after all, give Orders for thy Destruction? How shall I
do it? Though thou deservest to be forsaken by my Mercy, which thou have
abused, and seized by my Justice, which thou have provoked, yet how shall I
find in my Heart to permit it? Though I can hardly tell how to bear with thee
any longer, or with Honor to my Name and Government, to delay the Execution of
that destructive Vengeance, threatened on my part, and deserved on thine; yet, O
Ephraim, my dear Son, how shall I give thee up? O Israel, the Posterity of my
ancient Friend Jacob, how shall I deliver thee over to final Ruin?

In answer to this, says God, My Heart is turned within me, my Repentings are
kindled together: i. e. I find such Struglings of Compassion in my Heart
toward thee, that I know not how to execute what I have threatened: My
Repentings are kindled, I begin to repent of the Evil that I had threatened to
inflict: Or my Repentings are kindled together; that is, all the Thoughts and
Arguments that might persuade me to repent of my threatened Wrath, and keep back
Destruction, they are all mustered together, to prevent the Stroke.

Thus does the blessed God condescend, to bespeak us after the manner of Men;
and like a tenderhearted and compassionate Parent, who is loath to disinherit
even a rebellious, and disobedient Son. His Kindness contends against his
Anger; his Mercy pleads against his Justice; the one denounces Wrath, the
other begs a Reprieve; the one threatens Desolation, the other interposes to
prevent it: My Heart is turned within me, and my Repentings are kindled;
therefore I will not give thee up, I will not execute the Fierceness of mine
Anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim, I will not make a full end of him;
for I am God, and not Man, etc.

God has evidenced this to us, and others by undeniable Proofs; in that
notwithstanding the Provocations of a People, he is ready to Repent of his
threatened Judgments upon their Repentance, and Return to him; and likewise in
that, before he gives up such a People to Destruction, he gives them frequent
Warnings by his Messengers, and by his lesser Judgments; yea though his
Warnings are slighted, and his Calls rejected, yet he does not presently
destroy, but waits with much Longsuffering, giving them Time and Space to
Repent; and sometimes appears to give unexpected Deliverance, even for his own
Name sake; and does also spare and preserve a Remnant, in the most general
Destruction: And even at last does not willingly abandon such a People to utter
Ruin, but with Reluctance and Regret, so far as is consistent with the
unchangeable Purity, and Blessedness of the Divine Majesty.

Like a compassionate Judge, who does not willingly pass the Sentence of
Condemnation: If you will not repent, you must perish: If you will not be
reformed, you must be undone: If you will not take Warning, you must be
forsaken. But, O Ephraim, how shall I give thee up? O Israel, what shall I do
unto thee? O that they knew the things that belong unto their Peace, before
they be hid from their Eyes! He signs the Warrant, as it were, for their
Execution; and then he retracts the Order again: He gives Commission for their
Destruction, and then recalls it, and proves them yet a little longer. If that
will not do, but Justice renews her Plea for Vengeance, then Mercy interposes
for a Delay.

It was on this Account God permitted Abraham to plead with him so familiarly
for Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities of the Plain; God lets him say all that
he could, be grants him every thing he would have: If there be but fifty
righteous Persons, will thou not spare them? Genesis 18. Yes, says God, I will:
But, Lord, peradventure there be forty, is not that Number sufficient? Yes,
says God, that shall do, if there be but forty. But, Lord, it may be there are
but twenty, will thou not spare them for their sakes? Yes, for the sake of
twenty I will, says God. Once more let me beg, Lord, if there be but ten: Ay,
if there be but ten righteous Persons, I will spare them. God was willing to
hear the utmost Abraham could urge on their Behalf, as if he would have been
glad to have met with an Argument, that might dissuade him from so unpleasing a
Work. God grants him so often, and so long, till the holy Patriarch was ashamed
to ask any further, or plead any longer. So backward was God to destroy, and so
unwilling to give up a People to utter Ruin; and that too, though such a
wicked People as Sodom and Gomorrah.

In the 4th of Amos you find God impeached the Impenitence of that People under
various Warnings, and lesser Judgments; and mentions the Aggravation of each
Affliction, five several times, Yet have you not returned unto me, says the
Lord. Thereupon, to awaken them to Repentance, to prevent their Ruin, he
pronounces the Riddle of a Doom, Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel;
not mentioning what he would do, Thus will I do unto thee. Thus, as I have done
unto other Places, or worse than I have ever done to Any; Thus will I do unto
thee. It is a Relative without an Antecedent; It is a locked Cabinet, and
Treasure of Judgment, without a Key to open us a View of Particulars. No
Judgment is expressed, that All may be feared; and All to be feared, that None
may be felt: Therefore prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.

We have a great deal of Reason not to be Secure, notwithstanding God's
Unwillingness to destroy. National Judgments are deserved, and threatened, and
may be justly feared; and nothing but Repentance, Reformation, Prayer, and
Union, and such other Methods as are despised and neglected, can secure, or
preserve us.

This is certain, that no Situation of our Country, (or any Country, whether an
Island, or Continent) can be our Safety, if God be against us. For what can
preserve us from an Earthquake, or a thousand other Methods of Judgment, which
God can employ? All that Men expect Succor, and Deliverance, and Protection
from, is in vain, if God be not engaged on our behalf. All those things that we
can trust to, are but so many Ciphers, if God be not on our side.

The Assyrian trusts in his mighty Army, numerous enough to drink up a River,
Isa. 37.24. and yet the next News we hear of him, is, that God sends an Angel,
and cuts off near two hundred thousand in one Night. No Courage or Valor,
Numbers or Strength, can avail in a time of War: No Skill or Policy, (of the
Truth of this every Age affords Instances:). No external Relation to God by
Church-Privileges, whereof the Jews are a sad Example; No, nor any former
Deliverances God has wrought for us, are a Ground of Security for the future,
without a thankful, and a holy Improvement of them. Not many Years after the
Preservation of the City of Niniveh, that City and People were destroyed. So it
is threatened, Josh. 24.20. If you forsake the Lord, he will turn against you,
and do you Hurt, and consume you, even after he has done you Good. The like is
threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.63. If you forsake the Lord, he will rejoice over you to
Destroy you, as he rejoiced over you to do you Good. Though a City be defended
by Rocks and Mountains, as Edom was; yet the Strength and Situation of a Place,
is no Preservative against Divine Judgments.

In two or three Moments many thousand, yea many hundred thousand People may be
swallowed up by a sudden Earthquake, tumbling alive into one common Grave,
buried before they are dead, with miserable Cries, and Groans, and Shrieks,
till their Breath be stopped. And whatever the Wickedness of other Places may
have been, who have smarted by such Judgments, the Aggravations of our Sins in
England, and London are such, as may make us fear the like, or worse.

If there were nothing but the Misimprovement of our past Mercies, we had
reason to fear it: For what Blessing is there more than ordinarily valuable,
but we have had? If Peace, if Plenty, if Victory, if the Gospel, we have had
it. But what unanswerable Returns have we made, under all such Obligations? All
the Ways by which Eminent Mercies are abused, and God provoked, we have
practiced. Some of these we have not valued at all; Others we have soon
forgotten: As to some, we have given the Praise and Glory, not to God, but to
our selves, or our Friends, or the Instruments of Conveyance; Some (I fear the
most) of these Blessings we have misimployed to the Dishonor of God, and
therefore our very Mercies may make us tremble.

Yea further, that Drowsiness and Security, and Spirit of Slumber, that has
seemed to seize the Generality of Professors amongst us at this Day, is a just
Ground for our present Fears; i. e. The general Unconcernedness about the State
and Posture of things amongst us, with relation to God's Presence or Departure.
It cannot be well with such a People, they cannot but be in exceeding Hazard,
who when their Neighbor's House is consumed to Ashes, or is yet on Fire, are
fast asleep on their Beds. For this God threatens to search Jerusalem with
Candles, to punish the Men that are settled on their Lees, who said in their
Hearts, the Lord will not do Good or Evil, Zech. 1.12.

CHAP. VI.
Earthquakes usually reckoned the Forerunners of other Calamities. We have had
many Signs and Warnings; and a long Season of Divine Forbearance; though we
are guilty of the like Sins, as have brought destructive Judgments on other
People. The Land full of Sin. Public Societies only punished in this World.

BUT to come more particularly to consider the late Earthquakes. There are many
things that should affect us with an holy Awe and Fear of God, and his
Judgments, upon those Instances of his Severity in Jamaica, in Sicily, and by
the lesser one we felt September the 8th, 1692.

It is not to be overlooked, that most of the ancient Historians do observe,
that this kind of Calamity has been the Presage of further Judgment Cicero
speaking of an Earthquake, Orat. 30. de Haruspicum Responsis, speaks to the
like purpose: Etenim haec Deorum Immortalium vox, haec paene Oration judicanda
est, cum ipse Mundus, cum Aer, atque Terra, motu quodam novo contremiscunt, and
inusitato aliquid sono, incredibilique praedicant; in quo constituendae nobis
quidem sunt Precationes and Obsecratio, quemadmodum monemur. Sed faciles sunt
Preces apud eos, qui ultro nobis viam salutis ostendunt: Nostrae nobis sunt
inter nos Irae, dissidiaeque placandae. And in another Place, discoursing how
in the second Punick War, C, Flaminius neglected the Signs of Futurities, to
the Ruin of the Republic, his Army destroyed, and himself stain: He adds,
Magnum illud etiam, quod addidit Caelius, eo tempore ipso, cum hoc Calamitosum
fuerit Praelium, tantos Terrae Motus in Liguribus, Gallia, compluribusque
Insulis, totaque in Italia, factos esse, ut multa Oppida corruerint, etc. De
Divinatione lib. 1.. 35. And afterward,. 43, 50. speaking of other Earthquakes,
he adds, Quibus Portentis, magno Populo R. Bella, porniciosaeque seditiones
denunciabantur. Inque his omnibus responsa Haruspicum cum Sibyllae versibus
congruebant. -- And in another Place he reckons Earthquakes among those things;
Quae nuper Bello Octaviano magnarum fuerunt Calamitatum Praenuntiae. Cicero de
not. Deor. l. 2.. 13, 14.
. And even such as have no great Kindness for Religion, Machiavel himself not
excepted, have acknowledged this to be true as to Matter of Fact. Socrates
Socrates Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 11.
in his Ecclesiastical History, speaking of the Earthquakes that happened in
Bithynia, and the neighbo^ring Countries, in the Days of Valentinian and
Valons, takes notice of them as Signs of the Shakings and Convullions, the
Tumults and Diserders, which should afterward follow in the Christian
Churches. The whole known World, both Land and Sea, was then shaken, and its
like the then unknown too; which might seem to be a Prelude to the future
Confiagration, or Destruction of the whole. Thucidides mentions an Earthquake
in Delos, which in the Thucidides de Bell. Pelop. l. 2.
Memory of the Grecians never shook before; that it was interpreted for, and
seemed to be a Sign of what was to come afterward to pass, in a most bloody
War.

We know that Earthquakes were foretold before the Destruction of Jerusalem,
and the final Destruction of the World, Matthew. 24. That there shall be great
Earthquakes in diverse Places. How far this may be understood in a Metaphorical
Sense, is worth considering: because though some of those Signs may be taken in
a literal Sense, others cannot; as how the Stars should fall down from Heaven.
And the declared Suddenness of Christ's Coming to judge the World, pleads for
the Application of these illustrious Signs to the Destruction of Jerusalem. And
so it was literally as to Matter of Fact, before the Destruction of Jerusalem,
as De Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 12.
Josephus relates. So before the End of the World, or the Day of Judgment, the
last of the last Plagues, Rev. 16.18. we read of a great Earthquake, such as
was not since Men were on the Earth, so mighty an Earthquake, and so great.

I know many make light of these things, because they are capable of being
solved by natural Causes. But the Hand of God is not to be overlooked in such
things, under whose Government and Influence all natural Agents act, and are
overruled as to the Time and Degree of their Acting, especially such rare and
unusual Instances as Earthquakes. All second Causes in their several Motions
need the Continuation of the Divine Power and Influence, in order to their
Operations, as well as their Subsistence. God uses all Creatures to be the
Instruments of his Will, and to serve his Purposes. Natural Agents, and moral,
are all under his Direction. Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor, and stormy Wind
fulfill his Word, Psalm. 148.8. Blasting and Mildew, Drought and Barrenness, an
Infectious Air, Pestilential Diseases, etc. however brought about by natural
Causes, are under Divine Government, and act by virtue of his Influence. He
gives Order to the Destroying Angel in a Pestilence, 2 Samuel 24.16. He says to
the Sword, Go through the Land, Ezekiel. 14.17.

Now though I will not say, that always these things are Presages of further
Calamity and Judgment to a particular People; yet, because they have usually
been followed by some such, and we have many other moral Prognostications of
Divine Displeasure, it should call us to a humble Consideration of the Grounds
of our Fear, as to National Calamities. And there are several Things (some
whereof are taken notice of by Mr. Fleming 's Discourse of Earthquakes, 8o.
some of whose Remarks I here repeat.
Others) that may here very fitly be mentioned, as,

1. That we have a multitude of such Signs, as have been generally esteemed the
Forerunners of public Calamity. It is not the late Earthquake alone, but in
conjunction with many other things, that is the Ground of our Fear. And the
more Signs we have, and the more they are despised, the louder is their Voice,
to those that will consider them. We had Signs in the Heavens in 1681. We have
had Earthquakes of late, in diverse Places: And God has lately taken Peace from
the Earth, as to this part of the World, by engaging so great a part of Europe
in bloody Wars: All which has the Appearance of some great Things to be ushered
in. I durst not be confident, as many are, what they shall be, or the
particular Year, or Season of their Accomplishment: I choose rather to
acknowledge my Ignorance in Prophetic Scripture; tho diverse Learned Persons say
more on that Subject, than I am able to answer, or refute.

2. That the longer the Time is of God's Patience and Forbearance, with the
distinguishing Mercies, and repeated Warnings that we have had, the more
terrible Judgments are like to follow, if we are Unthankful and Impenitent
after all. Deliverances, if not improved, are but Reprievals from further
Judgment; we may not be so much preserved and saved, as reserved to greater
Misery. That Passage seems to record our Doom, Psalm. 106.43. Many times did he
deliver them; but they provoked him by their Counsel, and were brought low for
their Iniquity. As God will not always contend, so neither will he always
forbear. There is no greater Sign of a final Overthrow, than a Misimprovement
of past Mercies, and Judgments: And if God be provoked by National Sins, we
cannot think his Anger will be turned away, while the Cause of it remains; that
is as much as to say, Except we repent, we must likewise perish. Though a less
Repentance may prevent National Judgments, than will preserve from Eternal
Ruin.

Is it nothing unto us, that God has dealt so severely with other People? when
our Privileges and Obligations are equal to, or greater than theirs? There is
hardly any one ill Symptom, that has ever been upon any People, that God has
dealt in Severity with, but something of it is observable, and notorious
amongst us. I grant, we must not set Bounds to the Patience of God, any more
than to his Power: We know not how much longer he may bear with us, before he
vindicate his own Rights, or in what Way, or to what Degree he will do so, at
least in our Time. But we have no Ground of Confidence, and Security: For while
we say, Peace, Peace, sudden Destruction, yea National Destruction may overtake
us, as Travail upon a Woman with Child. And the rather, because all his
Warnings hitherto seem to be slighted: Our National Preservation and
Deliverance, so often repeated, has not bettered us; but our Provocations are
rather the more aggravated, by all that God has done to Reform, Establish, and
Save us.

3. If we are guilty of the like Sins with other People, who have been severely
punished by extraordinary Judgments, why may not our continued Impenitence
expose us to an equal Punishment? And may not England say, Are there not with
me, even with me, the same Sins against the Lord? The same Sins, for which
Others have smarted, and that with this Aggravation, that we sin against more
Warnings? God is unchangeably Just, as well as Gracious. It is Sovereignty
alone can preserve us; by that he may do so; But who can tell whether he will?
God hates the same Sins in our Days, which he hated, and punished formerly: He
is as much, or more, displeased with our Impurities, as with those of other
People, that are destroyed. He loves the same Holiness now, which he ever
loved; he is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: And why should we think,
God should go out of his way to spare us? As they may encourage themselves by
trusting in God, who have Examples of God's Deliverance, in the like Case of
holy Trust in him; so they may fear, under the like Provocations, for which
Others have been punished.

4. When a Land is full of Sin, and the whole Body of a Nation, a very Few
excepted, have corrupted themselves, and provoked God; consider, the Punishment
of such Sins can be only in this World, while the Community lasts. This is not
to be reserved to the Judgment of the Great Day, when every particular Person
shall answer for his own Guilt. And is not our Nation full of Sin? Do not our
Provocations reach to Heaven? Is there not a Fullness, as to Number and
Multitude, as to Measure and Degree, that the Children fill up the Measure of
their Fathers Iniquity; and as to Strength, and Growth, that it rises higher;
and as to Cunning and Dexterity in the Arts of Wickedness, in Court, City,
Country, University, among all Ranks and Degrees; and as to Boldness and
Impudence, by open barefaced Impiety? Many of those Crimes, which were
formerly Matter of Reproach, and Shame, are now Alamode, and in Fashion, and
the Character of a Gentleman.

CHAP. VII.
Most slight such Warnings. What was done in Jamaica, had special Relation to
us in this Island. We in England have had diverse Earthquakes formerly. Their
Wickedness was great, so is ours. Several Earthquakes have extended as far as
ours, Sept. 8th, tho felt beyond the Seas near the same Time. Other Instances
of Eathquakes in Europe.

WE ought to consider the Extraordinary Warnings that we have had, by the late
Earthquake in Jamaica, June the 7th, 1692. and here at home, September the 8th,
and what we have lately heard concerning Sicily. This is the more to be
attended to, because the Most are ready to ascribe all to Natural Causes. There
is an Atheistical, and Profane Spirit visible amongst us, to disregard any
thing of the Hand of God in these Matters; as if he did not direct such a
Judgment, to one Place rather than Another, and determine, and overruled the
Time, and Season, and Degree of it.

Consider, what was done in Jamaica, had a special Reference to this Nation;
the Interest, and the Inhabitants of that Place, being purely English, and so a
Part of our Nation, though at a distance: which calls upon us the more to lay
it to Heart. Neither is it to be despised, that they in Jamaica had a
Forewarning by a Trembling of the Earth, a little before that Desolation
overtook them; and soon after that, we had the Warning of the Earthquake here:
it followed so close upon the Tidings of that in Jamaica, as to be very proper
to awaken us to a deeper Sense of it, and to make the Warning the more
Remarkable. So that God may say of us, as he did to Moses, If they will not
hearken to the Voice of the first Sign, they may yet hearken to the Voice of
the second: and the dismal Account since that, of the Earthquake in Sicily,
makes a Third; if that of Malta may not be reckoned a Fourth.

We do not read of any Instance of Earthquakes before in that Island of
Jamaica, since it was under the English Power, nor before while under the
Spaniard: But we have had several Instances of Earthquakes amongst Us formerly
in England, and these Parts of Europe, tho more seldom than in the East;
therefore it is not unreasonable for us to Expect, and Fear the like.

It Is true, those Countries which are very hot, or very cold, are least subject
to Earthquakes; and therefore it has been matter of Wonder in Egypt, or in
Herodot. 1.4.
Scythia, to have the Earth tremble. Great Britain and Ireland are reckoned
among those Parts of Europe least liable to violent Earthquakes; and yet our
Historians mention several, as,

Anno Dom. 1081. April 6. in the time of Matthew Paris. Speed 's Chron. p. 446.
King William the First, (or the Conqueror) was an Earthquake here with a great
Noise, in the 15th Year of his Reign; and followed within a few Years with many
Calamities.

In Henry the First's Time, Baker 's Chron. p. 43.
the Earth moved with so great a Violence, that many Buildings were shaken
down; and Malmesbury says, that the House wherein he sat, was lifted up with
a double Remove, and at the third time settled again in the proper Place. And
in diverse Places it gave forth a hideous Noise, and cast forth Flames at
certain Rifts many days together, which neither by Water, nor by other Means,
could be suppressed. In Lombardy the same Year, was an Earthquake that
continued for 40 days, and removed a Town from the Place where it stood, a
great way off.

An. 1133. Matthew Paris mentions a great Darkness in England, and an
Earthquake at the same time.

An. 1165. He mentions another Earthquake, in the 11th Year of Henry the
Second, January the 26th, in Ely, Norfolk, and Suffolk; which threw down many
Persons, who were standing or walking; and made the Clocks to strike, and Bells
to ring in the Steeples. And in the 24th Year of his Reign, in the Territory of
Derlington, in the Bishopric of Baker 's Chron. p. 58.
Durham, the Earth lifted up her self in manner of an high Tower, and so
remained unmovable from Morning till Evening, and then fell with so horrible a
Noise, as frighted the Inhabitants thereabouts; and the Earth swallowing it up,
made there a deep Pit, which is seen at this day: The Pits in that Place are
commonly called Hellkettles.

An. 1180. A great Earthquake threw down many Buildings, amongst which the
Cathedral Church of Lincoln was rent in pieces, April 25th.

An. 1247. There was an Matthew Paris.
Earthquake in April at London, especially felt on the Banks of the River
Thames; which shook, and threw down many Buildings; and was the more terrible,
because these Western Parts are less accustomed to Earthquakes. And the same
Year there was little Ebbing or Flowing of the Sea observable as at other
times, for about three Months.

An. 1248. The same Historian mentions another Earthquake, which did a great
deal of Mischief, especially in the Diocese of Bath; the Bishop whereof gave
him an Account of it. And this was the third which had happened within three
Years, on this side the Alps; one in some Parts of Savoy, and two in England;
which was the more Terrible, because the like not known before in these Parts.
He takes notice of another Earthquake in England afterward, in the Year 1250.

In the thirteenth Year of Queen Elizabeth, a prodigious Cambden 's Eliz. p.
158, 159. Baker 's Chron. p. 399.
Earthquake happened in the East Parts of Herefordshire, near a little Town
called Kinaston. On the 17th of February, at six a clock in the Evening, the
Earth began to open, and an Hill with a Rock under it (making at first a great
bellowing Noise, which was heard a great way off) lifted it self up a great
Height, and began to travel; bearing along with it the Trees that grew upon it,
the Sheepfolds, and Flocks of Sheep abiding there at the same time: In the
Place, from whence it was first moved, it left a gaping Distance forty Foot
broad, and fourscore Else long; the whole Field was about twenty Acres. Passing
along, it overthrew a Chapel standing in the way, removed an Yew Tree planted
in a Churchyard, from the West unto the East: with the like Force it thrust
before it Highways, Sheepfolds, Hedges, and Trees; made tilled Ground Pasture,
and again turned Pasture into Tillage. Having walked in this sort from Saturday
in the Evening till Monday Noon, it then stood still.

An. 1588. The like Prodigy happened in Cambden 's Eliz. p. 244. Baker 's Chron.
p. 400.
Dorsetshire, as in the Year 1571, in Herefordshire. A Field of three Acres,
with the Trees and Fences, in Blackmore, moved from its Place, and passed over
another Field, traveling in the Highway that goes to Herne, and there stayed.

In the 23d of Q. Elizabeth, An. 1580. in the beginning of April, about six in
the Afternoon, happened an Cambden Ibid. p. 286.
Earthquake not far from York, which in some places struck the very Stones out
of the Buildings, and made the Bells in Churches to jingle. The Night following
the Earth trembled once or twice in Kent, and again the first of May. This
Earthquake was felt at London, so as to give Occasion to an Order of Prayer;
and a Godly Admonition concerning it, appointed Recited by Mr. D. Earthquakes
Explained, and Improved, 8o. p. 134.
to be read for the turning of God's Wrath from the Nation, threatened by the
Earthquake, by Order of the Queen and her Privy Council, to be used in all
Churches, and Households throughout the Realm.

An. 1657. On the 8th day of July there was an Heath 's Chronicle, p. 395.
Earthquake at Bickley in Cheshire.

Germany, and France, and the Netherlands, have also felt Earthquakes. In April
1640, all the Low Countries, and a great part of Germany, were shaken by a
sudden Earthquake. Which sort of Prodigy was very unusual, says Cluverius, p.
743.
Cluverius, in those Parts.

An. 1117. In the 17th Year of the Emperor Cluver. ad An. 1117. p. 434.
Henry the 5th, the World was shook by terrible Earthquakes; Cities, Castles,
Villages, and a multitude of People were swallowed up in the Caverns of the
Earth. Many at Liege, or Luyk, were destroyed by Thunder, while they were
paying their Veneration to the Saints for Safety: Mountains were cleft, Rivers
dried up, etc.

So lately as the Year 1660, France had experience of Letters writ by a Spy at
Paris, Vol. 6. p. 58, 67.
an Earthquake, which the Turkish Spy mentions, who was then at Paris. We have
felt the Menaces, says he, of a terrible Earthquake this Evening. When I lived
in Asia, an Earthquake was almost as common as the yearly Revolution of Summer
and Winter: and we took as little notice of it, as we did of Lightning, Hail,
or Rain. But now I have been so long disused to these Convulsions of the Globe
-- that I am become like the rest of the World, timorous, and astonished, -- my
Mind at first staggered as much as my Body. When I was walking cross my
Chamber, and felt the Floor rock under me, with that singular kind of Motion,
which no humane Art or Force can imitate, I soon concluded 'twas an Earthquake,
but knew not how to bear that Thought with Indifference. Death is familiar to
me in any other Figure, but that of being so surprizingly buried alive; it
appeared to me very horrible to sink on a sudden into an unknown Grave, I knew
not whither. Perhaps I might fall into some dark Lake of Water; or it may be, I
might be drenched in a River of Fire, or be dashed on a Rock: for who can tell
the Disposition of the Caverns below, or what sort of Apartments he shall find
under the Surface of the Earth? We walk on the Battlements of a Mavelous
Structure, a Globe full of Tremendous Secrets. -- We had News here of an
Earthquake, which had overthrown part of the Pyrenean Mountains, some days
before this happened at Paris; but few regarded it. Calamities at a Distance
frighten. No Body: Yet those which we feel, put us all in Fears. -- In another
Letter he says, The Earthquake lately in these Parts, has put all France into
a great Consternation, astonished every Body, and increased the Thoughtfulness
of the Wise. The first Effects of it were felt by the Inhabitants of the
Pyrenees, which are certain Mountains dividing France and Spain. There it did
great Mischief, overwhelming some Medicinal Baths, many Houses, and destroying
Hundreds of People. Only one Mosque or Church, which sunk into the Caverns
below, was thrown up again, and stands very firm, but in another Place. This is
looked upon as a great Miracle, especially by the French, who have disputed
with the Spaniard for this Church, as standing on the Frontier Line; but now is
removed near half a League within the acknowledged Limits of France. The Matter
of Fact is all I urge this Testimony for; his Remarks here (and in many other
places) not being such, as a Serious Christian will approve.

If France, and Britain, and Germany, have had few Earthquakes, in comparison
of other Places of the East, yet Italy has often smarted under such
Calamities. Among many Instances, I Will recite some, besides those already
mentioned.

An. Dom. 801. While Charles the Great was in Italy, there was an Earthquake Le
Sieur Hist. del. Eglise, etc. Vol. 7. p. 2, 3. 4o.
with great Noises, on the last of April, which shook all France, and Germany,
but especially Italy; it overthrew several Towers, and even Mountains; and the
Church of St. Paul at Rome was destroyed by it. Whereupon Pope Leo the Third
appointed three Days before the Ascension, solemn Fasts, and Processions. These
Prodigies were followed with furious Tempests, and contagious Diseases, which
affected the Cattle throughout Italy, so that the most of their Beasts died.

An. 1180. An Earthquake ruined a great part of the City of Naples.

An. 1222. There were such Cent. Magdeburg. Vol. 3. Cent. 13. cap. 13.
Earthquakes in Italy and Lombardy, that the Cities and Towns were forsaken,
and the People kept abroad in the Fields in Tents; many Houses and Churches
were thrown down, and many were thereby crushed to Death. The Earth trembled
twice a day in Lombardy, for fourteen days together. Besides two Cities in
Cyprus destroyed by Earthquakes this Year. The City of B. Corio Hist. Milanese,
p. 164.
Brescia was then almost ruined.

An. 1276. In July, the same Month when Adrian the 4th was made Pope, and
within a few days after, was Corio Ib. p. 268. Il che si prese per indicio de'
grandissimi fatti.
a dreadful Earthquake at Milan, and all the Country round about. Which Pope
died the next August, and in September Another succeeded by the Name of John
the 21st.

An. 1348. This Year was so famous for forty eight Earthquakes, and for
Contagious Diseases in Italy, and other parts of Europe, that Cluver. ad An.
1348. p. 516.
Albertus Argentinensis says, from the time of the Flood, was not such a
Season of Mortality, (Haud inde a Diluvio regnasse tantam vim morborum and
mortium putet.)

An. 1397. On St. Stephen's Day all Lombardy B. Corio Hist. Milanese, p. 542.
was shaken by an unusual Earthquake, which destroyed very many Buildings, etc.

An. 1456. There arose upon the Sea of Ancona, together with a thick gloomy
Cloud that extended above two Miles, a Tempest of Wind, Water, Fire, Lightning,
and Thunder; which piercing to the most deep Abysses of the Sea, forced up the
Waves with a most dreadful Fury, and carried all before it upon the Land: which
caused so dreadful an Earthquake some time after, that the Kingdom of Naples
was ruined, and all Monthly Mercury, March 1693. p. 90.
Italy carried the dismal Marks of it. A Million of Houses and Castles were
buried in their own Ruin, above thirty thousand People were crushed to pieces,
and a huge Mountain overturned into the Lake de la Guard.

An. 1473. There was such an Earthquake at Corio Hist. Milanese, p. 820.
Milan, and the Country round about, as the like was not known in the Memory of
any then Living there.

An. 1590. The Election of Pope Urban the Seventh (who in 10 Months made room
for Gregory the 14th) was signalized by an Cluverius ad An. 1590. p. 625.
Earthquake, by which Austria, Moravia, and Bohemia trembled; accompanied with
a prodigious Drought that Summer. Upon which ensued a Famine, and Pestilence,
with such Havoc in Italy, that in one Year there died at Rome, sixty thousand
Persons.

An. 1629. The Divine Anger broke out upon Italy by such horrible Cluverius, p.
680.
Earthquakes, that in Apulia seventeen thousand Persons were destroyed.

An. 1638. Athanasius Kircher the Jesuit, in his Preface to his Mundus
Subterrancus, gives a sad Narrative of a dismal Cited by Mr. Bay, p. 185.
Earthquake in Calabria, wherein himself was, and out of which he hardly
escaped with his Life: Nothing to be seen in the whole Country he passed by,
for two hundred Miles in length, but the Carcasses of Cities, and the horrible
Ruins of Villages; the Inhabitants wandering about in the open Fields, being
half dead with Fear, and Expectation of what might follow. But most remarkable
was the Subversion of the noted Town of St. Eufemia, which was quite lost out
of their sight, and absorp'd; and instead thereof nothing left but a stinking
Lake, etc.

Italy and Sicily abound with subterraneous Fires, especially in the Southern
Parts; which have broke out so often, as to be called by the Ancient
Inhabitants, The Burnt Country. In some Places are seen perpetual Burnings, as
in Aetna, and Vesuvius; in others, Conflagrations by times: All Campania
carries Footsteps of such Conflagrations. Mount Aetna has often raged
mightily, and has been wont to do so Kircher's Mundus Subterraneus.
almost as many Years before Christ as since. An. 1669. it broke out with
Violence, and overthrew all the adjacent Places with very great Desolation,
sorely threatening Catanea it self, which is since wholly destroyed by the late
Earthquake. These Irruptions of Mount Aetna, and Vesuvius, are always
accompanied with Earthquakes, more or less; which sometimes do incredible
Mischief in those Parts. For Instance, An. 1688. we have an Account from London
Gazette, 1688. No 2358.
Naples, June the 8th, of an Earthquake there, which was accompanied with the
Rage, and Roarings of Mount Vesuvius. On Saturday last, the 5th instant, about
the 22d Hour, happened here a dreadful Earthquake, (though it lasted not long)
which frightning the Inhabitants out of their Houses with the Terrors of an
inevitable Destruction, they betook themselves to the Piazza's, and the open
public Places of the City. The old College of the Jesuits was ruined by it,
also the great Chapel of their new College, together with three other Chapels
adjoining; three of the Fathers were killed there, besides many others whose
Numbers are not yet known. The Front of another great Church of the Jesuits
opened in many Cracks, and the great Tower or Steeple seemed ready to fall. In
the Theatins Convent of the Holy Apostles, a whole Dormitory fell down, besides
other considerable Damage they received: And the magnificent Arch erected
before the Church of St. Paul, belonging to the said Fathers, fell together
with those great and ancient Columns, that formerly made part of the Temple of
Castor and Pollux, there remaining only four of them standing, and those in a
tottering Condition. Out of those Ruins there have been already dug 19 Persons
that were dead; and there was reason to fear that the Mischief might have been
much greater, it being so near to a public Market, where there were great
Throngs of People. The Walls of the great Church of St. Dominick opened in many
places, and great part of the Refectory fell down, as also a part of the
adjoining Palace, where many were killed. Several other Churches of the
Augustins, etc. were ruined: and in short, there is scarce a Palace or House
that has not received some considerable Damage. This occasioned very devout
Processions of Persons of all Ranks. The next day was another great Shock,
which threw down many of the Houses that were before the most weakened: And
yesterday there was another perceived, but without much Damage; but this day we
have felt nothing of it. However, the Processions continue in great numbers,
and the Persons of Quality are all retired from hence. In the Neighborhood of
Vdico, a City at sixteen Miles distance from hence, a Mountain opened; and a
Courier from Benevento, a City belonging to the Pope, brings an account, that
it was all ruined, and that of 6000 Inhabitants there were but few left alive.
The Archbishop's Palace there was thrown down; and the Archbishop himself drawn
out of the Ruins, being hurt in his Head and Arm: and there are Accounts of
the like Damages in several other Places.

Which was confirmed from Rome, June 12. 1688. We have had nothing considerable
to entertain us here this Week, but the sad Relations of the Terrible
Earthquakes at Naples, and several Places about it. It happened at Naples on
Saturday last about twenty one Hours and a half, (which at the same instant was
perceived even by a great many here:) On Sunday too it returned. Several
Churches, Palaces, and Houses are ruined; among the rest, the famous Church of
the Jesuits, reckoned the finest in Italy, is all tumbled down, except the
Walls and the High Altar. The particular Number of those killed and buried in
the Ruins, cannot yet be known. The last Letters say, many of the Inhabitants
lie abroad under Tents, in Coaches, etc. and continual Prayers, Processions,
public Penances, etc. are performed; and every one runs about, crying,
Misericordia. Three Ships were sunk in the Harbor, and the Water in the Wells
rose many Handsuls. Benevento is almost totally ruined; and of 10000
Inhabitants they say there remain scarce 600 alive. Cardinal Vrsini, their
Archbishop, was taken out of the Ruins alive, but hurt. Several other Places
and Seats are quite ruined, and most of the Inhabitants swallowed up. This
City, and the Country hereabout, just felt the Shock, but received no Harm.

And in a following Account a Month after, it is said, the Damage done amounts
to above fifty Millions.

Now since by these, and other Examples (in the next Chapter) we find Europe
has been visited by such Calamities formerly: If the like moral Causes be
found among us, the Divine Justice can punish us by the like kind of Severity:
and we ought to apprehend, and consider it.

The Wickedness and Impiety of the Inhabitants of Jamaica, we are told by
Eyewitnesses, was grown to a very great Height, before this Judgment: And they
must be great Strangers to England, and London, who will not own the same of
us, both as to Principles, and Practice. Few will deny it, as to the latter:
And as to the former, it is dreadful to think how Atheism, and Infidelity
prevails, and barefaced Deism, with the Rejection of Christianity, and all
Revealed Religion: how it has obtained, and spread in this Nation. As if we
were weary of the Christian Profession, and would set up for Paganism, to the
Subversion of the whole Frame of the Gospel of Christ; pulling the Crown from
off his Head, and plucking him from his Throne. Or at best, amongst a numerous
growing Party of Others, who own themselves Christians, the Divinity of our
Lord is disowned, and they allow him to be but a mere Man, not the Eternal Son
of God. When such Provocations abound amongst us, it should affect us with
Horror, especially when they prevail against the highest Means, and Mercies,
and spread as a Gangrene over the whole Kingdom.

There were some Circumstances of the Earthquake amongst us, Sept. 8th, that
have been observed to be very peculiar. I do not reckon this for one, that at
the same Hour the Earth trembled here at London, and at many distant Places,
both in this Kingdom, and in the Low Countries, and the adjacent Parts of
Germany, and France, notwithstanding the Sea between us and them: for
Earthquakes have reached farther. Not to mention that Earthquake at the Death
of our Blessed Savior Christ, which shook not only one part of the Earth, as
in other Cases, but the whole of it trembled, if Lescoloper in Cicero de Not.
Deorum, p. 229. Quo motu, non pars aliqua Terrae, ut semper alias, sed tota
Terra conquassata est, and centro convulsa, ut nulla Tellus, ne nostra quidem
Gallia, (quam Plinius a Terrae motu immunem fecit) primo ipso Motore e vivis
amoto, cum suis omnibus Incolis, immotisque adeo Judeae rupibus, in tam
insolenti Commutatione, non moveretur: Et vero cum Dominus dedit vocem suam,
mota est Terra; ut canit divinus Vates, quanto putamus amplius commotam esse,
cum Dominus dedit Animam suam.
Dydimus may be credited. Or the Extent of that, whereby Cluverius (mibi) p.
214.
twelve Cities of Asia fell at once. Gassendus in the Life of Peireskius,
reports, that at the Mountain Semo in Aethiopia, there happened a burning at
the same time with that of Vesuvius in Campania, An. 1633. So that not only
Vesuvius communicates with Aetna by subterraneous Vaults, but also Aetna with
the Mountains of Syria, the Tunnels running under the Depths of the
Mediterranean Sea; and those with the Arabian; and lastly the Arabian with
Mount Semo in Aethiopia. And we read of other Instances, particularly by the
Earthquake in France and Switzerland, May 12. 1682. which reached as far as
Collen in Germany, and was perceived in Lionnois, Dauphiny, and Beaujolois, at
Mets in Lorrain, in Provence, etc. That the Cities of Orleans, Troyes, Sens,
Chalons, Joinville, Reims, Soissons, Laon, Moscon, Dole, Strasburgh, etc. felt
it, especially Remiremont on the Moselle. The whole World almost trembled at
once by the Earthquake, An. 1116. And by the Earthquake, An. 1601. Asia,
Hungary, Italy, Germany, and France, are said to have trembled at one time;
that Earthquake extending from Asia to that Sea that washes the French Shores,
the whole Length of Europe, in a quarter of an Hour; besides some Asiatick
Regions, it shook Hungary, Germany, Italy, and France: This is affirmed by good
Writers, says Mr. Of the Effects of Languid Motion, p. 49, 50.
Boil, and Mr. Physico-Theological Discourses, p. 215. Fromond. Meteor. l. 4.
cap. ult. Art. 4. Dr. Tho. Burnet 's Theory of the Earth, p. 119, 120.
Ray; relating from Josephus Acosta, an Earthquake in Peru, that reached for
160 Leagues. And Fournier gives an Account of one in Peru, that reached 300
Leagues along the Seashore, and 70 Leagues Inland, and levelled the Mountains
all along as it went, threw down Cities, turned the Rivers out of their
Channels, and made an universal Havoc and Confusion. All this, he says, was
done within the space of seven or eight Minutes.

Some have observed, that most People had their Heads affected with an unusual
Giddiness, before they apprehended, or understood any thing of the Earthquake.
The Time of it also may be observed by you of this City, viz. the second Week
in September, to Remember you of a former Judgment by Fire, in the first Week
of that Month.

Now think a little, what would have become of us, if it had lasted but a few
Minutes more? How near were we to Ruin? How soon can God do the like again, if
his Calls to Repentance be not obeyed? And how impossible is it for all the
Great Men of the World, as to cause such a thing, so to hinder or prevent it,
or to preserve themselves or us, if God should thus visit us in his Anger
another time?

CHAP. VIII.
Many Examples of Terrible Earthquakes in other Parts of the World, formerly,
and of late.

IT has been observed by Diverse what Plato mentions in his Timaeus, of a vast
Island without the Straits of Gibraltar, called Atlantis, and bigger than
Africa and Asia together, which in one Day and Night by a violent Earthquake,
and mighty Flood, and Inundation of Water, was wholly overwhelmed, and drowned
in the Sea. Earthquakes have made way for the Irruption of the Sea in diverse
Places. Our Island of See Mr. Ray of the Primitive Chaos, chap. 5.
Great Britain is supposed to be broken off from the Continent in France by
that means, and Sicily from Italy. Many Rivers have changed their Channels, and
many Countries have been turned into Deserts by Earthquakes. By that means the
River Purchase, out of Strabo, l. 15.
Indus in Asia, that receives fifteen other Rivers into it, did change its
Channel, and the neighboring Country turned into a Wilderness. Diodorus
Siculus Lib. 2.
mentions more than twenty thousand Lacedaemonians that perished in Sparta by an
Earthquake, that was of long Continuance. In the 7th Year of the Reign of
Herod, by an Earthquake in Josephi Antiqu. Jud. l. 15. c. 7.
Judea, ten thousand Men, and a vast Multitude of Cattle were destroyed.

It Is about two thousand and sixty six Years ago, that there happened Orosius, l.
3. c. 3. Diod. Sic. l. 15.. 48.
one in Achaia, which almost utterly destroyed it, and which was attended with
Inundations, which in the very Heart of Corinth, deluged the Cities of Helice
and Buris; of which Metamorphosis, l. 15.
Ovid makes mention: Si quaeras Helicen and Burin, Achaeidas Vrbes,
Invenies sub aquis; and adhuc ostendere Nautae
Inclinata solent cum Moenibus Oppida mersis.
He that for Helice or Buris seeks,
Achaean Cities, famed among the
Greeks,
Deep under Water sunk, may find
'em now.
And Seamen, they that often the Ocean
plough,
Now over lofty Towns we sail, they
cry,
That once surveyed the Secrets of
the Sky.


Tire and Sydon in Phaenicia suffered exceedingly by Earthquakes, and an
infinite Number of People buried under their Ruins. And Strabo mentions a
City, situate above Sidon, that was wholly swallowed up by an Earthquake.
Twelve Cities in one Night in Asia, Lib. 1. c. 84.
Pliny mentions. But S. De Miraculis SS. l. 2. c. 3. if that Book be his.
Augustine is cited for what is more strange, that in a famous Earthquake an
hundred Cities of Lybia were demolished.

In Trajan's time, the City of Antioch was swallowed up, An. 105. and a great
part of Asia with it: and some other Earthquakes there, I have already Chap. 2.
p. 76.
mentioned. The Terror of that in the time of the Emperor Trajan, is described
by several Dion. Cass. Trajan.. 18.
Historians.

An. 177. Smyrna in Asia was overthrown by an Earthquake, (as a few Years since
it was again) Eusebius.
toward the rebuilding whereof, the Emperor Antoninus forgave ten Years
Tribute.

Ammianus Lib. 17, and 26.
Marcellinus speaks of very dreadful Earthquakes that happened in Macedonia, in
the time of the Emperor Constantius. And of one that he says was Universal,
in the time of the Emperor Dioclesian. And Lib. 4. c. 16.
Sozomen gives an Account, that An. 358. the City of Nicomedia was overthrown
by an Earthquake, which made the Council appointed by Constantius to meet
there, to be put off to another Year. The City of Socrates, l. 4. c. 11.
Nice in Bithynia was ruined, and almost all the Inhabitants destroyed, twelve
Years after this, says Socrates.

An. D. 557. There was a violent Earthquake at Le Sieur. Agathias.
Constantinople, that lasted for many days; and every Hour the City suffered
extraordinary Shocks. Many Houses were thrown down, but the People betook
themselves to Prayer, and Fasting, and Repentance; and God had Compassion on
them: But many other Cities in the East were ruined by it. And even Alexandria
in Egypt shaken; which was the more strange and astonishing to them, because it
seldom happens in those Parts. An. 986. there was another at Constantinople,
which was so violent, that not only the Walls and Churches were shaken by it,
but all Cedrenus.
Greece.

In the 12th Century there were many in the Cent. Magdeb. cent. 12. cap. 13. de
Miraculis.
East. And in the Year 1300, which began the Turkish Empire, or the Ottoman
Era, Life of Pope Boniface the 8th.
Platina relates such an Earthquake at Rome, as the like was never before. And
An. 1348. such a one at Aventinus.
Constantinople, as endured for forty Days, and reached in the Extent of it to
Hungary, and Italy; twenty six Cities overthrown by it, Mountains torn up by
the Roots; several Men, Women, and Beasts, by that strange Exhalation turned
into Statues of Salt.

In Persia, An. 1400. Herbert' s Travels, p. 120.
Herbert gives an account of an Earthquake, which threw down 500 Houses in the
City of Lair. And An. 1593. the whole City (which they boasted to consist of
5000 Houses) was shaken, and 3000 Houses overthrown, and as many of the
Inhabitants killed.

In the Azores, or French Islands, in the West Indies, (St. Michael's Island)
Linschot mentions an Earthquake, An. 1591. that Herbert 's Travels, p. 398.
endured shaking from July 26, unto the 12th of August, to the extreme Terror
of the Inhabitants: Especially when by force thereof, they perceived the Earth
to remove from place to place; and Villa Franca, the best Town it had, to turn
topsy-turvy: the Ships that then rode at Anchor in the Bay, trembled and
quaked; insomuch that the People verily thought Doomsday was at hand, and that
the Fabric of the Universe was disjointing.

In Tercera, the first and biggest of those Islands, called the Azores, there
happened a great Mandelflo 's Travels into the Indies, added to Olearius, p.
221.
Earthquake, May 24. 1614. that overturned in the City of Agra, eleven
Churches, nine Chapels, besides many private Houses. And in the City of Praya
hardly an House was left standing. And in the Year 1628, June 16. there
happened so horrible an one in the Island of St. Michael, that not far from it
the Sea opened, and thrust forth an Island above a League and half in length,
at a place where was above 150 Fathom Water.

An. 1581. Joseph Acosta relates, that in Peru there happened an Earthquake,
which removed the City of Anguangum two Leagues from the place where it stood,
without demolishing it, in regard the Situation of the whole Country was
changed.

An. 1657. The Spaniards (says the Vol. 5. l. 3. Let. 9. p. 204.
Turkish Spy) have lately felt a Terrible Blow in Peru; which if it be not a
Mark of the Wrath of Heaven, is at least a sign that the Earth is weary of
them, especially in those parts, where they have stained it with so much
Innocent Blood. The City Lima not many Moons ago, was swallowed up by an
Earthquake: and Calao, another City not far from it, was consumed by a Shower
of Fire out of the Clouds. Eleven thousand Spaniards lost their Lives in this
Calamity; and the Earth devoured an hundred Millions of Refined Silver, which
the Lucre of the Spaniards had forced out of its Bowels. All the Mountains of
Potosi, from whence they dug their choicest Metal, were levelled with the
Plain, and no more hopes of Gold was left to their insatiable Avarice.

Concerning this City Lima in the Kingdom of Peru, we had a sad Account of
another Earthquake there, October. 20. 1687. (if it be not the same, and the Date
mistaken) which overthrew the whole Town, not leaving one House standing; and
buried many of the Inhabitants under its Ruins. At the same time Callao,
Fanette, Pisco, Chancay, los Florillos, etc. most of them Sea-port-Towns, were
destroyed by an Inundation of the Sea, which carried several Ships above three
Leagues into the Country; and great numbers of People and Cattle were drowned,
there being found, when the Water fell, at one place near the Seaside, above
5000 People dead; and every day more were found, so that no Account could be
given of their Number. This was mentioned in the An. 1688. Number. 2349.
London Gazette, and confirmed by many Merchants Letters: Tho the Damage by the
Inundation was lessened by another Account afterward.

CHAP. IX.
God will yet preserve his Church, and enlarge the Kingdom of Christ; tho
Particular Churches and Countries may be destroyed. The Accomplishment of
Scripture-Prophecies and Promises, ushered in by great Commotions, and by
Earthquakes. Some Instances thereof.

LAstly, However God may deal with any particular Branch of the Protestant,
Reformed Churches, as to National Judgments; yet we may hope he will gloriously
Accomplish his own Work, for the spreading, and enlarging of the Kingdom of
Christ; and that all the Shakings of Heaven and Earth, shall but make way for
the Desire of all Nations to come. God has preserved his Church hitherto,
notwithstanding all Opposition. The Preservation of the Venetian Government for
eleven or twelve hundred Years, is nothing to the Continuance and Progress of
the Christian Church, in the midst of Paganism, Atheism, Antichristianism,
Deism, Arianism, Socinianism, and all the Scoffs, and Reproaches, and
Opposition of sensual profane Infidels. It has born up its Head under all the
Revolutions, and Changes of Countries and Nations; notwithstanding all the
Wars, and Confusions, and Overturnings, that have been in the World. The
Kingdom of Christ is an Everlasting Kingdom, and shall endure; he will always
have a Church, and People, against whom the Gates of Hell shall not prevail.
Tho famous Countries and Cities have been destroyed, that made a great Figure
in History, whereof nothing is now left but their very Name; and hardly so much
of their Dust and Ashes, as will suffice to write their Names in. But Jerusalem
that is from above, the City of the Great King, which is built upon the Rock,
does and shall endure. No Length of Time can weaken this Foundation, no Storms
can shake it, no Earthquakes overturn it, no Waves or Floods drown it. There
ever has been, and will be, a Church of Christ on Earth, professing so much
Truth as is necessary to Salvation. He has appointed his Ordinances, and a
Ministry to continue to the End of the World, and promised his Presence with
them: He has appointed the Memorial of his Dying Love to be kept up, till his
second Coming: And therefore will always have a People, amongst whom these
shall be kept up. Tho particular Churches, in this Country, or another, may
have their Rise, Growth, and Period, as there have been particular Inundations
in several Countries, notwithstanding the Oath of God to Noah, that there
should not be another General Deluge: But the Truth of God endures throughout
all Generations: Mount Sion abides for ever, and cannot be moved; and all the
Promises of the latter Days shall certainly be accomplished: Though I will not
be positive, as to the Time of those things, so as to ground any Assurance
concerning their near Accomplishment, or the particular Share of this Nation in
them: Yet as to such prophetic Periods, God will break through all
Obstructions to accomplish his own Counsel. And what the present Shakings, and
Convulsions of the Nations round about, may issue in, who can tell? For never
was any great Good to the Church, or any considerable Reformation introduced,
without great Commotions. And Literal Earthquakes are often taken notice to
have preceded.

About the Beginning of the Reformation from Popery, An. 1569, and 1570, there
was one in Ferraria, which Country was lately given to the Pope, and in
Portugal, whereby P. Jovius.
Lisbon was shaken, 1500 Houses ruined, all the Temples turned into Rubbish,
the Ships swallowed up in the Ocean, the River thrown out of its Channel. And
the same Earthquake affected the Netherlands, and caused great Inundations of
the Sea. And the like formerly is observable before the Division of the Roman
Empire into ten Kingdoms, that there were frequent Earthquakes, and other
Prodigies. Before Saladin attempted the Overthrow of Jerusalem, and to ravage
the Holy Land, An. 1172. Saladinus adjecit animum ad Regni Jerosolymitani
eversionem, praevio, ut solet fieri, Terrae motu, quo Antiochia, Laodicea,
Alapia, Caesarea, Emissa, Tripolis, aliaeque Urbes fere conciderunt. Cluverius.
great Earthquakes preceded. Anno 1300. when the Turkish Empire began to be
considerable, there Platina.
was such an Earthquake at Rome, as the like never was before. As when the
Pagan Empire was to turn Christian, in the time of Constantine the Great; great
Earthquakes also did precede: by one whereof thirteen Cities in Campania were
overthrown.

Great Designs of Providence being served, and the Changes of States and
Countries ushered in by Earthquakes, after the mention of that Terrible One in
the Days of Vzziah King of Judah, Zech. 14.5. it is added, And the Lord my God
shall come, and all the Saints with thee: Or thus, And yet O Lord my God come,
and all the Saints with thee. Notwithstanding our Fears and Terrors, without
this we should not see thy Salvation. Dr. Dr. Jackson 's Works, Tom. 2. Part 2.
lib. 7. p. 526.
Jackson thinks that Earthquakes were Emblems, and Types of that Great Change
by the Ministry of John the Baptist, our Lord's Forerunner, in the 15th Year of
Tiberius, who declared the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand; when Publicans and
Sinners were advanced, and the Children of Abraham, who gloried in their
Birthright, were debased; when poor Fishermen became Heads of the Tribes of
Israel, greater Men in the House of God, than Moses and Aaron had been; while
the Successors of Moses, the Chief Priests and Doctors of the Law, were
infatuated, and like Salt without Taste or Savor. And he reckens the Prophecy
of Isaiah, chap. 40.14. Every Valley shall be exalted, and every Mountain and
Hill shall be brought low, was fulfilled, and answered in its literal Meaning
(in part at least) by that Terrible Earthquake in the 6th or 7th Year of the
Emperor Tiberius, which overthrew twelve famous Cities in Asia. For among other
Symptoms of it, Tacitus Sedisse immensos Montes, visa in arduo quae plana
suerint. Tacit. Annal. lib. 2.
relates this for one, that the Valleys were exalted, and mighty Hills brought
low. Before the Accomplishment of diverse Prophecies, God gives some Glimpse or
Hint, by some real Event, answerable to the plain literal Sense of the Prophet,
but immediate Prognostics of Greater Mysteries approaching.

He says farther, that the Earthquake which happened in Jewry, while Augustus
Caesar, and Anthony tried their Fortunes in that great and famous Seafight at
Actium, was in part an Accomplishment of the Prophet Haggai his literal
meaning, chap. 2.6, 7. Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the
Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry Land: And I will shake all
Nations, etc. This shaking of the Nations, and of the Earth at that time, was a
sore Prognostic of that Mystery, which the Prophet in the following Verses
foretells, viz. That the Glory of the latter Temple should be greater than the
Glory of the former; and that He, who was the Desire of all Nations, and the
Glory of both Temples, the Prince of that Peace which God had promised to give
in Jerusalem, should shortly come. For about twelve Years after, Herod erects
the Temple anew, and made it even for External Pomp and Ornament, more
Beautiful than Solomon's Temple had been; that the King of Glory, and Prince of
Peace, for whose Entertainment (though unwitting to Herod) it was erected,
might come into it, and fill it with Glory. And within eighteen Years after
Herod began this Work, our Lord was presented in it, and acknowledged by Simeon
to be the Light of the Gentiles, (or one desired of all Nations) and the Glory
of his People Israel.

Great Revolutions, and Changes sometimes for the better, but more often for
the worse, have been observed to follow Earthquakes, as to Natural, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical Affairs: Let me mention some Instances.

Three Cities in Orosius, l. 7. c. 9.
Cyprus fell by an Earthquake, in the time of Vespasian and Titus, followed
with a great Pestilence at Rome. In Julian's Sozomen, l. 6. c. 2. Theodoret, l.
4. c. 4.
time there were several great Earthquakes, followed with a terrible Famine at
Alexandria, and in Egypt See Hottingeri Dissert. de Terrae motu, Diss. 4.
Quaest. 3. Unde Terrae motus immittantur, fintne fortutti, pure naturales, an
(...)?
.

An. D. 342. Constantius made several beneficial Laws for the People, and
renewed the Privileges granted to Artificers. It is observed he was constrained
thereunto by a sense of Public Calamities: for during the War with Persia, and
about those Times, great Mischiefs had proceeded from many, and most Terrible
Howel 's Genesis Hist. Vol. 2. p. 83, 84.
Earthquakes. St. Jerome in his Cronicon tells us, that the Year following the
Death of Constans the Younger, many Cities of the East fell to the Ground by an
horrible Motion of the Earth. And some three Years after this, that Neocaesarea
was overturned, and all its Inhabitants perished, except such as were saved
with the Bishop in the Church: as also that the Year following this, and
preceding the building of the Haven in Seleucia, Dirrachium was by an
Earthquake demolished, Rome trembled for three Days, and as many Nights, and
many Towns of Campania were sorely troubled. To these Cedrenus adds, that in
the fourth or fifth Year of Constantius, Antioch was endangered by an
Earthquake of three days continuance; that in his eighth Year Rhodes was much
distressed by the same Accident: That when Dirrachium, the City of Dalmatia,
perished, and Rome was in such Danger, twelve Cities of Campania were
destroyed: And that in the twelfth Year of Constantius, the greater part of
Berytus, the City of Phaenicia, also miscarried. In which Year also happened an
Eclipse of the Sun, on the sixth Day of the Month Desius. The ill Success of
Constantius in the Persian War, was by the more Orthodox Christians, according
to the Judgment of Parties, concluded to have happened to him, because of his
adhering to, and countenancing the Arian Heresy.

An. 344. In the fifth Year after the Death of Constantine, ( Marcellus and
Probinus being Consuls) a Synod was held at Antioch that condemned Athanasius,
and only in Words professed to own the Nicene Faith, but really to condemn it,
and substitute another in its room. This Impiety God declared against by
Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 7, and 10.
Terrible Earthquakes, say the Historians of that Time, especially at Antioch,
for above a Year together.

An. 366. while Procopius's Rebellion was yet but little advanced, July 21. in
the Consulship of the two Emperors, Valentinian and Valens, there happened such
Horrible Earthquakes throughout the World, as neither true Historians have
related the like, nor Fables themselves represented to us. A little after the
Day dawned, there was a great Tempest of Thunder and Lightning, which was
followed by so dreadful a Trembling of the Earth, that the Sea also was shaken
therewith, and deserted the Shore, and its ancient Bounds for a great space;
and the Depth of its Channels were discovered; multitudes of Fish were seen to
stick in the Mud, and the Unequalness of the Seas Bottom appeared, here Hills,
and there Valleys, which never had before seen the Sun, since at the Original
of all things they were first overwhelmed with the Floods. Many Ships were left
on the dry Ground, and Swarms of People flew thither to catch Fish; when
suddenly the Sea, as disdaining to be imprisoned, returned to its former Place
with such Fury, that not containing it self therein, but transported beyond its
Bounds, by the Violence of its Rage and Motion, it overturned Houses and other
Buildings innumerable, drowned many Thousands of Men, and overwhelmed numbers
of Ships; Great Vessels were by the Violence of these Gusts blown upon the Tops
of Houses, as it happened at Alexandria, and some near two Miles from the
Shore, as Ammianus Marcellinus (who relates these things, lib. 26.) saw one
himself Howel's Genesis Hist. Vol. 2. p. 231. ad An. C. 366.
. This Prodigy we cannot take to have signified any thing to Procopius's
Rebellion, so much as that Dreadful Inundation made into the Roman Empire by
the Northern Nations, which shortly after happened; and the Ruin of the Western
Provinces, which followed thereupon.

In the Year 430, a great Tricesimo deinde Anno Theodosii, Terrae motus facti
sunt ingentes per menses aliquot integros, maximarum Praenuntii Mutationum,
quibus Respublica tum Ecclesiastica, tum Mundana mox laboravit, ac tantum non
occidit. Romanum tum Praesulatum accepit Lea, qui primus in omnes totius Orbis
Christiani Episcopos dominatum, sibi aliquem, ut Privilegio Petro dato, coepit
arrogare. Cluverius, p. 322.
Earthquake preceded the Death of one of the best Emperors, viz. Theodosius, as
the Forerunner of Great Changes. Some Howel 's Hist. p. 673.
think this the same with that An. 446. which Marcellinus writes to have
happened in the Confulship of Aelius and Sepronius: which raged in many places,
and therein overturned many Cities; the Wall of Constantinople, tho but new
built, it threw to the Ground, with fifty seven Turrets: Stones of great Bulk,
lately placed in the Building of the Forum of Taurus, fell down. Many Towns
were ruined; and a Pestilent Vapor arose, which caused a Plague; and this
joined with a Famine, destroyed many Thousands. The Civil Motions and Ruptures
in the Roman Empire, were agreeable hereunto.

This Earthquake in the Reign of Theodosius, Evagrius Lib. 1. cap. 17.
says was the Greatest, and most memorable of all others: Such as by its
Greatness rendered inconsiderable all that went before it. It afflicted, he had
almost said, the whole World. The Earth gaped, and swallowed many Villages,
besides many other, nay innumerable Calamities both by Sea and Land. Some
Fountains were dried up; in other Places Water in great quantity broke out,
where formerly it had not been known: Great Trees were torn up by the Roots:
Heaps of Earth were so shaken together, that they were raised into Mountains.
The Sea cast forth dead Fishes: In it many Islands were overwhelmed and sunk:
Ships sailing in the Sea, by a sudden Retrocession of the Water, were left on
dry Ground. In conclusion, many Places of Bithynia, the Hellespont, and both
the Phrygia's were grievously distressed. This Disaster a long time and sorely
afflicted the World. Lib. 14. cap. 46.
Nicephorus writes, that it continued six Months, and that in a manner without
Interruption; that it reached Alexandria, but especially afflicted Antioch.
Besides the Countries mentioned by Evagrius, it invaded the greatest part of
the East, and spared not many Regions of the West. He adds, that the People of
Constantinople not daring to stay in the City, for fear of the fall of Houses,
continued together with the Emperor, and Proclus their Patriarch, in the
Fields, instant in Prayer for the removal of so heavy a Judgment. --
Theodosius, when delivered from the Danger of the Earthquake, presently betook
himself to repair the Walls of Constantinople, etc.

When Theodoret, l. 5. c. 34.
Chrysostom was banished, in the beginning of the fifth Century, by the
Emperor Arcadius, from the Church of Constantinople, the same Night was a
great Earthquake that shook the Emperor's Palace, and threatened the Ruin of
it; on which Messengers were sent to recall him.

An. 458. Evagrius writes of a great Howel 's Hist. p. 202.
Earthquake that happened at Antioch, which the Citizens had sad cause to
remember. Before it began, some of the Inhabitants were seized with an
extraordinary Madness, such as seemed to exceed all Ferity of wild Beasts, and
to be the Prelude to that Calamity which followed on the fourth Day of the
Month Gorpiaeus, which the Romans call September, about the fourth Hour of the
Night, and the fifty sixth Year of the Life of Leo. It overturned almost all
the Buildings of the new City, which was well peopled, and none of it forsaken
or empty, being curiously built by the Magnificence of Emperors, who strove to
exceed each other in the Adornment of it. The first and second Fabrics in the
Palace were also cast down, the rest standing, together with a Bath; which
having formerly been neglected, now when by the Earthquake the rest were
choked up, stood the Citizens in very good stead. Many other Damages of this
Earthquake are there mentioned, (with some Differences as to Chronology) and
the Disorder of public Matters, as the Murder of Majorianus, joint Emperor in
the West with Leo in the East, etc.

An. D. 557. There was a violent Earthquake, with great Noises and Tempests, at
Constantinople and Rome, in Agathias, who continued the History of Procopius.
Justinian's time, followed the next Year with a great Plague at
Constantinople. The Earthquake which shook that City three Years before, lasted
forty Days, and destroyed many Places in the East.

In the Year 648, before the Cent. Magdeburg. cent. 7. c. 13.
Saracens overrun Africa, there were many great Earthquakes in the time of the
Emperor Constans. The like Ingruentium Maloru praenuncius. Cluver. p. 350, 406.
Earthquakes followed with great Calamities in the East, were observed, An. 679.

In the Year 740, was another at Constantinople, which also destroyed many
Cities of Asia, and lasted above a Twelvemonth. This was thought to Cent.
Magdeb. cent. 8. c. 13. Cluver. p. 358.
forebode the Death of the Emperor Leo, the Loss of Artabasdus, and the
Conquest of Constantinople, which soon after followed.

In the Year 791, in the time of the Empress Irene, a great Favourer and
Patroness of Image Worship, was Hospinian de orig. Templorum. l. 2. c. 16.
another violent Earthquake at Constantinople.

In the Year 1077, the Earthquake on the 6th of April, in the 15th Year of the
Reign of King William the Conqueror, was followed by many Calamities, say
Matthew Paris, Speed, etc.

In the Year 1088, the Earthquake in the time of William Rufus, or William the
Second, was followed with such unseasonable Weather, that there was no
Seeds-time till December.

In the Year 1298, the Earthquake at Rome, in the time of Instabat nimirum
ferale seculum, quo solvendus e carcere Satanas, sursum deorsum omnia volutare
cogitabat. Cluver. p. 497.
Boniface the Eighth, (who fainted away for fear, and afterward published a
Jubilee) was followed with many Calamities.

An. Dom. 1509. On the 14th of September there happened a terrible Earthquake
at Knolles 's Turkish History. Bajazet the Second.
Constantinople, and the Country thereabouts, in the time of Bajazet the
Second; by the violence whereof, a great part of the Walls of that Imperial
City, with many stately Buildings, both public and private, were overthrown,
and thirteen thousand People overwhelmed and slain. The Terror thereof was so
great, that the People generally forsook their Houses, and lay abroad in the
Fields: Yea, Bajazet himself, then very aged and sore troubled with the Gout,
for fear thereof, went from Constantinople to Adrianople; but finding himself
in no more safety there than before, he left the City, and lay abroad in the
Fields in his Tent. This Earthquake endured by the space of eighteen Days; or,
as the Turks Histories relate, for a Month, with little Intermission. Which was
then accounted ominous, as portending the miserable Calamities which afterward
happened in the Ottoman Family.

After this Earthquake ensued a great Plague; where with the City was
grievously visited, and for the most part unpeopl'd. But when the Earthquake
ceased, and the Mortality was assuaged, Bajazet caused the Imperial City to be
repaired with all speed, and employed eighty thousand Men about it; who, in the
space of four Months, in a most beautiful Manner, repaired the Ruins of that
great City.

An. 1510. The late Wars of the French in Savoy, were thought to be foreshewn
by many Prodigies, and even those preceded by an Earthquake in Apulia, whereby
more than sixteen thousand Persons were overwhelmed; after which ensued the
War, which devoured more than a Million of Men.

An. 1631. The like terrible Earthquake in February, was in, and about the City
of Naples, before the Commotions, and Troubles there: which did such Mischief
as to Houses, Men, Women and Cattle, as cannot be expressed.

In the Year 1590. The Election of Pope Urban the Seventh, was signalized by an
Earthquake, which made Austria, Bohemia, and Moravia to tremble, and was
followed by an extraordinary Drought. Gregory XIV. quickly succeeded, and died
in ten Months. There was such a Famine and Plague in Cluverius, citing Thuanus.
Italy that Year, that above 60000 died.

CHAP. X.
Concerning the Fear of Divine Judgments, and the Regulation of it. What Fear
of Evil God has promised, and we may expect to be delivered from, and what
not. Counsels proper to obtain an Interest in those Promimises, and to
experience the fulfilling of them.

AFter all these Examples of terrible Earthquakes, which may make us tremble,
it may be proper to add something to regulate our Fears of Divine Judgments,
and to establish our Hearts under the doubtful Expectatitions of what God will
do against us. There is a natural Fear of approaching Evil, which we must not
expect to be delivered from, nor is it possible we should. There is also a Fear
of prudent Caution, that may help us to suppose, and provide against the worst
that may happen: This we are obliged to, as opposite to Security: This will
make us flee to God as our Refuge, and Hiding Place. Neither must we expect to
be delivered from the Fear of all temporal Evils; considering what our present
State in this World is, and what is suitable for such imperfect sinful Souls,
who must have Matter of Mourning, while there are such Remainders of Sin:
Especially being in the Condition of Strangers, in a Foreign Country, and in
the midst of Enemies; and who have this present World to be saved from, and the
Love of the World to be mortified; and who must expect to be treated as the
Followers of a Crucified Savior; and so to be conformed to him, our Head, in
Suffering, or in Resolution and Readiness for it. Therefore, though it be true,
that if our Hearts are fixed on God, we need not be afraid of evil Tidings; and
God has promised to deliver us from anxious, tormenting Fears: Yet so much Fear
of Evil as is needful to drive us to God, by Prayer, Dependence and Trust, we
must not expect to be delivered from; especially as we are Members of a
defiled, divided Church; or live in a City, or Country, where are many whose
Sins call for Judgment; whom God does punish in this World. We may not think in
such a Case, that we shall be quiet from all Fear of Evil, especially if we our
selves have (as doubtless we all have) contributed our own share to the common
Guilt.

But such as fear the Lord, may hope to be delivered from the Fear of Evil; so
as it shall not overwhelm their Spirits, and destroy their Confidence and Hope
in God, weaken their Hands in present Duty, and take away the Relish of their
present Mercies, or would despirit and distract them. Such a Fear of Evil is
threatened as a Punishment, Deuteronomy. 28.64. Job 15.21. Job 18.5. Terrors shall make
him afraid on every side, and shall drive him to his Feet. Thou shall be afraid
to go forth into the Field, or to walk by the Way: for the Sword of the Enemy,
and Fear is on every side. Jer. 6.25. chap. 20.2. chap. 49.29. They shall cry
unto one another, and use this Expression, FEAR IS ON EVERY SIDE. That is; We
know not what to do, or what to expect; whither to go, or what Course to take;
what Counsel to follow, or what Evil next to look for; or how far it will
proceed, or when or where it will issue. The like Instance see, Isai. 28.2.

God promises his People, that they shall be kept in Peace, shall sleep in
Quiet, shall dwell in Safety, Psalm. 4. last. Prove. 3.24, 25, 26. When thou
lie down, thou shall not be afraid: Yea, thou shall lie down, and thy Sleep
shall be sweet. Be not afraid of sudden Fear, neither of the Desolation of the
Wicked, when it comes: For the Lord shall be thy Confidence, and shall keep
thy Foot from being taken, Job 11.18, 19. Psalm. 112.7, 8. God promises us
Quiet, Peace and Safety, from the real Hurt of temporal Evil; and from the
temporal Afflictions themselves, if that be best; and from such a Fear of
approaching Judgment and Calamity, as the Wicked are punished with.

If you would be interested in these Promises, and experience the fulfilling of
'em, study much the Covenant of Grace, and God's unchangeable Fidelity to it.
This is the Ground of Support in the worst times, Isa. 41.1. Fear not, for I am
with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God. He has made with me an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure. This is all my Desire,
and all my Salvation, 2 Samuel 23.5. I now need nothing more, I fear nothing, I
am solicitous for nothing. Let God build up or pull down, save or destroy;
prolong, or shorten my Life; do what he will with me and mine, he is my God in
Covenant. This made the Psalmist triumph in Faith, Psalm. 118.6. The Lord is on
my side, I will not fear: God is our Refuge and Strength, we will not be
afraid, though the Earth be moved, and the Pillars thereof be shaken, Psalm. 46.
beginning; Habak. 3.17. I am not afraid of what Man can do, I am not afraid of
what God will do, or what I shall do, or the Nation do. By this Consideration,
That He is my God, I can answer all my Fears: By this I know my great Interest
is secure, my Treasure is safe, my principal Concern is out of danger. He is my
God in an everlasting Covenant; He will not leave till he bring me to Glory: If
my Body perish by an Earthquake, my Soul shall ascend to Heaven. The Noise of
Wars, and Rumors of Wars, shall not break my Rest, for I have Peace with God
through Christ. Study therefore the Covenant of Grace, and the Promises of it;
and believe the Unchangeableness of God, and his Power, Truth and Goodness, to
make them good.

And in order to your advantage, by the Consideration of God as in Covenant,
labor to strengthen and increase your Faith, that you may be able to apply all
the Promises of the Covenant for your Comfort. If we did heartily assent to the
Truth of the Promises, and had a realizing View of what God is, and can be, and
do, for all that fear and trust him; and did more entirely yield, and devote
our selves to him, as our Lord and Sovereign, our God and Portion, to be
governed and disposed of according to the Tenor of his Covenant, (all which is
implied in Faith) this would relieve us against a thousand Fears: This would
make it evident to our selves, that let our Dangers be what they will, we are
safe in the Hands of a faithful, and a good God: All Events are under his
Management, and shall accomplish his Counsel. Our Dangers shall reach no
further, rise no higher, last no longer, than to serve his glorious Purposes.

Accordingly we read, Isa. 30.7. compared with the 15th Verse, that in Cases of
Danger, our Strength is to sit still. Not in opposition to the use of Means for
our Safety, for that is the Duty of every Man in his place: But in opposition
to Reliance on any other Help than God; as an Expression of Faith in God,
described at the 15th Verse: In Returning, and in Rest shall you be saved; in
Quietness, and in Confidence shall be your Strength. Waiting on God in the way
of our Duty, so far as we know it, in expectation of what God shall please to
do for, or against us.

You ought also to recollect, and improve former Experiences, to silence
distrustful Fears. The Lord is my Strength and my Shield, my Heart trusted in
him, and I was helped, Psalm. 28.7. Experience works Hope; and that which
assisteth our Hope, must needs scatter our Fears.

Endeavor also to mortify the Love of this World, and of Life it self; and
look to your Integrity and Uprightness of Heart: This will make you as a
Brazen-Wall, and an Iron-Pillar: Whereas an Hypocrite will be afraid of every
Shadow. No wonder if the Sinners in Sion are afraid, and Fear surprizeth the
Hypocrite, while the Righteous are as bold as a Lion. It is therefore good
Advice of Zophar unto Job, chap. 11.14, 15. If Iniquity be in thy Hands, put it
far from thee, and let not Wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacle. And then it
follows, Thou shall lift up thy Face without Spot; yea, thou shall be steadfast,
and thou shall not fear.

Resign and give up your selves, and all you have, into the Hands of God.
Commit the keeping of your Souls, and the keeping of the Nation, and of the
City, and of your Families, and Friends, and Relations, into the Hands of God,
as of a faithul Creator and Preserver, 1 Pet. 4.19. Leave all to his Care,
resolving to be satisfied, and pleased with his holy Will. We shall not be
afraid of losing that by Violence, which we have voluntarily given up into the
Hands of God.

But especially let us give up our selves, by renewing our Covenant, penitently
and seriously, at the Table of the Lord. See that there be no Controversy
between God and you, while he has a Controversy with the Nation in general.
Renew Repentance for past Backslidings, that your Peace may be made with
Heaven; that God may not be your Terror, in a Day of evil: For nothing will so
much take away the Heart, abate the Courage, the Vigor, and Firmness of your
Spirits, as the Jealousy and Misgivings of a guilty Conscience. If you cannot
look up to God with Comfort, if you cannot lift up your Eyes to Heaven with
Hope, to what Refuge will you flee in a Day of Evil?

This is the great Counsel I would give, and take, as the best Preparation, for
whatsoever should come to pass. For what can daunt the Courage of that Man, or
Woman, who can say, This God is my God for ever; This Savior, who has all
Power in Heaven and in Earth, is my Savior and my Lord, and the Lord of all
this World? An upright Christian, with Assurance, was never a Coward, and never
can be. But if we live at Uncertainties about our Spiritual State, if our
Backslidings be many, our Corruptions strong, and our Evidences blotted; we
must needs be afraid of public Changes, and threatened Calamities, because we
are afraid to die. Shall I mind you how sad the Case of Saul was, when he cries
out, 1 Samuel 18.15. I am sore distressed, for the Philistines make War against
me, and God is departed from me, and answers me no more? How miserable is their
Case, who, in a time of Trouble, cannot ease their Hearts by Prayer to God?
who, in a time of Danger, cannot look to the End and Issue of Things with
Comfort? who have no Anchor to drop in a Storm? The Difference is unspeakably
great, at such a time, between the one sort and the other: For while the Wicked
is driven away in his Wickedness, and hurried by Temporal Sufferings into
Eternal Ones, the Righteous has Hope in his Death, Prove. 14.2.

CHAP. XI.
Security a Presage of Temporal and Eternal Ruin, to particular Persons,
whatever God may do as to the Nation in general.

LAstly; Whatever God may in Sovereignty do in sparing this Nation, and how
well soever he will provide for those who are upright before him; yet, as to
particular Persons, who are not at peace with God, it is most certain, that
Security is a Presage of Ruin; that sudden Destruction shall overtake them, as
Travail on a Woman with Child. When the slothful and wicked Servant thinks, and
says in his Heart, that his Lord does delay his Coming; He will come and cut
him in sunder, in a Day that he looked not for, and in an Hour that he was not
aware of, Matthew. 24.55. When the rich Fool in the Parable said, Soul, take
thine ease; the next News we hear of him is, that the Pillow is plucked from
under his Head, and he is cast into Hell. When, notwithstanding all the
Warnings of God by his Word and Providence, Men will bless themselves in their
Hearts, and say, I shall have Peace, though I walk in the Imagination of my
Heart, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. The Lord will not spare such a Man, but the Anger of
the Lord, and his Jealousy shall smoke against him, and all the Curses that are
written in this Book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his Name
from under Heaven. Therefore let Men take heed how they arrogantly boast
themselves in their Wickedness, lest God single them out unto some signal
Vengeance in this World, to make them Examples to those who shall afterward
live ungodly. If they regard not a Judgment to come, to put the evil Day far
from them, and despise all the Forerunners of Judgment in this World; yet they
may suddenly be surprised in their Security, and they are every Moment liable
to a sudden Arrest of Judgment, against which they have no Relief.

They are under Condemnation, they are yet in their Sins; and therefore to such
I must say, Except you repent, (speedily, and heartily repent) you must perish.
For tho God be loath to strike, and inclined to Pity, and willing to spare; tho
he be slow to Anger, and ready to forgive; Yet the Day of his Vengeance is at
hand, when he shall put on Fury like a Garment; when his Eye shall not pity,
nor his Hand spare; when he shall laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your
Fear comes. Now, O foolish delaying Sinner, that go on in Sin! the Patience
and Mercy of God pleads for thee against his Justice, and he would lead thee to
Repentance by his Longsuffering; his Bowels yearn over thee, and he would fain
overcome thee by his Love, and conquer thee by his Grace: But the Day is
hastening, when there shall never be a Word spoke for thee by the Mercy of God
more; when, because he stretched out his Hand, and thou regardest not, thou
would not hear his Voice, or know the Day of thy Visitation, he shall condemn
thee without Pity, and send thee to Hell, without any such Compassionate
Language as he used to his ancient People, How shall I give thee up, Ephraim?
The Voice of Mercy shall then cease, and plead for thee no more: He that made
thee, will show thee no Mercy; He that formed thee, will show thee no Favor.
He would Now delight in thee, and rejoice over thee to do thee Good, and
therefore beseeches thee to have Pity on thy self: But Then he will delight in
the Glory of his provoked Justice; because thou would not be persuaded to
Accept of his Mercy while it might be had. Think of it, and Tremble, all ye
that go on in Sin, and hate to be Reformed!

Whatever become of the Nation, if National Judgments do not overtake you, you
cannot be long out of the Grave, or out of Hell. You are in danger of Damnation
every Hour: And tho Sentence against an evil Work is not speedily executed, tho
a Sinner do Evil an hundred times, and his Days be prolonged; Yet surely I know
it shall not be well with the Wicked, Eccl. 8.11, 12, 13. Christ has told you
again and again, that such as you can never be Saved. It is the Word of the
Living God, that such and such Persons as you know your selves to be, shall
never enter into Heaven. It is a Truth founded on such Principles, that the
Contrary is impossible.

And yet to convince Men of this as to their own State and Condition, there is
the Difficulty. For if you will not believe God and Christ, how shall I expect
you should believe me? Alas! you will not consider your Case for one serious
Hour: We can hardly prevail so far, as to bring you to compare your selves with
the Word; and your own Character with the Description of such as shall perish.
You will put it to the venture, and a bold Venture it is: For if no Minister in
the World should tell you, That except you repent, you must perish; yea, if the
Devil should tell you the contrary a thousand times, it will not make the Word
of God of none Effect, or your Damnation the less Certain.

You may make a shift for a little time to drown the Voice of Conscience, or
stop its Mouth; to lay aside the Thoughts of Death, and Judgment, and an
everlasting Hell; to speak Peace to your selves, against the express Word of
God: But if you are not Renewed and Sanctified; if you do not truly Repent, so
as to hate Sin, and leave it, and turn to the Lord; if you do not unfeignedly
give up your selves to God in Christ, as your Savior, and Sovereign, in the
Method of the Gospel; your Judgment is near, your Destruction is at hand, you
must Perish; and that more dreadfully, than most others in the World: For your
Light, your Knowledge, your Means, your Mercies, your Calls, your Warnings, your
Examples, are more and greater than others. Divine Patience will not last
always. The Lord is not slack (as Men count Slackness) concerning the Promise
of his Coming, but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. But if they turn
not, he will whet his Sword; he has bent his Bow, and made it ready; he has
prepared also Instruments of Death, Psalm. 7.12, 13. Tho there are in God Riches
of Goodness, and Forbearance, yet if you despise the Riches of his Goodness,
not knowing that the Goodness of God leads to Repentance, you do but treasure
up to your selves Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the
Righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2.4, 5.

It is dreadful to perish as to a Temporal Ruin, by Wars, and Fires, and
Earthquakes, and such Calamities: But how much sadder is it to think of
descending into the Place of Remediless Torment, under the everlasting Curse of
God, to be tormented with the Devil and his Angels! It is sad to hear of this,
sad to foresee it, to consider it, to think of it; but it will be much sadder
to suffer, and to feel it. And be not deceived, it is not the less Certain,
because it is yet Future. You are now alive, and do not see the Grave dug
for you, and yet you must die: And as certainly do I know from the Word of God,
who cannot lie, That except you Repent, you must Perish, and that for ever.

THE END.
Books Printed for Abraham Chandler in Aldersgate Street.
THE Mourner's Companion, or Funeral-Discourses on several Texts.

Death a Deliverance; In a Funeral-Discourse preached in part on the Decease of
Mrs. Mary Doolittle, late Wife of Mr. Thomas Doolittle, Minister of the Gospel.

Sacramental Discourses on several Texts, Before and After the Lord's Supper;
Together with a Paraphrase on the Lord's Prayer.

All three by Mr. John Shower.

Books Printed for John Salusbury at the Rising Sun in Cornhill.
THE Harmony of the Divine Attributes in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. By William Bates D. D.

The Changeableness of this World with respect to Nations, Families, and
particular Persons: With a practical Application thereof to the various
Conditions of this mortal Life. By Timothy Rogers M. A.

A Mirror for Atheists; being some Passages of the Life and Death of the Right
Honorable John Earl of Rochester; written by his own Direction on his
Deathbed. By Gilbert Burnet, Lord Bishop of Sarum.

An End of Doctrinal Controversies which have lately troubled the Churches. By
Richard Baxter.

The Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits, fully evinced by unquestionable
Histories of Apparitions and Witchcrafts, Voices, etc. proving the Immortality
of Souls. By Richard Baxter.

The Protestant Religion truly stated and justified, by the late Reverend Mr.
Richard Baxter; prepared for the Press some time before his Death. Whereunto is
added some Account of the learned Author; by Mr. Daniel Williams, and Mr.
Matthew Sylvester.

The Christian's Converse with God, or the Insufficiency of humane Friendship,
and the Improvements of Solitude in Converse with God; with some of the
Author's Breathings after him. By Richard Baxter. Recommended to the Reader's
serious Thoughts when at the House of Mourning, and in Retirement. By Mr.
Matthew Sylvester.

The Mourner's Memorial, in two Sermons on the Death of the truly pious Mrs.
Susanna Soame: With some Account of her Life and Death, by Timothy Wright and
Robert Fleming.

The whole Works of Isaac Ambrose. Fol.


