A Funeral Sermon, PREACHED Upon the DEATH of The Reverend Mr. Nathaniel
Oldfield: Who Deceased December. 31. 1696. Aetat. 32. With some Account of his
Exemplary Character.

By JOHN SHOWER.

LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey.
1697.

TO His Worthy Friend and Brother, Mr. Joshua Oldfield.
SIR,
THE Honor which it pleased God to bestow on Your Deceased Brother, to be so
much a Blessing, and Beloved, while Living, ought to qualify your Sorrow for
his Death; and make you the more softly to lament your Loss therein. If the
reading of this Sermon do any way renew your Grief, you must thank your self,
and those who joined with you, in desiring to have it published.

'TWAS his Serious Godliness, that made him so valuable, and in some respects,
You and I are more obliged than others, to Follow his Faith, or Christian
Piety; (in * 2 Timothy I. 5. Chap. IV. 6.
that sense you know the word is sometimes used.) The Integrity of his Heart
toward God, joined with a true Zeal for his Glory, qualified him for great
Service as a Minister.

WILL you suffer me to mind my Self and You, (who I am persuaded, need it less
than I do) that it was his solicitous Care and Concern about the Salvation of
his own Soul, that made him so Diligent and Successful for the Souls of
others. He had very much Help herein, by the frequent and Attentive Perusal of
the close Warnings and Directions given Ministers in * Mr. B's. Gildas
Selvianus, The Reformed Pastor (...). Chap. 1.. 9. Chap. V.. 5, 6, 7, etc.
The Reformed Pastor, To take heed, lest we be Preachers and no Christians,
dedicated to the Altar as God's Priests, and not sanctified by dedication to
Christ as his Disciples, and so worship an unknown God, and preach an unknown
Savior, an unknown Spirit, an unknown state of Holiness, and Communion with
God, and a Glory that is unknown, and like to he unknown for ever. -- If we
soundly believe, and are affected with the Truth we study and preach, we shall
preach it more heartily. Experience will direct us to the fittest Subjects, and
furnish us with Matter, and quicken us to set it home. Whereas he is like to be
but an Heartless Preacher, who is a Stranger to that Christ and Grace, he
preaches of to others. And so if he do not first preach to himself, what he
teaches them; for if our own Hearts be cold, our Preaching will be so: And if
we have but an affected Fervency, we cannot expect a Blessing should attend it.

THERE are many Passages in that Book of the like Tendency, which we can hardly
read without Fear and Trembling; some of 'em, as I remember, he owned did most
deeply affect his Soul, and I have sometimes thought, they had some good
impression on mine. I desire to be more under the Awe and Influence of such
Considerations. It may be the Recital of a few more of 'em, may be of use to
some of the Younger Ministers; though I know your Character so well, that I do
not add them for your sake, but my own, and others. As Face answers to Face in
a Glass, so does the Heart of Man one to another: What was of use to him and
me, may reach more.

HOW many have preached Christ, and perished for want of a saving Interest in
him? Many may be now in Hell, who have told their Hearers of the Torments of
Hell, and warned them to avoid it. Who have preached of the Wrath of God
against sinners, and are now feeling of it. O what sadder Case can there be in
the World, than for a Man whose Business and Calling it was to proclaim
Salvation, and help others to obtain it, yet after all, himself to be shut out!
That we should have so many Books in our Libraries, that tell us the way to
Heaven, that we should spend so much time in reading those Books, and studying
the Doctrine of Eternal Life, and after all to miss of it! That we should
preach so many Sermons of Eternal Salvation, and yet fall short of it: And this
because we preached of Christ, but neglected him; of the Spirit, but resisted
him; of Faith, but did not heartily believe; of Repentance and Conversion, but
continued in a state of Sin; of an Heavenly Heart and Life, but remained Carnal
and Earthly our selves. Do we not know, that God is no Respecter of Persons,
and that an Holy Calling will never save an Unholy Man? That the Preachers of
the Gospel, must be judged by the Gospel; stand at the same Bar, be sentenced
on the same Terms, and dealt with as severely as other Men? -- It is a fearful
thing to be an unsanctified Professor, but much more so to be an Unholy
Preacher. When we open our Bibles, should we not tremble, lest we read our own
Condemnation? When we pen our Sermons, little do we think we are drawing up
Indictments against our own Souls: When we are arguing against sin, that we are
but aggravating our own: When we magnify the Riches of Christ, and his Grace,
and declare it to others, we publish our own Iniquity in rejecting him, and our
own Misery in being Strangers to him. O Miserable Life! that a Man should
study, and preach from year to year against himself, and spend his days in a
Course of Self-condemning. -- What aggravated Misery will it be, to perish in
the midst of Plenty, to famish with the Bread of Life in our Hands, while we
offer it to others, and urge them to receive it, but we our selves will not:

NEXT to His Piety, or as a part of it, his Peaceableness and Charity, in
opposition to Bitterness, and Dividing Zeal, and a Narrow Spirit, was very
Commendable and Exemplary. He could unite with all Christians in Things
Necessary, and was not for making more Fundamentals and Necessaries than Christ
has made; or for other Terms of Church Communion, than the Terms of our Common
Christianity: And therefore was ready to receive All, whom he believed Christ
would receive. He was of one Church with All those, whom he hoped to meet in
Heaven. Endeavoring to hold the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace,
because he acknowledged that there is but One Body, one Spirit, one Lord Jesus
Christ, one Hope, one Faith, one Baptism, (and consequently but one Holy
Table,) one God and Father of all, from whom, and by whom, and for whom are all
Things.

IT IS from this Principle, as esteeming the Piety, Learning, and Usefulness of
Men of all Persuasions, that I cannot be unaffected at the Death of the
Reverend Dr. Horneck, of the Savoy, this Week: His Devotion, Zeal and Diligence
in Preaching, Writing, and otherways endeavoring to do good to the Souls of
Men, makes him to be deservedly and generally lamented; though I had no
particular Acquaintance with him, I reckon my self bound to value and love
every Man, who endeavors to promote Reformation, and Practical Religion, and
spends his Time, as he did, to help to make the World better. I Rejoice in the
Gifts, and Graces, and Success of All the Servants of Christ, of whatever Name
or Denomination. Yea, I will Esteem and Love Them, whether they will Own and
Love me or no.

THIS Charitable Spirit, (let who will call such Moderation Lukewarmness,) with
serious Diligence to please God, and do what Service we can in our Several
Places, will be accepted with God, and yield us Comfort, living and dying. And
will, I doubt not, be better thought of hereafter, when the little Names of
Distinction and Matters of Dispute, that now divide Christians and Protestants,
shall be forgotten. As to all the Opinions and Censures of Men, while we
endeavor to do our Duty, we ought to be firmly persuaded, that every Man's
Reputation and Credit, is as much at the Disposal of God, and under the Conduct
of his Providence, as his Estate or Health, or Life; and accordingly we ought
to trust him.

SIR, By what I already know of you, I do not question your Agreement with me
in these things. I hope I shall know you better, by a nearer and more intimate
Acquaintance, if it shall please God to Direct and Guide you, to comply with
the Invitation you have (by a unanimous and speedy Choice) to succeeed your
Brother. However that may be, I beg of God to sanctify this Providence to you,
to the Congregation, and to all his surviving Friends and Acquaintance: May I
have Wisdom, duly to improve it! I am

SIR, London, Febr. 3d. 1696/7. Your Affectionate Brother and Servant, John
Shower.

Advertisement.
THere will be speedily Published a Funeral Sermon, on the Death of Mr. T.
Heasy, an Hopeful Student, Aged 19. With Serious Counsel to Young Students, and
Candidates for the Ministry, etc. And some Meditations on Several Subjects,
Collected out of the Papers he left.

By J. S.

BOOKS Written by the same Author, and Sold by John Lawrence, at the Angel in
the Poultrey.
WInter Meditations: Or a Sermon concerning Frost, and Snow, and Winds, etc.
and the Wonders of God therein. 4to.

A Thanksgiving Sermon. April the 16th. 1696. 4to.

An Account of the Life of Mr. Henry Gearing. 12o.

A Discourse of Tempting Christ. 12o.

A Discourse of Family Religion, in three Letters. 12o.

A Funeral Sermon.
HEB. 13.7. Remember them who have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you
the Word of God; whose Faith follow, considering the End of their Conversation.


THE Suitableness of this Passage to the present Solemnity, and to the Mournful
Occasion of it, is sufficiently apparent. The Direction here given, concerning
the Peoples Duty, with respect to their Ministers, is entire, and may be
understood without examining the Context. One would think it very easy to
determine, of what Ministers the Apostle speaks, whether such as were yet
alive, or such as were dead; did not our Translation favor their Opinion, who
would make the Original Word a Participle, rather than a Substantive, ((...);)
contrary to the more general Sense of most Learned Interpreters and Critics,
who read the Words thus, Be mindful of your Guides, or Rulers, and remember
them who have had the Rule over you; i. e. who have been, and were your
Spiritual Guides. That it is of these he speaks, is manifest by what follows;
Who have spoken to you the Word of God; or have been your Instructors in the
Faith; and who have kept the Faith, and finished their Course: For he advises
them to follow their Faith, and to consider the happy End and Exit of their
Conversation.

AS to the Duties unto Deceased Ministers here mentioned, it cannot be denied,
but they are applicable in part to other Good Men, departed this Life: For when
private Christians dye in the Lord, we are not to forget them, and are obliged
to imitate their Faith and Patience; and to that end, to consider their
Conversation in this World, and how they got safe into another. But the Apostle
speaks here of their Pastors and Teachers, the Ministers of the Gospel, and
such of their Spiritual Guides as were departed this Life. With respect to
these, we have two things to consider. First, The Account that he gives of
them, as to their Persons. Secondly, The Duty of surviving Christians toward
them, after their Death.

1. FIRST, As to their Persons, the Apostle gives us an account of them in four
Things. 1. As to their Name, They are Guides and Rulers, (...). 2. They have
spoken to you the Word of God, have been Preachers of the Everlasting Gospel.
3. He testifies their Exemplary Faith, proposing them as Patterns. 4. Their
Constancy and Perseverance in Faith and Holiness to the last; Considering the
End of their Conversation.

2. HAVING thus described their Persons, he mentions three Duties toward them.
1. To Remember them. 2. To Follow their Faith. 3. As a Motive and a Means
thereto, to Consider their Conversation, and the happy End of it; Remember them
who have had, etc. I shall first explain these several Particulars in the Text,
in the order mentioned; and then Apply my Discourse to the Solemn Occasion of
this Assembly, viz. the Breach which God has made amongst you, by the Death of
my Reverend and worthy Brother.

1. FIRST, As to the Persons here described: They are called Rulers and Guides,
for so the Original Word imports; such as have the Guidance and Instruction of
others, by Authority or Office. It is sometimes used for Civil Rulers,
sometimes for Ecclesiastical; and for the General of an Army, for the Captain
of a Regiment, for the Governor of a Town, and sometimes for a Principal
Person amongst others, Acts 15.22.

THE Sacred Writers make use of this Word, for such as were established to feed
the Flock of Christ, and had the Over sight of Particular Churches, so Ver. 17.
Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch
for your Souls, as they that must give an account; the like 24. ver. Salute all
them that have the Rule over you, and all the Saints; it is doubted, whether St.
James, who was Bishop of Jerusalem, was then alive; and more, whether the
Apostle directs this Epistle to all the Churches in Judea, or only to the
Converted Jews in Jerusalem. I shall not go about to decide it. It Is plain,
that these Rulers, these Warchmen are the same, who in the Text had spoken the
Word of God, or preached the Gospel.

TO this purpose we find that Clemens Romanus, who is the most Ancient Writer
of the Christian Church, next the Apostles, (the same Clemens who is mentioned
by the Apostle himself, Phil. 4.3.) in his Epistle to the Corinthians, uses
this very word very frequently for * (...), p. 2. (...), p. 30. (...), Ib. p.
73. St. Clemens Romans Epist. 1. ad Corinth. 4to. Edit. Patr. Junij Oxon. 1633.
Gospel Ministers, Bishops, such as preached the Word of God, and were over 'em
in the Lord, and several of them in one Church, making use sometimes of the one
Name, sometimes of the other,

OUR Blessed Savior is called the Head, the Husband, the Shepherd, the Lord of
his Church, which imports Authority; and the Church is his Body, his Spouse,
his Flock, his Family and Household; and his Ministers are called Rulers of his
Household, Mat. 24.45. When he was about to leave the World, he declared that
all Power in Heaven and Earth was committed to him, and commissioned his
Apostles to make Disciples by baptizing and teaching, promising his presence
with them therein to the end of the World: And when he ascended up on high, he
gave Gifts to Men, as part of his Dowry, not only Prophets, and Apostles, and
Evangelists, who were empowered by Miracles as a Divine Attestation, to prove
their Authority to reveal and publish the Rule of Faith and Life, but Pastors
and Teachers, to open and apply the Rule they sealed and delivered.

HE has determined in his Word, that every Church should have a Pastor, one or
more; he has stated the Nature of the Ministerial Office and Power, to
proclaim Repentance and Remission of Sins, to turn Men from the power of Satan
to God, to edify the Body of Christ, and to gather, feed and govern the
Churches of Christ, to rule as well as teach the Flock, to judge who should be
publicly taken into the Church by Baptism, or cast out; to rebuke those that
are disorderly, and see that all things be done to the Edification of the
Church, to bind over the impenitent, who are contumacious, to the Bar of
Christ, and reject 'em from the Communion of the Church, and to absolve the
penitent, and comfort 'em, and by themselves, or others, to look after the
Poor, and visit the Sick, etc. He has described the Persons that he would have
to be such Officers, by their requisite Qualifications; he did not appoint a
necessary Work to be done, and leave it to the wide World who should do it: And
that will help to determine, who are the individual Persons, that are fittest
according to Christ's Description.

I DISPUTE not, whether there has not been, and ought not to be, a distinction
of Powers and Persons in Ecclesiastical Government, or whether an absolute
Equality must not necessarily be attended with very ill consequences; or
whether Ministers do not need Order, and Rule, and Government among themselves,
as well as every other Company and Society of Men in the World. But that which
I argue from this Text, is this, That they who preach the Gospel, are to Guide,
Oversee and Rule their own Flock, according to the Holy Scripture.

THEY are the Servants of Christ in his Work, and your Servants for Jesus sake.
They pretend not to Dominion over your Faith, or to be Lords or Owners of the
Flock, but to be Helpers of your Joy; by their care the Sheep are to be sed,
guided, preserved, healed and brought home. They are Rulers over Christ's
Household, but not by secular Force and Rigor, not to compel Men to the Faith
and Obedience of the Gospel, otherwise than by Truth and Love, by Instruction
and Persuasion, and declaring the Mind of Christ in his Word. You are not to
obey Ministers as Civil Magistrates, that rule by the Sword, but thankfully
receive the Truths they teach, and the Mercies they offer. Our Weapons in the
Christian Warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual, to Edification, not
destruction, not coercive, but ministerial: We are to instruct and warn, to
reprove and exhort with Faithfulness and Seriousness, in the Name of Christ,
and with his Authority, which as it is another thing from the Power of a * See
Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase and Annotations on 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. Acts 11.30. Acts
20.28. Heb. 12.7, 17. 1 Timothy 1.17. 1 These. 5.12. Tit. 3.10. 1 Cor. 12.28, etc.
Magistrate, so by virtue of the Order and Institution of Christ, it is very
different from the private Counsel and Admonitions of one Friend to another.
The same works are not done with the same Authority, Efficacy, Certainty or
Order, by a private hand, as by public Officers. For in this case you are
obliged to Submit your selves in the Lord, to whatever is made known to you to
be according to the Will of God, revealed in his Word. It Is true, if we exceed
our Commission, you are not to receive us, but if we keep to the Words of
Christ, he that despises our Message, Despises not Man, but God. You know how
earnestly the Apostle admonishes to this purpose, 1 These. 5.12, 13. We beseech
you, Brethren, to mind them who labor amongst you, and preside over you,
(...), in the Lord; i. e. in the things of the Lord, and according to his
Order; and that admonish you, and to esteem them more than exceedingly, (...),
in love, for their Work or Office sake: And let the Elders who rule well,
(...), be counted worthy of double Honor, or Recompense, as the Original Word
often signifies, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18.

I MAY be blamed by some, for saying thus much; but there are certain Seasons,
when it is expedient (at least not unfit) for a Man to praise the Country or
the Family to which he belongs, or the Society to which he is related: And
therefore I here take the Liberty to Magnify mine Office, though I should become
a Fool in glorying, 2 Cor. 12.11. As to the Institution, Commission, and
Authority of the Ministry, it is not of Men, or by Man, but by Jesus Christ,
and God the Father, who raised him from the dead, Gal. 1.1. they received their
Ministry from the Lord, Col. 4.17. he makes 'em Oversers, Acts 20.28. Timothy
is called the Servant of the Lord, 2 Timothy 2.24. Ministers by their Office are
as it were his Menial Servants, that approach nearer to his Person than others,
and are employed in his particular Business. They are Stewards over the House
and Family of God, Tit. 1.7. Luke 12.42. which is no mean station. They are
called Presidents, Guides, Rulers, Shepherds, Planters, Husbandmen, Pastors,
Ambassadors for Christ, and the Glory of Christ, and the Ministers of his
Spiritual Kingdom, Angels of the Churches, Builders of his Church, etc. By
Baptism to initiate Disciples unto Christ, and by the other Sacrament to
confirm them, to feed 'em with the sincere Milk of the Word, to intercede for
them in Prayer, to bless them in the Name of Christ, to convey his Messages,
Instructions, Counsels and Comforts to 'em, which without his Institution and
Appointment they could no more do, than a Messenger can carry a Pardon to a
condemned Person, which his Prince never sent. No man takes the Honor to
himself, but he that is called of God.

2. THEY are described to be such as have spoken unto you the Word of God. To
feed the Flock, by sound Doctrine. Serious Study of the Holy Scriptures, and
diligent Preaching of the Word, is no little part of the Business of a
Gospel-Minister. Simon Peter, love thou me? Feed my Sheep, feed my Lambs. As
Stewards of the Household, they are to provide for the Family; as Shepherds, to
feed by Teaching. And it is in great Wisdom and Mercy to the Souls of Men, that
our Blessed Lord has appointed some Persons on purpose to devote themselves to
this Work; that they may be able to instruct the Ignorant, and establish the
Wavering, and comsort the Sad, and recover the Backslider; to awaken, warn,
convince and encourage Others in the Christian Warfare. And whatever some
pretend, that there is no such need of Preaching now, as there was in the
Infancy of the Church; yet in all Ages, this is the ordinary Means, which God
has appointed, and is wont to bless, for the Conversion and Salvation of
Souls, 1 Cor. 1.21. It pleases God now, as well as formerly, by the
foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe. And it is the Commission of
our Savior for the Ministerial Office, that they Preach the Gospel to every
Creature. And this, not only to plant a Church, but to carry on its growth; it
is for the perfecting of the Saints, and for the edifying of the Body of
Christ. The Ministry of the Gospel may be needful to Converts, and Believers,
and real Saints, and is so, there being something still lacking to their Faith
and Comfort. And they had need to be put always in Remembrance of the things
they do know, that they may be rooted and established in the Truth, 1 Pet. 2.12.

IT is wonderful to Observe, how our Savior rather chose to Convert Men by the
Preaching and Miracles of his Apostles, than by his own; how he would not fully
convert Paul without the Ministry of Annanias, though he spoke to him from Heaven
himself, and reasoned with him against his Persecution; how he would not fully
convert Cornelius and his Household, without the Ministry of Peter, though he sent
an Angel to direct him to a Teacher, nor would he convert the Ethiopian Eunuch,
without the Ministry of Phillip; nor the Jailer without the Ministry of Paul
and Silas, though he wrought a Miracle to prepare for his Conversion. Our Lord
knew the Necessity that the Infants of his Family had of such Nurses, and he
will keep up the Honor of his own Officers, whom he has appointed for such an
End and Use.

HOW much the Welfare of the Church depends upon the Ministers and Teachers of
the Word, and how little the Beauty and Glory of Religion can ever be kept up
in the World, if Ministers do not labor in the Word and Doctrine, will very
easily appear, to such as consider, how Religion has declined and been lost, by
the Ignorance, and Unfaithfulness, and Negligence of those that ought to have
Preached the Gospel of Christ: And how the Denial or Contempt of the Ministry
has always been accompanied with the growth of Atheism, Infidelity, and
Profaneness. How solemnly does the Apostle charge the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus, Acts 20.28, 30. Take heed unto your selves, and to all the Flock, over
which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God which
he has purchased with his own Blood, and to warn every man, lest they be
perverted by false Teachers, etc. And how expressly to the like purpose, are
they required to labor with their utmost strength in this Work, 1 Timothy 1.17. 1
Cor. 16.16. 1 These. 5.12. They are To give themselves continually to Prayer,
and the Ministry of the Word, Acts 6.4.

AND how needful is it that they should do so, who are to unfold the Mind of
God to others; to teach them what they must know, believe and do, avoid, and
hope for; who have so many difficulties to explain, and so often need the
Tongue of the Learned, and a good share of Prudence, to speak a Word in Season:
To acquaint their Hearers with their several Maladies and Remedies, Dangers and
Duties, to hold forth the Excellency of Christ, so as to make him received and
obeyed, admired and loved; and to be diligent in such Work in season, and out
of season; managing all, as under an Awe of God, and with sincere Compassion
and Love to Souls.

SUPPOSING the Word of God here to be the Written Word, I need not enquire
curiously, how much of Divine Revelation, or the Written Word, was then extant,
when the Apostle wrote this Epistle, (which is thought to be about the fifty
seventh, or fifty eighth year of our Blessed Lord, while he was a Prisoner at
Rome, and toward the end of his first Imprisonment there.) All the New
Testament seems to be then written, save the Epistles of St. John, and his
Revelations, and the Second Epistle of St. Peter. It Is certain, that the whole
Word of God in the Holy Scriptures, is to be explained, and applied by
Preaching, and that this is a principal part of a Ministers Work. They
therefore who pretend to the Ministerial Office, according to the order of
Christ, and yet either despise, or neglect the Preaching of the Word, one would
think, either do not understand their Office, or are not faithful to it.

3. ANOTHER Thing concerning these Deceased Ministers the Apostle mentions, is,
their Exemplary Faith. They would not have been proposed as Patterns, with
respect to Faith, if they had not been Famous and Exemplary, as to the
Clearness of their Minds, and the Soundness of their Doctrine. Follow their
Faith. Doubtless he means it of such, who as to Knowledge, and firmness of
Persuasion, concerning the Truths of the Gospel, and fruitfulness in suitable
Effects, did in Spirit and Practice, show themselves Believers. They would not
otherwise have been named, as fit Examples for the People to follow, as to
their Faith. You find Ministers are exhorted to Take heed to their Doctrine, 1 Timothy IV. 16. and to continue therein, that they May save themselves, and them
that hear them, and to speak the things that become sound Doctrine, 1 Timothy VI.
3. They are to keep the Doctrine of the Gospel pure and incorrupt, and to feed
the People with the sincere Milk of the Word. For if the Doctrine, which should
promote Faith and Holiness, should be depraved by the Ministers of the Word,
how is it possible that true Christianity should spread and flourish, or be
preserved and continued? What need have we to beg, that God would give and
continue such Pastors after his own Heart, as may feed his People with Good
Knowledge and Sound Understanding. They must hold fast the faithful Word that
they have been taught, that they may be able, by sound Doctrine to exhort, and
convince Gainsayers, Tit. 1.6, 9. Chap. 2.1. Such Speech that cannot be
condemned, that he who is of the contrary party may be ashamed. And how
comfortably and usefully may they preach to others, who are firmly persuaded of
the Truth of what they say; who believe and live the Truths they deliver? This
is a great help to Ministers in their Work, and a great Advantage in order to
Success.

THESE here, whose Faith is mentioned, were also Exemplary in all the Fruits of
Faith: They lived up to the Doctrine they preached, and therein others are
exhorted to follow them. They represented in a Holy Life, the Doctrine they
taught, and so glorified him, in whose Name they dispensed it. By Humility and
Meekness, Moderation and Self-denial, Zeal for the Glory of God, Mortification
of Corrupt Affections, Contempt of the World, Readiness for the Cross,
Condescension and Patience toward All, Heavenly-mindedness, etc. In all
things, Ministers should show themselves Patterns of good works, and be
Examples unto Believers in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in
Faith, in Purity, Tit. II. 2, 7. 1 Timothy IV. 12.

THIS is the most likely Method to have Success: For though it may now and then
possibly fall out, that the Seed of Divine Truth, * Dr. Spurstow's Medit. on a
Debauched Minister Medit. XX. 8vo.
like Corn sown by a Leprous Hand, may grow up into some fruit; yet how small
is the Good, that is wrought by his Doctrine, in comparison of the great Hurt
that is done by the dissolute Life of such a Minister? Is it likely, that he,
that in the Pulpit pleads for Honor unto the Person of Christ, for Obedience
to his Commands, and Faith to be exercised in his Promises, and when he is out
of it, contradicts all that he has said, by a sensual practice; is it likely
he should ever win many Disciples to Christ? Will Men ever hearken to such, who
decry Drunkenness, and Wantonness, and Covetousness, etc. as the way to
Destruction, and yet turn not their own feet from walking therein? will they
not say, Physician, heal thy self? or thou Hypocrite, First cast the Beam out
of thine own Eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the Mote that is
in thy Brothers Eye.

HOW can He be a Pattern to Believers, in those Graces he is a Stranger to? How
can he kindle Heavenly Affections in the Souls of others, when he feels nothing
himself? How can he speak of Divine Truth, according to the Excellency, and
Necessity, and Importance of it, if he does not believe, and live, and obey it
himself? We may as well think, that a Heretic may teach you the Truth, as well
as the Orthodox; and a Schismatic teach you Unity and Peace, as well as a
Catholic Peaceable Pastor; or a Man ignorant of Regeneration, and the Grace of
God, may teach you that which he knows not himself; or an Enemy to Piety and
Charity, teach you to be Pious and Charitable, as well as any other. The voice
of Jacob will do little good, if the Hands be the Hands of Esau. They that are
unholy, and unexperienced as to real Godliness, they have a secret Enmity in
their Hearts against that Holiness, which they should daily preach, which is a
Clog at their Feet, and a Gag in their Mouths, as to some Truths and Duties.
They will some way or other harden, and embolden others in their Sins, as well
as make themselves, and the Offering of the Lord contemptable, by showing, that
they do not believe what they say. How can you think they should lead you in
the way of Holiness, who never walked i^ (...) themselves? or guide you to
(...), and conduct you in the Chri^^^^^Warfare, who are Servants of the World,
the Devil, and the Flesh, against whom they must Exhort you to Fight.

HOW dreadful will be the Account and Portion of such Evil Stewards, and
Unfaithful Guides, who preach to others, and yet perish! As the Men that were
employed to build the Ark of Noah, yet were not saved in it. He that wins
Souls is wise; but it is he only, that shall do, as well as teach the
Commandments, who shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven, or ever come
there. The Judge himself has told us, that many in his Name may have
prophesied, and preached, and cast out Devils, and yet shall be disclaimed, as
Workers of Iniquity. And it is certainly more easy to make ten good Sermons,
than to practice one; and to expose and declaim against all Sins, than to
relinquish any.

HOW terrible is that known passage of Chrysostom, with relation to this?
Saying, That he is persuaded, that very few of those who are entrusted with the
Gospel, and Care of Souls, are likely to be Saved; and that he apprehends the
far greater part will be damned. For this Work, says he, requires a Soul more
than ordinary; He had need have a thousand Eyes in his Head, and have them all
awake, etc. How severe are the Psalmists Words, and how upbraiding of Ungodly
Ministers, Psalm. 50.16, 17. What have thou to do, to declare my Statutes, or
that thou should take my Covenant into thy Mouth? seeing thou hate
Instruction, and castest my Words behind thee. How must such a Man be
confounded in Preaching against his own Sins, and pronouncing Damnation against
himself? And with how little Success can he pray for the People of his Charge,
when he himself is not reconciled to God. S^^ for the Elders of the Church,
when sick, says the Apostle, and the Prayer of Faith shall save the Sick, but
it is the servent Prayer of a Righteous Man, James V. 14, 15.

4. HE mentions their Constancy and Perseverance in Faith and Holiness, 'till
the happy End, and Exit of their Conversation. And this he exhorts them to
Consider, to review, to reflect upon; and that not transiently, but with deep
Attention; not once only, but again and again. To consider what their Carriage
and Deportment has been in public, and in private; what was their Behavior
in every Relation and Condition, as keeping a good Conscience, both toward God
and Man; and this not for a start, for a little while, for a few Years only,
and then drew back or turned afide: But consider The End of their Conversation.
How they finished their Course with Joy. Their Beginning, and Progress was
commendable, and their latter End was answerably good and safe, desirable and
happy, either by a natural death, in the Peace of God, or with the Crown of
Martyrdom by a violent one.

I SHALL not need to enquire, how far the Apostle may here refer to the Death
of the first Martyr Stephen, and of James the Son of Zebbedee, who both
exercised their Ministty at Jerusalem, and suffered Martyrdom there, as it is
thought did the other James, the Brother of our Lord, several years before the
date of this Epistle to the Hebrews.

II. LET us consider what is the Peoples Duty to such their Deceased Ministers
and Pastors. It is threefold. 1. To Remember them. 2. To Imitate them in Faith
and Holiness. 3. In order to this, to Consider seriously, and often their
Conversation, and the happy End of it.

1. REMEMBER your Spiritual Guides, who have had the Instruction and Conduct of
your Souls, and faithfully discharged their Office. Remember them, so as to be
thankful to God for their Gifts and Graces, and for all the Flelp and
Assistance, you had by their Doctrioe and Example, while they lived, and for
all the Goodness and Grace of God toward them, in enabling them to do or
suffer his Will, with their Supports, Perseverance, Assistances,
Encouragements, and Victory. Remember them, so as to bewail your Loss, and lay
to Heart their Removal. Remember how much more you ought to have valued their
Ministry, and how much better you might have improved it; (the very thoughts of
what you would do, if God would again have tried you in that kind, might herein
be your Help.) Remember what Counsels, what Warnings and Reproofs, what
Encouragements and Consolations, you have ever had by their means. Remember
with what an Awe of god they were wont to Pray, with what a Zeal for Christ,
and Love to Souls, they did use to Preach; with what humble Condescension,
Meekness and Charity, and unblameable Conversation, they lived in this World.

REMEMBER them in your Thoughts and Affections, and in your Words and Actions;
so as on all fit Occasions to express your Love to their Memory. Be ready to
show that you do not forget them, by your continued Respects and Kindness to
the Living, for the sake of the Dead: I mean, the many despised Widows, and
Fatherless Children of Worthy Ministers. Think often of them, how God honored
them, to bring many Souls to Christ, and to build up Others: How successfully
they managed, and comfortably finished their Work. Think what, and where they
now are, what they are delivered from, what they enjoy, how they are employed,
etc. Don't be afraid to think often of your Deceased Ministers, and Friends:
It Is a plain Duty, and a help to many Duties, to have our Conversation in
Heaven with Christ, and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect. To think of our
Holy Relations and Acquaintance, and especially Ministers, who are got safe to
Heaven: It may assist and animate us, in our Spiritual Warfare. And much of the
Comfort of the Life of Faith depends upon it. They are part of the Family of
Christ, to which we are adjoined, if by Faith we are united to him, Heb. XII.
22, 23. We have no reason to believe, that they Forget us whom they have left
behind; and certainly there is none, why we should Forget them. Let us remember
them with Pleasure, Honor, and Love; and speak of them with Respect and
Gratitude.

CAN we think with Pleasure of such a Friend or Minister, of such an
Acquaintance or Relation, whom we tenderly love, that is many Miles distant
from us, here upon Earth; and shall we be unmindful of those who are in Heaven?
It should be a Complacential Thought, to consider, that such a Father or
Grandfather, such a Husband or Wife, such a Child or Brother of yours or mine,
are now with Christ, in the Bosom of his Love in glory. That such a Minister of
Christ, who was my Spiritual Father, or by whom I was edified, strengthened, or
comforted for many Years, has overcome, and is at Rest, has fought the good
Fight, and finished his Course. While we are following after, they have
attained: While we are in Tears and Conflicts, they are in Joy and Glory: While
we are waiting at the door, they are entered within the Vail. It Is our Duty to
Remember them. And,

2. TO Follow their Faith, that is, the Doctrine they preached, believed,
professed, and obeyed; or their found Doctrine, and Practical Godliness. Or
their Faith may be considered, as regarding Doctrines to be believed and
professed, Promises to be embraced and depended on, and Precepts to be obeyed.
Such a Faith, as realized the other World to them, and helped to crucify them
unto this. Such a Faith, as was the Evidence of things unseen, whereby they
were enabled to walk in Self-denial, Patience, and steadfast Obedience, 'till
they came to the End of their Faith and Hope. In short, we must follow them, as
holding the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience, and expressing the Power of
it in a fruitful Conversation.

YOU see, in what it is your Deceased and Holy Friends, and Ministers are to be
followed, it is in their Faith, and in the Principal Actings and Fruits of it,
so far as they kept The Example of Christ in their Eye, and followed him, for
no farther does the Apostle require it, 1 Cor. XI. 1. the Pattern of Christ is
proposed for Imitation in all Ages of the Church: We are no less obliged to it,
than the Apostle who prays for the Philippians, that the same Mind might be in
them, that was in Christ, Phil. 11.5. And therefore have we boldness in the day
of Judgment, says another Apostle, because We are in the World, as he was in
it, 1 John IV. 17.

OUR Lord is the only Infallible and Supreme Pattern, whom though we cannot
follow in his Miracles and Merits, and what was peculiar to him as Mediator;
yet has he set us an Example, that we should tread in his steps, in Obedience
to his Father, in Zeal for his Glory, in Submission to his Will, in Patience
under Suffering, etc. He gave us an Example of Subjection to Parents, Obedience
to Magistrates, Painfulness in Preaching, Frequency in praying, and in going up
and down the World doing good, in Forgiving Enemies, in Charity to all Men, etc.

AS to all other Examples, though there may be some things Imitable, there are
others, wherein we should be cautioned not to do the like; as in Noah and Lot,
David, and Solomon, etc. Even St. Peter was a Rock, and an Excellent Apostle;
but we should split upon that Rock, if we should follow him in all his ways: If
we follow him into the High Priests Hall, if we imitate him in making bold with
Temptation, instead of following Christ, we may be brought to deny him.
Therefore St. Paul expressly cautions us, how far we are to follow his Example,
Phil. IV. 8. Finally, my Brethren, whatsoever things are honest, just, pure,
lovely, of good report; if they have any virtue, any praise, think of these
things, which you have both learned and received, and heard, and seen in me, do
these things, and the God of peace shall be with you.

HOWEVER, granting the Life of Christ only be a perfect Copy, yet the good
Examples of our Brethren, and Fellow Christians, are a merciful Help, and
Assistance to us in the way to Heaven. We see by their Faith and Patience, that
our Duty is practicable. That they who dwelt in such Bodies as we, and were
surrounded with the like Temptations, and had as many Hindrances and
Difficulties, and no more, or better Assistance or Encouragement than we, have
yet been enabled to please and glorify God, and are got safe to Glory. We are
not the Forelorn Hope, not the first Assailors in the Spiritual Warfare, we are
not set in the Front of the Battle; many of our Fellow Christians have lived
and dyed in the Faith, have overcome the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, in
that very way, that we are called to do it.

MANY of our Fellow Soldiers have fought the Good Fight, gained the Victory,
and received the Crown. Their Example tells us, that the Difficulties and
Conflicts that we fear, are no other than they have experienced. They
complained as much we can, of inward Corruption, and outward Temptation; of an
unfaithful World, and a busy Devil, and a desperately wicked Heart; and yet by
the Grace of God they have Overcome. We have a Cloud of Witnesses, among our
particular Friends and Acquaintance, whom we have known and loved, whom we have
seen and heard, with whom we have conversed and discoursed: And it is a great
Encouragement, to consider we are to follow Them. For why should we be
disheartened, as if that were Impobssile to us, which the Grace of God has
enabled them to do and suffer?

IT IS one great Design of God's Gifts, and Graces to Some, that they may
instruct and edify Others. The path of the just in this sense, is a shining
Light: We are to Show forth the Word of Life in our Conversation, that we may
direct others in the way: And by our Zeal, we are to provoke many.

AND when the Precept is exemplified into Pattern, and the Commands of Christ
made legible in the Lives of Christians, we are the more encouraged to obey.
This has more Influence than mere Law, and naked Authority. We find that
Examples strangely affect us, and the Lives of Holy Persons, writ with Truth,
and Judgment, and Caution, have a singular Advantage to attract our Imitation.
When Charity and Humility, Self-denial and Patience, Piety and Devotion, are
characterized in the Practice and Actions of the Saints, they are written as it
were with Light, notwithstanding some mixture of Darkness, from Humane
Passions, and Failings, for which in all Men there must be Allowance. That Holy
Examples are apt to affect the Mind more deeply than Holy Laws alone, is
evident by the Malice of the Devil, and his Instruments against the Holy
Scriptures, exemplified in the Godly, more than against the Scriptures
themselves; they can better bear the Precepts of a perfect Rule, than the
imperfect practice of them in a Holy Life. They have burnt Martyrs, that could
endure good Books.

SUCH Examples may be of Use, both to Quicken and Enoourage us.

1. TO quicken and excite our Diligence, to this purpose the Apostle makes
mention of them, Chap. VI. 12. Be not sloathful, but be ye followers of them,
who by Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. To cure the Sloth and Laziness
of Christians, he says this, and to stir them up to Holy Diligence; with this
Encouragement in the following Words, that if they follow their Guides in their
Faith in Christ, they will find him an Unchangeable, never failing Savior: For
it is added, Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. i.e. He
will certainly receive, forgive, assist, preserve, and save them, as he did
their Deceased Guides. If we follow them, we shall find the same Comfort, and
meet with the same Reward.

HOW may the Temper, and Spirit, and Carriage, of such Exemplary Christians,
shame our Negligence? Their Humility and Zeal, their Gravity and Seriousness,
their continual Awe of God, and Apprehension of his Eve, their constant
Watchfulness over Hearts, Words and Actions, may be considered to humble and
shame us: When I think how diligently they improved their Talents, how
faithfully and fervently they attended their Work, how their Hearts were in it,
and how much they did in a little time, and how God was with 'em in abundant
Success, it should shame and quicken me. Do I pray, or preach, or live at that
rate of Seriousness, Integrity, Self-denial, and Devotedness to God, as they?
Durst they have indulged themselves, and pleased themselves, and allowed
themselves the Liberty which I take: Were they guilty of such Omissions and
Neglects as I am? Am not I more slight and formal, seldom and heartless in
Prayer, than they were wont to be, etc.

IF we have the same Spirit of Faith, with the Holy Persons, whose Examples we
read or hear of, these things will quicken and assist us, for so the Apostle
argues, 2 Cor. IV. 13. We having the same spirit of Faith, according as it is
written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken, we also believe, and
therefore speak. And if they do not move us, and excite us to follow them, in
their Faith and Obedience, it is a sign that we are not partakers of the same
Spirit.

2. NOT only as to Duty, but let us consider 'em for our Encouragement and
Comfort. Whatever Difficulties we may meet with in the Christian Race, the
Consideration of these Examples may encourage our Faith, and Patience, and
Perseverance. They found the Sweetness of Dependence upon God, and the Success
of a Life of Faith, and had gracious Answers to Prayer, and suitable Help in
every time of need: They could set to their Seal that God is true, and the
Scripture true; and never any Word of his, in which they regularly trusted, did
ever fail them. And is it no Encouragement, for us to be able to say, Lord, our
Fathers trusted in thee, and were delivered; they trusted in thee, and were not
ashamed; they cried to thee, and thou did answer them: They have told us what
thou did for them: How Good was God, and Faithful, how Wise and Gracious! The
Word of the Lord is tried, in six and in seven Troubles they found it true.

AND we that live in the latter Ages of the World, have a greater Cloud of
Witnesses than others; we have the Benefit of the Experience of all the Saints,
that have gone before us. They can tell us what they have found, of the false
Cavils, Slanders and Objections of Unbelief; of the Folly and Disingenuity of
our Carnal Fears, of the Fraud of the Devil's Suggestions, of the certain
Accomplishment of God's Promises, and a good Issue of all Events, if we wait on
the Lord and keep his Way.

AND as to many of them, we may observe, with what admirable Patience they
endured greater Trials, sharper Pains, and longer Exercises, without Murmuring,
and without Fainting, than ever yet we have known. How Diligent, Heavenly and
Fruitful were some of them, under less Advantages and Help than we? The
Examples of the Poor may shame many of the Rich: The Examples of some young
Converts, may shame Old Disciples: Religious Children may shame many Parents.
There are younger Brethren, by whom the Elder are outgone. Such who were
newborn but lately, who exceed them that were in Christ many years before.

HAD not they, whose Faith you are exhorted to follow, the like Temptations as
you meet with? Have not you the same Rule to walk by, the same Promises,
Assistances and Encouragements in the way to Heaven? Are your Wants to be
supplied, Diseases to be cured, Difficulties to be conquered, Burdens to be
endured, more, or greater, or other, than what they met with? And was not Death
the Passage to Glory, as to all of them, and sometimes by Lingering, Painful
Sickness, Antecedent to dying? Therefore you may, and should take Heart by
their Examples, and follow their Faith.

HOW you should do so, I will sum up in * See Mr. Baxter's Life of Faith, 4 to.
Chap. XXII. p. 585. And Mr. D. B's Christian Commemoration and Imitation of
Saints Deported. 120. 1691. Where these things are more fully expressed.
better Words than my own. Let us fix upon the same Ends, to Glorify God and
Enjoy him; let us choose the same Guide and Captain of our Salvation, let us
believe the same Gospel, and build upon the same Promises, let us obey and
trust to the same Spirit of Holiness and Comfort; let us live upon the same
Truths, and exercise the same Graces, and watch against the same Sins and
Corruptions; let us choose, prefer and use, the same Company, and other helps
and means of Grace, and under all the Trials and Temptations of this Life, act
the same Faith, and Patience, and Hope unto the End; and we shall finish our
Course as they did, and inherit the Promises as they do. In order whereto,

III. LET us consider the End of their Conversation. Be mindful of your
Deceased Ministers, that you may observe the happy End of their Conversation,
and so be assisted to follow their Faith. Their Conversation and Course of Life
was agreeable to their Faith, agreeable to the Doctrine they believed and
taught, and their End was answerable: They lived in the Faith, and they dyed in
the Faith, The End of their Conversations; an End attended with Victory and
Deliverance, the same Word that is used for Escape, 1 Cor. X. 13. Consider what
Difficulties they met with, and yet did overcome; their Faith did not fail,
their Hope did not perish, their Courage did not faint. They endured to the
End, and finished their Course, came off with Victory, and are got safe to
Everlasting Rest.

THE Consideration of this, their happy End, knowing what they were, and what
we are, should encourage us to Follow them. It ought to raise our Desires and
Hopes, fix our Resolutions, answer our Doubts, scatter our Fears, make Death
less formidable, and the thoughts of Heaven more familiar, and so excite and
forward our Preparations for it: That following their Faith, we may with them
at last receive the End of our Faith and Hope, the Salvation of our Souls.

I NOW come to the other Part of my Subject, to speak of Your Deceased Pastor.
Not that I design to give you the History of his Parentage, Birth and
Education, before he came to London, that is, before my Acquaintance with him,
or yours; but some Account of his Example, as a Christian, and as a Minister of
Christ; that being the more sensible of your Loss, you may take the more care
to improve it.

AND though I feel my self a real and hearty Mourner with you, as for one whom I
highly esteemed and loved, and had a great deal of Reason to do so; I shall yet
take care, that my Affection may not prompt me to say any thing concerning him,
that cannot be well attested, either by my own Knowledge, or by some of you who
now hear me: As knowing that I ought not to speak any thing that is not true,
of a dead Friend, any more than raise an Evil Report of a living Enemy. But I
speak to those, who knew his Doctrine and manner of Life, Purpose, Faith,
Patience, Love, Longsuffering and Charity.

1. HE was, (considered as a Christian) a lively Instance of inward Godliness
and Real Religion. He believed and practiced what he preached to others. He
lived in the firm Persuasion and Expectation of the Invisible, Everlasting
World, and in diligent Preparation of himself and others for it. Humility, the
Badge of our Relation to Christ, was his Clothing and Ornament, endeavoring
to approve himself to God, and to the Consciences of Men, as in the sight of
God, Not as pleasing Men, but God who sees the Heart, 2 Cor. X. 14, 15.

PRAYER was his Delight, Strength and Excellency. I have hardly heard of any
more abundant in Prayer, more Constant and Conscientious in it, with the like
Variety, and Fervor upon all Occasions. Besides what you had the Assistance of
in Public, in his Family and Closet every day, and also with his Wife, with
that Seriousness and Frequency, that 'twould be thought incredible, should I
name Particulars. And many times early in the morning before day, after the
Example of his Blessed Master, he wrestled with God in Secret Prayer. He tasted
the Sweetness, and reaped the Benefit of such Converse with God.

AT other times, the Thought of God, (and how often in a day did he think of
God!) and the very Name of God, was wont to strike him with a becoming A we and
Reverence. His whole Life was almost a Life of Prayer, which made his Face to
shine, and his Grace to thrive, and gained him so much of the Divine Presence
in his public Work, that sometimes you might manifestly discern that God was
with him. He never went about to compose nor preach a Sermon, without most
serious, earnest Prayer beforehand, with a particular Reference to that
Occasion. He gave himself continually to Prayer, as well as to the Ministry of
the Word. Acknowledging the most and best of his Knowledge and Learning he got
upon his Knees.

PRAISE and Thankfulness to God for all his Mercies, was a great part of his
daily Prayer, and made up much of his Religion. The Love of God, and the joyful
Praises of our Redeemer, were his constant and most hearty Service. They that
knew him best, can witness how much he delighted in Singing the Praises of God,
and how stated a part of Family Worship he made it every day.

THE Hely Scriptures were his continual, Delightful Study, as a Treasury of
Divine Wisdom and Knowledge. He despised all Books of other Learning, in
comparison of this: And next to the Bible, he most esteemed such Practical
Books, as Mr. R. and Jos. Allen's, and Mr. Corbet's Kingdom of God amongst Men,
etc.

THE Lord's Day was his Peculiar Delight, and the Solemn Worship of it the Joy
of his Soul: He was then and thereby revived, though he had been ill all the Week
before: And when confined to his Chamber, by Pain and Languishing Sickness, (so
as he could not attend the public Assemblies,) how would he lament, the slight
Sabbaths he thought he kept, and made Others keep? but could add, Thanks be to
God, it was otherwise formerly.

HIS Relative Religion in his Family, was most strictly Christian, and
Exemplary. His Affection to his Relations, evidenced in his Concern for their
Souls, and particular Recommendation of their Case to God, by Prayer, upon all
Occasions, aggravates their Loss in his Death, but will make his Memory
precious with them.

AS to his Carriage and Behavior abroad, he thought the Life of a Minister, in
some respects, was scandalous, if it were not Exemplary, and managed with
greater Strictness, than that of Ordinary Christians. What a Guard did he keep
upon the Door of his Lips! how watchful was he over his Words! how shie of
ordinary and common Conversation, upon this Account, because he could meet with
so little serious and profitable Discourse, even amongst Those, of whom it
might have been expected! With what Prudence and Faithfulness would he often
begin such Discourse, as became a Minister, and a Chtistian? suitable to the
Circumstances and Conditions of those he conversed with? And where there was
Occasion for it, with like Wisdom and Fidelity, would he admonish and reprove,
to the hazard, sometimes of losing their Friendship, whom otherwise he had
reason to value. But he knew, how to be severe against the Sin, and not
discredit and expose the Sinner; he knew how to search the Conscience, and yet
so far spare the person, as not to exasperate and provoke the Spirit.

WHEN some time since I visited, and prayed with him, (which I lament I did no
oftener,) enquiring concerning the State of his Soul, with Relation to God, and
the other World: Whether all were well and calm within; he told me, that
through the Grace of God, he could appeal to Him, concerning his Integrity;
that he hoped, He had found mercy to be Faithful. Through the whole of his long
Sickness, he had no Discouraging Fears, but a serious, steady Trust, and a
wellgrounded Hope in God, through the Merits of his Savior, without high and
full Assurance; which, he said, was not ordinarily to be expected here, where
Grace is so Imperfect. And yet sometimes he has experienced Extraordinary
Consolations. He has been sound alone, all in Tears; when upon Inquiry, what
it was that troubled him, and made him sad, he answered, he was very far from
Grief: It was not Sorrow that made him weep, it was from Abundance of Inward
Joy.

HE often prayed for more Faith and Patience, desiring that Patience might
continue, and have its perfect Work. And God granted it: For he had a calm,
composed Spirit, under very long languishing, and some painful Operations: He
submitted to the hand of God in all, without murmuring. And when every Body
about him seemed greatly concerned, he himself was not. Consider his Patience,
you that were Eyewitnesses of it; and Take my Brethren the Prophets, who have
spoken to you in the Name of the Lord, for an Example of suffering Affliction,
and of Patience.

HIS serious Piety, was crowned with an Extensive Charity. Besides his Charity
in Relieving the Poor, (in order to which he made Conscience, to lay aside a
fit Proportion, of whatever the Providence of God allowed him; and that as soon
as he received it, which he never after looked upon as his own:) Besides that
sort of Charity, he was in Principle and Practice, very Charitable, to those
from whom he differed in Opinion. He loved All Men, in whom he could discern
any thing of real Goodness. He did not confine the Church of Christ to a Party,
or endeavor to make Proselytes to Any: For he was of none, but that with all
Christians, for Christ, against the Devil.

HE did not think it the Excellency of Zeal, to go further than needs, from
those he did not fully agree with. He used the Lord's Prayer in Public, and
once a day in his Family, and thought he did his Duty therein. He had a Zeal
for Truth, but likewise for Piety and Peace, for Love and Good Works: He
remembered that his Master was the Prince of Peace, and his Message the Gospel
of Peace, that his Office was to be a Messenger of Peace, and that we are to
follow after Peace as well as Holiness, and that Blessed are the Peacemakers.
He was sensible how much the Interest of Real Religion is weakened, when the
Bond of Peace is broken; and that when we bite and devour one another, we are
in danger to be consumed one of another. He was therefore an Enemy to
Censorious Heats and Bitterness, and all such Narrow Principles as destroy
Love. He was of a truly Healing and Catholic Spirit. I wish he may be Imitated
in these things, by all who knew him.

I MENTION these Particulars, the rather, concerning his Personal Piety, to
confute the Cavils of those, who would run down all the younger Ministers in
gross, as more loose than their Predecessors. This is an Artifice of the Devil,
to hinder their Usefulness; but the Foundation of it, I am persuaded, is either
Mistake or Calumny. For what if one or two Candidates for the Ministry, be now
and then heard of, who are taken in the Snare of the Devil, and fall from
Hopeful Beginnings, so as to dishonor their Profession, or quit it; shall the
rest, who are Humble, Sober, Diligent, and Serious, be less esteemed? Was there
ever in any Age, any sort of Calling, or Profession of Men in the World,
whereof there may not be Some found, who are a Reproach and Blemish to the
rest? Would it not be very unjust, that Elder Ministers, who are Wise and
Learned, Upright and Exemplary, should lose the Reverence and Honor that is
due to them, if there should happen to be some Few of their Age and Standing,
who come short of such Qualifications? I do here most heartily thank God, and
Rejoice in Hope, as to the rising Generation, that I know many, (and hear of
more,) of the younger Ministers, who are well qualified for their Work, by
improving, growing Parts and Learning, and resolved Industry after more; with
deep Seriousness and Integrity toward God: And therefore will deserve the
Esteem and Encouragement of all that know them.

2. LET me now Consider him as a Minister of Christ. He was apt, and ready to
Teach, fit for Public Service, and Successful in it. How much did he answer
the Apostle's Character, To be Blameless, as a Steward of God, not self-willed,
not soon angry, not given to Wine, not Contentious, not given to filthy Luce; a
lover of Hospitality, a lover of good men; sober, just, holy, temperate,
holding fast the faithful Word, as he had been taught; able, by sound Doctrine,
to exhort, and to convince Gain sayers; making it his business to save himself,
and them that heard him, 1 Tit. VII. 8, 9. His Heart was in his Work, and he
wholly gave himself to it. He did not seek great things to himself: The Honor
of Christ, and the Salvation of Souls, was what he aimed at, and longed for,
and labored for.

AND such was his unwearied Diligence, in the well Improvement of his Time,
that he quickly grew Rich in all Spiritual Gists, by the Blessing of God on the
diligent hand: And from time to time he increased considerably. He found it
true, That to him that has, and uses well what he has, to him shall be
given, and he shall have more abundantly. He knew the Weight of the Ministerial
Work, to watch for the Flock, to strengthen the Weak, to confirm the Strong, to
satisfy the Doubtful, to resolve the Scrupulous, to answer Cases of
Conscience, etc. And who is sufficient for these things, without a great deal
of Industry, in hope of Divine Assistance? He knew the Difficulty of his Work,
to evidence Truth to the Conscience, to awaken Sinners to Repentance, and then
to manifest Christ the Redeemer, and Savior of Sinners; to Reprove some with
Meekness, and others with Sharpness; to pour Balm into Wounded Spirits, and to
speak a Word in season to the Wearied Soul; to difference the Sheep from the
Goats, the Precious from the Vile, etc. And to manage all this with a deep
sense of the Worth of Souls, and the inestimable Price wherewith they were
purchased, and the Aweful Account that he must hereafter give to the Great
Shepherd. The Consideration of these things, made him Diligent, and resolved,
and unwearied in what he undertook, so long as he was Able.

THOUGH he were as well able, as most, with very little Preparation, to speak
pertinently and usefully upon any Subject; yet he made Conscience, not to give
to God that which cost him nothing. He would not utter that in public, which
he had not considered, and digested, and prayed over. He durst not presume, in
the Name of Christ, to vent raw and indigested Notions, which he had not well
thought of; or to entertain his Hearers, with any loose and rambling Thoughts,
that came next into his Head.

AS to his Style, he was not for an affected Strain of Words; yet far from
taking any such Liberty, as argued Indiscretion, or exposed to Contempt. He
has given sufficient Proof, upon several Occasions, that he was Master of the
best Language, whenever he pleased to make use of it; but had the Wisdom, to
suit his Words, as well as Matter, so as might best answer the End, of doing
Good to those to whom he Preached.

YOU know very well, that Preaching was that part of his Work, wherein his
Heart was more especially engaged: And that he durst not speak to secure,
drowsy Sinners, concerning God and Christ, Heaven and Hell, in a cold and
careless manner. He knew the weightiest Matter, without lively Application to
enforce it, is but like Bullet without Powder. With what tender Affection,
would he invite Sinners to Christ? With what moving Expostulations, would he
address himself to all sorts? In fuitable Expressions to Young and Old! With
Clearness he would Open, and Apply the Doctrinal Articles of Religion, and, by
Catechizing, instruct the Ignorant. With Strength and variety of Arguments, he
enforced the Duties of Christian Practice. And how readily did he embrace all
Opportunities of doing good in this kind, to the utmost of his Strength, and
beyond it?

HE would often use the Expression of the Apostle, I am not sent to baptize,
comparatively, but to preach the Gospel, which is the Power of God to the
Salvation of the Soul. Not that he neglected the Administration of the
Sacraments: For, besides the Lord's Supper, which he administered every Month,
he had great Success in bringing many Adult Persons to be Baptized, in the
public Congregation, sometimes several in one day.

HE was careful to follow his Public Teaching, with Private Instruction and
Visits, especially of the Sick; so far as his Relation to so many, and bodily
weakness would permit. With Tenderness would he apply Comfort to the Mourners
in Sion. He was skilful in binding up the Broken in Heart. Many resorted to him
upon that Account. And with Compassion and Gentleness he would deal with
Offenders, in order to their Recovery. How earnestly did he desire, and seek,
the Peace, and Holiness of his People? His very Soul was grieved, if he heard
of any of them, walking disorderly. He could say, with the Apostle, I have you
in my heart, and God is witness, how greatly I long after you all, in the
Bowels of Jesus Christ, 1 Phil. 7.8.

YOU Remember, concerning his Preaching, how practically both for Matter and
Manner, he insisted on the Great Things of Religion: He did not amuse his
Hearers, (whom he considered, as near the Grave and the Eternal World,) with
Controversies, which they need not understand; and concerning which, Wise and
Good Men may have different Sentiments, and yet be Wise and Good, be accepted
of God, and bear with one another.

He carefully avoided Extrems, in opening and applying the Truths of the
Gospel. He was wont to exhort Men, to work out their Salvation with all
Diligence, and to strive to the utmost, to enter into Heaven; and yet after
all, to trust and rely only on the Mediation and Righteousness of Christ. He
preached, and proved, the Necessity of an Imputed Righteousness, and yet urged
the necessity of an Inherent One. That the Priestly Office of Christ, and his
Sacrifice for Sin, might be honored, and yet the Holy Ghost, in his
sanctifying Influence, may be honored too. He did not make Morality the whole
Duty of Man; nor yet deceive the People, by saying, that Christ repented for
them, and Believed for them. He magnified the Special Grace of God, in the
Conversion of a Sinner, and yet preached Repentance toward God, as necessary
to Forgiveness, with Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ: Without curiously
determining which is first, when both are needful, and never parted. He laid
the whole stress of our Salvation on Jesus Christ. He ascribed the Beginning,
Progress, and Finishing of all Spiritual Good, entirely to the Free Grace of
God. And yet the Impenitence, Unbelief and Damnation of Sinners, he justly
charged on their own Wilfulness, in hearkening to the Devil. And if this be
Legal Preaching, what is it to preach the Gospel of Christ?

ACCORDINGLY we find, that God honored him with great Success. He had Eminent
Seals of his Ministry, at his first Beginning, and many more afterward: He was
a good Man, and full of the Holy Ghost and Faith, and much People were added to
the Lord. There are many of you, who bless God, that you ever saw or heard him.
You are his Witnesses, that he did not run in vain, nor labor in vain. His
Preaching was made effectual to the Conversion of many. His Tong^^ was a Tree
of Life unto many: You will be his Crown of Rejoicing, in the day of the Lord.
And if they that be wise, shall ^^ine as the brightness of the Firmament; and
They that turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever, Dan.
XII. 3. We may believe, he will have a proportionable Reward.

HIS extraordinary Application to his Work, and Diligence in it, (which
hastened his Death,) may increase his Glory. Though some make a Question, whether
a Minister, who Converts many Souls here; or another, that is as faithful and
diligent, and yet has not such Success; Which of these shall have the most
Glory in Heaven. Some think the Second, because the one had much Encouragement
and Comfort here, which the other had not, for want of Success; and yet might
say, Though I have labored in vain, and spent my strength for naught; yet surely
my Judgment is with the Lord, and my Work with my God. I shall not lose my
Labor, Isa. XLIX. 4. And as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. (...). We are unto God,
a sweet Savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish. It Is
certain he bare you much upon his Heart, in daily Prayer, in order to the
Success of his Ministry among you: And gave Thanks to God for any such Fruit,
for any Service he had been enabled to do for your Souls. And was affected with
your grateful Sense of it, testified by your Kindness to him, in his last
Sickness, which he thankfully acknowledged.

SOME of you will never forget the Last Sermon he preached in Public, when
with much Difficulty he was brought into the Pulpit, how he spoke as in the
View and Sense of another World, with what serious Affection he proved and
pressed the Obligation we are under, Whether we live, that we live to the Lord;
or whether we dye, that we dye to the Lord; so that, Whether we live or dye, we
are the Lords, Romans XIV. 8. and that if we be thought besides our selves, or
sober, it is for your sakes. 2 Cor. V. 13. How agreeable to the Sense of his
Heart, was it for him, from such a passage to say, Let me be esteemed a Fool,
or a Madman, and besides my self, if I may but gain One Soul; let the Devil
roar against me, if I can but snatch the Prey out of his Jaws; let him
calumniate and revile me, if I can but weaken his Kingdom. But when by such an
Essay, he was made sensible of his own Weakness, and found himself really
disabled for public Service, he then declared he was satisfied; Now, says he,
I know my Work is done.

IF any of you are ready to Object, that his Work might not have been done so
soon, if he had prudently managed his Health and Strength, and not shortened his
Days by Over-doing. I grant, that his Zeal and Fervor, and unwearied
Diligence, though from a good Principle, might, as to Humane Prospect, have been
managed so, as to continue his Usefulness longer. But let us take heed, not to
blame him too much for Imprudence in this matter, unless we are certain, that
we know what it is to long for the Salvation of Souls, to be filled with Love
to Christ, and to live above the Love of Life, at the rate he did. However, *
Dr. Gilpin of Temptation. 4 to. Part. III. Chap. 15.
it may be reckoned as one of Satan's Temptations, to the most diligent and
useful Ministers, by overdoing, to lay a Snare for their Lives; lavishing their
Strength, in a Prodigality of Pains, for the good of Souls, which, like a Thief
in a Candle, immediately wastes them; whereas a better husbanded Strength might
be more advantageous, by continuing the Light longer: And yet their Ends are so
sincere, their Work so pleasant, and their Hearts so enflamed with Zeal, that
they seldom observe, as they might, that the Devil is glad of the Opportunity,
to destroy them with their own Weapon.

THIS many of his Friends took Notice of; among others, that Great and Good
Man, Mr. Baxter, who very much esteemed and loved him, (not long before he left
this World,) he sent him this kind Message, That he should take heed, lest he
spent too fast. That Mr. Baxter loved him, I reckon to his Honor: He was one
of many, who thanked God for the Assistance he received, as a Christian, and as
a Minister, from the useful Books, Preaching, and Conversation of that
Excellent Man: I freely concur with him therein, having reason to thank God
upon the like Account.

HE was Fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord: His own Soul was filled with Zeal,
to kindle Holy Fire in the Souls of others. He was willing to spend, and to be
spent: And hereby he wasted, and at last consumed himself. He ran fast, and was
the sooner at his Journies-End. But if we judge of our Days and Time on Earth,
by the good we do in this World, and the Progress we make in preparing for
another; that is, if we judge by weight, and not by measure; He lived long, he
dyed old, and full of days. Many a Man with a gray Head, had not lived so much,
though he might have been longer in the World: For he lived more in a Year, than
many do in seven. He did more Service in less than Thirty three Years, than
many do in Threescore. Though we reckon God took him off in the midst of his
Days, and in the midst of his Ministry; it was not too soon for Him, though it
may be for you. He was ripe and ready.

And considering his long languishing Pains and Weakness, (under all the
Attempts and Endeavors for his Recovery, which Humane Art, Skill and Care,
with the Earnest Prayers of many for Success, could contribute:) We may say,
that God was kind and Gracious to call him home. He did not so properly take
away his Life, as * Non tam ereptam ei vitam a Dijs Immortalibus, sed Donatam
Mertem. Cicero concerning Crassus.
bestow Death. Or to use the Words of Dr. Sam. Annesly, concerning Dr. Drake.
an Eminent, Elder Prophet, who went to Heaven the same day, ( Elijah and
Elisha, an Aged Paul, and a Young Timothy, within few hours) who speaking of
Another on the like Occasion, says, That he went out like one of the Lamps of
the Sanctuary, with a sweet perfume: So has my Dear Brother left this World,
and left a Good Name, as of a precious, sweet smelling Odor, behind him.

AND now He is gone, should I say any thing further to Surviving Relations, and
to you that sat under his Ministry; I shall but open another Sluice of Sorrow.
If I should consider him as a Husband, I might speak to Her, who so carefully
and diligently assisted him in his long Sickness, and beseech her to Remember,
how he was the Guide of her Youth; to Remember his Love to her Person, and his
Love to her Soul, and beg of God, that she may experience the promised
Blessing, Isa. LIVE. 5. Thy Maker is thine Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his
Name, and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel, the God of the Whole Earth shall
he be called.

FOR his Children, who may yet be more profited by our Prayers, than Counsel;
let us pray to God, that as their Father's Memory is Blessed, his Posterity
after him may be so. And we may do this with the more Hope, because there is
the Entail of Covenant Mercy, to be pleaded from Generation to Generation, both
on the Father's Side, and on the Mother's; as being both descended from
Excellent Christians, and Eminent Ministers. Upon which Accounts, you are
encouraged to trust God, as to the Children. Hoping that their Father's God,
and their Grand Fathers God, will be their God, and Guide.

SHOULD I consider him as a Son, as a Brother, as a Kinsman, as a Friend, etc.
and how he carried it in each Relation, I must be very large. You are sensible
of your Loss, be thankful to God for him. Remember his Example, follow his
Faith, think of him with Pleasure, and not with Grief; not as lost, but as
delivered, and crowned, and at Rest in Everlasting Joy.

TO You who attended his Ministry, and shall behold him no more in the Land of
the Living, nor ever hear him more in this, or any other Pulpit; let me add a
few Words; Remember him who has spoken to you the Word of God. Especially be
careful to practice the Sermons, you have heard him preach, and seen him live:
Imitate whatsoever you saw of the Image and Life of Christ in him; and write
down any thing that was very remarkable, that you ever heard from him in
Public or Private; any thing that did particularly affect you, or may be of
Service to you.

YOU have been favored with a Succession of such Burning and Shining Lights,
as are not set up in every Candle-stick. Remember the Sound Instructions, the
Faithful Warnings, the Earnest Exhortations, the Fervent Labors, and Exemplary
Lives of your Deceased Guides. What Fruit may God expect from you, after such a
Seeds-time as you have had! Your last Minister had a Lean, Withered, Wasted,
Consumed Body, that you might be fat and flourishing in the Courts of the Lord.

BUT You are of two Sorts: Either you have profited by his Ministry, or not. If
the former, you have reason to be thankful to God. You that have been
convinced, and awakened by his Preaching, that have been touched at the Heart
under his Ministry, who have often gone away striking of your Breasts, and with
Weeping Eyes driven to your Knees, when you came home, and obliged to come to
him again, saying, Sir, what must I do to be saved? You cannot but feel and
lament this Loss. Your affectionate Tears are his Commendation. And of several
of you he might say, with the Apostle to the Corinthians, Though you have ten
thousand Instructers in Christ, ye have not many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I
have begotten you by the Gospel, 1 Cor. IV. 15. To the like purpose I might
speak to Others, who have by his Assistance, been built up in their Holy Faith,
confirmed, strengthened, encouraged, established and comforted.

THERE is another Sort, who reaped no such Advantage by him. His Death is a
sharp Reproof to such. How far unprofitable Hearers may be guilty of the Death
of their Ministers, as well as an Unfaithful Minister of the Blood of Souls,
may deserve your Consideration. With how many did he prevail, but could not
with you! He shall now be a Reprover to you no more. Be persuaded to look back,
and think with your selves, what earnest Entreaties he used with you, in the
Name of Christ, beseeching you to be reconciled to God. How he longed for your
Salvation: How he studied, and prayed, and waited for Success. Be not deceived,
not a Sermon he ever preached, or a Conviction you ever had under his
Preaching, but must be accounted for. Though the Man be dead, and the Minister be
dead; yet his Message does not dye, and shall not fall to the Ground. Though all
Flesh be Grass, and the Glory of it as the Flower of the Field, yet The Word of
the Lord abides for ever, and not a Tittle of it shall be unaccomplished.

IT will be sad indeed, if he that spent his Health, and Strength, and Life,
for you, should be obliged at last to Witness against you, and to say, (though
not with such compassionate Words and Tears as formerly,) Lord, I did Instruct,
Admonish, and Exhort them, in season, and out of season; but could not persuade
them to leave their sins, and come to Christ, that they might have Life. I told
them of the Danger of their present State, and what was like to be the End of
it. I told them plainly, again and again, that now only was the time to be
reconciled to God; I opened to them the Gospel Covenant, and showed them the
Riches of God's Grace in Christ, and his Readiness, and Sufficiency to save the
chiefest of Sinners, and that his Blood cleanses from all sin. But they would
not consider, they would not regard, they would dye! O with what concerned, and
awakened Souls, should We Ministers study, preach and pray, when every Sermon,
for ought we know, may witness against Some of those that hear it, in the day
of Reckoning! O pity Us, and therein your Selves! for We do not desire the
woeful day, Lord, thou know.

WHAT would you have us say * See more to this purpose, in Mr. B's. Sermon of
Judgment. 8vo. p. 30, 34.
, in the Day of Judgment, if God should ask us? Did you tell this Sinner of his
need of Christ, of the Misery of his Natural, Sinful State, of the Glory of the
World to come, of the Vanity of this etc. Should we lie, and say, we did not?
We must unavoidably bear Witness against you, and say; Lord, we did what we
could, according to our weak Abilities, to reclaim them: Indeed our own
Thoughts of Everlasting Things were so low, and our Hearts so dull, that we
must confess we did not follow them so close, nor speak so earnestly as we
should have done: We did not cry so loud, or lift up our Voice as a Trumpet to
awaken them, ( Isa, 58.1.) We confess we did not speak to them with such
melting Compassion, and with such Streams of Tears beseech them to regard, as a
Matter of such great Concernment should have been spoken with; we did not fall
on our Knees to them, and so earnestly beg of them for the Lord's sake, to have
Mercy upon their own Souls, as we should have done. But yet we told them the
Message of God, and we studied to speak it to them, as plainly and as
piercingly as we could. Fain we would have convinced them of their Sin and
Misery, but we could not: Fain we would have drawn them to the admiration of
Christ, but they made light of it, Mat. 22.5. We would fain have brought them
to the Contempt of this vain World, and to set their mind on the World to come,
but we could not: Some Compassion, thou know Lord, we had to their Souls,
many a Weeping or Groaning Hour we have had in secret; because they would not
hear and obey; and some sad Complaints we have made over them in public: We
told them, that they must shortly dye, and come to Judgment; and that this
World would deceive them, and have them in the dust: We told them, that the
Time was at hand, when nothing but Christ will do them good, and nothing but
the Favor of God would be sufficient for their Happiness: But we could never
get them to lay it to Heart. Many a time did we entreat them to think soberly
of this Life, and the Life to come, and to compare them together, with the
Faith of Christians, and the Reason of Men, but they would not do it. Many a
time did we entreat them, but to take now and then an hour in secret, to
consider, Who made them, and for what he had made them, and why they were sent
into this World; and what there Business here is, and Whether they are going,
and how it will go with them at their latter End: But we could never get the
most of them to spend one hour in serious thoughts of these weighty Matters.
Many a time did we entreat them to try, whether they were Regenerate or not;
whether Christ and his Spirit were in them, or not; whether their Souls were
brought back to God by Sanctification; but they would not try: We did beseech
them to make sure Work, and not leave such a Matter as Everlasting Joy or
Torment, to a bold and mad Adventure; but we could not prevail. We entreated
them to lay all other Businesses aside a little while in the World, and to
enquire by the Direction of the Word of God, what would become of them in the
World to come; and to judge themselves before God came to judge them, seeing
they had the Law and Rule of Judgment before them: But their Minds were
blinded, and their Hearts were hardened, and the Profit, and Pleasure, and
Honor of this World, did either stop their Ears, or quickly steal away their
Hearts, so that we could never get them to a sober Consideration, nor ever win
their Hearts to God.

This will be the Witness, that many hundred Ministers of the Gospel must give
in against the Souls of their People at that day.

But to draw to a Close, Let us all be affected with his Death, so as wisely to
improve it. The Removal of such an one, at his Age, is a Public Loss; not only
to his Family, and to the Congregation; but to the Poor, to the City, to the
Nation; to the Church of Christ. One of a clear Head, and warm Heart; who
understood, believed and obeyed the Gospel. One of a Peaceable, and Public
Spirit; Abundant in Prayer, and of an Exemplary Life, and of Extraordinary
Diligence to do Good: Being fitted for it, as he was filled with Love to
Christ, and the Souls of Men, to carry on the great Design of Faith and
Holiness, to the utmost of his Power, in the Station God had put him: And full
of Thoughts and Care therein to abide with God. But mourn not for Him. Some
sorrowful Concern, it is true, is unavoidable, if you are sensible of your Loss;
and it is also fit and becoming: For it is a Judgment upon any, and a Reproach
upon a Minister, to dye unlamented: As if his Life were of no Use, and the
World were weary of him. But you need not mourn for Him, when you Consider Who
he was, and Where he Now is, being exalted to a higher Sphere of Action and
Enjoyment, for which through Grace and Holy Diligence he was prepared: And so
for ever delivered from all Pain and Sickness, from Sin and Sorrow, Corruption
and Temptation. If you follow his Faith and Patience, you shall meet him again,
in Unutterable and Endless Joy.

HEREUPON you will do well to admit the Thought, that all your other Ministers
are mortal and dying, and that you your Selves are so: And therefore should
improve their Lives and and Labors, as you shall wish you had done when They
are Dead, or when You your selves are ready to dye.

TO Conclude, Because He alone who made this Breach, has the Residue of the
Spirit, and can supply it; let me advise you, though the Shepherd be smitten, yet
that the Sheep do not scatter. Let not this Breach occasion Others; but Agree
together, and take the best Advice you can, in looking out speedily for a
Suitable Supply. And the Lord direct you to a Man after his own Heart, that may
be like-minded with my Deceased Brother. And whatever you have received, and
heard, and learnt, and seen in Him, as a Follower of Christ, that do; and The
God of Grace, and Peace, be with you. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey.
MR. Baxter's Life, published by Mr. Sylvester, Folio.

Mr. Lorimers Apology for the Ministers that subscribed to the stating the
Truths and Errors in Mr. Williams's Book, in Answer to Mr. Trails Letter to a
Minister in the Country. In 4 o.

Mr. Lorimers Remarks on Mr. T. Goodwins Discourse of the Gospel, proving that
the Gospel Covenant is a Law of Grace; answering his Objections to the
contrary. In 4 to.

Mr. Stephens's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Jan. 30. 1693. 4 to.

-- his Thanksgiving Sermon, April 16. 1696. before the Lord Mayor. 4 to.

Mr. Gibbons Sermon of Justification, 4 to.

Mr. Slaters Thanksgiving Sermon, October. 27. 1692. 4 to.

-- his Sermons at the Funerals of Mr. John Reynolds, and Mr. Fincher,
Ministers of the Gospel, 4 to.

Dr. Burtons Discourses of Purity, Charity, Repentance, and seeking first the
Kingdom of God. Pubished with a Preface by Dr. John Tillotson, late Archbishop
of Canterbury. 8vo.

Bishop Wilkins's Discourses of the Gift of Prayer and Preaching, the latter
much Enlarged by the Bishops of Norwich and Chichester.

Mr. Samuel Slaters Earnest Call to Family Religion, in Eighteen Sermons. 8 vo.

A Help to true Spelling and Reading, or a very easy Method for Teaching
Children, or elder Persons, rightly to Spell, and exactly to Read English, in
much less time then usual. By William Scoffin. 8vo.

Mr. Addy's Stenographia, or the Art of Short-writing completed in a far more
compendious way than any extant. 8 vo.

Mr. Addy's Shorthand Bible in the same Character.

Sir. Robert Howards Free Discourse: Wherein the Doctrines which make for
Tyranny are Displayed. The Title of our Rightful and Lawful King William
vindicated, and the Unreasonableness and Mischievous Tendency of the Odious
Distinction of a King de Facto and de Jure Discovered. 8 vo.

Robinsons Cambridge Phrases, being a General Phrase-Book for the Use of
Schools. In 8 vo.

The London-Dispensatory reduced to the Practice of the London Physicians,
wherein are contained the Medicines Gallenical and Chemical, that are now in
Use, those out of use omitted, and those in use not in the latter Copy here
added. By John Peachey, of the College of Physicians, London. In 12 o.

The Dying Man's Assistant, or short Instructions for those who are concerned in
the preparing of sick Persons for Death. Being also no less worthy the
Consideration of all good Christians in Time of Health. As showing the
importance of an Early Preparation for their latter End; with Regard as well to
their Temporal as Eternal State. 12 o.

Mr. Alkins English Grammar, or the English Tongue reduced to Grammatical
Rules. Composed for the use of Schools. 8 vo.


