THE Saints Liberty of Conscience In the New Kingdom of POLAND. Proposed for
the Consolation of the Distressed Brethren.
BRethren and Sisters in Tribulation, who groan under the Yoke of an Egyptian
Bondage, what shall we do for our Beloved Liberty in this the Day of our
Persecution.

Pharaoh's heart is hardened against us, and the Pagan Tories have prevailed
against the Israel of the Lord. The Ark of the Covenant is Removed from us; our
Sabbaths and Holy Assemblies are interrupted by Phylistin-Infidels, our
Prophets Persecuted, and though we are ready to burn with Zeal, they will not
allow us to keep Oil in our Lamps.

In this Persecution of the Saints, this Eclipse of the Ordinances, what shall
we do to walk in the Light; shall we submit to Baal's Priests, or stoop to the
Golden Image of Heathenish Episcopacy or Pagan Pope? Verily no. But let us in
despite of Law and Bondage, Fine and Imprisonment, of the Brethren, resolve to
pursue our Christian Liberty in the free Exercise of our Spiritual Graces. And
what we cannot perform in Public Assemblies, let us do in private Cabals,
Coffe-houses, Vaults and Cellers.

And since nothing can be dearer unto poor Christians then Liberty for the free
Exercise of their Judgments and Conscience, which, not many Years ago, cost so
many Thousand Lives. And considering that the little Finger of Apostasy, from
our first Principles of Sedition and Obstinacy would be a greater Burden upon
our Tender Consciences than the Loins of Episcopacy, we being bound in
Conscience to resist all Arbitrary Imposition, cannot reasonably submit to any
Law or Act for Prosecuting Dissenters.

And since many Noble and Worthy Lords and Commons of Poland, out of their
great Zeal and Stedfastness to the good old Cause, have stood up, and are still
inclinable for Liberty, we might have carried the Cause in the last Diet, did
not some Mercenary persons, as the Observator, Heraclitus and others, Aliens
and Strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel take up a Reproach against us as
persons Reprobated into an Impossibility of Submission to Principles of
Concord, Loyalty, Peace or Order in Church or State,

Therefore to convince these slanderers, and to the end that a Consistence and
Oneness of Judgment of the whole Dissenting Brethren, and their Moderation may
be known unto all Men, and that the World may know there is a Spirit and Itch
of Rule and Government as well as Sedition and Hypocrasy resting in us.

It is humbly proposed for the Solace and Comfort of all the Persecuted
Brethren. That the sole Power of granting Licenses and Indulgences for Liberty
of Conscience within the Kingdom of Poland may be Tested in the Persons
undernamed, for the Term of seven Years, under the Farm Rent of an Hundred
Thousand Pounds per Annum, to Commence from the 24th of May next, under such
Rates and Qualifications as are hereafter specified.

Ricardo Baxter^ski Archbishop of Poland: Fr. Bulliski Chaplin Presby Lobbiski
Holderforth Presby Farendiniski Principal Chaplin Chevaliero Waleriski Chief
Plunderer Chevaliero Playeriski Chamberlain of the Household. Chivaliero
Claytoniski Purchaser. Chevaliero Wardiski Tribune of the Libertines. Don
Pilkintoniski Banker of the Farm Fees. Don Betheliski Head Master General. Don
Papillioneski Tribune of the Factious Tumults. Don Duboiski Tribune of the
Factious Tumults. Henrici Cariski Pacquetier General L. Curtiski Public
Mercury Ben. Hariski Pamphletier General Henrici Vileski Public Libeller. Oggi
Shadwelliski Poet Bayse of Poland. Doeggi Sett^^liski Cas^^t and Characterer
Titus Salam^ncaski Pos^master in Ordinary. Mileski Pr^^ceski Knight of the Post
and Principal Evidence.
That the persons aforesaid may be Constituted Grand Commissioners and Farmers
of Liberty of Conscience within this Kingdom of Poland and Dominions thereof,
and may be Empowered to set up a Public Office, and to Nominate and Elect a
Convenient number of Registers, Clerks, and other Officers. And for the more
certainty of all Certificates to be granted as is hereafter appointed, we do
allow the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers to Form and make a Common Sale
to be known, and called by the name of The Public Sale of the Grand
Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience. Engraven An Ass without
Ears Braying, with this Motto, stat pro ratione Libertas. And the said
Commissioners and Farmers, or any 12 of them in the said Office Assembled, may
from time to time compound and agree for Liberty of Conscience with any Person
or Persons under such Rates and Qualifications, as are hereafter specified.

That the said Grand Commissioners or Farmers or any 12 of them, may consti^ute
and appoint under the public Sale of the Office, Sub-Commissioners, and other
Offi^^rs, for every Province and County within the said Kingdom of Poland, not
exceeding the Number of 12, for each County werereof 7 to of the Quorum who may
Compound and agree for Liberty of Conscience with any Person or Persons, Select
Congregations, Citys, Towns Corporat, Parishes, Hamlets, and Villages by the
great, within their Respective Countries not exceeding the Rates hereafter
mentioned.

Rates to be observed in all Compositions for Liberty of Conscience.
A Presbyterian-Minister Silenced. 05 00 00 A Presbyterian-Minister Convicted
upon the Statute, by reason of his Charge. 03 00 00 A Ruling Elder. 03 00 00
For a Trap-Door. 00 05 00 An Independent-Pastor. 05 00 00 A Teaching-Elder. 04
00 00 A H^l^er in Government. 03 00 00 A Baptist admitted to the Administration
of all Ordinances. 05 00 00 A Preaching-Assistant. 04 00 00 An Elder in Office.
03 00 00 A Hearer in Fellowship, Male or Female, to all Ordinances. 02 00 00 A
Common-Hearer only. 01 00 00 A Fifth-Monarcher admitted to hold forth. 05 00 00
An Elder under the same Administration. 04 00 00 An Assistant in Government. 03
00 00 A Hearer, Male or Female, in Fellowship, according to the Value of his or
her Estate, 1 s. per Pound. 00 01 0^ A Speaking Male-Quaker. 04 00 0^ A
Speaking Female. 03 00 0^ A Common Quaker, Male or Female. 02 00 0^ A
Muggletonian. 05 00 0^ A Mahumeton. 06 00 0^ A Jewish Synagogue. 10 00 0^ A
Jewish Priest. 05 00 0^ A Scribe. 03 00 0^ A Pharasie. 02 00 0^ A Seminary or
Mass-Priest, turned Holderforth for Conscience Sake. 05 00 0^ A Jesuist in
Masquerade, Preaching Sedition to the People. 06 00 0^ Any Chief Member or
Person, under any Administration, not mentioned in the Rates aforesaid. 05 00
0^ Any Common Person. 02 00 0^

At these Reasonable Rates, any person may have Liberty and Commission to
Prate, Rail, Hear or Preach in any Place and at any Time, provided it be not
in public, any thing in the Law, provided to the contrary notwithstanding. But
for the better Security of the outward Man, and that the Saints of the Lord may
escape the punishments of the Sons of Men, and the heavy Tribute and penalties
imposed upon us by Caesar, and or that the Sons of Darkness perform their
Idolatry of the Mass, and Common Prayer Superstition at Nine of the Clock in
the Day time, we order it to be done at Nine a Clock at Night, every Man or
Woman in his or her private Chamber, Friends house, or Tavern as the Spirit
shall move them to it.

And for the freer Exercise of our Consciences in Matters of Liberty, It is
further Proposed.

Rates to be observed in Compounding for Liberty of Conscience in the
Particulars Following.
For Liberty to Write, Speak or Preach, against the Government, as they shall
be inwardly moved. 05 00 00 For Liberty to Rail against the Bishops and
Common Prayer. 01 00 00 For Liberty to refuse all manner of Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, in Cases Civil or Criminal. 02 00 00 For Liberty to deny Tithes
and other Church-Duties 01 00 00 For Liberty to keep on their Hats of
Judicature. 01 00 00 For Liberty to break your Oath of Allegiance. 02 00 00 For
Liberty to Assert the Solemn League and Covenant. 01 05 00

That any Person or Persons Gifted for any the particulars abovesaid, may have
Liberty therein, provided still it be in private, at the RATES abovesaid.

But that we may neglect neither Means nor Money, to carry on our Cause, and
gain so many to our side, as Subornation, or the Mammon of Unrighteousness can
Purchase, It is Resolved, That the forementioned Sums shall be converted into
One General Stock or Fund, to be Distributed upon all Occasions, for the Uses
following, For a New Plot. 500 00 00 For each Witness. 010 00 00 For Impeaching
the Q. 200 00 00 For Impeaching the D. 300 00 00 For opposing the Succession.
100 00 00 For Excluding the Lawful Heir. 050 00 00 For Asserting a Bastard. 100
00 00 For Impeaching a Loyal Lord. 010 00 00 For clearing a Traitor. 500 00 00
For Subverting of Monarchy. 050 00 00 For Settling a Commonwealth. 100 00 00
For Railing at the Government in Public Dyot. 100 00 00 For helping to Disband
the Army. 010 00 00 For calling the Guards a Nuisance. 005 00 00 For Voting the
Militia into the Parliaments Hands. 005 00 00 For Voting the King no Money. 050
00 00 For a Whigg-Poet, in Pension, to Write against the Government, the
Lawreat and Lent-Prologues, per Annum. 050 00 00 For a Casuist and Characterer
to Write against the Succession. 040 00 00 For the Author of the Growth of
Popery. 100 00 00 For the Lawreat, if he had undertaken it. 400 00 00 For
Libellers and Pamphletiers. 020 00 00 To prevent a Justice, Headburrow or
Constable, from Persecuting the Brethren at the Solemn Assemblies. 020 00 00 To
bring over an Informer. 010 00 00 To Suborn a contrary Witness. 020 00 00 To
Byas a Jury. 100 00 00 To bring over a Kings Evidence. 010 00 00 To bring over
any of the Kings Officers, Servants or Messengers, under show of their Duty, to
Persecute his own Friends. 040 00 00

And because these Heart-burning-Sins of Ours, these King-Destroying-Sins,
these Kingdom-Ruining-Sins, these Church-Subverting-Sins, and these
Soul-Confounding-Sins of Ours, have brought this Persecution upon our Heads:
For the Bewailing of these Sins, let a Day be set apart for Public Fasting and
Humiliation, any Declaration or Law to the contrary notwithstanding; and it is
appointed, that the Twenty-Third of April next, commonly called St.
Georges-Day, be kept as a Day of Solemn Fasting and Humiliation, for a Blessing
upon these Gospel-Undertakings; and that Mr. Baxteriski, Bulliski, Lobbiski and
Burnetiski, be Desired to carry on the Work of the Day, and that the
particulars following, be Recommended to their Considerations in the Work of
the Day,

First, To Bewail All our Court-Sins. Our Tory-Sins. Our Bishops-Sins. Our
Common-Prayer-Sins.


2dly, To Divert Our Oxford- Jurys. Our Billa Vera- Jurys. Our Tory- Counsels.
Our Tory- Judges.


Lastly, For the Deliverance from our Tyburn-Judgments; for the Deliverance
from the Constables and Goals; for the Deliverance from the Hands of Ketch,
that Uncircumsised Phylistin.

EINIS.
WARSAW, Printed in the Year, 1683.


