A short State of our Condition, with Relation to the present PARLIAMENT.
IT is too sad a Subject to admit of Raillery, otherwise a man might say that
we may defy all the Plots of the Jacobites and the Machinations of Republicans,
since there is so good an understanding between the King and his People, since
the People have chosen him a Parliament, of which he thinks so many of the
Members are fit to be employed by him, as well as entrusted by them. A man
might Droll on, but he can have no English heart, nor thinking head, who can
sport himself with our Calamities. There cannot sure be any Circumstance which
can make England more impregnable, more Glorious and happy than when the King
and Parliament jointly agree in National Designs. But neither can there be any
juncture more fatal than when an House of Commons seem as much in a Separate
Interest from that of their Country, as Parasites in these latter Reigns have
persuaded our Kings to be. Such an House of Commons will make Slavery
Authentic, will bubble us out of all sense of Liberty. What with talking of
the Church and the Monarchy at one time, and the French and Popery at another,
they will first cheat themselves, and then delude as well as betray the Nation.
They will most easily betray the Nation, because we are not apt now to find
fault with any thing that has a Parliamentary Sanction. That two hundred
thousand Pounds a year bestowed upon the Parliament, has already drawn out of
the Subjects Pockets, more Millions, than all our Kings since the Conquest have
ever had from this Nation; and that without any rude complaint, is a Proof,
that if a King can manage well Mr. Guy's Office he may without much ado set up
for Absolute. VENALIS EST ANGLIA, for VENALE EST PARLIAMENTUM. Heretofore
indeed it was not necessary only that a Parliament should give, but that they
should give reasonably; as Flammocks Rebellion, and others in King Henry the
Sevenths Reign witness, and yet I believe our Rolls will not furnish us with
many Sessions wherein money was given, and no one Country Bill granted. But our
Ancestors were wise enough to instruct their Members, and our Constitution so
regular, that we had frequent Elections. But when think you shall we have a new
Election now, since the King has about Sixscore Members, that I can reckon who
are in places, and who are thereby so entirely at his Devotion; that although they
have mortal Fewds when out of the House, though they are violently of opposite
Parties in their Notions of Government, yet they Vote as lumpingly as the Lawn
Sleeves, never divide when the Interest of the Family (as they call it) is
concerned, that is to say, when any Court Project is on foot. The House is so
Officer'd, that by those that have Places, and Pensions, together with their
Sons, Brother;, and Kinsmen, and those who are fed with the hopes of
Preferment, and the too great influence these have upon some honest mistaken
Country Gentlemen, (who are possibly overfrighted with the French) the King can
baffle any Bill, quash all Grievances, stifle Accounts, and Ratify the
Articles of Limerick. I call them mistaken Country Gentlemen, who can be
persuaded that an Honest Bill can be at any time out of Season. I confess they
must adore Kings more than I do, who when their own Management has brought them
into Difficulties and Streights, don't love to make good use of their
Humiliations. I would trust an Elected King a great way, if I saw he understood
Election to be his Title, if our Generosity would engage him to Reformation,
but when I see he knows neither his own nor our Interest, Employs many of those
who have been our Enemies all along, and were his when the Debate of the Crown
was on foot; when I see him hate and Nickname as Commonwealths men those whose
Principles made them the Authors of his Greatness, and those that would have
him do the Business for which he came, for which both he and we said he came:
when I see him sometimes soliciting in person in the House of Lords, at others
by my Lord Portland, besides what he does by all his Underofficers, when I
hear he sends Commands to some Lords, and Bribes to others, and turns out of
his Place the gallant Lord Bellamount, merely for giving his Vote in the House
of Commons according to his Conscience, and thereby intends to terrify others;
when I find the Money the Nation gives to defend our Liberties from Foreigners
abroad, is like to undermine them at home, in a word, when I see neither the
one nor the other House can withstand the power of Gold, I say when I perceive
all this, it is time to give Warning, it is time to look about us. I once
thought to have affixed to this Paper a List of those that are in Office, which
if I had, it would not only have shown how many Members are bought off, but
would have pointed out many amongst the Number of Favorites and Pentioners,
who we expected should rather have been punished. Had we intended to have
justified what we have done to aftertimes. Had any thing but personal Grandeur
been the real intention of him who we intended should have been and valued
himself most upon being our Deliverer; these men must have been marked down as
Betrayers of their Country, who are now made the chief Supporters of his
Throne. I thought we called over the Prince of Orange to get or give us all the
Laws we wanted; to have made the Elections of Parliament secure and frequent,
Trials impartial, the Militia our standing Force, and the Navy our strength. I
thought we had called him over to call Ministers to an account, and to have put
it out of their power Impunibly to abuse us hereafter. If any spirit of Liberty
Remains, if we are not destined to destruction, sure the Nation will take some
way to let the King and both Houses know that they expect they should not only
provide for a Campaigne in Flanders, but (if we should yet have our wished for
Success) for our Security even against our own Victories, and such Laws as may
make it worth while at this time to defend our Country; I say worth while to
defend it; for if we are to be Slaves, its no matter to whom we are so. I would
not embarrass the Government, but I would have those that are in it undestand
that it is for our good and not to gratify their own Ambition that they are put
into those posts.

It was the Custom formerly for the People to pay their Members, and those
Members were trusted by the People to keep the Balance between their Liberties
and the Kings Prerogative. But since they are retained by him with such Over
grown Fees (such Places and preferments) to be Council on his side, how can the
People hope they will be just in their Arbitration? But after all I would not
be thought to insinuate, that all that are in Places give up the Interest of
England; there are some, and those in great Places too, of whom I cannot allow
my self to have one hard thought, though there are others of whom the world had a
very good opinion, who since they have had Preferment, have taken care to
convince us, that we were mistaken in their Characters. Lest the good should
not be distinguished from the bad, I forbear making a List, which most Members,
if they please, can make for themselves and their Neighbors, and more exactly
than I can do it, and I think the best ought to suspect and examine their own
Consciences, whether their Employments don't bias their Votes. If men are to
make fortunes by being of our Senate House, we had better our selves pay the
Disbursements of those we send, we had better our selves allow them plentiful
Sallaries for sitting there, each particular County would save by it in the
public Assessments, and find their account in it, whilst they preserve their
Members from the temptation of being hired out of their Interest, and
consequently get good Laws for what they give. We can scarce pay too much for
good Laws, and if we have not some that we have not yet we shall not when the
War is over (let it end which way it will) be able to call what we have our
own. If the Members of Parliament are to overlook all the ill Husbandry of the
Government, that they may share in the Profuseness and bribery of it, if our
Rights are set to Sale by some, and neglected by others, when the very Being of
the Government depends upon our being pleased, what amendment, what
confirmation shall we have of our Constitution when all our Dangers are over?
This is a thought that deserves our most serious Reflections. In the Late times
the City of London often petitioned for passing of Laws; will they always lend
Money now, and never expect a through alteration of the Ministry, and Securities
for the future against Court Projecters? In King James the first's time there
were certain Sparks that undertook for Parliaments, they were called
Undertakers, and there is a certain Secret that has Stole out of our Cabinet,
that one there immediately upon the Kings refusing the Triennial Bill last
Sessions, undertook that it should be thrown out the next time they Sat, with
as much scorn and contempt as was the Judges Bill. It is time to have Annual
Parliaments instead of Triennial, since Privy Counselors and Lords of the
Treasury (both which stations this Person enjoys) can so perfectly feel the
Pulse of a Parliament, during an Interval. I could name a certain Gentleman who
exactly resembles Harry Guy, that the last Sessions when the House was a little
out of Humor, disposed of no less then sixteen thousand Pounds in three days
time, for secret Service. Who are in Places we may find out, but God knows who
have Pensions, yet every man that made the least observation can remember that
some who opened loudly at the behinning of the last Sessions, who came up as
eager as is possible for Reformation, had their Mouths soon stopped with
Hush-money. It has been of some time whispered, that if this will not at first
preingage to do what will be exacted at their Hands, we shall have a new
Parliament. I cannot tell whether a new Parliament will not be practiced upon by
the Carmarthen Art; however it is our last and best remedy; for if this
continues, God have Mercy upon poor England; for hitherto we have been and we
are like still for ought I see, to be repayed for all our expense of Blood and
Treasure, with the mere Smoke that Boccaline mentions in his Advertisement from
Parnassus, whereby the Enemies of the Government have but too great advantage
given them to ridicule us for our foolish credulity.

FINIS.

