Death a Deliverance. OR, A Funeral Discourse, Preached (in Part) on the
Decease of Mrs. MARY DOOLITTLE, (Late WIFE of Mr. THOMAS DOOLITTLE, Minister of
the Gospel in London.) Who Departed this LIFE the 16th of December. 1692.

By JOHN SHOWER.

Eccles. 7.1. The Day of Death is better, than the day of one's Birth. LONDON,
Printed for Abr. Chandler, at the Chyrurgeons-Arms, at the Entrance into
Bartholomews-Close, in Aldersgate Street. And Samuel Wade, at the Bible under
the Piaza of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1693.

TO HIS Reverend and Honored Friend, and Brother, Mr. DOOLITTLE.
SIR,
IF you did not know how little time I have to command, I should need an Excuse
for not having sooner finished the Transcription, and Enlargment of the
following Discourse: which was preached at your Desire, on the Death of your
Wife, and now on the same Motive is made public. If it may any way Contribute
to allay your Sorrow for your great Loss, or be useful to any Others,
especially the Relations and Acquaintance of the Deceased, I shall not Repent
it.

The Text recommended to me is every way suited to the Occasion, and to your
Design of my instructing the Living from it, however defective the Prosecution,
and Performance be. You will not expect (from me, at least you cannot,) that a
Subject so often treated on by Others, should be beautified with new notions.
Neither do I fear to have displeased you, by the citation of some Passages, out
of the practical Writings of the Excellent Mr. Baxter. For whose Memory I know,
you have so dear a Value; and by whom, while he Lived, you had the Honor, and
Advantage to be esteemed and loved. For my own part, I think my self obliged to
take all Occasions, to express my Thankfulness to God for the Ministry and
Acquaintance, the Books, and Counsels of that Great and Holy Man: whom I reckon
to have been a Public Blessing to the Nation, and the Age: and am confident
that more Impartial Posterity will acknowledge it. I cannot doubt but that you,
with many thousand Others, do Join with me, in Praising God for his long Life.
That One so often near the Grave, and so fit for the upper better World, and
living in such delightful Forethoughts of Everlasting Rest, should be spared,
and continued among us, for so many years.

May he, that has the Residue of the Spirit, fill surviving Ministers, Younger
and Elder, with greater measures of Holy Light, and Love, to furnish us for our
work, and to assist, and suceed us in it. May we all learn to carry it with
greater Indifference to this present, Animal Life; and daily advance in our
Desires, and Preparations for the Heavenly one. The Removal of any of our
Friends, who were made meet for Heaven, may be many ways improved to this
Purpose; for whom, you know, we are not to Sorrow, as others who have no Hope.
Doubtless your late Sickness, and Indisposition, since the breach God has made
in your Family, will be regarded as an additional Call, and help to such
Thoughts, and Affections, as this Discourse is designed to promote. And if the
many Prayers, of those who have reason to Bless God for you, may be heard, (as
in some Instances they have been,) we may hope your Life and Serviceableness
shall be yet prolonged. In which request to God, I heartily concur, who am,

Sir, Your Respectful, tho most Unworthy Fellow Servants, in the Work of the
Gospel, John Shower.
London Febr. 13. 169^.
THE Contents.
CHAP. I. THe Introduction, Paraphrase, and Explication of the Text. CHAP. II.
The Method and Design of the following Discourse. Good Men, in the Present
State, are burdened with their Sins and Sufferings, so as to groan for
Deliverance, p. 13. CHAP. III. They have a Certain Expectation, of a Better
State and Life after this; and may be comfortably persuaded of their own Title
in particular, p. 25. CHAP. IV. To Desire and Long for this Blessed State
beyond the (...) is (...) the Temper of a Christian Spirit, p. 33. CHAP. V. Of
the Resurrection of the Body. It is Possible, Probable, and Certain. Where were
the Souls of those who have, been raised from the Dead, during their separation
from their Bodies? Our Resurrection by Christ Illustrated, and proved, p. 50.
CHAP. VI. The same Body for substance, is to be raised again at the last day.
What the Change will be of these Bodies hereafter, from what they are at
present, p. 68. CHAP. VII. Inferences of Truth, and Duty from the preceding
Discourse. The Soul does not perish, when the Body dies. The Felicity of the
Soul is that, which we principally desire. Our Faith should be confirmed about
it: Our Affections and Carriage should correspond to such a Belief, p. 79.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Characters of such, who may, and ought to long for this
Glorious Change; who they are, who have a Title to this desired Blessedness, p.
60. CHAP. IX. How Few Christians live in the Exercise of such Desires: What may
be the Reason? Some fear of Death consistent with Vprightness. Elder
Christians, and the Sickly and Infirm, should quicken such a Desire of
Deliverance. Reproof, and Exhortation in reference hereto, p. 94. CHAP. X. Our
Holy Friends Departed obtain their Desires by Dying: this should moderate our
funeral Sorrows. A short Account of the Exemplary Character of Mrs. Mary
Doolittle, with some Passages of her last Sickness. Conclusion. p. 112.
A Funeral Sermon.
2 COR. V. 4. We that are in this Tabernacle do groan, being Burdened, not for
that we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon, that Mortality might be
swallowed up of Life.


CHAP. I. The Introduction, Paraphrase and Explication of the Text.
SECT. I.
NOtwithstanding all the difficult Exercises of St. Paul from Enemies on every
side, upon the account of his Faithfulness to Christ, in the Discharge of his
Ministry; He bears up with an invincible courage and resolution, by the
expectation of an Eternal Recompense in the other World. This is the Tenor of
his Discourse throughout the foregoing Chapter, he begins and ends with it; and
repeats it at large in the three last Verses, For this cause we faint not, etc.
That is, however perplexed and persecuted, cast down and troubled; yet neither
he himself, nor any of those engaged in the same cause, and work with him, did
faint in their minds; because their present Sufferings did only prepare the way
for a more glorious Reward; For our light Affliction, says he, which is but for
a moment, works for us a more exceeding, and eternal weight of Glory; while
we look not at the things which are seen, which are but temporal: but at the
things which are not seen, which are Eternal. And supposing the worst, that
these Afflictions should end in Death, yet such a case would admit of comfort.
For we know, says he, verse 1.2. of this chapter, we are confidently persuaded,
upon very good grounds, that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a better dwelling provided, an happier Condition in hope and
view; We have a Building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens. And for this we groan earnestly, for this state of immortal Happiness,
desiring to be clothed upon with our House, that is from Heaven. A Blessed
State, so fitted for us, and we for it, that no Apparel for the Body can be
more.

SECT. II.
He was not only content to Dye, and ready with Patience to receive a Summons
out of this World; but so unspeakable was the difference, in his Judgment,
between his present State in the Body, and that which he expected beyond the
Grave, that he reckoned a Translation was every way preferable, and rather to
be chosen, even by intervening Death; that so, instead of this little House,
this mean and poor Dwelling, which we now inhabit, we may come to a better
Building, that is of God, formed and prepared by him; to the more spacious
Mansions, which the blessed God has provided for us above; that instead of this
movable Tent, This earthly Tabernacle, continually liable to so many changes,
dangers, and inconveniences, we may have a House not made with hands, that is
of God's immediate Work, more excellent and more lasting, more safe and more
abiding: That instead of this earthly House of dirt and clay, into which it
will shortly be dissolved, we may have a building in Heaven, suited to the
Heavenly State and Life; a more commodious Dwelling, fitted for the Offices of
a Glorified Soul, and which shall not molder, but be Eternal, that when this
Tabernacle is dissolved, which needs every day to be repaired, and with all our
care cannot long be supported, we may have a permanent, unchangable building,
eternal in the Heavens: In short, that our bodies, as well as our Souls, may be
glorious and blessed, and unchangably so, in the other World.

After such a State, and Life as this, so elegantly described, in the beginning
of this Chapter, he declares his earnest Desire in this Text; not in his own
name only, but as the common sense of all the Followers of Christ. This he
amplifies and limits, by several expressions, unto which some following verses
in this chapter will give further light; For we that are in this Tabernacle do
groan, being burdened, not for that we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon,
that Mortality might be swallowed up of Life.

SECT. III.
In which words we may consider two Parts. 1. The State and Temper of the
Followers of Christ, or of all real Christians, That while they are in the
Body, they are burdened, and groan for Deliverance. 2. A Judicious Stating the
matter of such Desire of Deliverance, Or what it is that they groan and long
for, set forth in three expressions, 1. Negatively, It is not Simply to be
uncloathed, But, 2. To be clothed upon. And 3. That Mortality may be swallowed
up of Life.

1. The state and Temper of good men, or real Christians, while they are in the
Body, They are burdened, and therefore groan for deliverance. We that are in
this earthly Tabernacle, Or, as the expression is ver. 8. While we are at home
in the Body, present in the Body, or While we converse and Sojourn in the Body,
Which he calls an earthly House, ver. 1. But because it is no certain fixed
Dwelling, he adds the other term, of a Tabernacle. While we dwell in this
little Fabric, framed at first out of the dust of the earth, as were the
Worms, who are therefore our Kindred and Relations, and they were formed before
the Creation of man. While we are in this earthly Tabernacle, whose foundation
is in the dust, Whose matter is not more excellent than that of the Beasts that
perish. An earthly Tabernacle, not only as to its original, but is sustained
and repaired by earthly things, 146 Psalm. 4.12, Eccl. 7.
and ere long to be resolved into Earth again; This dust shall be turned to
earth, as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God. While we are in this
earthly House we groan, and long for a removal; we earnestly covet, desire and
wait for, (...)
a better Dwelling, and a better State; we pant, and breath, and long for it,
from the Faith and Hope of what God has revealed, concerning the upper, better
World, and the future Felicity of all that believe in Christ, where we look for
another sort of Bodies, and another kind of Life: this is that we aspire and
groan after, and would fain obtain.

SECT. IV.
2. He describes the matter of such a Desire, and the just limits of it, in
three Expressions. 1. Negatively, Not for that we would be uncloathed; i. e. 1.
Not Simply to dye, for dying sake; Not merely to be rid of the Body, and to
live without any: As we are a sort of Creatures made up of Soul and body, the
separation of these two cannot in it self, for its own sake, be desirable; we
have a natural, innocent, unavoidable Aversion to Death, as such; And as it is
a Penalty, and the fruit of Sin, (as even to the best man it is,) there cannot
but be some unwillingness to dye, however fit it be to be desired otherwise, on
the account of the Consequences of Death. All the Faith and Reason in the world
cannot make Death to be no penalty, So neither is it possible that any man can
reason or believe himself into a love of Pain and Death as such. Therefore it
is not simply to be uncloathed, to have Soul and Body separated, that is here
desired. It is not a perpetual state of being without a Body; For he desires to
be clothed upon, and not found naked. Our case is so stated, that our Souls
are to be clothed upon with a Body, and we cannot but desire that the union of
the Soul and body should be preserved; and in the state of Separation there is
some hankering of the Soul after the body, Some such Desire of regaining that
Reunion.

SECT. V.
2. Neither is it merely a Weariness of this present Life, by reason of the
Burden of sorrows and Sufferings, which the Apostle and other Christians met
with in it, that makes them thus to groan: For if he might be further
serviceable to the interest of Christ, and therein be accepted and pleasing to
him, he declares, ver. 9. that he was willing to live. He professes his
readiness to prefer the Salvation of many Souls, and his being instrumental to
their happiness, before the hastening of his own. He knew that God may have as
much Service in our Lives, in an afflicted suffering State, as in a prosperous
Condition; he knew That we may glorify God in Sickness, and in a Prison, as
much, or more than in health or liberty? And that to bear any of our Trials and
Burdens well, and to honor God by a Christian Deportment under them, is better
than to be delivered. His Desire therefore to the blessed State, which was in
expectation, was not to the Act of Dissolution it self, without reference to
what would follow. He desires not so much the end of this Life, whatever he now
suffered, as the blessedness of the next Life; which he hoped for. It was not
an Annihilation, to put a period to his present sufferings, but a happy Change,
which he groaned for; Not a Ruin, but a temporary dissolution of this earthly
House, in order to an Eternal Advantage; Not a bare privation of this Life, but
a passage to a better. He does not groan so much, from the Sense of present
Evil, as by reason of the Absence of his most desired Good. He was not so much
burdened by what he felt, and could not avoid, or remove, as by what he foresaw
and expected, and could not yet Enjoy: He must dye first, and have the old
House pulled down, before he could reach that complete Felicity, which he so
earnestly aspires after.

SECT. VI.
2. It is therefore further expressed, as that which he groaned and longed for,
viz. to be Clothed upon; To lay aside this mean and little, troublesome
Garment, for a more beautiful and commodious one; To have this earthly House
dissolved, and moulder into dust, with the Expectation of reassuming Another,
or the Same with a glorious Change. And in that sense the Expression, verse 3.
may be understood. That being thus clothed, that is, with such a glorified
Body, we may not be found Naked, or without any Body at all. Though A. B. Cant.
3. Vol. Sermon. 6th.
some carry the expression, Desiring to be clothed upon, as wishing not to put
off this Body at all, but to be in the number of those, who shall be found
alive at the coming of Christ to Judgment, which some of the Disciples of
Christ expected, by a mistake of what he said concerning St. John, If I will
that he tarry till I come. And so the words may be read, If so be that we shall
be found clothed, and not naked; That is, if at Christ's coming we shall be
found Alive, and not Dead; and so have this mortal corruptible Body, changed
into a Spiritual Glorious and Immortal one, without Dying. Whether that was the
sense of the Apostle, or not, I shall discourse of these words, as the common
Sentiment of real Christians, who have no hope of Living till the end of the
World, but expect to dye e're it be long, and carnestly desire a future
Blessedness for Soul and Body in another Life; and therefore when they lay down
this Body in the Dust, they groan to be clothed upon, to have these vile
Bodies made like the glorious Body of Christ; or, as the Apostle himself
expresses it, 1 Cor. 15.53.
To have this Corruptible put on Incorruption, and this Mortal put on
Immortality. The putting off there, is the same with the being clothed upon
here. That is, they groan to have this present State changed for the Felicity
and Glory of that future State, which Christ has given them to expect, both
for Soul and Body in another Life.

SECT. VII.
3. There is yet another Expression, which rises higher, That Mortality may be
swallowed up of Life. That which is Mortal. (...)
This our mortal Life, which is subject to Dangers, Afflictions and Death it
self, That this may be Swallowed up of Life, as is that which is Imperfect, by
that which is Perfect; as Infancy and Childhood by Maturity and Manhood, or as
Darkness is swallowed up in Light. The meaning is, that our low Animal Life may
be changed into an Heavenly one; that our frail, short, and transitory Life may
be changed into an Immortal, Eternal one; that the Corruption and Mortality,
which our Bodies are liable to, and which remain in them while they are in the
Grave, may be removed; Or, according to the Apostles Phrase, That Death may be
swallowed up in Victory, may be finally, perfectly, and for ever Destroyed: For
so the expression does import, and is often rendered in other places, See Dr.
Hammond. 1 Cor. 15.54. g.
for ever: And that includes the Resurrection of the Body to an happy State, as
one part of this Desire. For if by Dying we are more miserable than before,
Death is not swallowed up in Victory, it rather is too hard for us, and gains a
Victory over us. But if our state be bettered by Death, not only as to our
Souls, but our very Bodies are also to be raised again to a glorious Life; if
when Death has done its utmost, our Souls pass into a State of Rest and Bliss,
to be completed in a glorious Resurrection of the Body, and to be continued
and increased to all Eternity; we are then Victorious over Death, Death may be
said to be swallowed up in Victory, or Mortality swallowed up of Everlasting
Life.

CHAP. II. The Method and Design of the following Discourse. Good men in the
present state are burdened with their Sins, and Sufferings, so as to groan for
Deliverance.
SECT. I.
After this Paraphrase and Explication of the words, that which I design as the
Ground of my following discourse, is this, That it becomes the State, and
Frame, of real Christians, while they are burdened in these mortal Bodies,
earnestly to desire a better, an Immortal Life, wherein the Body, as well as
the Soul, shall be gloriously Changed.

In discoursing of this, I shall first show, That such is the present State of
good men in these Bodies, that they groan under manifold Burdens, that may well
make them long for Deliverance. II. That they have the certain Expectation of a
better State and Life, after the dissolution of this earthly Tabernacle by
Death. III. That it is agreeable to the Temper of a Christian Spirit, so far as
renewed and sanctified, to long for that better State and Life, beyond the
Grave. IV. That it is not such a State and Life, wherein they expect to be
without any Body at all; but to have their Bodies raised, and changed, and
glorified; To be clothed upon with an House from Heaven, and to have mortality
swallowed up in Life. The consideration of these particulars will make way for
the practical Application, suitable to this solemn Occasion, on which I am
desired to preach on this Text.

SECT. II.
First, That such is the present state of good Men in these Bodies, that they
groan under manifold Burdens, which may well make them long for Deliverance. I
need not run far into the common Theme of the Miseries of humane Life, which
every one feels, or knows of those that do: Our Sufferings and our Sins, while
in this earthly Tabernacle, will be sufficient to be considered under this head.

1. Our Sorrows, and Sufferings, while in the Body. Our early Tears when we
come into the World prognosticate a good share of these to be expected. Not to
mention the Vexation of disappointment in our Temporal Enjoyments, as a great
part of this Burden; the actual Sorrows and Afflictions which all partake of,
are very many, and great, heavy and afflictive; they are such as extort the
Cries, and Tears, and Complaints, of all sorts of Persons. The little pleasure
and joy we meet with, is mixed with an alloy of Sorrow; but our Sorrows are
more numerous, weighty, and unmixed; many sad Occurrences, vexing Passions
painful and afflictive Diseases, every week disquiet us. Cares consume us,
Fears devours us. Grief scizeth us every way, and sometimes from such Evils, as
nothing but the Hope of Heaven can support us under: No other balm can cure
some of our Wounds. So that evil, as well as few, are the days of the years of
our Pilgrimage; and the present World, on thisaccount, 47. Genesis 7. 1. Gal. 4.
may well be called an evil World.

The very Necessities, Infirmities and Pains of the Body are a continual
Burden, even such as belong to our Humanity, and are common to Men; besides the
many more and greater, we are often exposed to as Christians, for the sake of
Christ, and the Profession of the Truth, to Indignities and Injuries of all
sorts, from the Malice of the Devil and the Perverted World, whom he uses as
his Instruments. But we need not other Creatures to fail us, and Friends to
grieve us, or Enemies to hate us, or Satan to molest us, or the World to
deceive us; this very Body, this earthly House, is subject to so many
Calamities, as may make us weary of it, and groan to be delivered. How much of
our time must it take up! How much pains and labor must we be at about it! How
much grief and sorrow must it undergo! How many ways do pain and sickness
enter! By every Member, and every part of the Body, and this is communicated to
the Whole, and we cannot but feel it. If the body be pincht with hunger and
thirst, the Soul is restless till it procure a supply: If the one be sick, the
other is sad. The Soul is affected with the wants of the Body, and for the most
part Inordinately, and sinfully Thoughtful, and calls out the Soul to attend
upon the several Passions of the Body, filling it with Desires, Pleasures,
Griefs, Fears, Angers, etc. Which hinder our Knowledge of God, service of him,
and Communion with him. Is it any wonder if they that do so, groan to put off
the Shoe that pinches them, that they may be Weary, and Pained, and cold, and
thirsty, afflicted and grieved no more? Can we find this present dwelling so
very inconvenient, and not desire to have something better? Do we not find the Sea Mr. S. S. Farewell to Life, p. 145. etc.
Body a clog to the Soul, when it would run; a Manacle to the Soul, that would
work; a snare to the Soul that would be free; a Fetter to chain it to Earthly
and Material things, etc. Do we not own these and the like Burdens to be
innumerable, heavy, and inevitable, and is it strange we should long for Ease?
How small a Portion of Time is it, wherein our own Sickness, or that of our
Relations and Friends, does not disquiet us! Their Afflictions, Sorrows and
Sufferings, or our own, are continual Burdens; and the more we love them, the
more we are interested in what concerns them, and the greater part we bear in
their Sufferings, as being the more affected with their Miseries. And yet God
knows all this is needful to keep down the Love of this World, take off our
undue Affections to Earthly things, and raise our Thoughts to something other
and better, than is here to be had.

O! How many do we know, and have known, who groan under these Burdens from the
Disorders and Pains of the Body, as the Harbingers of Death! Especially under
the weakness, Languishing and decays of Old Age: For even a Diseased and
Consumed Body in that case, tho it be less Tempting, is not the less
troublesome, but the more so, even to make them weary of Life.

Our days are grief and sorrow, trouble and affliction, that we may be made to
know we are not at home, but strangers here; while Israel dwelt in a fruitful
Goshen, they might be Tempted to forget the Promised Land, but their
Difficulties, Dangers and Conflicts in the Wilderness would not suffer 'em to
mistake a Desert for a Canaan.

What is the daily condition of our Flesh, as Mr. Baxter of Self-denial. Chap.
38,
one well expresses it, but Weakness and Suffering, with Care and Labor to
prevent much worse, which yet we know cannot be avoided? The Sorrow of many a
Man's Life has made him wish he had never been born; and why should he not be
as willing to dye, which does ten thousand times more for him, if he be a real
Christian, than to be unborn would have done. Not a Relation so comfortable,
but has its discomforts. Not a Friend so suitable, but has some discordancy;
nor any so amiable and sweet, but has something troublesome and bitter; not a
place so pleasant and commodious, but has its unfitness and discommodities;
Not a Society so good and regular, but has its Corruptions and Irregularities.
And should we be loath to leave such a Life as this? When the Fruit is Ripe,
should it not be Gathered? When the Corn is Ripe, would you have it grow there,
and not be Cut? When we are begotten again to the hopes of Immortality, should
we be so desirous to stay in the Womb? Is it not another kind of Life which we
shall have with God? Are they not purer Comforts that stay for us above? But if
you will not have the Grapes to be Gathered and Pressed, how can you expect to
have the Wine? Methinks our Flesh should have enough e're this time of
Sickness, and Pain, and Want, and Crosses, and should be contented to lie down
in hope of the Day when these shall be no more.

SECT. III.
II. Upon the account of Sin they are yet more burdened. The frequent
commission of sin, the fears of unpardoned sin, the remainders of Indwelling
sin, etc. are a constant burden to a Christian while in the Body. They are
sensible how short and small, how weak and low, their Knowledge of God, and Love
to him are; how imperfectly and defectively they serve him here, in comparison
of what their Brethren above do: And they are sensible, that much of this
arises from the Body, that it is no wonder if they are willing to be
Unclothed. They find it not only a troublesome, but a dangerous Companion, as
that which hinders them from many hours Communion with God; that clogs, and
diverts, and interrupts their Service of God, and Enjoyment of him: So that
even the best and Mr. Baxter's Dying Thoughts, p. 78.
holiest Men have owned they had much ado to refrain from wishing they had
never been born, even when at the same time they knew that thought to be
sinful. The interest of this Body stands in such competition with God and our
Souls, since the entrance of sin; we are exposed, and tempted, and drawn to
sin, so many ways by means of the Body by our Senses, Appetites, and
Imagination, as may justly make us groan for Deliverance. All the objects of
sense about us in every Condition, our Food, and Clothing, our Houses and
Estates, Friends and Relations, and our Selves, most of all, yield us
Temptations. And the more Holy and Sanctified any are, the more apprehensive
they must needs be of this Burden; their Spirits are more tender, Earthly
things are more unsuitable, God's displeasure is more Feared, so that they
would rather choose to be freed from sin, than to be Possessors of the whole
World. The clearer Light they have of the evil of Sin, and the more unfeigned
their Love to God and Christ is, who is dishonored and displeased by it, and
the more ardent their Desires are, to be like him, and please him, and the more
lively their Hopes are of living with him for ever, this makes this Burden of
Sin to be so much the more intolerable.

And even Temptations to sin, tho they prevail not, are a part of their Burden;
it is grievous to a good man to be continually solicited and tempted by the
World, Flesh, and Devil, to dishonor and disobey the Lord. And where are we
without such Temptation? We can hardly open our Eyes and Ears, but we meet with
one.

So that this is one great consideration that moves them to desire, and choose
to be dissolved, that they may sin no more, and be tempted no more, that they
may grieve the Spirit of Grace no more, and interrupt their own Peace, and Joy,
and Communion with God and Christ, no more for ever.

Yea, notwithstanding the Mortification of the Flesh, and the Life of Faith
sincerely begun, and carried on; yet the sinful distempers of our Spirits, our
frequent decays and backslidings, our low seize in Grace and Comfort,
are owing very much to this Body, as the Spring, or at least the occasion of
them; our sloth and negligence, our eager Passions, inordinate Cares, and
Fears, and Griefs, yea, our general Disinclination and Aversion to Spiritual
and Heavenly things, are much from this flesh, this earthly House of our
Tabernacle.

SECT. IV.
Let me sum up this Head, in the excellent words of Mr. How, of Blessedness,
p. 493.
another on this Subject. Who can reflect, says he, upon this present State,
and not be in pangs and groans after a better? Especially on the account of the
Spiritual Grievances of Christians, the darkness of our beclouded minds, the
glimmering and ineffectual Apprehensions we have of the most important things,
the inconsistency of our scattered Thoughts when we would apply them to
Spiritual Objects, the great difficulty of working off an ill frame of Heart,
and the no less difficulty of retaining a good one, our being so often tossed as
between Heaven and Hell, that when we have been raised, and hope to descend no
more, we are all on a sudden plunged in the Ditch, so that our own Clothes
abhor us. How often do repelled Temptations return again, and vanquished
Corruptions recover strength, that we know not when our work is done! We are
miserable that we need be always watching, and more miserable that we cannot
watch, but are so often surprised and overcome of evil. We say sometimes we
will seek relief in Retirement, but we cannot Retire from our selves; Or in
converse with Godly Friends, but they often prove Snares to us, and we to them,
or we hear but our own Sins and Miseries repeared in their Complaints. Would we
Pray, how faint is the Breath we utter! How long is it e're we can get our
Hearts possessed, with any becoming Apprehensions of God, or lively sense of our
own Concernments! So for Meditation, when we would compose our Thoughts, we may
as well attempt to hold the Wind in our fist, etc. And would we then out of
Choice continue in such a state as this, under so many Burdens, and of such a
Nature? How is it that we do not cry out more feelingly, O wretched man that I
am! Who shall deliver me from this Body of Death? Nothing but the belief and
Expectation of another and better state can support us under these Burdens; and
that is next to be considered.

CHAP. III. Christians have a certain Expectation of a better State and Life
after this; and may be comfortably persuaded of their own Title in particular.
SECT. I.
Secondly, THat real Christians have the certain Expectation of a better State
and Life, after the Dissolution of this Earthly Tabernable. 1. As to the thing
it self, such a better State is Certain. 2. As to Particular Christians, they
may have a certain Expectation of it, as to themselves. Let us Consider,

1. The Objective Certainty, That there is such a better State, and Life beyond
the Grave. Were there no such Expectation, of all Creatures in the World, Men
were the most Miserable, and serious Christians, and the Wisest and most
Knowing Men, would be See Mr. How Is Vanity of Man as Mortal.
most so The present Vanity of Life were enough to make us regret it, if
nothing more or better were to be expected, we could not but always live in
dread and fear of Death; we should not enjoy our selves here, and yet would be
afraid of losing our selves for ever hereafter.

Dr. Parker, Demonstration of the Law of Nature, Sect. xxi.
We were miserable indeed in this Life, if there were no such Future State of
Immortality to be expected. From the highest pitch of humane Felicity, there
could be nothing but a sad prospect of the gloomy Regions of Everlasting Death
and Darkness. What can support the mind under such a view? Or scatter our black
and Melancholy Apprehensions about it? When we think that after a short
Mushrome Life, we must return to Dust and Silence, and be for ever buried in
the horror and loathsomeness of the Grave. This will dash and disturb all our
Joys, and spoil the Cheerfulness and Tranquillity of our Spirits in a prosperous
State. This will double all the Miseries of Life, for under them to think to
fetch relief from dying, is such another kind of Comfort, as if you should tell
a Man in a Storm at Sea, that there is no hope of allaying the Tempest, but
when you are Drowned, the Storm will trouble you no longer. This will be an
intolerable Accession to the load of present calamity, to consider the Period
of Life is so short and Fading, and that so much of so little should be lost
and worn away in Sorrow and Misery, and to despair of any Remedy or
Deliverance, but in Eternal Death. It Is much more Eligible never to have been
born, than only to Grieve, and suffer a while, and Dye; to drop a Tear, and
vent a Groan, and pass a little time in a Stormy, Tempestuous World, and then
disappear, and sink back into Nothing.

But all who own any thing of Religion, acknowledge somewhat of an immortal
State; the poor Heathens themselves had some notices of it; the Jews in their
several Generations believed it: and the very Light of Nature will do much to
manifest that such a difference there will be hereafter between a Man and a
Beast, between the Good and Bad, between the final State of those that love,
and please, and serve God, and of those that disobey his known will. For who
can acknowledge and own a God, as Maker and Governor of the World, the Wise and
Righteous Judge of all, and think he will turn Men promiscuously into Heaven,
or Hell at random, without distinguishing between Friends and Enemies,
Righteous and wicked; or that he will neither Reward or Punish; that there shall
be no state of Happiness for the one sort, or of Misery for the other. Besides
the Testimony of Conscience, as to the Hopes and Fears of these things in
another World, is of weight in this case.

But I hope I need not here be large, when I speak to such as profess to
believe the Bible: and there it is as certain as that God is true, who has
declared it; or that Christ was sent of God, who has taught it; as true, as
that he died, and rose again, and ascended to Heaven; and that all his Apostles
and Followers have lived and died in the Expectation of such a State. The
Resurrection of the body, I grant, was not so plain an Article before the
coming of Christ; but a general state of Happiness for Holy Persons in another
World no Christians will deny: And our Lord has proved the personal Capacity of
future Rewards, by the Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul, and the
Resurrection of the body, and by an account of the manner of the Administration
of these Rewards, as more inchoate and particular at Death, more universal and
consummate at Judgment, in the great day of Retribution. All the Doctrines of
the Gospel concerning Christ, do suppose or ascertain this. He came into the
World to purchase our Right and Title to such a blessed State, and went to
Heaven again, to plead, and prosecute, and apply, and bestow it. So that such a
thing is Certain, and may be expected, by all, the Followers of Christ. It is
as certain and unquestionable as the Word and Oath of God can make it: much
more Certain, than if a Messenger from the Dead did come and tell you so: For
the manifold witnesses of the Holy Ghost to the Divine Commission of Christ,
and the truth of the Gospel, is a much greater thing, and more credible, than
any such transient Testimony could be. But I shall not insist on this, the
Devils themselves believe it, and prove it; for if there be no Heaven, there is
no Hell.

SECT. II.
Secondly, Particular Christians may have a certain Expectation of this happy
State beyond the Grave. We know, says the Apostle, that we have a Building in
Heaven, when this earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved. We know, and are
assured of it; It is a thing so evident and manifest, it is capable of being
demonstrated. It is not my bare Opinion, but the common sense of all the
Followers of Christ, built on such grounds, that we are ready to venture our
Lives, and all that is dear to us, upon this believing Expectation. And because
we know we have another better Building reserved in Heaven for us, we therefore
groan and long to be there; we have a Building in Heaven, though we are yet on
Earth: As he that has an Estate in another Kingdom or Country, may call both
his own, though he cannot dwell in both at once; nay though it may be he must
travel a great way, and cross the Seas, before he can reach to one of them.

Particular Christians may be certain. The Apostle often declares it as to
himself, and all the Children of God have a Title to the Inheritance, they have
Deeds and Evidences to show for it, they have the Will and Testament of their
Lord and Master to produce, and they have the Seal of his Spirit, as a witness
in their Hearts, which is the Earnest of the Inheritance, whereby they are
sealed to the day of Redemption.

Sanctifying Grace is called an Immortal, Incorruptible Seed, 1 Pet. 1.13.
and they that are partakers of it have Eternal Life abiding in them, 1 John
3.13.
because this present Life begun shall be perfected in Glory. This Seal of the
Holy Spirit on the Soul, is the Earnest of the heavenly Inheritance, to
manifest how sure and certain it is, as well as a foretaste to prove how good.
We have an House in Heaven, a Building not made with hands. We have it as our
own, we are so certain of it, as we reckon our selves in some sense already in
Possession. We abide, it is true, for a while in this earthly Dwelling; but we
have another and a better House, a Building of God, not made with Hands, and we
long to be there.

SECT. III.
They that can make out the unfeignedness of their Faith in Christ, and the
sincerity of their Love to him; who can discern the truth of their
Sanctification, who can perceive the Image of God upon their Souls, his
Impress, Character and Seal, having turned their Hearts from the World and Sin,
to God, and Holiness, and Heaven, with an answerable Conversation in Simplicity
and Godly Sincerity; they may have a subjective Certainty of this, by the
Testimony of Conscience, and the concurrent Witness of the Spirit, enabling
them to discern the Truth of their Grace: they may know their own interest in
the Promise, and argue it to their Comfort, from the qualifications of such to
whom the Promise is made. I do not say that All do reach to an actual
Certainty, and full persuasion; the generality we find do not; but such a thing
is attainable, and all should Labor after it: And did we seek it in the right
way, endeavoring, by the exercise and increase of Grace, to know the truth of
it, more would reach this, than commonly do; And then more would long, and
groan, and desire to be uncloathed of this Earthly Tabernacle, that they may be
clothed upon with an House from Heaven, and Mortality be swallowed up of Life.
Which brings me to consider the Third thing I proposed to speak to.

CHAP. IV. To desire and long for a blessed State and Life beyond the Grave,
proved to be suitable to the Temper of a Christian Spirit.
SECT. I.
III. THat it is suitable to the Temper of a Christian Spirit, so far as
renewed and sanctified, to desire and long for that better State and Life
beyond the Grave. I know there may be an impatient Sense of present troubles,
or an inordinate Fear of threatening Dangers and Calamities, that may make some
sinfully desire to be uncloathed, make them long for Death, and be glad to find
the Grave. O Lord, I beseech thee, says Jonah, 4. Jonah 3.
take away my Life from me, for it is better for me to die than to live. And my
Soul chooses strangling rather than Life, says Job. 7. Job 15.
But that is not the case here, the Apostle goes upon another Principle; he
groaned, while in this Tabernacle, for the glorious State which he believingly
foresaw. And every renewed Soul has a diposition so to do, in his new Nature,
he is born from above, and his very principles have a tendency to Heaven, (...)
he is attempered and suited to the heavenly State: by that very Grace whereby
we are made Christians, we are instructed to look for, and wait for, the
glorious appearance of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, at which
appearance we hope to be clothed upon with an House from Heaven: For when he
who is our Life shall appear, he has promised that we also shall appear in
Glory. They cannot but desire and long for this, if they had no burden of
Afflictions and Sorrows in the World, that made them groan for deliverance: For
I am persuaded, that all the Conflicts and Exercises of the Apostle Paul,
either by bodily pains, or with enraged malicious Enemies, never wrung such a
sigh from him, as the conflict with his own Corruptions, O wretched Man that I
am! All the pressures that he ever met with in his earthly Tabernacle, never
made him groan so much, as the burden of his own impure Flesh, and his lamented
distance from the Lord. Therefore consider,

SECT. II.
First, The Disposition of a sanctified Soul, as renewed by the holy Spirit,
does incline and fit for this. II. The want of full Conformity to Christ. III.
The Sense of our Distance from Him, while we are here. IV. The unequal
Communications of Light, and Grace, and Comfort from God and Christ, which a
real Christian does now Experience, will assist these Desires, and make him
groan for Deliverance.

First, There is such a Disposition in the Soul, sanctified by Divine Grace,
from whence such Desires must needs result. They have received the first Fruits
of the Spirit as the Earnest of more, and therefore groan within themselves,
waiting for the Adoption, even the Redemption of the Body, Romans 8.23. They are
now taken into Gods Family, as his Children, are born from above: But the most
solemn Act of their Adoption, is at the last day, when there shall be a full
and final Deliverance from all penal and afflictive Evil. Called the Redemption
of the Body, as Death is the last Enemy to be destroyed; and the Body, till the
Resurrection, is under the power of Death: Called a Redemption, because it is
done by virtue of the price, and ransom which Christ has paid for us. Having
received the first Fruits of the Spirit, they groan for the Adoption, this
Redemption of the Body. And by this Spirit, they are said to be sealed unto the
day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. The holy Spirit assures us of such a day. We are
now the Temples of the holy Ghost, and he will not leave his own Dwelling
continually in the dust. And by this holy Spirit all our Desires and Hopes of a
blessed Resurrection are wrought in us. And the mighty Change which is made by
the Spirit. on the Souls of Believers, will evidence the possibility of that
Change which is expected as to their Bodies: For to raise a dead Soul to
spiritual Life, is at least an equal Instance, of glorious Power, as to raise
the Body from the Grave.

This they may well groan for, as the most solemn act of their Adoption, in
conformity to Christ their Head, who, (as some observe,) though he were the Son
of God by his mavelous Conception, and owned to be so during his Life, yet
had the highest Declaration of it at his Resurrection; Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee. In like manner, though be Followers of Christ are now
owned and treated as Children; yet the most public Declaration of the Divine
favor toward them, will be at the last day, when their Bodies shall be
raised, and all the Children of the Resurrection shall be born in a day. They
are now made meet by the Spirit, to be partakers of the heavenly Inheritance, 1
Coloss. 12. they are now changed into the divine Image, prepared and fitted for
the heavenly State; their Spiritual Life is supported by the delights and
comforts of the other World, as the Animal Life is by those of the present
World. They know somewhat of the Excellency of it, they find something in
themselves that makes them value and desire it; and by the little Experience
they have had, of the Pleasure and Joy of obeying God, and conversing with him,
they conclude how unspeakably better it will be hereafter, when their Union and
Communion shall be complete.

The holy Nature they partake of by Regeneration, as mindful of its divine
Original, does mount the Soul to Heaven, tends to the place from whence it
came, works toward its Center, and makes them restless in their desires after
it; and by frequent, lively, believing thoughts of the heavenly Inheritance,
they gradually enter into it; and ripen for Glory, the nearer they come to the
full Possession. We read of being changed from Glory to Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. by
partaking of the divine Image. So that as Grace increases, Glory hasteneth on,
and every degree of Grace is a step nearer to Glory: For the more conformable
we are to the divine Image, the more meet are we to dwell with God: And he that
has fitted the new Nature to the heavenly Life, will not fail to bring his
Children to it, when he has wrought them for this felf same thing, and given
them the Earnest of his Spirit, 2 Cor. 5.6.

The new Nature, says one, does as naturally ascend to Heaven, when uncloathed
of Flesh, and has left all the Relics of Corruption behind it, as the pure
flame aspires into the Air, and seems to long to inbody it self with the Sun
the Fountain of Light. By this they have a fitness for Heaven and a Disposition
for that blessed Life, which, as it daily increases, must make their desires
stronger to enter upon it. For there is a Beauty in the divine Image, and a
sweetness in our imperfect Graces, in the present Actings of 'em, that must
make us value and desire Perfection. There is an Heavenly Sweetness in every
Act of love to God and Christ, that may make the Soul cry out, oh! how happy
should I be, could I but love as much, and as long as I would; could I be all
Love, and always Loving, might my God and Savior be my constant desire,
delight, and Joy! I would not envy the Honors or Pleasures of any in this
World, what then is that blessed State which I now hope for with persocted
Graces in the presence of Christ.

SECT. III.
If our Faith be true, so as to unite us to Christ, and make us soundly believe
the Gospel Revelation, and consent to be his, our Affections must needs be
kindled to a willingness, and desire to be with him: And if our Hope be of the
right kind, it must be an Expectation with desire and pleasure, of the great
and glorious things that we pretend to hope for. We are framed, and wrought by
the Spirit of God, for this very same thing, and by continual influence from
the same Spirit, will the Eternal blessedness of the future State be carried
on. But we cannot be meet for it, without desiring it, we cannot prepare for it
without longing after it: Preparing Grace is to make us willing of Glory, as
well as meet for it, and to keep us in the way to it. And all our Diligence and
Activity, all our Watchfulness and Care, all our Patience and Self-denial, all
our Stedfastness and Perseverande, in the Christian Course, as the Fruits of
Faith and Love, must be influenced, cherished, and maintained, by such defires.
This is the design and tendency of all the Operations of the holy Spirit on the
Soul, for which he is promised and given to Believers. This is one great End of
all the Ordinances and Institutions of the Gospel, under the Agency of the Holy
Spirit, to qualify and dispose us for the heavenly State, and to excite and
keep alive Desires after it, and help us to pursue the proper Ends and Uses of
Life.

SECT. IV.
Secondly, Our want of full Conformity and Likeness unto Christ, makes these
Desires suitable to the temper of real Christians. Though the guilt of Sin be
removed by pardoning Grace, yet they are not perfectly cleansed from all
Impurity; there are sad remainders of sensual and earthly Affections. Though
the reigning power of Sin be broken, by the Spirit of Holiness, yet we are not
wholly rid of it; we sensibly feel Darkness in our Mind, Disorder in our
Affections. Distempers in our Spirits: The most righteous Souls are now vexed
with their own Corruption from within, and the guilt of many actual Sins, as
well as by the Abominations of others. While we are in the Body, we are in a
State of warfare and conflict. We feelingly complain of the inward contest and
division between the Law of the Flesh, and the Law of the Mind, as Rebecca felt
the Twins, Jacob and Esau, stirring in her Womb. Our time of Triumph is not in
this World: The troubled Sea of corrup Nature will often send forth Mire and
Dirt; but the Blood of Christ shall perfectly cleause us from Sin, so as to
remove all our Filth, and fully deliver us from Corruption, as well as from
Condemnation.

The holiest Saints do now walk humbly with God under the sense of remaining
Corruption, they watch, and pray, and strive against it, endeavoring greater
Mortification, pressing after more Holiness; and therefore long for Heaven,
when the Deliverance will be perfect. They are now sensible of the workings and
contrary tendency of the two opposite Principles, Flesh and Spirit; they find
that the more spiritual any duty is, the more backward their Hearts are to it;
they perceive every little indulgence of the Flesh raises an interposition
between God and the Soul, and hinders the liberty, boldness, confidence,
activity and peace, which otherwise they might have; they desire and endeavor
nearer Conformity to the divine Pattern, as well as clearer evidence of
Forgiveness. They would feign be more like God, as well as escape his wrath;
and be delivered from Sin, as well as from Hell: They are sensible how
Indwelling Sin indisposes them for holy Duties deadens and distracts their
Hearts in spiritual Worship, makes them lose the benefit of Ordinances, renders
Sabbaths and Sacraments Lifeless, and unprofitable. They feel it to be the
Fuel of many a Temptation, and a constant root of bitterness, that opposes the
Spirit of Grace, and keeps them Low, and makes them barren and unfruitful; that
prevails frequently, by sudden and violent Motions, to the dishonor of God,
and the grieving of the Holy Spirit, and the reproach of their Profession; and
so shakes their Peace, and damps their Assurance, and obstructs their
comfortable Hopes of Gods Acceptance. They find the opposition of this bosom
Enemy most sensible, when their interest, duty, and desire is, to be most
serious in engaging their heart for God; when they are about to make the
nearest Approaches to Heaven; when they do so, or when they have just done so.
This is one part of their Burden, which may well make them desire a State of
perfect Holiness, and full Conformity to Christ.

SECT. V.
Thirdly, The Apprehension and Sense of their Distance from Christ, while they
are in the Body, is another reason why they thus Groan. Christ is now in us,
the hope of Glory; but our enjoyment of him is very imperfect in comparison of
what we expect: And if we have any true Love to Christ, we must needs desire to
be with him, to behold his Glory, to love him more, and feel the communications
of his Love in a higher degree. If we know any thing of the Sweetness of
Communion with him, we must needs breath after fuller measures of it: And the
sense of our present distant state, wherein we know so little of God and
Christ, and love him less; wherein we continue to sin against him, and daily
smart under the bitter fruits of sin, and dwell among those who provoke and
dishonor him every day; may well make us figh to be at home, that we may enjoy
that Presence of Christ, and Communion with him, which cannot be attained but
by Dying. Do we not own it best, to be with Christ? the best Company, the best
Place, the best Condition and State, the best Enjoyments? Certainly the little
we know of him, is enough to make us desire to be with him; the little we have
already received, may make us long to receive more.

Such will not say with the Shunamite, when the Prophet offered to speak for
her to the King; I am already at home; 2 Kings. 4.
I dwell among my own People; I am pleased with my Station; I like my present
abode; I am not ambitious of any better; I care not for any other Life, or
World, if I may but have this, etc. No, says a Holy Soul, I am a Stranger here
on Earth, a Pastenger, a Pilgrim through this World, as all my Fathers were; I
seek another Country, an Heavenly one; I belong to another City that has
Foundations; My Principal Kindred, Relations and Friends are not here, but in
that other Country. My Father is in Heaven, my Elder Brother is at his
Right Hand in Glory, and the most of my Brethren are gone to him, and the rest
are hastening as well as I; My Heart and Hopes are there, I desire to be one of
them, I would be glad to make one of that great and General Assembly of the
Firstborn, where is God the Judge of all, and the Blessed Redeemer, with an
innumerable Company of Angels, and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect: Yea, I
groan under this distance, and absence from my dearest Lord. Were it put to my
Choice, I would venture upon any difficulties, and dangers, and deaths, rather
than it should continue: Nothing but the sense of Duty to him, to serve the
purposes of his glory here, can make me brook so long a separation: otherwise,
whatever the League be between me and this Body, I had rather be with Christ,
though that be dissolved: If there be no way to come to Heaven but by Dying, I
would rather dye to be there, than live in this absence from Christ my Savior;
that I may doubt of his love no more, and feel no more effects of his
displeasure; that he may hide his Face from me no more, but with everlasting
Compassions receive and embrace me. And what is there in Death, that I should
fear it, that is half so frightful and grievous as my Absence from Christ? What
is there in this earthly Tabernacle, or in this present World, that I should so
love an abode in it, and not be willing to quit it, that I may be present with
the Lord! O let him call me when he will, if he will receive my departing Soul!
Let him draw me through the dust of the Earth, if he will draw me nearer to
himself, and bring me to his blessed Presence. It Is there I long to be, it is
that my heart is set upon, that is it I groan for; I am desirous of his
Presence, to behold his Glory, and receive the Communications and Reflections
of it. Henceforth I would not be unwilling and backward to go unto him, but
rather say, O when shall I come and appear before him! But there is a fourth
Particular to which I hasten.

SECT. VI.
Fourthly, The Unequal Communications of Light, and Grace, and Comfort from
Christ, while in the Body, make them thus groan to be unclothed. There is not
that steddiness, and Constancy in such Communications from God in our present
State, as hereafter there will be; neither is it suitable to the Character and
Condition of Strangers, and Travelers, that there should. Sometimes therefore
we may have better Entertainment than at other times; we may not expect to have
the same Sunshine, and Fair weather, during our whole Pilgtimage. The Light of
God's Countenance may be sometimes covered, and overcast. The inward state of
things, between God and our Souls may be often altered. But, when we shall be
at home in our Father's House, in the presence of our Lord, there will be a
fullness of uninterrupted Joy, and unchangeable Pleasure. Christians are now
sometimes in the Mount, and then again in the Valley: Sometimes they can
Rejoice, soon after they are Mourning and Dejected. Sometimes the Love of God
is strong and vigorous, soon after the Love of the World prevails again in some
sad Instance or other, to grieve the Holy Spirit of God, and cause him to
withdraw. Sometimes they can apply the Promises with Comfort, and go to God,
with Holy Confidence, as to their Father, and think of Eternity, and another
World, with transporting Joy, and of the Heavenly Inheritance as their own,
with raised Desires, and Delight; within a Day, or two, it may be, they are
again plunged in the Mire, and sunk into the depths of Darkness, and
Discouragement, so as not to be able to hold up their heads.

Sometimes at the Table of the Lord, they have Refreshing Views of the Glory of
Christ, in his Love and Grace, as bearing the Curse which they deserved; as
manifesting his special Kindness, and Sealing his Love, with particular
Application to their Souls, as Interested in all the Benefits of his
Meritorious Death; Hereby they are Revived, and Quickened, and Strengthened, and
enabled to say, I am as one who has found favor in his sight; My Beloved is
mine, and I am his. He led me into his Banqueting House, his Banner over me was
Love. He called to me, as to the Unbelieving Disciple, Come, reach hither thy
hand, thrust it into my side and heart, see how I have loved thee, Come, feel
the print of the Spear, and of the Nails in my Hands and Feet; see what I
suffered for thee, to express my Love; What can I deny thee after this? Upon
this an exulting Joy must needs ensue, but it did not last. And it may be the
next Month they bewail that it is quite otherwise with 'em; Sometimes their
hearts are enlarged, and delighted in Prayer, Thansgiving, Sabbaths,
Sacraments, etc. It Is their Joy sometimes to go to the House of God, and call
upon his Name, and be employed in Heavenly Work, to Sing the High Praises of
God in the Solemn Assemblies;

But this is not constant, and equal; not always alike.

Could a Christian Act Faith at all times, as sometimes he is enabled to do;
could he every day feel the Love of Christ, and express his own, as sometimes;
could he always resign, devote, yield himself to the Lord, with that entire
Adoration, Submission, and Satisfaction in the divine Will, and Glory,
Goodness, and Wisdom, as sometimes, and on some Occasions; he would hardly
believe himself a stranger, and Foreinner in this world, he would be tempted to
take Earth for Heaven, and say it is Good to be here. But whatever Influences of
Grace and Comfort we now receive, they are not steady, equal, and constant; and
it is but fit that we who are only Passengers through this World, and are not at
home, should be thus made sensible of our true Character and Condition, and not
find the Way or Weather alike good, or our own Health equal, or our
Accommodations, Provisions and Entertainment here. This helps to make as long
for a Better State and Life.

CHAP. V. Of the Resurrection of the Body. It is Possible. Probable, and
Certain. Some have been raised from the Dead Where were their Souls during
their Separation from their Bodies? Christ's Resurrection of the Body farther
illustrated and proved.
SECT. I.
The Fourth thing proposed is to prove, that this Blessed state and Life, which
Christians desire and long for, is not such a one, wherein they are to be always
without a Body, but to have their Bodies raised, changed, and glorified, or to
be clothed upon with an House from Heaven.

The Possibility of the Resurrection of the Body, the Probability, and the
Certainty of it, have been often and largely See Dr. Peirson. Dr, Towerson,
etc. on the Creed. Art. XI. of the Resurrection of the Body. And Mr. Baoeter's
Saints Rest, Part 1. Chap. 5. and Self-denial, Chap. 38.
proved. That it is possible, both on the part of the Agent and Patient: Who,
that considers the Divine Omniscience and Power, can doubt, but that God can
remake an Humane Body of that Dust, into which it is resolved; and however it
be dispersed, find out, and rally the several parts together, and unite them
one to another? What Impossibility is it, that the despersed parts of a Man's
Body should be disposed into their due Situation and Order, and reduced to a
Temper, fit to discharge the Functions and Operations of Life? and that the
Soul should be Reunited to a Body thus Restored? How is it impossible? Or why
should it be Difficult to him, who did at first frame and temper this Body out
of the Dust, and inspire a Reasonable Soul into it; and out of a mere Chaos
make this Beautiful World? who formed and fashioned our Bodies in the Womb;
which is as strange an instance of Allmighty Power, as the Resurrection from
the Dead will be: who gives us every Morning, and every Spring, a little
Representation of the Resurrection of the Dead; Who makes the dry Bones to
live, and is able to subdue all things to himself? Therefore to such as doubt,
or deny this, we must say as our Savior to the Sadduces; You err, not knowing
the Scriptures, nor the Power of God. Or, we may Expostulate, as St. Paul does,
Acts 26.8
What? Does it seem incredible to you, that God should raise the Dead? Is there
any Atome of our Dust can escape his Knowledge, though clothed with different
forms and figures, and has passed through various changes, swallowed by
Beasts, or consumed by Fire, or scattered by the Wind? Does not the Foundation
remain, though it put on a variety of forms? May not the Substance be entire,
notwithstanding all the transforming alterations that can be supposed? The
Divine Knowledge being infinite, and his Providence reaching to the least, as
well as to the greatest parts of the World, to the beginning progress and
dissolution of every one, he may easily call forth every part, when the
appointed time comes for the Reunion of Soul and Body. We must question the
Divine Omniscience, as well as Power, if we doubt of this. And are there not
many things in the first Creation, every whit as incredible, as the Collection
of our scattered Dust, and compacting these dispersed Atoms into an Humane
Body? Can it be harder to restore those things that were, than to create those
things that were not? See Dr. Barrow's Works, 2 Vol. p. 520.
Is it more difficult to an Infinite Arm, to Allmighty and Invincible Power, to
do this, than to make both Soul and Body at first? Is not the Blessed Redeemer,
who has all Power in Heaven and Earth, able to make good his Word, who is also
the Amen, the faithful and true Witness? and therefore to deceive us with a
Promise and Expectation, of what he cannot, or will not do, would be an eternal
Reflection his Truth, and Holiness, and other Attributes.

SECT. II.
God has already raised Some from the Dead, whereof we have Instances both in
the Old Testament, and in the New. Many were raised by Christ himself, and many
of the Saints came out of their Graves at the Death of Christ, and went into
the Holy City, and appeared publicly to many. If it be inquired, Where were
the Souls of those that were thus raised, during the space between their Death
and Resurrection? This being not to be known but by Revelation, and that
speaking nothing of it, we may safely acknowledge our Ignorance. It was a
peculiar Case, that does not make a general Rule; and therefore our Inquiry
about it must be very wary. It is sufficient to say, they were in the hands of
God, wherever they were. What if there were a particular Dispensation in
regard of them, different from the case of those, who are not to be raised till
the last day: Nothing can well be proposed in Answer to such a Question, but
what is conjectural.

Therefore rejecting all Suppositions that cannot be reconciled to other
express Doctrines, and Articles of Christianity, we may say, Aeuures de Mr.
Claude. Lettre 16.
That either they were received to Heaven, or remained in the Air, at a little
distance from the Body; Or, they continued in the Body, which was to be quickly
raised again, without animating and informing that Body. If we say the first,
and that these Souls returned from Heaven to their Bodies again, for the
Manifestation of the Glory of Christ in such a Miracle; it is no more
unsuitable and unbecoming an Holy Soul to be willing of this, and to be thus
employed, than was the Humiliation of the Son of God, for the Glory of his
Father. If we say the Second, that they remained in the Air not far from the
Body, it being but for a little while, What Inconvenience, or ill Consequence
can be assigned of such a Supposition? If we rather choose the Third way of
solving this, it is considerable what the Apostle Paul speaks of Eutichus, whom
he raised from the Acts 20.10.
Dead; Be not troubled, for his Life, his Soul is in him, though it did not
then animate, and inform his Body. As to those who were raised at the time of
Christ's death it was only for a little while, to (...) Testimony to our Lord,
and then they laid down their Bodies again, and returned to the Rest and Glory
of departed Souls.

SECT. III.
But, The Resurrection of our Blessed Savior, is the great thing here to be
considered, as an Argument both of the Possibility, and Certainty of our
Resurrection. For thus the Apostle Argues at large, 1 Cor. 15. v. 12. If it be
Preached, and Proved, and Assured to us, that Christ is Risen, How is it that
some say, There is no Resurrection of the Dead? that is, How can any deny the
possibility of it, when there is such an Evidence and Proof? How can it be
doubted, but that the same Power which raised Christ from the dead, can also
quicken our mortal Bodies? when the exceeding greatness of his mighty power,
was displayed in 1 Ephesians. 19.20.
raising Christ from the dead? His Resurrection assures us, that his Death and
Sacrifice were Satisfactory to the Justice of God: and all the Promises that
concern the Blessings of the eyerlasting Covenant, the sure Me^^^^^^ of David,
are hereby confirmed, (...) 32, 33, 34. We declare unto you (...) how that the
Promise which was made (...) the Fathers, God has fulfilled the (...) unto us
their Children, in that he has raised up Jesus again; as it is also written
(...) the second Psalm, Thou art my Son, th^^ day have I begotten thee. And, as
con^^^^^ng that he raised him up from the dead, (...) no more to return to
corruption; he said on this wise, I will give you the sure Mercies of David.
And therefore, after his Resurrection, he saluted his Disciples with Peace,
John 20.21. And God, as the God of peace, is said to raise Christ from the
Dead: For, had he not been reconciled, he would have left him in the Grave. Now
both the Moral, and the Natural Impossibility of our Resurrection is removed by
the Death, and the Resurrection of Christ; The former by the Merit of his
Death, and the latter by his Resurrection: for he can do the same for all
Believers. If his Power be not sufficient to raise us, it could not be
sufficient to raise him. He is now a 1 Cor. 15.45.
Quickening Spirit, able to give Life, as the first Adam, to transmit Death to
his Posterity. And he was raised as a public person, and the Head of his
Church.

Our Persons are redeemed by Christ, as consisting of Soul and Body; and our
Bodies Sanctified by him, and are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and therefore
shall be raised by him. Yea, we are said to rise with him, and to be set down
in heavenly places, in, and with him. It is not more true that he died for our
sins, than that be rose again for our Justification; and if for that, he rose
for our Resurrection too: For the guilt of sin being removed, which is the
meritorious cause of Death; Death, which is the Punishment, shall not remain,
but be swallowed up in Victory; whereas it lives, and reigns, and keeps the
Field, till the Restirrection. But we are assured that The Sea, and Death, and
the Universal Grave shall give up their Dead, Rev. 20.13. And then not only the
sting of Death, but Death it self shall dye, and cease for ever: for there
shall be no more death, Rev. 21.4. Our dead Bodies shall then live, so as to
dye no more. For, if we believe on him that raised Christ from the dead, the
same Spirit, that raised Christ, shall be the Author of our Resurrection, Romans
8.23. And, if we believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, even them also which
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him, 1 These. 4.14. He that was dead is now
alive, and behold he lives for evermore; and he has the keys of Death and
Hell, Rev. 1.18. And he has expressly told us, that the hour is coming, in the
which All that are in their graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth,
They that have done good unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done
evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation, John 5.28.29. And this is the will of
God that sent him, that every one who believes on him, shall have everlasting
Life; and he will raise him up at the last day, John 6.40. The like he declares
afterward to Martha, I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in
me, tho he were dead yet shall he live, John 11.25. He is the First born from
the dead, and Believers are the Children of the Resurrection, Colos. 1.18. His
Resurrection not only proves the possibility of ours, but it is the pledge of
the performance. God having raised him up, has loosed the pains of Death,
since it was impossible he should be holden by them; Naturally impossible,
because of his Divine Power; and legally impossible, because Divine Justice,
after such a Satisfaction as the Death of Christ, required that he should be
raised to Life, and receive a Discharge and Reward.

We could hardly believe the Dead should rise to Life, if Christ by his own
Resurrection, and by raising others, had not proved it possible, and already
done. But he has not conquered Death for himself alone, but for his Members
too, and to them he has promised, that they shall John 11.26.
never see Death, or come within the Prospect or Danger of it: And not only
shall not, but cannot dye any more, after the Resurrection, for they shall be
equal to the Angels, Luke 20.36. His Victory over Death was declared by his
Resurrection, and his entrance into Glory did Complete the Conquest. Now as
Christ has carried his Humane Nature into Heaven, we are to be made like him,
and bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam, and therefore our Flesh shall be
raised too. He is the first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15, 20. And, it
is Bishop Usher.
observable, tha the Rose from the Dead on that Day, whereon the Jews observe
their Feast of First Fruits. That Feast was not stinted to any day of the
Month, as other Feasts were, but was to be always on the Morrow after the
Passover Sabbath, that so it might fall always on the First day of the Week,
the Day of Christ's Resurrection. Well therefore might the Apostle say, Christ
being Risen, is become the First Fruits of them that sleep; As the Offering of
the First Fruits amongst the Jews Consecrated all the rest.

SECT. IV.
Neither can we suppose our Happiness would be complete, without the
Resurrection of the Body. As Soul and body concur to the Constitution of man,
the Soul is in a State of widowhood till reunited to the Body. And in this Life
the Body has a share in the work and service of the Man, which is to be
rewarded or punished, as executing the designs of the Soul. And the members of
the Body serve as members of Righteousness, or Sin. The Law of God commands the
entire Man, composed of Soul and Body, and this Law is obeyed or violated by
both, though the moral good or evil of our Actions be chiefly attributed to the
Soul, as the principal Agent; But on this Account the Body shall partake in the
rewards or Punishment of the next Life, if the entire Person be to be
recompensed. And it is with respect to the Body, that seemed to be lost, that
the Resurrection is promised; the Body resolved into dust, or swallowed in the
Sea, or consumed by fire: Such promises of the Resurrection are made to
Believers for their encouragment and hope. Besides, there are many Objects in
the heavenly State that do suppose a Body, and are to be discerned by our
bodily senses, as, the glorious beauty and magnificence of the blessed
mansions, and the Humane Nature of our glorious Redeemer, etc. On which, and
many other accounts, the Body shall be raised, and changed, and glorified.

SECT. V.
Reason it self would make this Probable. Man being created with a Body and a
Soul, which have so natural an Inclination to one another, that there is an
appetite and desire, as it seems, to be united, and cooperate together, and
many of our Capacities, of Joy and Comfort, as well as of Sorrow and Grief,
result from, and depend upon this Union: In order therefore to the full and
final Felicity that God will confer on some, and for the greater Misery
wherewith divine Justice will punish others, it is very probable from
principles of Reason, that God will raise the Bodies of men; That being united
to their Souls, they may be better capable of enjoying the promised Happiness,
or suffering the threatened misery of the next World. This seems to be the
sense of Job 14. Chap. 14. ver. where he says, that all the days of his
appointed time, I will wait till my change come, Speaking of the Resurrection
of the Body. There is hope of a Tree he says, if it be cut down, that it will
sprout again; but man dies, and where is he? he lies down, and rises not,
till the Heavens be no more. If a man dye, shall he live again? All the days of
my appointed Time etc. Mr. How of Blessedness. p. 210.
According to common Apprehension, and Appearance, the State of man at death is
hopeless; But he professes his Expectation, that at a set and appointed Time,
God would remember him, so as to recall him out of the Grave: And therefore
puts the question, If a man dye, shall he live again? And till the appointed
time when God should revive him, out of the dust, he would wait for that
glorious Change. when God shall have a desire to the work of his hands, i. e.
not allways forget to restore and perfect his own Creature.

There are many Images and Resemblances of this. As in the Corn by which we
live, when it is cast on the earth, and buried in the ground, that it may
corrupt; after it is corrupted, it revives and multiplies: Our Bodies are fed
with this constant Experiment. And the Apostles similitude of a grain of Corn
Sown in the ground, that it rises multiplied, augmented, and adorned, sets out
the advantageous difference between the Qualities of our Bodies when they dye,
and when they shall be raised. And herein he imitates the manner of the Jews,
who were wont familiariy to illustrate the business of the Resurrection, by the
similitude of leed sown in the ground, and springing up again. And what can we
discern in a small corn, or little seed, of a Tree, with Body, Bark, Branches,
Leaves, Flowers, Fruit? and yet afterward we behold them, when the seed has
been sown in the ground. The Apostle at large Insists on this similitude of
seed, to explain the manner of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.35. So also is the
Resurrection of the dead Dr. Scot of the Christian Lise, part 2. chap. 7.
, So is this mortal Body to be the seed, and material Principle of our
Resurrection: For that which is sown is not quickened, except it dye. And so is
this Seed of our mortal Body to dye, and be corrupted, before it shall be
raised again. And Sois this dead corrupted Body to be raised and quickened by
the power of God. For God gives to every Seed a Body as it pleases him. And so
are our dead Bodies to be raised again, into the proper form and kind of humane
Bodies, for unto every seed God gives his own Body. And, Lastly, So is the
Resurrection of the Dead; that is, So are those humane Bodies to be changed, and
altered by the Resurrection, as that which is but bare Seed when it is sown;
when it is quickened, it springs up into a long stalk and ear: So the raised
Body shall be changed for the better.

This is further Illustrated by Mr. Baxter of Self-denial, p. 206.
another, That the dead Body of a man may be supposed to have a living Root, as
truly as the plants in winter. The Soul is the Root of the Body, and the Soul
is still alive; And Christ is the Root of the Soul, and he is still alive: For
though we are dead, our Life is hid with Christ in God; and when he who is our
Life shall appear, at the Spring of the Resurrection, we shall also appear with
him in Glory, Colos. 3.3, 4. There is a Relative Union between Soul and Body,
and a deep rooted Love of the Soul to its Body, and Inclination to it; so that
it is mindful of it, and waits with longing for that hour when the Command of
God, shall send it to revive that Body. Why may not the Living Soul, that is
the Root and Life of the Body in the dust, be the Instrument of God, to inform
its own Body, as it will be the Principle that shall re-inform it? The Body in
the Grave has its own Relation to Christ, who is still Living, and resolved
and engaged by Promise, and inclined by Love to revive that Body. And when the
Hour comes for this Soul that waits to be sent again into the Body, what can
hinder? The very Love of the Soul to its Body, and its desire to be reunited,
is a kind of Natural Cause of the Resurrection. A Candle not lighted, is as far
from Light, and as much without it, as a dead body is without Life; and yet one
touch of a lighted Candle will light that which never was lighted before: And
so may one touch of the living Soul, that is now with Christ, put Life into the
body, that lies in the dust. And as the lighted Candle makes the other like it,
and Communicates of its Nature to it; so does the glorified Soul Communicate a
new kind of Excellency to the Body, which it never had before; even to be a
Spiritual, Glorious, Incorruptible, and Immortal Body. And God takes the Soul
to Heaven before hand, that it may be first Glorified, and so be fit to
communicate Glory to the body. So that there is more reason for the
Resurrection of the body, though it be turned to Earth; than there is reason
that a Candle, that is gone out, should be lighted again by another; or than
there is reason, that I should put on my Clothes in the Morning which I put off
at Night: For Nature disposes me to abhor nakedness, and desire my Clothes,
and therefore in the Morning I will put them on: So Nature teaches the
Separated Soul to desire a reunion with its body: And therefore when the
Resurrection-Morning comes, it will gladly take the word from Christ, and give
that vital touch to the body, that shall revive it; and so put on its ancient
Garment, but wonderfully changed for the better, etc.

CHAP. VI. That the Same Body, for Substance, is to be Raised again at the last
day. And what the Change will be of these Bodies hereafter, from what they now
are.
SECT. I.
IF it be inquired, How can the same Body, after so many Changes, be raised and
reunited to the Soul? And what need is there of Asscrting, That it shall be
the same? It ought to be considered, that the very word Resurrection, does
suppose, or imply this, That the Bodies of Men shall hereafter be truly the
same with those that died. It is the Body falls to the ground, when the Spirit
goes upward; That Body that then fell, is to be raised again, and no other Body
than that. This Mortal Body shall be quickened by the Spirit of Christ, that
now falls, to the ground: The same Flesh that was separated from the Soul at
death, shall be united to it again: The same Temple that was destroyed, shall
be rebuilt; The same Tabernacle that was dissolved, shall be raised. We are
bid to fear God, who can destroy Soul and Body in Hell, Mat. 10.28. What cause
of fear, if this very body be not to be raised? Resurgere non est nisi ejus
quod cecidit. Tert. advers. Marc. l. 5. c. 9.
This Corruptible must put on Incorruption, this Mortal put on Immertality: As
the Body of Christ, which is our Exemplar, with which he rose, was the same
that he deposited in the Grave; and as the bodies of those whom our Savior
raised, when he was on Earth, were the same with those in which they died. And
how shall the Graves, and Sea give up their Dead at the Last Day, Rev. 20.13.
What need of this, if the same Bodies are not to be raised? for they can give
up no other Bodies than what they received. These Receptacles of the Dead,
might be suffered to be quiet for ever, and the Bodies that rest there to
remain there for ever, if we do not expect the same Body to be raised.

And as the Body was the Servant of Photii Bibliotheca. S. Nilt Oration, Prima
and Secunda in Patch. p. 1528, etc.
the Soul, in good or evil actions, Si quidem Sola Anima praeclaras edidit
Officii Actiones Jola eriam Coronetur. Sin autem Corpus quoque partem
sustinuerit Certaminum, coronetur etiam Anima una cum ipso Corpore. Hoc enim
justum, and aquum, and Convenicntissimum est. Isid. Pelus. lib. 4. Epist. 201.
He that did good or evil in one Body, is not to be Rewarded or Punished in
another: for that other Body would not be a part of the whole. Our present
bodies are the Members of Christ, and the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and he
will not suffer them Eternally to be lost. What words can more plainly express,
that it is the same body for substance, than the putting on of Incorruption,
and Immortality; declaring, that the Corruptible, Mortal Body, that is laid in
the Grave, is that which shall be Immortal and Incorruptible?

This has been the common opinion of Christians in all Ages. Upon this account
the Primitive Christians were so careful of the Bodies of their deceased
Friends, manifesting their belief, that their Souls should meet these Bodies
again. On this account their Pagan Adversaries, to show their spite and malice,
when they had burnt their bodies to ashes, scattered their dust in the Air, or
had thrown them into Rivers; that, if it were possible, they might deprive them
of all hopes of a Resurrection, and make it impossible; Some of them triumphed,
saying, Now let us see whether they can rise again, whether their God can help
them, or deliver them out of our See more of this in Dr. More's Mystery of
Godliness, l. 6. c. 4. With Dr. Beaumont's Observations thereon; And Dr. Bury's
Naked Gospel, Part. 1. Chap. 11. With Mr. Nichols's Answer.
hands.

SECT. II.
But though the bodies shall then, for Substance, be the same, with those we
now have, yet the modes and qualities of them will be so altered, that they
will be quite another kind of bodies, than those we have for the present. In
reference to this Expected Change, the Apostle says in this Chapter, ver. 7.
That we walk by Faith, not by Sight. We do not yet know what our Happy State,
by that Change, will be; but in another place he does more particularly speak
of it, and more distinctly, viz. 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.

1. That our vile bodies, Sown in Dishonor, shall be Raised in Glory; shall be
made Glorious, like the Glorious Body of Christ, Phil. 3.21. That which is sown
in dishonor, shall be raised in Glory, and bear the Image of the Heavenly
Adam: Shall be like the Glorious Body of Christ in Perfection of Parts, even in
External form and figure, and it may be stature too. But, for certain, how vile
and mean soever the matter of these bodies now be, however they may corrupt and
putrify in the Grave, they shall come forth in a bright and beautiful form;
Compared to which, the most Exquisite Beauty is but Darkness and Deformity. For
the Righteous shall shine as the Sun, in the Firmament of their Father, Matthew.
13.43. As the Stars of Heaven differ from a Clod of Earth, or a Carrion in the
Ditch, so will their Glorified Bodies from this Earthly House. The very
activity, sprightfulness, and joy of their Glorified Souls, will make their
faces shine, and give the Countenance an amiable Air. Yea, Solomen, in all his
Glory, was not arrayed like one of these Children of the Resurrection,
glittering with Heavenly brightness, and decked with Light, as with a Garment.
The beams of Christ's Glory, who is the Sun of Righteousness, shall reflect a
Luster upon them, besides what shall be transmitted from their Glorified Souls.

Our Lord gave a Specimen of this at his Transfiguration, and his Glorified
Body is to be the Pattern of ours; His face did then shine as the Sun, Matt.
17.2. the Substance remaining, there was a Glorious Appearance: For he had the
same Lineaments in Tabor, as at the foot of the Mount; otherwise Peter could
not have distinguished him from Moses, and Elias. Mr. Charnock, of Christ's
Exaltation, Vol. 2. P. 1093.
But his Body now in Heaven does more excel in Glory that Body he had on Earth,
than the Glory of the Sun surpasses that of a Glowworm; not only from the
Glory of his Soul, but of his Divinity shining through it. What a wonderful
Change must pass on the bodies of the Glorified Saints, to make them capable of
beholding this Glory of Christ; when a little Glimpse of it on Mount Tabor, was
more than a Mortal Eye could bear; it cast Peter into an Exstasie? Our Lord
forbad his Disciples to speak of the Glory of his Transfiguration, till after
he was Risen from the Dead; but now is willing, and has commanded it should be
spoken of, all the World over, that our thoughts and apprehensions may be
raised, to consider that Glory, which this did but imperfectly shadow and
represent. For if before his Resurrection, and Ascension, the Human Nature of
Christ had such a Glory, how much more in Heaven? and we shall be like him.
Moses on the Mount did so shine, that the People were afraid to come near him,
and he was forced to cast a Vail upon his Face. One ray of Christ's Glory on the
Holy Martyr Stephen, made his Countenance shine with an Angelical Luster. And
when he shall appear, we shall be like him; he will then be admired of all them
that believe: We shall be like him who is the Blessed and only Potentate, the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who alone has Immortality, dwelling in that
Light which no man can approach unto; whom no man has seen, or can see, 1 Timothy
6.15, 16.

2. There will be a change of these bodies in respect of Spirituality. It is
sown a Natural body, and raised a Spiritual one. The grossness and Feculency
that now adheres to it, shall be purged off. Not Spiritual in opposition to
Corporeal, that is a Contradiction; but in oppositition to Natural; of a
Spiritual Nature in opposition to this infirm flesh; a body raised to the
highest degree of Excellence, as near the Angelical State as a body can be
brought. It is called our House, from Heaven, (...) not (...), not an House
that is to descend from Heaven to us, but that is of an Heavenly Nature, all of
a Piece with Heaven. So Purified, as to be Assimilated to the Heavenly Region,
where we are to dwell for ever. The first Man was of the Earth, Earthly; the
second Man is the Lord from Heaven: And from each of them we partake of an
answerable Nature. As is the Earthly, such are they that are Earthly, even all
of us in our fleshly State having earthly bodies from an earthly Adam, and
natural bodies from the natural Adam. And as is the Henvenly, such are they
that are Heavenly: For Christ will make them like himself; and as he has an
Heavenly Spiritual body, and not an Earthly. Natural body, so shall his Members
have, that they may be like him. And as we have born the Image of the Earthly,
in having a Natural Fleshly body, we shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly
Adam, in having a Spiritual Body, not needing the use of Meats, or Drinks, or
any of the refreshments or pleasures of the animal Life, or be employed in any
of those Acts, whereby the body is now denominated Natural, and suited to this
Earthly State. But our bodies shall then be Spiritual, suited to the Life that
Angels and Saints live in Heaven; every way greatly refined, and the Activity
of our Spirits improved, without the defects and infirmities of flesh and
blood; shall be invested with Caelestial Qualities, depending wholly on the
Soul, and yielding ready obedience, and conformity to its desires and motions,
executing all its Commands with pleasure and Dispatch. Yea, the employment and
operations of the body shall be raised above those in the present state, as
much as the Employment of a King exceeds that of a Scullion. This Spiritual
Body one represents by Organized Light, as a torch or wood that loses its
drossy and foggy qualities, when heightened into a pure flame, or minerals
heightened into Spirits.

3. The Bodies of the Saints shall be changed from weak and passive, into
Active and Powerful Bodies. Sown in Weakness, but raised in Power. They are now
dull and sluggish, but then they shall be nimble and active, like the Body of
Christ, that, at his Ascension into Heaven, being done in one day, moved many
thousands of Miles in an hour; the distance between the highest Heavens and
this Earth, being computed to be some hundred millions of Miles: They shall be
raised with Angelical Agility and Strength: He that is weak among them shall be
as David; he that is as David, shall be as an Angel of God; moving without
difficulty, and without weariness. Now we often find the Body cannot keep Peace
with the Soul, the Flesh is weak when the Spirit is willing, but it shall be
raised in Power. It is now liable to Diseases and Passions, can do little and
suffers much; but no Diseases or Infirmities shall hereafter hinder its
motions, or impair its Health. A glorified Body will move without weariness,
and fast without hunger, and wake for ever without need of refreshment: Herein
there will be a suitableness to the Activity of a glorified Soul; and without
this they could not bear the weight of the Heavenly Glory: Besides, they are to
endure to all Eternity, without reparation by meat, and drink, and fleep.

4. They shall be Incorruptible, and Immortal. It is sown in Corruption, it is
raised in Incorruption. This mortal shall put on Immortality, They shall dye no
more, but live for ever. Therefore the day of the Resurrection, is called the
Redemption of our Bodies; They shall not be liable to be put out of tune by
infirmities, and pains, and numberless diseases, as now; which often make Life
it self a Burden. They shall be Immortal, without needing that Labor by day,
or sleep by night, which now we bestow to supply their Necessities, and repair
their decays, and prevent Death. Now the Body has the seeds of Mortality and
Corruption, but shall then be refined from all such Principles; There shall not
be a tendency to Death, in the nature and constitution of the Body; such will
be the glorious Change, that they cannot dye any more, 20. Luke 36. They that
were raised by Christ when on Earth, they dyed again, their second Life was no
more exempt from death, than their First: But at the Resurrection, Mortality
shall be swallowed up of Life, it shall lose its power and force for ever.

CHAP. VII. Inferences of Truth, and Duty from the preceding Discourse. The
Soul does not perish, when the Body dies. The Felicity of the Soul is what we
principally desire. Our Faith should be consirmed in the Believing Expectation
of this Glorious Change. Our affections and Conversation should be Suitable
SECT. I.
First, Let us not then imagine the State of the Dead to be a State of
Nonexistence, or Annihilation, that the Soul perishes with the Body, and that
we are without Hope of its Resurection. Whereas, when our Soul passes into a
state of Rest and Joy with Christ, our Flesh rests in Hope that these Bodies
shall be raised and reunited to their glorious Souls. We are to pass through
the Valley of Death to a Blessed Life. This is the Desire and Hope of all the
Followers of Christ. And these very Desires of a blessed Life beyond the Grave,
will prove the Certainty of it.

We must have strange Thoughts of the infinitely wise and holy God, and of his
Love and Goodness, to imagine he should give his Creatures such a Knowledge of
himself that makes them desire more, even a Desire to know, and love, and enjoy
him perpetually, and yet never intend an eternal Communication of himself,
answerable to those Desires. Can we think the blessed God would deceive and
mock those that desire to seek, and please him? by inabling them to aspire
after a Happiness in his presence, and by giving them a Capacity for it, And
then to frustrate and disappoint his own work? Can we think, that God would
excite their Desires after another, and a better state, and yet never admit
them to it? Can we imagine that God would raise their Desires from sin and this
World, to himself and Heaven, and that these shall never be answered in a happy
Issue? Shall the very Sanctification of our Nature prepare for our Torment, and
help to make us miserable? Will the God of Love and Grace enable us by his
Grace to hunger and thirst after Righteousness, and after the blessed vision of
his Face in Glory, and yet never design our Satisfaction?

The more any partake of the divine Image, we find that they groan and long the
more earnestly after another sort of Happiness, than is here to be had; after
another State, and Life than now they enjoy: And may we not conclude that such
a State there is? The natural Desire of Happiness in all mankind, will do much
to prove that there is such a thing: But the holy Desires of the Sanctified,
influenced by the spirit of Grace, will much more prove it: That spirit of
Christ, that has enabled thee to long and pray for a more perfect State, that
has conquered thy vain Desires after earthly things, and raised them to seek
the Knowledge, and Love, and Fruition of God; That Spirit is the Witness of
Christ in thy Soul, that there is such a State after Death, and that thou shall
share in the Blessedness of it. He has framed, and wrought, and fitted, and
made thee meet for it. These Desires, it is true, are but faint and weak, to
what the promised salvation may Justly challenge; yet they are holy and sincere,
and have God, and Christ, and his blessed Presence above, for their Object;
thou have his Image and seal imprinted on thy Nature, Mind and Will. This
Evidence and Experience in thy self shall no be deseated in its Tendency and
Designt

SECT. II.
Secondly, In our Contemplation of this happy State, which the saints desire,
beyond the Grave, we ought to remember, that though the Glorious Change of the
Body be one part, the Felicity of the Soul is the principal one: Yea the Glory
of departed Souls, is one great Cause and Means of that happy Change, which we
expect for the Body. To be with Christ, and behold his Glory, and partake of
it, does especially refer to the Soul: We shall see him as he is, and in that
respect be made like him. We are now the Children of God by free Grace and
Adoption; but his admirable Love will not desist, till our Consormity to his
Image be more complete, till we are brought to his Presence, and partake of his
Holiness to that degree, as to be the objects of his eternal Complacence and
Delight. Father, I will, says Christ, that those that thou have given me,
should be with me to behold my Glory.

Then all our Sins and Failings, all our Follies and Infirmities, all our
Wrinkles and Blemishes, all our Transgressions and Imperfections, shall be done
away; and our Souls shall be washed white in the Blood of the Lamb, being
conformed to our Divine Pattern.

The lesser Manifestations of the Spiritual Glory of Christ, which we have
sometimes here, are highly valuable to a Saint, but unspeakably short of that
which we expect; these hereafter will be more clear, more transforming, more
satisfactory, and more lasting: We now see through a Glass, but darkly; but we
shall know as we are known, for we shall see him as he is. We hope for an
enlightened, and enlarged Mind to behold the Excellency and Radiancy of the
Divine Perfections, shining in and through our glorified Redeemer. This will
oblige the most Improved Saint that ever left this Earth, to cry out with the
Queen of Sheba concerning Solomon, that the one half was never told them, was
not known or believed before. And if we are changed into his Image by beholding
his Glory in the Gospel-glass, the Vision hereafter will be more clear; and so
the Change will be greater, and the Delight and Complacence resulting from it,
must needs be unspeakably more. And this is our Comfort, that it will be such,
as shall last for ever. If we have any Glymps of him at present by the Light of
Faith, we quickly lose the sight again: How soon does an interposing Cloud hide
him from us? But the Felicity of the Blessed Vision above, will be permanent,
we shall dwell for ever in the joyful Light of his Countenance, and abide with
him continually in the Heavenly Mansions.

SECT. III.
Thirdly, Let us then endeavor to confirm our Faith in the Expectation of this
blessed State, for Soul and Body after Death. Let us keep the Grounds of Faith
visible in our Eye; let us employ our Thoughts frequently, and seriously upon
the blessed Object: Let us deeply and often consider the cogent Reasons, upon
which we believe and expect such things; both the intrinsic Grounds of Faith,
and the Motives of Credibility; that our Assent may be the more firm and
lasting; that our Christian Faith may influence us, as present things are wont
to do.

Did we not look upon the great things of the other Life as uncertain we could
not but reckon them preferable to the best of our present Enjoyments. Did we
believe them, we could not but desire (...) for our not desiring that blessed
State, but our criminal Infidelity, that we believe it not: For were we but
fully persuaded of the truth of the Promises, we must needs embrace them for
their Goodness, and Excellency; and then we should long till Death did draw
aside the Vail, open the Gate of Heaven, and bring us into the Divine Presence.
But we waver and doubt concerning the invisible future World; and hence it is
that we close with what is Present, because we are not equally persuaded of the
Truth and Cortainty of what is Future. Let us then endeavor to strengthen, and
confirm our Faith.

SECT. IV.
Fourthly, Let us regulate our Affections and Carriage in this Earthly
Tabernacle, as Persons who believe and expect such a glorious Change. Let us
pass the time of our Sojourning in this World, as Pilgrims and Strangers. Let
us abstain from fleshly Lusts that War against our Souls. Let us use both our
Souls and Bodies answerable to the belief of such things. Let us watch lest we
are surprised into sin by our bodily Senses, Appetites and Imagination. Let us
remember that the Soul and Body; like two diseased Creatures bound together in
one chain, do now mutually infect, corrupt, and Poison one another; Let us take
heed of sin by the inordinate Love of Bodily Pleasure, or the undue fear of
Bodily Suffering.

Let us imitate the Pattern of Christ while he dwelt in a Body, and labor to
have the same Mind which he had, to be in this World as he was in it. Lot the
good and evil of this World have less powerful impression upon us. Let us not
be over fond of the Pleasures of the Animal Life; may they every day be less
considerable with us! Let us not so love the Body, as on that account to
decline any present Duty; much less so over-love it, as to prefer the Comforts
of the present Life to a future Felicity.

Let us not regret over much that such an earthly Tabernacle must fall into
dust, that such a perishing Body must dissolve, and lie in the Grave. We are
sensible how weak and useless it was for a good while at first, before the Body
was fitted for the service of the Soul; and we cannot but be sensible what a
Trouble and Temptation it has been since: Let the burdens and inconveniences of
the bodily Life be more tolerable, let us not be impatient under them; let us
be willing that the outward Man decay, so that the inward Man be renewed, let
our Judgment and Esteem, our Desires and Endeavors, our Joys and Sorrows, be
rectified and moderated, as to all that refers to the Body, and this Present
Life. Let our Eyes and Hearts be fixed on the Heavenly State, let us remember
we are a sort of Creatures related to the other World, though we dwell at
present in an earthly Tabernacle.

In the midst of our earthly Comforts, let us think of the Heavenly State and
Lise as infinitely better. Let us keep alive the Desires of the Presence of
Christ, and fuller Conformity to him, in the height of our Temporal Prosperity.
Let the believing Thoughts of the Caelestial State be unspeakably sweeter to
us, than the best of all this World, when it is most pleasant, commodious, and
inviting: Our Spirits are Distempered, and out of Order, if it be not thus with
us.

And let all the Calamities and Afflictions of this present Life, be supported
by this Expectation; and improved likewise to strengthen, and increase such
Desires of a better State. This is one design of God in our Temporal Crosses,
to assist our Victory over this World, and make us more intensely and earnestly
to aspire after Heaven; to teach us to long for everlasting Rest, and Peace,
and Glory; to bring us practically to reckon, and conclude, that the expected
Glory that is to be revealed in us, will infinitely out balance all the
sufferings of our present State.

In short, if you believe and expect such a blessed Change, let the Apostles
Exhortation take place, to be steadfast, unmovable, allways abounding in the
work of the Lord, for you know it cannot be in vain in the Lord. Do not regret
the Thoughts of laboring and suffering, for a little while more and longer in
this Body; you need not apprehend you shall be loosers, or fear to have a hard
Batgain: For your present Sorrows, and sufferings, and difficult Services, can
last but a little while, and shall have an eternal Recompense: If we are never
so abundant in the Work of the Lord, if we begin never so soon, and last never
so long, it shall not be in vain in the Lord, If therefore you thus believe and
expect, be persuaded to give all Diligence, adding to your Faith Virtue, to
Virtue Knowledge to Knowledge Temperance, to Temperance Patience, to Patience
Godliness, to Godliness Brotherlykindness, to Brotherly-kindness Charity, being
filled with all the Fruits of Righteousness that are by Christ Jesus to the
Glory and Praise of God, that an Entrance may be administered to you abundantly,
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Let us
follow after, that we may apprehend that, for which also we are apprehended of
Christ Jesus. Let us reach forth unto those things that are before, forgetting
those which are behind, and press toward the Mark of the Prize of the high
Calling of God in Christ Jesus; that if by any means we might attain unto the
Resurrection of the dead. Philip. 3.11, 12, 13.
Let us remember we are to be but a little while in this Body, and this earthly
House is appointed for Labor, it is a workhouse; Let us therefore give all
Diligence to work out our Salvation, as knowing we shall not be long in the
Body. This is the Apostles Argument as to himself, (and equally concerns us) 2
Pet. 1.12, 13.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Characters of such, who may, and ought to, long for this
Glorious Change; who have a Title to the Desired Blessedness.
SECT. I.
FIfthly, How sollicitous should we be to find in our selves the Characters of
such to whom these Desires are suitable, and to clear up our Title to that
blessed State, which the Followers of Christ do thus earnestly long for? The
Promise of the Heavenly Inheritance is annexed to our being born of God, or
being born from above; You must therefore look after the Renovation of the
Divine Image and Life, by the Spirit of Life and Power in Jesus Christ: that
the Holy Spirit may Witness with your Spirits to his own Work; that you may
discover and discern those holy Affections as the Fruits of the Spirit, which
are proper to the Children of God; such, as an humble Fear of him, and diligent
Care to please him; a fervent Love to God and Christ, an entire Resignation to
his Will; Holy Zeal for his Interest and Glory, and trust in his Word, etc.
For, till your Natures are changed by the Spirit of Christ, and you are so made
meet for the Heavenly Inheritance, you cannot have a share in this Blessedness
no more than if the legal Bar be not removed by the forgiveness of Sin, or your
Persons not reconciled by the Blood of Christ.

The Qualification of the Heirs of this great Salvation is variously described
in Scripture. Sometimes by Faith, sometimes by Regeneration, sometimes by
Heavenly Affections, sometimes by Holy Obedience, and Fruitfulness in Good
Works: All must concur to suit us, and to Entitle us to the Heavenly State.

You are therefore to inquire after the Characters of the Children of God, and
the Heirs of Heaven, which is a state of Sinless Perfection: And therefore to
examine whether you are brought to loath your selves for your Sins, and that
there is no sin but you would desire to know, and are as desirous to be rid of;
and would rather be freed from Sin, than from Affliction: Whether you do not
aspire after the highest Degrees of Holiness? Whether you would not rather be
perfect in the Love of God, and the Obedience of his Will, than have all the
Riches and Pleasures of the World? Whether you do not like, and love that
Degree of Holiness in others, that you have not yet attained your selves?
Whether you do not love the Image of God and Christ, wheresoever you can
discern it? Whether you do not endeavor to Mortify the Flesh, not to live or
walk after it, but to be Crucified to the World, and with your chiefest care
and endeavor, to serve and please God, and enjoy him for ever; depending on
Christ his Sacrifice, and Intercession, and Spirit, for all your Grace and
Glory; all your Hopes of Acceptance with God, and Capacity, or Title for
Communion with him; giving up your selves entirely to be governed by him, being
willing to obey his Law, whatsoever it shall cost you; watching over your
Heart, Affections, and Thoughts, as well as outward Actions, taking Pleasure in
the Worship and Service of God, as a delightful Work, resigning to God, and
being devoted to his Will, Praying frequently for his Grace, and casting your
selves on his Mercy, through Jesus Christ for Eternal Life.

These are some of the Characters of such, as are Heirs of Salvation. These you
must look after; and then endeavor to advance, in a Joyful Hope and Assurance,
that the Heavenly Inheritance is yours; laboring for a settled Conscience,
growing in Grace, and especially in Mortified Affections to the World; and
living in the Exercise of Grace, by careful obedience to God, as those that are
absolutely devoted to him, and hope to live in his Blessed Presence for ever.

CHAP. IX. How Few Christians live in the Exercise of such Desires after the
Blessed Change. What may be the Reason. That some fear of Death, and
particularly of a painful Death, may consist with Vprightness. That elder
Christians, and the Sickly and Infirm, should endeavor to quicken such a
Desire of Deliverance by Death. Reproof and Exhortation in reference hereto.
SECT. I.
SIxthly. Let us be Ashamed that we find in our selves no more of this holy
frame. That we so over-love this Earthly House, and are afraid of Death: That
our Desires are so faint toward this blessed Change. How shameful is our
backwardness and unwillingness to depart, and be with Christ? And how faulty
are the Causes of it! which, in See Mourner's Companion, Discourse 3d. The
Saints Desire to be with Christ.
another Discourse I have opened. How is it that so few can say with the
Apostle, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far better.

Have we not Experienced enough of the Vanity and Vexation of this World, to
make us willing of a better Abode? Have we not sinned and suffered enough in
this Body, to desire to be uncloathed? at least to wait patiently the Pleasure
of God for our Removal? And so glorious is the Change, which Christians expect,
that one would think there should rather be need of Patience, to make a
Believer wait till then. But whatever the exercise of this Patience, under
present Burdens may be, we need not doubt but one hours Enjoyment, will make
amends for all our Waiting and Preparing.

It cannot be long with the Youngest of us. Let us not put it at a great
Distance, for that will quench the Coal of Heavenly Desire, if we look upon
Heaven as Twenty or Thirty years off. We know not how soon God may call us; But
have great Reason to lament the strangeness of our Thoughts to the Heavenly
State, and the faintness of our Desires, when the Promised Felicity is so
attractive! Do we think we shall live ever the longer for being unwilling to
Dye? Can it enter into our Thoughts, that our excessive Love of the Body will
procure our Continuance in it?

Is it possible we should imagine, that sincerity of Love to Christ is
consistent with our Backwardness to go to him, and live with him? Why then do
we not aspire more earnestly after this glorious Change? How is it that we
groan under the Burdens of this Earthly Tabernacle, and yet are loath to be
delivered?

Will a Sick Man be afraid of his Recovery? Or, a Prisoner tremble at the News
of a Jail-delivery? No more should a real Christian be afraid of Death, or
unwilling of it: For, considering the Death, and Resurrection, and Ascension,
and Promise of Christ; it is to a Believer a quick Passage from Sickness to
eternal Health, from Toil and Labor, Captivity and Sorrow, to everlasting
Rest, and Liberty, and Joy.

I think, ( says Mr. Baxter of Self-denial, p. 202.
one,) God has purposely clothed your Soul with so poor a Dress, that you
should be the less unwilling to be uncloathed; and might learn to set more by
your Souls, than by your Bodies, and make more careful Provision for them. It
seems he has purposely lodged you in so poor a Cottage, that you should not be
at too much Care for it, nor be too loath to leave it. You have its daily
Necessities, Infirmities and Pains, and somewhat of its Filth and Loathsomness,
to tell you of its Meanness: And why should you be so unwilling that so frail a
Body should be turned to Dust? Dust it is, and to Dust it is Sentenced. When
the Soul has left it but a Week, Men can scarce endure to see it, or smell it;
And should the breaking of such an Earthen Vessel be so unpleasant a thing to
you? And, for its Usefulness, though, so far as it is obedient, it was
serviceable to your Souls and to God; Yet was it so refractory, ill-disposed,
and disobedient, that it proved no better than your Enemy. Many a Temptation it
has entertained and cherished, and many a Sin has it drawn you to commit.
Your Senses have let in a World of Vanity, your Wandering Eyes have called in
Covetousness, and Pride, and Lust. Your Greedy Apperites have been so eager on
the Bait, that they have too often born down your Faith and Reason, and drawn
you to Excess in Meats or Drinks, for Matter or Manner, for Quality, or
Quantity, or both. Many a Groan these Sins have cost you, and a sad
uncomfortable Life you have had by reason of them, in comparison of what you
might have had, and this Flesh has been the Mother, or the Nurse of all. You
were engaged, by your Baptismal Covenant, to Fight against it, when you entered
into the Church; and, if you are Christians, this Combat has been your daily
Work, and much of the Business of your Lives; And yet are you loath to have the
Victory, and see your Enemy under your feet? Have you fought your selves into
Friendship with it, that you are so tender of it? Do you not know, that when
you are the greatest Friends to the Body, it will be the most dangerous Enemy
to you? Do not think that it is only Sin, and not the Body, that is the Flesh,
which the Scripture calls your Enemy: For it is the Body, as inclining to
Creatures, from which the sinful Soul cannot restrain it: It is the Body, as
having an inordinate sensitive Appetite, and Imagination, and so distempered,
as that it rebels against the Spirit, and casts off the Rule of Reason, and
would not be curbed of its Desires, but have the Rule of all its self. Was it
not the very Flesh it self that Paul says he fought against, and kept under,
and brought into Subjection, lest he should be a Castaway? 1 Cor. 9.26. Why
should Sin be called Flesh and Body, but that it is the Body, or Flesh, that is
the principal seat of those sins, that are so called? etc.

How earnestly should we beg of God, that Faith and Hope in Vigorous Exercise,
that may kindle our Desires, and Love toward the Heavenly State, and make us
long to behold the Lord in Glory? when we shall put off this Body, and our
Souls be filled with Heavenly Light and Love. Certainly, if we do not now
desire it, we shall never enjoy it: For, we can never be happy by full
satisfaction, in that which we do not know enough of, to make us desire: But
the little Knowledge and Love of God, which a real Christian now has, must
needs make him Importunate in his Requests for more, and will make him value
his Hopes of a better State, beyond all the Pleasures of Sin, and all the
Possessions of this World.

O How Passionately have some excellent Persons lamented the weakness of their
Desires and Love, and cried out for more of Heavenly Life and Light, and Love
to God! O Mr. Baxter's Dying Thoughts, p. 184. 212.
where is the longing, the rejoicing, the triumphing Faith? Where is the
pleasant familiarity above, that should make a Thought of Christ and Heaven to
be sweeter to me, than the Thought of Friends, and Health, or all the Pleasure,
and Prosperity in the World? Do those that dwell in God, and God in them, and
have their Heart and Conversation in Heaven, attain to no more clear and
satisfying Preception of that blessed State, than I have yet attained? Is there
no more Acquaintance above to be here expected? No livelier sense of future
Joys? No sweeter Fore tastes? No fuller silencing of Doubts and Fears? Alas!
How many Christians are less afraid to go to a Prison, than to their God; and
had rather be Panished to a Land of Strangers, than sent to Heaven? O Lord,
must I, that am called thy Child, and an Heir of Heaven, and a Co heir with
Christ, have no more Acquaintance with my Glorified Lord, and no more Love to
thee, who art my Portion, before I go hence and come to thee? -- Must I go
hence, so like a Stranger, to my home? O what do I beg for so frequently, and
so earnestly, for the sake of my Redeemer, as the Spirit of Life and
Consolation, that may show me the pleased face of God, and unite all my
Affections to my glorified Head, and draw up this dark, and drowsy Soul, to
love and long to be with thee?

O God forbid, that this sinful Flesh should be more powerful to draw me
downward, than Faith, and Hope, and Love, to carry my Desires up to God. O thou
that freely gave me thy Grace, maintain it to the last against its Enemies,
and make it finally Victorious: It came from thee, it has been preserved by
thee, it is on thy side, and wholly for thee; O let it not now fail, and be
conquered by blind and base Carnality, or by the Temptations of a Hellish
conquered Enemy! -- It is thine Image which thou love, it is a Divine Nature,
and Heavenly Beam; What will a Soul be without it, but a Dungeon of Darkness,
a Devil for Malignity, and dead to Holiness and Heaness? -- O rather deny me
the Light of the Sun, than the Light of thy Countenance: Less miserable had I
been without Light or Being, than without thy Grace. -- O forsake not a Sinner
in his extremity, who consents to thy Covenant, and would not forsake thee. My
God, I have often sinned against thee, but yet thou know, I would fain be
thine. I have not served thee with that Resolution, Fidelity and Delight, as
such a Master should have been served; But yet I would not forsake thy Service,
nor change my Master, or my Work. I can say with thy Servant Paul, Act. 27.23.
That thou art the God whose I am, and whom I serve. And O that I could serve
thee better! For to serve thee, is but to receive thy Grace, and use it for my
own, and others good; and so to glorify thee, and please thy Will, which being
Love it self, it pleased best, when we receive it, and do most good. -- Nothing
in this World is more my Grief, than that I love thee no more: Forsake not then
a Sinner, that would not forsake thee, that looks toward thee, that feels it,
as his trouble, to be so dark and strange unto thee; that groaneth, and gaspeth
after thee, feeling, to his greatest sorrow, that while he is present in the
Body, he is absent from the Lord. My Lord, I have nothing to do in this World,
but to seek and serve thee. -- O pardon all my Carnal Thoughts, and all my
Unthankful Neglects, of thy precious Grace and Love; and let the fuller
Communications of thy forfeited Grace, now tell me by experience; that thou
do forgive me. -- When I have said, Will the Lord cast off for ever? And
will he be favorable no more? My Conscience has replied, That this is mine
Infirmity I never wanted Comfort, because thou ever wantedst Mercy; but because
I wanted Faith, and Fitness to receive it, and perceive it; But have thou not
Mercy also to give me, even that Fitness, and that Faith? My God, all is of
thee, and through thee, and all is to thee: and when I have the Felicity, the
Glory of all for ever will be thine; If I can live and dye in trusting in thee,
surely I shall not be confounded.

See a more full Example of the Acting of Holy Desires toward the Blessed
Change, in the Close of his Saints Everlasting Rest.
These be some of the Dying Thoughts of that Excellent Person.

SECT. II.
And yet, my Friends, mistake me not. I say not that all are Graceless, that
are afraid of Death. For Nature desires Life, even under Sufferings that are
but tolerable, rather than dye: And this is from mere natural, necessary
Inclination, which Free Will has not full Power against. Death, as the
Dissolution of our frame, as the Separation of Soul and Body, cannot, for it
self, be loved: The putrefying of this Body in the Grave, the greatness of the
Change of Death, the darkness of our Minds, and the weakness of our Grace, the
remaining Sense of Sin, with the dreadful Majesty of that God before whom we
must appear, joined with our Natural Averseness to Dye, may make us shrink and
tremble; But the Faith of the Invisible World, the Love of God and Christ, and
a desire to enjoy him, and please him, and be with him, should do much to
overcome these Fears, and make us willing.

Though some remaining Fear be consistent with Vprightness, yet remember, that
not to desire and long for this Blessed State, though mixed with a Fear of
intervening Death, is highly criminal and faulty: For the Love of God and
Christ, and earnest Desires to be like him, and to be with him, seems to be the
better half of all Religion, 2 Timothy 4.8. 2 Tit. 13. 2 Pet. 3.12. Not to desire
this Blessed Change, is directly a sin against the Gospel, whereby we are 2
These. 2 12 1 Pet. 1.12.
called to the obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. Without such
Desires, we comply not with the Design and Will of God, who has called us to
his eternal Glory by Christ Jesus: For how can his Call be answered, without an
Inclination of Heart to such a State, and a Desire after it?

For a real Member of Christ, and Heir of Heaven, to be only Content to see the
Lord, to be Content to be for ever in his Blessed Presence, and perfectly holy,
and freed from Sin, is a very hard and harsh expression. Men are covetous,
eager and ambitious after earthly good; And shall a Christian's Desire be less
earnest after the Heavenly Glory?

I grant, some remaining Fear of Death may consist with Integrity; when it is
not God and Heaven we are averse to, but Death that stands in the way; or when
it is because of our Doubts of God's Acceptance of us. For I question not but
most upright Christians would rather dye than live, might they but hope to be
with Christ, and enjoy the Divine Presence. As others would be glad of a
Removal, might it be without Dying, because they fear the Pains and Terrors of
a dying Hour. Might they not be uncloathed, but clothed upon by an immediate
Translation, they care not how soon it were. For there be many such, who desire
the Second Coming of Christ unfeignedly, and the Blessed Consequences of it, to
whom all the parts of the Heavenly State and Life are sweet and grateful, who
live and walk in their Integrity before God, though their Grace prevail not
against this Fear of death.

Whereas you ought to consider, that the Throes and Pangs of Traveling
Women, in ordinary cases, may be supposed to equal, or exceed the Pains of
Death. (And who knows the divine Supports that may make our Dissolution easy?)
yet many a Mother has Courage and Patience, by the Hopes of Life, and of a
living Child, when all these Sorrows shall be soon forgotten.

And shall the Knowledge and Expectation of Heaven, and Eternal Life be less
powerful, to influence thy Soul against the Fear of Death? How many have been
enabled to conquer the Fear of Death, and been displeased with their Friends,
that talked of their Recovery as hopeful, and have told them, that such
Discourse was not pleasing, they had rather dye, and be with Christ.

Is it thy Usefullness to Relations and Friends, or to the Interest of Christ
in this World, that makes thee unwilling? Think a little, Are you fitter to
Judge and determine of that than he? Can he not do his own Work without thee?
Consider therefore, Christians, you that know you cannot have an House above
without pulling down this earthly Tabernacle; you that know you cannot get to
Heaven but by dying, and pretend to be related to the heavenly Country: Are you
desirous of nothing better than the Fruits of this Earth? What a contempt of
God and Christ, What a gratification of the Devil, what a contradiction to your
belief and hope, does this Backwardness carry with it? yea a contradiction to
the very End and Design of all Religion; which is a dead, and vain,
infignificant, and trifling thing, if it refer not to a blessed Eternity beyond
the Grave, and if it bring us not to desire, and choose it as our End.

You especially who are Old Disciples, and have been long in the School of
Christ, should consider this. You know you must ere long lay down this
Tabernacle and be uncloathed, you profess to hope shortly to enter into the
World of Joy; What a shame is it, that your Sight is no clearer, your
Perception no quicker, your Apprehensions no higher, your Desires no stronger,
as to this expected Blessedness after Death! though you are sensible you draw
nearer to the things believed, and hoped for, and that within a little while
you expect the Promises will have a full Performance as to you; that you are
almost there, where Faith shall pass into Sight and Love; You are almost ready
to take your place in Glory, where Millions are gone before you; O how is it,
that you are no more Joyfully affected with these Hopes: How is it, that your
Thoughts are so doubtful, your Desires so sluggish? That this Body, and this
present World, is so unduely loved? even though the pleasure of sensible things
be almost gone; though bodily Infirmities and Pains, make this present Dwelling
uneasy: For they require your Patience, and call aloud to you to hasten your
work, to set loose, and prepare to come away. God has made you weary of this
World, and makes you often cry for divine Assistance and Grace: He has given
you to know by experience, that He alone must be the Portion of your Souls, his
Favor alone your Life, and Heaven or nothing your happiness: You find that the
Hope of Heaven is your only Comfort: For such as you, to be unwilling to dye,
who, by Age and Weakness, have one soot in Heaven already, is most inexcusable.

You have found that your Souls are usually worst, when your Bodies have been
best, and when the Body is in the best State, it is usually worst with the
Soul: should it not therefore be your care, when the outward Man is decaying,
that the inward Man should be aspiring after God, and grow better? Has this
vile and corruptible Flesh been so much your Friend, that you are loath to be
uncloathed? What Entertainment have you had in this World, that you should be
so loath to leave it? Have your Fears, and Cares, and Sorrows, by reason of the
Body, been so delightful, that you would not that they should have an end, that
you do not groan to be clothed upon with an House from Heaven? Methinks, as
every Pain and Ache, and Trouble, and Sickness, should mind the wicked of their
eternal Sorrows; so the bodily Infirmities, Decays, and Sickness of good Men,
should raise their Desire to be with Christ.

O What a shame is it, as to All of us, that we no more desire and groan to be
delivered, when there is so glorious and blessed a State in view before us?
That the Thoughts of these things are so cold and seldom! Our heavenly
Affections so low and weak! What can be the reason? but that we look upon the
heavenly Glory as at the distance of many Years to come, if at all we believe
and expect it? But this is shameful, to those that profess by Death to expect a
freedom from all the incumberances of Flesh and Blood, of bodily Passions and
Appetites, and of all the present Temptations of sensuality: who expect that
our Time of Sinning and Suffering shall shortly end together, when we shall be
released from all the sad Accidents of Mortality, and this vile and corruptible
Body be raised in Glory. Shameful indeed for us, who believe a blessed State so
near, when there shall be nothing from within, nor from without, ever more to
intercept, hinder, or abate our complete Felicity: who look for the Light of
Gods eternal Favor to shine upon us, and the plentiful pleasant Streams of
eternal Goodness, flowing from God and the Lamb, to make our delight, and Joy
perfect and everlasting. And yet we do not, as we ought, desire and long to be
Partakers of this blessed State.

CHAP. X. Our Holy Friends Departed obtain their Desires by Dying: this should
moderate our funeral Sorrows. A short Account of the Exemplary Character of
Mrs. Mary Dootle, with some Passages of her last Sickness. The Conclusion.
SECT. I.
Lastly, HOW should all this moderate our Sorrow, for the death of our holy
Friends and Relations? whose earthly House is pulled down, to enjoy a Heavenly
one; Who groaned, and waited, and longed, for that Disolution, which we unduely
Mourn for. Who are pleased with that Translation, and Removal. which we bewail.
It is but what they desired, and long have waited for. They are now pleased, in
the Happy Change of their old Earthly, Dwelling, for a Building of God, not
made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens. They are uncloathed to be Clothed
upon. Let us not then mourn for their Advancement to that Happy State, which
they earnestly aspired after; and which we our selves should live in the Joyful
Expectation of. Let us rejoice rather, that they have finished their Course;
that their Souls are gone to Christ; That their Bodies shall rest in their
Graves for a Time, and hereafter arise in Glory. Let us think where our
deceased holy Friends now are, what they See, and know, and do, and enjoy: what
the State, and Life, and Company, and Employment above is: and how much better
it is with them now, than when they were with us on Earth. They have received
the End of their Faith and Hope, and so attained their desire in the present
Salvation of their Souls; and they have Assurance too as to their Bodies, That
hereafter they shall be raised, and changed, and made like the glorious Body of
Christ.

SECT. II.
Let us thus think in particular of our Good Friend Mrs. Doolittle, who has
put off this Earthly Tabernacle, and is entered into the glorious Assembly of
the Friends af Christ above. What I shall say of her, is not merely to comply
with Custom, concerning the Dead, but in hopes to edify and Instruct the
Living.

I Know there be some, who disgust the publishing of any particular Passages of
our departed Friends, how Imitable an Praile worthy soever: But it is the
Fluttery and Falsehood often used on such. Occasions, concerning those whose
Character will not bear a Commendation, that is the Cause. But I fear no such
Censube as to what I shall now say concoming Her, whose Death and Funeral
brings me here, and gives another Place this day to my Reverend Brother, than
this, where he is wont to be.

God will not be displeased, that we should Honor those, whom he has Honored
with eminent Grace. The Memory of the Righteous shall be blessed. And how shall
others be persuaded to follow the most Laudable Patterns, if we conceal
particulars? At least the Surviving Relations, Friends, and Acquaintance may be
edified, and assisted by it, in their Duty upon such Providence. And I have
the less to apprehend of Cavil, or Objection in the present Case, because what
I shall mention is from such Hands as there can be no Doubt of the Truth, of
what I shall say: and very many of you here, will readily yield a concurrent
Testimony.

SECT. III.
It shall be under three Heads. First her personal Piety, or her general
Character as a Christian. Secondly, her Relative Religion, or concerning her in
the several Relations wherein she stood, as faithfully discharging the Duties
of them. Thirdly, Her Christian Deportment under bodily Infirmities and
Sickness, with some more remarkable Passages in this her last Sickness, before
she put off this earthly Tabernacle.

First, as to her Personal, Piety, and general Character as a Christian, That
she was truly Serious and Religious in her Youth, and so esteemed and judged
abone forty years ago, was the ground of her being chosen by her Husband, as
the Companion of his Life. And God continued her to him in much Mercy, for
about nine and thirty years: being pleased by her to build up his House to such
a Degree, as not many Instances in City or Country can be given of the like.
That out of his own Family, there was not one Solemn Funeral in Thirty nine or
forty years; except of two Children in the Month; and one newly weaned; and
none at all in the space of five and twenty years. Let God have the Glory, and
let Thankfulness to heaven be mixed with your mourning by this Reflection. I
have many witnesses amongst you, who were acquainted with her serious Piety;
and they who knew her best, had abundant proof of her secret Converse with God,
and daily retirement for Meditation and Prayer: and this very often early in
the Morning. Which is Imitable by all of us, and one of the best Evidences of
Unfeigned, Real, Living Religion, in the Power of it.

I do not understand, (and I like it not the worse) that she pretended to high
flights of Confidence and Assurance, which few attain or preserve very long:
and I fear many deceive themselves, by somewhat that is not of God under that
Name. Yet when she had any Darkness as to her Spiritual State, when she was
sensible of the weakness of her Love to Christ, and Lamented it; He who on all
accounts was fittest to assist her, endeavored to let her know the Truth of
that Grace, by distinguishing of a threefold Love to Christ a Delighting Love,
a Desiring Love, and a Mourning Love: telling her that tho she had not the
former of these, to her Comfort: she could not deny or disown the two latter.
And this helped to give her Satisfaction, and support, concerning the Trial of
her State. She added Judiciously the Night before she died, I look to
Sincerity, and uprightness of Heart, as a ground of Comfort, but I do not put
them in the room of Christ my only Savior.

Several years ago she read much in the practical Writings of Mr. Isaac
Ambrose, particularly concerning Eternity, which made a very great Impression
on her Mind, so as that she trembled under the Apprehension, lest she should
come short of that Blessed Eternity, there described. However under her Doubts
and Fears, when the free Grace of God in Christ was discoursed of, she could
comfortably say, why then may not such a one as I, be accepted by free Grace in
Christ? and hope to be capable of Blessedness in Heaven, as well as others?
this is a Faithful Saying, worthy of all acceptance, that Christ came into the
World to save Sinners, of whom I am Chief. This she did, and could say from her
very Soul, and appeal therein to the Omniscient Searcher of Hearts, and this
was her Encouragement and Joy, that she could Say it, I have resigned my self
to God in Covenant again and again. I Bless the Lord who has enabled me to
devote, and give up my self to be his. Lord? I am thine, Accept and Save me.
And at another Time she was able to say, I have had that Converse with God, and
Communion with him, that I would not part with for the whole World. This is
more than many who are Sincere attain unto. For tho some real Christians have
great Refreshments, and support, by Communication of Light, and Strength, and
Joy upon a sick and Death Bed: as if the Light of Glory shined into them, and
they had the beginning of Heaven here; yet many others may want this, when they
come to die, and Experience little of these exuberant Joys, through their whole
Course. For God exercises Prerogative in the Dispensation of his Comforts, at
that, and at other Times. Therefore the Judgment we should make of Persons,
must rather be grounded on their general Course of Life, than on their
particular frame in Sickness, or toward the approach of Death; Some times by
reason of the disorder of the Blood and Spirits, the Holiest servants of God
may be either Lumpish and Melancholy; or else Feverish and Phrenetcal:
sometimes through the Temptations of the Devil, they may be unsettled in their
Minds, or through Dissertion speak uncomfortably to those about them. They may
afflict themselves with dispairing Thoughts, and leave the World under inward
Darkness. Their agonies in death may be without any sense of Comfort, and yet
they may be accepted with God, and pass to eternal Glory: because we shall not
be Judged according to that particular Iustant of Death, but according to the
general Course of our Life. However it is observed in most cases, that God does
speak peace to upright Christians, before he takes them to himself. And thus it
was with our Deceased briend, of which more presently. But.

SECT. IV.
Secondly, Let us Consider her Carriage in each Relation. There were many
things Im table in her Example, as a Wife, a Mother, a Mistress, etc? Her
Affection and Reverence to her Husband, were very observable. When he, among
many other of the faithful Servants of Christ, was Silenced, and forbidden to
Preach; though she had then Children, and like to have more, and a considerable
Maintenance was thereby to be stopped, and a growing Family to be cast upon the
Providence of God; and many urged her to persuade him to comply with the
Imposed Terms; she wholly declined it, and would rather trust God in a
Suffering State; leaving him entirely to his Conscience, as the fittest Judge
of his Obligations, Trust, and Duty, in that Case.

When afterward, of Consequents to his Nonconformity, he met with any
Difficulties, by continuing to Preach, she patiently submitted, and took
joyfully the spoiling of their Goods; saying often, when his Person was in
hazard, That she was ready, rather to adventure her own Life, then that his
should be in danger: as apprehending his to be more valuable to the World, and
the Interest of Souls, than hers, or Twenty such.

This Affection she continued all her Life, advising her Children in her last
Sickness, to be careful of their Father, and tender of him in her Absence: for
by so mild, and good a word, she spoke of her Dissolution, then in prospect.
Advising them withal to Love one another, and be kindly affectioned to each
other: Praying particularly for her Son, whom she had the Comfort to see settled
in the Sacred Work of the Ministry, that God would furnish him with suitable
Strength of Body and Spirit, and crown his Ministry with an abundant Blessing.

Not long before she died, she thankfully owned the Goodness of God to her, in
the Spiritual Assistance and Comfort, she received by such Relations, who had
an Interest in Heaven, and could plead it for her in Prayer, while she was
languishing on a Sick Bed. O what a Mercy is it, (said she, when her Husband
and Son had both been Praying for her, with great Fervency and inlargedness of
Heart,) What a Mercy is it, that I should have such Relations, to plead with
God for me. And, at last, when she took her Farewell of her Husband, she thanked
him for all his Love, and all his Prayers, as audibly as she was then able to
speak.

Many Memorable things she said, by way of Counsel and Advice, to her Children.
As concerning the Deceitfulness of the Heart, and the need of searching it
again and again; for God knows it, and will not be mocked. Exhorting them to
seek God with their whole Heart, to Pray fervently, and importunately for his
Grace and Favor, and not in a slight and overly manner, as if they were
indifferent whether God did Answer, or Deny. I hope they will remember it, and
act accordingly.

At another time, in her Sickness, she cried out, whilst her Children were
about her, O Love the Lord all ye his Saints! Love the Lord ye my Children!
Love him, Fear him! She desired that they would Pray for her, and she assigned
a good Reason why they should; For, says she, I have often Prayed to God for
you, when you could not Pray for your selves.

Under this Head, I might add somewhat of her Carriage even to Servants, to
whom she gave the most Seasonable Counsel, particularly in her last Sickness,
to the Servant that attended her, to be much in Reading the Holy Scriptures, to
value Catechizing, and be diligent in learning the Principles of Religion, to
be faithful in her Place, etc. But this leads me,

SECT. V.
Thirdly, To the Last Scene of her Life, to speak of her deportment under
Bodily Weakness and Pains; under which her Patience and Submission were very
becoming, and truly Christian. When a day or two before she died, her
Relations seemed more than usually concerned; She asked them why they were so;
saying, It is not Death yet; I may outlive this, and be buffeted by Satan, as
a Roaring Lion, before I die.

When she could not sleep in the Night, she said the next Morning, I thought
this would have been a Comfortable night to me: but presently recollected her
self, saying, So it is, for it is a Mercy I am out of Hell, when Ten thousands
are cast into the bottomless pit, that never sinned as I have done.

How well she bore her own Sickness, and how little sollicitous she was about
the Issue of it, is evident from her own words; O how comfortable is Death,
when sin is Pardoned, and God Reconciled? O that I might entertain kind, and
good Thoughts of God, and trust him, though he slay me. When spoken to about
her Recovery; She could say, I do not hope it; and blessed be God I do not
desire it. When asked, Are you not in a straight about it? Are you willing to
leave Husband, and Children, and all to be with Christ? She declared her
Willingness.

It is true, sometime; she complained, that she had not such vigorous, lively,
melting Affections, in Sickness, as sometime formerly in Health: yet she
depended on God still.

When she was Asked, Whether she kept her Thoughts employed about Heaven? She
Answered, I do what I can. And the Night before she died, after a little
silence, when she was questioned concerning her Thoughts, What she was
thinking of? She Answered Three things, (which are fit for all of us often to
think of) a Deceitful Heart, a Painful Death, and a Tempting Devil: God
restrained the last, and carried her above the Fear, and Feeling of the Second:
for though she said, She feared a hard Death, as many Holy Persons do. Yet she
added, I submit to the will of God, he will not lay upon me more than he will
enable me to bear.

When the 17th Chapter of John was Read to her, where are those remarkable
Consolatory words of Christ, Father, I will, that those whom thou have given
me, may be with me, to behold my Glory; though she could hardly speak, so as to
be heard, she made a shift to say, O Excellent, Excellent; expressing her
Faith, and Hope, and Joy, as far as her weakness would permit.

Her Humility, and Thankfulness was very conspicuous during this Sickness. O
what a Mercy is it, said she, that such a one as I should have Hopes of Heaven,
of the Pardon of Sin, and of an Interest in Christ? And yet when any of those
holy expressions she used were repeated in Praver to God, by those who assisted
her, She desired, no such Speeches of hers should be mentioned to God; For,
says she, my Frame is not equal, and alike a way. I cannot think, and speak the
same things, at one time that I do at another.

An hour or two before she left this World, she testified her desire to be with
Christ; saying, How long! O Lord, how long! (if my Work be done) Come and
deliver me! She begged they would pray for her, that her Strength might hold
out to the last; that God would not leave her, nor hide his Face in the Agonies
of Death. She defired rather to be dissolved, than to continue in the Body:
saying, I Look, I Long, I Hope; O when will the hour come? Must I tarry, and
endure another Night! Come Lord Jesus, come quickly! Have thou no Bowels for
me? Whilst thou were on Earth, thou were full of Compassion to poor Sinners,
and art thou not the same in Heaven? After this, she owned her self refreshed
by Prayer, and that though her Body was weak, her Heart was in a good Frame;
being much recruited, and encouraged by Prayer. And so she commended her foul
to God, calling on him to the very last, for his merciful Assistance, and
Succor, through the dark Valley, and to accept and receive her departing Soul;
and so she died in the Lord, and slept in Jesus.

God grant to us, as he did to her, saving Help in that hour of Darkness and
Trouble; and enable us to follow the Exemplary Faith and Patience, of those who
are gone before; that with them at last, we may receive the end of our Faith
and Hope, the Salvation of our Souls, and the Resurrection of our Bodies in the
day of Christ, who is the Resurrection and the Life; in whom, whosoever
believes, shall never die the Second Death; but the Spirit, that raised Christ
from the Dead, shall quicken our Mortal Bodies, and make them like to his most
glorious Body, that with Soul and Body we may be for ever with the Lord. To him
be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books to be Sold by A. Chandler, of the same Author.
THe Mourners Companion, or Funeral Discourses on Several Texts.

An Exhortation to Repentance, and Union among Protestants.

The Present Correction and Reproof of Sin; or a Discourse on 2 Jer. 19. Thine
own Iniquities shall Correct thee, and thy Backslidings shall Reprove thee.

A Sermon of St. Peter's Sin, and True Repentance. Printed for S. Wade, at the
Bible under the Piaza of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.


