Family Religion, IN THREE LETTERS TO A FRIEND.

By JOHN SHOWER.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey. 1694.

Of Family Religion.
The FIRST LETTER.
SIR,
THE Substance of what I lately preached concerning Family Religion and
Worship, I now send you, at your Desire, in Three Letters. The First recommends
the Duty with the Grounds of it: The Second answers some Objections, and
Difficulties as to the Practice: The Third directs the manner of Performance,
etc. The Success of these plain Discourses, through the Blessing of Heaven, was
beyond Expectation; to bring the daily Worship of God into several Houses,
where before there was none; and to have it constant where it was performed but
seldom, and uncertainly; and to be now every Day, instead of once a Week, and
every Morning and Evening instead of Prayer at Night only.

Diverse of our Brethren in this City can say the like, and I hope more, of the
good Effects of our Agreement to preach on this Subject about the same time. It
was seasonable to more than we imagined: And there may be diverse who have since
begun to worship God in their Families, who are ashamed to own that they
neglected it so long. Tho not a few, with humble Thankfulness to God, have
acknowledged their Conviction, and Reformation of that Neglect. Many Servants
and Apprentices assure us, that God is now daily worshipped, and the Holy
Scriptures read in the Families where they live, who had no such thing before,
save only on the Lord's Day.

I had no thoughts at first of publishing any thing on this Subject, because
there is a great deal to this purpose already printed in Mr. Gurnal 's
Christian Warfare. Mr. Swinnock's Christian Man's Calling. Mr. Baxter 's
Directory. Yet Supplem. to the Morning-Exercise at Cripplegate. Some of Dr.
Manton 's Sermons. Mr. O.H 's Family-Altar, etc.
other Practical Books, from whence I have had Assistance; and some others of
my Brethren, I did hope would be prevailed with to print their Sermons, (and am
glad to hear that it is now doing, or resolved to be done.) But you, and others
who do constantly attend my Ministry, do hope to profit further by the Perusal
of those things, which in the Delivery were of some use.

This is reason enough to me for appearing again so soon in Print. I may say in
this case as one (whose Name I honor) does upon somewhat a like Occasion, that
as in all the Removes of my Life, I have been still led to that place, which
was most remote from my own Thoughts, and never designed or contrived by my
self; So it has been, as to what I have published; there has been (for the
most part) some unexpected Providence, and Occasion sufficient to satisfy me,
that I ought to do it; while those Writings, which I most affected, have been
stifled in the Conception; and those which I have most labored in, are like to
be buried in the Dust: Hereby I am made to know that God is the Disposer of all.

In this first Letter I shall collect the Substance of what may recommend and
prove the Duty of Family Religion and Worship; at least what I think is
sufficient to do so, tho it be not all that can be said. I begin with the
Necessity of it, in order to a National Reformation.

There is not a more common Subject of Complaint, than the growing Corruption
of Manners, and the Prevalency of Debauchery, and Irreligion among us. We must
shut our Eyes, and stop our Ears, if we are not acquainted with it: Who is not
sensible of the Justice and Truth of such a Complaint? All serious People
profess to bewail the want of Reformation; and many are apprehensive of
impending Judgments upon that Account. But what Hope of a National Reformation,
if it begin not in Families? If they, who have the Care and Government of these
lesser Societies, will not faithfully do their part; neither Magistrates, or
Ministers can expect Success in doing Theirs. Nations will be wicked, and
Churches will be corrupt, and Cities will abound with all manner of Impurity;
if particular Families, out of which the Members are all composed, be
disordered and irregular.

They who are not taught the Knowledge and Fear of God betimes, no wonder if
they run into Atheism and Debauchery as they grow up. That so many are thus
corrupted in Principles, and Conversation, must needs be very much owing to the
Neglect and Miscarriage of Parents, and Heads of Families. Reformation must
therefore begin in Families: And a whole Street would soon be made clean, by
every Man's Care as to his own House, and sweeping before his own Door. The
Psalmist began that in his own Family, which he designed should reach to his
whole Kingdom: Psalm. 101.

Is it strange, if they who have lived many Years in such Families, where God
was not worshipped, where there was little or no Concern about Religion, (it
may be not so much as the Form, and the Show of it) if they are ignorant and
careless, dissolute and profane, when they come to have Families of their own?
If they be as little solicitous for the Souls under their Care, as their own
Parents and Masters were of theirs, during their Minority? If there be no
reading the Holy Scriptures, no instructing of Children and Servants, no Prayer
and Praise offered to God in the Family, as such; how unlikely is it, that such
who are brought up in their Youth in such Houses, should afterward be
Exemplary for Religion in their own?

It lies more upon Parents and Masters, to recover, and preserve serious
Godliness in the World, than either upon the Civil Magistrate, or the most
diligent and faithful Ministers of Christ, in their places. And whence can we
hope for any useful Magistrates, or faithful Ministers, if they are not formed
to be capable of being such, by the wise and good Instruction of holy Parents,
and the Blessing of God thereupon, in their tender Years? It is certain, they
are like to profit little by the preaching of the Word, if they have not
Understanding and prepared Minds, by the Instructions of Parents and Masters at
home; at least little in comparison of others who have had that Advantage. One
great reason why People do not better understand Sermons, and profit more by
them, is, because they never well understood their Catechism.

It is in vain therefore to talk against the Badness of the Times, and the
Looseness of the Age, unless you will resolve that Reformation shall begin at
home; and every one be at the pains to Reform his own little Family.

It is from thence that Wickedness does spread and diffuse it self over a whole
Kingdom. One ignorant, atheistical, erroneous, or wicked Family may do much to
corrupt, defile and destroy several others, when the Branches thereof are
separated: As by a Son going into one Family, and a Daughter into another, and
a Servant into a third: They carry and communicate their evil Principles and
Customs, and Prejudices, to the Infection of others. It cannot reasonably be
expected that Persons, when they come abroad in the World, should ordinarily
prove better than their Education. Whereas, as one observes, a Religious Family
is, on the contrary, a diffusive Blessing, like a Stock of Bees, which sends
forth Swarms and Honey into Neighboring Parts. Especially as the Members
hereof come hereafter to have Families of their own. Therefore to shut Religion
out of Families, or not promote it there, is the means to thrust it out of the
World.

This has been observed by the very Pagans, as the proper way for a private Man
to be a Public Good, and serviceable to the Welfare of his Country, viz. by
ordering things well at home, with Wisdom and Care, in his own House and
Family. And there is hardly any thing whereby so much Evil is done to the
Public, as by the Carelessness of Parents in the Instruction of their Children,
and the Negligence, or ill Examples of Masters with respect to their Servants.
Among some of the Heathens, a Penalty has been laid upon the Parents, when the
Children were ill-conditioned: and they might be sued in the Courts of
Judicature, if they neglected the Education of their Children.

And how much the Safety, Pleasure and Comfort of our Lives depends upon the
faithful Discharge of Relative Duties, Experience will teach us. What greater
Comfort can a Parent or a Master have, than to see the Success of his
Endeavors for the Good of those under his Roof? A natural Parent may say it,
as well as a spiritual one, I have no greater Joy than to see my Children
walking in the Truth. It is said of Abraham, Heb. 11.9. that he dwelt in Tents
with Isaac and Jacob; Heirs with him of the same Promise. How comfortable is it
when Father, Son and Grandson, are all Heirs of the same promised Salvation?
Especially if God bless your Endeavors toward it, that they who come from
your Loins may serve the Lord. There is a double Blessing where the Father is
Godly, and the Son so likewise. To see them alive to God, who were dead in Sin,
will revive the Heart of a Religious Parent, as it did old Jacob's, to know
that his Son Joseph was alive. To have Wife and Children bear the Image of God,
and our Servants to obey, and serve, and please their Heavenly Master; and by
our Faithfulness, and Care, and Diligence to be brought to know, and love, and
worship, and honor him, and be accepted with him; What an unspeakable Delight
must this be! when the Savor of Religion descends from the Head to all the
Members of the Family, as the precious Ointment, poured on the Head of Aaron,
ran down to the Skirts of his Garments. You then may, and will love them with a
higher kind of Love, than bare natural Affection.

In short, you will love your Husbands, Wives, and Children, and holy
Relations, with another sort of Love than other Persons do theirs. It is a more
fervent, more pure, more faithful, more comfortable Love, which is superadded
by Religion, and results from their Love to God, and Participation of his
Image. You love them, as the Friends and Brethren of Christ, as Heirs of the
same Inheritance, as begotten again to a Divine Life by the same Spirit, as
born of the same Immortal Seed of the Word, as nourished by the same Spiritual
Food, as under the same Bond of the Covenant, as of one Household of Faith, as
Soldiers under the same Colors and Banner of Christ, as called to the same
blessed Hope of the Gospel, as Travelers to the same Heavenly Country, and
Coheirs of the same glorious, everlasting Kingdom. You cannot love your
unsanctified Relations in this manner, whatever Natural or Civil Bonds of Union
there may be between you and them. It will please you doubtless, to see them
thrive and prosper in the World, whom you tenderly love; but it must much more
do so, to see them faithful to God, live to his Glory, and ripen for Heaven.
Whether you live or die, you may then comfortably resign them, and trust them
with God, who loves them better than you, and will be sure to take care of
them. With what Pleasure can you think of the Sin and Misery which they escape?
What Wickedness such a Child would else have committed on Earth? and what
Torments he must have endured in Hell, if he had been wicked? Their Love,
Honor and Obedience to you, (which the Grace of God will teach them) will also
add to your Joy; in your Health and Sickness, or old Age, they will pray for
you. And if they die, you can look forward to the everlasting Happiness of
their Souls, as well as your own, and the hopes of meeting them with Comfort in
the Day of Reckoning.

And what an Honor is it to any Family, to have serious Godliness transmitted
from Father to Son, and from the Son to the Grandchild? To be able to say, My
God, and my Father's God, and my Grand-father's God? 2 Timothy 1.5. as Pliny
reports, Dr. Manton on Heb. 11. p. 551.
it was counted a great Honor and Felicity, that in one Family of the Fabii,
there were three Presidents of the Senate one after another; and in one House
of Curio's, there were three Orators one after another.

Besides, how Beautiful and Pleasant a Thing is a Religious Well-ordered
Family! How Comfortable is it to dwell in such an House? Where God is
Worshipped, and his Laws observed, and his Day sanctified, his Word read, his
Authority owned, and his Laws made the Rule! Where it is an Honor, and not a
Reproach to eschew Evil and do Good! God promises to bless the Habitations of
the Just, and how sweet will his Presence be unto such! Whereas, to live in a
House where the Name of God is never used, but in jest, or scorn, or profane
Oaths; where the Inhabitants are as so many Brutes, that live from day to day,
as if they had no Souls to save, no World but this to mind, and no Expectations
beyond the Grave; where Worldliness and Sensuality, filthy Talk, and
Intemperance, etc. have infected Superiors and Inferiors. Who would dwell in
such a House? There cannot generally be Peace and Union, Love and Concord in
such Men's Dwellings. Family Jars, Contentions and Sorrows are occasioned by
Sin, which Family Religion would do much to prevent and cure.

If Children are a Grief to their Parents, and Thorns in their Eyes, (as a
Wicked Son is the Calamity and Shame of his Father, and Heaviness to his
Mother;) they may thank themselves, as of their own Planting: if they did not
with Love and Diligence, with Wisdom and Faithfulness seek their Salvation. If
Servants neglect their Duty to you, how can you wonder, when you have neglected
yours to them? You must bear the Fruit of their Sin, if you do not teach them
the Principles of Religion, which should make them better; and teach them to
keep a good Conscience by giving them your own Example. But if your Endeavors
should not succeed for their Conversion, and Salvation, you will yet have much
more Peace than otherwise; as having done what you could toward it. Whereas,
without such Endeavors, it must be an afflictive piercing Thought when any of
them Die, or when you your selves must; to consider that you did no more to
prevent their Damnation; and that such and such, through your Unfaithfulness,
are like to Perish for ever, who sprang from your Loins, or went to Hell out of
your House.

Moreover, what Evidence can you have of your own Piety, and Sincerity toward
God, if you do not thus endeavor the Spiritual and Eternal Good of those under
your Charge? Abraham would command his Children, and his Household after him,
that they should fear the Lord. Joshua resolves to engage all his House to
serve the true God with him; though a General and a Great Man, did not think it
beneath him to own Religion before all the World, and endeavor to promote it.
He would not serve the True God alone, if he could prevail with Others to join
with him: Proposes his own Example to the whole Nation; and that as far as in
him lay all his Family at least should be Religious. Cornelius was a devout
Man, and feared God with all his House. We may, without being uncharitable,
suspect the soundness of their Religion; who are unconcerned for the spreading
of it in their Families. How is it consistent with Faithfulness to your own
Souls; to have little or no Care concerning theirs? If you are wanting in using
the means for their Salvation, you shake the ground of Hope concerning your own.

And Family Prayer and Instruction, and the Holy Examples of Good Men in their
Houses, is one of the First Means which God commonly makes use of to Convince,
and Turn, and Sanctify such as were Ignorant and Carnal. At least, Education
making the first Impression on their Minds, whatever Change may be afterward
made by free Conversation, somewhat of the first good Tincture is like to abide.

Ordinarily I say, through the Blessing of God, this may be hoped for; tho it
must be confessed, that where the Advantages of Education are misimproved, it
is observed, many of the Children and Servants who have been bred in good
Families, prove worse than others. If they forsake God, he has said, He will
forsake them, and cast them off for ever. It is a Judicial Act in God, when
Children cast off the God of their Fathers. If they turn Apostates, they many
times run deeper into Sin, and further from God than others, as Cain, Cham,
Ishmael, Esau, Eli's Sons, Absalom, yea Solomon, Rehoboam, Manasseh, and few
comparatively recovered. The Light and Means they sin against provokes God to
abandon them. Upon the same grounds we may give an account, why there are more
Atheists in such places, where the Christian Religion is professed, and the
Power of it rejected, than among any other sort of Men, even than there were
among the Heathens themselves. For See to this purpose, Dr. Owen of
Spiritual-Mindedness. 4o. Chap. 8.
God has designed to Magnify his Word above all his Name, above all other
ways of the Revelation of himself to the Children of Men. Therefore where this
is despised and rejected, Reason or the Light of Nature shall not have the same
Power and Efficacy, as on them who never enjoyed the Light of the Gospel, or so
much of it. From the same Reason, that the Children of Professors are sometimes
irrecoverably Profligate, there is more Common Housty and Justice to be found
among civilized Heathens and Mahumetans, than among false and degenerate
Christians. Their Hearts are judicially hardened, and their Eyes blinded. And
the Contempt of Gospel Light must needs beget, and leave on the Mind such a
depraved corrupt Habit, as cannot but incline unto the worst of Evils. 2 Pet.
2.21. And as all Atheism springs from a Resolution not to see things Eternal,
and invisible to Sense; wherever Men are resolved not to see, the greater the
light is which shines about them, the faster they must close their Eyes. It is
not therefore to the Disparagement, but Honor of the Gospel, that so many avow
themselves to be Atheists, in those places where the Truth of it is known and
professed: For none can have any inclination thereto, till they have rejected
the Gospel, which immediately exposes them to the worst of Evils. They take
shelter from their Fears in downright Atheism, which alone pretends to give
them security against the Light of Divine Revelation. And what means can be
used for the recovery of such? The most rational Arguments to prove the Being
and Existence of God, may be of good use to shame, and expose their foolish
Pretenses. But Men under the Power of Atheistical Thoughts, are ensnared into
them by a Love of some Lust, and a desire to live securely in Sin; and no
Arguments from Reason, are like to prove an effectual Cure to the Predominant
Love of Sin, and an Habitual Course in it, where Men have rejected the Means
and Motives unto that end declared in Divine Revelation.

Parents however have sufficient encouragement to hope for success in their
faithful Endeavors: There be many can speak of God, and praise him as their
Fathers God, from Age to Age. If they neglect their Duty to Children, (which is
ordinarily the reason, why so many miscarry) they cannot challenge God, for not
performing his Covenant-Promise, but must condemn themselves. But whatever the
Success be, every Parent, and Head of Family is obliged to Honor God, and
Promote Religion, and do what good he can for the Souls of others, within his
Sphere.

This all in their several Places are bound to endeavor, as they have
opportunity. You must be faithful to Christ and his Interest in every Relation,
and in every Capacity. If you are obliged to serve and worship God in a single
Capacity, as Private Persons; by virtue of the same Dedication of your selves
to Him, you are bound to serve and Honor him in every Relation, as Husbands,
Parents, Masters, and Heads of Families, in every State and Condition,
according to your Capacity. And by Family Prayer and Worship God has greater
Honor, than by Secret Prayer; tho therein you may more particularly, and
largely express the state of your own Soul.

And of how great Consequence, to the Eternal Salvation, or Ruin of Souls, is
your Care, or Unfaithfulness herein! How can you serve the Devil more
effectually, than by furthering the Damnation of all under your Roof, through
the neglect of your Duty to them? And without giving them Assistance, and Help
to a Holy Life, they will have continual Temptations to Sin. In that House
wherein God is not served, honored, and worshipped, the Devil's Interest will
prevail. And since they have an Everlasting Happiness to attain, and Endless
Misery to escape, they will have little reason to thank you, for whatever else
you can teach them, or do for them; if you will not instruct them, and assist
them in This, their most Important Concern.

It might be hoped, that if Parents did their part in the use of God's first
appointed Means, to sanctify their Children; he would usually bless their
Endeavors in order to his saving Grace. And when serious Religion is once got
into a Family, it has been observed, for your Encouragement, that ordinarily
the Grace of God does not soon leave it: tho there may be some sad
Interruption, yet it appears many times again in Grandchildren, and Great
Grandchildren; as in the Seed of good Jehoshaphat and others, 2 Chronicles.
20.21.22. Chap. Jotham had Ahaz, but Ahaz had Hezekiah; and if not in the
direct Line, yet collaterally. So that by this means you may transmit Religion
to Posterity, from Generation to Generation; as Sin is propagated from Father
to Son, and from one wicked Family diffused to many others: And you perpetuate
your own Name and Honor too; for Godly Children occasion their Parents to be
called to Memory. By beholding Timothy's Piety, the Apostle is minded to
remember his Mother, and Grandmother, Eunice and Lois, 2 Timothy 1.5. When I call
to remembrance the unfeigned Faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy
Grandmother Lois, and thy Mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also.
The Piety and Care of holy Women is recorded with Honor, Acts 16.1. Behold a
certain Disciple was there, named Timotheus, the Son of a certain Woman which
was a Jewess, and believed; but his Father was a Greek.

Such is the fingular Usefulness of the holy Government of Families to reform
the World, and destroy the Kingdom and Interest of the Devil, that there is
hardly any thing that Men have more Objections against, or more Evasions and
Excuses to extenuate the Noglect of their Duty, or persuade themselves it is
none, than in this Case. One of the most common and prevailing Cavils is this,
That if they bring their Children and Servants to the Public Worship, to be
taught by the Minister, there is no positive, express Scripture for the Worship
of God in their Families, to call them together, to pray with them, and read
the Scriptures, etc.

But in how many other cases is it granted, that the want of a positive express
Command will not conclude such or such a Thing to be no Duty? The Baptism of
Infants, the Sanctification of the first Day of the Week as the Christian
Sabbath, the Admission of Women to the Lord's-Table, and other Instances may be
given, which may be proved to be Matter of Duty, without positive express
Command. The Apostle is said to confound the Jews dwelling at Damascus, proving
out of the Scriptures, that Jesus was the Christ; Acts 9.21. it must be by the
Harmony of the Holy Scriptures, and by Deductions from express Texts: for he
did not bring any one particular Scripture out of the Old Testament, to prove
in so many Letters, that Jesus was the Christ. Nor did our Lord in his Proof of
the Resurrection of the Dead against the Pharisees, out of the Old Testament,
Mat. 22.37. There are no such words as the Resursurrection of the Dead
mentioned in that Passage, from which he proves it. I am the God of Abraham,
etc.

It Is an Argument of a very perverse Mind, to insist so much upon positive
Scriptural Proof of that as our Duty, which must be acknowledged to be so much
for our Benefit and Advantage, and for the Public Good.

There is reason enough to believe, that they who pretend there is no express
Scripture for this kind of Duty, would little mind it, if there were never so
many, and never so express. for if Men were true to God, and their own Souls,
in those things for which we have the most positive, and express, and repeated
Authority of the Holy Scriptures; they would not raise such a Scruple. There is
an express Command to Repent of Sin, and to Believe on Christ, and to make your
Calling and Election sure; to Redeem your Time, and walk Circumspectly; to do
good unto all; to pray every where, and all sorts of Prayer; and in every
Calling, Station and Relation, therein to abide with God; to live by Faith upon
the invisible World; to prepare to die, and to remember the Judgment Seat of
Christ, before which we must be made to stand, to answer for all we have
received and done in the Body, etc. there are Express Scriptures about these
things: And did we believe them, remember them, and obey them; we should soon
see Reason, and Evidence sufficient for all that Duty of worshipping God, and
promoting Religion in our Families, which I would now press.

I know there be some Arguments used from Scripture upon this Subject, which
many think will not conclude all that which they are brought to prove. As that
because we read of the Church of God in such a Man's House, Romans 16.5. (when it
is likely there were no common Assemblies of Christians at Rome) that therefore
every House should be as a Church, by daily Prayer and Praise to God: For the
House of God is an House of Prayer, and a Church is God's House. I will not
urge this, because a House might be called a Church, only on the Account of the
Church sometimes assembling for Divine Worship in such a Man's House. I grant
the smallest Congregation of the Faithful met to worship God, may bear the Name
of a Church. However, I do not believe this Argument, because I believe it true
of many in this City and Nation, (and wish I had no ground for it) that they
have had frequent Meetings in their Houses for Prayer and Preaching, and diverse
Christians have resprted to the Worship of God there; and yet the Master of the
Family lived in the neglect of Family Prayer, and the daily Worship of God in
his House.

Neither will I urge the Example of our Savior Christ, his praying with his
Disciples: Though much may be gathered from his Pattern, as having a Family,
whereof he was the Master, and his Twelve Apostles Members. (Constant Residence
in one House is not necessary to constitute the Relation between the Head of a
Family, and the Members of it.) We read of his instructing 'em, praying with
'em, and praising God, by singing together, etc. But I will not lay too much
stress on this Example, because though our Blessed Lord did occasionally pray
with his Disciples, as we find in several places of the Gospel-History; yet his
Case and ours are vastly different. What was suitable for his Disciples, was
not proper for him. He could not ordinarily be their Mouth in Prayer, for what
they daily needed: He could not for himself ask the Forgiveness of Sin, and the
Mortification of Lust, and the Increase of Grace, etc.

But there is enough from the Holy Scriptures, to convince those that will
seriously consider it, of the Duty of Family Religion, and Prayer as a part of
it. For Instance, we read of Joshua, that he resolves for himself and Family, I
and the Men of my House will serve before the Lord: That is, the Men who dwelt
with him in his House. And we read of Cornelius, Acts 10.2. that he was a
devout Man, one that feared God with all his House, and gave much Alms to the
People, and prayed always. He was a Roman Captain over the Italian Band, which
attended the Roman Governor's Person as his Lifeguard, and therefore probably
of that Nation. This Cornelius is said to be a Devout Man. Whether he were a
Proselyte to the Church of Israel or no, is doubtful, be sure not a Proselyte
of the Covenant, or of Justice, for such were Circumcised. If he were an
Uncircumcised Proselyte, or a Proselyte of the Gate, he was not incorporated
into the Commonwealth of Israel. The Apostle Peter had a Vision first to
authorize him to go to him. And the Christians of the Circumcision expressed
their Resentment for his Conversation with him, till they knew his Warrant,
Acts 11.3. Yet this Roman, this Soldier, this Centurion was accepted of God,
as being prepared to believe in Christ, as soon as he should be revealed to him.
He was a devout and good Man; and not only good himself, but chose such to be
in his Family, as feared God. He was full of good Works, and constant in
Prayer: and God testified his Acceptance of him, Thy Prayers, and thine Alms
are come up as a Memorial before God, Verse. 4. Of a Truth I perceive, says the
Apostle, that God is no respecter of Persons; but in every Nation, he that
fears God, and works Righteousness, shall be accepted, Verse. 39. Here is a
surprising Example of a devout Soldier, a devout Roman, spreading Religion in
his Family; One that feared God with all his House, and prayed always. The Fear
of God is an usual Expression, comprehensive of all Divine Worship, 2 Kings
17.36, 37. Let all the Earth worship him, Psalm. 66.4. Let all the Earth fear
him, Psalm. 67.7. And Prayer being the principal part of it; we may suppose,
that as he feared God, and all his House, so he prayed with all his House unto
God. And he himself seems so to explain it, I prayed to God in mine House at
the ninth Hour; or with my Household, as it may be rendered. He afterward
called together his Kindred, and his near Friends, when Peter came; but
mentions not the calling of his Household, as what was usual and supposed.

And the praying always, or continually, can hardly bear a less Sense, than the
doing of it every Day: As the daily Sacrifice which God appointed the Jews, is
called the continual Sacrifice, which was offered Morning and Evening, Dan.
8.11. So Mephibosheth is said to eat Bread at the King's Table continually, 2 Samuel 9.7. that is, at Mealtime every Day. Nature and Scripture both seem to
concur to recommend Morning and Evening as the proper Season for Prayer. It is
good to give Thanks unto the Lord, and to sing Praises to thy Name, O most
High; to show forth thy Loving Kindness every Morning, and thy Faithfulness
every Night. Ps. 92.1, 2. God is to be worshipped by all Persons, and all
People, Ps. 22.27, 28. Ps. 66.4. and by Social Worship, Psalm 34.3. Acts 12.12.
The general Nature of Worship, and all the Essentials of true Divine Worship is
found in the Worship of God by Families, as such. The Object, the End, and the
Rule is the same.

And since there are many Commands in Scripture concerning Divine Worship, and
this part of it, Prayer in particular, which are of general Extent, such as of
praying always, and giving thanks always, and continuing in Prayer and
Thanksgivings with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, every where
lifting up holy hands, in every thing giving thanks, etc. 'twill be hard to
obey all these Commands, and yet live in the neglect of Family Prayer. For by
the Light of Nature we may from hence be able to determine the Performance of
this Duty, to be every Day, as a proper Time, and in every House, as a proper
Place for it. But if it were only permitted us, we are greatly wanting to our
own Interest to neglect it. These general Rules and Precepts do at least
warrant, and make lawful our Praying together every Day. We have leave to pray
together, and shall we not use it? What if God should have forbidden us; if he
should put any of our Families under an Interdict; and say, You shall not pray
to me: I will not receive a Sacrifice from you. Your Neighbors may pray to me
every Morning and Night, I Will hear them, and accept them. As for you, you shall
have no Family-Altar, or Sacrifice. Who would not be grieved to be forbidden
such a daily Privilege? Who would not then use it, if they might? And because
the Evening and Morning do make one Day, as the Beginning and the End do
comprehend the whole; he that prays every Morning and Evening, may be said to
pray continually, to pray always, to pray without ceasing.

Does not the Light of Nature, which instructs us in the Being of God, and the
Immortality of the Soul, oblige us to endeavor the good of those in our
Families? And as one proper means of their spiritual Welfare, it may direct the
Master of a Family to pray with them; there being Family-Sins to be confessed
by us, and forgiven by God; there being many Temptations every day to be
resisted, Wants to be supplied, Duties performed, Graces exercised, Crosses
prevented, Mercies acknowledged, etc. in Families, as such: with respect unto
all these, Family Prayer and Worship is an excellent Means.

Some of those who had not the Advantage of Scripture-Revelation, have yet had
their Houshold-Gods. The Eastern Nations had their Teraphim; the Egyptians,
Greeks, and Romans had their Lares and Penates, a Sort of Family-Gods, to rule,
preserve, and defend them in their Houses; whom they worshipped and sacrificed
unto in their Houses: and several of them had a particular Room, set apart for
an Oratory to that purpose. The Heathen Poets, Hesiod, Homer, and others,
mention their daily Sacrifices to their Gods every Morning and Evening; that
they might prosper, and succeed by their Favor in all their Affairs: and their
Practice may be urged for our Conviction. It seems a Prescription of the Law of
Nature, that every Society wherein Men do unite, and join according to the Mind
of God, should own their Dependence on him, by some Worship common to that
Society; and as performed in the Name of it; especially is it so, as to an
Household or Family, which is the Foundation of all other Societies. Hence there
were Sacrifices peculiar unto Families before the Law, wherein the Father of
the Family was the sacred Administrator. So Job offered Burnt-Offerings for
himself and Family, Chap. 1.5. and Jacob for his, Genesis 35. And such
Family-Sacrifices were famous among the An Eminent Instance hereof the Roman
Historian gives us in C. Fabius, who when Rome was sacked by the Gauls, and the
Capitol besieged, upon the stated Time of the solemn Worship and Sacrifices of
the Family of the Fabii, passed through the Enemies Camp to the Quirinal Hill,
and dischargod the accustomed Sacra, returning to the Capitol, without
Disturbance or Affront from the Enemy. Live. lib. 5. And the Family-Ceremonies
in the Sacrifice of an Ox unto Hercales, by the Folitii and Pinarii, were
adopted by Romulus and Numa, into the use of the whole People, the Posterity of
those Families being made as it were their. Public Prirsts thereby. And after
they had confirmed the Administration of their Sura in public Solemnities for
the whole Community, yet they left it free to single Parsons and Families, to
sacrifice for themselves as they saw good. For as they took up the Former
Course, probably from the Form and Example of Mosaical Institutions, so they
did the Latt^ from the Original Practice and Tradition of the World. Even the
meanest of the People continued their Family- Libations. Sacrima they called
the Wine which your Countrymen offered to Bacchus, as Festus testifies; and
Capar, the Vessel out of which they drew the Wine, whereof they made a Libation
to Jupiter. Struserta and Suo-veturaulia, were the Satrifices of poor Families.
And something in Resemblance of this Original Practice, continued among the
People of God, after the giving of the law. -- Dr. Owen on the Hebrews, Vol. 2.
Exer. cit. 10.. 4.
Heathens. And shall the Pagans outdo us? Shall they be sensible of their
Dependence in their Families on some Superior Aids, so as to worship Stocks
and Stones in their Houses, rather than have no Worship at all; and shall
Christians live contentedly without the Worship of the true God in their
Families? All People will walk every one in the Name of bis God, and shall not
We resolve to walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever? Mic. 4.5.

IN SHORT, If God be the Founder, the Owner, the Governor and Benefactour of
Families; If such little Societies be of his Appointment, and do both need and
receive daily Mercies from him; it is but fit he should be worshipped, and owned
every Day in particular Families. Before the giving of the Law to Moses, how
was God worshipped but in Families? Family Worship was the first kind of Social
Worship: Religion was at first confined to single Persons; upon the Increase of
Mankind it begun in Families. Every Ruler of a Family was then a Priest to his
own House, or offered his own Sacrifice, and governed his Family, not only as
such, but as a Religious Society: Afterward Religion spread into larger
Societies. This was the first Power God entrusted Man with, to be the Head, and
Ruler, and Father of a Family; to take care of the Welfare of that little
Society, and of all that belonged to it: Especially to take care of Religion,
and the Worship of God there. He was not only the Civil Governor, but the
Priest, though not by proper Office, for that results not from the Light and
Law of Nature, but depends on Institution, as typical, and representative of
the Priesthood of Christ. I mention this, because it is commonly said, that the
Priesthood belonged to the Firstborn, as a Branch of the Primogeniture; and
that the Priesthood of every Family was in the Possession of the Firstborn,
till the time of the Levitical Law. But this is not Bp Stilling fleet's
Irenicum, Part I. Chap. 4. citing Theodoret. quest. 108. in Genesis 8. and Isid.
Pelus. lib. 2. Ep. 47, and 48.
proved from Scripture; what is commonly alleged from Numb. 3.41. of the
Levites being taken instead of the Firstborn, will conclude no such thing. God
having delivered their Firstborn in Egypt, Exodus 12.23. called for them to be
sanctisied to him, Chap. 13.22. upon the Account of the special Propriety he
had in them by that Deliverance; and not on the Account of any special Service,
for many were unfit for that by reason of Age: and which is observable, God
requires as well the Firstborn of Beasts to be sanctified, and redeemed. When
therefore God would settle a way of Worship, he gave the Israelites liberty to
redeem them, and instead of the Firstborn, he pitched on the Tribe of Levi for
his own Service.

Besides, we find in Scripture, that the Younger were ordinarily preferred
before the Firstborn, as Abel before Cain, Seth before Japheth, Abraham before
his Elder Brethren, Isaac before Ishmael, Jacob before Esau, Judah and Joseph
before Reuben, Ephraim before Manasses, Moses before Aaron, and David before
the rest of his Brethren, although that was after the Law. From the Beginning
doubtless the Father of the Family was the High Priest to it, and the Duty of
sacrificing was committed to him, and herein it is See Dr. Owen on the Hebr.
vol. 2. exercir. 1^,. 6, 7, 8, 9.
probable he had the special Assistance of the Firstborn of the Family, whereby
he might be initiated into his future Duty. But that Office of a Priest was not
confined to the Elder Brother, for Abel offered Sacrifices in his own Person,
while his Father and his Elder Brother were alive, as Abraham did after the
Flood, while the Eldest Son of Noah was living; and when the Younger Sons of
Noah were separated, and dispersed into several distinct Families, they did not
lose the Right of solemnizing the Worship of God thereby.

When the World increased, and larger Societies were set up, the Power of a
Parent as Head of a Family was in some respects broken, and Parents had not the
Power of Life and Death over their Children, as before: But much of the Power
of a Parent, and Master over his own Family, is continued by God; and therefore
Children and Servants are commanded to obey their Parents and Masters, as well
as to obey Civil Magistrates. Now I would argue thus, That if Family Worship,
at first, did not exclude personal Religion, and private Prayer to God by one
alone, as doubtless it did not; then the public Worship of God (when many
Families meet together) should not exclude Family Worship, or the daily
Invocation of God in particular Families, by as many of such a little Society
as can come together. There is the same reason why Family Worship and Religion
should continue, after the public Worship of God by many Families together is
set up, as that Personal Religion, and secret Prayer should continue a Duty,
after God began to be worshipped in Families.

I shall not insist upon Queen Hester's keeping a Fast with her Maids, which
was extraordinary; nor, enlarge on the Example of Jacob, who built an Altar,
and called on the Name of the Lord, and called on his Family to prepare for it,
Genesis 35.2, 3. Saying to his Household, and all that were with him, Put away the
strange Gods, and let us build an Altar to Jehovah, etc. His Grandfather
Abraham circumcised all the Males in his House, brought 'em under the Bond and
Seal of the Covenant; and wherever he resided with his Family for any
considerable time, he built Altars, and offered Sacrifices. That dreadful Curse
imprecated (or denounced rather, and predicted) upon the Families that call not
upon God's Name, (though principally meaning Tribes of People; and by calling
on the Name of God, worshipping the true God in opposition to Idolatry;) yet
deserves to be considered, because by parity of Reason, it may extend to the
lesser Societies, where the True God is not owned, and worshipped.

God has also promised to bless the Habitations of the Just, and he has often
owned by his Providence his acceptance of Family-Religion and Worship. When all
the Old World had neglected God, and corrupted their Ways, the true Religion
continued but in the Family of Noah; He and his were saved from the Universal
Deluge, when the rest were swept away by the Flood.

Agreeable to this is a Passage, frequently mentioned to this purpose, in
Suitzerland in the Canton of Bern, Anno Christi 1584, when a whole Village,
consisting of ninety Houses, were overturned by an Earthquake; there was but
one Family excepted, and but one half House preserved; and in that half of the
House that was preserved, the Master of the Family was earnestly praying to
God, with his Wife and Children, while the Earthquake destroyed all his
Neighbors.

For the Instruction and Teaching of Children and Servants, as a part of
Family-Religion, there are sufficiently express Scriptures. To bring them up in
the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord; To train them up in the way wherein
they should go; And consequently to teach them to pray to God, and praise him.
And the Example of a Parent or Master is one of the best ways of teaching them.
The Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 5.8. That he that does not provide for his own
House and Family, has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. He that
does not provide Food and Raiment for those of his own Household, comes under
this Character. And if he be so bad, who takes no care of the Welfare of their
Bodies, what shall we think of him who has no Concern for their Souls; not to
instruct them in their Duty to God, not to pray with them, not to read the Holy
Scriptures to them? He, it may be, feeds and clothes his Children and Servants,
as a kind Father and Master, and as an Englishman, but carries it to their
Souls like a Barbarous Indian, or a Careless Insidel. As much more worth as the
Soul is than the Body, so much worse is that Man that is careless of the Souls
in his Family, than he that is careless of their Bodies: Such a one the Apostle
says, has denied the Faith, he cannot with any Face pretend to be a Christian.

How shameful then is it, for Men to be admitted to the highest Privileges of
Christians, I mean to the Table of the Lord, and yet neglect the Worship of God
in their Families? We find in Exodus 12.47, 48. that no Proselyte might presume
to come to the Passover, unless his whole House, as well as himself, were
circumcised, and professed the Jewish Religion. If this Law, as well as its
Equity, were still in force, how few would now come to the holy Sacrament.

He that does not provide for his own, is worse than an Infidel. He that would
suffer their Bodies to starve, and does not give them sufficient proper Food,
deserves this Censure and Reproach: much more does he who neglects their Souls.
It is not indifferent to you, whether your Children and Servants be sed, and
clothed, and have necessary Provisions, or no; whether they be nourished, or
whether they be starved: And is it nothing to you whether they be saved or
damned? You would not be accessory to the Murder of their Bodies, and will you
not be as careful to avoid the like, and greater Guilt with reference to their
Souls?

If Parents had no Trust and Charge committed to them from God (who says, All
Souls are mine) with relation to the Souls of their Children; if Ma^ers were to
give no Account to God of their Servants, but whether they gave them Food and
Wages, etc. they might be concerned as to these things. But you are Stewards
entrusted with the Care of their Souls, as well as their Bodies. And it will be
sad hereafter, for a Child to say before the Bar of Christ, There stands my
cruel Father or Mother, who never prayed with me, or instructed me in the
Matters of Religion, and so I minded it not. The like for a Servant; he lived
so many Years with such or such a Master, and never had any Assistance from him
to further his Salvation.

Certainly as to Children, Parents are more especially obliged, as having
greater and nearer Obligations to them, than any Ministers or Pastors can have
to their People. Your Children are Parts of your selves, and if you are not
concerned for their Souls, you are unnatural and cruel to them: It is from you,
their immediate Parents, that they receive their corrupted Nature, their
Pollution and Misery; and therefore you are bound to endeavor their Recovery
and Cure. You will also condemn your selves, in being sollicitous for their
Bodily Welfare (which most are to an excess) while you neglect the Salvation of
their Souls. And by your Care of their Souls, you provide for their Bodily
Welfare too. God has promised to bless the Posterity of his Servants. Tho the
Church was continued in the Line of Isaac, yet God promised to bless Ishmael
for the ^ake of his Father Abraham. I will make him a great Nation, for he is
thy Seed; Genesis 21.13. But remember they must die, and they are capable of Grace
and Immortality; and will you only provide for them as you do for your Beasts?
Plutarch taxing the Abuse of Parents, who strive to leave their Children Rich,
and not Virtuous, says, they do like those who are sollicitous about the Shoe,
but neglect the Foot. They depend on you for their Maintenance and Livelihood,
and so you have an Advantage to promote their Good; they will hearken to your
Counsels, when they will not regard what a Minister can say. You have an
Interest in their Affections, joined with an Authority over them; they are with
you in their tender Years, and so your Work is the easier.

This is well described by an eloquent Bishop Jer. Taylor's Discourse of
Baptism, 4^. 1653. p. 54, 55.
Pen. God was confident concerning Abraham, that he would teach his Children;
and Parents have great Power by strict Education, and prudent Discipline, to
form the Minds of Children to Virtue. Joshua did undertake for his Household, I
and my House will serve the Lord; and for Children we may better do it, because
till they are of perfect Choice, no Government in the World is so great, as
that of Parents over their Children. They rule over their Understandings, and
Children know nothing but what they are told, and they believe it infinitely:
And it is a rare Art of the Spirit to engage Parents to bring them up well in
the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. They are Persons obliged by a
superinduced Band; they are to give them Instructions and holy Principles, as
they give them Meat. It is certain Parents may better stipulate for their
Children, than the Church can for Men or Women. They may be Hypocrites, and the
next day may change their Resolution, and grow weary of their Vow; and that is
the most that Children can do when they come of Age; and it is much in the
Parents whether the Children shall do any such thing or no --. For Education
can introduce a Habit, and a kind of second Nature, against which Children
cannot kick, unless they do some Violence to themselves, and their
Inclinations. And although it fails too often, whenever it fails, yet we pronounce
prudently concerning future things, when we have a less Influence into the
Event, than in the present Case. This would succeed oftener, if Parents were
faithful in their Duty to them while young. It would commonly succeed if you
begun betimes, according to the Comparison which one makes of Childhood and
Youth, to Water spilt on a Table, it rune after you that way which you draw
your Finger. They may be prejudiced against a holy Life, or settled in a way of
Sin, before they are capable of profiting by public preaching: But your
teaching them at home, as it may begin sooner, so will prevail more: and they
will acknowledge your Teaching to be with more Authority than ours. I fear,
says a great See more largely, Mr. Baxter's Saints Rest, Part 3. Chap. 14.
Sect. 11.
Divine, that many of those, who are otherwise good People, do little
understand, or consider the Authority, which their Teachers have over them from
Christ. They know, it may be, to value their Gifts, but think not themselves
bound to learn of them, and obey them in the Lord, by virtue of their Office.
However, the Obligation of Ministers to teach you and your Children, will not
cancel your Duty of Teaching them at home; no more than that because
Magistrates must govern you and your Children, you should therefore not govern
your own Families.

How many yet misimprove all these Advantages, to do the Devil's Work, and
teach their Children the way to Hell, by inducing them to sin betimes; by
instructing them to be proud and revengeful, to backbite and rail, to speak
filthily, to curse and swear, to scorn Holiness, and the Word, and Ministers,
and Ways of God. How much worse, says one, are such Parents than the Devil
himself! As it is worse for a Mother to dash out the Brains of her own Child
against a Wall, than for a Wolf, or a Dog, or a Bear to kill her Child. It is
in your Hands to do them the greatest Kindness, or Cruelty in all the World:
And if you saw a Burning Furnace, much more the Flames of Hell; what would you
think of that Parent, who could find in his heart, to cast the Child into it,
or to put him into the hands of one that would?

If therefore you love them, show it in those things wherein their greatest
Interest is concerned. Do not say you love them, and yet be so unmerciful as to
damn them: And what can you possibly do more to damn them, than to bring them
up in Ignorance, and Sensuality, and neglect of God? The Devil damns none but
by tempting to Sin, and drawing them from Godliness; for there is no other way
to Hell. But it is no great wonder; for you do by Your Children, but as you do
by Your Selves: You say, you desire not to damn your selves, but yet you do it:
So it is with respect to them. Shall he that casts his Child into the Sea, say
he intends not to drown him? Or he that sends him into a Pesthouse, or a
Stews, say he intends not to endanger his Health? Or that trains him up in
Thievery, and Robbing, say that he intends not to have him hanged? It is all
one in effect; for the Law determins it, and the Judge will take care to have
it done.

As ever you would not be charged by God with the Murder of their Souls, and
have them cry out against you in everlasting Fire, as the Means of their Ruin,
be now faithful and diligent for their Salvation. It will be sad for those, who
dedicated their Children to God by Baptism in their Infancy, that afterward
they should bring them up for the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; as God
complains, Ezekiel. 16.20. Thou have taken thy Sons, and thy Daughters, which thou
have born UNTO ME, and these thou have sacrificed to be devoured. That Sin in
the Israelites, to sacrifice their Sons and their Daughters to Devils, Psalm.
106.37. was less than that of Negligent and Profane Parents, who sacrifice not
only the Bodies, but the Souls of their Children to Satan, and so bring them
forth to the Murderer, Hos. 9.13.

Upon the whole, I hope I have said enough to recommend and urge the Duty, till
I hear what is further objected, besides the want of express positive
Scripture. Some of the most considerable Objections, I shall consider in the
next Letter. Let Conscience be faithful, and if you admit of Conviction by what
you have read, take heed how you stifle it, or delay to do that, which you
cannot deny but you ought to do.

I am Yours.

Of Family Religion.
The SECOND LETTER.
SIR,
I Am sensible that a great deal more might be said, and more Methodically, to
prove and urge so important a Duty, as Family Religion and Worship, than what I
have mentioned in the former Letter. What is done in the midst of many
Interruptions, now a little, and then a little, cannot be expected should have
that Beauty, Order, and Exactness of Method and Connection, which you may think
necessary. However, I proceed to what I promised, in answer to some Objections:
Only let me premise, that it is foretold concerning the days of the Messiah,
when the Spirit of Grace and Supplication shall be poured out on the House of
David, and on the Inhabitants of Jerusalem; when the Multitude of the Isles
shall rejoice, and all Flesh shall see the Glory of the Lord; That Holiness to
the Lord, (which was the Inscription on the Mitre of the High Priest) shall be
upon the very Bells of the Horses, and the Pots in the Lord's House, or the
Ordinary Pots in the Kitchins of the Temple, shall be like the Bowls before the
Altar, Zech. 12.10. chap. 14.20, 21.
which received the Blood of the Sacrifices; Yea every Pot in Judah, and
Jerusalem, shall be Holiness unto the Lord of Hosts: That is, the Utensils of
Private Houses shall be dedicated to God, every Family shall be a Temple,
wherein God shall be worshipped.

And as God required of the Jews a Continual Burnt-Offering, or a daily
Sacrifice of two Lambs; the one in the Morning, the other in the Evening: It
may be expected that so often (at least) he should be worshipped every Day in
the Families of his People. Our daily Sacrifices, by Prayer and Praise, under
the fuller Dispensation of Gospel Grace, should not be fewer or less frequent
than theirs of another sort.

But I hope I have said enough in the Former Letter to recommend the Worship of
God in Families; Doubtless one Advantage of it would be, to sit us for those
other Duties, and Parts of Worship, which are sometimes urged to excuse the
Neglect of this. For how many are ready to say, we pray to God every day in
Secret, and we join every Week with others in Public Worship; and what need of
any more? Whereas one part of our Duty is so far from interfering with the
other, that the one will help to the better performance of the other. By
praying in Secret, you will be enabled to pray in your Family: and by both
these may obtain Assistance and Success in the Public Worship of God; and by
attending upon the Public Worship, you will be fitted for the other parts of
your Duty in Secret and Private. You are obliged to pray in Secret, if you had
no Families; and it is very doubtful, in a numerous Family, whether all the
Members of it do daily pray in Secret, or not.

If it be said, that there are very many of those who make a great Profession
of Religion, who yet live in the neglect of Family Worship; I answer, that is
no wonder, because there be many who profess to be what they are not; who have
a Name to live, and are dead. But if they be real, upright Christians, they are
either under the Power of a present Temptation, or under the Conduct of an
erring Mind, as misled by some False Teachers, etc. and so they will neglect
this Duty no longer, than till their Error be removed; or the present
Difficulties in the way of this Practice are got over; which many say they
would be glad of, but cannot yet attain.

As in some Families it is pretended they have not Time every day for such
Work: My Trade will not allow me, I have a Charge of Children that must be
maintained, and my Business must be minded; or I am obliged to be Abroad early
and late; I cannot read the Holy Scriptures in my Family, and pray every day
with those of the Family, for want of Time.

I have often thought of this Objection this Winter, and how the Providence of
God has removed it, as to a great many Families, to their sad Disappointment
and Sorrow. What else mean the many Complaints of Starving Families, for want
of Trade? They have Time enough now to pray, for they have no Work. Let such
reflect upon themselves, and consider how righteous it is from God, that
whereas, while they had Trade and Business, they would not find Time to pray,
God should punish their Neglect by blasting their Endeavors; and now they want
Trade, and would be glad of Work to employ their Time.

But what need is there for any to be so long in Family Worship, as to hinder
the Business of their particular Calling? Though it may be, all in the Family
cannot come together, yet some may, and possibly the greater part, if a little
Prudence, and Consideration be used, as to the choice of the Time.

And if less time were spent in the Morning, in most cases there might be more
redeemed in the Evening. Many might redeem time from the Coffee-House, and from
the Tavern, and from time-wasting Clubs, and Meetings by appointment, without
Business; while their Children and Servants at home are exposed to Temptation,
and the Worship of God neglected there, or hudled over slightly, toward
midnight, between sleeping and waking.

Every one will grant, that Success in his Trade and Calling depends upon the
Blessing of Heaven; but most live as if they believed nothing of it. For it can
hardly be denied, that to begin the Day with God, and heartily implore his
Blessing, is the best way to have it. If what you get be not accompanied with
the Divine Blessing, you will have little Comfort in such increase. And how can
it be proved, that it is your Duty to grasp so much Worldly Business, as is
inconsistent with the worshipping of God in your Families, and having time to
mind the Souls of those committed to your Charge? Business, you say, must be
minded. Your lawful proper Business, it is true, must be so, in its place: But,
as one says, this Devil of (pretended) Business, has destroyed and damned more
Souls, than all the Devils in Hell besides.

How easily can God, by Sickness, or grievous Pains, unfit you for the business
of your Calling, or disable your Servants by Sickness, if he be provoked by
your neglect of him in your Families? He may either blast all your Diligence;
the Curse of God shall blow upon you; you shall labor much and get nothing. Or
he may disable you and yours from following your Trade and Business. O how
easily can God make you know, that if you will not find a time to pray, you
must have a time to be sick, as well as others! How soon, and suddenly may he
summon you by Death to his Judgment Seat! Think now, whether, when you shall
appear there, you will pretend the want of time for this Work. Let Conscience
speak the Truth; Is it not that you want a Heart? God allows us a sufficient
Time for our particular Calling. If our Hearts were filled with Love to God,
and awed with his Holy Fear, we should not rob him of that which belongs to his
Service. The Grace of God to sanctify our Hearts, would answer and remove a
thousand such Pretenses.

There be many, who cannot plead the want of Leisure, who pretend the want of
Parts, and Gifts to instruct and teach others, or to pray with them. But let
them seriously accustom themselves to secret Prayer, and they may quickly learn
to pray in their Families. Get but your Hearts affected in a due manner with
Family Wants, and Sins, and Mercies; and you will soon be able out of the
abundance of the Heart, to express your selves sufficiently well: For it is not
fine Words, and good Language that God regards, and is pleased with, but a
serious, reverend, holy, thankful Heart. You do not want words to express your
Desires in other Cases; nor would you here, if you were to beg your own Life,
or that of a dear Relation, of an earthly King or Judge. It is a shame for
Christians, who have lived long under the Ministry of the Gospel, and have such
Advantages of the Bible in a known Tongue, and of so many useful practical
Books, to pretend the want of Gifts for this Duty. However, rather use a Form,
and take the Assistance of a Book for a while, than wholly neglect the Duty.
Almost all the Old Divines (called Puritans) acknowledged the Lawfulness of a
Form of Prayer, and advised the use of one in this Case. It is better to own
and acknowledge God, and do something in this kind, though with some
Imperfection, than affront him, and despise him, by a total neglect. And for
some Masters of Families, (I know not, all Circumstances considered, but) the
use of a good Form, may be more advisable, and more for the good of those with
whom they join, than to pray without One. All things should be done for
Edifieation; and for those to use a Form, who cannot otherwise do so well, is
for Edification: And Experience will prove that some cannot do so well without
one.

I deny not, but the Spirit of Grace is a Spirit of Supplication, and ready to
assist and enable us in some measure to pray: so that if you neglect not the
Gift that is in you, you would increase in this, and other Gifts by Exercise.
The Holy Scriptures will furnish you with Matter and Expressions; and if you
study your own Hearts, and observe the state of your Family, you will be
competontly able to apply them: And God will afford you that Assistance of his
Holy Spirit which is needful. As in the Case of Moses, he excuses himself from
speaking to Pharaoh, as God would have him, because he was not cloquent, but
slow of speech. The Lord said to Moses, Exodus 4.11. Who veaketh the Dumb to
speak? Who has made Man's Mouth? Have not I the Lord? Now therefore go, and I
will be with thy Mouth, teach thee what thou shall say. His Call to speak to
Pharach was Extraordinary, and so was his promised Assistance from God. Yours
to Family Prayer is Ordinary; and the Ordinary Help, and Assistance you therein
need, you may likewise expect.

It is a greater Disconragement to others from the daily Worship of God in
their Families, that they are often composed of such Persons, as care not to
join in such Duties: Or they are such Scoffers, that it is a scruple whether
they should be suffered to be present, if they were willing. Some had rather
pray alone, than endeavor, or desire such Company; they think they had better
leave them out, than have their presence, who will not heartily join in the
Requests that are made to God, and who desire not his Grace, or seek his Favor.

To such it may be said, That it is the Duty even of wicked Men to pray to God:
and you know not what success their joining with you may be attended with. Some
have dated their first Conviction and Conversion, from Family Prayer and
Instruction. You knowing the Sins of those in your Family, should be very
serious in the Confession of Sin; and God may touch their Hearts, and give them
Repentance. However, if you look to your own Hearts, and do not regard Iniquity
there, the Wickedness of others in the Family shall not be laid to your Charge,
while you do what lies in you for their Recovery. The Presence of Judas with
our Lord and Savior, when he prayed with his Disciples, did not render them
unacceptable to God: For I know, says Christ to his Father, thou hear me
always. If you are sincere in your Worship, the Presence of unworthy Persons
will not obstruct your Acceptance with God. Another Man's Unbelief will not
prejudice thy Faith. If you should scruple to pray in your Families on that
account; What think you of a Minister's Prayer in the Public Congregation? If
any neglect Family Worship on this Pretense, they are most likely to be such,
as refuse to come to the Lord's Table, because of the Admission of supposed
unworthy. Persons, But how is it that they come to hear the Word, and join in
public Prayer in the Congregation, while this Objection is stronger there,
than with reference to Prayer in their own Houses?

The Authority of Parents as to their Children is so manifest, and their Duty
to oblige them to join in the Worship of God is so plain; that it is
principally as to scornful, or stubborn Servants, that this Objection speaks.
And as to them, unless they prove much otherwise than you thought they would,
you were greatly to blame in admitting such: And after trial of other Means for
their Conviction and Cure, if they can be removed, you ought to do it, Psalm.
101.4, 5, 7. A froward Heart shall depart from me, a Slanderer will I cut off;
He that tells Lies shall not tarry in my sight, or dwell in my House. But
where is the Authority of the Head of a Family all this while? Should they not
observe your Orders in Matters of Trade and Business, you would quickly let
them know you were their Masters. And does that Relation signify nothing to
them, while they dwell under your Roof, and are employed in your Service? Does
not the Fourth Commandment suppose a Master's Authority to bring his Family to
worship God with him? And your Concern for their Souls chligeth you to
endeavor it.

There is one very common Objection, that I fear, has too much of sad Truth for
the Foundation of it, viz. That many of those, who pray in their Families, and
read the Holy Scriptures there, and keep up the Externals of Religion beyond
their Neighbors, do yet live no better, than such as pray not; their Children
are no better than other Men's Children; their Servants are no better than other
Men's Servants; they themselves no better than their prayerless Neighbors: They
are one thing on their Knees, and another on their Feet. They are as vain and
worldly, as proud and passionate, as hard to the Poor, as false in their
Dealings, as revengeful and inexorable, as others, etc.

Would to God there were no ground for this Objection. Woe be to the World
because of such Offenses, but woe be to them by whom they come. Who can tell
what unspeakable Mischief such do, who keep up the Worship of God in their
Families, and yet walk disorderly in their daily Conversations? Who begin with
God in the Morning, and keep Company with the Devil all the Day after. What
Stumbling Blocks do they lay in the way of ignorant Children, and ungodly
Servants, and Neighbors, who are acquainted with it? They tempt them to be
Atheists, and deny God, and make them question the Reality of Religion. But
whatever Hypocrisy any such may be guilty of in such like Duties, it will not
discharge you from the Obligation to perform them sincerely. You may as well
refuse to join in public Worship, because some constant Hearers are no better
than some of those who stay away, and turn their Backs upon all such positive
Institutions.

However, it is not the Fruit of their praying, but the want of Seriousness and
Sincerity, which provokes God to leave them to the Power of Temptation. It is
not long of Christ, and of the Holy Scriptures, and of Religion, and of
Christianity, that any professing Christians are so bad. No Ruler was ever so
severe against Sin, as Jesus Christ; no Law was ever so strict in the
forbidding Sin, as the Laws of Christ: The Rule is straight, and the Christian
Religion is not to be blamed, because some that profess it are not true to
their own Profession: They condemn themselves, and dishonor God, and reproach
their Lord and Savior, and without Repentance he will condemn them too; Psalm.
50.17. These things bast thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest I was
altogether such a one as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set thy Sins in
order before thee. I will reject your Sacrifices, I will spread the Dung of
your solemn Services before your Face; Your very Prayers shall witness against
you.

A Caution yet is needful here, To take heed of bearing false Witness, or
easily believing one against our Neighbor. Do not hastily credit every Story
you are told, against such as profess Religion. For the Devil imploys a great
many to do his Work, by defaming and discrediting such. Every lesser Fall of
such a one shall be blazoned: Though it were but a single Fault, committed but
once, and soon and heartily repented of, and seldom or never relapsed into; it
shall yet be longer talked of, and more aggravated, than the customary,
continued, foul Miscarriages of others. This is seen daily among such, whose
Hearts are filled with Enmity against real Holiness.

Granting therefore, (what is too notorious to be denied) that some Few, who
pray to God every Day, do yet live as if they believed there were none; yet
compare the Families of such as daily worship God together, with the Families
of others, that neglect God and Religion; and it is not ordinarily true, that
the former are no better than the latter: The Families of such are commonly the
Nurseries of Religion. Was not Noah's Family better than the drowned World,
though there were one Cham in it? as there was one Judas in the Family of
Christ Himself? What would you think of a Man, says Mr. Baxter, who, looking
over his Neighbor's Garden, when his own is all overrun with Weeds, and
wholly neglected, should see in his Neighbor's Ground here and there a Weed,
mixed with much better Stuff; and thereupon should say, These Men that bestow so
much Pains about their Gardens, in dunging and weeding, etc. yet they have
Weeds in their Garden, as well as those that do nothing; therefore who would be
at so much pains? Thus foolishly do People talk of those that pray, and read,
and instruct their Families, and hear Sermons, etc. they have their Faults, as
well as others; wicked Persons amongst them, as well as others; their Children
and Servants are bad, as well as ours. But they consider not, that it is not
the whole Garden that is overrun with Weeds, as yours is, it is but here and
there a Weed; and as soon as they spy any, they pluck them up, and do what they
can to prevent their growth and spreading.

There is some Difficulty indeed as to those whose Lot is cast into prayerless
Families, who would be glad with all their Hearts, to have the Worship of God
kept up; but have either no power, or prevalency to bring it about. My Lot is
cast into such an ignorant, worldly, profane Family, says a religious Servant,
where they call not upon the Name of God from Week to Week, or at most, never
more than once a Week. If this be the Case of an Apprentice, and bound by his
Parents, who should have chosen better for him; he may bear it the better, as
hoping God will not charge it as his Fault. But if you rashly engaged your
selves into such a Family, because it was a place of more Ease, or more Profit;
you ought to repent, and beg of God forgiveness; and be afraid lest some
spiritual Judgment, and it may be temporal too, should follow you. You ought to
remove into a better Air, as soon as you can conveniently. But let me beg you,
as you tender the Honor of God, and the Credit of Religion; while you stay in
such a wicked family, endeavor with utmost Humility, Modesty, Seriousness, and
Circumspection, to adorn your Profession; to leave a Conviction in the
Conscience of those with whom you dwell, that serious Godliness does make the
best Servants. How sad is it, if by you who profess Religion, your ungodly
Masters or Fellow Servants should be hardened, and stumbled, and prejudiced
against the holy Ways of God! It may fall out that if you carry it so, as to
win the Love of all, you shall have an Opportunity offered, humbly to suggest,
and urge something to promote Family Prayer and Worship; and possibly obtain to
have it begun. Be sure, however, that you be more diligent and constant in
secret Prayer. The less help you have in the Family, the more should you redeem
to be alone with God. But Servants who value the Welfare of their Souls, and
their Improvement in Grace, should take heed what Families they choose to dwell
in. Do not, out of choice, place your selves in a House where God does not
dwell; to which the Curse of God according to his Word, is threatened. You know
he dwells in the House of Prayer; His own House is such, and ours should be so
too; and he inhabits the Praises of his People.

My case is yet worse, may some object; I am Son to a prayerless Father, and I
cannot leave the House; Or I am Wife to a Husband that minds not God, or his
own Soul, much less mine, or any in the Family. The like Advice as was given
before to religious Servants, is fit to be taken here; viz. to spend the more
time in secret Prayer, and Closet Devotion, and to pray the more earnestly and
fervently for such a Relation, who is the Head of a Family, and yet neglects
the Duty of his place. The holy fervent Prayer of a believing Child, or Wife,
may help to save an unbelieving Parent, or Husband; It may obtain Grace from
God to turn his Heart. In the next Sickness, or under the next worldly Cross or
Disappointment, or Family-strait and Affliction, you may have a Season offered
with Meekness to suggest this, and other Duties; and who can tell the Success?
However, take heed to adorn your Profession; and let such near Relations, with
whom you are obliged to dwell, be convinced by your Christian Carriage, of the
Amiableness and Excellency of a Holy Life, and be made to think and speak well
of practical Godliness.

If the Parent, or Husband be either unfit or unwilling to pray in the Family;
can you not obtain that some other may do it in his room and stead? Though it
be the proper Work of the Master of the Family, yet in many Cases another may
be substituted; even an holy Servant sometimes, with the Master's leave and
desire. Or, in his Sickness or Absence, I know not why, in diverse Cases, the
Wife, who is to share in the Government of the Family, may not perform
Family Prayer, at least with those of her own Sex; and with all the Family if
she be a Widow; and if she be a Wife, why not in the Husband's Absence? For if
he do not his Duty in this particular, what reason is there, that she may not
be the Mouth of the Family to God in Prayer, rather than it should be omitted?

These plain things I offered and recommended with Seriousness to remove the
common Objections, Pleas, and Excuses for the neglect of Family-Religion and
Worship, and touching the Duty of the several Relations in Religious Families.
If any may be hereby confirmed, or convinced, I know you will rejoice with me,
and bless God.

I am Yours.

Of Family Religion.
The THIRD LETTER.
SIR,
WIthout farther Preface, I continue to make good my Promise, by sending you
the Remainder of my Papers on this Subject, containing some Directions, and
Counsels relating to Family Religion.

You who are Heads of Families, are in the first place obliged to be very
Careful, and Circumspect, Serious and Exemplary in your Lives: (you ought to
take heed, that you give no Example of Vice before Inferiors.) They will
sooner Imitate you in what is Evil, than Good. Let them have no Encouragement
or Countenance given them to Sin, by any thing they see you do. You will
quickly lose all Authority, and Power to reprove, or suppress their Evils, if
your own Example countenance them in it. It is altogether unlikely, that
Religion should thrive among Children and Servants, where the Parent or Master
gives a Pattern of Drunkenness, or Lewdness, of Injustice, Deceit, and Fraud;
or only keeps up the Worship of God, to cloak his own Wickedness, or serve some
secular Design. Woe to those Parents and Masters, whose Children are Witnesses
of their Impiety, and like enough to follow them (without a wonderful Grace) to
their eternal Ruin. Never Parent had such a wicked Child, said a bad Eather
once to a Rebellious Son; Yes Sir, replied the Impudent Youth, My Grandfather
had. Some have inquired for what reason the Prophet Elisha called for Vengeance
on the Children that mocked him, and styled him Bald-pate, 2 Kings 2.23. when
many of them, it is probable, hardly understood what they said. The Reason
assigned, is this, because the Children learnt that Language from their
Parents; and God punished the Parents in the Death of the Children, and both at
once. Some of the Heathens have been very wary and cautious, not to speak an
uncomely word in the presence of their Children. Certainly the Head of a
Christian Family is obliged to behave himself Wisely in an upright way, and to
walk within his House with a Perfect Heart, Psalm. 101.2. and in all things to
show himself a Pattern of Good Works, Tit. 2.7. A prudent, grave, cheerful,
sincere Deportment, as becomes Saints, would recommend Religion, and diffuse
the savor of it to all about it. But if you give them never so good Counsel,
they will sooner be influenced by a bad Life, than by the best of Words. All
your good Precepts and Counsels, will be as Water spilt on the ground, if not
accompanied by a good Example. What you would reprove, and amend in their Words
or Actions, let them be sure to hear nothing of it in your Discourse, and see
nothing of it in your Practice: You must lead them the way in Humility and
Charity, in the Government of the Tongue, Passions, Appetite; in the Redemption
of Time, in Prayer, and love to the Holy Scriptures, and the Ordinances of the
Gospel, etc.

How can a drunken or unrighteous Father or Master expect his Children, and
Servants should be sober and faithful? Can you hope to teach them Sobriety, and
they see you are Intemperate? or Meekness, when they see you cannot govern your
Passions? They will sooner learn your Sin, than your Trade. And is not the
Money given with such an Apprentice very ill bestowed? One, Two, Three Hundred
Pounds, or more, to have them taught to serve the Devil, and damn their Souls,
by the Example of a wicked Master? But such Masters shall have double
Damnation. Therefore let your own Example teach all your Relations, that
Holiness and Unblamableness, in Tongue and Life, which you desire they should
learn and practice.

But besides your own Example, you are obliged by all other ways to endeavor
their Spiritual and Eternal Good. You are worse than Insidels, if you provide
not what is Needful, and Fit for them as to their Temporal Life; much more if
you neglect their Souls. O look upon them with Pity and Compassion; help them,
as knowing their Ignorance, their Temptations, and Danger! Remember, they must
shortly die, and be saved or perish for ever. Use all Advantages you have to do
them good: Let them not be betrayed to eternal Ruin, by your neglect.
Ministers, by public Preaching, cannot do so much to further their Salvation,
as you; and it is very little we can hope to do, without your Assistance. You
can speak (sharply enough sometimes) of unfaithful Ministers, who neglect the
Souls of their People; but consider not your own Guilt and dreadful Reckoning,
upon the like Account. You expect more Duty sometimes from One Minister, than
Six can perform, while you make no Conscience of neglecting your own Duty, in
your proper Sphere.

It will be a dreadful Meeting in the Day of Recompense, to have your Children
or Servants to accuse their Parents and Masters; saying, I was so many Years in
my Father's House; or I lived so long with such a Master, who never concerned
himself about my Soul: I had never been a Servant of Sin, and a Firebrand of
Hell, if he had done his part to prevent it. The like will be true of ungodly
Husbands and Wives, who notwithstanding the Duty and Profession of the dearest
Love, do little or nothing to save one another from the Wrath to come. O cruel
Husband! O cursed Wife! It was long of You, that I am now a lost, undone
Creature; You never did any thing to assist my Salvation, it was long of You,
that I came to this Miserable End; You neither by Example, or Discourse, or
Prayer, or Admonition, etc. discovered any Care for your own Soul, or for mine.
Yea how many in such Relations, do much to hinder, and obstruct the Happiness
and Salvation of those, whom they are most concerned and obliged to help! For
if the one be ungodly, and the other be an awakened serious Christian; the
Latter shall commonly find the greatest Opposition and Difficulty, and
Hinderance in Religion, from him, or her, who should have given the greatest
Help and Assistance.

Remember therefore, that besides Prayer in your House, you have other
Endeavors to use, for the Salvation of those that live with you. You mock God
by praying for the conversion of Children and Servants, if you do not otherwise
endeavor it: If you do not endeavor to convince them of their Sin, and of
their need of Christ and his Grace; if you do not recommend him as the best
Master; and put them in mind of the uncertainty of this Life, and of the
certain Account they must give to God another day, of all their Time, and
Talents, etc. And yet this neglect is now so common, that they are reckoned
Good Parents, and Good Masters, who will but give their Children and Servants
leave to be good, and go to Heaven without them: Who will not hinder their
Inferiors from serving God. Whereas, you have much to do of Positive Duty, to
See Mr. Baxters's Saints Rest, Part. 3. Chap. 14. Sect. 16.
inform their Minds, to furnish their Memories, to rectify their Wills, to
quicken their Affections, to keep tender their Consciences, and restrain their
Tongues, and watch over their outward Carriage; to make them hate Sin, and love
Holiness, and prize the Bible, and delight in the Ordinances and Institutions
of Christ, and like good Company, and dislike all others, etc.

And to what End has God given you The Authority of Parents, or Masters, if
not to prevent Sin, and to promote Holiness in your Families? Humane Nature is
so corrupt, that (unless in some few with whom the Spirit of God begins very
early, and the Effects of Holy Baptism are discovered in Childhood) there need
to be great Restraints put upon it, by those who have Power and Authority over
Young People. Your Authority must be kept up, lest you should be despised by
those that you should Rule. Labor therefore to understand the Nature, Use, and
Extent of that Authority, with Relation to all in your Family. And the more you
grow in Knowledge and Holiness, and walk according to the Gospel-Rule; the
better will you preserve your Authority among all your Inferiors. Humility and
Wisdom, and circumspect Walking, will enable you to do them the more good, in
the use of that Power which God has given you. The Indulgence, and Allowance of
Children in what is sinful, you know did highly provoke God in the case of Eli,
and how dear did it cost him? That his Sons made themselves vile, and he
restrained them not, ^ Sa^. 3.13. You must not let Wickedness dwell in your
Tabernacle, Job 11.14. or in those of your Family. They will observe your
Orders, and regard your Commands; if you do not indiscreetly lose your
Authority, by not keeping your distance, or suffering them to be too bold with
you; or on the other hand making them too strange, so as to be fearful and
discouraged, (I here speak especially of Children:) If what you resolve upon,
and order, in commanding what is good, or forbidding what is evil, you see be
punctually observed, still managing all with Affection and Love; and
manifesting the Honor of God, and the Interest of their Souls, and Salvation,
to have been your greatest Motive. And remember, that Commendation when they do
well is as needful, as Reproof and Correction, when they sinfully transgress;
which also ought to be without Partiality, or the causeless cockering, or
countenancing of one above the rest.

The like may be said, though with some difference, with respect to Your
Servants. Be Just, Compassionate, and Loving to them, but lose not your
Authority as a Master: Be Faithful and Affectionate in your Counseling of them
for the good of their Souls. But if they be refractory and stubborn, and slight
your Advice, and go on in Sin, and wax worse and worse, and deride serious
Godliness in their Fellow Servants; you must use other Methods, or get rid of
them, as soon as you can. You are to take care, that Wickedness dwell not
within your House, without Admonishing and Reproving of it. You must warn them
who are anruly, and of others have Compassion, making a difference. Some must
be rebuked sharply, others save with fear, pulling them out of the Fire, Jude
22, 23 Verses.

As to those who have Trades and Families, but God has not blessed them with
Children, or has taken them away by Death; their Care, and Labor, and Trust
is thereby lessened, and they ought to be the more careful with respect to
their Servants. They have many Considerations to keep them from Repining, or
Sorrowing much for the want of Children, upon the Account of the Duty, the
Pains, the Care, and Grief of Heart, which they are freed from: For in this
dissolute Age, how few Children answer the Hopes, Desires, and Pains of
Parents? Or prove Comforts to them when they grow up? If God had given you
Children, or prolonged their Lives; what a Life of Trouble and Sorrow might
They probably have passed in this World? besides the constant Fear you would
have had of their Sin and Damnation: which may be put in the Balance against
the Uncertain Comforts of those who have Children, abstracting from that
Consolation, which arises from the faithful discharge of Duty to them.

More particularly, it is advisable, with Family Prayer, to join Serious
Reading of the Holy Seriptures every Day, and frequent Catechizing, or
Instructing of Inferiors in the Principles of Religion. Abraham had such
Trained, Catechized Servants in his House. These things that I command thee,
says God to his Ancient People, shall be in thy Heart, and thou shall teach
them diligently to thy Children, Deuteronomy. 4.9. chap. 11.19. Teach a Child in the
way he should go, and when he is Old, he will not depart from it, Prove. 4.4.
chap. 22.6. 2 Timothy 1.3. Acquaint them by little and little with the great
Doctrines of Christianity; give them Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept,
as they are able to receive, and bear it. Acquaint them betimes with the Word,
and Works of God, When you sit in the House, or walk by the Way, or lie down,
or rise up; by asking them Questions, and putting them upon asking you.
Abraham's Example is approved, and recommended by God in this matter, Genesis
18.19. For I know him, that he will command his Children, and his Household
after him, that they shall keep the way of the Lord.

Never diel any Age afford better Helps for Catechizing, than this; there being
so many excellent Catechisms, or Summaries of Christian Religion, already
printed, and easy to be had. If any of you want a Method for Regular
Catechizing in your Families, as suppose upon a Lord's Day Evening, or once a
Week; let me mention one, which is practiced by many with good Success, in some
Counties of this Nation; viz. Let the Master of the Faly begin with a short
Invocation of God, praying for his Presence, Assistance and Blessing; and then
ask the younger sort Three Questions out of the Assemblies Catechism, and upon
each of the three Answers, ask the explicatory Questions in Mr. Joseph Allen's
Catechism, or Mr. Lye's, so that by answering Yes or No, you will perceive
whether they understand the matter treated of. After this, read The fuller
Explication of those Three Questions in some larger Catechism, as that of Mr.
Thomas Vincent; and then close with a short Prayer; and if you can, Sing a
Psalm. All which may be done in an Hour, and you will find it very profitable
both for younger and elder People.

The reading of the Holy Scriptures frequently in your Families, as well as in
your Closets, upon the Weekdays, as well as upon the Lord's Day, I hope I need
not use many Arguments to recommend. Deuteronomy. 11.18. They are able to make us wise
unto Salvation, and they are suitable to every Case, that you or yours can be
in. They that cannot read, or will not read, or have not so much time to read,
may be profited by your reading the Holy Scriptures in your Family with them.
The Singing of Psalms or Hymns, in Christian Families, where there are enough
who are able to join in that part of Worship, is also a very commendable and
excellent part of Family-Religion, Col. 3.16. Let the Word of Christ dwell in
you richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and
Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.
Especially on the Lord's Day.

And that I would next speak of, because I am persuaded, that no
Family-Religion can be duly kept up, without the Sanctification of the weekly
Sabbath. What the Jews said falsely of Christ, we may apply truly enough to many
a Parent, and Master; This Man is not of God, for he keeps not the Sabbath
Day, and takes no Care that his Family with him do so. You have many helps to
understand the Nature of the Duty, and of your Christian Deportment on that
Day, in public, private, and secret. You would do well, the Night before to
make some Preparation for the Solemnity of that Day; and in the Morning, to
possess your Souls with the Consideration of the Privilege you enjoy in such
weekly Seasons of approaching to God, and paying Homage to him. Serious
Godliness has never been found to flourish in any Soul, or in any House, as to
any Person, or any Family, where the strict See my Lord Chies Justice HALES's
Contemplations, 8o. Vol. 1. Directions to his Children, touching the keeping of
the LORD's DAY.
Observation of the Lord's Day has been neglected. If you begin with God in
secret, that will prepare you for Family Worship; the private Worship of God in
your Families will fit you for the public; and your careful serious Attendance
on that, will help you to return to the Worship of God in your Families, and
Closets. You ought to methodize, and time these Duties so, as one may not
interfere with the other. Sanctify the whole Day to God, improve every part of
it; make it not shorter than the other Days of the Week, as many do, by rising
later, and going to bed sooner. Bring as many of your Families to the public
Worship with you, as you can. When Elkanah went to sacrifice to the Lord, he
and all his House went with him; 1 Samuel 1.21. And if you recollect, and repeat
to them afterward, the Substance of what you, and they have heard preached, it
may promote their Attentiveness in hearing, assist their Memories to retain
what they heard, and quicken your own Affections. That by reading the Holy
Scriptures, by Catechizing, by repeating Sermons, etc. your Children and
Servants may be instructed in the Knowledge of God, his Nature, and Works, and
Will; in the Knowledge, of themselves, the Immortality of their Souls, the
Nature of Sin, our first Apostasy, and the sad Effects of it, our Redemption
and Recovery by Jesus Christ, his Person, his Offices, his Ordinances and
Sacraments, his Promises, Faith in him, the Covenant of Grace, the Properties
and Privileges of Believers, the Rewards and Punishments of the next Life, etc.

In short, do but spend that Day, as knowing how small a part of every Week,
one Day is to be solemnly employed in preparing for an Eternal State: do but
employ that Day, under the Sense of the Value of Immortal Souls, your own and
others: And think how near the Judgment-Day may be, when you must be
accountable to God for all your Time, and especially such sacred Time. Do but
spend that Day, as believing the Good or Evil Influence it will have upon all
the other Days of the Week; The Affairs of your Souls will thrive, or not
thrive, as the Lord's Day is sanctified, or neglected: The Souls of your
Children and Servants, if not minded then, are unlikely to be minded on the
other Days of the Week: And oftentimes it is found, that even your civil, and
secular Affairs do prosper, or not, according to your Care, or Remisness in
sanctifying the Lord's Day.

Moreover, you ought not only to pray with your Families, and worship God with
them; but to observe the Necessities of every one in particular, and heartily
to pray for them in secret. You would have more Comfort in your
Family-Relations, and God more Glory from them; did you more fervently beg of
God the Grace which you and they do need. Monica the Mother of Austin, had
gracious Answers to her Requests to God, both for her Husband and her Son. How
can you strive with God in Prayer for your own Souls, and not remember to do
the like for those whose Souls are committed to your Care? O that my Son may
live to thee! O that my Daughters may not die for ever! O that my Servants may
not serve the Devil! O that there may not be a Son of Perdition, nor a Daughter
of Belial, under my Roof! Have mercy on me, O Lord, says the Woman of Canaan
unto Christ: For my Daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil. A certain Man,
at another time, comes kneeling to him, saying, Lord have mercy upon my Son.
for he is a Lunatic, and sore vexed: For oftentimes he falls into the Fire,
and oftentimes into the Water. Such Prayers had success for the Cure of bodily
Evils, and may rather be hoped to have so, for spiritual ones. If the Case of
your Children resemble this, that any of them fall sometimes into the Fire of
Lust, sometimes into the Water of Drunkenness, sometimes into this Sin,
sometimes into that, being hurried, and led captive by the Devil; beg that God
would dispossess Satan, and that he would have mercy on them, and bring them to
themselves. You know not what effect your Prayers may have while you live; nor
of what Advantage a Stock of Prayers, laid up, may be unto your Children, after
your Death. The largest Portion, the fairest Inheritance, or Estate you can
leave them, may be a much less Kindness. Your Interest in the Covenant, and
hearty Prayers for their Salvation, is a Treasure, they cannot sufficiently
value. Whereas a wicked Father lays up Iniquity for his Children, as you have
the Expression, Job 21.19, 20. He may store up Riches, and God treasures up
Wrath: And upon Imitation of their Father's Sins, God fills up the Measure of
their Judgment, Luke 11.48, 50.

While you neglect not Family and secret Prayer in these respects, you must
likewise remember to observe what Answers, God at any time gives to such
Prayers; What serious Impressions are made on the Minds and Hearts of Children
or Servants; how their Knowledge and Grace do increase and grow; what
Convictions the Spirit has wrought on any of them; who is reformed, etc. and
how God has prospered your secular Endeavors, how he favors your Diligence
in your Calling; but especially how he rewards your Faithfulness to the Souls
of Inferiors. If any of your Children be good, or hopeful, though one it may
be, or more be not; bless God for such a Mercy. Let not your sorrowful
Complaints as to one, silence your Gratitude for Divine Grace manifested in
another. All your Children were born in Sin, and might have lived and died in
Sin; but you can say, though I have a Cain, I have a righteous Abel, I have a
Shem as well as a Cham, a Jacob as well as an Esau, a Solomon as well as an
Absalom or Amnon. God has answered my Prayers, and blessed my Endeavors as to
one or more, though not as to all: I will wait, and pray in Hope as to them
also. By thus taking notice what Answers of Prayer you have upon this Account,
you will know the better how to frame your Petitions to God for them, and to
order your Counsels, Instructions, and farther Endeavors for their good: You
will know what you have to acknowledge, and be thankful for, and what you have
to lament, and beg in Family Prayer.

And in the Management of that, Care is to be taken to choose the fittest Time.
A good Man will endeavor to order his Spiritual Affairs with Discretion, as
well as his Temporal ones. In Family Worship you should endeavor to be short,
distinct, methodical, and serious; and not make such Duties overlong, lest some
of the Family be tempted to say, Behold, what a Weariness is it? Labor to be
serious and affectionate, though ordinarily you be but short: you may be longer
on the Lord's Day. Be serious, I say, and affectionate: for he that is the
Mouth of others to God in Prayer, if his Heart be drowsy, they who join with
him are not like to be affected. You ought discreetly to choose the Time also:
In the Morning you will find, if it be deferred till such ^or such a Business
be first dispatched, ^or if it be not one of the first things ^one in the
Morning; you will find something or other intervene, to hinder it altogether.
And in such Fami^ies where it can conveniently be done, before Supper; for the
Evening is the most desirable Time. Many never kneel down to pray in their
Families at Night, till they are fitter to lie down upon their Beds.

In the ordering of these things, let Husbands and Wives, who would further the
Salvation of each others Souls, ^ointly concur to promote Godliness ^n their
Families. Their first Care should be to endeavor the Salvation of each others
Souls. For this they have Scripture-Incouragement, 1 Cor. 7.16. For what
know thou, O Wife, whether thou shall save thy Husband? Or how know thou,
O Man, whether thou shall save thy Wife? It is true, no ferious Christian would
deliberately choose to be so nearly related to one, that is a stranger to
Christ: And they who are so related, ought to beg God Forgiveness for their
sinful Rashness. But if they find themselves mistaken in their Choice in that
respect, they must use the greater Care to persuade them to be such, as they
supposed them to have been: Remembering however, that if they cannot as yet love
them, as real Saints, they must yet love them, as Husbands and Wives.

But how hopefully may Religion be carried on in the Family, where both are
devoted to God, and married to Christ! How should (and may) they build up one
another in their Holy Faith, watch over each other, study their Tempers and
Dispositions, exhort one another daily with Meekness and Wisdom, and strengthen
one another Hands in the Discharge of their respective Duties to Inferiors;
endeavoring the utmost Union in this Work, lest, through the want of it, their
Authority be weakened, and their Endeavors be frustrate of any good Success.
The Endeavors of both are required: And if Covenant-Mercy descend from Parents
to Children, it is on this Condition, that during their Minority, they take care
to bring them up in the Knowledge, Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. When
they come to be adult, or grown up, there is another Condition on the part of
the Children, that they consent to the Terms of the Covenant, and willingly
come under the Band of it. But both Parents are concerned to bring up their
Children for God. Men should not cast all the Care of Children, and Servants on
their Wives; and Women should consider, as Matter of Duty, their joint Interest
in the religious Government of the Family. I wish it were not a very frequent
Case, that they, who should rule, are the most unruly part; and the Cause, that
the Family is ungodly, and ungoverned.

There is a great Latitude in the Duty of Parents to their Children, to take
care of them in Infancy, to dedicate them to God betimes, and bring them under
the visible Band of the Covenant by Raptism; and to teach them the meaning of
it, as soon as capable; to keep them in subjection while young; to encourage
them in all that is virtuous, and praiseworthy, and good; and lovingly, and
seasonably reprove them for what is evil; to dispose of them with Wisdom and
Care, as to their Schools, Callings, and Marriage, according to your Rank and
Station, in the best Manner you can. And therein to consider the Interest of
their Souls, as well as their temporal Welfare, and prefer it. Beg of God to
teach you the true Medium between the Errors of Education, on either Extreme;
either that of humouring them in Vanity, and indulging them in Sin, or that of
Frowardness, Harshness, and too much Severity. If your own Parents be living,
give your Children an Example of the Honor and Obedience you expect from them,
by your becoming Carriage toward their Grand Parents.

If you would recommend, and promote Religion among Children and Servants,
there is one thing I would beg of you, that you take heed never to speak of God
and Sacred things, without the utmost Seriousness, and Reverence. If you do not
possess their Minds with an Awe and Reverence of God, and Christ, and the Holy
Scriptures, and the Life to come, you will do them little good. You should
begin betime to do this. Mothers especially may drop Instruction into their
Children, as soon almost as their Milk: At least you may teach them to pray, as
soon as they begin to prattle. Timothy received that Knowledge of the Faith, in
his Childhood, from his Mother and Grandmother, (though his Father was a Greek
or a Pagan, Acts 16.1.) which afterward he publicly professed, and adhered
unto.

And much of the good or bad Impression upon their Minds, from what you say,
will depend upon the Manner of your speaking: Your words must discover your
honorable Thoughts of God, and Holiness, and Holy Christians, and Ministers,
etc. They will be apt to like what you commend. Endeavor therefore to speak of
Sin, and of wicked Men, with loathing and dislike; that they may see your
Judgment, and learn to form their own. The way to win them betimes to the Fear
of God, and Hatred of that which is Evil, is frequently to represent, in your
Discourse, how fafe, how profitable, how honorable, and pleasant a Life that
of serious Godliness is. Hereby you remove, or cure their Prejudices concerning
practical Religion, as a melancholy, burdensome thing. And take heed what Books
they read, and what Company they keep, lest their Minds be poisoned and
corrupted by ill Principles, and their Hearts enticed and drawn to Sin; and so
all your Instructions fail of Success. Without such Care it is in vain to put up
Bills to Ministers, Week after Week, to pray for your dead Children, whose
Souls you your selves do murder by your Negligence, or ill Example.

But your Counsels and Discourse, backed by a Holy Example to enforce them, may
do much good; and will if these go together: For if Inferiors see you to be
unjust, deceitful, drunken, wanton, cruel, etc. all your serious Talk will do
them harm, rather than good. Especially if you do not carry it well in your
Relations to them; if Parents be very passionate, and hasty with their
Children; if Masters be barbarous, and hard-hearted to their Servants, and
remember not how it was with them when they were Servants: I mean not so much,
how they fared, as how they desired, and wished to have been used, under their
Apprenticeship.

And of all the serious things which may be proper to be recollected; there is
hardly any thing of greater Moment, than to instill often into their Minds, the
value and worth of Time. That they may be brought to hate Idleness, and not
care to mispend one Hour: But as they grow more capable of improving it, may be
still employed. You cannot insist too often upon the Brevity, and Uncertainty
of our little Time on Earth; the Swiftness and Irrecoverableness of it, and the
Consequence of redeeming it well or ill, in order to our future Account. The
Devil is almost sure of those, who are brought up in Idleness, and put no value
upon their precious Time. Urge this therefore to Inferiors, and help them to
improve their Time, and to begin every Day with secret Prayer alone, and to
employ the other part of it, in what is suitable to their Age, Capacity,
Condition, and Relation.

You would do well to put them upon secret Prayer; to advise your Children and
Servants, and charge them to pray alone every Day, as well as be willing to
join in Family Prayer. You ought also to teach them, by Word and by Example, to
beg a Blessing on their Food, at the usual Seasons of Refreshment, and
seriously to return Thanks afterward. We depend on God for our Daily Bread:
And our Blessed Savior did never eat himself, or feed others at his Table, but
he blessed, and gave thanks, Mark 8.6, 7. So the Apostle, Acts 27.25. and by
Prayer and Thanksgiving is every Creature sanctified, 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5.

It will be of great Moment in order to a religious, well-ordered Family, to be
very careful whom you admit to dwell with you. The Case may be so stated, it is
true, that you must dwell with such as scorn, and despise Family-Religion, and
Worship; But take heed lest you sinfully choose such Relations, and such
Inhabitants. It may be, David thought that Michal, whom he knew came of a bad
Stock, might be prevailed with by him, to join in the Worship of God, and in
time be brought over to what he desired; but she despised him in her Heart, and
mocked at his Zeal, and proved a Snare and a Cross, and made him repent his
Choice. Woe to him, who has a Philistin in his Bosom, as Samson had. Marriage
is the turning-point of Life: Your future Religion, and your Eternal Interest,
are greatly concerned therein. We find the Wickedness, and Ruin of several of
the Kings of Israel, laid at this Door; that they married into a wicked Family:
Such a One, he had a Wife of the House of Ahab, and was quickly drawn off from
God, by one who had a wicked Ahab to her Father, and a curfed Jezabel to her
Mother; and she stirred him up to work Wickedness, 1 Kings 21.25.

A due Care on this Account is to be had in the Choice of Servants also: Such
are to be preferred, who by Education, and, as far as you can judge, by
Inclination too, will be willing to serve God, and rejoice in the Helps they
may have to do so, in a religious Family. And how orderly and beautiful is
Family Worship, where all in the House do heartily join in it? You complain,
you cannot bring your Servants to do what you desire, as to Matters of
Religion, when it may be you had nothing of Religion in your Eye, in the Choice
of Servants. It may be for a small Sum less with an Apprentice, or for the same
Wages to another Servant, you might have had one, whose Education, and
Inclinations would have been more encouraging; and who would thank God to enjoy
such Advantages, for the Knowledge and Service of God, as he might have in your
House. Servants also in disposing themselves; and Parents in the disposing
their Children, ought to consider this. A wicked Master will commonly choose
wicked Servants, and make them worse. When a Ruler (of an House, or Town, or
Country) hearkeneth to Lies, (or is otherwise wicked) all his Servants are
wicked, Prove. 29.12. Such a one cannot endure the constant Reproof, that is
given him by the good Conversation even of a Servant: And therefore will desire
no more Religion in a Servant, than not to be unfaithful to his Trust. I wish
there be not some Masters, (even amongst those, who would be accounted
Religious) who are shy of choosing Servants, that have the Character of being
so; contrary to David's Practice, Psalm. 101.4, 5, 7. It is true, some that have
been well educated, have proved very ill afterward; and Masters have found
themselves mistaken, after all their Care in this Matter: But if they did their
Duty, to make the best Choice, and use the best Endeavors they could, they may
have Peace and Quiet in their own Minds, when they meet with a Disappointment;
which otherwise they cannot.

They ought to look to it, whom they admit into their Families; unless they
value their particular Calling above their General one: For who can tell the
Mischief, that one bad Servant may do in a House? One Sinner destroys much
good: as one Joseph may bring a Blessing upon a Family, and upon all that his
Master has in the House. You can hardly expect, that God should succeed you
with a Blessing in what you undertake, when you care not with what Tools you
work, or whom you employ: And in the Nature of the thing, there is little
reason to hope, that they, who are false to God, and to their own Souls, will
ordinarily be faithful to you. We read of those who were no good Men, viz.
Laban, and Potiphar, etc. who have thrived the better for taking good Servants
into their Families; but I no where read of a good Man, that was the better for
a wicked Servant: We have sad Experience every Day to the contrary.

But the Welfare and the Comfort of religious Families, depends not wholly on
the Duty of the Heads of it; They who are Children, or Servants, are obliged
thankfully to improve the Blessing of Religious Parents, and Masters, and
faithfully to do their Duty in each Relation. Without a wonderful Change by the
Grace of God, you will never be good Parents to your own Children, (if you live
to have any) if you are not good in the Relation of Children. The same may be
said for Servants: Nor are they like to be good Husbands or Wives, who were not
good in their former Relation as Children, or Servants. Neither are such who
are not good in their Family-Relations like to be so in any other: Either good
Neighbors in a Town, or good Members in a Church, or Magistrates in the State.
Absalom, a Rebellious Child, proved a Traitorous Subject: Hophni and Phineas,
disobedient Children, proved scandalous, and sacrilegious Priests; so in other
Instances.

Let Children honor and obey their Parents in the Lord: See that there be
inward Reverence, Respect, and Love: Despise not their Persons; slight not
their Instructions, Rebukes, or lawful Commands, or Government. Take heed of
speaking contemptuously of either of them. He that curses Father or Mother,
let him die the Death, Levit. 20.9. His Lamp shall be put out in Darkness,
Prove. 20.20. You should prize their Counsels, delight in their Presence,
rejoice in their Company, sympathize with them in their Sorrows or Joys, and
readily deny your selves for their Sakes. The Expressions of outward Honor
from Children to Parents, by the Dissoluteness of the Age, are almost out of
Fashion: Such as rising up, and standing bare before them, (which is required
of the Younger, unto such as are their Fathers only by Age, Lev. 19.31.) to bow
before them, and desire their Blessing or Prayers, to speak always with respect
to them, and of them, etc. The Honor that consists in Obedience, may be
expressed many ways; as by being content to obey their lawful Orders, though in
the meannest Services; to be content to have their own Wills crossed, that the
Will of their Parents may be fulfilled; by not marrying without their
Knowledge, and Consent; and by submitting to their just Reproofs, Rebukes, and
Corrections; and obeying them especially in the things of God, and for the good
of their Souls. There is an Honor due to Parents, which consists in
Thankfulness, and Recompense: Readily serving them, and supplying their outward
Wants, comforting them in their Sorrows, Sufferings, Sickness, Old Age; being
sollicitous for their Safety, and Welfare, concerned for their Reputation and
Good-Name, praying daily for them; and plentifully, freely, and honorably
providing for them, according to your Ability, and their Need. As Joseph did
when advanced in the Court of Pharaoh. This is not Justice only, but Piety. Let
them learn to show Piety at home, and requite their Parents, 1 Timothy 5.4. And
our Lord reproves the Seribes and Pharisees, who by their corrupt Doctrines
would dispense with Children from such an Obligation, Mat. 15.5, 6. Such
Children then who are a Grief to their Parents, or purloin their Goods, or
waste their Estates, or do not to their utmost minister to the Supply of their
Wants, do so far fail of their Duty. The Children of Religious Parents, are
especially bound to pay them Honor; and so to walk, as to reflect Honor on
them; imitating their good Examples, thanking God for his special Mercies to
their Parents, while they lived, doing what they can to honor them at their
Death; pleading with God the Covenant Relation of their Parents, to obtain a
Blessing on themselves, as their Offspring; and faithfully adhering to the
Truth, Worship, and Ways of God, as their Holy Parents did before them.

This Honor is due to Parents whether they be Rich or Poor, Wise or Weak,
whether in an honorable Station in the World, or in meaner Circumstances,
whether in vigorous Health, or bowed down under Sickness, and the Insirmities
of Old Age: Remember still they are your Parents.

It is a Mercy you ought to be very thankful for, to have Religious Parents,
and live in a Religious Family. It is a Prize in your Hands, you must give an
Account of: And a sad Account it will be, if you remain ignorant of God, and
Rebels against Christ, under those Advantages to know, and obey him, which
others want. How unthankful are you, if you value it not as a Privilege? What
work for the Worm of Conscience do you provide, if you improve it not! You
might have been born of such Parents, as would have wholly neglected the
Salvation of your Souls; or you might have been cast into some Atheistical
Families, where God is not worshipped from Week to Week. Few are sensible enough
of the Obligation they are under to God, by being related as Husband, or Wife,
as a Child or a Servant, to such as truly fear God.

I would here call such Children to Repentance, who have neglected, and failed
in their Duty to Parents. Let grown Persons reflect on their Childhood, and
Youth, when they lived with their Parents, and since. Have you not been
Stubborn and Rebellious, Irreverent, and disrespectful in your Carriage to one,
or both of them? Have you not secretly despised them in your Hearts? or openly
published their Infirmities? Have you not often disobeyed their lawful
Commands? or slighted their wholesome Admonitions? Have you not denied, or been
backward to Assist and Comfort them? Have you not secretly coveted their
Estates, before their Death? or desired that it might be quickly? Did you
honor them, inwardly with a good Conscience, from the Love of God, and the
sense of his Authority? Let us call our selves to an account, and renew our
Repentance before God, for such Sins, that his Pardoning Grace may prevent his
Threatened Wrath. And let us take heed to live hereafter as the Children of
such, of whom God was not ashamed to be called their God.

Remember the Advantages of your being thus related to Holy Parents: for
Temporal Blessings, Ishmael, Solomon, Rehoboam, and others are Instances of the
kindness of God to Children upon the account of their Fathers. But you stand
fairest for Spiritual and Eternal Blessings, you are Children of the Covenant,
and Members of the Visible Church of Christ, the Blessing of Abraham, I will be
thy God, which reached unto his Seed, being now come upon us Gentiles, Gal.
3.14. You have many Helps to serious Godliness, which others have not: You have
many Hindrances removed, which make it more difficult for others, who descend
from wicked Parents, and live in Ignorant, Irreligious Families. You have more
Knowledge of God and Christ, of Sin and Duty. And usually the Spirit of Grace
begins more early with such Children, and follows them with more Calls, Offers,
Invitations, Strivings, Convictions; and leaves them not till they are
Profligate, Desperate, and Resolved in Wickedness: whereof Ishmael a Scoffer,
Esau a Profane Person, and the Jewish Nation, (who filled up the measure of
their Iniquity, by Rejecting and Murdering the Lord of Glory) are eminent
Examples.

Remember your Relation, and think what God and all the World expects from you.
There is a great Privilege belonging by Gospel-grant to the Children of Holy,
Covenanted Parents, if they do not forfeit it, by forsaking, and practically
disavowing their Fathers God. If you will own him, he will be Your God, as well
as Theirs. He has an early preventive Interest in you, upon which you may lay
your Claim to him as Your God, if you will devote your selves to him, and stand
to his Covenant. To be ungodly Children of Holy Parents is the greatest
Unworthiness that can be. Be astonished O ye Heavens at this! Jer. 2.12. That
any Persons, or People should cast off their God. Thine own Friend, and thy
Father's Friend forsake not, says Solomon, much less thy Father's God. How
reproachful will be your Wickedness, if you are not better than others! If you
who are the Children of the Covenant, become the Children of the Devil, by
doing his Works! Shall there be a scoffing Ishmael come out of Abraham's House,
or a profane Esau from Isaac's Family, a rebellious Absalom, or a filthy Amnon
be found in the Family of the Holy David? God forbid that any of you should
find or force the way to Hell, out of such Houses, where God is daily
worshipped. Certainly a Wicked Child of Religious Parents is one of the most
miserable Spectacles in the World. He is within the Visible Family of God,
devoted to him, made acquainted with his Duty, and can have no excuse for his
Sin. What Aggravatious has such a one's Guilt! They must have stifled more
Convictions, and resisted more Grace, than others. And how sure and severe will
be their Condemnation! when all the Prayers, and Pains of Holy Parents shall
witness against them! and God account such Children, as the Children of the
Ethiopian, or Arabian.

And have you no Concern for, or Love to your Parents? Consider how wicked
Children embitter all the Comforts of their good Parents. A Father of a Fool,
says the Wise Man, bath no joy, Prove. 17.21. While Parents are in bitterness
for a dissolute Child, they cannot have that Joy and Comfort in one another,
which otherwise they might: nor in the other Children, who are more hopeful:
The whole Family is Afflicted, and Disturbed. The Grace of God, by which they
overcome their own Corruptions, gives them not so much Comfort as otherwise,
when they see the Sin they have mortified and forsaken, break out, and reign in
any of their Children. Nor can they rejoice in God, and Jesus Christ, as
otherwise, when according to the Word of God, they hope and believe he is their
Friend and Father, and by the same Word know he is an Enemy to this or the
other Son, or Daughter, and that the Wrath of God abides on them: And that if
they get to Heaven themselves, such of their Children are not like to follow
them there.

Lastly, Let Children and Servants take heed of their Carriage toward One
another. Let them endeavor Concord, and Union, and Love; and avoid Contention,
and Falling out, and the using of provoking, exasperating Language to one
another. Let them help one another, as they can, in Health and Sickness, and
take each others Concernment as their own. Let them watch over one another, as
to the Sins, and Temptations they are most in danger of. Let them beware of
vain unprofitable Discourse, and Idleness; and most carefully put away all
filthy corrupt Communication, whereby they may poison the Souls of one another.
Let them tenderly bear with one another Failings, and prudently conceal one
another Faults, (where the Concealment of them tends not to the Wrong of the
Parent or Master, or of any other; and where the opening of them will but stir
up Strife.) This would also help to promote Family Religion. I desire and pray
that these plain hasty Thoughts, may be serviceable to that purpose. With that
Hope, I commend them to the Divine Blessing, and you to his Grace and
Providence: Let us unite in the Resolution, that whatever others do, we with
our House, will serve the Lord, and worship the God of our Fathers; and in that
way and manner as to Our Families, wherein we have, besides their Example, so
much other Encouragement from the Holy Scriptures, and Reason, and the Practice
of the best Men. I am with Respect, and Sincerity,

Sir, Yours, J. S.

APPENDIX, CONTAINING Rules of good Advice FOR OUR Christian and Civil
Carriage, Mostly from Bishop HALL's Epistles.
LET us begin with Him, who is the First and the Last: Inform your self aright
concerning God, without whom, in vain do we know all things. Be acquainted with
your Redeemer, who paid the price of your Redemption on Earth, and now
intercedes in Heaven; without whom we have nothing to do with God, or he with
us. Adore him in your Thoughts, Love him with all your Heart, and Trust him
with your Souls. Renew your sight of him every day, and his of you. Call your
selves to often Reckonings; cast up your Debts, Payments, Graces, Wants,
Expenses, Employments. Think not your set Devotions troublesome; yield not to
such a Thought; take not easy Denials of your self, and beware of
Self-flattery. Think all God's outward Favors and Provisions the best for you;
your own Ability and Actions the meanest. Suffer not your Mind to be a Drudge
or Wanton; Exercise it ever, but overcharge it not. Every Day take a View of
your last, as what may prove so. In all your Business look through the World to
God; whatsoever is your Level, let him be your Scope. Offer not your self
either to Honor or Labor, let both seek you. So frame your self to the Time
and Company, that you may neither serve it, nor sullenly neglect it; and yield
so far as that you may not betray your Conscience, or countenance Evil. Let
your Words be few and digested: It is a shame for the Tongue to cry the Heart
Mercy, much more to cast it self on the uncertain pardon of other men's Ears.
There are but two things, which a Christian is charged to buy, and not to sell,
Time and Truth, both so precious that we must purchase them at any rate. So use
your Friends, as those which should be Perpetual, may be Changeable. While you
are within your self, there is no danger; but Thoughts once uttered must stand
to Hazard. Do not hear from your self, what you would be loath to hear from
others. Give the Eye and Ear full scope in what is good, for they let Knowledge
into the Mind, but restrain the Tongue; few Men have repented them of silence.
In all serious Matters, take Counsel of Days, and Nights, and Friends; and let
Leisure ripen your Purposes; never hope to gain ought by suddenness. The first
Thoughts may be confident, the second are wiser. Serve Truth and Honesty ever,
though without apparent Wages; the Recompense is sure, if slow. As in Apparel,
so in Actions; consider not so much what is good, as what becomes you. Excuse
not your own Evil, agravate not that of others: and if you love Peace, avoid
Censures, Comparisons, and Contradictions, and Evil Speaking. Out of good Men
choose Acquaintance, of Acquaintance, Friends, of Friends, Familiars; after
Trial, admit them; and after Admittance, change them not. Do not always your
Best: it is neither wise nor safe for a Man ever to stand on the top of his
Strength. Be ever below your self, if you would be above the Expectation of
others. Expend according to your Purse, not after your Mind, or the Example of
Neighbors. Rather smother your Griefs and Wants as you may, than be either
Querulous, or Importunate: Frequent Suits, or Complaints are wearisom to a
Friend. Let not your Face belie your Heart, nor always tell tales out of it. In
all your Reckonings for the World, cast up some Crosses that appear not; either
they will come, or may. Let your Suspicions be Charitable; your Trust fearful;
your Censures sure. Give way to the Anger of Great Men, against whom you have
no Fence: patiently bear the Inconveniences you cannot mend; and make the best
of what must be. If the World smile upon you, with double care look to your
Soul, for there is more danger in Good than Evil.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey.
SOme Account of the Holy Life and Death of Mr. Henry Gearing: Who died,
January the 4th. 1693/4. Aged 61. With the Trial and Character of a Real
Christian, collected out of his Papers, for the Examination of himself: From
which several other Particulars are added, for the Instruction, Encouragement,
and Imitation of Christians. By Mr. John Shower, 12o.

A Discourse of Tempting Christ: By Mr. John Shower, 12o.

Mr. Slater's Sermon on the Funeral of Mr. John Reynolds Minister, 4o.

-- His Sermon on the Funeral of Mr. Richard Fincher, 4o.

-- On the Thanksgiving Day, Oct. 27. 1692. 4o.

Mr. Giles Firmin's Answer to Mr. Rich. Davis. 4o.

A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of London, January the
30th. 1693/4. By W. Stephens, B.D. Rector of Sutton in Surrey, 4o.

Mr. Hammonds Sermon on Mr. Steels Funeral. 8o.

Miscellanea Sacra, Containing Scriptural Meditations, Divine Breathings,
Occasional Reflections, and Sacred Poems. 12o

Aickins English Grammar; or the English Tongue reduced to Grammatical Rules. 8o

There will be shortly Published,

Mr. Slaters Discourse of Family Religion, in 18 Sermons. 8o

Mr. Hammonds Discourse of Family Religion, Written and Published at the
request of the United Ministers of London. 10o

A Discourse of the Right of the Children of Believers in the Covenant, against
Mr. Hercules Collins, By Mr. Mence of Wapping. 12o


