OF Long Life and Old Age. A Funeral Sermon, Occasioned by the DEATH OF The
much Honored, Mrs. Jane Papillon, Who departed this Life, July 12th, School.
Aetat. 72.

By John Shower.

LONDON, Printed for J. Fawkner, at the Talbot on London Bridge, School.

To the much Honored, Thomas Papillon, Esquire
THE following Sermon was Preached, and is now Published at your Desire. Your
near Relation to the Extraordinary Person Deceased, and that which I have the
Honor to bear to You, does manifestly determine my Choice to whom to Address
it.

You will not, Sir, expect in this Epistle, that I should give the World an
Account of Your Eminent Qualities, after the manner of Modern Dedications. The
Aversion I ought to have for Flattery, and that which You have of any thing
that looks like being Flattered, besides the Censoriousness of this nice Age,
(which will not bear the Praises even of those who very well deserve 'em,) make
this Point so tender to be touched, that I dare not adventure to draw Your
Character. However, if Your Children and Grandchildren, following the Worthy
Examples of their Parents, in great part are, and the Rest like to be,
Excellent Examples unto Others; that, Sir, is a living Panegyric upon You,
which You cannot escape.

Upon the like Reason, I have said so very little of the Deceased. Your
positive Prohibition not suffering me, to do her that Justice which the
Audience expected. I should otherwise have mentioned her Exemplary Piety and
Devotion; the great Moderation of Her Principles and Temper; Her Concern at
Heart for the Division among Protestants; Her strict Observation of the Lord's
Day, in Public, and Family Worship; Her extraordinary Care to take a frequent
Account of the State of her Soul, and of her Progress toward Perfection; Her
Love to all Good Men, of whatsoever Denomination; Her Prudent Administrations
at Home, and her diffusive Charity Abroad; (a Charity not confined to a Party,
measured only by the Merit and Necessity of the Objects.) And to her Honor, I
should have taken Notice of the Wise and Successful Education of her Children;
and the great Regard she had to the regular Behavior of her Servants; on whom
she endeavored to leave some lasting Impressions of Religion.

In short, I would have declared, that she had discharged the Duties of every
Relation, as a Wife, Mother, Mistress, Friend, Neighbor, etc. in that manner,
as perhaps there have been few such Examples of Piety and Prudence, in our Age.
In not doing this, I observed Your Orders; which I ought to mention, as a just
Excuse for that Defect in my Sermon.

Dear Sir, May all the Blessings of an Holy and Honorable Old Age, which I
have named, be long Yours! May it please God, to satisfy You with long Life,
and afterward show You his Salvation! This is the Hearty Prayer, of

SIR, Your Affectionate, Obliged Nephew, and Humble Servant, John Shower.
London, Nov. the 3d. School.
A Funeral Sermon, OF Long Life and Old Age.
JOB V. 26. Thou shall come to thy Grave in a full Age, like as a shock of Corn
comes in his Season.


THOUGH Eliphaz was mistaken in the Application of his Discourse unto Job, whom
he supposed to have been very wicked, because of his great Afflictions, yet
what he delivers in this Chapter of the Punishment of Evildoers, and of the
Divine Favor to Good Men, is a most certain and undoubted Truth. He assures us
it was that which he had well considered, and found it to be confirmed by
Experience; and therefore fit to be believed and remembered, v. 27. Lo this, we
have searched it, so it is, hear it; and know thou it for thy good. Now what is
it, that he thus ascertains the Truth of? But the Promise of God's Kindness and
Favor to Good Men. In the foregoing Verses he mentions several that have been
fulfilled to the Person, and Family of our deceased Friend: As, To deliver and
save them in Six and Seven Troubles, v. 19. To supply and defend them in a time
of Danger: To protect them, though encompassed with Enemies, v. 20, 21. That
wherever they go, they shall have a watchful Providence over them for Good:
That in what part of the World soever they pitch their Tent, they shall find it
in safety; their Tabernacle shall be in Peace, (they shall return to it, and
visit it, it may be after some Years absence,) and shall not sin, v. 24. And
then it follows, their Posterity shall be great and numerous; their Offspring
shall flourish as the Grass, and be considerable for their Number and
Condition, v. 25. And then as the close of all, in the Text, that they shall be
saved from a violent and untimely Death; they shall be carried to their Graves
in Peace, as Corn into the Barn, when it is fully ripe, and fit to be gathered.
Thou shall come to thy Grave in a full Age, as a shock of Corn comes in his
season.

The End of a Good Man's Life is here described, two ways.

First, Properly, Thou shall come to thy Grave in a full Age. Secondly,
Metaphorically, like as a shock of Corn comes in his season. It is plainly
employed and supposed, That the best Servants of God, however favored in this
World, and who live the longest; yet at length they must come to the Grave:
However God may protect and prosper them for many Years on Earth, they are not
to be Immortal here. But as that is implied, so there is also asserted and
promised, that the manner and Season of their Death shall be kind and gracious;
they shall dye in Peace; they shall have a Grave and Burial: and this after a
long Life, in a full Age, when fitted for the other World, as a shock of Corn
fully ripe is fit for the Barn. Accordingly we may observe these Four
Particulars from this Passage.

I. That the best Servants of God, who have lived in his Favor for many Years,
must come to the Grave at last.

II. That it is a Mercy to a Good Man to dye in Peace, so as to have a Grave
and Burial.

III. That to live to old Age, to come to the Grave in a full Age, is a
promised Blessing. Since the ordinary Age of Man is set to Threescore and Ten,
the Excellent Person deceased, (who dyed at Threescore and Twelve) may well be
accounted to come to her Grave in a full Age; especially if we apply the
Similitude of the Text, like a shock of Corn ripe for the Harvest; and
understand it of one fitted by the Grace of God for the blessed World: Which
will afford a Fourth Particular; viz.

IV. That Old Age with the Grace of God, and serious Religion to ripen and fit
the Soul for the Heavenly State, is a singular Honor and Favor of God. This
last I principally design to discourse of; and more briefly of the former.

I. That the best Servants of God, however favored and prosperous for many
Years in this World, must at last come to the Grave. This is one of those
Things we need not prove; but it would be of great Advantage to consider it.
Dye we must, as Men, whose Souls dwell in such Earthly Tabernacles, it is
unavoidable: And as Sinners, we are under a Sentence of Death, by a Divine
Constitution and Appointment. Which is a Kindness unto Good Men; who cannot
else have their promised Rest and Crown, by the full Accomplishment of their
Desires and Hopes. They cannot be perfectly freed from Evil, nor partakers of
complete Felicity, without Dying. The Capacity of our Nature, the Improvements
we may attain to, and the admirable means which God has appointed to fit us
for a nobler Life, may easily convince us that he has prepared another State,
and Life, and World; which it is now our Business to provide for.

It were well if the best Christians would consider it more, to make them
diligent to improve this Life, wisely to employ their Talents, and carefully to
do all the Good they can, before the Night comes. And it were well if others
would consider it, who are related to them; who have Opportunity to converse
with them; and are capable of receiving Good by them; if they would consider,
that such Useful Excellent Persons are not to stay always with us. If you that
are Younger should have many Years longer to stay; your most valuable Friends,
who are advanced in Age, must shortly be gone.

And let All seriously count upon it, that it is but a little while and every
one of us shall be called away. The oldest Man or Woman, the longest Liver that
we read of, did not reach that which, in comparison with God's Eternity, is
called one Day, did not live a Thousand Years. Methuselah is the longest Liver
upon Record; and yet it is a much longer Time since he dyed, than that was which
he lived. Before the Flood they lived nine or ten times as long as now we do,
yet all dyed. Enos 905 Years, Seth 912, Adam 930, Jared 962, Methuselah 969,
yet all dyed: They who tarried longest on the Stage, were at length called off.
Moses speaks of the ordinary Duration of the Life of Man to be Seventy Years,
and reckons it a great matter if any attain to Fourscore; as now and then there
are Instances of some that do, yet is the Strength of their Years but Labor
and Sorrow. But because Moses himself was Fourscore Years old when God made him
a Captain, and Aaron Eighty Three before he was made High Priest, we may not
conclude the Age of Eighty, at that time, to be a very decrepit old Age:
Therefore the Account given by See Dr. Hammond on Psalm XC.
Moses may rather be understood, either to refer to after Ages, or to the
particular Case of the Children of Israel in the Wilderness: where multitudes
were destroyed for their Murmuring and Unbelief; so that in Forty Years time,
all the Males of Twenty Years old and upwards, that were able to go forth to
War, were cut off, except Caleb and Joshua. The number of such as dyed under
the Age of Eighty must be reckoned very great, at least Three Hundred Thousand
Men.

But the longest Life of Man, absolutely and in it self considered, is very
short. Once in a Hundred Years the Scene of the World is shifted, and all the
Actors go off the Stage, and others come in their room. And how soon and
suddenly are Individuals called away? There is hardly any thing that is weak
and withered, that is vanishing and of no continuance, that is movable and may
be taken down at pleasure; but the Life of Man is compared to it: To a Vapor:
To the Flower of the Field: To a Tabernacle: To a Shepherd's Tent: To a Shadow,
etc. And in comparison with several other Creatures, it is also short; for we
read of diverse Animals that lived sometimes thrice as long as Man ordinarily
has done: How little at longest is the measure of our Days, that may be
reckoned up by one Figure and a Cipher? What is this to Everlasting Life? The
Life to come will continue more Millions of Ages, than there are Moments now in
the longest Life of Man; yea, if it were Ten Thousand times longer than
Methuselah's. The present Life is to the future but as one Moment, in the
Apostle's Reckoning, 2 Cor. 4.17. And it is shorter yet, if compared with God's
Eternal Duration, which has neither Beginning nor End. Mine Age is as nothing
before thee, Psalm. 39.5. and Psalm. 90.4. There is no Proportion between the
greatest number of Years and an endless Life.

How certainly, how soon will the little number of the Days of the Years of our
Pilgrimage be ended? Though we should be favored by Divine Providence more
than others; and flourish in outward Prosperity to a great Old Age; yet what
Man is he that lives and shall not see Death, let him live never so long, and
never so well? Shall he deliver his Soul from the hand of the Grave? Psalm.
89.49. Jacob was an 130 Years old when he said to Pharaoh, Few and Evil have
the Days of the Years of my Life been; and yet that time was short in
comparison of the longer Lives of his Fathers: But unconceivably shorter in
comparison of the Everlasting Life, which this is the passage to. I have read
of certain little Beasts, on the Banks of the River Hypanis in Poland, that
never live above a Day; they which dye at Eight a Clock in the Morning, dye in
their Youth; they which dye at Five in the Evening of the same Day, in their
extremest Old Age. Who would put so small a Continuance into the Consideration
of Good or Evil? And yet the longest of our abode in this World, in comparison
with Eternity, is much less than the Life of one of those Creatures compared
with Methuselah.

II. It is a Mercy to dye in Peace, so as to have a Grave and Burial. To dye in
Peace, is sometimes opposed to an untimely, violent Death, 1 Kings 2.6. It was
promised to Zedekiah, that he should not dye by the Sword; but dye in Peace,
Jer. 34.4. To do so, and to be decently Interred, is an additional Mercy, which
the best Men have desired and been concerned for. We read that Abraham
purchased a Burying-place for his Dead. God encouraged Jacob, by the Promise
that his Son should take care of his Funeral. And God expressed his Kindness to
Moses, in that particular, that he buried him. And Joseph of Arimathea, is
commended for his Care in the Burial of our Savior. And it is threatened and
inflicted as a Judgment, to want a Sepulcher. As in the Case of Baasha, and
Jezabel, Jehojachim, and others, Jer. 22.19. Psalm. 143.11. It is threatened to
this purpose, Jer. 14.16. That the People should be cast out in the Streets,
and none to bury them; and that the Bones of the Kings, and Priests, and
Prophets, should be taken out of the Grave, and laid open to the Sun and Moon.
It Is part of a very sad Complaint, Psalm. 79.2. The dead Bodies of thy Servants
have they given to be meat unto the Fowls of the Heaven, the Flesh of thy
Saints unto the Beasts of the Earth. Their Blood have they shed like Water
round about Jerusalem; and there was none to bury them. The Romanists have been
often very Barbarous and Inhumane to our Protestant Brethren in this
particular, by prohibiting their Burial, and ill treating their dead Bodies,
and digging up their Bones, etc.

And yet we should not make too much of this: For if I dye in the Peace of God,
and Christ receive my departing Soul; whether my Body putrify above ground, or
under, that concerns the Living and Survivors more than me. Christ will
recollect my scattered Dust; and raise it a Glorious Body, like his own: Though
sown in Corruption and Dishonor; it shall be raised Incorruptible and
Glorious: But it is reckoned a Privilege to be Buried. David acknowledged this
to the Men of Bethshemeth, in Burying the Body of Saul, 2 Samuel 2.5. Blessed are
ye of the Lord, who have shown this Kindness to Saul; and have buried him: The
Lord show Kindness and Truth to you: It ordinarily bespeaks Kindness; and may
imply the Hope of the Resurrection of those Bodies, that are committed to the
Ground.

But this Expression, Thou shall come to thy Grave, may denote further, that
not only shall they be Buried, and have a Grave; but Dye at Home; have a
Peaceable End; Dye among their Relations, so as to be Buried in their own
Sepulcher, and have their Bones laid in the same Grave, or Vault, where their
nearest Kindred have been Interred, with those of their own Family, who Died
before them.

III. That to come to ones Grave in a full Age, is a very great Favor. God
has put an Honor upon Old Age, and promised it as a Blessing to them that
fear him: He has required us to honor the Face of the Old Man; and made it a
part of Religion, by connecting it with the Fear of God, Lev. 19.32. This is
one Duty required in the fifth Commandment; which is the first with Promise,
Ephesians. 5.2. And when God would threaten to punish a Family; He declares there
should be no Old Man in it, 1 Samuel 2.31.

It was foretold to Abraham, as a Blessing, that he should dye an Old Man; that
he should go to his Fathers in Peace, and dye in a good Old Age, Genesis 15.15. He
that fears God, and walks in his way, he shall see his Childrens Children;
and unto such God has said; With long Life will I satisfy him, and show him
my Salvation, Psalm. 91. ult. and 128. ult. There shall not be an Old Man, who
has not filled his days, Isa. 65.20. is a Promise that concerns the later Ages
of the World: i.e. The Aged shall complete their time, and fall ripe into the
Grave. They shall not be taken away as Corn on the Housetop, that withers
before it be grown up: But as Corn that is fully ripe, and fit to be gathered
into the Barn. S. John, the most beloved Disciple, lived longest of any of the
Apostles: He was banished in the time of the Emperor Domitian, which was
Eighty Years after Christ; and so he could not be less than a Hundred Years old.

Length of Days, long Life, and Peace, are promised in many places to such as
please God, and obey him. Zach. 8.4. Thus says the Lord of Hosts; There shall
yet Old Men and Old Women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem. You shall walk in
all the ways which the Lord your God has commanded you, that ye may live, and
that it may be well with you, and that ye may prolong your Days in the Land
which ye shall possess. Deuteronomy. 5.33.25. chapter 15. What Man is he that desires
Life, and loves many Days that he may see good? Keep thy Tongue from evil,
etc. Psalm. 34.12, 13. By me thy Days shall be multiplied, and the Years of thy
Life shall be increased. If Life it self be a Blessing, if to be taken away by
Death, sooner than according to the ordinary Course of Nature were not an Evil;
God would not have promised to reward with length of Days. It were not the
subject matter of a Promise, if it were not Good. You have the contrary
Threatenings in many places, Job 18.16, 18, 19, 20. So Chap. 21.17. That the
Years of the Wicked shall be shortened: That his Candle shall be put out: That
he shall not live out half his Days, Prove. 10.27. Psalm. 55.23. I will be a
swift witness against the Fornicator, Adulterer and false Swearer. The triumph
of the Wicked shall be short, and the joy of the Hypocrite but for a moment.
The Years of the Wicked shall be shortened; his Root shall be dried up beneath,
and above his Branches shall be cut off; his remembrance shall perish from the
Earth, and he shall have no name in the Street. He shall be driven from Light
into Darkness, and chased out of the World. He shall neither have Son nor
Daughter among his People, nor any remaining in his Dwelling: Such are the
Dwellings of the Wicked, and this is the Portion of them that know not God. His
Branch shall not be green; he shall shake off his unripe Fruit as the Vine, and
cast off his Flower as the Olive. His Candle shall be put out, and sudden
Destruction shall overtake him. He shall be as Stubble before the Wind, and as
Chaff which the Storm carries away. It was for the Wickedness of the Old World,
that God shortened the Life of Man after the Flood: And again at the Building of
Babel, for the Sins of those that went about to build it: And again in the
Wilderness, because of the Peoples murmuring, and despising the promised Land,
of which Moses speaks. Psalm. 90.7, 8, 9. But to come to the Grave in a full
Age, may likewise import more than barely living long.

First, Riches and Honor are often joined with Length of Days: Though Old Age
and Long Life are preferred before them, as the right hand Blessing; Prove. 3.16.
Length of Days are in her right hand, and in her left, Riches and Honor. It is
mentioned with Advantage concerning David, that he died in a good Old Age, full
of Days, Riches and Honor, 1 Chronicles. 29.28. It Is a Mercy when our Relations and
Friends do not leave the World in Disgrace: That they do not set in a Cloud;
and go off undesired and unlamented: But honored with the Affections of many
living; and their Lamentations when they are removed.

Secondly, In a full Age, so as to be satisfied with having lived so long; and
willing to dye. With long Life will I satisfy thee, and show thee my
Salvation. There are few Wicked Men who are satisfied with living; they would
fain be Immortal here. God is forced to Demand, and require their Souls of
them: This Night shall thy Soul be required of thee: But many a Good Man can
say with the Prophet Elijah; and in a much better Temper, than he was in when
he used these words, 1 Kings 19.4. It is enough, now O Lord, take away my Life.
Or with old Simeon; Now Lord, let thou thy servant depart in Peace. Not
only I am content to go, if thou call me, but with the Apostle, I desire to be
dissolved; for while I am present in the Body, I am absent from the Lord. Come
Lord Jesus! come quickly!

Thirdly, In a full Age, when they have lived to see their Children brought up,
and disposed of in the World: And it may be have seen their Childrens Children.
This is a further Mercy; that God has made their House to grow; and they can
leave the World with hope, that their Children shall follow them to Heaven, and
that they also will command their Children after them to serve the Lord: Not to
be called out of the World, till they have a fair and hopeful prospect that the
Covenant Promise shall be made good to their Seed; that they that descend from
them shall bear up the Name of God, own his Truth, and live to be Blessings in
the World, and not to reproach and shame the Stock from whence they come.

Fourthly, To dye in a full Age, a good Old Age, with a competent vigor of
Health of Body and Mind, in their Elder Years. I mean without the extraordinary
Infirmities of Old Age. Moses being an Hundred and Twenty Years old, yet his
Eye was not dim, nor his Natural Strength abated, Deuteronomy. 34.7. With what
Thankfulness does good old Joshua speak this; Josh. 4.10, 11. I am this Day
Fourscore and Five Years old; and yet I am as strong this Day, as in the Day
that Moses sent me; as my Strength was then so it is now. What Vigor of
Health, both of Body and Mind, God blessed the Honorable Person Deceased withal,
for the greatest Part of her Life, [all Things considered as to Her particular
Case,] ought to be acknowledged with great Thankfulness. For though Old Age be
a Blessing; yet a very infirm one is not desirable. Which Archbishop
Tillotson's Funeral Sermon of Dr. Witchcot.
a Great Man takes notice of upon such an Occasion: Who, says he, would desire
to live very long Uneasy to himself, and Troublesome to others; who would not
think it time to dye when by reason of Old Age we can hardly live with the Good
Will of our Friends; when those who ought to love us best, begin to think much
that we live so long; and can hardly forbear to give us broad signs that they
are weary of our Company: In such a Case one would almost be contented to dye
out of Civility, and not choose to make a long stay, where a Man sees his
Company is no longer acceptable; if we can hope we shall be welcome to a better
Place; and more delightful Society? Why should we desire to thrust our selves
upon those, who have much ado to refrain from telling us that our Room is
better than our Company. The Extremities of Old Age are generally peevish and
quarrelsome, falling back to the weak and helpless Condition of Infancy and
Childhood: And yet less Care is commonly taken to please Aged Persons, and less
Kindness shown them, (unless in Expectation of receiving greater,) than unto
Children; because these are cherished in Hope, the others in Despair, of
proving better. So that if God see good, it is not desirable to try Nature, and
the Kindness, and Good Will of our Relations to the uttermost.

I mention this, because it is one of the Blessings of Old Age, to have the
Taper of Life burn clear to the last: For any to have their Understanding good;
their Memories and Senses tolerable; their Conversation acceptable; their
Relations kind, and respectful to them, as long as they live: This is a rare
Case, and happens seldom to Old People: And when it does, it is commonly to
those who, by a Regular and Religious Course of Life, have reserved some of
their best Spirits till last; and have not, by Vice and Intemperance, drawn off
Life to the Dregs; and left nothing to be enjoyed, but Infirmities and Ill
Humors, Guilt and Repentance: It Is the Blessing of such who have laid in a
good Provision for such an Evil Day, by Peace with God, and the Comforts of a
good Conscience, the Hopes of Heaven, and the Sense of God's Favor and loving
Kindness, which is better than Life. This is a special Privilege, and a
singular Favor of God, that might easily be applied to the present Example.
Which brings me to the Fourth Thing.

IV. That Old Age, with the Grace of God, and serious Religion, to ripen and
fit the Soul for Heaven, like a shock of Corn fit to be gathered, is a most
desirable Blessing.

But before I speak to that, I must Answer an Objection, that you will be ready
to make from Observation and Experience; viz. That this Promise is not very
often fulfilled even to Good Men: That there is little distinction between the
Righteous and the Wicked in this Respect: Many Excellent Persons are taken off
in their Youth, and many Wicked People live to a considerable old Age.

Answer. Many Things may be said in Answer to this: As that the Providence of
God are of a great depth: And that if a Good Man be called out of the World in
the midst of his Days, he will have no cause to repent that he did not live to
be old. If God promise Long Life, and give Eternal Life, there is no more
Damage done to the Person, than if you should promise another Twenty Shillings,
and give him a Thousand Guinea's. And by giving long Life to some Good Men, God
shows that it is his Gift; as by bringing others to Heaven sooner, he tells us
he has something better to bestow.

We are hereby instructed in the nature and value of present Things, and
assisted to expect Eternal Rewards and Punishments. We cannot reckon any such
Temporal Blessing a peculiar Mark of God's Favor, because it is not the Portion
of all Good Men, and others sometimes partake of it. Without this Variety in
the Dispensations of Providence, we should want one of the best Moral Arguments
for another Life after this.

We must likewise consider the difference between the Dispensation of God's
Providence to Good Men under the Old Testament, and now under the New. Eternal
Rewards were couched and shadowed very much under the Promise of Temporal
Blessings on the Jewish Nation: Their Land of Canaan was a Type of Heaven; and
long Life promised to them, was the Figure of an Eternal one: And though, now
under the Gospel we have the Promise of the Life that now is, as well as of
that which is to come; yet the fulfilling of any such Promises must be left to
the Wisdom of God, who knows what is best for our Spiritual Advantage; and when
in all the Circumstances of it, it will tend to our truest Interest, and
promote our Eternal Welfare. God who knows our Strength and Weakness; what
Temptations we are able to resist, and what not; knows when, and to whom, to
fulfill such a Promise as this, of long Life. And we cannot be so unreasonable
as to desire it, if it would tend to our Detriment. It Is therefore added Deuteronomy.
5.16. Honor thy Father, etc. that thy Days may be prolonged; and that it may
go well with thee. It must also be considered that there were particular
Reasons for the extraordinary long Lives of the Patriarchs, and those before
the Flood, that will not reach to our Times.

Josephus The concurrent Testimony of the Greeks and Barbarians concerning the
Long Lives of Men in Ancient Times, is mentioned by Josephus, Antiq. lib. 1. c.
3.
gives this Account of it, that they being Men beloved of God, and newly made
by him, with a strong Constitution, and excellent Temper of Body, and using
better Diet, the Vigor of the Earth serving at first for the Production of
better Fruits: All these Things joined with their Temperance, constant
Exercise, moderate Labor, a sweet Temper of Air, etc. might contribute much to
the Length of their Lives. Which was but necessary, that the World might be the
sooner Peopled Which Reason is long since ceased, and the shortning of Man's
Life is as needful now, as the prolonging it was in the first Ages of the
World. Humani Generis Incrementum Terra non caperet, si omnes senescerent qui
nascuntur. Petrarch.
, Knowledge and Religion more certainly propagated by the Authority of living
Teachers, and Arts and Sciences brought to greater Perfection.

Not that the Privilege of living so long was peculiar to the Holy Patriarchs
mentioned in Holy Scripture; but that generally speaking, it was true of all in
those Times. We read but of Seven Generations of the Descendants of the Race of
Cain, from the Death of Abel unto the Flood. And if it had not been thus, the
Peopling of the World, and the Increase of Mankind, could not have been
attained by the long Lives only of Five or Six of the Holy Patriarchs: Nor
could another End have been reached, (viz.) the increase of Arts and Sciences,
and useful Knowledge for Humane Life; because not only Good Men, nor
principally they, but others, who have little Religion, are as well concerned
in those matters See this more largely treated of by Joh. H. Heidegerus Hist.
sacra Patriarch. Tom. 1. 4o. Amstel. 1667. exerc. 14. de longaevitate
Patriarcharum. And Mons. le Clerc. Comment. in Genesis cap. 5. v. 27. Fol. Amstel.
1693. And B. Patrick on Genesis 5. and Hackwell 's Apology. Fol. Sir W. Raleigh 's
Hist. of the World, l. 1. c. 5.. 5, 6.
.

It Is true S. Cyprian, and some of the Fathers, thought that Men's Lives were
now shorter, because the World is grown old and declined, and that Nature
decays by degrees, and that it is upon that Account that Men do not now live so
long as formerly. But then, how comes it to pass that for so many Ages, as from
David's Time to ours, there has been little or no Change? For he is called an
Old Man, and full of Days, at Seventy. 1 Chronicles. 23.1. We should now be in the
decrepit Old Age of the World, and hardly live Ten Years, instead of Threescore
and Ten, if Nature decayed so as Man's Life did proportionably decrease, by
reason of the old Age of the World. We must therefore consider the
determination of this matter, to depend entirely on the Holy and Wise
Providence of God, to serve the Purposes of his Glory, in Mercy, and Justice,
and Wisdom, past our finding out, as to many things: Though sometimes we discern
a plain Reason. As we may well suppose, it was one principal Reason of the long
Life of the Holy Patriarchs, that they might propagate Religion in their
Generations, as Abraham, and Noah, and Enoch, and the rest did. There being no
Scriptures written; the Knowledge of God was conveyed from Parents to Children;
and God prolonged their Lives, that they might be the Props and Pillars of
Religion in their Families, and transmit a true Account of the Creation of the
World, and of the Counsel of God to Adam concerning the promised Seed: The
Tradition of these Divine Revelations to our first Parents, might have been
continued by Three Men from Adam to the Israelites going into Egypt. Adam being
taught of God by Oracle, he lived long enough to teach many others: Methuselah
lived Three Hundred Forty Three Years with Adam, and with Noah Five Hundred,
and continued to the Flood: Noah lived with Abraham Fifty Eight Years, by whom
it was not hard to pass by Isaac, Jacob, and his Posterity, to Moses: For Sem
lived with Methuselah Ninety Eight Years, and flourished about Five Hundred
Years after the Flood: And Isaac lived Fifty Years with Sem, and died about Ten
Years before the Children of Israel went down into Egypt: So that by the long
Lives of the Patriarchs, Methuselah, Sem and Isaac, might continue the
Tradition of the Creation, and the Truth and Purity of Religion, from Adam to
that time; which was above Two Thousand Two Hundred Years.

But it is sufficient in Answer to the Objection, that, Whenever a Good Man
lives long, it is in Mercy to him: But the Sinner a Hundred Years old is
accursed, Isa. 65.20. If Wicked Men have their Lives prolonged, as well as
those that fear God, yet there is a vast difference; the one is a Gift of
Divine Love, and the Fruit of a Promise; the other is only a common Benefit, to
serve some Ends of Providence: For the sake, it may be, of some Good Men to
whom such a one is Related; or, it may be, as a Reward of some little Service,
that even a Wicked Man may be employed to do in this World. In the one Case
long Life is in order to greater Mercy; but the other will have a dismal End in
his Eternal Ruin. The former like a gentle River, as one well expresses it,
which has run many Miles, and watered and enriched the Neighboring Grounds,
mingles at last with the vast Ocean of Glory: The other, though, like the River
Jordan, it has extended its Course a great way, falls at last into the dead
Sea, into endless Howlings. In the one Case it is a sign that a great deal of
further Mercy and Blessing is to be added to it: In the other, that after this
all his Blessings are at an end, and he shall have no more.

The Sinner of an Hundred Years old shall be accursed. Some Sinners bring Age
upon themselves, by their Wickedness, before the time; and are an Hundred Years
old at Forty. Some commit the Sins of an Hundred Years in half that space of
time; and though they should live to that Age would continue to sin on. And in
Old Age their full Ears of Corn are blasted with a Mildew, they are under the
Curse of God: And their longest Day shall shut up in Everlasting Darkness,
never to see Light or Comfort more.

Besides, the Promise of long Life must be considered as made to such as are
eminent for honoring their Parents; as are strict and conscientious in the
Government of the Tongue; as are Exemplary for Justice toward Men, and Charity
to the Poor. Now every Good Man who has Sincerity enough to carry him to
Heaven, cannot expect the accomplishment of these, and the like Temporal
Promises, which are made to Persons who are peculiarly eminent for such Virtues.

I conclude this Head with the words of the Wise Man, Eccl. 8.12, 13. Though a
Sinner do evil a hundred times, and his Days be prolonged; yet surely I know it
shall be well with them that fear God, that fear before him. But it shall not
be well with the Wicked, neither shall be prolong his Days, which are as a
shadow; because he fears not before God. Job 21.7, 20. The Wicked live,
become old; yea, are mighty in Power: His Eyes shall see his Destruction, he
shall drink of the Wrath of the Almighty.

I come now to consider, That Old Age, with the Grace of God, and a Course of
serious Religion, is a very great Blessing; when the Soul is fitted and ripened
for Heaven. And this is the Benefit of a long Life, that we may know, and
serve, and praise, and glorify, and enjoy God more than others; this has made
the best Men desire and pray for a longer Life. Psalm. 39. ult. Spare me that I
may recover Strength, and be fitted for my Duty and thy Service, and fitter to
leave the World, when thou shall call me. Psalm. 71.18. Isa. 38.19. This is the
proper Blessing of a prolonged Life, to do God more Service in this World, and
lay up a good Foundation for hereafter, viz. the Comforts of a good Conscience
against a dying Hour, and a greater meetness for the Heavenly Inheritance.

It Is doubtless true, that the Grace of God does beautify every Age; but how
Lovely and Honorable is the Hoary Head, when found in the way of
Righteousness? After the resistance of many Temptations, and enduring many
Years Conflicts, that yet the Soul is fixed for God and Heaven, and its Choice
abides. When after many Years Experience, they like their Master's Service the
better, when they have faithfully served him for Fifty, Sixty or Seventy Years.
To say with good Obadiah, 1 Kings 18. I have feared Jehovah from my Youth. It
was a Title of Honor given Gnason of Cyprus, that he is called an old
Disciple, Acts 21.16. So Anna the Prophetess was of a great Age, Luke 2.36. So
Paul the aged, and now also a Prisoner of Christ, Philemon, v. 9. What a stock
of Grace must such an old Disciple be supposed to have? who was early planted
in the House of God, and for several Years flourished in the Courts of the
Lord; who has been treasuring up, and increasing from Year to Year; adding
Grace to Grace, and proceeding from Strength to Strength? And it is but an
equitable Supposition, that such have understood their Opportunities, and
managed their Time and Talents to good Advantage.

How comfortably may such a one reflect on the past Instances of God's Wisdom
and Faithfulness, Kindness and Compassion? On the sweet Communion he has had
with God in his younger Years, at his first Dedication of himself to be the
Lords, under such a Man's Ministry, who is long since dead; at the Table of the
Lord, in such or such an Assembly of Christians, in the City or Country? What
comfortable Reflections can he make? What pleasant Reviews may such a one have
of Spiritual, Inward, Experimental Religion? Who can say with David, I have
known thy Testimonies of old, Psalm. 119.152. who has often seen the Word of
God fulfilled to himself, and others? Who has observed how Public and Private
Providence did comment upon the Holy Scriptures; and it may be, has had the
Pleasure and Joy, to see his Prayers answered, and his Endeavors prospered, in
the Education of Children; that they and theirs after them, might know and
serve the Lord? It Is a great Blessing to live to such an Age, and find this.
How helpful may their long Experience be, to enable them to do good in the last
part of their Life, more than in their younger Years? For Wisdom is gotten by
Experience; and generally speaking, they who have longest Time to improve, must
be the wisest People. And it is as rare, almost, to see a Young Man Wise and
Prudent, as to see an Old Man Strong and Healthy. Therefore Two or Three Years
of the Life of an Aged, Experienced Christian, especially if employed in any
Public Station of Service, either in Church or State, may be of more use, than
many Years of Younger less Experienced Men.

And there are many Services and Duties for the Honor of God, which we are now
called to, that even the Saints in Heaven are not capable of. The faithful
improvement of our Talents as to these, may increase our Happiness in another
World. If there be different Degrees of Glory, he that has a long Life of
Service and Improvement in Grace, may hope to rise higher than others.

How Useful may be the Example of an old Disciple, and how Beneficial his
Prayers to the Public? But especially to his own Family and Relations? And
there are many, who understand the Blessing of long Life in the Fifth
Commandment, which is promised to those that Honor their Parents, to be the
Consequence of Parents Blessing their Children, by their Prayers and
Intercession to God for them. And since the Apostle tells us, that without
Contradiction the less is blessed of the greater, and the Prosperity of
Children depends very much (as in Reason and Experience is evident it does,)
upon the earnest Prayers of holy Parents for their obedient Children; one may
wonder that Children should now be taught (by any otherwise good People,) not
to ask that Blessing, not to beg those Prayers, which have so manifest an
Advantage. Especially when the doing it, has the general Attestation of all
Christendom; and is no contemptible Testimony of that Honor and Respect, which
is due from Children to their Religious Parents. I say Religious, because to
make Old Age Honorable, and a Blessing, those Graces must be supposed, which
are the Ornaments of that Age, Sobriety and Temperance, Gravity and
Seriousness, Soundness in the Faith, Charity, Patience, and Diligence to finish
the Work God has given them to do. How honorable and excellent is such a one?
Full of Days, and full of good Works? Who has served his Generation according
to the Will of God, and is now trimming his Lamps, girding up his Loins, and
waiting for the coming of his Lord? What a Privilege, what a Blessing is this?

As to the Metaphor in the Text, As Corn fully ripe, fit to be gathered into
the Barn, many Things might be considered for Illustration: What a variety of
Seasons it passes through before it be ripe; how See a large and ingenious
Account of this by Sir Matthew Hale, in his Magnetismus Magnus; or Metaphysical
and Divine Contemplations on the Loadstone, 8vo, 1695. on Psalm. LXXXVI. 8. p.
151.
gradually it does advance after it is sown; how it springs up like an Herb,
shoots forth a tender Blade, rises to a Stalk, and then comes to be ripe: To
all which a great deal of Time is requisite, before it be cut down, and laid in
the Barn; and then it is to be threshed, and fanned, before it be fit for the
Master's use: But yet the Harvest is certain; and when the Corn is ripe it
shall be cut down. 'Twere easy to run the Parallel, as to a good Old Age
according to this Metaphor.

You see plainly, it is not merely to have lived long; but to live so as to be
ripe for Heaven, that is the great Blessing. That Old Age which is truly
honorable, is not to be known by a withered Face, but a mortified Spirit; not
by the decays of the Natural Body, but by weakening the Body of Sin; not by the
Temporal Good we have enjoyed for many Years; but by the Spiritual Good we have
received and done. An Hoary Head is a Crown; but Righteousness is the Jewel of
it. As a fair Woman without Discretion is like a Jewel in a Swines Snout; so
are Gray Hairs on the Head of an old Sinner. To be an old Atheist, or Drunkard,
or Miser, and have many External Advantages above others, without the Grace of
God, and serious Religion, is no great Blessing; such a one is accursed, though
a Hundred Years old. To be good, and do good, is indeed Life; and from our
beginning to be, and do so, we must reckon our Lives. As he that was converted
at Sixty, being asked Five Years after, how old he was, did very justly and
truly say, he was but Five Years old. He had lived no longer to any good
Purpose, though he had been Threescore Years more in the World. He reckoned his
Life, not from the time of his being born, but from his new Birth; from his
being born again. They therefore who remember their Creator in their Youth, and
begin betimes to serve God; if they reach to Old Age, they live three times as
long as other People, who yet may count as many Years as they, from their
Infancy and Childhood, but have lived in the pleasures of Sin, and in
forgetfulness of God, and so for many Years were dead whilst alive.

The Application of all this shall be by some Inferences of Truth, and Duty.

First, If length of Days, and a long continuance in the World be an honorable
Privilege and Blessing, what high and adoring Thoughts should we have of the
Eternity of God, who is pleased to condescend to us, to be called the Ancient
of Days; and who gloryeth in this, that he inhabiteth Eternity; unto whom a
Thousand Years are but as one Day, yea but as yesterday when it is past; and as
a Watch in the Night. A Thousand Years are in God's sight, but as one Day. If
then we suppose a Man as old as this World, born above Five Thousand Years ago,
he would be, in God's Account, but as one born Five Days ago: And by this
Computation, he that has lived Sixty Two Years, has lived but One and half;
and he that was born Forty Years since, is but as if he came now into the World
this present Hour. But there is a shorter Reckoning; for it is added, and as a
Watch in the Night, which is the fourth part of Twelve Hours, or Three Hours. A
Thousand Years are no more, in God's Account, than Three Hours; and by this
Computation, he that dies between Thirty and Forty Years old, is as if he had
lived but Five or Six Minutes; and he that dies betwixt Sixty and Seventy, as
if he lived but Twelve or Thirteen Minutes. Such is the Proportion of Minutes
in Three Hours compared to a Thousand Years. But the longest Age imaginable,
compared with God's Eternity, is not so much as One Minute. For let a Man bring
forth all the Numbers he can think of; let him heap Millions upon Millions; let
him lay on Ten Thousand Millions one upon another; they are all less than one
Unit unto Eternity. One single Minute bears some Proportion with the greatest
Number of Years, that can be reckoned: But there is no Proportion between Finite
and Infinite. Take as many Millions of Years as you please, and add as many
more to them, Ten Thousand Times over, yet still they will make but a Finite
Number; whereas God's Duration is Infinite. With what humble Adoration should
we think of the Almighty, Eternal God, who is from Everlasting to Everlasting.

Secondly, If Old Age and Length of Days be a promised Blessing; how faulty is
it for any to shorten their Days; or not to use proper Means for prolonging
their Lives. And here such are to be reproved, who either by Luxury and
Intemperance, or by Quarrelling and Duelling, or by Attempts of Self-Murder,
out of Peevishness and Discontent; or any other way, do discover a Contempt of
Life; or do not take care to preserve it. They consider not what a Blessing
Life is, that will throw it away, and hasten their own Death. There are
excellent Purposes for the Glory of God, and our own Good, to be served by this
present Life, and therefore we must not foolishly part with it, till he who
sent us into this World does call us into the other. And he that goes thither
before he is sent for, has no Reason to expect to be welcome there. He that
will shorten his own Time by Wickedness, or Wilfulness, of any sort, he
despises this Blessing in the Text; and exposes himself to the Anger of God,
and a terrible Reckoning beyond the Grave. You acknowledge that after Death
follows Eternal Judgment; whereas many of the Heathens reckoned Annihilation
was the hardest and worst of the Case. But Christian Religion has brought Life
and Immortality to light; and the Scriptures tell us of future Punishments, as
well as Rewards, which should make us value and improve this present Life; for
how long soever it be, it is little enough to prepare for the Everlasting World.
This I have already taken notice of, and so proceed to infer,

Thirdly, That the Contempt of Old Age, which God has promised as a Blessing,
must needs be a Sin. I apprehend no Impropriety for one that is not very Old,
to plead for the Honor of Old Age: It Is but a piece of Justice to Humane
Nature. And whoever in their Youth will divert themselves with the unavoidable
Infirmities of the Aged, he does but laugh at himself beforehand, and expose
his own future Condition. It is well known, to the Honor of Old Age, that in
almost all Countries, they of most Years have been thought fittest to preside
in Counsels, and have the Direction in Public Affairs: So that the very Name
of Office and Authority is derived from thence: See Mr. J. Collier 's Essays,
Second Part, 8vo, of Old Age. Sir Francis Bacon 's Essays of Youth and Age,. 42.
Witness the Jewish Elders, the Spartan (...), the Roman Senate, and the Saxon
Aldermen. Though, younger People were sometimes joined in the Commission. The
Reason is plain, Matters of Moment being to be managed with Conduct and Temper;
the Aged have always stood fairest for such a Trust and Honor. And among
several Nations, and particularly the Lacedaemonians, and from them the
Credebant hoc grande nefas, and morte piandum, si Juvenis vetulo non
assurrexerat. Juvenal, Satyr. 29. in Euterp.
Romans, they were honored as Fathers of their Country; and reverenced almost
as Gods. To honor Ancient People is joined with worshipping the Gods in
several Countries. Temporal Jurisdiction and Spiritual, the Magistracy and the
Priesthood, for the most part have been appropriated to the Elder, as the Names
for both, in almost all Languages, will evidence. And therefore whatever
Alterations there may seem to be in Elder Persons, by reason of their Age, that
may any ways expose them to Contempt; if they are such, who have had Great and
Useful Employments in the World; their very Infirmities are to be attributed to
their Generous and Profitable Labors, and looked upon as Honorable Sears:
They having spent themselves in the Service of Christ, and the Souls of Men; or
in the Service of their King and Country: and so the very Decays of Nature, in
such Persons, should rather move Respect than Pity. God has commanded us to
honor Old Age, Lev. 19.32. Thou shall rise up before the Hoary Head, and
honor the Face of the Old Man, and fear thy God; I am the Lord. It is enjoined
as an Instance of the Fear of God. So that the Contempt of Old Age is not only
Rudeness, and Incivility, but Irreligion; not only shows the want of good
Manners, but it is Profaneness. Rebuke not an Elder, or Ancient Person, but
entreat him as a Father. 1 Timothy 5.1, 2. Likewise you Younger submit your selves
to the Elder. 1 Pet. 5.5. Especially Children to Parents: You know the
Punishment of Disobedient Children. Prove. 21.18. If a Magistrate neglected his
Duty; the Ravens of the Valley shall pluck out his Eyes, and the young Eagles
shall eat them. As to Parents, the Obligation is manifold not to despise their
Age; but reverence and honor them; to advise with them; to hearken to them,
and be guided by them; especially in the great Turns of Life. Prove. 23.2.
Hearken to thy Father that begat thee, and despise not thy Mother when she is
old. Because the Mother is more likely to be slighted than the Father; God
commands the Honor and Fear of the Mother first. Lev. 19.3. Ye shall fear
every Man his Mother, and his Father, etc.

And here may be considered, what is certainly confirmed by Experience, in very
many Instances: That when God makes any Breach in a Family, by the Death of a
Parent, whether Father or Mother, there are hardly any Children, though never
so Respectful, Affectionate, and Dutiful to the Deceased, but have many a
serious Thought upon their Decease; Oh were my Honored and Dear Parent now
alive, I think I should express my Duty and Affection, in this and the other
Instance, more and better than I did: Even they who did observe the Fifth
Commandment, so as to be accepted with God, and with their Parents, yet, after
their Death, will have some such Thoughts. There is doubtless more of Religion,
in the good Carriage of Children toward their Parents, than is commonly
believed; especially in their declining Years. Reverence and Respect is due to
them for their Age, if they were not our Parents. It Is a very ill Symptom upon
any Nation, when Children behave themselves proudly against the Ancient; and
the Base against the Honorable See an Instance of this, even among the Tartars
and Chinese, how the Love, Obedience, and Respect of Children for their Parents
is conducive to the Public Peace of a Country. P. le Comte 's Memoirs and
Observations of the Empire of China. 8vo, School. Part. 2 of their Policy and
Government, p. 264, 265, etc.
. Isa. 24.2. And considering how soon they are to remove out of this World, to
take their final leave, and imbark for a Foreign Country, it is but a piece of
common Justice to our departing Friends, it is no more than is due to their
Condition; to show them Respect and Affection at last; to signify we are loath
to lose them; and that we wish them Happy in their Removal.

Secondly, Let me apply this for Exhortation to Younger, and to Elder Persons.
First to Youth, in Three Things.

First, Do not count upon it with any Certainty, that you shall live to be Old.
How few comparatively do outlive Thirty? And whether you are called away in
Youth or Riper Years, there is a Blessed or Miserable Eternity to follow. O
that it were considered, and believed, you shall not dye the sooner, by being
ready and prepared to dye while you are Young. And as it will not hasten your
Death, so neither will it spoil the Pleasure and Comfort of your present Life;
but every way contribute to it. But how little ground have you to expect to
live to be very Old, when so many dye suddenly, and so many dye Younger than
you: And you know there is no Opportunity beyond the Grave, of making Peace
with Heaven, if you dye in your Sins. Your Work is great, and you cannot begin
too soon: you may not live to that time, unto which you adjourn your good
Purposes. It is the Devil's great Artifice to cheat Men of the present Season,
by the Promise and Expectation of future Time. We are not certain whether God
will try us with another Day; or if we trifle now, whether he will then
vouchsafe his Grace; therefore now while it is called to Day, hear the Voice of
God, Remember thy Creator, and work out thy Salvation. How many of your
Acquaintance have dyed Younger than you, who were as likely to live, and more
so? You think you have a great while to come, Thirty, Forty, Fifty Years; this
seems at a mighty distance; though they who have lived so long, when it is
gone, say it is past as yesterday, they cannot tell how. A Week to come seems
longer than a Year that is past. But think seriously, how many more have dyed,
before they have arrived to your Age, than ever did attain to it. And how
unreasonable is it, to desire to dye of Old Age, and of the Decay of Natural
Strength, considering that is a kind of Death, of all others the most rare. If
that be most Natural that is most common, to dye of Old Age is a Death rare,
singular, and extraordinary, and so less Natural, than any other of the
numberless ways of dying, and the less to be expected. It Is not always true,
that the fewer Days and Years a Man has past, the more he has to come. A new
built House may fall, when an old one stands. Therefore count not upon a long
Life, but begin presently to prepare to dye. God may call thee forth to that
War, from which there is no Discharge, without giving thee an Hours Warning.
You know not what shall be on the morrow. Jam. 4.14.

Listen not to those, while you are Young, who would persuade you to put off
your Repentance to a further time: Who will tell you, you are in the heat and
flower of your Youth, and should now (if ever) indulge your selves: That
Religion is a melancholy thing, and you will have time enough for it hereafter.
But who would defer his Repentance till hereafter, that does not know but he
may dye to Night? Who would put it off to Old Age, when it is so uncertain
whether he shall not dye Young? Ludovicus Capellus tells us of one of the
Rabbis, that when one of his Disciples came to him, to know what was the
fittest Time to repent in; He answered, One Day before his Death; meaning,
Presently: Because the youngest have no Assurance of another Day.

Secondly, Take Care in Youth to lay a good Foundation for Old Age, by being
such who may apply the Promises of long Life, unto whom they are like to be
made good. There Is nothing but serious Religion betimes, can bring you to a
healthful and comfortable Old Age. This would tend to promote and preserve your
Health, as well as Interest you in the favorable Protection and Providence of
God. Serious Godliness is a Friend to the Health of our Bodies, and the
Cheerfulness and Content of our Minds; and not to obey God, is ordinarily to
neglect our See Dr. Lucas, The true Notion of Humane Life, 8vo, p. 187. Showing
how the lengthning of our Lives depends on the Cheerfulness of the Mind, the
Health of the Body, and the Providence of God for Protection, besides the Good
Will of our Fellow Creatures; and how serious Religion does contribute to it on
all these Accounts.
present Interest, as well as our Eternal Salvation. To fear the Lord, and
depart from Evil, is Health to the Navel, and Marrow to the Bones. To how many
Lusts and Vices is an untimely Death threatened? And of how many is it a Natural
and Ordinary Consequence? There are Promises of long Life made to such as are
Just in their Dealings, and Charitable to the Poor; to such who are Meek and
Patient, who trust in God, and do all the Good they can in the World. But for
Sensual Men, they dig their own Grave by their Vices: They pour in Wine and
strong Drink, and let out Life: They strangle themselves with their
Intemperance, and hasten the Infirmities of Old Age by the Excesses of Youth.
He who would have his Health hold out, must live Regularly, and not too fast.
He that will indulge Youthful Lusts, will corrupt his Blood, and weaken his
Constitution, and give Death opportunity to enter: And if he live, shall
possess the Sins of his Youth; his Bones shall be filled with them, they must
lie down with him in the Dust. Job 20.11. What painful Methods will Men submit
to for the Preservation of Life? Skin for Skin, and all that a Man has will he
give for his Life. But he that loves Life, and desires many Days, and to see
Good, let him fear God, and keep his Commandments; for after all the endeavors
used to keep off Death, and prolong Life, there is none like remembering our
Creator in the Days of our Youth. And it is not only for Murder, and Adultery,
and the vilest Impurities, that God threatens an untimely Death; but for
Disobedience to Parents, for Covetousness, Oppression, Injustice, and
Worldlyness. Jer. 17.11. As the Patridge sits on Eggs, and hatcheth them
not: so he that gets Riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst
of his Days, and at his end shall be a Fool. Prove. 28.16. He that hates
Covetousness shall prolong his Days. 'Twere easy to enlarge on this Head.

Let me only add that yet such as are Religious in their Youth, should not be
over desirous of living very long: For though it is a Blessing as has been
proved, when joined with Piety: and if God think fit, that we may live to be
Instrumental to God's Glory, the Good of others, and our own Benefit; yet if we
consider our Enemies, and our Temptations, and our own Corruptions, the odds is
on the other side: Blessed are the Dead, who dye in the Lord, though in their
Youth.

Thirdly, If you should live to Old Age, and feel the Infirmities of it, you
will not be able to bear up then, without living well now. Nothing but the
Comforts of a good Conscience, will be able to support you, when the Evil Days
shall come, wherein you shall have no Pleasure; as it is described at large
Eccl. 12. which I thought to have Paraphrased, and Explained, but it is well
done by many, in several Books easy to be consulted. Your Sun and Light, and
Moon and Stars, will grow dark, and the Clouds return after the Rain; one
Infirmity following another, as a sign of approaching Night; as a warning that
the Grave is ready for you, and you should be for it. You may reasonably
expect, that the time will come, when you shall complain of darkness of Mind,
and dry Affections, dull Senses, and faulty Memories; your Eyes dim, your Ears
heavy, your Limbs feeble, and Feet lame, your Joints benumbed, etc. You cannot
ordinarily think of meeting a great Old Age, without some of these
Inconveniences: Though by a peculiar Providence, some are in a great measure
exempted from them.

Now consider, what can support and comfort you in this Condition, but the
Sense of God's Favor, and the Testimony of a good Conscience, and Reflections
on a well-spent Life? To look back, how you have employed your Time? What Good
you have done in the World? What Provision you have made for Eternity? What
Care you have taken for your Souls? These Questions well answered, will be a
great Support in Old Age; and keep off much of the Weight of it; and make many
Years sit more easily upon you. It Is true, a good Conscience will not make a
Man Immortal; but the Quiet of our Minds and Spirits, will contribute much to
the Strength of our Bodies, and enable us to bear the Infirmities of Old Age,
and slide into the Grave more gently. But above all, it will give you Hope of
finding Favor with God in another World; and that being satisfied with long
Life, God will show you his Eternal Salvation. And so I come to speak a few
words to the Sea more largely, the Duty of the Aged, very well explained, and
urged by Mr. Steel, in his Discourse of Old Age, 8o. 1688.
Aged.

First, Unto such who have lived a great many Years in the World, and are yet
unfit to dye; who by reason of Ignorance, Impenitence, and a Wicked Life, are
altogether unprepared to leave this World; having nothing but a miserable
Portion to expect in the next. You lose the Crown, and Glory of Old Age; you
are the old Servants of the Devil, and Slaves of Sin; you have long treasured
up Wrath against the Day of Wrath; and are going shortly to receive your Wages;
even double Condemnation. How many Years time have you misimploy'd, that you
are now to reckon for? What a shameful Bill may be made of the Expense of so
long a time of Trial, and of all the Talents you have had? How can you look
back without Amazement and Horror? Your lost Hours can never be recalled, you
must Repent speedily, or you are undone for ever. There is but a step between
you and Death; between you and Hell. Oh how near do you stand to the Judgment
of God? A young Sinner may perish shortly, and he may not; for God may spare
him, and give him Time and Space, and Grace to Repent: But you must be gone;
there are but a few Sands in your Glass; but a little Oil in your Lamp, to
preserve the Flame: Your active Time is gone, and yet your great Concern, and
main Business for the Everlasting World, is now to begin. We read of old
Adulterers, as an Agravation of their Sin. Ezekiel. 23.43. And the Prophet Jeremy
says, I am full of the Fury of the Lord, I will pour it forth upon the Aged,
and him that is full of Days. Jer. 6.11.

Let us consider the sad Circumstances of those Persons, who wax old in
Wickedness and Irreligion, and Contempt of God, how dead and disinclin'd their
Spirits are to God, and Spiritual Matters; how every Day more unwilling to
Repent; how they are hardened by a long Impunity; finding, that though they
have sinned for Twenty or Thirty Years or more, they are well still, and all
the Preachers Sermons but harmless Thunder: We shall find that they still grow
worse and worse. Be sure they that defer their Repentance to Old Age, their
Repentance comes off the harder; their Zeal is less, their Love is weak, and so
is every thing they do. But though, there be less Hope of such, who have been
all their Days under the Preaching of the Gospel, and not converted, till they
are old, yet we cannot limit the Grace of God: We dare not say their Case is
hopeless. He that quickens the Dead, and raised Lazarus out of his Grave, can
breathe on those dry Bones, and make them live. The Penitent Thief proves a
late Repentance possible to be true. I grant, except a Man be born again, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but say not therefore, How can a Man
be born again when he is Old: For, He that of Stones can raise up Children to
Abraham, can sanctify and renew an old Sinner, and make him a real Saint. Let
such therefore awake, and bethink themselves, and seek his Grace. How many
Years has God waited on you? How many Mercies, how many Afflictions, how many
Warnings have you had? How many Calls by his Word, Providence, and Spirit? And
now you are in view of the Grave, stooping to it; Death begins to seize you; it
has seized some Parts of you already; it is manifest in your Eyes, in your
Ears, Hands, and Legs; you cannot see without Art, or hear without Difficulty,
or walk without Pain; you cannot look into a Glass, but you may see something of
the Pourtraicture of Death in your Face, if you can see at all. You are filled
with Wrinkles, which is a witness against you, and your Leanness rising up in
you, bears witness to the Face. Job 16.8. O think how near you are your
Journeys-end, and lose not one Minute longer! You are on the brink of
Perdition, and therefore should speedily escape: Every Hour you delay, you will
be more unfit and indisposed: So much of your Time, Parts and Strength is gone
already, you should use the remainder to the best Advantage. You have seen by
your own Experience the Vanity of all Worldly Things, and the Misery of a
wicked Course, and may have many Things to help your Seriousness in this Age.
You have no other Employment proper for you, but to be preparing for Death; to
be bidding adieu to the World; to be casting up your Accounts; to be fitting to
abide in that State for ever, into which you are next to pass. Therefore awake,
and give all Diligence. Certainly we can never set about this Work too soon;
but let none think it is too late to begin to be devoted to God, and live to
him. It is always the best thing we can do; and therefore we should at any time
endeavor it; and there are special Reasons for it in every Age. It is
seasonable for the Youngest, but it is absolutely necessary for the Aged, to
make all the haste possible.

Secondly, To you my Fathers, who are old Disciples, whose Hoary Head is found
in the way of Righteousness, who have served the Lord from your Youth; Let me
recommend a few Things.

First, Think how near you are to the Grave. You have but one Remove more to
make, till you get thither: Your Warfare is almost accomplished. O be not
strangers to the Thoughts of Death, thereby to quicken your Actual Preparation!
Improve every Providence to that End, especially every Breach in your own
Families by Death; Particularly, as in the present Case of Him, who, though the
deepest Mourner, does not mourn alone. When the Companion of your Life is gone
before, with whom you have pleasantly, comfortably, and usefully conversed for
so many Years: Who was the Instrument of so much of God's Mercy to you, with
whom you have worshipped God so often in Public and Private, prayed together,
wept together, and sang the Praises of God together, and mourned together under
Difficulties and Trials, and helped to bear one another's Burdens, etc. God
calls aloud to you for serious Preparation to follow, that you may be both
ready and willing.

Secondly, Look back on your past Lives, and consider the many Instances of the
Care, Wisdom, Faithfulness, and Goodness of God, to strengthen your Faith for
the last Scene of your Life. Reflect humbly upon the Time you have lost; how
much more Good you might have done; how many of your Talents you might have
better improved; how many Heu quam multa Paenitenda occurrunt, diu vivendo!
Seneca.
Errors and Follies you have committed, and beg of God to forgive the Sins of
your Youth: And yet look back with Thankfulness to God, that it is no worse;
that Goodness and Mercy has followed you all your Days. Can you not say, Thou
have been my God from my Mothers Womb; my Praise shall be continually of thee:
Thou have been the Guide of my Youth, and the Stay of my Riper Years: Thou have
been my Dwellingplace in all Generations: Thou have furnished me with
Opportunities of doing and receiving Good: Thou have built up my House, and
made it to grow, when thou pullest down others: Thou have been my Shield,
Refuge, and Hiding Place in Times of Danger; when Thousands have fallen on the
righthand, and on the left: Thou have been with me and mine Abroad and at Home,
by Sea and Land, in one Country and another; and compassed me about with thy
Salvation. How many Personal, how many Relative Blessings? How many Temporal,
how many Spiritual Mercies, have I had? How many Useful, Excellent, Exemplary
Christians, (Ministers and Magistrates,) have I followed to the Grave; and seen
their Bodies laid in the Dust? And yet God has spared and preserved me unto Old
Age, that I might be more ripe for Heaven: And Oh that this may be the Fruit of
all, that I may be so!

And with the Consideration of what God has done for you, you old Disciples
should acquaint others that are younger, with what you your selves have found,
and what their Children, and Childrens Children, will find to be true, as to
Religious and Civil Prudence. In this especially, Days should speak, and
multitudes of Years teach Knowledge. Job 33.9. Admonish them to remember their
Creator in the Days of their Youth; charge them to be followers of you, so far
as you have been followers of Christ, in hopes that among all your Children, or
Grandchildren, there may not be one Son of Perdition, nor one Daughter of
Belial. Thus David; Come ye Children hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear
of the Lord. Psalm. 34.11. Thus Solomon at large, Prove. 4.1, 2. Hear ye Children
the Instruction of a Father, and attend to know Understanding. Thus Timothy's
Mother and Grandmother taught him. Tell them of the Snares of Satan, of the
Deceitfulness of Sin, of the certain Disappointment, if we expect much from the
World; though it may be they will hardly now believe it.

Thirdly, Let the last part of your Lives abound in the Fruits of
Righteousness; and be much employed in serious Devotion. Let more Time be spent
in Prayer and Meditation, and secret Converse with God. In what a Frame does
the Psalmist speak when he was Old. Psalm. 71.17, 18. Which Holy Rivet was wont
to repeat every Day in his Old Age.
O God, thou have taught me from my Youth; and hitherto have I declared thy
wondrous Works. Now also when I am Old and Gray Headed, O God, forsake me not;
until I have showed thy Strength unto this Generation, and thy Power to every
one that is to come. Though in the Morning we must sow our Seed, yet in the
Evening, we must not withold our hand, we know not which shall prosper most.
Whether you may not please and honor God in your Old Age, by suitable Fruits
of Righteousness, as much as ever heretofore in your Younger Years. I have lost
a world of time, said the Learned Salmasius on his Deathbed, if I had One Year
longer, I would spend it in reading David 's Psalms, and Paul 's Epistles. I
repent of all my Life, said another on his Deathbed, but that part I have
spent in Communion with God, and in doing Good.

O Pray much for your selves, and for your Children, and for Theirs after them,
that none of them may be lost; that none of them may dishonor their Parentage,
blemish their Family, break the Fetters of their Education, and cast off their
Fathers God, and their Mothers God. Methinks it is a Pleasant and Comfortable
Passage, Heb. 11.9. That Abraham dwelt in Tents with Isaac and Jacob: (That is,
they all did so, though not in the same House,) and were all Heirs of the same
Promise. Father, Son and Grandson; All Heirs of the same Promise; All
Believers; All within the Bond of the Covenant; All pleasing God, and accepted
of him. It Is a singular Mercy to be able to say, Lord, I am thy Servant; truly
I am thy Servant, the Son of thine Handmaid, the Son of thy Servant. I hope my
Father's God, my Grand-Father's and Grand-Mother's God, is my God, and shall be
the God of mine.

And here I can hardly forbear something more particular of the Excellent
Person Deceased, who is now above our Praises. Her Character and History is not
to be summed up in the few Syllables of a Funeral Ring; that she lived to such
an Age, and died at such a Time. I might say of her with strict Justice, upon
my own knowledge, very many Things, Great and Praiseworthy; but that it was
against her Desire; nor is it His, who has a greater Power over me, than that
comes to. There are Multitudes who knew her Example, who are Mourners for her
Death, in City and in Country, besides Relations; Multitudes, who by her
Charity were enabled to praise God: Who will tell one another of this, and the
other Particular, which I shall not name. And if any think that her dislike of
a Funeral Commendation, do add to her Character, and really greaten it, I
cannot help or gainsay that.

Let me urge this a little further upon Elder Christians, who have been for
many Years planted in the House of the Lord, that they would bring forth Fruit
in their Old Age. Sirs, Be not weary of Well-doing; God is not weary of doing
you Good; he has provided for you in Old Age, that your Youth should be
renewed like the Eagles. God's Goodness to you does not abate but increase. He
may say to you as to old Israel, Isa. 46.3, 4. You were born by me from the
Belly, and carried from the Womb; even unto Old Age, I am he, and even to Hoary
Hairs will I carry you. You have had a long Time to take deeper Root, and to
bring forth riper and better Fruit than Others: and now you are preparing for a
Remove; within a near prospect of it; you know it cannot be long; for Old Age is
the next Condition to the Grave. 'Twas the Honor of Thyatira, that her Last
Works were better than her First; and of Zacharias and Elizabeth, both well
stricken in Years, that they were both Righteous before God, walking in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless. And of Anna, who was of a
great Age, that she departed not from the Temple, but served God Day and Night.
Luke 2.36. They had need look to this, who cannot reasonably think to be many
Years short of the Everlasting World; who have no other Business now to mind,
but that they may finish their Course with Joy; that they may have fresh
Supplies of Spiritual Life, and suitable actings of Grace to the very last;
that their Breaches may be repaired, their Backslidings healed; that what is
weak may be strengthened, and what is decayed may be recovered, etc.

There is such a Thing as a Spring in Autumn, a latter Spring; and though it be
inferior to the first, yet the Husbandman cannot spare it; and it is reckoned a
sign of barren Ground, if there be no Attempts to put forth afresh toward the
end of the Year. God expects the like from Christians in their Old Age:
Especially from such, who have made a great Appearance, and Profession of
Religion in their Younger Years. It Is dreadful for any such to be Dead, and
Cold, and Worldly, and Selfish, and Earthly-minded. Though the Fruit be
somewhat different in Old Age from the former, yet that which is expected, is
the Fruit of that Season; Such as Spirituality, and Heavenly-mindedness,
Mortification to the World, fitness to dye, and willingness to depart, and
diligence to clear up your Evidences for Heaven, that you may be on sure
Grounds for Eternity: These are Fruits fit for Elder Saints. Such Fruits in Old
Age will show, to the Glory of God, that the Lord is Upright, that he is your
Rock, and there is no Unrighteousness in him.

If You should not be willing to dye, it can be less expected from younger
Christians. You have seen so much of the Vanity and Vexation of the World, of
the Falsehood and Deceitfulness of Men, of the Divisions in the Church, of the
Weaknesses of Good Men, and the Wickedness of Others, (and there is so little
Prospect of any Thing better,) that it will be justly thought, that you should
be willing and glad to be gone. Mr. Dod, in a dangerous Sickness in his Old
Age, being told by his Physicians, that they had good Hopes of his Recovery;
replied, That the News pleased him no better, than if one should tell a
Weather-beaten Mariner, who was putting into the Heaven, that he must to Sea
again, and conflict with more Storms.

Fourthly, Be Patient under the Infirmities and Weaknesses of Old Age. You have
born the brunt of the Battle, and heat of the Day; hold out a little longer.
Give Glory to God by submitting to his Will. Don't mistake the Decays of Nature
for Declensions in Grace; and because your Natural Strength is abated, conclude
therefore that God has forsaken you. But know that your Esteem, and Judgment,
and settled Bent of Heart may be (and I hope is) more for God, Holiness, and
Heaven, than formerly; and your Disesteem of the World and Sin more than
heretofore; though lively, vigorous Affections will decay with Age. Consider what
this Body is, and how near it is to Dissolution; and that God has promised
never to leave nor forsake you. Therefore endeavor patiently to bear the
Weaknesses and Infirmities of your present State. And Aged Persons should not
think much of Infirmities, Languishings, and Decays, that may every Day bring
them nearer to their long Home. Be thankful to God if they are tolerable; you
cannot expect to be wholly exempted. And think a little, how many in their
younger Years have more Sickness, and Weakness, and Bodily Indisposition, than
many of you, even in old Age.

Lastly, Labor to live in the joyful Expectation of the Heavenly Glory. You
shall shortly be with Christ, and with Millions of his Servants; many of them
you have known, and multitudes more whom you never saw, will then be as dear to
you, as if you had known them. What a joyful Meeting will this be with Christ
and them! It Is true we know not the Particulars of our blessed State, in the
Better, Upper World, but we trust in Christ, who has promised we shall be with
him. And he knows what is the Place, State and Company, and where we shall be,
and what we shall enjoy and do. We leave it to him; he is Wife, and Kind, and
Faithful. O think with your selves, that your Salvation is now nearer than when
at first you believed. We that are Younger, may have many Difficulties and
Conflicts, before we get through the World; but You are near your Reward. As
old Soldiers, who have been long in Service, expect the next Place of
Preferment; so old Disciples are near to the Heavenly Glory: The next Place in
Heaven it may be is for you, or you, of all the Heirs of Salvation in this
Assembly. Let your thankful, joyful Hopes, and fervent Desires to be with
Christ, be part of your Testimony to the Faithfulness of God, and the Truth of
his Word; to convince Observers, that Religion is a Reality, and that a holy
Life is Best, that has so Desirable, and Comfortable an End. But whether the
Younger, or Elder of us shall be called first, is only known to Him who knows
all Things. May God of his Infinite Mercy, make us Ready, and then Willing, to
follow Those, who by Faith and Patience are gone to inherit the Promises! Amen.

FINIS.

