The THIRD and LAST PART OF THE Magistracy and Government of England
VINDICATED: With REASONS for a General Act of Indemnity, etc.
IT has been the observed Misfortune of most mixed Governments, particularly
of our own, never long to enjoy the entire Friendship of all its individual
Subjects; the lowermost Side has too frequently acquired the greatest share of
the Peoples Love, or at least, Pity: It Is then no point of Wonder, that the
Servants of former Crowns should incur their proportion of Envy, Hatred, and
Reproach; and amongst all those none more obnoxious to it, than the Ministers,
Officers, and Instruments of Justice; for such are the vitiated Sentiments of
Persons interested in all Suits, that the Vanquished is certainly injured, or
thought, or said to be so, which is all one, by the Persons themselves, their
Friends or Relatives, their Patrons or Creatures. In truth there is scarce a
Trial on the Plea or Crown-Side, but one Party, and sometimes both, do leave
the Court with a swinging Curse or two on Judge, Council, Jury, Witnesses, and
perhaps all concerned; upon which account, it can never be deemed a
justifiable, much less a commendable and meritorious Employment, for Lawyers to
note and report, and afterward publish to the World the Clamors of such
Malcontents, with the addition of Sarcasm instead of Argument, and blushless
Lies instead of Law and Precedents, and all this under the pretense of serving
their Majesty's and the Government: but it is a mere pretense; for first,

It Is not their Province; these Publications are made by them, not as
Legislators or Judges, but as private Persons; and one of their Libels seems
calculated only for private Lucre, as either the hopes of a Place, or increase
of Practice, by telling the Town in the first and last Pages where the Author
lives, of what Profession, and how long standing; an Art learned from some of
those exquisite Doctors inhabiting toward the Fields, whose Knowledge and
Conversation is pretended to be in Heaven: Another writes for Bread, and
scribbles that he may eat, etc. A third, or rather the first and prime, is
inspired with Venom and Revenge, even the pure Spirit on it, as one balked he
is angry at all, and because some were not his true Friends, he is resolved to
make Enemies of those who despise him, and of them the number is great. But
secondly,

It Is of no use to the present Government, for Truth only can be a sure Basis
of Respect to that; and in case of Slander, the Filth rebounds and the Dirt
thrown most surely turns on, and dawbs their own Faces, especially when they
arraign those as ignorant, whose Learning, Knowledge, and Judgment, are so clear
and acknowledged, as to render the Censors unworthy even of being their
Bag-bearers; the like when they censure those as corrupt, who have always
boldly done their Duty, even in defiance of a Court-Cabal or a Popular Faction;
who have always adhered to the old English Law and their just Opinions in it,
tho Frowns from Whitehall, or Clamors from Wapping, tho Lampoons from
Grubstreet or a worse usage from an Observator, tho a Supersedeas or a Take
him, etc. were the only Reward they could expect for such their (formerly
called Puritanical now Arbitrary) Justice: Gentlemen who never polled the Law
(which the great and good Sir Matthew Hale did truly call a robbing the Poor of
Justice) for the acquiring a Farm or an Office, or a lumping Sum for Sale of
it; who never begged an Executorship for to gain a Fortune; Gentlemen who never
gave strained Opinions concerning the Revenue when made for their Clients the
Farmers, but clamored at the same when used by their King with more Moderation;
Gentlemen who parted with their Places, tho of Honor and Profit, rather than
comply with a Court-Opinion or a Club-Notion, when others (I name no body)
offered entire and everlasting Service, if they could have preceded or
succeeded them, (Test.... apud St. James's and the City of Gloucester) but
missing their aim then, as now they do, their Gall must have a Vent, and so it
has with a Vengeance, when a true and bold Justice is made the Subject on it:
The Reason is plain, those Men's Repute is too great for Truth, Probity, and
Usefulness; An Eclipse is necessary, if possible; for if otherwise, the
Defender will never be Keeper, the Remarker Solicitor, nor the Gray's Inn Poet
wear Scarlet in Wales; their hopes are but small, unless they can postpone all
their Betters by Death, Commitments, or that which is but little worse,
Reproach and Slander: but some think their Sting grows weak, for it is now
apparent that there are a sort of Men, who, tho they might and did love his
Majesty when and as Prince, yet do not, will not, cannot love him, or any Man
else, as King: and this is now pretty plain. But thirdly,

Their Libels are criminal, and injurious to common Justice, for they create a
Disrespect and Contempt upon all Judiciary Proceedings; to arraign all past is
to excite a Suspicion of all ptesent and future Administrations; whereas
Plowden says, fol. 38. It Is a good and sure way to believe the last Judgment;
and if so, it is plain what Name the contrary Practice deserves; besides, were
it otherwise, the Institution of Judges and Courts were vain, and our State, as
Englishmen, the most unfortunate; for we have no Rule but ex ore Judicum, or
from particular Statutes, and of them they are the Expositors. Now let us
inquire which is Law, the Defender's Fancy in his Argument Enter S. and B. or
the Judgment in the Exchequer Chamber, affirmed by the Lords? If the Judicial
Resolution be so, then the Publication of his Argument was scandalous, and I am
not to follow him as my Guide: but perhaps he will tell me, That manifest Reason
and good Lawyers ought to govern me; if so, then I ask him, Who shall I follow
in the E. of D's Case of a Capias pro fine puis Judgment, etc. whether the
eleven best Lawyers, or the Vote of the House? if the latter, why not so in the
former Case? and if otherwise, then his Judgment was mistaken; so that
quacunque via data, there is no Infallibility in this World, and consequently no
excuse for private Censures of public Proceedings in Courts of Justice:
besides, the Books are pretty clear, that such things are punishable; but I
leave the Reader to peruse them at leisure. Now let us but consider the
Confusion that must ensue upon the public countenancing such a Practice as
these Scriblers have introduced; for if allowable on a disbanded Judge, it is so
on a sitting one, for the Case is the same in respect of private Lawyers who
pretend to think their Judgments erroneous or corrupt; but surely both are
unlawful. Besides all this, in the present Case

They have palpably wrested the Law in diverse Instances: I need name no more
than the Indictment in question, which that it was legal and good, most Men do
now agree, especially since the dint of the Opposal seems current only on the
Evidence, with a Waiver of the other, the Indictment being good since that
Guards are proved lawful, and the Observator concedes it the most legal part of
the Procedure, and the Justice of Parliaments, etc. supposed written by the
Defender, strains all its Forces on the Evidence and the Times; and their
Follower, the Poet, in his new Nonconformist, page 10. runs the same way too:
only

There remains one Objection to the first Vindication, which is, that it
affirms, Words may be Treason within the 25 of Edw. 3. and the Remarker
challenges a proof of it, and asks where it may be found; and the
Nonconformist quarrels at the Lawyer that did assert it, and some others have
done the same ore tenus.

I confess, that the first Sheet did publish the Assertion, but waved its
Eviction, for fear of a strained use of such Opinion to ill purposes, for the
serving a turn upon particular Occasions; nor had there been any more said on
it, but that their Confidence and Malice seems so exorbitant as to extort a
Check, for that the Regulator is grown so confident of his own Knowledge as to
undervalue the greatest of Judgments; whereas his Commonplace Book affords us
no Titles but Collusion and Malice prepense; and his Practice has been much of
the same stamp, only that sometimes he has added a little of the Lunatic as
appears by his Rhimes, Prophecies, Dreams, Politics, and other religionary
Works.

To prove the Assertion, I depend not on the Authority of the sense of the
Commons House 1 Jac. 2. tho (let the Crier for Justice, or who else pleases
contradict it) it was in Fact then affirmed and agreed unto, and upon that, the
then King's Council and Courtiers desisted the Motion and Prosecution of a Bill
to make Words, etc. But that is a supernumerary Argument, there is more than
enough besides.

I am not to maintain that all rank, malicious, gross Words against the King or
Queens Person are such, nor that whosoever drinks an Health to our Sovereign
the Lord the People, or to the late King James, is a Traitor; but that Words
significative and expressive of a present Intention to do an Act to the King's
Destruction, such Words deliberately, maliciously, and advisedly spoken on
purpose to accomplish the Demise of the King, as by promise of Money with
importunity to commit the Fact, may be an overt Fait to prove the Imagination
within. 25 Edw. 3.

To evince this, let us think a little..... and 'twill be plain

The Words of this Statute are clear and of an easy Construction, if we will
allow those dull old Times to speak Sense: They are to this effect, That if
shall compass or imagine the Death, etc. and de ceo provablement soit attaint
per overt fait: Now the Objection is this, That Words are not Deeds within that
Clause; to this the Answer is very clear; for by all the Grammatical and other
Rules for Interpretation of the Sense of Words, the latter part of a Sentence
is to be construed (if used by way of opposition) as opposite to the thing
mentioned and intended in the foregoing Part, and not as opposed to every thing
which it may ex vi termini exclude in other Cases; and this is an agreed
Difference both amongst Divines in Exposition of Sentences in Scripture, and
Grammarians in almost all Cases whatsoever: now to apply this;

Overt fait is used not in opposition to Words, for there is no such thing
mentioned; but it is added in contradistinction to that which was before
specified, viz. Thoughts, and such are Imagination and Compassing; and
therefore overt fait must mean any open manifest thing as can truly discover
those Thoughts, as may proveably attaint the Traitor of such his Imagination:
and it is a most natural and proper Mode of Speech, if they did intend, as most
undoubtedly they did, that the Thought should be the thing prohibited, then
it is as plain they intended by the Word fait any discovery of such Thought by
Words or Actions; and so said Newton in 19 Hen. 6. that to imagine the Death of
the King is Treason, tho he do no act toward it, if such Imagination be
disclosed that it can be tried if he did so think and imagine. If that Thoughts
and Words are mentioned both in a Sentence, and afterward Deeds in opposition,
then the last will exclude both the former; but here when used only in
contradistinction with Thoughts, it seems plainly otherwise. That Deed, when
used in Opposition to Thought, does include both Words and Acts, none can deny;
a thousand Instances might be given of it: and in the exactest propriety of
Speech, Words are Deeds when and as contradistinguisht from Thoughts; for the
Soul thinks even as abstractly considered from the Body, but Man never speaks
without Action and Motion: the difference is plain, and needs no Explication.
But further,

I would fain know, What is a Consult or Plot, but the mutual and reciprocal
Declaration of two or more Traitors Minds each to the other? Each declares his
traitorous Imagination by Words, and so of an Agreement to commit the actual
Murder, it is but a Declaration of their Minds by Words each to the other, only
they do happen to agree. Now suppose one Man thinks and intends to destroy the
King, and by Words does willingly, deliberately, and advisedly declare this to
another that is not of his Mind, tho by mistake is thought to be such; is not
this the same thing? If a Man traitorously offers and promises to another a
thousand Pounds to perpetrate the villainous Act; if he accept it, and a parole
Agreement is made between them accordingly, surely the Apologists for Treason
will agree that to be an overt Thing, and both guilty, if it can be proved by
two Witnesses of credit. Suppose then the Party offered and promised does abhor
and refuse, will that make a distinction? if it does, it is without a
difference: perhaps the Word Consult will be called a new Cant; we know whose
Coin it is, and who gave it the first stamp; 'twas no less a Man than Sir Will.
Jones, who at the time of such his Invention was no Prerogative Lawyer, tho
considerably so in Times then lately past: nor is it imaginable what is the
meaning of a Conspiracy or Plot to take away the King's Life, but a
Communication by Words between several Traitors concerning such Act, and the
method of its Accomplishment, and a Declaration by Words of each Man's being
fixed in that purpose; which if it be proved by sufficient Testimony, will
undoubtedly be an Evidence of a Compassing, etc. which is the Treason
prohibited and punishable; nor can the Meeting make it more so, for they could
not discourse unless they met; and therefore it is the Words only that are the
manifest overt fait. Nor does Hugh Pynes Case, or the Resolution of the Judges
therein, contradict this, notwithstanding the Confidence of the Remarker that
it did; they only say that the Words in that Case were not Treason, that those
Words were not an Evidence of Compassing, that for those Words he could not be
Indicted upon that Statute; but their Opinion does plainly imply, That had the
Words been Evidence of a Compassing, etc. as they were only slanderous and
reflective, it had been otherwise; and the Instances there mentioned are full
to this, as John Quick's Indictment was only for Words to King Henry, unless
standing up and speaking will alter the Case: Thomas Koiver's, John Clipsham's,
and John Mirfield's, are all for Words, and some others there specified.
Besides, it is observable that in most Indictments on this Statute, some Words
have been alleged in them as an overt fait to demonstrate the Imagination,
which would be impertinent if the Law were thought otherwise. I Will not insist
on Colledge's, because that Case has been cavilled at, tho with no color as
to the Indictment: part of Patrick Harding's Indictment was loquendo
publicavit, but I Will not dwell on that, because foolishly drawn; but Arthur
Crohagan's Case in Cro. Car. is pretty full and for Words; and the Words of the
Book are, That the traitorous Intent and Imagination of his Heart was declared
by his Words, and therefore held High Treason within the express Provision of
2^ Edw. 3. and upon his coming into England he was arrested, etc. Now no Answer
can be to this, but that he came into England; but the Words only showed his
Intent, and by that Book the Words are alleged as the overt fait: besides the
Case of Blanchflower and Atwood, Mic. 5 Jac. 1. B.R. in Yelverton's Reports
107. per curiam, resolved, that Words may be Treason; and that is an express
Resolution, for there was then no temporary Law in being concerning Parole
Treasons that I know of. The Case of Berisford and Press. Hill. 8 Jac. 1. B.R.
Yelvert. 197. adjudged, that Treason may be committed by Speech as well as by
Act, for any thing which discovers the Mind of a Man to be traitorous to his
Sovereign, is capital to the Party: Hitcham ad Brook Pasch. 1 Car. 1. Hutt. 75.
held per cur. that the speaking of Treason was Treason, and that sermo est
index animi as well as Preaching or Writing; and no Man can doubt but those are
Acts; and Speech is as much so.

Besides, if the Consequence of the contrary. Doctrine be well considered,
'twill appear to be a plain Evasion of the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. as is manifest
upon the reading it: and the common Books are full of this, for otherwise no
Action could lie for saying a Man has spoke Treason: but here is enough said to
answer the Challenge, where is the Authority for such an Assertion? tho
infinitely more might be said for it, nay it is as easy to dumbfound the
contrary as it is to transcribe Law Cases. If this does not give them
satisfaction, they shall remain unsatisfied for me, I Will plague the World no
more with writing on this dull, flat, unprofitable Subject, Crown-Law, lest I
should provoke our new Scriblers to double the Plague by their Replies. If they
attempt an Answer, I Will leave the Tobacconist and Grocer to confute them; and
unless a Trunk or Band-box chance to bring them to my View, I Will never be
tempted to read them; and of this they may assure themselves. I say it to
complement the Reader with Patience to peruse the rest of the Sheet, being
ascertained never to hear more on it, at least not from this hand.

Some perhaps may wonder at the reason of the Publication of these Sheets, and
conceive them the product of Malice on one side as those virulent Pamphlets are
on the other: To solve that Scruple, I need only repeat the Reasons alleged in
the first; but a Repetition is damnably dull as well as tedious and irksome;
I Will therefore add a new one, and that is to show the Reasonableness as well as
the Necessity of a general, indefinite, speedy Act of Oblivion; for tho the
Bloodhounds fret, and huff, and bounce, as if all their Madness and Rage were
founded on a true Basis, yet it is apparent from the Premises, that their
foundation is false, and the Law is direct and plain in their teeth, and does
and will justify in most of the particulars, at which they foam their Curses
and Execrations: Reason therefore as well as necessity enjoins a silence as to
what is past, for otherwise the Kingdom can never have its desired
satisfaction, for in points justifiable or at least doubtful, the justice of
inflicting Punishments can never be vindicated, did I call them Punishments, I
beg the Readers pardon for the Impropriety, however I Will not name their proper
term, but with calmness, endeavor to Evince three things.

1. That it would be grateful to the Nation in general, and every good Man in
particular. 2. Conducing to the Settlement and Interest of the present
Government; and lastly, That it is consistent with and promotive of the highest
and truest Justice.

First, The Nation did and does expect it, for Revenge is never natural but
when freshly pursued, and time wears off the sense of Injuries, by the
Intervention of new ones either real or imaginary, which is all one as to this
purpose: the horror of any Crime, or at least the detestation of the Criminal,
grows faint and languid upon the removal of the Object, especially if time
interposes with the accession of present fears, which as present do more affect
us than greater if more distant. It can never therefore be thought the desire
of the People of England to have their Neighbors or Acquaintance harrass'd and
persecuted by Fines, Confiscations, Imprisonments, Marks of Disgrace, or the
like, for Actions done in the last or former Reigns, about which the World has
been so much divided, if lawful or not: Besides, that this was the general
Expectation of the Kingdom on the new Settlement or at least the Coronation, of
which pature there never was an Instance before this without an Act of Grace;
And it is most plain, that none are Adversaries to it, but the Republicans and
the Jacobites, not for that they need it not, as I shall show anon, but for
different ends, each drives at and wishes a Change, it matters not to what, for
if to the latter the other hopes a Commonwealth will be the more desirable: If
the Republican succeeds, then the other believes a Restoration the more easy,
but both dislike the present, and therefore dread a Settlement, and
consequently dread the Peoples satisfaction and quiet under Their Majesty's,
and consequently dtead an Act of Indemnity; it is true, the Cry for Vengeance is
loud, but it is only from these two corners; which leads to the second
particular, that

It will establish and promote the Interest of the present Government, while
the popular Bully is full of his Damme's and Menaces, there is certainly danger,
and where there is danger there is fear, now fear causes an aversion, and
aversion begets hatred: and the Object of it is that from whence the supposed
danger arises, which is from the Government irritated by the Venom and Fury of
those hotheaded Animals, whatsoever has power and will to hurt me must and
will be abhorred; and though none are immediate actual Patients, yet the being
possibly obnoxious to it, and the want of security for the contrary does of
necessity cool their respect to the present Power, under which they are not
safe; and this tempts them and their Friends upon contrivances and attempts of
Danger both to themselves and the Public; and danger by the attempt is no
discouragement where the like danger attends their forbearance: and this is of
weight, unless Cromwell's Politics be thought Christian, to cherish and
promote a Plot, as of advantage to Settlement, if seasonably discovered and
subtly managed; but however it is as true, that Enemies who are desperate
ought never to be thought inconsiderable; for they may shake and batter what
they cannot destroy, they may do mischief though they cannot work ruin to their
Adversaries, upon which account the temptation of continual impending Danger is
fit to be removed: Besides

The want of Security, and the fear of Danger, making Men uneasy in their
thoughts, replenishes them with Complaints and Murmurs at every awkard Action,
or supposed miscarriage of the Government feared; it makes them Mutineers at
public Taxes and Impositions, partly because they think it strengthens and
increases the power of hurting them, and partly because it sponges and bleeds
them of that, which they sear an occasion of themselves to bribe Blackrods;
Sergeants at Arms and other Goalers with; and in a conjuncture when
extraordinary Aids are indispensibly requisite, no temptation to complaint is
deserving of Countenance; besides, that it cramps Trade and discourages
Projects for Public Good, etc, but further, Its the living, not the dead, the
happy, contented, and cheerful, and free, not the oppressed, miserable,
forlorn, or imprisoned Subject, that does Service to the Crown and the Public.

It hinders all such as are thought to be so obnoxious from any bold Essays for
the use of the present Government, for that if success be the attendant of such
their attempt, they continue unsafe notwithstanding, for no Man will adventure
an hazard to secure that Authority, which he is not sure will make him safe, if
he does undertake the present Adventure, and escapes that Danger, and performs
the Service; so that Self-preservation renders it their Policy to unhinge
themselves from, or to be shy of the present Power, of which a considerable
number might prove useful Friends; which are now Newters at least, if not
Enemies.

Its observable in all foreign Policies either to work a total Extirpation of
the whole Party, or an universal Indemnity after so grand a Revolution as this
was: the former is not to be practiced here for two Reasons, 1. Because we want
People, 2. Many of our Friends must be banished too, for diverse of the supposed
Criminals were instrumental to the present Change, etc. Ergo the latter only is
and can be most advisable: for once I Will suppose their numbers but small in
comparison to the Saints and Innocents, (if any such there are in the Nation)
yet under our present Circumstances all are to be obliged as Friends that
possibly may; but if the thirteen Heads, with the Surrenderers Clause, and all
its and their Subdivisions had been reduced into a Law in the designed act of
Attainder, one third at least of the Nation had been involved, who with their
disobliged Relatives and Dependants is not so contemptible a Flock, though but
of Sheep for the slaughter: besides

It Is impolitick as well as unjust to deny or delay it to those who have
submitted to the Government, yielded it Obedience, and quietly bore its public
Charges according to their Proportion, and yet give a free, full and general
Pardon both in Scotland and Ireland to all that took up Arms, for all their
Sins then past and present; it provokes the former to repent their
non-concurrence with the latter, for 'twas but resuming their Quiet and
Submission at pleasure, and then they were safe, which now they are not, but
under continued Menaces and Dangers both, as appears in their being baited by
every barking Cur, that can but write with Gall in his Ink, or speak with a
Damme in his Mouth.

Experience further tells us that nothing turns or changes the humor of the
English Commoner, like Rage, Insolence and Cruelty in their fellow Subjects
when made Superiors, and such is raking into old Sores thought to be; it
matters not whether justly or no as to this purpose, the effect is generally
such: The Star Chamber in Car. 1. his time, the Major-General's in Cromwell's
time; The Tophamizing of Abhorrers in Car. 2. his time; The Western Campaign,
and the other criminal Prosecutions in the beginning of Jac. 1. I say all the
Violences, used in these several periods (and yet they had their respective
Provocations) did most noriously alter the kidney of the Commons, and made even
their once beloved, first dreadful and terrible, then odious and loathsome,
they produced considerable Changes in their several Consequences, I could come
nearer home even to the tearing of Moore and North, and other Citizens of
London, which first turned the Stomach of that City, as is now apparent, but
Sat verbum, etc. but further

The want of this, renders both the Policy and Honor of the great Bellowers for
Vengeance to be justly suspected, 1. Their honor in taking care of their own
Servants for all their Excesses upon the Revolution, and opposing the Indemnity
of all others, as by the Act appears, 2. Their Policy, for that its observable
in Story, that the Association in Queen Eliz. time was under a Protestant
Prince for the Protestant Religion, and no ill Success attended it, yet those
wise Ancestors of ours thought fit to secure themselves by turning the
Association into a Law, and a general Act of Indemnity; I do not say they
needed it, but the Associators in that Reign thought it needful; and it is very
considerable, that in no Reign was there more Peace and Quiet than in hers, and
in none were there ever more free and general Pardons, and in truth the latter
was the occasion of the former; for when Men are once safe and quiet, no small
Temptation will provoke any more adventures though they like another better,
yet Men being easy are generally contented: There was one free and general
Pardon of the Queens at first confirmed 5 Eliz. cap. 11. another, 8 Eliz. cap.
18. 13 Eliz. cap. 28. 18 Eliz. cap. 24. 23 Eliz. cap. 16. 27 Eliz. 13. 29 Eliz.
cap. 9. 31 Eliz. cap. 16. 35 Eliz. cap. 14. 39 Eliz. cap. 28. 43 Eliz. cap. 19.
Eleven in number, and never five years without a Parliament-Pardon, and this
made Parliaments and Crowns the darlings and desire of the People: Besides,
it is the Interest of each party amongst us, though some don't see it, the Whig
ought to promote it for two Reasons, 1. Left being the lesser part he chance to
feel the want of it, and for that he has given some Provocation, 2. That if he
be the greater, the Memory of his Vengeance and Fury may be forgotten, and
himself restored to the good Opinion of the rest of Mankind, by one act at
least of good Nature: The Tory ought to pursue the same measures, and much for
the same Reasons, for his Top-gallantry has been, and if repractis'd will be
again as odious and loathsome to the moderate and good, as ever it was, or as
the others could be: Temper therefore is now the Game, and a Veil over all
that is past is certainly the most Politic, especially considering the
multitude of the supposed Criminals, and the justtice of their several Excuses,
which comes next; for

Lastly, It Is consistent with and promotive of the truest and highest Justice,
for in most of the Cases the Law is doubtful, and to punish Opinion in matters
of Law, is as unjust, as to persecute mistakes in matters of Religion is
unchristian, and new Laws for Government de futuro are more agreeable to
natural Equity than a retrospective Fury; that it is so, is plain, the modern
Scriblers have sufficiently proved it. In two of the Cases cited they differ
themselves, for Dr. Story's Case the Defender cries it is not Law, the Remarker
agrees it is, and that he was well hanged, for Plunket's Case the Defender cries
he was well hanged, for there was Treason enough in his Charge, the Remarker
insinuates as if he suffered hardly; now what shall a little Lawyer believe
between these two great bodies of Learning? the like may be said of Soames's
Case, and the other abovementioned: But what is more? In the Voluminous
Argument against the Dispensing Power owned by Sir R. A. he does concede that
there are some Prerogatives so personally and inseparably inherent in the
Crown, that no Act of Parliament can cramp or diminish or at least take away;
and that being granted, I Am sure all that the rest of the Book says can never
make that a plain Case, and in truth his own Argument shows and leaves it a
disputable Point, and if that were doubtful, every particular else may well be
buried in Oblivion; besides in Cases of Construction the nature of the thing
admits of doubt, and then there is no color for Punishment; Besides

In respect of Inferior Persons by our Constitution they are obliged to submit
to and follow Westminster Hall, which is the lex loquens Angliae, and when all
these things are duly considered, there will remain but few grand execrable
Criminals, who are fit to be made Examples of, only to tickle some, aggrieve
others, and terrify none, for that will be the Consequence, for that is the
Case of all Violence where the Justice of the thing is not clear and undoubted;
Then for Exceptions,

Let us think a little, is it reasonable that some should suffer for not being
afraid of Punishments never declared or promulgated, and others shall escape,
because their Countenances are more fawning, or that by consent their Relations
have played on the other side, or that their swinging Fortunes enable them to
scatter Mice for their personal Indemnity, or that they have had the luckly
Principle of being faithful to all Changes, and true to nothing else, or that
they have been forward to subvert their old Master, after their fire and folly
had ruined him and endangered themselves; these and such like are no pleas for
Justice, and yet this is the Case: Further,

The drift is to magnify and aggrandize Punishments by Bill, which by the
standing Laws, and common Justice of the Realm could not be inflicted, and they
urge two Reasons for it, 1. Their particular Pardons will otherwise excuse
them. To that I answer, Either they are valid in Law or not, if not, there is no
need of Bills; If they are valid in Law, the same Law and Justice of the Land
enjoin their Allowance; even the same Law by which the Countryman Plows his
Land, the Gentleman receives his Rent, the Trader recovers his Debt, and the
Senator sits in the House, and by the same Reason that these enjoy their
Properties, the Criminal ought to have his Pardon allowed, for one's a right
accrued by the Law as well as the other. 2. The common Channel is too smooth:
Severity is sometimes necessary, and that now if ever; and therefore the
Legislative Authority ought to exert its power, and punish according to
demerit; To answer that, I say, either they are no offenses by Law, and there
needs a Bill to make them such, and inflict evils upon them as such; or else
they are offenses but deserve a greater Punishment than a common Court may
pronounce; now if the first be the Case (...) I Am sure it is rank palpable
tyrannical Injustic^, and that is the plague of living under an Arbitrary Power,
for none can know what is not Criminal: If they mean the latter, as I suppose
they do, then I ask to what end were Punishments invented in Societies but to
restrain Men from doing particular actions through the power and influence of
Fear, and how could that Consequence be expected when the penalty was never
known before it is inflicted; and to inflict an evil afterward, which was not
known before, is to make a Man suffer that which he could not fear, because he
could not know it, and this because he did not fear it: and the Justice of that
is plain too.

I agree with the Satyrists that there are some Precedents of this last method
of proceeding, but most of them are repealed, I Will name two that are so, the
Earl of Strafford's, which the very Law it self did enjoin Postetiry not to
observe, or follow, or do the like; I cannot forget one Expression of his to
this effect upon the Trial, if there be an Error in a Judge, so that he give a
Sentence otherwise than a Man of better understanding conceives Reason, for,
there is no cause the offense should be heightened because he was not so wise a
Man as he might have been, nor so understanding as another, which if allowed,
will make it more eligible to follow a Plow than serve a Government, to dig in
a Ditch than bear an Office, for all Men stand obnoxious to the Constructions
and Passions of succeeding Times: There Is one Instance more, and that was Sir
Thomas Haxey's who was attainted of Treason for bringing in a Bill into the
Commons House aga^^^^ the Prerogative, though while, and as a Member: I suppose
the Sparks will not much applaud the justice of that Procedure for their own
sakes; but as I said before, that and most others of their Precedents were
repealed, when a cooler Assembly met upon the next Session, and so was Haxey's,
in 1 Hen. 4. Cott. abr. rec. 362, 393.

But if Vengeance be requisite, it ought to be without respect of Persons, The
Justice of it ought to be impartial, true and Catholic: and then come in the
Pensioners and Surrenderers, the Regulators and Promisers, the old High
Commissioners, and the New Creed makers, etc. and God knows quis non, etc, Nay
since the Revolution, some must come in for a snack of Censure too, the buyers
and sellers of Places, the Members that took Offices contrary to their own
motion and vote in the Westminster Parliament: The Proclamation-men for
prohibiting of importing French Commodities under pain of (...) of Ship and
Goods, three Weeks before a War proclaimed, contrary to eleven Acts of
Parliament for Free Trade, even in Parliament-time: the Treasury for farming
Lotteries, which are common nuisances contrary to multitudes of Statutes, and
continuing them still with non-obstante's (...) Indenture, though illegal and
void ab initio: the great Seal for passing four Patents at one Seal in this
Lent Vacation with non-obstante's contrary to the Bill of Rights, the new
Sheriffs for practicing what themselves condemned in a Moore and a North Cum
multis aliis quos nunc describere longum, etc. To conclude, Our Savior's Rule
if observed will be the most infallible Indemnity that can be contrived, and
that is, John 8. c. 7. v. Let him that is without sin amongst you, cast the
first stone. And in truth a Censor of the Manners of others ought himself to be
pure, clean and innocent, in omni re quacunque; and if there be no danger but
from such, I Am sure there is no danger at all, and that it should be so, is the
truest Justice in the World, quod fuit probandum.

I Will not mention the Argument from the Vacancy, that the Government was
dissolved, every thing reduced into its primitive state of Nature, all power
devolved into individuals, and the particulars only to provide for themselves
by a new Contract, for if so, there is yet no new consent for Punishment of acts
done before the Dissolution, and consequently Revenge, for that is at an end;
Indemnity therefore ought to be promoted by those who made that Vote, for
otherwise their truth may be suspected, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
SOme perhaps will blame the boldness of this Style, as provocative rather than
palliating, to which I say, truth ought never to be shamefaced, for veritas
prevalebit, one time or another: and if it do not, but angers some, 'twill be
only those that were implacable before, who if they ha'nt good nature enough to
pardon a bold stroke or two with a Pen, they will never consent to an Act of
Indemnity, and then their Fury is not to be regarded, for the want of it will
inflame (as it has created) our present Divisions, and consequently run us at
last into a true Confusion, from which, Good Lords deliver us.

FINIS.

