Theophania: OR SEVERAL MODERN HISTORIES Represented by way of ROMANCE: AND
POLITICKLY Discoursed upon; BY An English Person of Quality.

STAT. THEB. -- Nec divinam SYDNEIDA tenta
Sed long sequere, and Vestigia semper adora.
LONDON, Printed by T: Newcomb for Thomas Heath, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Russel Street, near the Piazza's of Covent Garden, 1655.

THE STATIONER TO THE READER.
THough the Preface of a Stationer be commonly interpreted no other then a
slight to betray the Customer into the buying of a Book: yet to let you know I
deal heartily with you, I put you to the trouble of acquainting you, that the
best, and most severe Judgments have rationally satisfied me, that what I here
offer, is a thing of so much worth, as it needs not the unnecessary
anticipation of any discourse of mine.

Had not this curious Piece (which of the kind, I think to be the first that
ever our Country produced) come to my hands, in the quality of an Orphan, I had
saved this labor; yet (since it seems the noble Author rather chose to
beglorious in obscurity, then shine in popular applause) I will be bold to say*
you will find so many marks and emanations of an illustrious Spirit, as could
not possibly be acquired, but by the great advantages of education, travel and
converse in the world (and the Epitome's of the world (Courts) which may well
entitle our Author to undertake a Subject of this nature wherein you will find
Man, and the Passions of man (the great Engines of our Conversation) and (it
may be) Traverses of State, set down as in a Mapp or Chart before you; withal,
it is naturally English, and you have it faithfully out of the Original.

Nor did I rashly venture upon this Publication; I took council from the best
Judges of these things: They unanimously tell me, that there wants nothing of
the Spanish Design, the French fluency and Courtship, the Italian gravity; or
indeed any thing that may make up the whole Symmetry and decorum of a Piece of
this nature. For, his Designs are natural, correspondent, and effective; his
Scenes probable, and suitable; his Loves high and generous* (but without
extravagancy;) his Passions essential, and real, and such as perfectly limn
different souls, in their different agitations; his discourses and reflections
solid and mature, and the resultance of all this, so generous and harmonious,
that I rather choose to leave you to the consideration of the several beauties
you will find in every part thereof, then corrupt your judgments by a previous
information in the general.

Thus much to do you and my self right, I thought fit to acquaint you with;
being of opinion that the smallest part of the fate of this book depends upon
my word, since I am persuaded it will justify it self; and if under some
seeming Grotesques, you can find such a glass as will represent to you real and
excellent figures, you will add to the pleasure I intend you, and I believe be
a gainer by it.

Near the Piazza in Covent Garden, November 14. 1654. T. HEATH.

THEOPHANIA.
BOOK I.
THe Sicilian Monarchy being invincible against all foreign assaults, was the
envy of her neighbors, and the wonder of the whole world; till the people
weary of so much felicity, to show the greatness of their power, destroyed
their own happiness, and what no Enemy durst attempt, by an intestine war
invaded the liberties of their native Country.

But this madness was not yet general, when the season of the year, with the
favorable influence of the heavens, had produced so great a serenity in the
air, that the Sea having remained diverse days in an undisturbed calm, the
inhabitants of the coasts of Leontium resorted in troops to the shore, there to
enjoy the freshness that in the evening came off from the Main; and whilst some
recreated themselves with their country sports upon the sands, others more
active showed their address in rowing, and those whose profession it was cast
out nets for fish the chief Lord of the place, and of many adjacent villages, a
person of eminent rank and condition, who being retired from the great affairs
of the world, chose rather to live beloved in his own Province, then through
vain ambition to tempt the hazards of fortune, in a State by civil dissentions
exposed to ruin; and though not insensible of his Countries sufferings, yet
not so far dejected with the sense thereof, as to debar himself of such
delights as were necessary for the preservation of his health; with two
Gentlemen, his attendants, came down to the Seaside; and after some ordinary
civilities passed amongst the chiefest of the Country People that were his
neighbors, entered into a Fallocque that waited for him, which was covered with
Crimson-dammask, and slightly gilt and painted with the Arms and Devices of his
Family, rather to show a distinction from the vulgar, then any way to boast
either his birth or quality.

The Steers-man, as soon as his Master was seated in the Boat, directed his
course toward a great point of Land that lay out into the Sea, where with more
privacie he might enjoy the benefit of the air: And whilst they advanced gently
into the Main, he entertained his company with several discourses, to which
they were exceeding attentive, all that had the honor to be near him, finding
that they profited more by his ordinary familiar talk, then they could ever
attain to in the Schools of the Philosophers; for they study only to dispute,
but he studied the truth; and with those reasons on which he had founded his
own judgment, would communicate his conclusions to others: Yet at that time he
was not upon any deep subject, but only relating diverse passages and
occurrences of State, in which himself had been a principal actor; and from the
unexpected alterations that had happened, arguing the uncertainty of man's
condition. When having gained the Point whither he was going, he discovered a
tall Ship, with her fails flaging about her masts, that lay becalmed about two
leagues from the shore, which at the same instant first hung out a white Flag,
and then struck her main Top-sail, intelligible signs amongst Mariners of a
friendly approach; and if she were not in some distress, that either she
desired Boats to land passengers, or else a Pilot to conduct her upon those
Coasts.

Synesius, so was this noble person called, whatsoever the meaning were, being
ever ready to perform the office of a Cavalier, presently commanded his men to
row back again with all the speed that was possible; and having taken care
himself to see a Fallocque well manned, gave them order to go immediately
aboard the Vessel, to be informed what she was, and if they found her a friend,
as he imagined, to do them all hospitable services that their occasions did
require. But notwithstanding the diligence that was used* by that time they
were ready to launch, the Sun had finished his course for that day; yet the
dawn of the evening, with the brightness of the Moon in a clear sky, encouraged
the Seamen to a prompt obedience, though otherwise observant enough of their
Lords commands, who was not more reverenced amongst them for his authority,
then beloved and honored for his hospitality.

As soon as they had doubled the Point, they presently saw the Ship* which
still lay hulking in the same manner, and at that time again with beat of drum
and sound of trumpet made all the noise that was possible; which caused the
Mariners the more vigorously to pursue their course: But before they had
advanced far, they perceived, a good distance from them, two things floating
upon the water, which at first they supposed to be either by chance, or on
purpose, cast out of the vessel; but by the disturbance of the Sea in so great
a Calm, they soon found their mistake, yet could not imagine what they should
be; for their motions yielded sometimes such a resplendent brightness, and such
a sparkling light, as if against nature the Ocean had cast up flakes of fire,
or else Stars shot from the firmament had remained floating upon the surface
thereof. Some conjectured one thing, some another; and the wisest amongst them
would needs have the rest imagine that it was nothing else but the reflection
of the Moon upon the breaking of the water, caused by Porpices or some other
great fishes, and began to wish their business dispatched, apprehending, as it
is commonly believed among Seamen, that the appearing of those creatures
presaged a storm, or at least a great alteration of the weather.

Whilst they were thus reasoning amongst themselves, they approached so near
the object of their wonder, that the dispute ceased, though not their
admiration: For they plainly discerned two young men of an excellent beauty
swiming toward them; one whereof carried in his hand a naked Sword of a rarely
polished mettle, and the other had about his neck a Tablet mervailously
enriched with diamonds. The former seeing an unexpected assistance so near,
launched himself forward with a wonderful force, and catching hold of one of
the Oars, with the help thereof leaped aboard; then waving his sword above his
head, immediately with both his hands laid the hilt thereof, which was
curiously enchased with rubies, to his heart, and casting up his eyes to heaven
smiled a little, as if by that he had overcome the present, and meant to
vanquish all future danger* But at the same instant the other, his strength
failing him, began to sink, and he had undoubtedly perished, if the mariners,
notwithstanding their surprisal by so strange an accident, had not been very
speedy in giving him assistance, and as he rise again above the water, taken
hold of his Tassata breeches, which were all the garment he had on, and by them
lifted him into their Fallocque.

At the first, though he were not altogether without life, yet he was in a
manner past sense; but by bending his body forward, and other usual remedies
that Seamen in such cases practice, having voided a great quantity of water,
which overcharged his stomach, he soon came to himself again, and immediately
feeling for the Tablet that was about his neck, with great reverence kissed it,
holding up his hands to heaven, as in token of thankfulness, that since his
life was preserved, that Jewel was so likewise, which he seemed to value not
inferior to the other: Then kissing it again, and fixing his eyes upon the
Characters artificially formed with Diamonds of an inestimable value, after a
deep sigh cried out, Ah Mariana! and having pronounced that name so sacred to
his memory; presently stoped, as if in that one word he had said all that could
be spoken.

But at length calling to mind his condition, he looked earnestly about him to
consider into what hands he was fallen; when perceiving his companion that had
run the like hazard with himself, and in the same manner as he thought
preserved, they presently embraced, with infinite testimonies of joy
congratulating each others safety; and had continued longer in those
expressions, if the mariners desiring to finish their work, had not interrupted
them with signs that they made, for they perceived they were strangers, and
spoke another language, to know whether they should return back, or else go on
to the ship, of which they supposed they were: but understanding they desired
rather they should return, having accommodated them the best they could with
garments, of which two of the Seamen willingly stripped themselves, they
instantly tackt about, and a fresh gale then rising from the sea, almost in a
moment arrived upon the shore.

The Country People, partly in curiosity to hear news, for by reason of the war
some novelty or other happened almost every day, but the better sort to wait
upon Synesius, attended the return of the Fallocque; which no sooner touched
upon the Beach, but they all flocked to the Seaside, and when they were ready
to land, He with his Gentlemen being come to the head of the Boat, when they
saw the strangers, were seized with a kind of admiration, in beholding two such
goodly persons in a habit so unsuitable to their demeanure, and presently
stepped to give them their hands; which civility, as soon as they were on shore,
they returned with great demonstrations of gratitude, and by their deportment
gave testimony of a birth and education far above their present condition.

They were both of equal perfections, though something differing in years, the
eldest being about two and twenty, the other not above nineteen; the one of a
most deli^^te complexion, the other of a more manly vigorous composition; the
one the people were ready to adore as the God of war, the other emblemed that
Youth for whom the Goddess of Love herself suffered such an ardent passion; and
both had impressed such characters of manhood and beauty, as promised an
assured victory in the contentions either of Love, or War.

The elder was of a stature more then the ordinary size of men; his hair, which
was brown, hung in great ^ings dangling upon his shoulders, his beard appeared
only like young down, his eyes were gray, yet full of a majestic gravity, and
his face though something inclined to leanness, was the index of a most daring
mind, and more generous spirit; in brief, nature had framed his body, as if to
show the perfection of the ^ex both in comelines of proportion, and address in
all manner of exercises. The other was about half the head lower, and of a
complexion that made all others near him seem to have none; his hair flaxen,
with such a glistering brightness, as that alone was ornament enough for any
one man; but all the rest of the fabric was answerable, large gray eyes, a
wide forehead, a mild cheerful countenance, and a shape so complete as drew
the eyes of all the beholders into admiration.

The worthy Synesius took so strict a survey of these rare endowments, that he
assured himself they were persons to be treated with more then a common
civility: On the other side, his grave deportment, the honor that was rendered
him by the people, and the extraordinary respect he used toward them, were
sufficient testimonies that he was a person of eminent degree and quality;
wherefore they made their addresses to him with great shows of humility, being
ready to give him all the dues belonged to his quality, as willing for the
present to conceal their own. So that after the first salutations were past
with equal complements and caresses on either side; Sir, said the elder
stranger, We desire you will be pleased to look upon us as persons, after
infinite sufferings, at length by the compassion of the Gods exposed to your
charity; and though we already owe you for our own preservation, before we can
scarcely acknowledge that debt, we must implore the continuance thereof toward
the men left in our Vessel, which lies not far hence in the road, but has
sprung so many leaks, that without present assistance they must all certainly
perish. Synesius not suffering him to proceed farther, replied, If I have any
way obliged you, I perceive you are Cavaliers of so much worth, that I esteem
my self happy in the occasion; and for your request, it is my duty to perform
what you desire: But you have already suffered too much in your own persons,
therefore I beseech you to take such refreshment as my poor habitation not far
from hence will afford, and doubt not of my care in sending present assistance
to your ship. Whereupon turning about to Nicander, he gave him order and full
authority immediately to man all the Boats upon the coast, and to conduct them
himself into the Road.

Whilst he was giving such directions as were necessary, it being something
late, and the sky beginning to be darkened with clouds, his Chariot was come to
the place, with some of his servants, to wait upon their Lord home; and
immediately the wind beginning to rise by degrees, such a sudden shower of rain
poured down upon them, as forced him with his guests, and Eleutherius the other
Gentleman that accompanied him, without farther complement or ceremony to enter
into the Chariot, and dissipated the rest of the company to their several
homes; only Nicander calling the Seamen about him, remained under the shelter
of a poor Cottage, to put in execution those commands which his Lord had left
with him concerning the Vessel in the road.

Though Synesius house were but a little way distant from the sea, yet the
storm was so sudden and violent, m^^ed with such terrible thunder and
lightening, that the horses being hot-metled could not be governed by the
driver; yet with the help of the Footmen, though with some disorder, they were
made to advance, till being come under the shelter of certain trees, which
planted in four ranks made a spacious shady ascent up to the house, they began
to go quietly of themselves; and at length being come into the Base-court,
diverse servants with torches of white-wax attended at the gate: But when they
were descending from the Chariot, the younger of the two Strangers was found in
such a condition, that they could scarcely discern any life in him, which by
reason of the noise and disorder caused by the tempest, was not till then
perceived; wherefore he was carried upon men's arms, accompanied by Synesius,
and his companion in misfortune, into a chamber fit to receive so noble a
guest, where all means were used to recover his fainting spirits, caused, being
of a delicate complexion, through his sufferings first in the ship, and the
over-violent force he used afterward to recover the shore by swiming. But
being laid in a bed, and having taken such Cordials which Synesius sent for out
of his Cabinet, he soon came to himself again, yet not so but that there
remained almost certain symptoms of a violent fever; to prevent which, nothing
was judged more necessary for the present then a little repose: wherefore
Synesius having expressed his sorrow for so ill an accident, and left a
necessary attendance about him, conducted his other guest to another
appartement, which was so richly furnished, the feelings so nobly gilt, and the
chimneys and windows so adorned with porphyrie, and polished marble, that the
Stranger could not think it less then a Princes palace, or at least a Subjects
of the most eminent rank. Nevertheless Synesius, through his accustomed
civility, made many excuses for the defects of the place, promising to supply
them with a ready obedience to all his commands; and thereupon it being late,
caused only a slight Collation to be brought up, to refresh him after his
sufferings at sea: But as they sat together, perceiving his Guest to be full
of pensiveness, for that time troubled him not with many questions, or much
discourse; but the tables being taken away, told him that he thought rest was
most suitable to one in his condition, and therefore for the present he would
leave him to it, assuring him that he would not be deficient in any obsequious
offices either toward himself, or those remaining in the ship; and that if the
sudden tempest had not prevented it, they had already received such succor as
that Coast could afford.

Sir, replied the Stranger, I find you so abounding in all kind of courtesy,
that I cannot but render thanks to heaven, that after so many adversities I am
arrived in a place of such generous entertainment; yet I cannot but remain
perplexed to see my companion in affliction, though otherwise a stranger to me,
in so ill a condition; but as to those in the ship, (whereupon through a
generous compassion he fetched a deep sigh) I fear the storm has prevented
those benefits you intended toward them; however I cannot despair of their
safety, since you have been pleased to undertake their protection, whose
actions I perceive are favored by the Gods.

Synesius told him, If the Gods were pleased to concur with his desires, there
was no doubt of their safety; therefore earnestly entreated him to take such
repose as the time required: And thereupon, after infinite acknowledgments of
mutual obligations, and many civilities passed on either side, Synesius,
leaving two Gentlemen to attend him, retired to his own lodging, where as soon
as he had given order to one of his servants to go early the next morning for
Cassianus a famous Physician, who was then at certain medicinal wells about two
leagues off, went to his rest, which he fell into with great satisfaction,
having ended the day with works of so much hospitable charity, yet not with a
perfect content, because of the fears he conceived for those still remaining in
the ship.

The Stranger being now left to himself, having put on such linen as lay
prepared for him, soon dismissed his attendants, and casting himself into his
bed, the remembrance of his former misfortunes in the whole course of his life,
came so thick upon him, that overpressed with care and grief, at length he
yielded to sleep which on a sudden wholly possessed him.

About two or three hours after, as soon as day began to break, by which time
the storm was quite over, there was a great noise of men and horse about the
house: whereupon Synesius, who was watchful upon all occasions, apprehending
Soldiers were come into those quarters, and fearing his new guests might be
molested with tumults, immediately calling for Eleutherius, desired him to look
out, and to bring word what might be the occasion of so early a disturbance.
But as soon as he had caused the gates to be opened, and was going out with
half a dozen resolute men, well prepared for any equal encounter, Nicander
entered into the Court, followed by a great number of Seamen and Country
people, besides horses and mules with several ladings, and amongst the rest two
persons, who both by their habits and demeanure bore the appearance of
Gentlemen.

Eleutherius soon conjectured the truth, that these were persons and goods come
from the ship; yet desiring to return with full information, entreated Nicander
to relate to him the particular passages that had happened: Who readily
condescending to his request, told him that immediately after his Lord was
departed, whilst he was preparing Boats, there rise so great a wind, which came
directly off from the Sea, that the Captain seeing his Vessel almost half full
of water, and despairing of all other means of safety, taking the advantage
thereof, commanded his men to make all the sail they could, and laying her just
in the wind, ran in upon the shore, where she stuck fast upon the sand for a
while; but being so near, he used such diligence, that all the men, and goods
of any value were saved, and that immediately after by the force of the waves
beating upon her she was broke into a thousand pieces: That among the rest
those two Gentlemen, who called themselves Lysander and Cleanthes, made great
enquiry after two persons, who rather then to run the hazard of perishing
miserably in the Vessel, had exposed themselves, whilst the Sea was calm, to
the mercy of the waters; And being assured they were in safety, with great
expressions of joy desired to be conducted to them with those coffers which it
seems were left in their charge; but being very sparing in their discourse, and
wary of discovering themselves, that he knew nothing more of their story then
what their present condition declared.

This was sufficient: Therefore having desired Nicander to give all civil
respects to the Gentlemen, and to entertain the rest in the best manner he
could, according to their several conditions, he hasted with the news to
Synesius, who was not a little pleased that the men were so happily preserved,
and desired Eleutherius to communicate the same to his guests, but by no means
if they were reposed to disturb them.

The one being indisposed, he judged it most convenient to go first to the
others appartement, who being lodged on that side the house next the gate, had
heard much that passed, and as Eleutherius came to the door, was ready, having
cast a nightgown about him, to come out; and as soon as they met, after the
first salutations were past, he recounted to him all that had happened, and how
there were two Gentlemen, Cleanthes and Lysander, that made great enquiry after
him and his Companion. Whereat the Stranger seeming much rejoiced, returning
again into his chamber, desired Cleanthes might be brought to him, which was
immediately done, who as soon as he saw his master, touched the ground with one
knee, and offered to kiss his hand; but he not suffering it, raised him up, and
as he embraced him, pretending to kiss his cheek, whispered something in his
ear: which Eleutherius observing, though it were only to advertise him that he
should not use any such ceremony, imagined he desired to be in private, and
presently withdrew.

Being gone down stairs, passing through the great Hall, he met Cassianus the
Physician, whom Synesius had sent for to visit his sick guest, and after a
civil salute conducted him to his Lords lodging, who being by this time ready,
kindly welcomed him; and having first visited his Lady to acquaint her with
what had passed, which as yet she understood but imperfectly, immediately
called for Lysander, and having embraced him gave him his hand, which the other
offered to kiss; but he not permitting that, said, I shall perhaps return your
civility to your satisfaction, if you will take the pains to go a little with
me. For understanding the other was private with Cleanthes, he meant to visit
his sick guest first; and entering into the Ante-chamber, he was informed by the
attendants, that though he had taken a little rest, yet he found no
intermission of his fever. Wherefore going softly into the room, they
approached toward him with as little noise as might be: but he hearing their
tread, put back the curtain with his hand; to see who they were; and as soon as
Lysander espied him, without any ceremony, running to the bedside, he kneeled
down, and holding up his hands said, Ah my Lord and Prince! Is it possible I
see you safe here? Have the Gods been so favorable to hear my prayers for your
preservation? I can now no more doubt of a good success to all our
undertakings, and that this Land will be propitious unto us, since at our first
arrival we have found such humanity amongst the inhabitants, and so favorable
an entertainment in this place.

He would have spoken more; but the Prince putting his arm about his neck, and
laying his face close to his, with a close embrace hindered his speech, saying,
How pleasing this encounter is, I leave to your self to judge; but the
preservation of my life; and with my life this Jewel (showing the Tablet) which
encloseth the Idea of my souls happiness, I owe to this worthy Lord, pointing
to Synesius, who took that occasion to approach nearer to him, though with
greater reverence then before, understanding something of his quality, and
humbly desired him not to call that a debt which was but a duty on his part;
for if he had done him any service, both the benefit and the honor redounded
wholly to himself, praying him for the present to think of nothing but the
preservation of his health, and thereupon presented Cassianus, assuring him
that he might rely upon his skill as the most learned and practiced in his
profession, of the whole kingdom.

The Prince having accepted his offer, and with a courteous salute welcomed the
Physician, Synesius presently left the chamber, desiring Lysander who remained
there, to command both himself, his house, and family in any thing that might
be useful for the Princes service, who having made a due acknowledgment of his
noble hospitality, and conducted him to the stairs head, returned again into the
chamber to advise with Cassianus concerning the Princes indisposition.

In this interim Cleanthes gave a full account to his Lord of all that had
happened in the ship after his departure; how the mariners being wearied with
their continual labor in pmping, the water came in upon them in such
abundance, that to lighten her they were forced to heave all the lumber, and a
great part of their lading over board, and that amongst the rest the coffer in
which was the Cabinet with all his jewels, was in the confusion, by mistake,
cast into the sea. Wherewith not seeming at all moved, he only asked whether
his Arms were safe; and understanding they were, replied, With them, and this,
pointing to his sword, I must get more. And thereupon Synesius entering into his
chamber, hearing him coming he left Cleanthes, and receiving him at the door,
after mutual complements and civilities on either side, the Company waiting in
the outward room, they sat down together, and began to enter into discourse.

There is no doubt but Synesius had a great desire to know the person he had
entertained, and something of the passages of his life, having as it appeared
by some strange accident been brought upon that coast; yet he would not so much
as by circumstance give any hint thereof, lest it might displease. But the
Stranger making many acknowledgments of the obligations he had received from
him, and then composing his countenance, began to speak in the native language
of the Country; at which Synesius was not a little amazed, and could not so
conceal it but the Stranger perceived an alteration in his countenance.
Whereupon he said, I see you wonder that I, a Stranger, having hitherto used
another dialect, should now speak in your own language: But I find you a person
of so much honor, that I dare not doubt to repose a confidence in you; yet I
have been hitherto so unfortunate both in my self and family, that if I were
not inwardly assured by all your proceedings, that you live by principles of
honor and justice, should not so freely communicate my self to you as I intend.

When you know my name, you will know part of my misfortunes; and as you are
affected to your Kings service, either continue your friendly offices toward
me, or else deliver me into the hands of his and my enemies, who I very well
know have only for their own ends caused so many miserable distractions in this
Island.

Synesius finding him so well acquainted with the affairs of the Country,
replied, Sir, whatsoever my inward inclinations are concerning the present war,
or the differences between the King and his People, you may be assured I can
never betray a trust; and therefore you may freely communicate your self so far
as you think I may be serviceable to your affairs, and you shall not find me so
impertinently curious as to enquire farther.

Then the Stranger, bending his body a little forward, with a great sigh said,
No, I know the worthy Synesius is descended of too noble a race, to be
treacherous to the unfortunate, and much wronged Philocles.

Immediately Synesius putting back his chair, rise up, and replied, Sir, you
have told me enough to teach me my duty; I now know the respect I ought to bear
you, and you shall not find yourself deceived in the trust you have been
pleased to repose in me. But before he could proceed farther, Prince Philocles
forced him to take his seat again, and then he continued:

Sir, if I am contented to be thus unmannerly in your presence, be pleased to
impute it to a compliance with your affairs; for I shall humbly advise you will
as yet conceal your self, and not make known who you are to any in this place:
For though my loyalty, and the relation I have ever had to the Kings service,
will oblige me to be faithful to you, yet I am not exempt from those
inconveniences which diverse great Families in this Country now suffer, to have
many near to me, and even my own Children, of contrary inclinations perhaps to
my self; and though I believe they would not injure me so much, as to do any
thing unworthy of their birth, yet being engaged with the other party, I cannot
tell how far those obligations may prevail with them above the respect they
ought to bear to you as a Prince, or the reverence which is due to me as a
Father.

It is true, I have heard much of the calamities that have befallen your royal
family, yet not so perfectly, but I shall, if the request be not unmannerly,
desire to be better informed, when your disposition, and the convenience both
of time and place shall concur to invite you to it; but for the present I shall
with leave retire, until such time as you make yourself ready to partake of
that homely entertainment which this poor place can afford. And Philocles being
exceedingly pleased with the discourse he had already held with Synesius, not
desiring to pass farther for the present, willingly dismissed him.

During the time of this conference, Cleanthes having caused the Coffers to be
opened, had prepared clothes and other necessaries for the Princes wearing,
which he put on whilst Synesius was giving order about his household affairs.

The one and the other were soon dispatched: For Synesius lived in such order
and method, that his more serious thoughts were seldom interrupted with petty
domestic business; and Prince Philocles was so much a Soldier, that he
despised effeminate adornments, and held those unworthy the name of Man, that
would consume any considerable part of their time in those affected vanities.

Therefore soon after they had parted, Philocles having sent Cleanthes to visit
the sick Prince, they met in the garden, which was so stored with rare fruits
of all kinds, so adorned with Fountains, Grots, Canals, and Walks both
artificial and natural; and that part of the house which fronted upon the
Garden, was such a noble, ancient fabric, that all considered together, they
showed both the antiquity of the family to which they belonged, and the
continuance of it in greatness and prosperity to those latter times, which had
furnished so many rare inventions for pleasure and magnificence.

When they had a little recreated themselves with walking, and were discoursing
of the pleasant situation of the place, Eleutherius brought Lysander and
Cassianus the Physician to them, who gave this account of his Patients
condition, that he was in a violent dangerous fever, caused as he understood
by unaccustomed sufferings in his voyage, yet, as he feared, augmented by some
inward passion of the mind; and that besides the remedies he should apply,
there was nothing more necessary for the recovery of his health then a quiet
repose, and therefore that he desired he might not be molested with any company
saving a necessary attendance for the space of three days, in which time he
should be able to give a sure judgment of his disease; doubting not if these
orders were observed; he would by the help of youth quickly recover his former
strength.

The Prince was exceedingly pleased with such fair hopes of his Companions
recovery; and after mutual congratulations between him and Lysander for their
safe arrival, notice being given by the Steward that it was Noon, and Synesius
having intimated to Prince Philocles, that to avoid the suspicion of desiring
to be concealed, it would be best to eat publicly, as a private person with
the rest, all the Company went together to his appartement, where by Synesius
directions the dinner was prepared, and all things were served with that
decency and order as was suitable to the present occasion, though not with
that ceremony and state as was due to so great a Prince. But Synesius failed
not to entertain his guests with variety of discourse, in which he excelled
most men of that age; and in this differed from all others, that he never
willingly suffered any thing to be said at his table of sacred things belonging
to the worship of the Gods, nor of the present differences or public affairs,
nor yet in censure of particular persons of what degree or quality soever; but
ever framed his discourse suitable to his company: With Soldiers, he would
talk of martial exercises, or Fortifications; with Courtiers, of Tennis,
Hunting, or riding the great Horse; with Scholars, of some point of
Philosophy, or else compare histories of ancient times; and was so generally
knowing, that he pleased all of the meanest capacities: For even with the
Country Magistrates he would seem to inform himself of their ways of
Judicature; and with his neighbors talk of Husbandry, planting Trees, or
breeding of Cattle, with as much insight as if he had been bred only in such
employments. But at that time falling aptly upon it by reason of the Princes
sickness, he proposed a subject whereby Cassianus might show his learning,
concerning the Circulation of the blood, which by reason of the novelty was
very pleasing; and he proved it with such strong argumentations, and solid
reasons, that all the company condescended to his opinion.

Dinner being ended, they returned again into the garden; where Philocles and
Synesius having withdrawn themselves into a private Walk shaded with Laurel,
Synesius with many professions of service and fidelity humbly desired the
Prince to acquaint him with the particular passages of his life: To which he
was very willing, but for the present excused himself, as thinking it necessary
in the first place to give a visit to his Lady: but Synesius told him, that she
having intended a journey to Palermo, the Metropolis of that Kingdom, to visit
her Sister, had chosen that time as most convenient, that the house might be
the more free for the entertainment of himself; which inclination of hers he
had farthered, as thinking her absence at that time not unnecessary, and that
she was departed early, to enjoy the cool of the morning.

The Prince smiling, thanked him for his care; but in stead of entering into the
discourse desired, told him, You already know much of my story, or at least so
much as is public to the world; and for other particulars, I shall not fail to
take a time to acquaint you with them. But for the present I should request you
to make me some brief account of the state of these Kingdoms, the original of
the War, and the proceedings thereof, in which I am too ignorant being so
nearly concerned, having never yet, though I have been active enough in the
cause, met with any that agreed in their relations, or could make a perfect
discourse thereof; yet if it please you, we will for a while lay by both the
one and the other: For this stranger that is in your house, and who it seems is
a Prince, has certainly been drawn hither by some extraordinary adventure,
which perhaps would be of some concernment to know; and the Physician having
ordained him so many days of repose, it is not unlikely we may receive
satisfaction therein from Lysander, who undoubtedly is acquainted with every
particular of his life.

This Proposition was very grateful to Synesius; therefore they returned again
to mingle with the company, and having separated Lysander from the rest, when
they were at a distance, Prince Philocles without more circumstance said,

Worthy Lysander, I esteem it one of the happiest encounters of my life, that
offered an occasion of my coming first into your Princes company; and though we
were strangers before, we have since been companions, at least in our
sufferings; and I have observed in him so great and generous a courage upon all
occasions, that I cannot be blamed if I am transported with a passionate desire
to know the story of his life: Besides, we are both indebted to this noble Lord
for our preservation; and he joining with me in this request, I suppose you
will be ready to give him that satisfaction, unless there be some notable
reason to the contrary.

Sir, replied Lysander, I easily imagined our noble Host and yourself, having
seen so much of the Prince my master, could not be without a curiosity of
knowing more; and therefore conceiving it just to comply with persons of so
much worth, I took that time you were retired together into the close walk, to
ask his consent thereunto; which having easily obtained, I am ready whenever
you please to satisfy your desires.

They both returned him many thanks for his ready compliance; and their
curiosity not suffering them to defer it longer, by Synesius advice, for the
more privacie, they went out of the garden, through the house, into the Park,
which was but a hundred paces distant, and lay upon an easy ascent, there
being a spacious Walk adorned with fountains, and shaded with well grown trees,
that led to a Mount covered with a great wood, in the midst whereof was a
square place cut out with seats of marble, and an artificial Grot representing
Parnassus, on the top whereof stood a Pegasus, from the impression of whose
foot issued a Fountain, and round about it were placed Apollo with the Muses
playing upon several instruments, which by the motion of the water yielded a
most pleasing harmony, and even ravished the beholders with delight.

But having a while considered the beauty of the place, the artificial
conveyance of the water, and the pleasant prospect they had from thence over a
declining Lawn, (in the midst whereof, by a great Lake, fed a numerous Herd of
Deer) upon the house and gardens compassed in with a large river, and bounded
on the other side with fruitful hills, flourishing with corn and wine; Synesius
invited them to sit down, and Prince Philocles not failing to put Lysander in
mind of his promise, he expecting it, being placed in the midst of them, began
his relation after this manner.

The Story of Prince DEMETRIUS.
GReece is not so remote, nor the name of the renowned Polidor so unknown to
the world, that I need spend much time either in the description of the
Country, or of the noble race of which Prince Demetrius my master is descended.

Philocles at that name clapping his hand upon his breast, Is this, said he,
that Prince Demetrius whose actions have rendered him so famous, and whose loss
of late has been so much lamented throughout all Greece?

It is the same, replied Lysander; and since you take such pleasure in the
discovery of the person, I doubt not but the story of his life will yield you
such content, that you will the easilier pardon my defect of language in the
relation of it.

Then settling himself again to continue his discourse, they heard in the wood
close behind them the treading of horse, and a sound of harness; when starting
up to see what the matter should be, they perceived they were almost quite
environed by a company of twelve or fourteen armed men, who as they came out of
the Grot, rushing violently upon them, he that seemed to command, cried out,
That is the other we look for, pointing to Philocles, Seize upon him; and for
the rest, you may if you please be secure, for there is no harm intended
toward you.

But Prince Philocles being of too great a courage so tamely to yield himself,
stood upon his guard; and the first that advanced to lay hold of him, he
encountered so luckily with the point of his sword beneath his arms, that
receiving a mortal wound in the belly, he fell dead from his horse; and the
Prince at the same instant seizing upon the reins, with a mavelous activity
leapt into the saddle; when immediately the whole Troop having surrounded him,
one crying out, Yield thy self and thou shall have quarter, those words
animated him with such a fury, that he soon stopped his speech that uttered them
with a fatal thrust, which entering in at his mouth pierced him quite through
the throat: Then seeking to disengage himself from amongst them, and finding
one, who was the chief of the party, had fast hold of his bridle, with one
mighty blow he cut off both his hands, and so having freed himself wheeled
about to gain advantage for a second encounter.

These more then actions of a man, seeing two of their men killed, and their
Commander in such a condition, so daunted the rest, that they began to think of
their defense; but perceiving that Synesius and Lysander having possessed
themselves of the weapons of their slain Companions came likewise to assault
them, one taking their hurt man behind him, they immediately set spurs to their
horses, and with all the speed they could make fled toward a great Wood about
five hundred paces distant, not far from the Park-gate.

Philocles eager of an absolute victory, pursued them close: Synesius and
Lysander being on foot, could not accompany him otherwise then with their eyes,
which notwithstanding all their manhood were even ready to overflow with tears,
when they perceived it was impossible for them to give any assistance to that
gallant Prince, who being near the Wood, there issued out of the shelter
thereof a body of about a hundred horse, which having on a sudden hemmed him on
every side, immediately marched away quite out of their sight.

This unexpected surprisal was such an infinite affliction to the noble
Synesius, that notwithstanding the great resolution which in all accidents ever
preserved him in an equal temper, he could not forbear to break out into most
grievous complaints, that the hospitality of his house should against all the
laws of civility be so barbarously violated; and Lysander was no less sensible
of the Princes misfortune: But having both been Soldiers, they very well knew
that such accidents were the ordinary effects of war; and therefore returned
toward the house, with a resolution to make all the force they could and
immediately to pursue after them. But as they were going down the hill, they
perceived four or five horsemen spuring up toward them, which were Nicander
with some other of the domestics; who told his Lord, That he and Cleanthes
walking in the Park without any weapons, they were on a sudden set upon by a
party of half a dozen horse, and that not being in a posture to make any
defense, they had seized upon Cleanthes and carried him away with them;
wherefore his intent was to follow the same rout they had taken, and if it were
possible to deliver him out of their hands.

No, no, replied Synesius, it is too late: But immediately return; and whilst
some make ready all the horse in my own stables, let others try what force they
can raise in the village, for we have present occasion to use all our friends.

Nicander not staying to reply, presently returned; and by that time Synesius
entered into the Court, the allarum which was given had brought together a great
number of Country People, who without asking the cause were ready to hazard
themselves upon any design, and nothing seemed more irksom to them then delay
of action. Nevertheless he declared to them in short the reason of their
assembling; and having called for his Arms, desired such as were sensible of
the affront he had received, to assist him in the just vindication of his
honor: To which all expressed a wonderful readiness, professing to live and
die with him; and Lysander having visited Prince Demetrius, yet with a great
caution that he should not acquaint him with any thing that had passed, would
needs accompany him in the action; but Elentherius was left behind with order
to arm all the Mariners and Seamen, that had suffered shipwreck, to defend the
house, if occasion should be, from any sudden assault.

They marched about two leagues upon the same rout which they imagined the
other took, without hearing any news of them; but at last met a poor Peasant,
who being asked whether he had not seen such a troop, replied yes too lately,
for they had by force taken away his horse to mount one of their companions,
and that about a quarter of a league thence, in the valley, lay their main
body, consisting of fiveteen hundred horse, and that when they joined they made
great shoutings and acclamations of joy, as in token of some notable success.

Synesius and Lysander easily conjectured the cause of their rejoicing, but
were very much troubled at the report of their number; and the Country People,
though before their coming forth they were so hot and defied all the world,
presently upon this news began to face about; yet at Synesius entreaty were
content to make a stand, till himself with Lysander and some others went to the
top of the hill to discover their strength; and finding it rather more then
less then was reported, besides that they knew it would be impossible to make
the men advance, they saw indeed it would be but a vain attempt to pursue them
any further; and therefore with many thanks dismissing the peasants to their
several habitations, he with Lysander and his domestics, though with sorrowful
hearts, returned toward his own house.

But when they were within sight of the Park-wall, a little on the right hand,
behind a Wood, they heard a great clashing of weapons and arms: wherefore moved
with curiosity to know what should be the occasion thereof, Synesius spuring
his horse, took a path that led directly to the place from whence the noise
came, where he beheld a Knight in black Arms excellently well mounted, that
seemed to perform more then humane actions: For of a dozen that had attacqued
him, four lay already dead upon the ground; and he with the help only of his
Squire, who having had his horse newly killed under him fought on foot, with
admirable valor and address defended himself against the rest, yet so wounded
in several places, that through the loss of blood it was impossible they should
have held out long against so great a disadvantage: but at the same instant
that Synesius came in, having recollected all his strength, he charged the
foremost with such a mighty force upon the head, that his helmet flew off, and
then redoubling the blow, separated his head from his shoulders: which struck
so great an admiration into Synesius, that he could not forbear to cry out,
Sir, I perceive your own valor is enough to protect you against a multitude of
enemies; but the baseness of these appears such, that they deserve not to fall
by your hands; thereupon giving one of them such a wound upon the right arm,
that his sword fell to the ground; and by this time Lysander with the rest
being come up to them, finding it in vain any longer to persist in their
attempt, they sought to preserve themselves by flight, which was no difficult
matter, for there was not any took care to pursue after them, believing their
own fears would carry them far enough from attempting any new mischief.

But the stranger Knight finding himself disencumbered of his enemies, lighted
immediately from his horse, which he delivered to his Squire; and Synesius at
the same time doing the like, they embraced each other with great sentiments of
joy, the one that he had been so fortunate to succor so undaunted a Cavalier,
and the other in the encounter of so generous a Friend.

But the Knight breaking silence first, said, Sir, I know not who you are that
have thus obliged me; but I am sure your courtesy has preserved my life from
the barbarous attempt of these bloody villains; which I shall never hereafter
account my own, since in gratitude you ought to dispose of it.

To which Synesius replied, That the Gods being sensible of his late
sufferings, had blessed him with this occasion to perform a service to a person
of so much apparent merit; and though he feared the assistance he had given
him, in it self unconsiderable, might be a detraction to his own valor, by
which alone he would undoubtedly have forced his adversaries to have paid the
forfeiture of so vile a treachery with the effusion of their dearest blood, yet
he beseeched him that he would make a favorable construction of his
intentions, and in token thereof (putting up his own beaver) fo far to honor
him, that he might know his face, whose virtue he so much admired.

Whereupon the Knight thinking it discourteous not to satisfy his request,
having unlaced his helmet, discovered such a majestic beauty, that they all
thought they never had beheld any equal to it, though Synesius who was no less
ravished then the rest, supposed the air of his countenance was not altogether
unknown to him; yet not calling any thing perfectly to mind that might avow
such an imagination, he only looked upon him as the perfection of all the sex:
His eyes, when he fixed them seriously, commanding an awful reverence in all
the assistants; and when he smiled a little, infusing a kind of cheerfulness
into their hearts.

He was not above eighteen years of age, yet of the just stature of the most
accomplished men; his hair of so perfect a black, that for color and luster
nothing could be compared to it but Jet; which hanging in great curls below his
shoulders, as the wind blew it before his face, appeared like a cloud envying
the glory of the sun; and his face which was full and round, cast such
resplendeut rays through that cloud, that it even dazeled the eyes of the
beholders; and all together framed such a royal meine, that both knees and
hearts were ready to bow at his devotion. And though Synesius still lamented
the ill fortune of Prince Philocles, yet he could not but applaud his own,
which had ministered such an opportunity to offer his service to this stranger.
Therefore with great respect addressing his speech to him, he besought him that
he would be pleased, though he could no way merit so great an honor, that in
regard of himself, having some wounds upon him, which perhaps might require the
assistance of a Surgeon, for the present to repose himself at his house,
whither he should not presume to invite him, but that he was assured he had one
there that was esteemed the most skillful Operator in the whole kingdom.

The Knight finding his condition required such a one, kindly accepted his
offer; and mounting again on hors-back, having given Nicander's to the Squire,
they soon arrived at Synesius house, which was not above half a league from
that place; where having conducted the Knight to Philocles appartement, and
called for Cassianus, who was a most excellent Chyrurgion as well as a
Physician. All retiring out of the room except the Squire and some few
attendants, he was presently laid into his bed; and Cassianus having searched
his wounds, found none of them dangerous, and but one of any consequence, which
was a deep c^t upon the fleshy part of his left arm: To which having applied
such remedies as were necessary, and by reason of his loss of blood ordained
him only some comfortable Cordial for that night, would have left him to his
rest; but the Knight would not let him depart until he had, in his presence,
first performed the same office to his Squire, who had, besides a great hurt on
the head, a deep wound on his left side under the heart, which raised some
apprehensions of danger; and the Knight perceiving as much; caused a pallat to
be made for him in his own chamber, his life being so dear to him, that he
would not trust the preservation thereof to any but himself.

It was now well advanced in the night, and Cassianus not permitting Synesius
to visit any of his patients, assuring him that Demetrius reposed, and that the
other had need of nothing more then the rest, supper was called for, of which
both they and Lysander fed but very sparingly, being full of thoughts both for
what was become of Philocles, and who this Stranger should be that was so
barbarously assaulted by such an unequal number. But committing the care of the
one to the Gods, and doubting not in a short time to satisfy their curiosities
concerning the other, for that night they retired to their several rests; only
Synesius earnestly entreated Lysander, that he would not acquaint the Prince
with the misfortune befallen to Philocles, lest so sad a mischance should cause
an augmentation of his fever.

End of the first Book.
THEOPHANIA.
BOOK II.
TEmperate nights in hot seasons afford gentle repose to quiet minds: But
Synesius and his guests were so distracted with various thoughts, that they
little enjoyed the benefit thereof.

Himself calling to remembrance the several accidents that had befallen in so
short a time, could not but make strange conjectures of the event: and the
violence offered to Philocles was no small affliction; but above all, his
imagination wrought most upon the adventure of the strange Knight; for
sometimes he conceived he perfectly knew him, and then again was as far from
that conceit, as from the remembrance where that knowledge should begin.

On the other side Demetrius, not heeding his disease, languished in the hopes
of a future happiness, embracing a shadow instead of a substance, and
sacrificing an ocean of tears to a Picture that was insensible of his
complaints.

But the Knight suffered agonies too great for any breast to contain but his,
that was fortified with so much virtue: Yet that virtue was so violently
assaulted with vehement passions, that the force thereof sometimes transported
him into most bitter complaints; and at the time knowing none were near but his
faithful Squire Eruillius, he brake out in this manner!

Wretch that thou art! were thou only made great, to be exposed to the greatest
of all miseries? Have the Gods that favored thy birth with so much happiness,
so soon forsaken thee? Or else to show the infiniteness of their power, made
such a sudden change in thy condition? Yet if they remain just, why have they
chosen thee for a subject of their anger, that have scarce lived days enough to
commit sins answerable to their punishments? Or if the guilt lie in our family,
and through a secret providence vengeance were reserved only to these times,
have not the sufferings of my Royal parents yet satisfied your wrath? Will you
still persecute them, and be nothing merciful to me? Or if by destiny I were
involved in the same fate, is it not enough that my infancy was exposed to all
the barbarisms of a cruel war? That my daily passtimes were interrupted with
mournful spectacles of the blood and slaughter of my dearest friends? That I
could never advance any but to certain ruin? And that those who were born to
be my Subjects, use all manner of stratagems and force for my destruction? But
to add to all these, and at once to cut off all possibilities of a future
happiness, have you likewise deprived me of the divine Theophania? Heap
afflictions upon my parents; deprive them of their Empire, and me of my
succession; destroy my friends; let the designs of the people prevail against
me; and besides those at home, raise up foreign Nations to be my enemies, so
you restore to me again that innocent Virgin. Let me enjoy her, and though the
whole world oppose me, I shall not doubt to vanquish their malice. We were in
our infancy bred together; and nothing could have separated us but a g^^eral
ruin; and whenever we meet again* it will I doub* not bring a general ruin
to all our adversaries.

Oh Theophania, if thou be yet in the world, why do thou not hear my
complaints? and hearing them, find some means or other to afford me relief? Or
if thou art retired to the mansion of the Gods, why do thou not, by thy
intercession, procure my deliverance from such a world of miseries? But I am
assured thou live; for otherwise my soul has such a sympathy with thine,
that it could not long remain behind: besides, immediately after thy birth, the
Oracle declared to thy Nurse, who was curious to enquire after thy fate, that
thou should live to be the mother of many Kings; and if it were not for this
assurance, I would with my own hands soon release it out of this vild prison, I
would tear off these bands and swathes, and not suffer so many plasters and
medicines only to prolong a miserable life.

Yes, yes, Thou live, Theophania, and Alexandro lives to be thy Champion, who
will not leave any part of the habitable world unsought for thee, and no co^ner
or desert of the earth shall conceal thee from him, but in despite of all
opposition he will at length place thee by him upon the Imperial throne of this
Island, where we will triumph over the persecutors of Princes, and the Kings
that descend from us shall remain a perpetual terror to their posterity.

Ervillius, who besides the pain of his wounds, bore so great a part in his
Masters sufferings, that he enjoyed but little rest, plainly overheard all that
he said; yet knowing that the best way to assuage his passion, was, not to
interrupt the course thereof, remained silent; and Alexandro, after infinite
transportations both of grief and anger, his spirits being at length wasted,
sleep seized upon his senses, giving some intermission to the anguish of his
mind, and the cool distillations of the morning which then began to appear,
yielding a general refreshment to men's bodies, Ervillius likewise fell into a
sound repose.

But if waking Alexandro endured all the torments of an afflicted mind,
sleeping he enjoyed all the pleasures that imagination could afford: For, the
Idea of her whom his heart adored, appeared to him in a more pefect shape then
ever he had beheld her, and with a pleasing countenance approached near to him,
holding in her right hand a naked sword, and delivering it to him, said, The
Gods, Alexandro, have destined me to be thine; and though I am now detained
from thee by the cruel persecutors both of my life and honor, with this thou
must make thy way to me through a multitude of enemies.

Whereupon immediately awaking, and having seized upon his own sword which
stood ever ready drawn at his bedside, seeing it in his hand, he believed it
more then a dream, and began to cry out, Yes my Theophania, with this I will
force my way to thee, and through a sea of our enemies blood swim to thy
embraces.

But as he uttered these speeches, his ears being stricken as from the next
room with the heavenly sound of a most excellent harmonious voice, which he
believed to be the very same of his Theophania, he began to be confirmed in the
reality of the appa^ition; and lying quietly down again upon his pillow as in a
trance, was exceeding attentive, when to the ravishing touch of a Lute, with
wonderful admiration he heard these ensuing words.

Great Jove, in thee all power does rest
To make men wretched, or else blessed;
But in our selves it does remain
Our lives unspotted to maintain,
And never yet a virtuous mind
Though kingdoms have, has ere declined.
Then if my Love do live,
To him this comfort give,
That whilst our lives and hearts are pure
Midst all our foes we are still secure.
This ended, he lay still a while with his cheeks all bathed in tears; then
gently raising himself, opened his arms to embrace her whom his fancy
represented to him in the chief perfection of her beauty; but after he had
recollected himself, finding he embraced nothing but empty air, and that it was
only a mere illusion, he burst out again into these bitter exclamations.

Oh ye divine Powers! is the wretched Alexandro at length become your sport,
that you thus delude his miseries with vain imaginations? Either direct me to a
real fruition of her presence, or else in compassion free me from this
languishing life, and armed with all your thunder at once destroy me in an
instant.

These last words proceeded from him with such a vehement shril voice, that
Ervillius being wakened therewith, though with some difficulty, by reason of
his wounds, rise to comfort him. But when he came to the bedside, and saw such
a strange alteration in his countenance, that he was scarcely to be known; his
eyes, at so sad an object, overslowing with tears, Oh Prince, said he, will you
thus by an obstinate perseverance in your griefs, destroy both your self, and
all your hopes? Can the virtue of Alexandro so much fail as to doubt of the
protection of the Gods, who so lately defended him from the fury of his
enemies? Are not those bands and swathes testimonies against you of the care
they have of your preservation? And your heart, if it be not at defiance with
heaven, must it not needs confess it was providence guided the sword which made
this wound in your arm, that otherwise might with more ease have clest that
asunder.

Alas my dear Ervillius, replied the Prince, how cunningly do thou argee, to
render me impious against those Divinities, which thou think I do not with
reverence enough adore?

The Gods lay afflictions upon men, to make them sensible of their displeasure;
and if they slight their punishments, think they contemn their power.

Thou have been a constant witness of all my sufferings; and if thou can not
deny they are beyond all examples of forms ages, thou must needs confess my
griefs ought to be so too, or else they come short of that sense which in pi^ty
I ought to have of them.

But suppose my complaints have hitherto exceeded a mean, there are no
expressions answerable to the present pangs I endure.

The divine Theophania, through a charitable commiseration of my sufferings,
came herself to encourage me to a generous fortitude, and on a sudden she was
ravished again out of my sight.

I saw her here before me, she spoke to me, she directed me what I was to do,
and with her heavenly voice raised my soul into such an ecstasy of joy, that I
forgot all my former sufferings, but by the deprivation of that blessed object
am now become far more miserable then ever.

Whereupon sighs stoping his speech, after he had lain a good while silent, at
length a torrent of tears issuing from his eyes, he remained such a spectacle
of sorrow, as would have moved the most obdurate heart to pity his condition;
much more the gentle Ervillius who participated so much of his grief: For, all
his former passionate transportations, to him, that was acquainted with them,
seemed only the effects of an afflicted mind; but this was so transcendent,
that it appeared little less then the extravagancie of a broken and disjointed
understanding. Wherefore casting a pitiful regard upon him, and lifting up
his eyes and hands to heaven, as if at the same instant his heart had broke,
sunk down breathless upon the bed. Which the Prince perceiving, and that the
life so precious to him was ready to expire, he recollected himself from that
profound trance, and endeavored to give him all the assistance that he could;
which doubtless had proved altogether vain, if immediately thereupon Cassianus,
thinking it time to open their wounds, had not by chance entered into the
chamber.

But he was not a little surprised to find them in such a posture: Nevertheless
presently calling the attendants to assist him, he laid Ervillius again upon his
own bed, and giving him a little Cordial, which he ever had ready for all
occasions, soon brought him to himself again; and then whilst he had a little
recovered his spirits, approaching to the Prince, by the motion of his pulse,
conceived him to be possessed with a high fever; but by that time he had
dressed his wounds, the violence thereof was so much abated, that it appeared
plainly to have proceeded from some other cause; wherefore without difficulty
he permitted him, having thrown a nightgown over his shoulders, to rise,
whilst Ervillius wound was opened, which he presently assured him was not at
all dangerous in it self, though his fever through some ill accident were a
little increased. Which was such pleasing news to Alexandro, that he returned
to his bed with so much satisfaction, that if Synesius and Lysander thinking it
their duty, had not come to visit him, he might perhaps have refreshed himself
with a little rest, after those violent agitations which he had suffered in the
night. But the presence of that person from whom he had received so late an
obligation was so grateful to him, that for the present he was diverted from
all other thoughts, but how to make an acknowledgment equal to the benefit he
had received.

On the other side, Synesius, who though he surpassed all men in a general
knowledge, and was likewise a most perfect Cavalier, yet in this encounter he
was stricken with such an awe, that he could neither conceive expressions
suitable, as he thought, to the person to whom they were to be addressed, nor
yet express those conceptions which his heart prompted him to utter. Wherefore
with great respect approaching to the bedside, as Alexandro put forth his arms
to embrace him, he with wonderful submission kissed his hand; and then having
fixed his eyes upon him said, Sir, in beholding you methinks I see something so
far above me, that I am almost ready to pay you the same reverence that I would
pay the Gods; but then I confess there is something in your countenance so
familiar to my knowledge, that it inwardly checks those inclinations: Yet not
being able to make any certain conjecture, when I consider your courage, and
beauty, the rays of majesty that encompass you, and the actions which I have
seen you perform, my Genius gives me an assurance that you have divinity about
your person, and says, Synesius, thy life and fortunes are all too little to
sacrifice to his service whom thou have now the honor to harbor in thy house.

Alexandro starting a little at that name, with a modest blush replied, Noble
Synesius, if I were happy in the least of those perfections which you are
pleased to attribute to me, I should perchance think the life you have
preserved a fit Present for a person to whom I stand engaged upon so great an
account: however I shall never fail in a due acknowledgment of those courtesies
I have received from you, and hope you will never find a cause to repent that
you have placed them upon so unworthy a subject.

Whereupon Cassianus, who whilst they were in discourse had slipped out of the
room to give a visit to Prince Demetrius, came smiling to Alexandro, and said,
Sir, by what I had heard before I admired your valor, but now by experience I
must applaud your skill in my own art, and, which those of our profession
seldom do, yield to you as a much better Physician then my self.

The Prince not conceiving what he meant, with a pleased countenance answered,
that he was as far from knowing any such good quality in himself, as from
avowing the other. It may be so, Sir, replied Cassianus; yet for ought I can
perceive, notwithstanding the report these Gentlemen have made of your actions,
you may with more ease recover a thousand men that are sick to their health,
then kill one of your enemies; for that I evidently see is not without some
expense of your own blood, but the mention of you only I find works miraculous
cures.

Whereupon the Prince desiring him to explain his meaning, he began in a more
serious manner to tell him, that a stranger who through many sufferings at sea
had been seized with such a violent fever, that he believed many days must
have passed before it was possible he should have been able to quit his bed, at
the relation which Lysander had made of his magnanimous actions, was
transported with such a passion to see the person that was master of so much
virtue, that having quite forgoten his disease, no persuasions almost could
detein him from coming to have the honor to kiss his hands; and though he
could not truly say it was very safe for him to go out of his chamber, yet he
absolutely was of opinion that it was far less dangerous then to debar him of a
thing which with such ardencie he desired.

Oh said Alexandro, smiling, I perceive it is not any thing in me, but Lysander
who has wrought the miracle; and indeed it is little Iess then a miracle, that
so mean a subject should furnish matter for a discourse of such advantage to
the author: but since his eloquence is so powerful, I could wish it were
employed amongst my enemies, for by the effects I easily suppose it would avail
me more then an Army; and it is much more glorious by the force of words only
to conquer men's affections; then by the sword and violence to triumph over
their wills.

Sir, replied Lysander, my life is an unworthy offering with devotion dedicated
to your service; and though I am conscious of my own defects, yet I very well
know that to a good subject Eloquence is as necessary a consequence, as harmony
from an excellent Lute well tuned, though touched by an ordinary master:
Nevertheless as those who have not a musical ear are not affected with the
sound thereof, no more can any but generous spirits be transported with the
relation of heroical actions.

But the admirable sympathic which we see between two instruments set to the
same note, that if you touch the strings of the one, the others will apparently
move, the same is naturally between virtuous minds.

Your selves therefore contain within your selves the cause of this wonder; and
if either resist those motions which invite to a mutual band of amity betwixt
you, that party must needs confess he enclines to a discord, and for the
present does a little fail of his virtue; which defect I dare not suppose on
your side, in whose every part there is such a perfect harmony with the rest;
and of the other you have heard with what earnestness he runs to your embraces.

Neglect not then the proffered friendship of a stranger, which I will presume
to say, if you knew some passages of his life, you would esteem worthy of your
acceptance; and though he that says so has a near relation to him, yet he is
so far from flattery, that he dares avow even to your self, that he no less
boasts that relation, then he admires your virtue.

Having thus spoken, Alexandro made only this answer; That being bred a
Soldier, he was so unaccustomed to such Courtships, that he knew not what
reply to make to his civil expressions; and though he had many imperfections,
yet to show how ready he was to embrace the friendship of virtuous persons, he
would presently prepare himself, if he might be permitted, to give his friend a
visit. To which Synesius and Lysander, knowing with what impatience the Prince
desired to see him, and that it would be dangerous for him to expose himself to
the air, though unwillingly, seemed to consent; and whilst he put on his
clothes, withdrawing themselves to Ervillius his bed, gave him a kind of
particular visit; and Cassianus, to prevent Demetrius lest he should rise, went
to entertain him in the mean while with discourse.

But Alexandro, who used little curiosity in adorning himself, made them not
attend long; for being instantly ready, he put only a scarf about his neck to
support his arm, and desired they would conduct him to the strangers lodging;
who as they entered into the chamber, notwithstanding all the resistance
Cassianus could make, would have risen out of his bed; yet perceiving company
enter, he lay down again: But when he saw Alexandro, who presently went to
embrace him, instead of returning that civility, all his senses were on a
sudden seized with so strange a stupidity, that falling backwards upon his
pillow, he fixed his eyes upon him with such a ghastly countenance, that they
all thought he was at the same instant yielding up the ghost.

Whereupon the Prince, turning about to Lysander, cried out, Is this sympathy,
that produces such horried effects! Oh Lysander, now confess thy error; and
that he whom thou would have flattered into a belief that he was more then
man, is the vilest of all creatures, that only by his presence has brought
this direful calamity upon thy friend.

But whilst he was speaking, Demetrius by degrees began to move his eyes; and
raising his body, cried out, Oh let me for ever gaze upon that glorious object!
Some heavenly Deity in commiseration of the languishing Demetrius has assumed
that form, to restore him to a perfect happiness. When Alexandro once more
approaching toward him, before he could speak, he proceeded; Disdain not,
divine creature, a sacrifice of that heart which has been so long devoted to
thy service: Thy presence has infused into me a new soul, and I already feel
such an overflowing joy, that one pleasing look will enable me not only to
overcome this trivial sickness, but to vanquish even death it self.

But Alexandro was so far from showing any content in his looks, that on the
contrary finding what Lysander had said too true, he had such a sympathy with
him in his sufferings, that his cheeks were all b^dewed with tears, to see so
gallant a Youth so miserably oppressed, as he conceived, with the violence of
his disease, believing all those strange expressions to be the extravagant
ravings of a mortal fever.

Nevertheless desiring to pacify him a little, if it were possible, he could
not forbear to reply, Sir, whatsoever represents it self to your imagination, I
suppose you do not know me; for till this hour to my remembrance I never had
the happiness to see you, if it may be called a happiness to see one whom I
have such strong inclinations to serve in so ill a condition.

An ill condition, said Demetrius, when I hear such pleasing language from (the
divine Mariana, he was about to say, but recollecting himself a little, after a
short pause he continued) one whose very shape I am ready to adore, and whose
virtue, by the relation I had heard of his glorious exploits, before I had the
honor to see him, I admired, though now I do not at all wonder you should with
your sword vanquish a few barbarous Assassins; for you strangely resemble, if
you are not the same, a person, whose least regards are capable to subdue and
triumph over whole Nations.

There was still such a confusion in his speech, but withal such a connection,
that Alexandro nor the rest could not tell what judgment to make thereof, yet
finding him much more composed, he began to comfort him in this manner.

Noble Knight, I believe some providence has directed me to this place, where
I have met a Cavalier of such generous sentiments; and though there be nothing
really in me worthy of your esteem, yet if I bear any resemblance that may
render my service grateful to you, I shall esteem this a most happy encounter;
for you seem endued with all those perfections of a man, to whom I would
willingly and with ambition give the name of Friend.

I take you at your word, replied Demetrius; and if you repent not your
courteous offers, as ordinary civilities that you pass indifferently upon all,
which I will not imagine, let me embrace that person whose friendship I would
have purchased with my dearest blood.

Whereupon they flew into each others arms with such a mutual concurrence of
affection, that they seemed to breath their souls into each other bosoms. At
which sight the standers by were moved with such a tenderness, that they could
not refrain from tears; and the two Princes glorying in the acquisitions of
their several virtues, by the cheerfulness of their countenances declared the
inward content of their minds.

Nevertheless on both sides there was something wanting to accomplish their
felicity. The one, though his new friend spoke the language perfectly, yet
perceiving him to be a stranger, and by all appearances of eminent condition,
infinitely desired to be perfectly informed both of his birth and country. And
the other, the more he considered, the more still fancying within himself a
resemblance to his souls Idol, the beautiful Mariana, could not longer have
concealed his passion to know more particularly the owner of those rare
perfections, if Alexandro preventing him, upon a sign Cassianus made, lest his
spirits should suffer too much agitation, had not at the same instant began to
take his leave of him for the present: But as he was going away, by chance
saying, that there was nothing he desired more then a confirmation of their
friendship by a better acquaintance; Demetrius taking hold thereof, and
thinking it would conduce to his own satisfaction in the same kind, replied,
That though his life afforded nothing remarkable, or worthy of his knowledge,
yet he would willingly acquaint him not only with every particular passage
thereof, but even with the most secret thoughts of his heart.

Alexandro answered, Though he meant not then to have made that request, yet he
embraced his offer as an exceeding obligation; and that when the Doctor should
think it might be without prejudice of his health, he would challenge him of
his promise.

Whereupon Cassianus interposing, earnestly desired he would finish the three
days with repose, before he strained himself too much either with discourse,
or any other motion: Which being seconded by the entreaties of Alexandro, he
promised that though he was then assured of his health, and that nothing could
endanger it more then such a confinement from his presence, yet to show an
absolute obedience to his will, he would for the present submit to the
Physicians: And to make the way more clear to compass his own desires,
pretending it would put him to the blush to recount things so inconsiderable of
himself, desired whilst he was under this restraint, that he would take the
relation from Lysander. Which being agreed to on all sides, after a multitude
of embraces, and infinite protestations of an eternal friendship, Alexandro
attended by Synesius and the rest, retired again to his own appartement, where
they found Ervillius, having in their absence taken a little rest, in an
apparent disposition of amendment.

Prince Demetrius being thus left to himself, his fancy began to work upon a
thousand several imaginations; and immediately taking the Tablet out of his
bosom, when he had opened it, considering the several parts of that visage
which was then before him, and calling to mind those of Alexandro's after a
strict survey of every lineament and feature, the complexion and proportion, he
could observe no other difference, but that the hair was not so perfectly
black, the symetry of the face not altogether so round, and the eyes, though of
equal majesty, more inclined to sweetness; yet such an admirable resemblance in
every part, that what he thought amiable in the one, he admired as excellent in
the other.

The one was the object of his affection, the other of his emulation; to the
one he dedicated a pure flame of chaste love, to the other a loyal breast full
of friendly inclinations, and to both an entire submission of his heart, where
they reigned as victorious conquerors over all the faculties of his soul, yet
their several Empires causing no civil dissentions in his breast.

On the contrary he enjoyed such an absolute peace of mind for the present,
that through the transportations thereof he fell into a gentle repose, which so
refreshed his spirits, that Alexandro proved indeed the Physician which
restored him to his perfect health.

In the mean while Synesius having commanded dinner to be prepared, caused
Alexandro to be served alone in his Ante-chamber, yet he forced him by many
entreaties to sit with him, whilst Lysander, impatient to know his Princes
disposition after the late interview, returned again to his appartement.

There passed not much discourse between them at that time by reason of the
attendants; but dinner being ended, they descended into the garden, where to
avoid the heat, they retired into a square arched room, supported with marble
pillars, and curiously paved with mosaicque work, built on purpose for coolness
at the end of a large Canal, in the midst whereof was a Fountain that by an
artificial conveyance cast forth an abundance of water like small rain, and
caused a pleasing freshness in the air, which rendered the place exceeding
delightful, even when the sun was at the highest.

But before they were entered into any serious talk, Lysander came to them with
news that his Prince was fallen into such a sound sleep, that he thought it was
impossible to wake him. At which Alexandro and Synesius having expressed a
great content, they desired him then, since the time and place were so
convenient, to discharge the injunction that was laid upon him by Demetrius to
communicate to them the passages of his life; which knowing he ought not to
refuse, being seated, he began in this manner.

Continuation of the Story of Prince DEMETRIUS.
YEsterday by the command of the noble Synesius I was entered into this
discourse, when we were by a sudden accident interrupted; but not so far
advanced therein, that I shall need to make any repetition; only I must renew
my request, That the person whose actions I am to relate may not suffer through
my want of expressions; for though I am able to give a faithful account of
every particular passage, yet I cannot set them off with that advantage of
language which should give them their proper luster. However, not to transgress
too much with an apology, I shall without farther circumstance proceed.

The Grecian Emperors having either by conquest or alliance gotten the
possession of many large and spacious dominions, trusting in the vastness of
their own power, so miserably oppressed their subjects with taxes and
insupportable burdens, that they grew weary of their yoke: But above all, the
people inhabiting the Islands and Provinces bordering upon the sea, though they
were not subdued by the sword, but by a marriage with the rightful Princess
thereof annexed to the Imperial crown, suffered such violation both of their
laws and liberties, that being no longer able to support that tyrannical
government, by a general consent they resolved to free themselves from so cruel
a slavery; and having addressed their complaints to the renowned Polidor Prince
of Achaia, chose him for their General, who in compassion undertaking their
protection, by his great valor and wisdom not only delivered them from their
oppressions, but established them a free State, which in short time grew so
mighty, that it stood upon equal terms of defiance with the Emperor himself,
and grew even a terror to all the neighboring Nations. Which great successes
rendered Polidor so beloved and popular, that the people were ready to deliver
up again into his hands that liberty, which with such eagerness they had
pursued; and though he had not the title of King, he enjoyed in effect all the
prerogatives and privileges of Sovereignty. Besides, to show their gratitude,
in case he should dye, they declared his young son Demetrius the Prince my
master, then an Infant, their General.

Thus being in his cradle destined to the war, his Genius so suited to his
destiny, that in his childhood his only passtimes were martial exercises; and
when he had attained to the age of fourteen years, he always accompanied the
Prince his father in the Army, where not withstanding the care and diligence
that was nsed to prevent him, he would many times go out upon occasions, and
performed actions so far above his years, that they were the admiration of
those that were about him.

But lest this forwardness should at some time or other hazard him too far, the
Prince, though he would not absolutely check his inclinations, thought fit to
place some one of trust about his person that might have a care of his
preservation; and though I was not then above nineteen years of age, he was
pleased to repose that confidence in me, believing perhaps that being of noble
birth, and not very much elder then himself, I might the easilier gain upon his
affections as a companion, and by that means have a power to persuade him to
any thing.

Neither was the Prince deceived in his opinion: For I knew so well upon all
occasions to manage his humor, that in a short time I was so much in his
esteem, that he would do nothing either of recreation, or serious without me,
but I could when I pleased with as much ease divert him from any rash design,
as he was apt of himself to engage in any action of honor; and I have been so
happy, that as he grew in years, the affection which he bore me then has still
more increased, insomuch that I have not only been privy to all the actions of
his life, but I believe very few of his thoughts have been concealed from me.

Two Summers passed in this manner, during which time he performed many gallant
exploits upon the enemy, sometimes as a private person, and sometimes as chief
of a considerable party. But the third Prince Polidor thinking it time to make
the early virtue of his son known to the world, entrusted him with the command
of an Army designed for the assistance of Philocles Prince of Thessaly, by the
Emperor dispossessed of his Country: And though Philocles main Army, through a
precipitate haste to fight, were unfortunately defeated before Demetrius could
come to join with him, and himself forced to fly for safety, Hydaspes his
brother, against whose advice he had engaged, having rallied about a thousand
horse of the scattered Troops, before the Enemy was aware passed a river, and
by diligent marching came safe to our Army, bringing himself the first certain
news of his brothers defeat.

This stoped Demetrius intended course, and made him immediately enter into
council what new design to go upon. Some would have continued their march to
find out the Imperial army and to give them battle; but that was thought vain,
because we were far inferior in number, and the Emperor by his late victory
having cleared those parts, was marched to join in person with those Forces
that were already sent against the Persians.

Others proposed to take that advantage to make an inroad into Philocles
Country, and to seize upon some strong places there: But that was rejected,
because if they should take any, they could not spare Forces to man them, and
so by consequence they would presently be lost again.

When Demetrius having with attention heard all, said, No, let us neither
follow an Enemy that marches away from us, nor lose time in taking of places
that cannot be kept. The Emperor not supposing we have an army considerable
enough to annoy his dominions, is gone toward the borders to prevent the
invasion of the Persians by an invasive war; so that the way lies open before
us even to Constantinople the chief City of the Empire; which though perhaps we
shall not take, yet the attempt is glorious, and it is more honor to strike a
terror into the heart, then to wound any other member.

This proposition was generally applauded, not only as the gallantest, but as
the wisest thing that could be undertaken. Wherefore the whole Army, which
consi^ted not of above twenty thousand men, the word being given, immediately
faced about, and by the encouragement of the General made such long marches,
that in a short time, almost as soon as notice could be given of their
approach, they were before the walls of Constantinople.

If nothing were more attempted, Demetrius had already obtained his end; for
his approach struck such a general terror not only into the inhabitants, but
even amongst the Soldiers also, that they were ready to abandon the City, the
Commanders with much difficulty persuading them to make any defense; neither
had they been able to prevail over them, if Theodosia the Empress with her
daughters had not gone from place to place themselves, to see the Ports secured.
Where they saw any forwardness, animating them to the defense of their capital
City, her self and Children, who were committed to their trust; and above all
of their own honors, which would suffer with perpetual infamy, if the sight
only of an inconsiderable Enemy should make them abandon their Country, their
Emperor, who was then hazarding his life for their ^^leties, the dear pledges
of his soul his Children, and the Temples of the Gods to a certain destruction.
On the other side, where they found any neglect, reproaching their vile
cowardice; That if they were not corrupted by the Enemy, they could not so
basely betray the whole Nation; and that if they had but so much the hearts of
men as to show themselves only, the very sight of their numbers would gain the
victory: But since the Gods had deprived the Emperor of his son, they did well
to deliver up his daughters to the mercy of strangers; for even women would
disdain the subjection of so pusillanimous a people, and that it was far more
honor for them to live in perpetual slavery, then to have the dominion of such
treacherous subjects.

These and the like speeches so wrought upon them, that partly through shame,
partly through a sense of honor, they began to stand to their arms, and things
being now in a reasonable posture of defense, she retired with her daughters to
the Palace, where, besides the ordinary guards, all the chief Cavaliers and
young Noblemen of the City assembled themselves for their defense.

In the mean while Demetrius was not unmindful of his condition, That he was
too far engaged in the Enemies country to make any long stay, having so small a
force, lest the passage for his retreat should be cut off; besides the allarum
being once given, the Emperor with his whole power would come upon him. But
perceiving no Sallies to be made out of the City, imagining the true cause
thereof, that his sudden approach had struck them with a panick fear, being
informed by Emilius a principal Officer, who the year before had been prisoner
in Constantinople, of the situation of the place, with the several advenues
and approaches, and that the Palace was a spacious building by it self, on the
one side compassed in by the Sea, on the other separated from the City with
strong walls and towers, and that part which lay exposed to the Campaign very
well fortified in the same manner; The description agreed so in all points with
the several Planes he had seen, that imagining he knew enough thereof, a little
before Sunset calling me to him, he said, Now, Lysander, is the time to make a
trial of our valor, and either to dye gloriously, or to live with eternal fame.

Whereupon communicating to me his whole design, I thought it an undertaking,
though of wonderful hazard, yet nothing impossible; and withal of such
infinite honor, that I could not but applaud the generosity of his resolution.

Wherefore giving presently order that the Soldiers should refresh themselves,
and repose till midnight, he divided the Army into two bodies, the one under
the command of Hydaspes, and the other of Telamon his Lieutenant General,
appointing them at that hour, having left some horse to guard the baggage, to
assault the City in two several places at once; and reserved to himself, for a
particular service, only a thousand selected men, that were the eldest and most
experienced Soldiers, which Emilius and my self chose out of the whole Army.

Things thus disposed, he rid out himself with a small party of horse to view
the walls; and being returned, commanding Emilius and me to draw out those
thousand reserved men apart, coming to the head of them, made a short speech to
this purpose.

Fellow Soldiers, I have from my infancy been bred among you, being in my
cradle destined to be your General; and to show my self worthy of so great an
honor, I would do something worthy of that birth which advanced me to it;
wherefore amongst thousands of others I have made choice of your tried valor
to assist me in an enterprise, which is not more full of danger then of glory,
in which we will be all equal sharers, and if you stand firm to me, both
vanquish the one, and triumph with the other.

Remember only that when I lead you on, I commit my honor into your hands:
therefore whosoever is not a friend to Demetrius honor, let him with leave
depart; and to those who undertake the protection of that, Demetrius here in
the presence of the Gods dedicates both his life and fortunes.

There was none so meanly spirited as to relinquish his General in a personal
occasion; but all cried out with one voice, Demetrius honor is his Soldiers
glory. Wherefore having thanked them for their forwardness, he presently
divided them into two bodies, and giving the conduct of the one to Emilius, led
the other himself, commanding me, as I always did, to accompany him.

The night being very dark, was exceeding favorable to our design; for by the
help thereof, marching with a wonderful silence, we passed quite beyond the
City till we came under the Palace-wals without being discovered by any of
their Sentinels, and lay close there for almost the space of an hour under the
covert of a thick Wood; but the time being come that the assault was to be
given, by reason of the silence of the night, we plainly heard the beating of
the drums, accompanied with a great shout, by which we knew our men were
engaged, who on both sides made a furious onset; and though Telamon's after a
fierce contestation were at length repulsed, Hydaspes showed such an example of
courage to his men, with a pike in his hand, himself first mounting upon the
ladders, that being seconded by Philander and Drusilius, two eminent
Commanders, they forced the Enemy with great slaughter to retire, and possessed
themselves of one of the Towers; which being secured, they advanced,
notwithstanding all resistance, to the gate, and having killed most of the
guards, letting fall the bridge, made an easy entrance for Telamon with all
his Forces.

This gave so hot an allarum, a general cry running through the City, that all
was lost; that the Cavaliers who were in the Palace thinking all secure on that
side, leaving none there but the guards, hasted to the place from whence the
chief allarum came, and so encouraged the Soldiers, that they rallied their
forces, and began to make a strong resistance; but by reason of the darkness
not distinguishing enemies from friends, miserably slew and oppressed one
another: And there was now such a confused cry in the City, that Demetrius
thought the time no longer to be delayed; but having commanded his men to put
their shirts above their arms, himself and the Officers wearing white scarfs,
they began to fasten the ladders in several places, which could not be so done,
but the Sentinels took an allarum; nevertheless Demetrius covering himself with
his shield, went on first himself to the assault, and was followed with such an
unanimous consent of the soldiers, that we were upon the walls almost as soon
as the enemy; yet there we encountered so strong an opposition, that our men
began to fall back: whereupon the Prince crying out to them, Will you thus
betray the honor committed to your trust ^ remembering their promise, they were
animated with such a courage, that they not only possessed themselves of the
walls, but forced the Imperialists to retreat, yet in so good order, that if
Demetrius had not performed actions above the strength of man, we had all
certainly perished; but he made such way with his sword, killing all about him
which made any resistance, that we advanced into a large open place, where our
men had room to exercise their valor, which was so well employed, that diverse
casting down their weapons cried out for mercy, and the rest paid the
forfeiture of their obstinacy with their lives; insomuch that having seized
upon the gates, especially those toward the Sea, and placed strong guards
about them, we became absolute masters of the Palace.

This attempt was so unexpected, and the execution so sudden, that the Empress,
by the information that was given her on all sides, finding into what a
straight she was reduced, and to escape impossible, she took a resolution
suitable to the dignity of so great a Princess; every thing, as we heard since
by certain prisoners, being ordered by her directions: For not to show any
apprehension of danger, having commanded all the gates and doors that led to
her appartement, to be set wide open, she prepared to entertain her sufferings,
or if the worst should happen, even death it self, with as much majesty and
glory, as if she had been to receive the Emperor returning triumphant with all
the spoils of the Persian Monarchy.

On the other side Demetrius, having secured the Ports, though he intended no
violence, meant to show himself as a Conqueror: Therefore giving a strict
command that none upon pain of death should follow him save Emilius and my
self, with two Gentlemen more, he went presently toward the Empress quarter,
whither he was directed by an infinite number of lights that appeared both
before the gate, and in the windows of the Palace, and approaching nearer we
found a guard of Halbardiers, every one with a great white Torch lighted in his
hand, who at first we expected would have made some resistance, but they were
so far from offering any violence, that neither using motion nor speech, they
stood orderly in two ranks from the entry of the gate, through a great hall,
and so up the stairs into another room, as if they had been liveless Statues.

Nevertheless seeing so many armed men, and yet such an open passage, the
Prince made a little stop, as thinking some treachery might be intended: But
then supposing they durst not attempt any such thing, or else having a courage
above all fear, he passed through them into the hall, which was a spacious
arched room, supported with two rows of pillars of white marble, with the walls
and pavement of the same; then ascending a large stair, which was likewise of
white marble, with a rail and balluster of Porphyrie, adorned at the bottom
with two Lions, and on the top with two figures representing Justice and
Fortitude, we entered into another great Hall beautified with Statues round
about it in niches, the rest embellished with marbles of several colors
curiously carved with a large border of Frutage, and the Roof richly gilt and
embossed. Then having the Guards still on each hand of us to the next room, for
they reached no further, we passed through another paved with Mosaique work,
and adorned with the pictures of all the Grecian Emperors, drawn by the most
excellent Masters of their several times, in which were diverse Pages and
Attendants, who seeming to take no notice of us, we went on into another room
that was hanged with Tapestry, besides the rarity of the workmanship richly set
off with gold and silver, which by the reflection of the lights appeared in
great abundance. At the upper end, under a State of wonderful rich Embroidery,
stood a Chair upon an ascent covered with Persian Carpets; and upon seats that
were placed round about the walls, sat diverse persons of several ages, by there
habits and presence appearing to be the most eminent Counselors or Officers of
the Empire; and those which sat uppermost, being very aged, with long beards
as white as snow, bore such a reverend aspect, that if their sad dejected
countenances had not showed them subject to humane passions, they would have
appeared more then mortal. Yet seeing them remain without motion, not so much
as casting an eye upon us, in so profound a silence, I could not, for my part,
but call to mind the strange stories of enchanted Castles which we read of in
Romances.

But as we advanced further, our wonder still increased; for the next Room that
lay open before us, was so richly furnished, that it seemed the wealth of a
whole Nation amassed together in that place; and the company was suitable to
the richness of the furniture; An assembly of Ladies of such rare beauty, and
withal so gloriously apparelled and adorned with jewels, that the whole world
could not afford the like spectacle, though the riches and state of that Court
made it usual there. And this disorder happening before they were retired to
their rest, they were not divested of those ornaments. Nevertheless there was
such a silent sadness amongst them, as at once represented to our
considerations, in the pride of those luxuries, the glory of all earthly
happiness, and the uncertain content those glories afford our minds.

Insomuch that the Prince seized with a kind of admiration, turning the point
of his sword to the ground, made a little stand, looking about to whom he
should address himself; but perceiving that none of them would vouchsafe so
much as the least regard, seeing yet another door open, he boldly ^tept in.

But if before he were seized with admiration, he was now in an instant struck
with an astonishment: If before he saw none but dejected countenances that
seemed to submit to him as a Conqueror, he now beheld such transcendent
beauties, armed with so magnanimous a fortitude, that himself was ready to fall
prostrate at their feet, to crave the pardon of his bold intrusion: For at the
upper end of the room, from the ceeling whereof hung about forty Branches of
Crystal with white Tap^rs, upon an ascent of some half a dozen steps sat the
Empress alone under a State, with an Imperial Crown placed by her upon a
Cushion of Crimson-velvet; and besides those Diamonds in a kind of Coronet upon
her head, having so many Jewels besides of an inestimable value about her, that
with the reflection of the lights her least motion seemed to dart forth flames
of fire.

At a little distance on her right hand but a step lower, sat the young
Princess Mariana, eldest daughter to King Antiochus, who you know upon the
peace made between the two crowns, being sent a child into Greece, became the
contracted wife of Leonides, the Emperors only son, though before the marriage
was consummate he dyed sudenly of an Apoplexy, and at that time she was not
returned back again into Sicily; but, by reason of her widowhood she was then
clothed in a long garment of black after the Grecian fashion, with wide
sleeves that touched the ground, her neck bare, and on her head a light Vail
that shadowed a little her face, but hid no part of it, and without any other
ornaments besides, save only those of nature, with which she was so plentifully
stored, that her beauty was the admiration of the whole Empire.

On the other hand but a step lower then that, and at a farther distance* sat
the Emperors two daughters Doriclea and Clarinda magnificently habited
according to their birth, not being inferior to one another in perfections, and
surpassing all others except only the incomparable Mariana.

The Empress in her countenance expressed a majestic gravity, accompanied with
an undaunted mind; Mariana a cheerful sweetness, as secured by her own beauty
against the violence of fortune; and the two Princesses a noble disdain of
their present condition; but Doriclea a severity inclined to revenge; Clarinda
a mildness apt to pardon her enemies; and all in beholding Demetrius, began to
be so far from apprehending the tyranny of a cruel enemy, that they rather
believed some divine assistance was sent them by the Gods.

On the other side Demetrius viewing their several perfections, especially
those of the accomplished Mariana, began to feel that courage which had never
failed him in so many encounters amidst a multitude of enemies, to yield at the
very first summons of two fair Eyes: yet remembering where he was, and how
little time, perhaps, he had to spare, with great submission approaching to the
degrees; kissed the hem of the Empress garment, and casting such glances upon
Mariana, that she might easily imagine his speech was directed chiefly to her,
said,

Madam, I find the rashness of my youth has precipitated me into an action of
so much violence, that my guilt is little less then theirs, who impiously
assaulted the sacred mansions of the Gods; and if armed with their anger, you
pronounce against me the heavy sentence of your just displeasure, there will
need no mountains, my own afflictions will be enough to overwhelm and press me
down even to the very center of the earth.

Therefore consider, most excellent Princess, looking steadfastly upon
Theodosia, that He who stands here a supplicant is Demetrius the son of Polidor
a professed enemy, who very well knows, that if he should lay desolate this
noble City, and bury in its own ruins the remembrance of this Imperial palace,
the laws of arms and of nations would not only justify the act, but render him
a noble fame to posterity that was the author of so great an exploict.

Then casting his eyes again upon Mariana; Yet I confess there is a divinity
about your person which is above all humane laws; and my valor, since it has
offended you, I account a crime, in expiation whereof I offer my life a
sacrifice, if that may satisfy for so great an offense. Here is my sword,
laying it at her feet, the instrument of my transgression, with which if you
please you may exercise upon this breast that cruelty which you expected from
it.

Mariana either perceiving the conquest her beauty had made, or moved through
her natural mildness, cast a smiling look upon the Prince: But Theodosia, to
whom his speech seemed only addressed, rising from her seat, with a wonderful
gravity replied,

Noble Demetrius, To conquer is the effect of a daring courage, common to
beasts, and men of a savage nature; but such a generosity of mind, is a
particular endowment of the Gods: Against the one I was armed with a resolution
above the malice of fortune; but to the other I submit a willing Captive, and
here deliver up my self, and these Princesses the daughters of the invincible
Andronicus into your power.

I need not exhort you to make a noble use of your victory, but let not your
success make you too secure: Our honors are now in your protection; and be not
less active in the preservation of them, then you were by enthralling our
persons to advance your own fame.

The Soldiers and Inhabitants, though surprised with the terror of a nightly
assault, may yet again, as day appears, make head against your Forces, and in
that confusion both expose this City to the hazard of perishing in its own
flames, and us all to the violences of an incensed enemy: Or if by the chance
of war, or their multitudes they should prevail, be assured, they who have so
basely defended their own and their Countries safety, will exercise a barbarous
tyranny over those they reduce into their power; for Cowards have naturally
cruel inclinations, and it would grieve me more to see so much virtue suffer,
then to see a whole nation of such pusillanimous people led into perpetual
slavery.

Therefore reassume your sword, and consider that Demetrius though environed
with a victorious Army, is less safe in Constantinople, then Theodosia and
these Princesses in the sole protection of the generous Demetrius.

As the Empress was thus speaking, some of the Soldiers, notwithstanding the
command to the contrary, knowing how much both their own safety and the Princes
honor was concerned, came running into the room, giving an allarum that the
enemy attempted the recovery of the Palace, and came on so furiously, that the
men wanting his presence, began to be disheartened, and were no longer able to
withstand the fierceness of the assault.

Wherefore the Prince taking his sword in his hand, said, I must go, Madam,
whither the conservation, as you confess, of your own honor calls me, and armed
with your authority shall soon appease this fury of my enemies. But as he was
going away, the Empress taking a Diamond of an unseen bigness and luster from
her finger, said, You might if you pleased seize upon that, pointing at the
Crown, as the price of your valor, or carry us after you in chains as
witnesses of your conquest; but since you refuse such trophies, and are pleased
that I shall still retain my dignity, being still an Empress, I will enjoin you
to wear this as a testimony of my gratitude.

Which having accepted with great reverence, turning about he cast a
languishing regard upon the Princess Mariana, and immediately hasted to
encourage his men in this unexpected assault; leaving behind him no less an
admiration both of his beauty, youth and person, then of his unparalleled
generosity to the wife and children of his greatest, and so powerful an enemy.

But his return to his Soldiers was so seasonable, that at the same time they
were ready to give way to the assailants, but reanimated with his presence, on
the contrary forced them to retire: Wherefore intending a fair composition, and
an honorable retreat, he sounded a Parley, and went himself to the battlements
to declare his intentions were not to use any farther violence, but without any
the least damage to quit the City. When day beginning to appear, though so as
things were scarcely distinguishable, he perceived by the Ensigns that he was
attacqued by Hydaspes forces: wherefore he only cried out to them, Tell Prince
Hydaspes, who has gallantly forced his way thus far, that Demetrius is
advanced hither to meet him, and will immediately set open the gates to receive
so noble a friend.

Whereupon his voice being known by some of the principal Officers, there was
an unspeakable joy amongst them all, which when they met was expressed by a
general shout and acclamations on either side; and the Princes having embraced,
Demetrius, though his heart returned into the Palace, thinking it necessary for
the preservation of the Army to unite his forces, marched toward the chief
Market place, which Hydaspes told him Telamon had possessed, and that thereupon
he was advanced with three thousand men to attempt the Palace, which they
conceived had still held out.

But as he was marching away, turning about to behold those walls that enclosed
his incomparable Mariana, a Damsel of a most exquisite beauty, having a small
Casket under her arm, in the habit of a slave, came running toward him, and
almost breathless, with her cheeks bathed in tears, prostrating herself at his
feet, besought him by the love he bore to virtue, by the reverence he ought the
Gods, and as he was desirous by their protection to obtain a noble fame, to
take compassion on the sufferings of a distressed Captive, who amongst many
other grievous calamities was at length reduced to an ignominious slavery, and
had no hope of freedom, but by the generosity of so noble a Prince.

Demetrius was not a little surprised at so wonderful an object; for such a
dazeling beauty appeared through that cloud of sorrow, that he thought he never
beheld any thing more excellent, but his most excellent Mariana. Wherefore
raising her gently from the ground, he assured her if the hazard of his dearest
blood could contribute any thing to her repose, she might give an intermission
to her griefs; for when he once understood what way he might afford her relief,
he should not think any enterprise impossible in the assistance of so rare a
creature; and that in the mean while she might rest secure upon his word, that
he would sooner transgress the sacred ordinances of the divine powers, then
suffer any violence to approach her person.

Wherewith seeming a little comforted, she said, Upon that noble pawn I deliver
my self and honor into your protection; and that preserved, dispose of this
miserable life as you please.

Then immediately calling me to him, Here Lysander, said he, I dare trust to
thee my own life, and in that confidence commit to thy care, till these
disorders are a little over, the safeguard of this excellent Maid, whose
preservation I charge thee to be as tender of, as thou would be of mine or
thine own honor.

I confess I was not a little pleased with so worthy a charge: Therefore with
great submission approaching to her, she rested her hand upon my arm, and we
continued our march toward that quarter where Telamon lay with the rest of the
army. But when we came to the market place, we found him engaged in a hot
conflict with the enemy, who when the day approached rallied their forces, and
made a gallant attempt to recover their lost city, and indeed had forced
Telamon to give ground; but when they saw a fresh supply come to him, their
hearts absolutely failed them, and casting away their weapons, they yielded at
discretion to our mercy.

Whereupon Demetrius instantly commanding all actions of hostility to cease,
called for the Governor, who being brought into his presence, he spoke to him
in this manner.

I believe no neglect of yours has caused the surprisal of this noble City;
you appear a person worthy so great a trust as the command of that place which
is the residence of the Empress Theodosia and those excellent Princesses her
daughters; therefore into your hands I deliver it again; there shall no violence
be offered to the inhabitants, nor to any thing that belongs to them: And all
that I require of you is, That you tell Andronicus the Emperor, from Demetrius
the son of Polidor his mortal enemy, that he could as easily and with more
justice have laid desolate this metropolitan City, than he deteins the Country
and patrimonial inheritance of Prince Philocles: but if he continue his
oppression, that we now know the way to Constantinople, and in his own Palace
shall force him to a due surrender, or bury him in the ruins of it.

Then, not suffering any reply, looking back once more upon the Palace, and
sighing to himself the name of Mariana, he immediately gave the word to march;
and having appointed a chariot for the stranger Captive, commanding her to be
attended with all manner of observance, in a short time we arrived at Sparta
the capital City of the United Provinces, where Demetrius was recived with a
general applause and acclamations both by the States and common people, but
especially by Polidor, who gloried more in this one exploict of his son, then
in all the actions of his own life. Insomuch that if being deprived of the
presence of the incomparable Mariana, he had been capable of any content, he
might have enjoyed a perfect felicity; but he was so far from esteeming his
condition happy, that he believed himself the most miserable man living.

Nevertheless his afflictions made him not forget his respects to the stranger
Virgin; but having, according to her desire, placed her in a private condition
with the Queen of Macedon mother to Philocles, who being driven out of her own
country lived there retired, she received from her, being a Lady of
incomparable goodness and humanity toward strangers, such extraordinary
demonstrations of kindness, that though her griefs were so pressing, that they
were not to be forgotten, nevertheless she found some relaxation for them at
the present; yet Demetrius could find no intermission of his own, but on the
contrary by unexpected accidents was so traversed in the designs of his new
affection, that he grew almost desperate of any future happiness.

Lysander had continued his discourse, but that a servant came in haste to give
notice that the Prince being awake called for him, and would not be satisfied
but with his presence. Wherefore Alexandro giving him many thanks for what he
had already related, and expressing an impatience to hear the rest, they all
returned together into the house, and would have visited Demetrius, but that
the Physician entreated them, though he were strangely amended, to forbear till
the next day; and only Lysander, being always about him, was permitted to
enter into the chamber. So that Alexandro passing the rest of the evening alone
with Synesius, he entertained him with such excellent discourse, that he was
wonderfully satisfied with his company; and at length, though it grew late,
very unwillingly parted from him.

End of the Second Book.
THEOPHANIA.
BOOK III.
THough Alexandro were retired to his private chamber, he could not retire from
his griefs: When he was alone, they came pressing upon him in multitudes, and
now brought with them a new companion, the noble sense of Demetrius sufferings
in the languishments of an uncertain affection: but then reflecting upon the
gallantry of his actions, the assured acquisition of so generous a friendship
afforded some little refreshment to his sorrows.

On the other side Demetrius, though he found a perfect intermission of his
fever, his wonder still continued at the height in contemplation of those
admirable objects of his souls chief felicity, those Twins of beauty and
honor, the most beautiful chaste Mariana, and the no less accomplished valiant
Alexandro.

Insomuch that when day was come, having called to him Lysander, who lay in the
same room; Behold, said he, Lysander, the lively representation of all earthly
perfections, the Model of Mariana's beauty, and the Epitome of that noble
Strangers accomplishments; And wonder not it bears so great a resemblance to
both, for such singular excellencies cannot but be of near affinity.

Whereupon, as he was continuing, one knocking softly, interrupted his speech,
and Lysander having opened the door, he was not at all displeased to be so
interrupted when he saw Alexandro enter, who through an impatient desire to
establish their new commenced friendship, having only cast a nightgown about
him, came to his chamber, and without any ceremony approaching to the bedside,
having embraced him, said, Most generous Prince! my inclinations to confirm an
everlasting league of amity between us can no longer comply with these
ceremonious delays of Cassianus: If you are still in that state, as he, perhaps
only to set an esteem upon his art, would have us think, I come to assist you
with my service; or if you find an amendment in your self, to enjoy your
conversation; for to a sick man there is no such comfortable cordial, nor to
one in health any companion more grateful then a perfect friend: and if you
honor me with such an esteem, which I cannot doubt from Demetrius who showed
such an example of generosity to his greatest enemies, I am sure in any
condition I shall be welcome to him.

Welcome, replied the Prince, As glorious victory to a Soldier; As deliverance
from a violent Ravisher to a chaste Virgin; As any noble occasion of action to
a virtuous mind; As the fruition of your own dearest wishes to your self; Or as
one gracious regard, or the heavenly presence of the divine Mariana would be to
the languishing Demetrius.

The report of your valor bred in me an impatient desire to see you: Seeing
you, that valor was so communicative, that at the very first view it infused
into me a vigor to encounter the terrible assaults of death; and now by the
confirmation of your friendship I am restored to such a degree of strength,
that it assures me the victory over that cruel enemy.

Alexandro was about to answer in terms answerable to these high Encomiums: but
Synesius and Cassianus at the same time coming into the room, he had only time
to say, I am glad to be thus happily prevented in a reply that would come as
far short of the zealous intentions of my heart, as my now limited power is of
the vast desires I have to serve you; but let Prince Demetrius rest assured, he
has besides his owh virtues such powerful advocates with the Princess Mariana,
that he cannot be more constant to his friend, then the Gods have ordained him
to be successful in his love. Then kissing him on the cheek, and with a strait
embrace testifying something more of kindness then was yet expressed, he rose
to entertain the company, leaving Demetrius in a strange perplexity to
comprehend the meaning of his ambiguous speeches, for he could not imagine who
should be that happy mediator of his love to his adored Princess.

Nevertheless at that time he had not leisure to let his imagination work; for
Synesius came to congratulate his unexpected amendment, and Cassianus to
persuade him, if it were possible, not to stir that day out of his bed; but all
he could obtain, though assisted by the company, was, that he would not go out
of his chamber, which Alexandro pressed the more earnestly, that he might have
the better opportunity to hear the rest of Lysanders relation: wherefore
desiring him and Synesius to meet him presently in the garden, he returned with
Cassianus to his own appartement, that his wound being dressed he might prepare
himself for that entertainment; and Synesius staying behind, not thinking it
fit any longer to conceal the accident befallen to Philocles, acquainted the
Prince with every particular that had happened, at which he expressed a
wonderful discontent; yet being something appeased by Synesius with the hopes
that they should suddenly have certain news of him, it was agreed amongst them
that no mention thereof should be made to the Stranger. And Lysander having by
this time clothed himself, with Demetrius leave they went immediately
according to their appointment into the garden, where they were no sooner
entered into a shady walk, but in an Arbor close by a pleasant Fountain they
found Alexandro, which being a convenient place, without going any farther they
took their seats, and Lysander proceeded in his discourse.

Continuation of the Story of Prince DEMETRIUS.
I Have already showed the glorious entrance of Demetrius upon this Theater of
the world; but the Scene is already changed, and as you beheld him at
Constantinople victorious amongst his enemies, you must now look upon him as a
submiss Captive paying myriads of tributary sighs and tears to an emperious
Beauty; by his patient sufferance, and constant perseverance, by his many
resolute undertakings and an undaunted resistance to all oppositions, giving
unpatterned testimonies of an incomparable Lover.

After he had received the several congratulations of his friends, and taken
order to dispose his Soldiers into quarters, the visits of ceremony being
past, his first care was, having commanded me only to wait upon him, to give
one in particular to the stranger-Virgin; and entering one morning into her
chamber, he found her sitting by a table, whereon stood a small Casket open
full of Jewels of an infinite price: but she was so far from taking delight in
such a treasure, that on the contrary beholding it, her eyes overflowed with
tears, which trickling apace down her cheeks seemed to outvie in value those
oriental pearls and sparkling diamonds that lay before her, and every
succeeding tear to contend for bigness and luster with the former.

Never was such a spectacle of sorrow, nor ever sorrow which showed so lovely
as in the mansion of that heavenly face, her griefs seeming rather a divine
compassion of humane sufferings, then the cruel oppressors of an afflicted mind
subject to mortal passions.

Wherefore being seized with an awful reverence, he began to retire; but she
having spied him, cried out, Oh generous Prince, she not from the miserablest
creature living; my griefs are not infectious; on the contrary when you know
the cause of them for the present, armed with a noble anger, you will take a
just revenge upon her who has sullied the luster of all your glories.

You undertook my defense, being a desolate stranger; by your charity I enjoy
the protection of this virtuous Queen; and which is above all, you have
preserved my honor inviolate: In recompense whereof I have stained your noble
fame, made you appear a violator of your word, and your whole Army a rude
multitude not subject to warlike discipline For though through an heroic
generosity you not only restored the Empress, and the Princesses her daughters
to their liberty, but at the same time made them a present of their City, with
an entire restitution of the wealth thereof; and though your orders were so
punctually observed by the soldiers, that not any of the inhabitants could
complain of the least loss, nevertheless miserable I, who ought to have obeyed
you more then all the rest, by a fatal misprision, contrary to your express
command, committed a violence in that place which you esteemed most sacred,
even in the Palace it self, from whence I brought that mass of wealth which you
see there before you, belonging as I suppose formerly to young Leonides the
Emperors only son, but by his death in the possession of the most excellent
Princess Mariana, amongst which there is a Tablet enchased with the Characters
of her name, that bears the value of a Princes ransom, but contains within a
far greater treasure, her own picture drawn by that famous Limner Pecorus, who
has so happily encountered every feature and lineament of her face, that
beholding it, I think she herself is present, reproaching the monstrousness of
my crime, which has given occasion of so vile a scandal, that either Demetrius
was not careful of his word, or else his Soldiers through a base avarice
slighting their Generals command, sought rather a prise of wealth then fame:
For none will suppose me guilty of such an act, but rather a part of the prey;
and though you perhaps may contemn so mean a satisfaction as this unworthy
life, yet when the Soldiers shall know how much I have injured your virtue and
their own, their just rage can never be appeased but by my blood, which I shall
willingly offer in expiation of my offense.

Nevertheless I will not be so treacherous to my own innocence, as to
acknowledge a wilful guilt: This is but one amongst infinite other misfortunes,
to which my whole life has been exposed; yet a greater malice of fortune then
any of the rest, that not content to have brought me into the miserable rank of
slaves, she would likewise make me seem to participate of their nature, who
because they are forced to serve, seldom prove faithful.

But the Grecian Admiral who first made me a prisoner was more favorable; for
he, I must ever confess, used me nobly, and took nothing from me but my
liberty; which he would in some measure seem to restore, when at his arrival in
Constantinople he bestowed me upon the Princess Mariana, with whom I remained,
till you by a gallant attempt became master of that City: And though I cannot
but extol the favorable usage I received from the Princess, yet the natural
desire of liberty, and to return into my own country, made me fly to you for
refuge, who by such an unpatterned unparalled generosity had so lately
enfranchised even the Empress herself with all the Royal family, and the
Princess to whom I was a servant.

Wherefore taking the opportunity of the confusion that was then in the Palace,
hasting to my Mistress Cabinet, where none having such free access as my self,
I had hid a small Casket which contained all my poor treasure, through haste,
being in the dark, and both of them of the same size and proportion, I brought
away this instead of my own, which at first, without considering it at all, I
delivered to Lysanders care; at the same time you were pleased to commit to him
likewise the protection of my person, and he by reason of his many employments
having restored it to me again but the last night, I did not till then know the
error of my mistake, by which I have robbed the Princess of all her chiefest
jewels; and though I have left some behind in my own Casket of value
considerable enough, yet she will be no more satisfied with the exchange, then
I am with my self for having committed so great a folly, by which I have not
only offended so gracious a Princess, and left in their place things that I
valued far above my own life, but which more afflicts me, trespassed against
the honor of that person to whom I owe the preservation of my own; and I am so
miserable, that it is not in my power in the least degree to repair the injury,
much less to make a due satisfaction on either side: Therefore laying my life
at your feet, I desire you will be pleased to take these into your disposal,
for of right they belong to you; and it is in your power, by restoring them to
the Princess, both to vindicate your Army from a soul aspersion, and me from
the blame of a premeditated malice.

The Prince was exceeding attentive to this discourse; but at the mention of
Marianas Picture, so transported at once both with a sudden joy, and a
passionate desire to be possessed of that dear jewel of his life, that he could
scarcely forbear to discover the inward inclinations of his heart; yet
containing himself as much as was possible within the bounds of a moderate
temper, replied,

Most excellent Virgin, though both your name and quality lie concealed under
your misfortunes, yet your perfections are so eminent, that they abundantly
testify the excellency of the person to whom they belong: And I am so far
from supposing you have in the least degree injured me, or my soldiers, that
on the contrary I believe they owe their success to your cause, some supreme
power having directed me to lead them on to that enterprise only for your
deliverance: Neither do I imagine any wrong done to the Princess Mariana; for
thus to restore those trifles, is far more justice, then not to have brought
them away.

Therefore I may presume to say, your griefs are unseasonable; unless as our
great Heroes wept when there were no more worlds to conquer, you likewise lament
because it is not in your power to exercise a greater virtue. But remember, his
insatiable desire of honor was imputed to him as an ambition too great for any
mortal creature: And either you must confess your self what indeed you
resemble, a Divinity, or else remaining unsatisfied with the admirable effects
your virtues have already produced, be content to submit to the same censure.

However, since the deteining of those things seems such a burden to your mind,
if you please to trust me with them, I shall not only take care to send them
back, but that your own may be restored to you again: For though I believe the
Princess Mariana infinitely regret your loss, yet I cannot imagine, though it
were in her power, that she would refuse to enfranchise that person, of whom
the Gods seem to have no less a care then of herself; much less keep from you
those Jewels, which a conquering Enemy thought a sacrilege to make his prise.

Whereupon immediately delivering the Casket, she besought him by many
conjurations to obtain a pardon of the Princess for her fugitive slave Irene:
And until she could find a fit opportunity to return into her own Country, that
she might still remain in the same condition; assuring him, that though for
many reasons she desired not to be farther known, yet neither her birth was so
mean, nor her alliance so inconsiderable, that either he needed to shame at, or
repent those charitable offices, which through a generous compassion he used to
an afflicted stranger, by destiny cast into his protection.

No, I can no more, said the Prince, repent those poor services I am able to
render you, then yourself can conceal those excellencies, which require a
strict obedience to all your commands. But the same power you have over others,
exercise, in some degree, upon your self, and suffer not sorrow to tyrannize
over that beauty which has so absolute a dominion over all the world besides.
I would not say I leave you to your griefs, but in a disposition to vanquish
them; at least permit me to hope, that when I have the honor to see you next,
I may congratulate with you for that happy victory.

Whereupon taking his leave, he immediately returned to the Court to his own
appartement; and being retired alone into his Cabinet, you may easily imagine
with what an excess of joy he beheld the Idea of that face which was already so
engraven in his heart, that it was not capable of any other content. But then
considering how he was engaged by promise to part with a Jewel so precious to
him, he began to exclaim against the severe laws of Honor, as injurious to
those of Love: yet not willing to transgress either, his fancy wrought upon a
thousand several inventions how to satisfy both; but finding no better
expedient, at length after some few days respite he resolved, though then
unknown to me, to keep the Picture as in a complement, for he durst not presume
to avow his love, and to send the rest back by Mercurio a Sicilian gentleman of
an approved fidelity, who being of a Nation in league with the Empire,
especially as employed to the Princess Mariana, might without difficulty pass
through the Enemies country. Wherefore having given him sufficient
instructions, he secretly dispatched him away with a Letter, which I have seen
since, and was as I remember to this effect.

Demetrius to the Princess Mariana.
YOur slave Irene by me implores your pardon for her escape, and has sent back
a Casket which through a mistake she brought away with her; yet can never cease
from tears, till you both confirm a grant of her liberty, and a remission of
that unwilling offense, which she still laments as a crime of the highest
nature, but I applaud as a particular favor of the Gods to render me possessor
of a shadow of that Beauty which preserved the Imperial City of Constantinople
from destruction, and redeemed the Empress Theodosia with her daughters from
captivity; for it was not any inherent virtue in the Conquerors, but the
powerful operation of your heavenly eyes, which changed the savage customs of
war to so contrary a proceeding with a professed enemy: Therefore I will
henceforth keep it to preserve me from all future dangers; and unless you wish
his ruin who offers daily sacrifices for your preservation, you (...) not
disdain the wearing of so glorious a favor (...) Captive

Demetrius*


He conceived some hopes, if Marlana answered this (...), he should discover
something of her inclinations, or at le^^t open a way to the farther
declaration of his love. But whilst he pleased himself with these thoughts,
there were countermines a working, which turned his hopes even into despair;
and though he found difficulties enough before, interposed almost
impossibilities to encounter. For Polidor, when he saw he had a son worthy to
succeed him in his honors, not content with a small Principality, his
patrimonial inheritance, nor with the great power he enjoyed in the new
Commonwealth of the Revolted Provinces, as Generalissimo, and chief in all
their Councels; but believing what he had gained with his own sword, by the
same right, of due belonged not to any other, had long entertained a secret
design to bring them likewise into his subjection, and either by a popular
carriage to induce them to a voluntary resignation of their liberty, or else by
a foreign alliance to awe them with his power.

Neither wanted he abettors, even amongst the States themselves, who either
through a grateful consideration of his merit, or else for their own interests,
sought to advance his. But above all, the Princess Salmona his wife, a Lady of
an aspiring mind, yet no less prudent in all her actions, and exceedingly wise
in the management of great affairs, let pass no occasion or opportunity to
encourage him in the attempt; and besides by her compliance, and private
conversation with persons of all degrees, gained no inconsiderable party of
adherents amongst those of most eminent authority.

Insomuch that being now prepared for the yoke, they began by a general accord
to contrive the means with most ease to bring themselves into it.

Some would have it proposed to the people in their several Provinces; Others,
that by degrees the power should be let fall into his hands as it were through
a remisness of the States; Others, that he should make use of the credit he had
with the Army, and having seized upon all the strong places, immediately to
declare himself: But the wiser sort proposed an Alliance first with some
powerful neighboring Prince, and then whatsoever should be attempted
afterward none would dare to resist; but the people, though the name of
Liberty were precious amongst them, yet being much less esteemed then the dear
fruition of their wealth, would rather submit to an easy government, then
expose all to the hazard of a doubtful war. Wherefore the result of their
debates was, that the States in gratitude to Polidor should offer to treat in
their own names with the Nobility of Armenia to bestow their young Queen
Diophanta in marriage upon Prince Demetrius; and to second it with such
advantageous conditions to that Crown, that they should not be easily rejected.

What was thus concluded in their several private Cabals, in a short time
became the public act of a general Assembly; and Polidor finding himself
entreated to accept what with such industry he had labored to procure, began
to think of nothing less then a Crown, or at least the establishment of it in
his son. But Solmona imagined herself already possessed of it; and though she
were endued with a singular wisdom, yet to show she was a woman, and subject to
the passions of that sex, she began to stand upon punctilio's and terms of
competition with the Queen of Macedon, whose greatness of birth, and experience
in the changes of the world, made her nevertheless contemn, or at least not
take notice of those little frailties in a person whose virtues she had ever
loved.

But in the mean while Demetrius was altogether ignorant of these great
contrivances; what intrigues, plottings and stratagems were used to make him a
King, who esteemed it a far greater honor to be a slave, and would not have
changed his fetters for the Empire of the whole world, much less for so
inconsiderable a portion of it as the Armenian Crown. But when by the public
act he perceived how far they had proceeded to his ruin, he armed himself with
a resolution answerable to so great an opposition; and it was not long before
he was put to the trial of his force: For within a few days after Polidor
coming early one morning to his chamber, after the attendants were dismissed,
he began to entertain him with this unwelcom discourse. Demetrius, how dear
thou art to me I cannot better express, then by letting thee know the care I
have ever had of thy advancement.

These people who thou see thus forward to treat a marriage for thee with the
Queen of Armenia, will be as ready when occasion shall serve to offer thee the
sovereignty of these Provinces; but it will be necessary in the first place to
strengthen our selves with this alliance; therefore prepare thy self to be a
Lover, that thou may be a King, and having the possession of one ^rown, soon
become master of another.

Yet you must consider, that though I have with great patience by degrees
ascended to these hopes, there lies now a necessity upon us to go on vigorously
in the prosecution of his enterprise: For our intents are perceived, if not
known, by many who at the present only comply because either they think it most
secure for themselves, or else know not how to avoid it without the hazard of
greater inconveniences both to the private and public: But if they find any
remisness in our proceedings, or that we fail never so little of those supports
upon which we have laid the foundation of our rise, they will quickly take the
advantage of our defects; and having once insinuated into the vulgar how near
they are to the loss of their liberty, easily prevent the like danger for the
future, by removing not only all possibilities of making a second attempt, but
those persons from amongst them, whose greatness they have such cause to
apprehend: For the Emperor being weary of the war, and attacqued on all sides
by other enemies, they may, having once raised these jealousies, when they
please make a peace with him upon any terms; and the peace once confirmed,
under fair pretenses, at once disband the Army, and deprive us of our power.

Therefore we must now either advance forward, or else be sure to retire with
disgrace; and that these very people whose fathers Polidor with his sword
redeemed from slavery, will trample upon his son Demetrius as their vassal.

But by this Match you may establish your power above the reach of their
malice, and bring the whole Nation into an absolute obedience; which otherwise,
when I am dead, will neither want arts nor pretenses to contrive your ruin,
and repose no security in the benefits they have received from me, for they
will as easily forget them, as they did their allegiance to their own natural
Prince.

Commonwealths reverence their Benefactors when they are marble, gracing their
sepulchers and statues with glorious inscriptions to point others the way to
the same honors, but seldom suffer the power to remain long in any one family
that is great, either in birth, or merit; for though they love and cherish
valor and courage, and undertaking spirits, when they are in distress, and
have need of such virtues, yet in times of prosperity and peace they become
their greatest terror.

If Demetrius were less worthy, this State perhaps in gratitude would be
content to let him enjoy the title, which when he was a child, in a complement,
as a thing yet remote, they conferred upon him; but having already seen how
much he dares, they will not dare to trust him with so great a power, unless
their fears make them not dare to deprive him of it.

Since then we are not safe, nor the honor of our family secure, whilst these
Peasants who despise all Nobility, and love nothing but wealth, enjoy their
liberty, to reduce them again to the obedience of a Crown, cannot be called
ambition, or if it be, having so just a motive, it is an ambition without a
crime, and Diaphanta cannot but embrace the love of that Prince who has so
noble an ambition to preserve his own honor.

Demetrius being prepared for such an encounter with a recollected serious
countenance, presently replied; Sir, I am not ignorant, that as I received my
life from you, I was not only born your Subject, but likewise bred a Soldier
under your command, and by those relations am obliged by a triple duty to
render an humble, willing, and strict obedience to all your commands.
Nevertheless having ever showed your self both a singular just Prince, as well
as an admired wise General, and a no less indulgent Father, I conceive you will
permit me the liberty, before I yield an absolute concurrence, to allege some
objections, which perhaps will not be inconsiderable, against the many supposed
advantages of this pretended alliance.

It is chiesty proposed as the only means to cumulate honors upon our family,
and as a strong Rampire, not only to defend it against the malicious assaults
of an insolent ungrateful people, but from thence to batter and destroy that
liberty which otherwise would perhaps in time seek the ruin of its Protectors.

But alas, what honor can it be to the son of the renowned Polidor to borrow
the shadow of a Kingly dignity from a woman, that is herself a mere titulary
Queen? For do not the Nobility* and chief Officers of the Crown, to whose care
she was left during her minority, though she be now of age to assume the
government, still as Guardians usurp the Regal authority; which cannot be
without an aim either to confirm it for ever in themselves, or else by a
marriage to establish it in some of their own families.

Therefore to what intent, unless to procure a disgraceful repulse, should I
direct my addresses to such a Queen, who is so miserably oppressed, that she
has the least voice of all in the disposal of her own affections? Or suppose
you should by a formal Embassy gain the consent of the Nobility, which is very
unlikely, can it be thought probable, that they who contrary to all right
detein the power from the lawful Inheritrix, will by the mediation of a foreign
Allie resign both that and themselves into the hands of a stranger? So
Demetrius who was born to be a Sovereign in his own Country, must sue, and
entreat, and perhaps with much difficulty obtain the honor to be admitted a
Subject to the Subjects of another Nation.

Where are then those specious advantages of aids, and strength, not only to
support the present dignity of our family, but to make an assured passage to
the dominion of the United Provinces? Are they not still in the disposal of the
Armenian Nobility? And it is not likely till they have a desire to divest
themselves of that authority, that they will arm their new made Pupil with a
force to make a conquest of the Peloponesians, that he may the easilier when he
please reduce them to an absolute obedience.

Therefore if my vote, as I am a party of no small interest, might intervene in
the decision of this great affair, I should wholly reject the proposition as
grounded upon false principles, and as absolutely contrary to the noble designs
of so worthy a Father, as it is prejudicial both to his own and his Sons honor.

Then falling at his feet, and embracing his knees, besought him by the tender
affections of a father, either to leave him to his own inclinations, or else at
least to respite his definitive sentence till he had taken time to consider of
his reasons, which if they proved not of validity to alter him from his
resolutions, he would by submitting to his will, in testimony of a perfect
obedience, deliver up again into his hands that life which he had received from
him.

But Polidor was so far from being moved by his supplications, that on the
contrary relying upon the experienced wisdom of his age, either through disdain
that so young a man, and his son, should undertake to dispute what he upon
mature deliberation had resolved on, or else contrary to his nature, by the
persuasions of the Princess Solmona rendered inexorable, in a passionate rage he
turned away from him, and going out of the room, with a look that expressed his
displeasure, made only this short reply: Either resolve instantly to prosecute
the love of Diophanta, and be a King, or remain for ever unworthy the name of
Son.

So heavy a decree, with such severity pronounced, struck such a sudden damp
upon his spirits, that he continued a while in a manner senseless like a statue
fixed to the earth: But then recollecting himself, rising from the ground,
cried out; No Demetrius will never show himself unworthy of his birth; He will
either be a King, or perish in the attempt; and that title which he disdains to
hold from a woman, by the virtue of his sword make the purchase of his own
valor.

But oh Polidor! from whence proceeds it that of an indulgent father thou art
so soon become a tyrannical oppressor of thy sons affections? Thou would have
me love, and my soul is already so wholly possessed with that divine passion,
that the Goddess of Love herself sitting enthroned in my heart, I cannot be
subject to any other laws; and I love a Princess, besides her natural
endowments, both in birth and dignity so far above a petty titulary Queen of
Armenia, that if I thought not my self assured of a Crown, I should not presume
to say I loved her: And thy self, if thou knew the slight my fancy has
taken, would say, Demetrius, thy thoughts soar too high.

If then I love with such an ardent flame; if I am in my imagination already a
King; and if my ambition be much greater then thy self did ordain; in what do
I contradict thy will? Is it an infringement of thy commands, to anticipate thy
desires? Or am I less a Lover, or less ambitious, because my Love has raised
my Ambition to a height so far above thy pretenses? Is it against the laws of
piety to be directed by that supreme law of laws, that ought to be the guide of
all our actions, Reason? which assures me, that in complying with thy desires I
submit my self to a perpetual slavery; but in the fruition of Mariana's love
shall at the same instant become possessed of a vast Empire.

A filial duty is less obliging then a divine decree: The Gods have ordained me
to love the incomparable Mariana; and either I must enjoy her love, or else the
family of Polidor, which to establish he vainly contests with heaven, remain
for ever extinct in the miserable death of the unfortunate Demetrius.

Whereupon throwing himself upon his bed, such a tempest was raised within his
breast, that if his passion had not burst out in tears to allay the violence
thereof, his soul undoubtedly had been oppressed and overwhelmed with the
weight thereof. But at the same instant I entering casually into the chamber,
having overheard these last words which proceeded from him with an unusual
vehemence, and besides seeing him in so sad a condition, I could not forbear to
say,

What can make the happy Demetrius call himself unfortunate, and thus talk of
misery and death, and the extinction of his family, and a contestation with
heaven as if he were a person wholly abandoned to despair? What has dissolved
that manly courage into these womanish tears and complaints? Can any thing but
a general ruin produce so great an alteration? Sure some strange unheard of
grief has taken possession of that noble soul, and expelled thence the use of
reason, or else he could not thus yield to passion, and lie as it were senseless
of any thing but sorrow.

If it be so, and your griefs are too violent, as it appears, for any one man
to encounter, communicate them to me that I may bear a part in your sufferings;
for I have dedicated my life to your service, and either now employ it to ease
you, if it be possible, of these afflictions, or else having entertained a
diffidence of my fidelity, add to your miseries by embruing your hands in that
blood, which shed in your cause would prove fatal to the oppressors of your
felicity.

Whereupon turning toward me, after a great groan, he replied, Oh Lysander! I
am so far from the least mistrust of thy faith, that if I were not assured of
thy friendship, and that I might with confidence discharge my soul into thy
bosom, my heart is so overcharged with unspeakable griefs, that it would force
a passage through this tormented breast.

I can no longer conceal from thee the only secret of my life; let this,
showing me the Tablet, represent to thee the true object of my happiness, and
consider in Polidor the counterfeit of an indulgent father: Mariana's beauty is
the star by which I direct my course, and his cruelty the storm that threatens
a miserable shipwreck to all my fortunes.

Then relating to me the beginning of his love, how he detained the Picture,
when he sent the Casket back by Mercurio, and all the particulars that had
newly passed between him and the old Prince, he continued: Now can thou
wonder that this constancy is shaken that lies exposed to such furious
batteries? Rather admire that the whole fabric is not sunk into the earth,
which has been so cunningly undermined by the councels and policies of an
erroneous affection.

But Mariana makes good the place, and will for ever keep possession, not by
secret plots and stratagems, but by an open defiance against the assaults of
the whole world.

Nevertheless it is a miserable condition, to maintain a war, though in a just
cause, against a Father; and in a Subject a crime so capital, as cannot be
expiated by the life of the offender, but the whole race must be involved in
the same punishment: Yet it is as impossible to disunite me from my Love, as to
be separated from those relations.

A fathers severity may be turned into mildness, and a Prince at his pleasure
may alter his laws; nay, the vast frame of the world may be shaken, and the
universality of nature suffer a change; but a perfect Lover can neither turn,
nor alter, nor change; for Love is the chiefest attribute of the Gods; and he
that participates so much of their divine nature, must like themselves still
remain the same.

That power therefore which has laid a necessity upon me to continue constant
in my love, will either inspire me by a just means to overcome these
difficulties, or else infuse such a gentleness into Polidor, that he will at
length comply with my desires.

In the mean while I expect from thee an assistance to my resolutions; which,
to avoid the anger of an incensed father, and to dash at first all hopes of
proceeding farther in this business so fatal to my happiness, are immediately
to retire into the shelter of some other Country, till the violence of the
storm be over.

Prepare therefore habits with all things necessary for our escape, and after
to morrow, about midnight, meet me in the wood, on the farther side of the
Park, without the City, from whence, before any notice can be taken of our
departure, we may easily get out of the States territories: And wheresoever I
am, freed from these encumbrances, and Lysander in my company, I cannot want
something of content, which in this place is wholly denied by the cruel
adversaries both of my life and liberty.

I perceived that the apprehension of being crossed in his designs, had so
firmly settled him in this resolution, that it was impossible by any arguments
to dissuade him from it: Wherefore only desiring he would duly consider the
condition of his affairs, without farther circumstance, I promised faithfully
to obey his commands; yet that it would be necessary however to recollect his
spirits, and not by a dejectedness to express his discontents, but by appearing
in the Court with his usual alacrity, if occasion of discourse were offered by
Polidor, to show a flexibility to his desires, and that it was rather a
youthful ardor, or love of liberty, then any aversness, that had moved him at
first to disrelish his proposition, which a little time, with better
consideration, might bring to an effect agreeable to his wish.

Whereupon having with many kind embraces testified a great satisfaction in my
ready compliance, and assured me punctually to follow my advice; he prepared
himself to receive his ordinary visits, and I retired the private way out of
his chamber; but upon the stairs unexpectedly met Mercurio, who was newly
returned; yet knowing he would not communicate any thing of his business to me,
passed by him only with a salute; and though I thought his coming might cause
some retardment of our intended departure, yet not to give any suspicion of a
neglect, as Lovers are subject to all kind of jealousies, I went immediately to
put things in order according to my directions.

In the mean while, after some great persons were dispatched, who attended to
present their customary respects, Mercurio gave a short account of his voyage:
That the Princess Mariana at his arrival showed him so little countenance, that
at the first he doubted whether he should see her any more; nevertheless after
two days attendance, one of her Ladies having sent for him, delivered him a
Casket, and afterward with her own hands she gave him a Letter, which having
presented, he told him that the Emperor being advertised of the surprisal of
Constantinople, marched that way with his Army, but afterward understanding he
had again left it, came only himself with his ordinary train, to see how matters
stood, and by the relation made to him by Theodosia of his proceedings, so
admired his valor, and was so enamoured of his generosity, that it was
commonly discoursed he had an intent to offer him his younger daughter Clarinda
in marriage, and upon ratification of the match both to relinquish his right to
the united Provinces, and to acknowledge them a free State; it being said there
was already one nominated to be sent to propose a Treaty, and an indifferent
place for Commissioners of both sides to meet, because the Emperor for the
preservation of his honor to the world, stood only upon this punctilio, That
at the same time he offered his daughter, the States should likewise send an
honorable Embassy to demand a Peace. Which news was so displeasing to the
Prince, that he could scarce forbear to break out into complaints against the
hardness of his destiny, which raised so many oppositions to his happiness:
But having received the Letter, his joys and fears were infinite, till he had
perused the contents: wherefore Mercurio being dismissed, first he considered
the Characters, then kissed it a thousand times; but going to open the seal, he
made a pause, as loath to offer violence to an impression made by those fair
hands; and when pale and trembling, he began to tear the paper, a messenger
from the Princess Solmona came to give him notice that she desired instantly to
speak with him.

When remembering my advertisements* and indeed considering how necessary it was
by a present cheerfulness in some measure to assuage Polidors anger, and
apprehending the Letter might move such an alteration in him as would render
his compliance impossible, having again kissed it with great reverence, he put
it next his heart, and went directly to the Princess appartement, who beginning
to enter into a discourse concerning Diophanta, he so behaved himself, that she
received an unexpected satisfaction, beyond her hopes; and the old Prince
likewise coming in, he found his humor so changed, that he believed the
greatest difficulty already past; wherefore with a seeming content on all
sides, they passed a great part of the day together: but the hours were
tedious to Demetrius, until he had disengaged himself, for it was toward
evening before he could find an opportunity to retire; at which time I being
then in the Ante-chamber, he made me a sign to follow him; and being come
together into his private Cabinet, he drew the Letter out of his bosom, and
with a trembling hand breaking the Seal, read these following lines.

Mariana to Prince Demetrius.
I Can easily pardon Irene's escape, and confirm her liberty; in testimony
whereof I return the Casket, which contains things of so great value, that I
believe she had no intent to injure me in that kind: But I can never consent
that a Prince who is Captive to a Slaves beauty, should boast in any favor of
mine; neither can I think that you esteem it such; but repenting your
generosity in carrying none with you from Constantinople, you mean to wear that
as a Trophy of your victory, in contempt of

MARIANA.


That this caused a strange emotion, you may easily imagine; but it is
impossible to conceive the effects it wrought in him; for he was scarce come to
the end, before his life seemed to be at the last period. But that word
Contempt pierced him so to the heart, that the Paper falling immediately out of
his hand, he sunk down upon the Couch like a breathless carcass, continuing so
a long time without any the least show of motion, and by all appearances past
the help of any external remedies; for he was already pale, and cold, in his
face and hands: but unbracing him, about his heart where the Tablet lay,
remained such a burning heat, as if his soul by Mariana's cruelty expelled that
noble mansion, had in a just revenge kindled a fire there to consume the Idol
it had so much adored; yet withal such a violent beating, as if Love and Anger
armed with all their power contending for the victory, and having made that the
seat of their war, sought in the same slames to consume each other.

But Love, the more powerful passion, at length prevailing, she by her
gentleness extinguished that fire; and his vital heat at her command
dissipating it self again through all his members, he began by degrees to return
to his former color: When lifting up his eyes, as if two floodgates had been
opened, there issued forth a torrent of tears, which making way for his speech,
with a saint voice he uttered only these few words.

He that can serve any other beauty, is indeed unworthy of Mariana's favors;
but he that can harbor a thought of contempt in disparagement of so divine an
excellence, ought to suffer, as I do now, torments worse then the pangs of
death.

Whereupon I answered, He that did not contemn Marianas love, or at least were
not ignorant in the arts of Lovers, could not so miserably afflict himself,
having such fair assurances of her affection.

What in modesty could she have said more? Or in regard of her honor less,
then that the jealousy you served some other Beauty, suggested to her thoughts
you contemned hers, and bred an apprehension you did not set so great a value
upon her favors as she desired.

It is evident she labors with these doubts, no less then Demetrius with the
fears of her displeasure; and used this artifice to procure her satisfaction,
whilst he loses all his, and even his life with vain imaginations.

Women are not less inclined to love then men, but far more subtle to conceal
their flames; yet her regards did sufficiently testify, when you gave the
other Princess, their freedom, that her heart still remained the prise of your
conquest.

Oh my dear Lysander, he replied, how severe thou art to thy friend, and how
charitable to the chiefest enemy of his life! Had the Princess such skill as
thou supposest in the arts of Love, she would have been more merciful then by
so cruel a censure to deprive him of all hopes, whom she thought worthy in the
least degree of her affection.

But for thy sake I will for a while flatter my self with a belief of
impossibilities, and do something speedily either to vanquish Mariana's disdain,
or else to convince thee of thy error, that thou may at length be forced to
confess, there is nothing so despicable and wretched, as that life which thou
endeavorest to preserve.

In the mean while deliver that, pointing to the Casket which stood on his
table, to Irene; and whilst I take care of the rest, dispose all things in a
readiness according to our agreement.

Whereupon leaving him that night to his thoughts, the next morning he made a
visit to the Queen of Macedon, to recommend more earnestly to her the
protection of Irene: And having showed himself in the Court, toward the evening
retired to his Cabinet, where he writ a Letter to Polidor, which he left sealed
upon his table; and at the hour appointed, in the habit prepared for him, came
alone into the Park, where I waited with horses to receive him. The Letter was
to this effect.

Demetrius to the renowned Prince POLIDOR.
TO disobey your commands, or by a compliance to betray both my life and
honor, are crimes of an equal nature; therefore to maintain my innocence, I am
forced to seek for refuge in another Clime. If this may excuse the present, my
actions shall justify those future proceedings, by which I will either compass
those ends your self has proposed, and obtain your pardon, or else in a noble
pursuance of the means by a resolute death expiate the offense of your
unfortunate son

DEMETRIUS.


How this came to Polidors hands, or of what happened afterward, I can give no
perfect account more then by common report, that his departure as soon as known
was generally lamented; but before any notice could be taken thereof, we were
advanced beyond the States dominions to Larissa a Town upon the borders of
Macedon, and from thence making a great circuit, to avoid all possibilities of
being discovered, after two months travel we came to the famous City of
Thessalonica, where we had first news that Ambassadors were arrived from Sicily
at the Port to conduct the Princess Mariana into her own Country; and that the
Emperor with his whole Court intending to bring her as far as Trajanopolis,
meant there to consign her, with a full restitution of her Dowry into their
hands.

Notwithstanding the Prince remaining constant to his purpose, we continued our
journey to Amphipolis a great City built upon a Lake some four leagues over,
and about forty from Trajanopolis: when being certainly informed the Emperor
was already upon the way, and that after a weeks repose at Trajanopolis the
Princess would in a short time be in that City, where Artabaces the Sovereign
Prince thereof, but a Feudotary of the Empire, made exceeding preparations for
her reception; he resolved there to expect the happiness he so much desired,
once more to behold those fair eyes, whose first glances had gained such a
sovereign dominion over his heart.

Wherefore for privacie seeking a lodging in a remote part of the City, we
happened upon a house joining to the Lake, that belonged to an aged man of a
very reverend aspect, called Dribleon, who was a great Naturalist, and his
humor, though a little extravagant, so divertising, that the Prince took great
delight in his company.

He was the author of many rare inventions, and amongst the rest had framed a
motion of water, that indeed was most admirable to consider; and finding we
were not only exceedingly delighted with it, but applauded his industry, he the
more freely communicated to us his other secrets; and the Prin^e apprehending
his art might be useful to him in a design he had working in his head, with an
assurance of large rewards, obtained a promise of his assistance; and thereupon
having commanded me to sell certain Jewels, furnished him with what money he
would demand to encourage him in the work he had undertaken.

In the mean while there happned nothing worthy mention. On the contrary the
time began to seem tedious, especially to Demetrius; for by reason of some
little indisposition in the Princess, they staid twenty days longer at
Trajanopolis then was intended: But that being over, and the ceremonies of
parting ended, the two Princesses Doriclea and Clarinda were to accompany her
to Amphipolis, and Xenobarbus Prince of Thrace, with Simonida his Princess, and
a numerous train of great Lords and Ladies, being appointed by the Emperor to
conduct her to Epidaurus where she was to embark, they departed from thence,
and in eight days after arrived at Amphipol^s; where the entertainment was so
noble, and the manner of it so extraordinary, that I cannot forbear to make a
brief relation of the particulars.

It was on purpose ordered that she should make her entry upon the water; and
being arrived at the Lake, she was there received by Artabaces, who (^s we
heard afterward) bearing a concealed a^^ection to Doriclea, took that occasion
to show the magnificence of his State.

He came with a Fleet of a hundred Galleys all completely rigged and manned, as
if appointed for some present expedition; but so gloriously gilt, and adorned
with Ensigns and Streamers, as if he would at once display both the riches and
power of his Principality.

They lay all ranged along upon the shore, and from the Admiral was cast forth
a spacious bridge, at the foot whereof Artabaces with a great number of
Gentlemen, the chief Nobility of his Country, sumptuously clad, though like
Soldiers, attended her coming; and as the Princesses descended from their
Chariot, with great reverence approaching toward them, having kissed the skirt
of their garments, conducted them, with the Ambassadors and the chiefest
persons of quality, aboard his own Gally, the rest of the Train being at the
same time by the several Commanders disposed in the others appointed for them,
which were all splendidly furnished according to the occasion, but the equipage
of the Admiral surpassed the whole Fleet besides.

There was no part of her that appeared, not so much as the Oars and Masts, but
were richly carved and guilt; The Sails, being fastened to the Yards, were of
white Taffata, and all the Shrouds and Tacklings of ropes of gold; The Chiorm
which consisted of twenty Banks, and twenty Slaves on a Bank, were clothed in
Cassocks of Cloth of gold, with their Chains of massy silver; And on the Poop
was raised a Pavillion of Tissue embroidered with the Imperial Arms, supported
by pillars of Goldsmiths work; under which upon a little Ascent covered with
Persian carpets of silk and gold, were placed Chairs for the Princess^s, and a
little lower Seats for Artabaces and the rest; Forty Pages, all of a stature
and age, being clothed alike with Gaberdines of Tissue, and short paned Hose
richly embroidered, attending upon the Deck to serve upon any occasion.

Having thus taken their seats, the Admiral moved first, and the whole Fleet
dividing it self into three Squadrons, two came on each side at a distance, and
the other in the ^ear.

In this posture they began to advance toward an Island, which was made in the
middle of the Lake upon great Boats, containing a thousand paces in compass; on
the one side whereof upon a Rock, artificially raised to an extraordinary
height, stood a Castle of a seeming impregnable strength, with diverse armed men
appearing upon the battlements as in a posture of defense: But coming before
the Harbor, which lay in the form of a Half Moon, with two Forts upon each
point as to guard the entrance thereof, there issued from thence another Fleet
of Galleys with all warlik^ appointment; whereupon the two flanking Squadrons
(for the Train were in the other) advancing to encounter them, there began a
terribl^ Sea fight, which seemed so much in earnest, that in the conflict two
Galleys of the adverse party were sunk, and a great number of the men seen
swiming as it were for their lives.

But Artabaces Galleys at length prevailing, the others fled; and the Castle
and Forts at the same time, as in token of obedience, taking in their Flags,
planted other Ensigns in their rooms, with the Imperial and Sicilian Arms
joined together.

Then the Admiral with the Squadron in the Rear entering the Harbor, as it were
to seize upon the place, as the Princesses landed, there was a young woman of
an exquisite beauty representing Venus, attended by diverse Cupids, and two
hundred Virgins, who upon her knees delivered up the keys of the Castle, with
the possession of the whole Island, and the Palace, which was a piece of
excellent Architecture raised upon pillars some twenty paces from the
waterside, and in the Frontispiece of the Porch, in great characters of gold,
was written, THE PALACE OF LOVE; Through which was seen a spacious Garden,
adorned with many artificial Fountains, and Walks of Trees, bearing all manner
of ripe fruits; which being taken up by the roots, and set in ranks, made it
appear a place by long industry brought to an admirable perfection.

Here was prepared for them a sumptuous Banquet, during the time whereof the
Nymphs made such a ravishing Consort of music and voices, that it appeared
indeed the heavenly Palace of the divine Godess of Love: And the Collation
being ended, the Tables on a sudden vanishing out of sight, the Princesses
remained seated upon a kind of Throne, which, part of the Island at the same
time falling away, remained even with the water: When immediately out of the
hollow of the Rock whereon the Castle stood, appeared two Sea Monsters, which
drew after them a Chariot framed like a great shell, in which sat Neptune and
Thetis by themselves, being followed by diverse other Chariots, drawn likewise
by several Fishes with little Boys upon their backs blowing trumpets of
Fishshels; in which were an infinite number of Sea-Gods and Nymphs, who with
voices and instruments made a most delectable harmony; and passing by the
Princesses, Neptune as in sign of homage laid his Trident at their feet.

Then entered into the haven a small Gally with twenty oars, at the head whereof
stood Clitiphon brother to Artabaces, in complete armor richly gilt,
representing Mars, with all manner of warlike instruments at his feet; and
coming up to the throne, presented his Sword and Shield, in which was engraven
this Motto in Greek, Vanquished by Love.

Presently after entered two other Galleys, in the former whereof was the young
Prince Euripedon, Nephew to Artabaces, clad like Paris, with a golden ball in
his hand; and in the other the three Goddesses, who eagerly pursued him for
that prize of beauty: But passing by the Princesses, he cast the ball amongst
them; whereupon the other Gally with the Goddesses immediately making a stand,
they celebrated the praise of their beauty in an excellent song, being answered
by all ^^e Sea-Nymphs that made up the Chorus.

(...) whilst they were singing, in the middle of the Harbor, to (...)
admiration of all the beholders, rise from under water t^^ ^ulk as it were of a
small Vessel, which casting forth (...) and flakes of fire, the Decks at the
same instant parted, (...) (...) appeared a Gally rowed by twelve Negro's
clothed in cloth of silver, the Stern guided by an old man representing Time,
and upon a Shield of silver sat Cupid triumphing with a shaft in his hand,
pierced through a heart; at whose feet lay a Knight in plain silver-arms
suitable to the shield, his helmet by him, and his sword and lance, broken into
diverse pieces. But when the Gally came before the Princesses, and Cupid
delivered the Shaft to Mariana, she was surprised with such a wonder, that her
color and countenance changing on a sudden, she neither believed what she saw
to be real, nor had the power to behold what she imagined only an apparition:
Neither were the two Princesses less amazed at so unexpected an object;
Doriclea remembered perfectly the lineaments of Demetrius face, and Clarinda by
her blushes showed she had never forgotten that person, whose virtues she
esteemed incomparable.

But before they had recollected themselves, whilst they remained gazing one
upon another, the Gally being advanced again into the midst of the harbor, with
artificial fireworks that were placed about it, seemed all in a bright flame,
and as it were by degrees consuming, the Decks on a sudden closing again, in an
instant it sunk under the water, leaving all the company in an astonishment
what art could produce so rare a spectacle.

Artabaces himself beheld it as miraculous, and approaching to the Princesses,
said; Some Deity that inhabits this Lake, in derision of our endeavors, has
now at length showed it self to congratulate your presence; for otherwise I
confess my self as ignorant from whence it should proceed, as unable to
comprehend the secret of so strange a mystery.

But the Princesses who knew the virtue and power of Demetrius made another
conjecture, yet not seeming to take farther notice of it for the present, they
again embarked, and in the same manner they came to the Island, save only the
Sea-Chariots with their Muoick kept about the Admiral-Gally, they went on to
the City; where they received an entertainment suitable to the entry, but I
know nothing more of the particulars: For the Prince being returned with
Dribleon the Conductor, and inventor of the invisible Gally, to his house,
having nobly rewarded his ingenuity, lest enquiry should be made after him,
immediately left the City; and but once more had the happiness to see the
Princess in her passage, which was at Stobi. Wherefore finding it was
impossible, whilst she was thus in continual motion, to effect his desires or
approach her presence, he retired to Salona a Port-town in Albania, with a
resolution to hire a ship there, and with the first occasion to follow her into
Sicily.

Being come thither, we lay a while privately, till news came that the Sicilian
Fleet with the Princess was departed from Epidaurus: And in the mean time
having found a Captain of a Vessel, who for a good reward was willing to
undertake the voyage, we prepared our selves for our departure; when being
ready to embark, a stranger who likewise waited for a passage, desiring to be
admitted into our company, the Prince perceiving he was a person worthy
respect, willingly condescended thereunto; and the wind being fair, we
presently set sail with assured hopes of a succesful voyage.

Thus favored with a fresh gale, we advanced into the Main: but toward the
evening the wind so abated, that we scarcely made any way at all, and six days
and nights successively after were in a manner becalmed: Nevertheless at the
end of the seventh, we hoped with the next rising Sun to discover the Coa^^s of
Sicily; and early in the morning one of the Shipboyes having from the main-top
descried land, at the news thereof ascending upon the Deck, whilst we stood
with delight beholding the long wished for shore afar off, we perceived a Gally
with mighty force making toward us; which when she approached nearer, the
Captain by her Colors knowing to be a Sicilian, wished us to prepare to fight,
for it was impossible, we having so little advantage of the wind, but by the
help of her oars she would overtake our Vessel, and if she were of the adverse
party to Antiochus, undoubtedly assault us.

Whereupon the Decks being cleared of encumbrances, every one betook himself to
such weapons as were next at hand; except only a young man about nineteen years
of age, in the habit of a Mariner, but whose extraordinary mein could not be
concealed under that base covering; who with his arms folded upon his breast,
his legs across, and a sad countenance, leaning against the Mainmast, stood
in that dejected posture as unconcerned in all our motions, or any thing else,
but his own sorrowful thoughts. Which Demetrius first observing, wondering at
such an indifferency in a time that threatened something of danger, and in a
person whose goodly composition promised a manly performance, stepping to him,
said, If thou art what thy habit speaks thee, why art thou so neglectful of thy
Captains command, or so careless of thy own safety, when every man expects the
encounter of an enemy, to remain thus regardless of both? But either not
hearing, or not minding his words, he only looked up a little, and pulling his
cap more over his eyes, fixed himself again in the same disconsolate posture;
and before the Prince could question him farther, the Gally having hailed our
Vessel, commanded the Captain to strike his Topsail, which he refusing unless
required in the name of Antiochus, they presently attacqued us, and being
grapled together, the Sicilians came on so vigorously, that in an instant they
leapt upon our decks; yet by the valor of Demetrius, and the Stranger that
came with us, many of them by the loss of their lives found the error of their
boldness, diverse with dismembered bodies, lay gored in their own blood,
bewailing their too much forwardness; and the rest being driven to despair, to
avoid the fury of the Conquerors, were ready to expose themselves to the mercy
of the waves.

When the Captain of the Gally perceiving such a slaughter amongst his men, and
that they were not only like to lose the possession of the Ship, which he
esteemed so easy a purchase, that he had not vouchsafed his own presence in
the fight, but his Gally likewise, if his men were so repulsed, to run the
hazard of being taken; incensed with the disgrace, with his sword in his hand,
he flew like lightening into our ship, and his motions were no less terrible to
our almost wearied men: So that easily making a way through them, the Stranger,
who had given exemplary testimonies of a noble courage, was forced to a little
retreat, and even Demetrius himself to retire two or three steps backwards; but
reassuring his footing, he advanced upon him again with a double force, and a
terrible combat began between them two.

When the Mariner, who all this while had remained as o^e stupid either to his
own or others danger, as soon as he beheld the Captain of the Gally, like a
Lion roused from his sleep, he stepped as enraged to the next man he encountered,
and having wrested his sword out of his hand, with a voice that threatened
destruction, he cried out, To me, thou rebellious inhumane monster! for to me
alone belongs the chastisement of thy horrible treasons; and whosoever seeks to
share with me in the glory of my revenge, I defy him as an enemy.

At which summons, the Captain, as receiving new vigor, forsaking Demetrius,
turned to the Mariner, whose prodigious strength was no less an admiration,
then the occasion of his sudden fury; for with the weight of his blows he
compelled his daring adversary to retire, and having driven him to the side of
the ship, on a sudden closing with him, thought as we conjectured to have
thrown him headlong into the Sea; but struggling so for mastery, being fast
entwined in one another arms, they fell both together overboard with a
confused shout and cry, both of our own and the adverse party.

When Neptune, who by the terrible clashing of their swords, as if summoned by
Joves thunder, had been raised from his profound mansions, to behold the issue
of this furious conflict, astonished with the prodigy of so much courage in
humane breasts, and affrighted with their fall, lest if they perished in the
Main, their ghosts should invade the peace of his dominions, by the power of
his Divinity conveyed them safe into the Gally* where having loosened their
hold, they soon recovered their feet, and as soon, with the same eagerness as
before, renewed the combat. But the Captain, showing that in the greatest
extremities he had a present judgment, as soon as he perceived he was in his
own Vessel, content with that prize which he then thought sure his own, lest we
should follow after them, cried out to his men presently to unfasten the
grapling irons; who were so speedy and resolute in the execution of his
command, that before we could force a passage, they got free of our ship, and
with main force made for the shore; whilst with afflicted minds that we were
not able to afford him any assistance, we beheld the Mariner alone defending
himself against the whole force of the Gally, and we lost the sight both of him
and it, before we perceived he was vanquished; for when we could no longer
distinguish the men, by the brandishing of their weapons in the air we knew the
fight was not yet ended. Which more then humane prowess seemed to verisie those
ancient fables of the Gods, who upon several occasions are feigned to have
assumed the shapes of inferior mortals.

Nothing ever before caused greater admiration in Demetrius, then this
unexpected accident; nor ever any man's actions, except only Prince Alexandro's,
could make so great impressions of an Heroic virtue. But when we had
recomposed our selves and whilst the ship was cleansed, the hurt men provided
for, and the dead heaved overboard, we sat in the Cabin descanting thereon:
As if the Gods had been offended that we should so partially attribute so much
of miracle to a creature of the same composition with our selves; To show there
was something above us both of greater power and terror, on a sudden covered
the heavens with a midnight darkness, and at the same time loosening the winds
from their obscure dens, which with hideous roaring invaded the bosom of the
Ocean, we had no other light, but what with horrible thunder breaking from the
clouds, seeming to inflame the whole horizon, menaced us with a fearful
destruction; and the Sea, as if our boasting had been the cause of its
disturbance, with mountainous waves threatened to overwhelm our frail Bark,
which with their impetuous beatings against her sides, having at length opened
a plank, the Mariners forsaking their labor, abandoned both themselves and us
to be devoured by that merciless element.

When the courage of the Stranger was in this remarkable, that with threats of
death overcoming their fears, he compelled them again to work, some at the pump,
and others to endeavor the stopping of the leak; whilst Demetrius, as once the
Trojan Heroes in the like extremity, though not seized with the like cold fear,
stretching forth his hands to heaven, implored the assistance of the divine
powers, who pleased with that humiliation, commanded the winds back again to
their dark prisons, and unvailing the heavens, discovered certain stars, which
comforted us with the hopes of an ensuing day, and with the day once more to
enjoy the glorious light of the Sun.

Such was the efficacy of a pious devotion, that our wishes were fully
accomplished; but when day appeared, we found the violence of the tempest had
driven us many leagues from the coasts of Sicily, and in a now still calm, not
left us without almost as certain apprehensions of danger: For, our Vessel had
sprung many leaks, and having no wind to drive us to any Port, our only trust
was in the strength of our arms, by continual pumping to endeavor our
preservation; and though death was now as near as in the storm, yet the terrors
not being so great, our men having less apprehension thereof, with wonderful
alacrity continued their labor.

In this manner we remained ten days floting upon the sea, without any certain
hopes of succor; and though we hoised all our sail, could scarcely perceive we
made any way. Nevertheless at length we descried land, and by degrees, contrary
to all expectation, arrived in this road, within two leagues of the shore;
where our men, with much watching and extreme labor, of which though every one
of us, and even the Prince himself bore a share, not able longer to continue,
unless Boats came to fetch us off, we were sure before the next morning to
perish,

Wherefore, notwithstanding all the signs we had made perceiving no aid coming
to us from the land, Demetrius and the stranger, confident in their swiming,
with a generous resolution exposed themselves to the sea; with an assurance
that if they escaped themselves, as in such a calm they doubted not of their
strength, they would send us a timely relief; which both they and we, turning
to Synesius, have received by your noble care: And now you know the person you
have so highly obliged, I hope you will not retract any of your favors, but for
his sake pardon the many errors I have committed in my tedious discourse,
especially for deteining you so long at this time.

Whereupon Alexandro infinitely delighted with this story, with many thanks
kindly embraced Lysander; and both he and Synesius having expressed a great
satisfaction in the knowledge of so gallant a Prince, by a mutual consent they
returned all again to his appartement.

End of the Third Book.
THEOPHANIA.
BOOK IV.
MOst part of the remainder of that day was spent in Demetrius chamber, to his
no little content: But the company being retired, Alexandro, whose thoughts
suffered him not to enjoy any long repose, early the next morning walked out
alone; and when he was about two furlongs from the house, following a small
tract that led into a solitary grove, the place so suited to his humor, that
venting a world of sighs and tears, he became insensibly engaged in a thick
wood, on the farther side whereof lay a great rode; and wand^ing up and down to
seek a path whereby to return, having at length traversed it almost quite
through, between the Trees in a green Lawn, not far from the highway, he spied
a horse tied by the reins to a shrub that grew upon the banks of a running
stream; and advancing a little further under the shade of a large spreading
Oak, perceived an armed Knight lying upon the ground, with his helmet off, and
a tawny shield under his head, who by the restlesness of his motions expressed
a great unquietness of mind: which breeding a curiosity in Alexandro to know
more, he approached softly without being. perceived to a thick bush within
distance, and lying down under the shelter thereof, to his wonderful
astonishment heard these ensuing complaints.

Just Gods! You have at length forced me to acknowledge your power; I now see
the vanity of my ambition, the malice of my revenge, and the little confidence
that is to be reposed in Armies; for I that so lately commanded multitudes
which threatened destruction to Antiochus and his posterity, am now left thus
desolate, forsaken of my friends, and unpittied by my self.

But why do you not pursue your vengeance? Will you suffer him still to live,
who has been so vile a Traitor both to his King and Country; and not only
sacrilegiously profaned your Temples, violated the holy P^iesthood, and
despised your Laws, but as in contempt of your divinity pulled down your
Altars, and thrown your sacred Images on the earth? Can you forbear to dart
thunder against that breast which has harbored such impieties? I have by
degrees proceeded to the height of all mischiefs, and it is not now in my power
to provoke you farther: Therefore no longer delay your punishment.

But death is too mild a chastisement for offenses of so transcendent a nature:
The World, which I have abused, must be a witness of my miseries; Antiochus,
whom I have injured, receive a satisfaction in my sufferings; and Eudoxia his
virtuous Queen, whose chastity I have defamed, triumph in my overthrow.

But Love, thou gentle Deity, to thee I appeal for mercy; Thou kindlest those
flames which sought to consume all that opposed them. Had I not by thy command
loved Artemia, and she by violence been taken from me, my other injuries
perhaps had been forgotten, and I had not thus been at defiance both with Gods
and men.

Therefore since thou have in some measure been the author of my crimes, in
compassion afford relief to my torments; and if thy own darts have not the
power to kill, borrow one of death, and with a favorable wound pierce this
heart, which by thy instigation has nourished such presumptuous thoughts not
only against Antiochus and Eudoxia, but even against heaven it self. Whereupon
Alexandro being no longer able to contain his passion, rising from his place,
and drawing his sword, cried out,

Wicked Cenodoxius! for by thy crimes I know thy name; dare thou think of
death, and still thus add to thy guilt? Will thou make innocent Love, which
never inspired other then noble thoughts, conscious of thy bloody designs? Thou
have enough derided the divine mysteries of the Gods, and vilifying their
authority, rebelled against Antiochus: Therefore Alexandro, the son of that
Antiochus, whose birth, if it had been possible, would have been stained with
thy base scandals of Eudoxia, stands here armed with their power, as the
minister of their justice, to send thy soul to those torments, if there be any
so horrid, that thy ills deserve.

Upon this sword depends thy fate, which thou can not possibly avoid: yet in
thy defense show thy self worthy of my revenge, that I may not repent thou
had the honor to fall by these hands; which, if thou have not a courage,
great as thy mischiefs, to encounter me, I shall wish had been the act of an
infamous executioner. To which Cenodoxius, who when he first saw him approach
in such a posture, started up and stood upon guard, presently replied,

The world has received such testimonies of my valor, that Prince Alexandro
cannot be ignorant I dread not death, much less any mortal encounter; and only
chance has discovered to him that inward sense of my proceedings, which his
sword assisted with the force of all his allies, nor the united strength of the
whole Nation, nor the cruelty of tortures, could ever have extorted from me.

Yet know I repent not my own intentions, but lament in my fall the rise I have
given to others to put in execution their dangerous designs.

What I have done was in a noble sense of my sufferings, which were so
injurious, that I believed the Gods would never have forsaken so just a cause;
and I will avow I was ambitious to have had it in my power to revenge them, but
was ever as far from intending any violence to the sacred person of your Royal
Father, as I am now from lifting my arm against his lawful Successor, which
shall never be, though provoked in the just defense both of my life and honor;
for I acknowledge there belong to him as well a present respect, as a future
obedience.

Therefore if it were possible, I would fly this encounter: But lest he should
be apt to impute that to a degenerate cowardice, which proceeds only from a
reverence to his birth, I will remain here under the shelter of my sword and
shield; as just men when Jove darts lightening upon the earth, retire into
their house, not that they fear the thunder, but because they will not defy
his power: And thus guarded, my life is secure as in an impregnable Fort, which
apprehending neither batteries nor assaults, sends forth no forces, nor makes
any sallies to repulse the enemy.

Yet if you will vouchsafe a parley, I shall upon easy terms surrender up the
place into your hands. I only desire a patient hearing of my wrongs, the
redress I will leave to your Princely inclinations: But if upon the recital of
my story you judge me, though not blameless, unworthy of your compassion, and
still despise that life, which perhaps will appear the only means left for your
preservation, I shall patiently submit to my own misfortunes; but you will
never be able to divert that torrent of confusion, which, in Corastus new
acquired greatness, threatens the total subversion of this flourishing Monarchy.

Whereupon making a stop; Thou do so gallantly, said the Prince, beg for thy
life, that I almost begin to wish thou were less faulty, or that thou had not
spoke so well.

Such an undauntedness of spirit in a lawful enemy, would make me ambitious to
embrace his friendship; but in a Subject it is an insolence so insupportable,
and the permission of it so destructive to the dignity of Princes, that had
thou no other crime, I might in a just indignation, to suppress thy arrogance,
sacrifice thy blood to my anger.

Yet I so much love the resemblance of virtue, for I cannot deny the bravery of
thy resolution appears no less, that I am content for a while to respite thy
fate; and not to satisfy thy desire, but the world in the candor of my
actions, will lend an impartial ear to the relation of thy story; of which
already I know so much, that though thy courage were equal to thy boasting, and
thy security, under the defense of thy arms, much more then thy vanity does
suppose, yet I could not doubt with far less difficulty to force a passage
through them to thy disloyal heart, then I have obtained this victory over my
self, to delay the execution of my just revenge.

However I give thee my word for thy security, till thy discourse be ended; but
upon this assurance, for I suppose a reconcilement impossible, that thou shall
afterward prepare in equal combat to receive the chastisement due to thy
demerits; though I confess I feel a strange inclination within my self, to
desire that thou might appear, after a due submission, worthy of Antiochus
and my pardon.

If I do not, replied Cenodoxius, I am content to accept of your conditions;
but I am as confident to be received into your favor, as I am assured you are a
Prince of a generous magnanimous spirit, and being born to be a King, have such
a public soul, that for the general good you will forget all personal
injuries, or particular interests.

In the mean while I deliver my self into your hands; and in testimony I desire
not henceforth to employ my sword but in your service, thus prostrate upon my
knees, I lay it at your feet.

This was a strange unexpected sight to Synesius, who when he heard Alexandro
was gone abroad, fearing some ill encounter, with Eleutherius in his company,
went to seek him; and imagining it most likely he was walked into the wood,
knowing the passages thereof, happened presently upon the place where he and
Cenodoxius were together, at the very same instant that in such a submissive
posture he delivered up his sword. Which caused in him no little wonder; for
though he were ignorant who Alexandro was, he very well knew Cenodoxius, and
that such humiliations were very contrary either to his custom or humor. But he
was surprised beyond all imagination, when Alexandro putting forth his hand to
raise him up, said, I receive this thy submission not as satisfactory, but as
the duty of a Subject: yet laying aside my birth, and the name of Alexandro,
though I will not say I should be glad to find a cause to entertain thee as a
friend into my bosom, I cannot deny but I wish thy actions had not rendered thee
so odious.

By which time having spied Synesius, No more they had not, he replied, if the
prudent advice of this my noble Kinsman could have prevailed, who wisely
judging of the event, dissuaded me from the undertaking; and though I
inconsiderately rejected his counsel, I must, with pardon, crave leave to
embrace his person.

But Synesius stepping back, told him, he could not permit his embraces, whose
actions had rendered him odious to Prince Alexandro; and though the neerness of
his alliance had hitherto been chiefly the cause of his disgrace with the King,
yet he would now give that testimony of his loyalty, as not to own a relation
to his enemy.

Then with one knee touching the ground, and kissing the Princes hand, humbly
besought him to pardon those errors he had through ignorance committed: For
though, as he had often expressed, his genius ever assured him he was a person
to whom he ought to pay more then an ordinary duty, and that there was
something in his countenance which he believed he had formerly known; yet not
having had the honor to see him since he was a child, and not forgetting how
unhappy he was in the displeasure of his Royal master, he was as far from
supposing him to be the Prince, as from the imagination that he would be
pleased to grace that Subjects roof with his presence, whose fidelity, through
the malicious suggestions of his adversaries, was, though wrongfully, so much
suspected.

When the Prince interrupting him, replied, I cannot dissemble, that the
impressions I formerly received, if I had known you sooner, might perhaps have
made me more scrupulous in accepting the offer of your house: But besides the
obligation at our first encounter, I have since observed such a discerning
judgment in your discourses, and so right a sense of honor in all your
proceedings, that I believed it impossible you could any way favor, or be
engaged in so unworthy and unjust a cause as the present war; and this accident
has but by a few hours prevented the discovery I meant to make to you of the
person whose life you did preserve, which I am resolved so to employ in the
vindication of your honor from those scandalous aspersions of disloyalty, that
the King finding his error, shall at length in justice be forced to declare,
that they who treacherously in such difficult times deprived him of so worthy a
Councellor, were no less his, then your enemies.

But for the present let me prevail with you to give a friendly entertainment
to Cenodoxius; for in your presence I will hear the relation of his story, and
in the mean while engage my promise, That though I cannot easily forget the
injuries past, I will neither look upon him as an enemy, nor yet by any outward
resentment testify that I believe him to be the author of them.

Whereupon not admitting any farther discourse of that subject, he desired
Synesius to be their guide to conduct them out of the Wood; and going directly
to his house, whilst Cenodoxius disarmed himself, went to visit Prince
Demetrius, and entering into the chamber, heard him, as he lay upon his bed,
utter these complaints.

Oh Love! why art thou so cruel a tyrant to require such a strict observance of
thy laws, and wilt not afford thy vassals the reward of their obedience? Which
though I have served thee with so pure a devotion, I dare not presume to hope,
much less to aspire to the fruition of those incomparable joys, which thou
have ordained to be the only object of my felicity. Where then shall I vent my
moans, or of whom seek redress to my sufferings?

Of whom, replied Prince Alexandro, but of thy friend? Who being a witness of
thy constant love, will be the instrument to procure thy satisfaction; and
either Mariana must gratefully acknowledge her happiness in the acquisition of
so noble a Lover, or else disclaim the interest which Alexandro, as a Brother,
may justly pretend to in her affection.

When Demetrius casting himself at his feet, and embracing his knees, I cannot,
said he, more reverence the person of Alexandro, knowing him the heir of a
mighty Monarch, then I did before in his resemblance of the divine Mariana: But
that from such a height he can descend so low as to compassionate my miseries,
strikes me with no less admiration of his generosity, then the consciousness of
my own demerits makes me apprehensive of her cruelty.

She must be cruel to herself, replied the Prince, and an enemy to Alexandro,
if with the same tenderness of affection as he does now, she receive not his
friend Demetrius into her bosom.

Then casting his arms about his neck, they remained both a while mute; till
Alexandro first breaking silence, said, With what an excess of joy could I thus
for ever embrace my friend, if like him I might at length hope to see the
period of my sufferings?

Whereupon Lysander entering into the room, interrupted their farther Caresses;
and understanding who Alexandro was, kneeling down to kiss his hand, besought
him to pardon the overgreat liberty he had presumed to use in his presence:
which though it had been a known fault, would have been easily excused in one
so dear to Demetrius: And to express the confidence he reposed in him for his
sake, he presently related the passages of the late encounter between him and
Cenodoxius, desiring them to be witnesses of his story, which if he were
faithful in the recital, would acquaint them with a great part of his own
misfortunes. And thereupon taking them both with him to his own appartement,
where they dined together, which was by Alexandro's absolute command, because
he would not be known to the domestics; after the tables were taken away,
Cenodoxius having by Synesius desired to be admitted to his presence, whilst he
went to call him, they retired into the Princes bedchamber, that Ervillius
likeise might partake of that entertainment; who finding a great amendment in
himself, sat up in his nightgown upon a couch; and Demetrius having embraced
him with great demonstrations of affection, Alexandro acquainted him with the
occasion of their coming thither, with which he was exceedingly surprised at
first; but seeing Cenodoxius enter into the chamber, he composed himself the
best he could; and the Prince having placed Demetrius by him, and commanded the
rest to take seats, after such salutations as you may imagine might pass from
persons that bore such inward animosities against Cenodoxius, he began to enter
into this ensuing discourse.

The Story of HERACLIUS and CENODOXIUS.
THe justest actions are are not always followed with applause, not the most
wicked designs ever reproachful to the contrivers; both the one and the other
are variously censured, or esteemed according to the success: But it is the
constant fate of great undertakers, that if they fail in their attempts, they
not only lose their fortunes, but withal the reputation either of conduct or
valor. Therefore I will not seek by arguments to maintain a cause, which is
already condemned because it has miscarried; though I may truly boast, not
through either of those defects: Neither was I ever conscious to my self of
those ignoble principles destructive to Monarchy; which by the discourse of my
life will be so evident, that in considering the vast ruins of my party, I am
confident you will find not only sufficient, but worthy materials to raise a
rampire against this popular inundation, which by the overflowing power of
Corastus and his adherents menaceth the devastation of your Fathers Kingdoms.
And not to lose more time in the pursuance of so glorious an enterprise, I will
without farther circumstance enter into the narration of my story; by which you
will perceive, that though in the late defeat of my forces the superstructure
were demolished, a foundation still remains whereupon Prince Alexandro may
build to himself a more absolute Empire, then any of his Predecessors, since
with victorious arms they first gained the sovereignty of this Nation, durst
ever aspire unto.

This preamble, to Demetrius and Lysander, who were strangers, and unacquainted
with insolence in Subjects, appeared very unsuitable to the condition of a
vanquished Rebel in the presence of his natural Prince, which by their
countenances they seemed to express: But Alexandro, who very well knew the
vainglory of the person, and being besides resolved to hear with patience what
he would say, without showing the least distaste, desired him to proceed: And
the rest thereupon settling themselves in a posture of attention, he continued
in this manner.

To show the original of my disgraces, and of the troubles in which this Nation
is now involved, I must look back some few years to the reign of Theodora, who
though by a doubtful claim she got possession of the Crown, through a seeming
popularity brought the people into a slavish obedience: And not only the
Natives, but foreign Princes, and even a Queen as absolute in dominion as her
self, who if not before her in right, the acknowledged heir of this Kingdom, by
whose title the King your father now sits upon the throne, felt the bloody
effects of her tyranny.

But however the legality of her succession were questionable, having once
assumed the government, she entertained those Maxims which most conduced to the
establishment of her power.

Wherefore knowing that a Prince who will be absolute, must either by (...)full
terror compel a strict obedience, or else with a (...) of clemency and virtue
gain the affections of the people; and being in her nature cruel and ambitious,
she thought severity the most certain means to compass her designs:
Nevertheless surpassing even all her sex in the art of dissembling, she so
veiled it over with a mask of affability, that though she were resolved to make
her will a law, yet she appeared to the vulgar the most submiss of women, and
was believed to have neither affections nor desires, but what tended only to
the common good: Insomuch that her most violent proceedings were thought forced
by a public necessity; her unjust wars abroad in fostering rebellions amongst
the subjects of neighboring Princes, pious undertakings for the relief of the
distressed; her frequent oppressions at home, studied policies for the
preservation of her Countries liberty; her violation of the laws, a watchful
providence for the protection of justice; and which was most admirable, her
profound dissimulations real virtues, and an innate tenderness of affection to
the people; by which she so won their hearts, who judge only by outward
appearances, that the great ones, who chiefly groaned under her tyranny,
though they perceived her artifices, durst not seek to undeceive them; but
whilst she lived, they reverenced her as their common mother and Protectrix,
after her death deified her, and have ever since offered annual sacrifices to
her memory.

Amongst other s^btleties by which she deluded the world, it was her chiefest
glory to maintain the name and reputation of the Virgin-Queen, pretending that
having wedded the Subjects Interests, she could not confine her love to any
particular object: But indeed neither her pride would suffer her to admit a
Companion in the Empire, nor her variable desires to be confined to the chaste
embraces of the nuptial bed.

Notwithstanding being often pressed and supplicated by her dear Children, for
so fawningly she called the people, by the choice of a Royal husband, to permit
them at least to hope continuation of their present happiness to their
posterity, which they could no way expect but by the establishment of the
succession in the issue of so gracious a Princess; though she meant nothing
less, yet upon occasions to serve her own ends, which without regard of the
future, were only to maintain a vast uncontrolled power in herself during her
own life, she many times seemed to comply with their desires, and by this bait
appeased the fury of diverse neighboring Princes, who whilst she entertained
them with the hopes of joining this Kingdom to their own by an alliance,
neither assisted one another against the invasion of her Armies, nor sought to
revenge the injuries received in their own persons.

To omit diverse others, A great example of the advantages she gained by this
cuning practice, was that notable overthrow given to the Imperial Navy: For
having by her allurements brought Hipolito Prince of Istria into a belief that
she meant to marry him, the hopes of a Crown, though otherwise his virtue was
the glory and emulation of that age, made him so far forgetful of his virtue,
that upon several pretenses and punctilio's of command, retarding those succors
which from the Islands that were under his government should have joined with
the Grecians, he gave the Queen leisure to raise a mighty force both by sea and
land; and whilst the Emperors Fleet hovered about these coasts in expectation
of his assistance, it was by a terrible storm for the most part so broken and
shattered, that Marcellus our Admiral obtained an easy victory over the
remainder of that invincible Armado.

But Theodora being once past her fears, Hipolito soon found how he had been
deluded by the vain hopes of an imaginary greatness; and by that wonderful
success being now freed from all apprehensions of a foreign enemy, she ^o
little cared any longer to dissemble her inclinations, that those Princes whom
till then she had amused as Suitors, ^^nding that their perseverance would in
the end produce nothing but a dishonorable repulse, began with less earnestness
to pursue those treaties, and at length wholly desisted from their addresses.

Nevertheless the Queen seeming still desirous to satisfy her people; and
having by her instruments instilled into them as it was easy for her to work
them any way, that a strange alliance would be prejudicial to their liberties,
she began to publish to the world, that she intended to provide them a Father
indeed, by making a worthy choice amongst the Nobles and Princes of her own
Nation. Under which pretense admiting diverse Favorites to a more then ordinary
familiarity, as often as her fancy pleased, disgraced some, and advanced
others to the same hopes: But amongst all those who were looked upon as capable
of so great an honor as the fruition of this reputed incomparable Queen, none
was more worthy, though none had so sad an experience of her pride and
inconstancy, as the noble Heraclius my unfortunate father.

He was by a long continued descent of famous ancestors, though born a Subject,
a fit pretender to a Crown; By his glorious achievements both at home and
abroad, though young in years, grown old in the esteem and admiration of the
people; And as if the Gods by the excellence of his endowments had intended to
raise him to a fortune equal to his merits, the beauty of his person, his
meine, and deportment considered together, had such a powerful influence, that
even the chastest Virgins, to maintain their virtue, contended for his love;
but all their hopes and con^^stations ended, when they perceived that those
perfections were now become the so e object of the ungrateful Theodora's
affection.

At first by eminent employments she drew him to a neerness about her person,
which he so discharged both to his own and her honor, that the favors she cast
upon him seemed but the just rewards of his service: Then at times ^etting fall
ambiguous speeches, she emboldened him to pretensions of a higher nature, which
though either through modesty, or prudence, knowing the fickleness of women's
passions, be seemed not to understand, yet he wanted neither a noble ambition
to undertake, nor a generesity of courage to struggle with those difficulties,
which either through envy, or competitors were opposed in his way to the throne
of Sovereignty.

But whilst things hung thus in suspense, an unexpected accident seemed to
remove all obstacles on every side, which to the world might both justify
Thedora's love, and entitle Heclius to a more then common interest in her
affection.

Though the Queen were now in the height of all her glory, victorious over her
enemies, and generally beloved by her own people, yet there wanted not those
both at home and abroad, who maligning her prosperity, when they saw open force
could not prevail, sought by secret machinations to deprive her both of life
and Empire; amongst which, her greatest, and then most powerful adversary, was
Valentinianus Emperor of Rome, who, besides the affronts and indignities he
received from her, had ever favored the title of Aurelia Queen of Cyprus, who
being her Competitor for the Crown, she then detained in a miserable
imprisonment, and afterward, when there was no opposition to awe her tyranny,
under a formal show of Justice most barbarously murdered: Which the Emperor
either foreseeing, or at least endeavoring to prevent, had long solicited her
deliverance; but finding no submissions or entreaties could procure her
liberty, had set on and assisted the Grecians to invade this Kingdom; but when
that design failed, lamenting the misfortunes of Aurelia, and his own want of
power in not being able at that time to afford her relief, Castorax a valiant
Commander amongst the Romans, but whether or no authorized by the Emperor was
never certainly known, undertook by a desperate course at once both to satisfy
his Masters revenge, and to free the distressed Queen from the oppressions of
her usurping adversary.

Wherefore assuming the habit of a Merchant, he soon arrived in Sicily; and
having some time frequented the Court, under pretense of several Negotiations,
as was very well known to those by whom he made his addresses: One day as the
Queen was walking in a garden, attended by Heraclius with diverse other Lords
and Ladies, taking that advantage to put his enterprise in execution, he
presented her with a Memorial, which whilst she was perusing, he secretly drew
from under his mantle a short dagger; but as he lift up his hand to give the
fatal blow, Heraclius perceiving his treachery, at the same instant steping
between, received a terrible wound under his right pap; yet nothing daunted
either with the danger, or the suddenness of the accident, the poignard
remaining behind, he pulled it immediately out of his own bosom, and stuck it
in the Assasins heart.

Then turning about to Theodora, The Gods, said he, have this day showed their
justice in your protection. But as he was about to continue his speech, through
the abundance of blood that issued from his wounds, his spirits beginning to
fail, he fell prostrate at her feet, and with a faint voice uttered only these
words; Madam, I die, but die contented, since I have sacrificed my life for
your preservation.

Whereupon the Queen, who knew not any cause she had to fear, till at the same
time she saw both the Traitor weltring in his blood upon the ground, and the
dear preserver of her life ready to expire his latest breath, she could no
longer suppress that passion, which till then she had so artificially
concealed; but breaking out into a desperate rage, ran furiously to the dead
body of Castorax, and setting her foot upon his throat, drew the poignard out
of his side, which aiming at her own breast, she perceived certain characters
engraven upon the blade thereof, and pausing a little to peruse them, read this
inscription: Castorax a true born Roman
To Theodora the Barbarian.


In considering whereof, having something recollected herself, Are these, said
she, the Regalio's, those boasters of their own virtue prepare for Princes?
Barbarous Theodora indeed, if thou should thus abandon thy life, which now
more then ever thou art bound to cherish, that thy just vengeance may become
the terror of these blood-thirsty Romans.

Then falling upon Heraclius, and as she embraced him putting one hand under his
head, and the other upon his wound, with a pale trembling countenance, the
Index both of sorrow and wrath, burst out into these expressions:

I will, if it be possible, stop this passage through which thy soul slies so
swift away toward the Elysianshades, as esteeming the love of a Queen too mean
a reward for the merit of such an heroic action.

But why were thou so generous, to raise that hidden fire in my bosom to such a
mighty flame, if thou will now leave me to be consumed by it?

The Gods have allotted me too sad a fate, if I could not live but by thy
death, and yet have ordained my life to be inseparable from thine.

When sighs interrupting her speech, she laid her mouth so close to his, that
she seemed to breathe into him her own soul; for holding her hand still upon
his wound, which stopped the blood, he list up his eyes a little, and looked
her in the face, but immediately closed them again. Whereupon she cried our,

Ah do not so unkindly leave me! Live, my Heraclius, live to add the glory of
thy revenge to that of thy suffering: She entreats thee to live, for whose sake
thou were so willing to die; Or if thy eyes are now shut for ever, let thy
spirit hover a while about this place, to hear the vows, which in stead of
tears, that would assuage, if not extinguish the heat of a noble passion, I
here offer to appease thy offended ghost.

Be witness, O you Gods! I henceforth declare a professed hatred to the Roman
Empire, that Nursery of pride and ambition, which not contented with any
limits, seeks to usurp the dominion of the whole earth; and those Kings that do
not willingly submit their necks to be trampled on, either they endeavor by
force to subdue, or else employ their bloody Agents thus to massacre them even
in their own Palaces.

But for every drop of blood that has (...) from this manly breast, I will
send thousands of Roman fo^ls to lament their cruelty upon the Stygian banks.

I will pull that usurping Monarch from his thro^e; his insulting Princes shall
feel the sharpness of my sword, their Priests nor Elamens shall not escape the
fury of my revenge; or if amongst the Gods any can be so unjust to protect such
monsters, I will throw down their Altars, and renounce their Deities, and even
Jove himself shall find the people of Sicily love their Queen, and reverence
her authority, more then they fear his thunder; and in contempt of his power I
will set up Onions, or Cats, or what my own fancy shall best like to be adored
in his chiefest Temples.

As she uttered these horrible blasphemies against the divine Powers, which
were enough to fright even the dead out of their graves, Heraclius stirred a
little and fetched a great groan; insomuch that the Physicians, who were
instantly called, being come upon the place, and perceiving motion in him, gave
some hopes that his condition was not altogether desperate; and desiring the
Queen to commit him to their care, which by the persuasions of the Lords that
were about her she willingly granted, they conveyed him to his lodging, and
having searched his wound, assured her the danger was not great, unless the
abundance of blood which he lost had too much weakened him: But when they had
applied their remedies, and given him some Cordials, the signs of his amendment
were more apparent; for in a short time he recovered his speech, and not long
after took a little rest, to which Theodora with infinite joy for the present
left him.

Nevertheless her desire of revenge was nothing abated, but immediately
assembling her Council, after unheard of cruelties used upon the dead body of
Castorax, she published an Edict that diligent search should be made to
apprehend all the Romans in her dominions: which was accordingly done, and
those that could be taken, of what age, sex, or condition soever, were
presently condemned to dye by most cruel tortures; nor therewith satisfied, the
enacted a law, that those who were found for the future should be procceded
against with the like severity.

No Province, City, Town or Village, but was filled with blood and slaughters:
For by reason of the strict league that till the reign o^ Theodora had been
between the Emperors and the Kings of this Island, the Romans lived
promiscuously amongst the Sicilians, as if they had been one people: but now
such was the zeal they bore to their Queen, that when they heard of the attempt
made by one of that Nation against her life, they ran headlong in multitudes to
destroy them; Children delivered their parents, parents their children, and
wives their husbands into the hands of their persecutors; Infants were torn
from their Mothers breasts, and even Priests in the midst of their sacrifices
were dragged from the Altar to the place of execution.

Whilst these tragedies were acting in all parts of the Kingdom, Heraclius by
the exceeding care and diligence of the Physicians was again restored to his
former strength, and Theodora now openly avowed her inclinations, insomuch that
the management of all great affairs was wholly committed to his trust, the
Nobles courted him, the people applauded so worthy a choice, and all in general
expected either with envy or desire the consummation of their hymeneals.

But the news being arrived at Rome, of the terrible persecution of the Romans
in Sicily; the Emperor Valentinianus, though with a resentment of the injury
equal to the provocation, and no less revengeful in his resolutions then
Theodora, yet proceeding with more moderation, sent Ambassadors to disavow the
fact of Castorax, and withal to desire a cessation from the slaughter of his
innocent subjects. Which was only to mitigate the Queens rage, if it were
possible, until such time that he had prepared an Army for their defense, and
her chastisement

But these modest solicitations on the one side rendered her more insolent; and
Valentinianus on the other lost no time in completing his Army, which was
already increased to a formidable number; so that the Ambassadors, who were
scornfully treated, had no sooner set sail for Italy, but they were ready, if
not prevented, to arrive upon our coasts; and the report of their force struck
such a terror into Theodora, that her thoughts were for the present diverted
from the soft delights of a Lovers embraces. The only care now was to divert
the fury of this terrible storm; the Ports are secured, the Nobles consulted,
and the people by invective declarations against the Romans animated to their
just defense. But the result of all lay in her own bosom, which at that time
was open only to Heraclius, whom she appointed Generalissimo of all her forces
both by sea and land; and when all things were in a readiness for this great
expedition, retiring one day into her Cabinet, she spoke to him in this manner.

Heraclius, how high thou art in my esteem, thy own merits may assure thee; for
I have never been ungrateful for the least benefit received from any the
meanest of my subjects, but to thee I owe the preservation of my life with the
apparent hazard of thy own; which being an obligation of the highest nature,
thou may justly expect from me whatsoever is in me to give: Wherefore I have
already invested thee with the power, and when thou returnest victorious, as it
were a sin to doubt of thy success, I may without exceptions of the most
envious, bestow upon thee with my self, the title and dignity of a King.

Remember then, it is not same alone for which thou art now to fight, nor the
spoil of the enemy, nor thy Princes honor, nor the public good, those ordinary
incitements that draw all generous spirits into action, but for thy own proper
interest, and the establishment of the Crown upon thy self and thy posterity:
which can never be, unless together with the suppression of the Romans power,
we raise an irreconcilable hatred between the two Nations, who otherwise,
having lived hapyily so many ages in a firm league of amity, will perhaps when
they feel the inconveniences of a war, desire to unite again; and our subjects,
to purchase their own peace with security, relinquish that cause, which now
through a blind zeal of affection they are so forward to maintain.

For thou art not ignorant through what difficulties I have passed to the
Crown, nor with what a constancy the Emperor Valentinianus has adhered to
Aurelia's party, under a false supposition, not only that my birth was
illegitimate, but that Dyonisius my father did at his death by a solemn
testament deprive me of the succession; which though maliciously suggested, are
pretenses that strongly oppugn the conservation both of my life and honor: For
as well the laws of the Kingdom, as likewise the strict dictates of the Gods,
do under severe penalties forbid that the scepter of this Island should be
polluted by the hand of a spurious issue. And though by artifices and
dissimulations, to speak truly, unworthy the dignity of a Queen, I have so
gained the hearts of the people, that hitherto for the most part they have
given but little credit to those scandalous aspersions; yet being in their
nature sickle and unconstant, we shall be too much wanting to our selves, if we
neglect any means wahtsoever to prevent the danger of a future alteration.

I will no longer therefore conceal from thee those secret coun^els which have
so long labored in my bosom for a delivery: And be not startled at my
resolutions; for though at the first view they may seem to carry a face of
horror, yet once brought to maturity, they will appear the beautiful issue of
Piety and Reason.

Know then that the chief tie between the people of this Country and the
Romans, is the unanimous consent of both Nations in matters of Religion; which
knot nothing can dissolve, but by discovering to the world the luxury, pride,
and avarice of the Priests and Flamens, and by that means to work them to a
detestation of the Roman Gods, the numerous, various adoration whereof are
indeed either the vain Chimera's of superstitious brains, or else the subtle
inventions of wicked Politicians, introduced only by a specious show of
devotion to tyrannise over men's consciences, and by bringing them into an awful
reverence of their divine power, to serve as bottomless gulfs to devour the
vast treasure of whole families provinces and kingdoms.

For what else are the several names given to Jupiter, but so many effects of
his power; and all the other rabble of Gods, but the sundry attributes or
influences of his divinity? Yet those diverse names are honored with several
Temples, and different ceremonies; and the heavenly virtues or divine
influences which flow from him only, are reverenced as so many distinct Deities
with peculiar rites and sacrifices. Yet not content with those delusions, but
to accommodate their Religion to all sorts of inclinations, the drunken feasts
of Bacchus, the immodest Lupercals, and even the beastly God Priapus himself
are held in no less veneration then the Goddess of Temperance, Minerva, or the
most chaste Diana.

Is it not then evident that this multiplicity of Godheads is only to increase
a blind zeal amongst the vulgar, and by the infinite number of sacrifices and
oblations to enrich and cherish the slothful luxury of their attendants? into
whose store all kind of humors empty their superfluities, and even the most
necessitous increase their own wants to add to their abundance; insomuch that
the Priests do in every Province enjoy the goodliest possessions; and they who
ought to be examples of humility, are grown so insolent with their wealth, that
they dare contest with the chief Nobles and Princes of the land; nay, their
pride is so exorbitant, that they have often strugled for power with our
Predecessors, and do to this day exempt themselves from the jurisdiction and
authority of our laws.

Wherefore, not to hold thee longer in suspense, I am resolved to lance these
pestilent tumors; which otherwise will ulcerate the whole body of the State;
besides, it were a dangerous folly to permit those to have the directions of
our Subjects consciences, who tacitly disavow our right of succession, and at
the same time to engage them against an enemy whose principles are the same,
and their quarrel grounded on no other pretense.

No, my Heraclius, since we cannot by any other mean procure our own safety, we
must no longer suffer these idle superstitions to reign amongst us. Yet that
both Nobility and people may be the rather induced to like the change; and not
imagine it proceeds from any interest of our own, they must be enriched with
the spoils of these domineering Flamens and their adherents; but especially the
Soldiers, who being ever least scrupulous in matters of Religion, will, when
they see it so much concerns their own profit, need no provocation to hasten
their ruin, and ever after with a more steadfast resolution maintain the
justice of our cause.

If therefore thou concurrest with me in opinion, we will immediately put this
design in execution, and henceforth no God shall be acknowledged in Sicily but
the omnipotent Jupiter, whose Images we will adore by the name of the Sicilian
Jupiter, yet with a limited devotion, and such rites as may best suit with the
politic maxims of the present Government; and as for the rest, their Priests
and superstitions being abolished, they shall be exposed to the rapine of those
who are most forward to seize upon the prey.

Heraclius with no little astonishment, but with exceeding attention observed
the issue of this discourse; and whether convinced with her reasons, or knowing
it in vain to oppose her will, and that not to comply was instead of
advancement to procure his own ruin, finding she expected an answer without
any deliberation, made this reply.

Most illustrious Princess, I can neither sufficiently admire your wisdom, nor
give a due commendation of the studious care you have ever shown for the
welfare of your people; but that you should make one so unworthy as my self the
object of your favor, is a goodness so far beyond all expectation, as the poor
inconsiderable services of your Vassal Heraclius are from the ambition of
aspiring to so great a reward as the affection of the most excellent Theodora;
yet to remain insensible of the impressions of so transcendent a h^ppiness,
were an unmanly degenerate stupidity: And though (...) plead desert to raise me
to such a height of ^elicity, I am in that no more deficient then the most
potent Monarchs of the earth; for though they may lay Crowns and Scepters, and
the Trophies of conquered Nations at your feet, yet they cannot be so vain to
boast an offering that may deserve the love of so incomparable a Queen: It is
your clemency alone can create such a world of merit; which if you lay upon
these shoulders, shall be as strongly supported as Atlas does the immense
fabric of the Universe.

I cannot promise more, nor will I perform less; and to testify I am as ready
to comply with your desires, as free from the servile flattery of ignoble
spirits, your pleasure once declared, the insulting Flamens shall soon feel the
chastisement due to their demerits: Yet consider, I beseech you, the dangerous
consequence of such violent alterations; and if whilst you thus endeavor to
secure your self, you open not a way to the extirpation of your posterity; for
it is only the fear of the Gods, and of infringing their laws, which maintains
amongst the people the Prerogatives of Princes, as deputed to them for the
administration of their divine justice; nor is it improbable, that to add a
greater reverence to their persons, they have by degrees suffered the increase
of these superstitions, as pious frauds, both to preserve the dignity of their
office, and a civil union amongst men; therefore in abolishing them you may
perhaps destroy the tenure of your own power: however it is apparent, when you
embolden the vulgar with profane hands to violate those things which in all
ages have been reputed sacred, at the same time you instruct them to vilify
and despise the authority of Kings; for if they once perceive the holy
mysteries of the Gods have not been exempt from error, upon the least
suggestion of turbulent discontented spirits, they will easily believe that
Princes their Vicegerents have through ambition usurped a tyrannical
jurisdiction, and then the Sacred Unction cannot protect them from the rage of
popular innovation; but the multitude contemning all humane dictates, the Regal
Ornaments will become the derision, and the Flowers of the Crown the Trophies
of their fury.

Besides, it is not unworthy our most serious thoughts, that as Religion is the
chief obligation which preserves the concord of particular people amongst
themselves, and of several Nations one with another, so it is the fairest
pretense for factious Contrivers to stir up domestic Rebellions, or for
foreign Princes, being ambitious of Empire, to invade the Territories of their
neighbors. And though amongst your subjects, some will undoubtedly without
difficulty approve of the change, others for their profit comply, and the major
part perhaps through fear submit to the present exigence; yet education has so
powerful an influence upon the minds of men, that they who have been bred in
them, will never be drawn to forsake their errors, but be ready to embrace any
occasion whatsoever to embroil the State, through hopes that in a general
confusion an opportunity may occur to introduce again their ancient
superstitions: And stranger Princes, under a pretended detestation of our new
received opinions, though indeed to make a miserable prey of this so distracted
Kingdom, will not only renounce their former leagues, but be still ready to
foment the fire that shall set all in a combustion.

And though our habitation be indeed strongly fenced in with the Sea, and
separated from all the rest of the world, yet we are so small a parcel of it,
that we cannot possibly think long to subsist, if we live at defiance with the
whole race of mankind: which, if we set up a new Religion, never before heard
of, or received in any other Clime or Region, must inevitably follow; for our
old Allies will forsake us, and if we seek for new, the most barbarous Nations
will refuse us for their friends, who have been so unconstant to our Gods.

When therefore our Island, as the best policed Commonwealths are subject to
mutability, shall either be infested with civil dissentions, or else lie open
to the oppressions of some formidable Invader, having neither charity amongst
our selves one to another, nor the compassion of friends from abroad, being
destitute of help, and utterly deprived of all external support, it will appear
like a poor small weather-beaten Bark floting in the midst of the Ocean, and
miserably tossed with storms and tempests; whilst the despairing passengers
beholding her sails torn with the wind, her tackling fail, her masts shivered,
her anchors lost, the rudder broken, and their whole Vessel full of leaks,
terrified with the horror of their present danger, both lose the use of reason
to assist themselves, and in vain implore the assistance of the heavens, having
neither Compass, nor Mariner, nor Pilot, nor so much as the glimmering light of
any favorable star to conduct them safe to a secure harbor.

I may therefore under favor suppose, that though what you have designed is
most congruent to the present condition of your affairs, yet perchance the most
certain means to establish your Empire for the future, will be to let things
rest as they are, and to conclude a happy peace with the Emperor Valentinianus,
though purchased at any rate, so he will relinquish Aurelia's, and acknowledge
your, Title: Otherwise, I am ready to execute your just commands; and this arm,
supported with your power, shall either depopulate the vastest Regions of the
habitable world, or secure you from the apprehension of your Enemies.

Oh my better Genius! replied the Queen; it is no marvel thou have such an
attractive power over my affections, since both our souls seem inspired with
the same thoughts, and governed by the same principles. These reasons thou have
now put into the balance, have long strugled with my resolutions; and if
either by Treaties, or the mediation of Allies, or by incredible submissions,
or any other means whatsoever I could have contracted a peace with
Valentinianus, I should never have proceeded to such extremities; and you may
easily believe it is not choice, but necessity, that at length forces me to it:
For during the reign of Euphemia my elder sister, when I was cruelly persecuted
by the Fl^mens, as suspected to have an aversion to their Gods, did I not by
oaths and protestations, and a strict observance of all the usual rites and
ceremonies, assure my sister of my constancy in that belief wherein I had been
bred? And if you will imagine me so wicked to have dissembled then for my own
security, why, since the power has been in my self, have I not freely declared
my opinions? You see I have not yet since my coming to the Throne, either in my
own private practice, or in the public solemnities altered any thing of the
ancient forms; but to show my zeal to that profession, received my Crown, and
the holy Unction from the Roman Flamens, and have hitherto maintained
Ambassadors at Rome, by declaring my sincere intentions to continue still the
same league and union with the Emperor, to obtain his approbation of my Title:
But since he is so obstinate not to depart from Aurelia's interest, and nothing
can induce him to hearken to any terms of reconciliation, We must, if it be
possible, by rooting out his faction, disenable him to offend us.

This is the most visible remedy for the present evil; and future ages, as we
do now, must suit their councels according to the different revolutions of
their affairs.

Pursue therefore, with an undaunted courage, in my safety, thy own greatness:
But let us no longer lose time in discoursing of what ought already to be put
in execution. And thereupon taking a Ring from her finger, she brake it
asunder, and delivering the one half thereof to Heraclius, I conjure thee, said
she, to preserve this, as I will do the other part, in testimony of my promise
that thou shall hereafter enjoy with me an equal share in the Empire, as
likewise to remain a pledge of our mutual fidelity: And if in thy absence
during this present expedition, or at at any other time, thou should by cross
fate be plunged in any exigence of misfortune send me that as in remembrance of
the vow I here make in the presence of heaven, that though in the remotest part
of the earth, I will employ all the power of our dominions, and even my own
life to redeem thee from thy adversity.

Whereupon kneeling down, he kissed her hand with such a zeal as expressed the
gratitude of his heart; and after reciprocal protestations of an inseparable
amity, and a constant perseverance in the prosecution of their designs, they
parted for that time, Theodora to communicate her intentions to the Nobles, and
Heraclius with the promises of infinite booty to prepare the Soldiers to
withstand any opposition that might happen.

The soldiers with little difficulty embraced the proposition; but the Princes
and Nobility, or the greatest part of them, as much as they durst, sought to
dissuade her from such an attempt, as they conceived no less perilous then
impious: But knowing the obstinacy of her disposition, and that besides the
fond affection of the people, the Army was disposed to be at her devotion, they
were forced to submit, or at least to suffer what was not in their power to
remedy.

So that things being thus ordered, and Theodora having in a general assembly
of the States made a specious declaration of the abuses and superstitions
introduced by the Flamens, a severe Decree was published, under grievous
penalties prohibiting the use of any other rites or ceremonies except only
those that appertained to the worship of Jupiter; and to cover her malice with
a greater show of piety, lest through corruption the same errors should again
creep in amongst them, she assumed to herself and to her successors the sacred
office of the High Priesthood, vainly supposing that all the inferior orders
depending wholly upon the Prince, He might the easilier, upon any occasion,
impose upon men's consciences such Tenants or laws, as should most conduce to
the supporting of an unlimited Prerogative. Whereas indeed the right of divine
authority being denied them, their ordinances have ever since been contemned;
and then their abject compliance with the Crown, only to maintain the shadow of
a borrowed power, has in these latter times been so scandalous, that it has
given the chief, if not the sole occasion, to ruin both themselves and it;
whose sufferings it will be then too late to lament, when their fall, as
inevitably it must, has crushed and dashed in pieces the whole frame of the
civil government.

Nevertheless mischiefs not foreseen, or if foreseen, not regarded by Theodora,
in respect of the secure fruition of a Crown, not at all de^erred her from the
accomplishment of her designs; but proceeding without control, every thing
succeeded so according to her desire, that it is almost incredible with what a
precipitate rage the multitude ran in throngs to demolish those ancient
Relics of Antiquity with which their Ancestors had adorned the Shrines and
Altars of the Gods.

The Priests were expelled the Temples; the Vestal fire was extinguished; and
the sacred Virgins wishing to be interred alive, as desirous rather to suffer
the punishment than the crime, were polluted with unchaste embraces.

In fine, all was exposed either to massacre or rapine; and the Queen being now
absolute Mistress of her desires, she seemed to defy the force not only of
Valentinianus, but even of the whole world.

Yet to carry all with a show of sanctity, in the first place she took care to
establish her new Model of Religion; and having caused an Image of gold, formed
by cunning workmen, such as for art the like had never been seen, to be set up
in the chief Temple; Herself attired in the holy vestments, with a Garland of
Oak upon her head, riding in a Chariot drawn by four white Bulls covered with
trappings of gold, with a hundred Virgins clothed in white, perfuming the air
with incense, being attended by Heraclius and diverse of the Nobility, who durst
not seem to dislike of her proceedings, besides an infinite number of the
common people, the Beasts destined for the offering being led before, went in
solemn Procession through the City, every street where they passed being
sumptuously adorned with the richest furniture belonging to to the Inhabitants:
And approaching with a submissive reverence to the new erected Altar, herself
pulling some of the hair from between the Beasts horns, which she cast into the
fire, and drawing a long crooked knife upon their backs, the inferior Priests
slew the Sacrificee, the Ceremonies whereof being ended, with a general
applause of the people, she returned again in the same pomp, to her own Palace.

In the mean while Valentinianus with his whole fleet was approached so near
our Coasts, that those who would not comply, and had escaped the persecution
were sled to him for protection; but finding by their relation, that the party
he relied upon for assistance was totally suppressed, and the rest generally
united with the Queen, knowing his own strength was not sufficient to make an
invasion, rather then to hazard a disgraceful repulse he resolved to return
back again to Rome without attempting any thing, and though now more irritated
then ever, to delay his intended revenge till some sitter opportunity.

Thus those enterprises however difficult, that are resolutely undertaken, and
vigorously pursued, are for the most part prosperous in the event, the success
making them appear both just to the world, and honorable to the contrivers: And
so at this time it happened to Theodora, for having luckily effected her
designs, and Valentinianus at the report thereof having withdrawn his Army,
never any action was esteemd more glorious, nor ever Prince so applauded with
the general acclamations of the people.

But this surfeit of happiness made her nauseate all other pleasures; the
thoughts of Love were despised, her Vows to Heaven forgotten, and Heraclius
who had placed her on the Throne of Fortune, because the only instrument of
her Felicity, the chief object of her hatred.

Nevertheless she knew so well how to dissemble, for that was her chief
masterpiece, that at first, being of a frank generous nature, he perceived it
not: And the Sardinians, a people acknowledging Theodora for their Sovereign,
having at the same time tumultuously taken arms in several Provinces for the
protection of their ancient Gods, and at last united all their force under the
command of Conar, who was descended of the true race of their native Kings;
Heraclius, under a pretense to add to his glory, was with the Army under his
command, sent upon that enterprise.

But he no sooner arrived at Oristagnum, the Metropolis of that Kingdom, but
his friends at home advertised him, that the Queen began already to cast her
eye upon new Favorites, and that it was apparent a little absence would wholly
alienate him from her affection, if not prove fatal both to his life and honor.

Whereupon transported with a rage, he furiously assaulted the Army of the
Rebels; and having driven them into their holds, began with a recollected
seriousness to consider of the condition of his affairs.

When being daily stimulated with fresh advices of the inconstancy of that
ungrateful woman, he privately assembled some few of his chiefest Confidents,
to whom having laid open his secret griefs, after various debates they all
concluded,

That since the Queen, according to the common maxim of tyrannical Princes, no
longer regarded any Subject, then either whilst his service was apparently
necessary for the support of her greatness, or his power a terror to the
licentiousness of her will, no means ought to be omitted which might conduce to
those ends of which herself had been the principal author: Neither could he now
with security retire again to a private condition; for a popular great man,
though he walk in never so direct a path, very hardly avoids at some time or
other to stumble upon a s^affold; and the very well knew the people so
applauded her choice, that finding themselves deluded of their expectation,
they might be apt upon the least summons to take arms, in his sufferings to
revenge their own injury: Nor was it to be doubted, that incited by those
jealousies, she would endeavor, either by force or stratagem, to procure his
ruin; which if not suddenly prevented, would be no less certain, than
reproachful, That he who for Theodora's sake, to establish her upon the throne,
durst by abolishing their rites, provoke the anger of the immortal Gods; to
maintain justice, and for his own security, had not the courage to oppose the
petulant humors of a sickle ungrateful woman.

Therefore to avoid both the danger and the scandal, he should immediately
whilst the memory of his late victory rendered him terrible to the Sardinians,
by offering a grateful advantageous peace, oblige them to his party; and to
engage them more firmly, having taken hostages of Conar for their fidelity, to
put Sicilian garrisons into some of their chief Towns; yet that his Army might
not be diminished, and to express a greater confidence of the Sardinians, to
receive a competent number of them under his pay, who through an innate disdain
of their long slavery, would willingly follow his Ensigns: By which means he
should not only wonderfully increase his strength, but by their invading of
Sicily, putting them past all hopes of a reconciliation with the Queen, make
them more faithful to his designs: And though he might be confident his own
soldiers would ever remain firm to him, yet such associates who fought for the
vindication of their Gods, and their Countries liberty, would questionless by
their example render them more resolute in their undertakings: And if he
attained to his ends, the restoring of their ancient privileges would be a
welcome reward of their labor; or if by the chance of war he were overcome, he
had a whole Kingdom at his devotion for a secure retreat.

But success was as certain as the attempt; for having a Fleet ready in the
harbor, he might transport his whole Army, before there could be any
advertisement of the design. Neither had the Queen as yet secure in her
prosperity, prepared any force to oppose his power.

Nothing ought therefore to retard so just and necessary an enterprise; but
instantly concluding a Treaty, with as much expedition as might be to prepare
for his departure, and with his sword in his hand, either to force Theodora to
ratify her former vows, or else by the punishment of her infidelity to wash
away the stain of his own dishonor.

This was the united advice of all his friends, but most urgently pressed by
Ergastrix his own Secretary, who though ever faithful to his master, in his
heart detesting the violation offered to the Gods by Theodora, hoped thus by
her fall, in restoring Aurelia to her right, to introduce again those ancient
customs; not without some assurance, that being free in her choice, she would
in gratitude of so great a benefit, make the author thereof the companion of
her happiness.

But Heraclius, who never rashly concluded any thing, having with a profound
judgment hearkened to their debates, when Ergastrix had ended his speech,
remained a while silent, but presently recollecting himself said,

Most faithful friends, By the council you have given me, I perceive how
sensible you are of my injuries, and doubt not but you will be as forward to
assist me in all dangers, as you have been free in your advice to prevent them:
But before I can return a determinate answer, you must give me some small
respi^e in a business of such weighty consequence, to consult a while with my
honor.

Whereupon immediately leaving the room, they retired severally; his friends to
expect, and he into his private Cabinet to form a resolution.

Hereupon Cenodoxius fetched a deep sigh, and making a little pause, said; Some
accidents about that time intervened, which though they are material to the
continuation of this story, yet because they more particularly concern
Heraclius, than point at that end to which this discourse is chiefly directed,
and having already perhaps in your opinions, though I shall aptly enough apply
all in the conclusion, related many things impertinent to the present purpose,
not to delay your expectation any longer, I will hasten to those occurrences,
which having reference only to the public, will seem most worthy of your
attention.

But Alexandro at that sudden stop observing an alteration in his countenance,
was curious to know what might be the cause thereof; besides having never
before heard those affairs discoursed of in that manner, though he thought he
had too boldly trenched upon the honor of Theodora, and the justice of her
proceedings, yet desiring rather to know the truth from an enemy, then relying
upon things, because none durst contradict them, received as truths, to found
his actions upon false principles, was not only exceeding attentive to what he
had said, but seeming very much pacified toward him, desired he would not omit
any particular either of Heraclius or his own fortune: For though at first he
had only promised to hearken with patience to his discourse, he confessed he
was now something pleased with the novelty thereof; therefore enjoined him what
persons soever he were to mention, or whatsoever were the subject of his
ensuing narration, that he should use the same freedom which he had done
hitherto. And this he spoke with so much mildness, that Cenodoxius began
already to conceive he had vanquished the fury of his disdain: Wherefore
absolutely to gain him, in a more submissive manner he proceeded in his
discourse.

End of the Fourth Book.
THEOPHANIA.
BOOK V.
Continuation of the Story of HERACLIUS and CENODOXIUS.
MOst excellent Prince, Impartiality is one of the greatest virtues required in
those who are born to Sovereignty, and you abundantly testify how worthy you
are of such a birth, by permitting so great a license to my speech, in which
otherwise, through fear of offense, I should have forborne to touch upon diverse
passages which will not be unworthy of your knowledge.

But emboldened by so gracious an invitation, I shall conceal nothing that is
material to the present subject, nor leave your curiosity unsatisfied in those
particulars, which hitherto have been the secrets of our unfortunate Family;
therefore without interruption to continue.

No sooner had Heraclius retired to his Cabinet, which for the greater privacy,
was in one of the highest Towers of the Castle, which had a fair prospect upon
a large Plain that extended it self many Leagues upon the Seaside, but opening
one of the Casements he addressed his prayers to heaven to direct him in his
resolutions; when suddenly his meditations were interrupted with an unusual
spectacle, which at a remote distance presented it self to his view in the
adjacent Plain.

He immagined he saw a great white cloud advance leasurely forward upon the
earth, and as it moved ascending into the air, seemed to be insensibly
dissipated by the brightness of the Sun, which by reason of a clear serene
sky, caused in him no little admiration, but approaching within distance to be
discerned, his wonder was not at all abated, when he perceived a solemn
procession of Matrons and Virgins, clothed all in white, barefooted, some
bearing white Tapers in their hands, and others with Censors casting Incense
into the air.

Whereupon immediately descending, he called his chiefest friends to him, and
placing a strong guard upon the Gate, for fear of some intended stratagem by
the enemy, himself accompanied only with those that were of his secret Council
issued forth to attend the success of this adventure, giving a strict command,
that whatever happened there should be no farther motion in the City but by
express order, and by that time they had advanced some few paces from the
Castle, the Procession was almost ready to encounter them, when it immediately
made a stand, Heraclius and his attendants doing the same, exceedingly admiring
the order of their proceeding.

But I doubt once more, said Cenodoxius, you will think me teadious in the
relation of this seeming Pageant^y; No, replied Alexandro, and again I both
entreat, and enjoin you, not to omit any circumstance to make up the full
narration of your story especially in this particular, for it promises to be
both delightful, and of consequence in the conclusion. Your Highness judges
rightly, answered Cenodoxius, therefore I will under pardon describe to you the
whole manner of their solemnity.

The Leader of this reverend Band, was a modest elderly Matron clothed in a
loose garment of course Canvas, with a vail upon her head of the same; she was
barefooted, and carried in her hand a Spear, to the point whereof was fastened
a Banner, having painted on it in lively colors, a Peacock with his train
spread, being the bird of Juno, the Goddess whom that people superstitiously
adore as their Protectrix, After whom followed in pairs a hundred and fifty
women more, about the same age, and in the same habit, their eyes devoutly
fixed on the earth, each one bearing in her hand a burning Taper; and after
them a very aged Mat^on supported by two others, herself in the same kind of
habit, but flowing more loosly, and some other little distinctions, which
showed her to be the Superior, or Governess of that society.

The next was a woman of middle years, who bore likewise in her hand a Banner,
wherein was represented Juno sitting upon a cloud, and diverse people of all
conditions praying to her; she was followed by two hundred more in the same
manner, carrying lighted Tapers, and bare footed, but their habit differing
from the former, for their under-garment, the border whereof only appeared, was
black over which they wore a white vest or fine linen girt close to them with
a silken cord, and their Matron had on her head a larger vail then the rest,
training upon the ground, with a long silver staff in her hand, on the top
whereof was an Imperial Crown.

The third Banner was richly embroidered with the figures of Jupiter and Juno
sitting together in their Majesty, and the troop that followed were young
women, none above thirty, their heads adorned with curious Coronets made of
Peacocks feathers; their under garments were of Purple, their upper vests of
pure Lawn pleated, and fringed with silver, being girt to them with a silver
girdle, over which they wore mantles of cloth of silver training upon the
ground; their Matron bore in her right hand a mass of gold set with precious
stones, on the top whereof was a small figure of Juno cut out of one entire
Emerald; she had diverse attendants about her, and her mantle was born up by one
of the same order; but herself as well as her company, had sandals upon their
feet of Crimson Velvet, with laces of silver.

After them marched another banner, which by reason of the greatness, was born
up by twelve young maids, in which Jupiter sat enthroned with his threefold
Scepter, Juno kneeling on a cloud before him, and on the earth a King in his
Royal Robes offering up his Crown, with diverse people behind him in a devout
posture, who by the intercession of that great Queen of heaven, seemed to be
recommended to the protection of the Thunderer.

Those that followed were maids of admirable beauty, their hair hanging loose,
and on their heads Chaplets of flowers; their under garment was of crimson,
short before, but very long behind, covered with another of lawne girt close to
them, with wide sleeves hanging to their feet, and over that a kind of jacket
of silver net close to their bodies, and straight short sleeves as far as the
elbow, but a loose skirt cut in panes like scallops, which reached to their
knees.

These as the others bore tapers in their hands, but sung in a most mournful
tune, yet with a harmony that seemed celestial.

Then followed two hundred maids more, four in a rank, little differing in
habit from the others, with silver Censors, which smoking with rich perfumes,
they tossed in the air as they marched.

The next in order were fifty young women playing upon Ivory Harps, with
strings of silver wier, being clad in a close garment of black, over which they
wore a short vest of lawn curiously wrought about the skirts, and in every seam
with needle work, which reached only to their knees; after whom followed fifty
more in the same habit, that played upon several other Instruments, all
together making a most excellent consort, which infusing a kind of
sorrowfulness into the heart, raised the soul into a divine contemplation; yet
in contemplating the celestial quires, no humane fancy could frame a more
perfect image of them then what was there represented to the fight.

Then came a hundred young Virgins, none above twelve years of age, in long
garments of cloth of silver, with wide sleeves, bearing in their hands Olive
branches, who likewise in sad notes sang the praises of their Gods; after
whom came a Damsel clothed in black, on her head a battered Coronet, and in
her right hand a broken Scepter.

Then followed a Lady of a Majestical presence, her hair slowing upon her
shoulders, on her head a Garland of Olive mixed with Roses; her Garment which
was close to her body with wide sleeves, and a long train; was made of little
plates of silver artificially joined together like the small scales of fish,
over which she wore a Mantle embroidered with pearl, in the Anticque fashion
fastened on one shoulder with a large Diamond of great value: Her train was
born up by six Virgins of the most eminent quality, besides diverse others which
attended her; but her self with her eyes, and hands held up to Heaven, seemed
unmindful of all earthly glory.

Immediately after, under a Canopy embroidered with a Sun, whose glistering
rays cast a glorious light, supported with twelve staves of Gold, which were
born up by twelve Virgins richly habted, followed the Image of Juno all of
massy Gold, with a Crown upon her head, enchassed with Precious-Stones of an
inestimable value, in her right hand a Scepter, in the other a heart of one
entire Rubie hanging at a small chain of Gold, and about her neck, wrists, and
waste, great ropes of Oriental Pearl, besides diverse other Ornaments, as
Tablets of Diamonds, Saphirs, and Emeralds, which altogether made a vast
treasure, and testified with the greatness, and liberality, the devotion of the
doners; but because of the sadness of the occasion, all this glory was shaded
over with a vail of thin black Tiffany, which covered her from the head to the
feet.

Twenty Virgins carried the Goddess upon their shoulders, fifty more carried
great white Tapors lighted, and two hundred with golden Censors raised a cloud
of perfume that encompassed her: after which followed promiscuously a great
number of women, by their sad countenances, and the motion of their lips
seeming to implore the aid of their Protectrix against some common calamity.

But as soon as they perceived a company of men to encounter them on a sudden
they all made a stand, and dividing themselves into two ranks, made a long
lane; so that Heraclius had a full view of Juno^s Image, and of the
incomparable Lady, who stood in a devout posture before the shrine, when
immediately he perceived the damsel clothed in black, advance toward him, and
being come within convenient distance, she asked whether the General Heraclius
was present amongst them; who stepping forward said, Beautiful maid, I^ to him
you have ought to deliver, he stands here read to Answer your demands; when
falling upon her knees with tears in her eyes she thus began.

Most redoubted Lord, my doleful Lady, the no less virtuous, then beautiful
Agnesia, sole heir to the great Conar, the last surviver of our unfortunate
Princes, whom now in a hostile manner you persecute, by me, who bear these
ensigns of an oppressed Royalty, surrenders her self, and this dejected
company, who are willing to follow her fortune, into your protection, humbly
desiring she may be admitted into your presence; which reasonable request she
supposes you will not deny to a Lady of her birth, though the daughter of an
enemy, and by the power of your Arms now reduced into a most deplorable
condition. When raising her up he replied.

Ill were the power of my Arms employed, and I should esteem that victory a
scandal to my honor, by which either Beauty, or Virtue, were oppressed, and if
your Lady accompanied with those Graces seek here for protection, she may not
only command my presence, but you may likewise give her assurance, that even
my life is devoted to her service.

Whereupon the Damsel making a low reverence, without any reply hasted back to
her Lady; who as soon as she had received this joyful message, turning about,
and prostrating her self before the Goddess, after a short Orison for a happy
success to her undertaking, with a modest pace, attended only by the same
damsel, and some principal young Virgins, moved toward Heraclius, who h^sting
to meet her, as soon as they had a distinct view of each others perfections,
they both were sensible of unexpected passions.

Heraclius spirits retiring to his heart, he looked pale, and felt a trembling
in his flesh; but Agnesia's blood starting into her face, made her cheeks
sensible of that flame which was on a sudden kindled in her heart.

Then Heraclius blushing that he had appeared so unmanly, and Agnesia trembling
through an apprehension that she had betrayed too much of woman, by the often
changing of their color, they discovered the secret agitations of their minds,
yet both were so amazed that neither perceived the others alteration; but
Heraclius first recovering out of his trance, offered humbly to kiss her hand,
which she by no means permitting thus addressed her speech to him.

Noble Heraclius the Ceremonious respect you are pleased to show to me, as to a
woman, I wish rather may be converted to a real compassion of these my
compassions, and my sufferings.

That I am the daughter of the unfortunate Conar, you are not ignorant, but I
retain an honor above that my virgin purity: These you see are likewise
professed votaries to chastity, and those that follow after us the chaste wives
and matrons of the neighboring City, all devout reverencers of that sacred
figure of the Celestial Juno, which we hold in the greater veneration, because
it was not formed by the art or industry of man, but he who had undertaken the
work, finding his fancy incapable to comprehend such an excellence as might
represent the perfections of that great Queen of the Universe, devoutly
invoking the assistance of the Gods to aid him in his endeavors, was instantly
surprised with a heavy slumber, and waking, found the Image formed in that
heavenly shape, which as a present from the Divine Powers, being forthwith
transferred into a sumptuous Temple, by the piety of our Ancesters, prepared
for it, the place has ever since been especially honored by the presence of
the Goddess, (...) h^th convincingly appeared by the effectual operation of
(...) miracles, nor was that the least, of which we (...) witnesses, when the
Goddess, (...) of these our present calamities, this her sacred Image was seen
many days together continually to weep.

But perhaps I recount these supernatural effects to persons incredulous of
such divine mysteries; however our wretchedness is so obvious to every sense,
as cannot but gain a credit in the relation, and may beget a compassion in the
most barbarous enemy, much more in the generous breast of so noble a Conqueror.

For it so happened immediately after the late encounter, wherein the chiefest
of our youth signalized the nobleness of their courage with their blood, that
our troops disheartened with their fall, being at length forced to a shameful
flight, the runaways to palliat the ignominy of their cowardice, made such a
terrible relation of the invincible valor of the Sicilians to the rest of the
Army, that of twenty thousand men, who lay encamped without the City, in less
then an hours space, being overcome by their own fears, not any remained for
the defense thereof, except some few of the principal Commanders, who,
notwithstanding all their endeavors, finding themselves so abandoned by their
soldiers, hasted to the Palace to advertise their Prince of his peoples
disloyalty.

Whereupon his Highness immediately taking horse, with an intent, if it were
possible, either by persuasions or threats, to bring them back again to the
defense of their Country, this sad disaster was so quickly bruited among the
inhabitants, that perceiving the soldiers precipitate flight* and beleiving
their Prince had likewise forsaken them, being struck with a pannick fear, all
the men, both old and young, that were able so to secure themselves, and even
the Priests, who by hollowed vows, are obliged to attend at the Altars, ran
headlong out of the gates, to lu^k for safety in the adjacen^ Woods, and
Mountains.

The Mothers tears, the Wife's embraces, the lamentable cries of tender
infants, nor the reverence due to the supreme Powers, could not fortify them
with a resolution, rather to dye manfully in the discharge of those natural,
pious Obligations, then most unnaturally, and impiously, in seeking refuge
amongst beasts to relinquish the protection of the Gods.

In this confusion, ignorant of what had passed, I returned from the Temple,
accompanied only with a small train of Ladies, when I found the streets
filled with multitudes of women running distractedly up and down; some weeping
over their children, some tearing their hair, and wringing their hands, and
others though more patient in their griefs, ready to expire with the anguish
thereof, but all irresolute, whether they should by laying violent hands upon
themselves, and their Infants, put a period to their miseries, or else by
following their fugitive friends, perish with them by a languishing death.

Thus whilst some exclaimed against the unkindness of their dearest Allies,
others reproached the vild timerousness of the Prince and Soldiers, and all in
general bewailed the cruelty of their own destiny, at length understanding
perfectly the cause of their lamentations, being inspired by the Goddess, I
ascended a high Tribunal in the chief place where on certain days the
Magistrate gives public audience to the people, whether they al presently
flockt about me, and having with much difficulty obtained hearing, after some
few arguments to excuse my fathers so hasty leaving the City, having assured
them if they would follow my example, either to lead them on by a glorious fall
to terminate their sufferings, or else to restore them to their former
happiness* with these promises, together with the respect and affection that
they bore to me as their natural Princess, they were persuaded to return
quietly to their houses, and with patience three days only to expect the
return of our Prince, our kinsmen and Allies; which being expired, and having
not heard the least news what is become of them, now truly disdaining either
the Empire, or Society of such pusilla^mous men, with a general consent we
submit our selves as Vassals to that power, the only report whereof has
already vanquished our Armies: Yet with these conditions, That our Chastities
may be preserved inviolate; The holy residences of these Votaries remain
protected from the rapine of your soldiers; and the sacred Temple of our
Goddess not be profaned, or polluted by the irreligious contemners of her
Deity: Otherwise rather then to suffer our own dishonor, or to be the wretched
spectators of any impious violence which may be offered to that Heavenly Image,
in contempt of your power we come thus prepared both to prevent your tyranny,
and by a voluntary Martyrdom to appease the anger of the incensed Gods.

When on a sudden, and at the same instant both her self, and all the rest
drawing out of their sleeves short poignards, the points whereof they directed
against their own breasts, pawsing a little, in that fatal posture, they
expected the answer of Heraclins.

But he without any demur falling presently on his knees, and laying one hand
on Agnesias poignard, besought her, that if from him she apprehended any
violation of her honor, that she would rather by his death secure her fears,
then through a diffidence of the Conquest her Virtue had made leave his memory
infamous to posterity.

When raising himself up, and having a while considered such a multitude of
Beauties, and in Agnesias person the amassed perfections of the whole
multitude; You have conquered, said he, most excellent Lady; The Invaders of
your Country, will henceforth become the Champions of your Liberty, and either
Theodora shall by remitting the punishment of this late revolt confirm to your
Nation their ancient privileges, or I will my self armed in your defense
undertake the protection of your cause.

Return therefore triumphant to the City with your holy Band, and recall
thither your Prince, your Husbands, and your friends, and despise not their
society, who by the chance of war being subdued, and through a fear in such
occurrences incident to humane nature flying the supposed fury of a Conqueror,
have lost nothing of their own honor, and given such a glorious occasion to the
whole world to celebrate the fame of your Heroic virtues; which will spread so
far, that as the Amazonian Queen to raise an issue worthy of her self ^ncited
by the report of his matchless Valor, through many Regions, sought the
embraces of the renowned Alexander, so the remotest Monarchs of the earth,
hearing the relation of this noble enterprise, will contendingly submit their
Crowns to these Virgins, that the glory of them may be preserved in their
posterity: But to your self the great example of so magnanimous an action, none
must dare to aspire, but he who by an invincible virtue shall acquire the
Empire of the Universe.

I know not by what tradition you have received the story of your miraculous
Image, but Nature has in your self formed so excellent a shape, a beauty so
transcendent, and the whole composure adorned with such heavenly endowments, as
if at the same time, in villification of the supreme powers, she meant to
ensnare men in Idolatry.

But since you so superstitiously reverence the shadow of a Deity, I may
certainly with less offense adore a mortal deifyed with such real perfections.

Therefore you may henceforth remain as secure from any attempt by us against
your divine person, your Patriots, or those things which you esteem sacred, as
the Temples, and Altars of your Gods are from being profaned, or destroyed by
their own Priests.

This more then expected Grace, abundantly satisfied Agnesia, as concerning the
success of her design: But she who preferring her Countries honor above her
life, came fortifyed with a resolution to defye the strength of a whole army,
now inspired with gentler thoughts, neither mindful of Country, nor friends,
nor the terror of those dangers so lately passed, through a compassion of her
self desired to live, yet not to live unless pittyed by that enemy, whose power
she had before despised: And though Heraclius had sufficiently discovered the
passions of his mind, yet innocent love ignorant how to extract any assured
hopes out of artificial expressions, though she thought he had given her
attributes far exceeding her merit, yet imputing all to Courtship, she could
hardly believe he was an affectionate lover, and when through a self kindness
she would have interpreted his words in favor of her desires, the remembrance
of Theodoras greatness, and the fame of their contracted vows, so confounded
those imaginations, that rage, despair, and emulation with an united strength
combating the sole support of a virtuous mind, if Honor and Chastity had not
repelled the fierceness of their invasion, would perhaps have forced a yielding
to those violent transportations.

But Reason being now again placed in its proper sphere, with a heart full of
generous thoughts, and the beams darted from her eyes, dissipating all clouds
of discontent, like a triumphing Conqueror, to secure a submissive enemy from
his fears, she first threw away her mortal weapon, and then thus replied.

Theodora's insatiate ambition of rule will be soon satisfied through your
generosity, for to be thus vanquished, all Nations will esteem as a certain
foundation of their liberty, unless through the fond opinion of a servile
loyalty, by suffering your virtue to be made the instrument of her tyrannical
oppression, you stain the glory of your Conquests.

However if you so dispose of us, we must now to her render a passive
obedience, but I believe the Immortal Juno, who in compassion of our long
sufferings inspired you with such a generous clemency, has likewise chosen you
to be the Author, and preserver of our future felicity, and remember that
Agnesia though a feeble Virgin, deserted by her father and his people, armed
with a resolution to despise the power of Theodora though supported by the
prowess of Heraclius, yielded not her self, as her slave, but the sole prize of
his incomparable Virtue.

When blushing that she had said so much, yet continuing her speech, on a
sudden upon the side of a hill descending into the plain, their appeared
advancing toward them a numerous Army, for Conar having collected together his
scattered Troops, and being besides animated with a fresh supply of his
confederates returned to the City but finding it desolate, and supposing the
Sicilians by the advantage of his absence had led his daughter; and the
inhabitants into captivity, enraged with the disgrace, he resolved either to
free them again, or else to perish in the enterprise; and their march being
likewise perceived by the Sentinels from the Castle of Oristagnuns, the
Commanders not attending any order, fearing a surprisal, issued out with a
considerable force, to the defense of their General, which moving a jealousy
on either side of some intended stratagem, yet each party apprehending even
more then death it self, to be thought guilty of so vile a treachery, they
awhile gazed upon each other without uttering a word, but Heraclius fearing his
men would advance too far, lest in an ignorant zeal, violence might be offered
to the Ladies, without any reply, hasted to withstand their attempt, yet if
need were to defend himself from the attempt of the enemy.

But Agnesia by his abrupt departure, judging her self already condemned as a
Traitor, with a perplexed mind remained doubtful, whether to justify her
innocence she should follow Heraclius, or else to prevent the mischief of a
fatal encounter, carry the joyful tidings to her friends, who she saw were
come to her rescue, of the happily contracted Peace.

Nevertheless, Love, not yet grown an absolute Tyrant, permitting a
consideration of the event, though it were an anguish to her soul to remain so
long suspected as the Agent of a contrived treachery, yet reflecting on the
dangerous ruin both of her life and honor, through an unhappy misprision on
either side, she with all the Virgins, chaunting the praises of their Goddess,
as the author of this success, but ignorant what sacrifices they ought to have
offered to the God of Love, in the same solemn manner of procession, returned
toward the Princes host, who being fully informed of all that had passed, no
less admiring his sisters matchless resolution, then the transcendent humanity
of Heraclius; presently commanding his Army to face about, with general
acclamations of joy, they returned to the quiet possession of their City; and
Heraclius when he perceived they were marched away, dismissing likewise his
Soldiers to their several stations, retired to commune with his own thoughts.

On the one side they represented to him Agnesias youthful beauty, accompanied
with such an undaunted courage, yet governed by the mildness of a modest
chastity; on the other the mature graces of Theodora, with an equal greatness
of mind, but subject to all the passions of an unbridled appetite; the one
innocent of what she desierd, the other so full of those desires that were
destructive to innocence* the one tied to him by the band of a holy vow;
himself united to the other by the sacred power of Love, and both, though
through a different influence, threatening the period of his fate, he proposed
to himself all the ways immaginable how to evade those difficulties into which
his cross fortune had plunged him, and at length with the preservation of his
honor to compass his desires.

In which perplexity he remained altogether irresolute, till the next day Conar
accompanied only with half a dozen of his chief Nobility ariving unexpectedly
about a furlong from Orrstagnum, without any ceremony or safe conduct, desired
admittance to a parley: whereupon Heraclius advertised of his coming, with the
like number went to meet him, and after the first salutations were past,
retiring a good distance from their followers, they entered into private
conference; the effect whereof was never known to any; only it was observed
that they parted with great demonstrations of kindness on either side, and
Heraclius assumed a more contented countenance then usually he had shown in
many days before; which Ergastrix perceiving pressed him to resolve his
friends concerning their late consultation, and omitting no occasion to incense
him against Theodora, produced fresh Letters of the immoderate favors she
bestowed upon her new minion Arsidas.

At the perusal whereof, with a disdainful smile, he replied, The resolution
is already taken; I will not by invading my Country, blemish the renown of my
Ancestors with the reproach of disloyalty, but by maintaining my faith, punish
the infidelity of this perfidious Queen.

To be short, I am determined privately to imbarque for Sicily, and let none
examine the drift of my intentions* but that my absence may not be known in the
Army, give it out that I am detained in my bed by an access of fever: In the
mean while to Callisthenes, Clytas and Lysias, with this caution, that by no
means they offend the Sardinians, I commit the government of all affairs; to
you the care presently to provide a Vessel, and my self will so manage the
rest, that at my return, which if I prosper in my designs, shall be no less
sudden then my departure, those friends who have been faithful to me, shall
participate of the glory; but if I miscarry, be no way involved in my disgraces.

Having thus disposed of all things in order to his intentions, within a few
days after in the habit of a Soldier, attended only by two trusty servants,
he set sail, and guided by a favorable wind, in a short time arrived in the
road of Palermo, upon the Western coast of Sicily, where Theodora being then in
her Summers progress, recreated her self with the pleasant situation of the
place, and to vary her delights, at the same time that Heraclius ship cast
anchor, she was in her barge upon the sea, to enjoy the coolness of the evening.

When supposing by her equipage it could be none but the Queen, presently
descending into a small skiff, he intended to go on land, yet as he passed, if
it were possible, to take a view of Theodora and her company, but being almost
within convenient distance, the gang to show their address, beginning to row
cheerfully with all their force, ignorant of the Stee^smans treachery, who as
the bruit present ran, was by some of Aurelias faction suborned to that
treason, the barge ran so violently against a rock, that her keel being broken,
the Queen her self with Arsidas, and the Ladies that accompanied her, were all
exposed to the mercy of the Ocean.

Whereupon he hasted to their relief, but Arsidas unskilful in swimming, was
presently drowned, and the rest every one in such an exigence preferring their
own safety, hanging about her sides endangered the oversetting of the skiff,
which Heraclius perceiving, and that Theodora by the help only of a small
plan^, being as yet preserved, cried out for assistance, casting away his
garments he plunged himself into the main, and with a manly strength lanching
forward to the distressed Queen, with the one hand he supported her under the
arm, and with the other, like another Neptune to preserve the Queen of his most
beloved Island, guided both himself and her, being somewhat assisted by the
plank, safe to the shore, from whence a timely assistance was sent to those
Ladies that yet hung struggling about the skiff; but when the manner of this
accident was related, all grew into a horrible confusion, with terrible threats
and exclamations against the authors of so foul a Treason.

Nevertheless the Court being again appeased, and the astonishment of the
danger a little past, Theodora knew not whether she should most lament the
death of Arsidas, or that she was now again preserved by Heraclius; yet
questionless the remembrance of past obligations, the nobleness of his person,
and this present deliverance had restored him again entirely to her favor,
especially now his corival was gone, if Glaucus and Pausanias, two chief
Counselors, who because they could not imitate his virtues, envied his
advancement, having by their spies intelligence of all that passed, had not
maliciously suggested that his excessive greatness began to grow dangerous to
the State, and already menaced a destruction of the Royal Authority; for if his
ambition were not boundless, why did he not content himself to remain in his
Government of Sardinia till it had pleased her Majesty to recall him home to
greater honors; or if his designs were not pernicious, why in such a manner
did he come away; but that which most manifests his high aspiring mind, was
the assuming to himself such a sovereign power, as of his own head to grant a
peace to Rebels, and without the privity of the Council, to entertain a
Conference with a public Enemy.

Which Objections were so aggravated with politic recriminations, that instead
of a reception answerable to the merit of so notorious a service, one morning
as he entered into the Palace he was by a sudden surprisal disarmed, and by
the guards conveyed to a strict prison, where notwithstanding the earnest
endeavors of secret friends, finding it impossible to gain access to the
Queen, and by this violent proceeding confirmed in the Oopinion that she had
cancelled the Bond of all former Obligations, the remembrance of Agnesia's
beauty wholly possessing his affections, and the known malice of his enemies,
representing to him his present danger, He began for her sake more studiously
to think of his own preservation, and by promise of large rewards, so entirely
gained Cardonius, Captain of the prison, that the second night after he made an
escape, and though with some difficulty in a short time after returned
undiscovered toward Sardinia, hoping by the fidelity of his friends, there to
arrive in a secure port, from whence he might upon a gentle stream sail to the
embraces of Agnesia, whose hereditary right would possess him of a Kingdom, and
her fathers forces united with his own, invest him with a power to oppose the
Tyranny of Theodora.

But those instruments who with such dexterity wrought his disgrace, being no
less diligent at the same time to secure the obedience of that Army; had
instantly dispatched Cleomenes, of their Partisans, with a large Commission
from the Queen, to assume the charge thereof; who at his first arrival at
Oristagnum, presently secured the persons of Calisthenes, Clytus, and Lysias,
with all others who were thought favorers of his designs, and then in a long
studied Oration laid such horrible Treasons to his charge, that the soldiery
remained for the most part satisfied with those transactions; and those whose
affections, nor Faith, would not admit of any alteration, Heraclius being
absent, and his chief friends under restraint, being destitute of Council,
fearing to act against their own interest, in expectation of another, submitted
to the present change.

Nevertheless Ergastrix as he was more vigilant then the rest, and his power to
hurt not so much regarded, escaping the persecution of Cleomenes, easily
procured a barque to transport him into Sicily, and having advanced some few
Leagues from the shore, happily encountered his Masters, who being desirous to
learn the news of Sardinia, boarded his vessel, and was not a little astonished
to meet so accidentally his faithful servant, but understanding by him the
state of his affairs, and how his designs were traversed by Cleomenes, without
any long deliberation altering his course, he steered directly for Sardinia;
where being received with exceeding honor by Conar, Agnesias gracious
deportment, added hopes so correspondent to his desires, that he believed he
might without offense discover the ardency of his affection; which was so
acceptable on the other side, that the nuptials were forthwith celebrated with
all the pomp due to the birth of so great a Princess, and the mannagement of
the war, being then resolved on as necessary, was wholly committed to his
direction.

This news flew quickly to Oristagnum, which caused a sudden disorder in
Cleomenes Army, for a considerable party that only watched an opportunity to
express their zeal to their former General, separating themselves from the
rest, forced their way through the Guards, to the Tower, where Calisthenes with
his other adherents were imprisoned, and having set them at liberty, marched
triumphantly with Colors displayed to Heraclius Camp, offering with their
lives to secure him from the persecution of his enemies, and he with this
sudden addition of force was so elevated, that he now esteemed himself beyond
the reach, or malice, of fortune.

On the other side Cleomenes giving advertizement of this unexpected defection
into Sicily, was presently supplied with fresh recruits, whereupon knowing his
greatness was inconsistent with his enemies, he took the field, with a
resolution to give him battle, which was joyfully accepted by Heraclius, but
in the encounter, the circumstances whereof would be tedious to relate, the
Sicilians on Heracluis party fighting gallantly, being all slain, the
Sardinians were soon totally routed, by which defeat their Country remained
afterward annexed to the Sicilian Crown, and their Prince, and people the
slaves of the Conquerors. But my unfortunate Father seeking a noble death
amongst his enemies, performed actions, which though I spare to mention,
succeeding ages will admire, yet being overpressed with multitudes, he was at
length taken Prisoner, and as a sure token of an entire victory, sent with a
strong guard into Sicily, where Glaucus and Pausanias, fearing time might
mitigate the Queens indignation caused his Process to be presently dispatched,
and the Judges being all of the same Cabal, without consideration of his many
glorious achievements, they condemned him to an ignominious death, which
being the sentence of a partial Faction, the relenting people, with a general
murmur, voted the Authors thereof the greater malefactors.

But they, who about the same time, had barbarously embrewed their hands in
the sacred blood of Aurelia, which was a horrid example for future ages to
violate the dignity of Princes, having brought Heraclius so near the Scaffold,
thought all delays dangerous until they had delivered him into the hands of the
Executioner.

Nevertheless Theodora, who though she dissembled her inclinations, was of a
haughty, insolent spirit, and no less unconstant then cruel in her resolutions,
through a disdain as some supposed, that the person whom she had once destined
to her bed, should by an infamous fall, be laid in an obscure Grave, for the
present suspended the Execution, which made others conceive, that hovvever, by
the persvvasion of his adversaries, who pretended her safety, she had suffered
them to proceed to this trial, and condemnation, yet she did it only to submit
him to her power, and that some sparks of her former love still remaining,
began to kindle a new flame, which if he would have absolutely humbled
himself, and acknovvledging his fault, have repudiated Agnesia, might have
lighted the Torches to his second Hymeneals.

But those who best knevv the Nature of her disposition, believed she did
indeed desire his submission, but with an intent only to insult over his
misfortunes, or if she suffered him to live, to let him know he lived only by
her Grace, and that she was abundantly acquit of all past Obligations, in
shevving so unusual a clemency, to so great an offender; whereas the best of
his services could pretend to no other esteem then as the duties of a subject
so highly obliged by his Prince, nor to no farther revvard then the
acknovvledgemen of his loyalty.

This was the conceit of the best judgments, and Heraclius himself concurred
in the same opinion, wherefore besides his unalterable affection to Agnesia,
rather then to submit, he resolved to entertain death, without any show of a
servile fear, and though some persuaded him to implore the mercy of his
Sovereign, and intimations were given him even from the Queen her self, that if
he would conform to the compliance of a submissive subject, he might expect the
mercy of a gracious Princess, yet he would never condescend to owe his life to
that person, who had so manifestly outraged his honor.

Notwithstanding the pitteous lamentations of Agnesia, who was then young with
child of me, and who, if he died, vowed her own destruction, so shaked his
resolutions, that the evening before he suffered, he sent privately for Despina
one of the Ladies of the bedchamber, who being highly regarded by the Queen,
was acquainted with many passages of their former love.

To her therefore with many conjurations of secrecy, he delivered that pledge
of a perpetual Union, the divided Ring, which in his greatest perils Theodora
had obliged him to send her, with a solemn protestation, that she would
interpose the whole power of her Kingdom, and even her own life between him and
danger; beseeching her if she tendered his life, with all the speed that was
possible to convey it to her, and his once most gracious Mistress, not doubting
it might produce effects suitable to her own desires.

Despina seemed very joyful of this occasion to serve him, but like a true
Courtier following the vogue of the times, when Heraclius began to decline, she
had received the addresses of Glaucus, who being one of Arsidas familiars, and
of the then prevalent faction, he so far ingratiated himself into her favor,
that to comply with him, having stained the honor of her husbands bed, she
thought it no crime to betray to him the secrets of a despicable friend.

So that instead of delivering the half Ring to Theodora, to oblige him the
more to her, she carried it immediately to her servant Glaucus, with a full
relation of all other passages, who giving her infinite thanks for so great a
discovery, charmed her by all the endeerments of their secret love to an
everlasting silence, and early the next morning, with Pausanias, posting to the
Queen, pressed her with diverse arguments to secure her self from many eminent
dangers, and her faithful Counselors from their perpetual fears, by delivering
at length the public enemy into the hands of Justice, who had not only lived
a contemner of her Authority, but being legally convicted of most enormous
Treasons* had neither acknowledged his guilt, nor once vouchsafed to sue to her
for mercy; but on the contrary, boasting of his own innocence, vauntingly
affirmed, even to the scandal of her Majesty's honor, that though he knew a
certain means to secure his life, yet he would rather suffer a thousand deaths,
then not leave a testimony to the world, that he despised both her favor and
her power.

This allegation had so strong an influence upon the womanish humor of
Theodora, who more then any thing, resented a contempt, that to punish his
arrogance, as she termed it, she condesended to their desires, whereupon not
expecting any further Commission, or Warrant for their proceedings, they hasted
to the prison, and to prevent a second reluctance, caused him inhumanly to be
dragged out of his bed to the common place of execution, where being spectators
of his fall, they did not more glory in their cruelty, then he by a generous
contempt of the world, triumphing over their malice, and even death it self,
with a cheerful alacrity exposed his neck to that fatal stroke, which though at
once it deprived him of life, and separated him from his dear Agnesia, yet
could not be said to shed his blood, since it so firmly cemented the affections
of the people, both to her and his posterity, that though deprived of her
Country, she was ever after honored by them as a Princess, and her son since
with the Title of their General.

But though I pass over the griefs of Agnesia as altogether unspeakable, it
were too great an omission, and even a transgression against the providence of
the supreme Justice, to seem forgetful of the last Scene of this woeful Tragedy.

Despina within the compass of a few months was seized by a violent Fever, in
the ravings whereof, she often cried out upon Heraclius, as if he had been
present by her bed; and at length desiring to speak with the Queen, delivering
the Ring, revealed her Treachery, and immediately thereupon delivered up the
ghost, not without many bitter curses and exclamations of Theodora, who either
through a real regret of her ingratitude, or else through a vexation of mind,
to be so deprived of her hopes in the submission of Heraclius, passed the rest
of her days in a languishing discontent, and before the year expired, often
sighing out the names of Aurelia, and Heraclius, at length breathed forth her
soul; and those torments of conscience that accompanied her to the end, being
generally interpreted to proceed from a tenderness of compassion, the effects
of her tyrannical cruelty, were wholly imputed to her Ministers, and to her
self the glorious, and still lasting titles, of the most Pious, Just, and
Merciful of Princes.

End of the Fifth Book.
THEOPHANIA
BOOK VI.
Continuation of the Story of CENODOXIUS.
THEODORA's fortunate Reign thus expired, though the people infinitely
lamented the loss of so beloved a Princess, Seleucus, son to Aurelia, King of
Cyprus, as her undoubted successor, with no less acclamations of joy, was
solemnly invested with the Regal Authority, who to endear himself to his new
Subjects with a show of mildness, amongst other acts of grace, to sweeten the
beginning of his Government, re-established Agnesia in a great part of my
fathers possessions, that by his conviction were seized upon for the Crown,
which was so far a comfort in her afflictions, that the issue of Heraclius, for
whose preservation only she was content to live, should not be exposed to the
miseries of a necessitous fortune; and having about that time brought me into
the world, her care of my education was such as suited to the tenderness of a
mother of an only child, the son of so beloved a husband.

But as soon as I grew up to any show of capacity, to ease her griefs, with
weeping eyes, she continually entertained me, from my childhood, with this sad
story of our misfortunes, which then made snch an impression, that though being
over-worn with sorrow, she ended this life before I had attained to the
thirteenth year of my age, yet I still retain so perfectly in memory every
particular passage thereof: Besides, after her death, the care of my youth
being committed to the tuition of Veveus, an intimate friend to my deceased
father, who sharing in his disgraces, lead a retired life in the Country, he in
that sollitude punctually related to me those secret transactions between
Heraclius and the Queen, with the inveterate hatred of his malicious enemies,
not to incite me to a revenge, but on the contrary, by so great an example, to
arm me against the various uncertain changes of the world and foreseeing I
should not be favored at the Court, instructed me with principles of
Philosophy, to suit my mind to the present condition of my fortunes, which I
easily comprehending, applied my self wholly to martial exercises, or those
harmless recreations of hunting, hawking, and racing, which so unbend the mind
from any great thoughts, that the lovers of them, for the most part, become
incapable of any other employment.

But neither that retirement, his excellent precepts, nor these divertisements
could defend me from the resistless power of love. For Lysimacus, a person
highly esteemed by the King, being appointed Governor of our Province, the
Inhabitants of Nicosia, the capital City prepared to entertain him with that
honor which was due to the dignity of his place, and one in such special
favor with his Prince. Wherefore being advertised of the time of his arrival,
and that he brought with him, accompanied with an illustrious train, his Lady,
and two daughters of a renowned beauty, being swayed by a cross fate, I was so
transported with a desire to be a spectator of those triumphs, that
communicating my design to Parmenio, one of my most familiar companions, and
finding him possessed with the same inclinations, we went privately together to
Nicosia, where the first night of our coming, at a public ball, though
unknown, we had a full survey of all the choice beauties in the Country; but
the two sisters, Belinda and Artemia were adorned with such admirable graces,
that the whole assembly receiving luster from their motions, all the delights
ordained for mankind, seemed to move in that circle as in their proper sphere.

Belinda the elder though not more mature in perfections, was by the Kings
mediation already espoused to an ancient Lord, who by his meritorious services
deserved no less a reward; but so unequal to her in years, that it was not
probable she could entertain his embraces with that content which was necessary
in the conjunction, to satisfy his hopes, in raising an heir to his Family;
and indeed, though she had complied with the commands of authority, it appeared
too evidently, by exposing her self to the Courtship of others, that she had
not pleased her own fancy in the choice of a husband: But Artemia was so tender
a Virgin, that though she were desired of all, nevertheless being thought
incapable of the impressions, she was not yet acquainted with the assaults of
love.

The contemplation of this Saint-like innocence so diverted my thoughts from
all other objects, that I observed not with what delight Parmenio's eyes
followed the motion of Belindas, but perceiving her so open to all addresses,
he fancied such a success to his new desires, that he had leisure enough to
mark with what a greedy appetite I sucked in that poison, the infection whereof
has since spread with such a rancorous aspersion upon my honor.

But alas! how can man avoid the perverseness of the fates, since from his birth
he is ordained to pursue those means which submit him to their decrees?

I saw Artemia, I admired her beauty, her innocent behavior even ravished my
thoughts with the contemplation of her growing virtues, and by envying their
happiness who had the honor to approach her person, though ignorant of such
passions, I knew I loved her, and loving her, with a restless anxiety of mind
employed all the arts a Lover could invent to betray my self to my own ruin,
in which I was so successful, that having found the means to discover the
fervency of my passion, I met with such a reciprocal concurrence of affection,
that in short, for I will not detain you with a narration of the circumstances,
I approached in my conceit to the fruition of all earthly happiness; for the
example of her sisters disproportioned match, which I failed not to enforce,
rendering her more plyant to my desires, we were solemnly contracted in the
presence of Parmenio and Hortensia her confident attendant, who were privy to
all our proceedings.

Nevertheless because Lysimacus fortunes depended wholly upon the Court,
doubting, lest he might seem to favor his cause, he would not easily consent
to bestow his daughter upon the son of him that had suffered as a Traitor; that
no opposition might traverse our joys, we resolved, having performed the
rites, secretly to consummate the marriage: And things were at length brought
to such a point, that nothing wanted to the accomplishment of our wishes, but
the period of all wishes, an opportunity to perfect our felicity, in the mutual
blisses of the sacred nuptial bed.

In this difficulty Hortensia her confident nurse used such dexterity, that
soon after, having one night concealed my self in the Governors Palace, the
Court being all at rest, I was secretly conveyed into Artemias Chamber, where
meeting no opposition, but a yielding Virgins modesty, I soon entered, like a
triumphant Conqueror into the Fort of Love; but had scarce taken possession of
that inestimable treasure, which all the graces, her faithful attendants, had
then been fourteen years amassing together, when suddenly the whole Palace
being filled with a confused noise; Hortensia as one amazed came running into
the chamber, and trembling, told us, that her old Lady Calista, with Belinda
and their maids, by what accident raised out of their beds, she knew not, were
coming toward the Lodging.

You may easily imagine such an unexpected alarm struck terrible apprehensions
into the poor Artemia, who notwithstanding my best persuasions to assure her
against the encounter, sunk down upon her pillow in a swound; at which sight,
though resolved to justify the action, yet moved with a tenderness of
compassion, I cast such a vengfull regard upon Hortensia, that she easily
understood I believed her treachery to be the cause of that mischief, whereat
either offended, or thinking it necessary to show her innocence, having
recollected her self, and being aided by her woman's wit, ever excellent in such
occurrences, without any show of perplexity, it is now no time, said she, to
talk, or by frivolous protestations to seek to remove your suspicion; if you
can shift for your self, leave to me the care of my Mistress honor, and of my
own justification.

Whereupon with a great lighted Taper that she had in her hand, in an instant
she put fire to the curtains, and to the other combustible things either about
the bed or the Chamber, and taking the half dead Artemia in her arms, ran
hastily with her toward the next room, which fell out so seasonably, that just
at the door meeting Calista, without any stay, thrusting by her, she cried out,
Alas Madam! what do you here? If you regard your own safety, or my Mistress
life, let us convey her quickly to some more open place, for what with the
smoke and the flames, that I know not by what mischance have seized upon our
Chamber, she is almost stifled, and if by chance sitting up late I had not the
sooner perceived it, she had undoubtedly perished in the fire. Which by what
they had seen, being already affrighted, bore such an appearance of truth, that
none suspecting the deceit, they hasted again to Belindas appartment, where by
their diligence Artemia soon recovered her sense, and was presently so
carefully instructed by Hortensia, that not any of them imagined the true cause
of her distemper.

In the mean while, when I perceived the Nurses subtle intention, and withal
heard what he had said to the Ladies, I was so altered in my opinion both of
her fidelity and address, that I was in no further pain for Artemia, but
conveying my self our of her Lodging, under the same disguise that I had
entered, the distraction was so great, that I easily mingled amongst the crowd
without any danger of suspicion.

The occasion of this uproar was a tumult amongst the Country people, who
having a little before had a new Tax laid upon them, though in it self very
easy, yet being unaccustomed to such impositions, thinking the pressure
thereof insupportable, they ran in multitudes to Nicosia, hoping either through
entreaties or fear to force Lysimacus, being scarce in possession of his
Government, to discharge them of that burden, and the better to effect their
desires, knowing the advenues of the City, at a certain place where the Wall
was decayed, entered at that dead time of the night, without being perceived
either by the Watch, which in a time of peace was but slight, or any of the
inhabitants, who slept securely under the protection of their careless guards,
until having possessed themselves of the Magazine, the Soldiers that escaped
their fury gave the alarm, which being unexpected, was so much the more
terrible, and the Peasans being by this time Masters of all the Ports, none
durst stir to make any resistance; but the Citizens running distractedly to the
Palace, had raised the Governor, who by their confused relation, not
understanding rightly the cause of their fears, nor perceiving any thing as yet
but clamor and disorder, assembling his guards, stood only in a posture of
defense, in expectation of the day, whilst Calista more apprehensive of danger,
having raised her daughters, intended to retire with them to some place in the
Palace, that might best secure them from the outrage of any sudden attempt.

But the flames by this time bursting out from Artemias lodging, caused a
second confusion, at the sight thereof a general cry running amongst them, that
they were miserably betrayed to an inevitable destruction, and they were so
possessed with the horror of their present danger, that death was the least of
their apprehension.

Nevertheless Lysimacus, whose courage had advanced him to eminent honors,
being accustomed to perils, with an unaltered temper, endeavored to allay the
tumult, and having by his example animated them to a better assurance, first
gave order to quench the fire, and then sent a party of his most resolute men,
amongst whom I intruded my self, toward the chief Marketplace, where finding
none to encounter them, they made a stand in expectation of a further order.

This pause gave me time to retire to my Lodging, where being presently armed,
and well mounted, I returned again to the Governor with the offer of my service
in this unexpected occasion, which he accepting with his usual civility, and
day by this time appearing, I marched out of the Palace to discover the cause
of this sudden uproar: But before I had passed through one street, the party
which was first sent out, being beaten from their Post by the Rebels, fled in
such haste and disorder, that if I had not happily withstood them in their
carreer, Lysimacus having so small a force, must of necessity have submitted to
the licentious will of an incensed rabble; but having encouraged them to a
second attaque, the pursuers began quickly to retire; in which action, though
my service might perhaps merit from the King, it was from none but Artemia that
I expected the reward, whose beauty only was of that power to animate me to
such a performance.

O that she, whose outward graces had then so strong an influence to repel the
rage of a lawless multitude, had not afterward so much virtue within her self,
to give the Law to the unruly appetite of one single man, or rather of an
impuissant effeminate Courtier.

But she being yet guiltless, her Champion fighting under the protection of her
innocence, soon gave those Traitors the chastisement due to their delinquency,
and afterward though they compassed not their ends, they obtained what they
less expected, not only a free pardon of their offense, but a promise that
their complaints should be favorably recommended to the King: with which they
were so well satisfied, that returning again to their several Villages, they
infinitely extolled the justice and clemency of their Governor.

This tumult thus appeased, Lysimacus spent some days in rectifying the
disorders of the Province, that the Government being well settled, he might
return again to Palermo, in which interim though I had frequent access to
Artemia, yet since the late accident, being lodged in Belindas appartment, it
was impossible to enjoy that privacy of conversation which the united hearts of
the chastest lovers are privileged to desire.

Wherefore knowing her departure would be sudden, and that the air of the Court
was not my proper element, rather then to be separated from my happiness; or by
appearing at Palermo, to revive the remembrance of my fathers disgraces, I
resolved publicly to avow our marriage; yet doubting Artemia, who had ever
been bred up in an awful obedience to her parents, being young and timorous,
would through fear of their displeasure, oppose my proceedings, without
acquainting her with my intentions, I went directly to Lysimacus, whose many
obliging civilities since the suppression of the Rebels, encouraged me to
reveal my secret first to him.

With this resolution entering into his Chamber, I found him, having newly
received a Packet from the Court, giving order for his removal the next day;
and before I could find an opportunity to utter my mind, taking me by the hand
he retired into his Cabinet, and after many endearing professions of kindness,
said,

If you have been rightly informed of my actions, you have no reason to esteem
me an enemy of your Family; On the contrary, as I lamented your fathers fall,
so I should rejoice to see you advanced to such a height, that you may be above
the reach of his persecuters; wherefore since your own virtue has opened you a
way to those honors which belong to your birth, neglect not the means, by
pursuing of glory, to establish your security, and that you may perceive I
intend more then a superficial complement, peruse this letter, and according to
the contents, judge how forward I shall be, by advancing your hopes, to confirm
you in a belief of the sincerity of my intentions.

Whereupon putting a paper into my ^and, he immediately returned again to the
company, leaving me full of amazed thoughts, to what end this discourse should
tend; but having unfolded it, I perceived it was a Letter from the King, the
contents whereof were to this effect.

King SELEVCVS to LYSIMACVS.
THough the late disorders in Nicosia may seem to require your presence, yet my
affairs here are of so great concernment, that I can no longer dispense with
your absence: Therefore committing all to the care of your Lieutenant, by the
haste you make to return, show the affection you bear to my service: And that
the young Cenodoxius who by your relation deserves so high an esteem, may
receive the reward due to his merit, fail not to bring him with you. For as
there is nothing I desire more then peace, especially in my own Dominions, so I
shall ever most cherish those persons who by their Loyalty, or valor, do most
contribute to it.

SELEVCVS.


I must confess I was not a little pleased with this real effect of Lysimacus
friendship, for I supposed he would not be averse to receive that person into
his alliance, whom he had so generously obliged, and with that assurance,
knowing I must of necessity accompany him, I quitted my resolution of declaring
our marriage till some fitter opportunity; yet as if by a secret instinct
foreseeing my future miseries, I could not without some reluctance cast my
thoughts upon the displeasing encounters, I might meet withal at Court.

I knew many of my fathers enemies remained still in great places of Authority;
I knew likewise that diverse of his friends being of no less eminence either in
birth or power, that my presence, especially if the ^ing looked upon me with an
eye of favor, might perhaps revive those factions which had formerly been
between them; and I was not ignorant that their clashings might render me
odious to that Prince whose only end was peace, and his chiefest policies to
suppress the dissentions amongst his Nobles.

Nevertheless on the other side I considered that the commands of a Sovereign
were equivalent to Laws, that to make excuses would be held a crime equal to
disobedience, and that only to avoid supposed inconveniences, I might both
neglect my fortunes, and incur the censure of ingratitude: But that which
removed all scruples, was the remembrance, that though those factions should
through my occasion break out into new animosities, Seleucus himself would be a
party engaged in the same interests, for those very persons who to satisfy
their vain ambition, brought my father to an ignominious death, to comply with
Theodoras, had embrewed their hands in his own mothers blood, with a double
scandal both to his lineage and dignity.

Whilst I thus ruminated upon my own imaginations, Lysimachus returning again
into the Cabinet, with all the submissions due to a father, I acknowled the
benefit I was like to receive by his favor, and his expressions on the other
side were so obliging, that invited by delusive hopes, with exceeding alacrity
I prepared for my journey, and the third day after we arrived with the Ladies,
in very good equipage at Palermo, where I met such civilities in the Court, and
received such extraordinary favors from Seleucus, that as I could not hear the
praises he gave me without blushing, so I cannot repeat them without an
ostentation of too much vanity: Let it suffice I found such an entire
satisfaction, that all things seemed to sort with my own desires, and I now
rather expected addresses from Lysimachus, then to meet with any opposition to
my just demands.

But these mountains of (...) by my own vain imagination raised to such a
height, were but as heaps of sand, easily levelled with the least gust of
adverse fortune: and the first clouds that darkened this sunshine of my glory,
appeared in Artemias countenance for intending to make her participant of my
joys, entering one morning into her Chamber, I found her sitting in her chair
with her hair loose, her head supported by her hand, a small Table that had
been placed before her, thrown down, her Jewels and other ornaments scattered
upon the floor, her cheeks blubbered with tears, her swollen heart ready to burst
with sighs, and in short all the marks of an extreme grief, enclining even to
despair.

What an afflicting object this was to a perfect Lover, your selves if you have
ever felt the effects of that noble passion, may easily judge. The accurate
sense of sorrow had so bereft me of all sense, that as if thunder struck, I
fell prostrate at her feet, not able to utter one syllable; which she
perceiving, taking me by the hand, and gently pressing it, said: Ah ^enodoxius!
what a world of enemies oppose themselves to our happiness? Parents, kindred,
friends, allies, and even the King himself, who ought to be the protector of
innocence, has determined our ruin.

Whereupon a great number of Guards rushing in upon us, she gave a great
shrike, and before I could turn my self about, we were both seized upon, and
without being suffered to exchange a word, conveyed severally away, under a
most severe restraint.

It is impossible to relate how strangely I was surprised with this barbarous
proceeding, and I will not offend your ears with the speeches or complaints
which I uttered in my passion; but in the solitude of my imprisonment, which I
may truly so term, for during the space of three months, in which time my
enemies were perfecting their mischief, none were suffered to come at me except
only two servants, who remained under the same close confinement, with the help
of those Precepts that I had received from my faithful instructor Veveus,
though ignorant of my offense, I so composed my thoughts, that I resolved with
patience to expect the event, and at length things being brought to that
maturity which the contrivers thereof themselves desired, my friends were again
permitted to visit me, yet my affairs went so ill that none were very forward
to perform that office, only Parmenio, whose friendship made him a partner in
my disgraces, would not suffer me to remain ignorant of what so nearly
concerned my honor.

Nevertheless he so prepared me to endure the changes of fortune, and withal
cast out such ambiguous speeches concerning my Love, that imagining any thing
more possible then that Artemia could be false, I expected nothing less then
the certain news of her death.

When at last fixing his eyes upon me, and fetching a great sigh; upon what
terms, said he, would you be content to quit your interest in Artemia?
Whereupon my blood rising into my face, Thy demand, I replied, is injurious to
our friendship, yet upon the first offense not to cancel that band, remain
satisfied with this answer, That not all the possessions of the world, the
hidden Treasures of the Sea, what the fruitful earth may produce, or the
benignity of the Heavens can promise, is able to purchase from me that
inestimable Jewel.

My demand indeed he continued, might give just occasion of offense, if she had
valued you at so high a rate; but if she have already changed you for another,
and voluntarily delivered up that Treasure into the possession of a Rival, upon
which you set such an infinite esteem, I suppose you will be content to
compound upon easier conditions, and not be such a slave to your affections as
by continuing your Love, to abandon your Honor.

To which as in a fury I presently returned, If Parmenio had sense of honor, he
could not thus vildly blemish the virtue of Artemia: Thou have conspired with
my enemies to betray me to some action of infamy, and under the pretense of
friendship, seek to undermine my Love, but thy blood shall pay the forfeit
of thy base scandal, that in thy heart I may read the story of thy treachery.

Whereupon with a sad countenance, and tears in his eyes, he replied, These
transportations are the generous effects of a violent, but I hope the last
effects of a dying passion. I came prepared for such reproaches, and value not
your threats. However though my life were as mnch in your power as you pretend,
yet I am not to be frighted out of my fidelity, but when your rage is satisfied
with my blood, in that heart which you believe so treacherous, you shall find
the impressions of your own sad story, all but this last part of it, which a
heart so loyal as mine is not capable of receiving, That Cenodoxins in
defending the falsest of women, has in his madness shed the innocent blood of
the faithfullest of friends.

The faithfullest of friends! said I to my self, is a title much more precious
then that of the best of women: whereupon recollecting my thoughts* and almost
beginning to suspect, what under that name he had seemed to affirm, as one
prepared to hear the sentence of death, I began to hearken to his discourse,
wherefore with the most comfortable terms he could possibly invent, he told me:

That Eumenes the Kings only minion, though he never declared so much, having
strong inclinations to Artemia, at the report of my actions, and perhaps upon
some information of my particular addresses, grew into such a jealousy of
being supplanted in his pretenses, that at his solicitation Scl^ucus, who in
his excessive indulgence to his favorites was only defective, had in such have
recalled Lysimachus from his Government. That the match being proposed, was
joyfully accepted both by him and his Allies. That thereupon Calista was
employed to prepare her daughter to receive this new suitor, which she at first
coldly refused, but being more earnestly pressed, absolutely denied; not
sticking to avow that she was already engaged in her affections, and in short,
that she was Contracted to me, but apprehending the rigor of her Parents, or
perhaps her own dishonor, had concealed the consummation of our marriage. That
nevertheless Eumenes persisting in his resolution, since he could not prevail
by entreaties, to show the power of a favorite, determined by force to compass
his desires. That Calista was by the King himself commanded to tell her
daughter, that it was his pleasure, she should marry Eumenes, who so abused the
interest he had with his Master, not being able indeed to deny him any thing,
that in case of refusal Guards were appointed to secure her person, and at the
same time to convey me to prison, as having transgressed an antiquated Law
against secret Contracts without the consent of friends. That it happened
immediately after Calista had declared the Kings resolute command to her
daughter, and was gone, I entering thereupon into the chamber, found her having
newly received this cruel Arrest, in that disconsolate posture, and so as I
have already told you, we were both seized upon together. That to hinder all
correspondence between us, it was held fit I should be kept close prisoner, and
in the mean while the kindred, and friends, to be employed to remove her from
her resolutions, but that she remaining yet firm, Hortensia who only knew our
secret, and till then as suspected of partiality, had been kept from her, being
gained with large promises of rewards, had so wrought upon the weakness of her
young novice, by the charms and allurements of a Princely greatness in
becoming the wife of the sole favorite, that she was at length absolutely
overcome, and being now again at liberty, did openly avow her love to Eumenes,
and that though it were already determined to nullify the former marriage, yet
to make some show of a legal proceeding, the chief Flamens were appointed as
Delegates to examine the justice of my cause. And indeed to confirm the truth
of Eumenes relation, before he had quite finished his discourse, or I could
make any Reply, I was summoned to appear in the Court, and by my Guards
conveyed to the presence of those temporising Judges.

It is impossible to recount the various agitations of my distracted mind in
this unexpected occasion: But oh the Heavens! when I beheld Artemia supported
by Eumenes, with an unusual confidence, before a public Assembly, stand ready
to confront me, the billows of a tempestuous sea are not more raging then at
that time were my distracted thoughts, and with the same impetuosity if I had
been at liberty, I should have broken out to my revenge.

But then calling to mind the innocent delights of our former conversation, a
tender remorse of love so calmed those swelling passions, that being asked what
were my pretenses of Interest in that Lady, believing her innocence was
betrayed, and though forced to a compliance, that she was not fallen from her
Virtue; instead of reproaching her Levity, magnifying her perfections, I
related at large the birth, growth, and maturation of our Love, our mutual
Vows, our private Contracts, our formal marriage, and at last the fruition of
those joys, which the Heavens esteeming me worthy to possess, I could not now
be deprived of, but by a too manifest, and impious violation of their divine
Ordinances.

This last asseveration was a circumstance unexpected by the Judges, and I
observed raised blushes in Artemia^^ cheeks, but being prepared with an answer,
laying aside all modesty she boldly replied:

It is indeed true, that overcome with Cenodoxius flatteries, not weighing the
greatness of the sin, I transgressed the rules of piety in consenting to an
unlawful Contract, but considering my unexperienced years, I hope my crime is
not so great, that for my punishment I shall be condemned to remain his wife,
who has here, in the face of the world, laid so foul an aspersion upon my
Honor.

Till now, I must confess, I retained inclinations, so far as it was lawful, to
love that vild man, but since not satisfied to have betrayed my youth to such
an unnatural contempt of my Parents, he has here so unworthily defamed my
Chastity, there is nothing I more truly hate, nor nothing more warrantable,
then to use all means possible to free my self from his engagements.

Wherefore though Hortensia's testimony with my own protestations, might be
sufficient to vindicate my fame, and to leave me free to a more worthy choice,
yet because the scandal has been public, to satisfy the whole world how
much my innocence has been traduced, since our Laws permit not the trials of
Chastity practiced among other Nations, by vvalking with bare feet through
fire, or over the sharp edges of burning plough-shares, I am content, though
either of those would be far more grateful, to expose my body to the near
survey of such skillful persons, who being competent witnesses of my virginity,
and by a sacred Oath obliged to the truth, may give testimony there of to this
Assembly. Yet considering the repugnancy of a maiden-modesty, to such an
immodest scrutiny, let me obtain this favor, that to cover my shame, my face
may be veiled from the view of those who are to be the witnesses of my
nakedness.

Was there ever such an unheard of impudence? or ever such a subtle invention
to work a sinister end? which was so much the more admirable, because she could
hardly yet be called woman.

I cannot but blush at the recital of such immodesties, and must make a
digression to crave your pardon before I can proceed farther in my discourse,
which not to offend your chaste ears, I shall pass over in as few words as
possible.

The Delegats commending her willing submission to such a certain decision of
the truth, and thinking it reasonable, in respect of the sex, to grant her
request, a Jury of Haggs, for it would be a scandal to Lucina, who is the
Protectrix of marriage rites, to entitle them that were the perjured Agents to
violate those sacred bands, her Ministers, were presently appointed to this
unseemly inquisition; and Artemia having before contrived her business,
retiring into a private Chamber only with Horte^sia, and a young maid one of her
attendants, who was both well instructed, and that she might not deceive them,
had alre^^y passed a privy search; the maid only with a vail over (...) laid
naked upon the bed, and the Bel^ams straight called in (...) perform their
office, in which they were so punctual, that no^ exceeding their Commission,
without having seen her face, (...) verdict upon their oaths on Artemias side,
who whilst (...) were busy in their vote, being concealed in a Closset be
(...) Arras, stood laughing at their simplicity.

(...) being thus cleared, she was again summoned into the Court, where calling
upon the Supreme Powers as witnesses of her virgin purity, to revenge her
injuries, and falling upon her knees, with dissembled tears, desired an (...)
sentence from those, as she called them, sacred Judges.

Sacred indeed in their profession and institution, but by their practice and
precepts, the corrupters and sycophants of Princes.

The Kings favorite is enamoured of a beauty already possessed by another; he
by his wicked Agents works her to a willing divorce, and they to please the
times, by a corrupt judgment, become the vile instruments to accomplish his
unjust desires: For notwithstanding the truth of my allegations, Artemia gained
her process, and not long after with all the pomp of the Court, was by the King
himself given to Eumenes.

A gift I must confess worthy of a King, if overcome with vanity, and the
subtle allurements of a wicked confident, her fame, before she knew the esteem
of virtue, had not been so miserably betrayed to an eternal obloquie.

But whilst she gloried in her inconstancy, and Eumenes boasted the purchase of
so rich a prize, the sense of this deep disgrace raised such furies in my
breast, that whilst I meditated a revenge answerable to the indignity I had
received, the torments of my own mind were greater then any I could invent to
inflict upon my enemies.

Eumenes death alone I thought too mean a satisfaction for so monstrous an
injury, unless the false Hortensia, the perjured Artemia, the corrupt Flamens,
and even the King himself, as guilty of too much partiality, being accomplices in
the offense, participated likewise of the punishment.

But Artemia and Hortensia not long after being found culpable of a greater
crime, which is so public a story, that none are ignorant thereof, and Eumenes
as a confederate, from that height of favor falling into the hands of Justice,
my anger for the present was in some measure appeased: In so much that knowing
the peaceful humor of Seleucus, and with what excellent policies he prevented
all occasions that might disturb the calm of his Government, during the rest of
his Reign I lived quietly, if not contented in my former retirement.

At length Seleucus being dead, and Antiochus seated in the Throne, though
Clearchus for a time through an excess of affection enjoyed little less then a
partnership in the Empire, and the Prince and Nobility, though they could not
deny his merit, maligned his greatness; yet he being by the butcherly hand of
an impious assassin, as you all know, in the midst of the Camp Royal, most
barbarously murdered, the beams of favor were so equally dispersed, that
through their benign influence, every one believing the way was now cleared to
those honors and dignities, which belonged either to their birth or virtue,
sought to ingross that authority to themselves, which with so much murmuring
they repined at in another. And in this general mutation of affairs, aspiring
with the highest, the renowned Justice and generosity of the King, made me
hope, if not the chief place, at least a change in my condition.

Wherefore having in a manner buried the remembrance of my former disgrace, in
the graves of my persecutors, I resolved once more to become a Courtier? O
resolution so destructive to my repose! O ambition so fatal to my honor! But
had I only served my ambition, and not again rendered my self a slave to love,
Fortune who contemns that petty Deity, would perhaps have been more propitious
to my designs.

In Artemias perfections I might have considered the hidden rancor of those
charming poisons; in her sudden change the flexibility of women's minds, and in
her unpatterned levity, the frailty of the whole sex.

I was not yet so neglected by Antiochus, nor so discountenanced by Eudoxia, as
well the Queen of his heart, as his associate in Sovereignty, but that in the
pursuance of their favor, I might have expected a more glorious success, then
in the vain contestations of love, though Venus her self had been proposed the
price of my Conquest: Nevertheless yielding to the flatteries of those impotent
delights, I began insensibly to burn in a second flame, which has been the
destruction both of my self and Family.

The Court was enriched with many excellent beauties, but none in my opinion to
be compared to the incomparable Paulina, whose fortunes not equalling her
birth, she easily condescended to so advantageous a party. But the story of her
infidelity is so well known to all the world, and so fresh in every man's
memory, that I need not be the relater of my own infamy; though I cannot but
exclaim against the folly of mankind, with such a general consent to allow the
lubricity of women, to become the stain of their husbands honor.

It is sufficient the adultres was detected, and though I were not my self
present, by diverse of my nearest friends, surprised in the lustful embraces of
her amorous paramour.

Wherefore her shame being so public, and her minion Vitellio, though in the
rank of Gentlemen, of too mean a quality, and the offense too great, to admit
the dispute of an honorable encounter, instead of revenge, seeking for
Justice, I required of Antiochus the punishment due to their crime.

But Vitellio being favored by Eudoxia, in lieu of redress, I was forced upon
our separation, not alone to endow Paulina with a large revenue, but to receive
her bastard-issue as the lawful inheritor of all my fortunes, and only Vitellio
to avoid the fury of my indignation, was for the present, not banished, but as
a darling of the Court, with many rich presents, sent to recreate himself in
foreign parts, in so much that I became the scorn and derision, not only of
Palermo, but even of the whole Kingdom.

This last wound stuck so deep, and made so large an orrifice, that all the
furies of hell entering at once into my bosom, represented my past disgraces in
such hideous forms tyranizing over my honor, that the thoughts of revenge
depriving me of all repose, rage and despair became at length the greater
tyrants.

My Fathers blood, Agnesias languishing griefs, my violate marriage, and this
late contempt, raised several passions, which like so many torrents, overthrew
all obstacles that withstood the rapacity of their course, where they met the
greatest checks, raging with the greatest impetuosity, and though the sacred
person of the King, with the holy Office of the Priesthood, seemed secure
Ramparts against any violence, they swelled to such a prodigious height, that
at last they overflowed them, and have now caused a vast sea of confusion, in
which my self have first suffered a miserable shipwreck.

Nevertheless those two considerations of piety and allegiance had perhaps
suppressed such unruly thoughts, if the malcontents of the times perceiving my
distemper, had not taken that opportunity to engage me in their own designs;
but that which chiefly forti^ed me in those resolutions, was the authority of
Alucinus whose councels I had ever esteemed as Oracles; for coming one day into
my Cabinet, where overwhelmed with griefs, I sat ruminating upon my own
misfortunes, after some gentle reprehensions, he began to entertain me with a
discourse much to this effect.

If I were ignorant of your sufferings, I should wonder to see so great a
courage so overcome by sorrow; and if your injuries were not so public to the
world* I should advise you with a manly fortitude rather to resist those
motions, which I doubt not prompt you to a revenge, then by the pursuance
thereof to publish your own shame.

But who is there, though then unborn, that is unacquainted with the story of
Heraclius misfortunes? Is not the miserable slavery of the Sard^nians a sad
testimony of Agnesia's calamities? Who knows not with what injustice you were
deprived of Artemia? And the contempt cast upon you in the impunity of those
base adulterers, is it not the common discourse of every man's mirth? even
children point at you as you pass the streets, and Mechanics in every corner
sing the vile pasquils published in your disgrace.

Notwithstanding you will perchance object, and that may be the chief cause of
your perplexity, That Theodora's monstrous ingratitude to Heraclius and her
tyrannical oppression of Agnesia, though they were acts of extreme cruelty, yet
she being dead, you can now retain only the resentment of them, That Seleucus
who supported the insolency of Eumenes, is by the same fate exempt from the
justice of your revenge, That the holy function of the Flamens, cannot without
sacrileidge suffer a violation in their persons; and though Antiochus, through
the instigations of the Queen, has by an injury of the highest nature, without
regarding the dignity of your birth, exposed your life to a perpetual infamy,
yet being by the supreme powers ordained a King, though he abuse his Authority,
the punishment is reserved only to themselves, and to attempt ought either
against his person, or his power, were an impious violation of their divine
Prerogatives.

It is true, though three Kings successively have been the constant persecuters
of your Family, yet if their malice had extended no farther, these reasons
might prevail with you, for a private cause, not to disturb the public peace.

But the whole Nation groans under the power of Antiochus, who not content with
an unlimited power in himself, which he wholly submits to the unbridled will of
Eudoxia; but seeking to introduce again the superstitions of the Romans, would
likewise make us slaves to the insulting pride of his ambitious Flamens, which
by the memorable prudence and piety of Theodora, though in other things
extravagant enough, being reduced to a small number, and a power depending only
on the Crown* begin now to be more aspiring then ever.

I will not insist upon the sufferings of the Commons, or under what false
pretenses they are burdened with intolerable Taxes: It will be enough by
representing the corruptness of the Fountain, to give you a view of the
impurity that flows in all the streams

Does not the Queen with such an absolute dominion sway the affections of the
King, that none dare pretend to advancement but by her mediation? And by her
ill placed favors is not the Court, the proper sphere of Princes, become a
harbor only for dissolute youth? or at the best such as they call wits? who
because they can hold up a chat, contrive the intriques of a Comedy, and in
their smooth Rimes flatter the Ladies, are thought the fittest Ministers to
govern a State.

How often whilst the Buffon Crotus; the chief Poet, and the chiefest of
Poltrons Valerius, the strong gameing wit Andemus, the play-wright Dante, the
Railleur Arterius; the intriguer Grollio, with the rest of that Cabal, and
their chief Patron, the luxurious Vitellio, have been admitted to the privacy
of Counselors; have the chiefest of the Nobility, upon urgent affairs, like so
many Lacquays, attended in the Ante-Chamber for an Audience? And no sooner
dismissed, but every one of you passed under the censure of those flattering
Criticques? Adraslus in his old fashioned habit smells too rank of Antiquity,
Percianus is reasonably well dressed, but holding his nose in the Air, walks
as if he were broached upon a stake, Giraldo besoted with too much Learning,
Archelaus an honest fool, and your self of so tame a disposition, that no Lady
would desire a more patient husband.

Can men of such noble descent suffer such vild affronts? Or because Antiochus
has divested himself of his power, are you obliged to lose the remembrance of
what you are? Were not Kings chosen for the public good, and when by their ill
government they in a manner make a war against their people, does it not tend
to the dissolution of their power? And if they obstinately persist, are not the
Subjects freed from the bond of their Alleagiance? To which they are no longer
obliged, then whilst they receive Protection from their Prince.

Consider the general ruin that is threatened to the whole Kingdom, in the
subversion of our fundamental Laws, and though the rest are possessed with a
Lethargick stupidity, be you awake to the crying complaints of your Country.

The supreme Jupiter has laid so many afflictions upon you, not as
punishments, but by inciting a just indignation against the subverter of our
native rights, to manifest to the whole world [the incomparable virtue of your
mind.

Wherefore since by these disgraces; you are as it were pointed out to the
people, to be the Champion of their Liberty, refuse not to undertake the
protection of so just a cause. Or if you can forget your unspeakable injuries,
and unconcernedly behold the miseries of the Commonwealth, at least suffer not
your self to be thus trampled on by every upstart Politician.

Though you have neither a heart of revenge, nor a sense of justice, I am sure
you cannot be without an ambition to enjoy those honors that belong to your
birth: and the path to the highest dignities is now so beaten, that every
State-Novice has found the way to compass his own desires.

If you once show your self an enemy to Antiochus, you may be sure he will seek
your friendship: both Seleucus and himself have been so besotted with the love
of Peace, and so unskilled in the art of governing, that whosoever have opposed
their proceedings, or by any means sought to embroil them in troubles, instead
of punishment have been rewarded with Offices of the greatest trust.

Who more fierce to defend the Peoples Rights, then that Giant of the Law
Severus, till for the title of Advocate-Royal he sold his honesty? Appius upon
the same score was made high Chancellor, Gallus Treasurer, Hortensius chief
Justician, and to conclude, what greater enemy of the kingly Prerogative, then
the now only Atlas of the present Tyranny Affrodartus? Therefore the more you
decline from that which you call duty, the greater value you set upon your
self: and if you pass so far as once to appear in Arms, doubt not but Antiochus
to purchase his peace will part with a great share of his power, which you may
afterward employ as you please, either for your own interest, or which is most
worthy so generous a spirit to redeem your Country from a certain slavery.

I must confess being willing to be deceived I was easily convinced by these
delusive Arguments, and though moved by a private hate, framing such plausible
pretenses for the common welfare, as were generally approved, I gained such a
considerable number of adherents, even amongst the most moderate men, who
wished only a reformation of certain disorders which were prejudicial both to
the King, and people, that I doubted not of a success in the enterprise: which
not to dissemble my intentions, being so highly provoked by them, was
absolutely to destroy the power and Office of the Flamens, and to let Antiochus
see that person he had so much contemned, was considerable enough to pull the
Crown from his head, but having shown what I was able to do, to do no more then
was the duty of a subject, or at the most but to limit that Arbitrary power,
which had been the destruction of mine own Honor, and was indeed the general
grievance of the people.

Wherefore knowing how He was, notwithstanding, as yet, in a manner adored by
the subjects, and the name of King even reverenced amongst them, I began first
to cast an aspersion upon the present Government insinuating by subtle Agents,
that they were unjustly burdened with heavy Taxes, that the public Revenues
were lavishly expended, that the pride of the Flamens was insupportable, the
Queens power intolerable, the designs of Affrodartus pernicious, and the
proceedings of the King terribly threatening a general subversion both of our
Liberties and Religion. The Alliance contracted with the Roman Emperor, by the
match between your self and the Princess Theophania, though you were then both
infants, giving manifest assurances of the one, and the undertaking, contrary
to his inclinations, a war against the Cyprians, promising nothing less of the
other. For it could not be doubted when Affrodartus engaged him in that
enterprise, it was with a design, if he proved succesful, to conclude his
Conquests with the absolute slavery of this Nation.

These suggestions taking that effect as was desired, having gained the to
stand as newters, all other neighboring Princes being imbroiled with wars at
home, the people of Palermo leagued with us, the Cyprians our faithful friends
already in Arms; the Sardinians through jealousy I had caused to be sowed
amongst them, of a total extirpation of their Nation, revolted; and Antiochus
through want of money, the sinews of a war, but ill assured of those forces he
had raised under the command of Affrodartus for the Cyprian expedition, I began
more openly to declare my self, and being accompanied by Adrastus, Giraldo, and
Archelaus, with diverse more of the same confederacy, confidently presenting our
selves before his Majesty: I boldly told him, that his own mis-government was
the cause of these disorders, and if he did not apply a present remedy, himself
with his posterity would be involved in the general ruin.

Insomuch, that perceiving his designs to fail, his person encompassed with so
many dangers, and without doubt relying upon the integrity of our intentions,
returning again to his former desires of Peace, he seemed ready to comply with
us in whatsoever we would propose.

Whereupon in the first place, we obliged him, having confirmed their
privileges, to desist from his enterprise against the Cyprians, and disbanding
his Army, to repair to his chief City, there to consult with us, for the future
settlement of his affairs, with faithful protestations, that a lasting peace
being established in the Kingdom, we would employ all our endeavors to render
him the most glorious of Princes: which either through a belief of our
promises, or with the hopes of a perfect settlement was so easily granted, that
being now in Palermo, secured by the affections of the Citizens we became more
arrogant in our demands, requiring, before we would enter into any debate, that
Affrodartus, whose destruction was necessary for the advancement of our
designs, for having counseled the war against the Cyprians; and Evaldus, the
Arch-Flamen, as the chief contriver of the Roman alliance, should be both
delivered into the hands of justice; That the marriage being not yet
consummate, the Princess Theophania should be immediately sent back to Rome,
the Contract pronounced void, and open war declared against the Emperor. That
all Taxes should be abolished, the Flamens absolutely deprived of their
Authority, the Receivers of the public Revenue called to a strict account, and
the strength of the kingdom entrusted with such persons, as our selves should
nominate; but above all, as obliged in commiseration of their sufferings,
though indeed to have an Army yet on foot for security, That the Cyprians, till
they were reimbursed their charges, should not be bound to dismiss their Troops.

It would be infinitely tedious to relate the several disputes, and
contestations on either side before Antiochus would yield to these
Propositions, but we persisted so resolutely in them, and were so cordially
abetted by the Citizens, that at length, finding it vain to resist, he
condescended to all our desires, and to show the confidence he reposed in us,
putting himself wholly into our hands, constituted me Lieutenant General of all
the forces in his Dominions, with so absolute an Authority that I was no longer
a subject, but more then a Colleague in the Empire, and himself enjoyed only
the Title of a King.

Having thus attained to that height which was beyond the aim of my Ambition,
presently seizing upon all the strong holds and Forts of the Kingdom, but
especially the Magazines and Navy; to be yet more absolute, all thoughts of
Reformation being now laid aside, I raised an Army, under pretense, that the
King, repenting his confidence in us, upon whom he ought chiefly to rely,
sought to introduce a foreign Enemy for the reestablishment of his Tyranny.

Nor ye content having thus divested him of his Power, to render him as well
contemptible, as odious, I declared him, through natural defects incapable to
govern, and to complete my revenge, through the occasion of Vitellios favor,
spared not to cast some aspersions upon Eudoxias honor.

At this discourse the Prince could not so govern his passions, but the blood
rising into his face, seemed ready to fly forth at every part, to vindicate it
self from so foul a scandal; which Cenodoxius perceiving, with a submissive
countenance casting his eyes upon the earth, and with a profound sigh that
testified the sorrow of his heart. The remembrance, said he, of these
proceedings, is no less grievous to my self, then they are offensive to you,
and have been injurious to my Sovereigns Honor; but I have been thus punctual
in my confession, that I might leave nothing to be objected against me; and my
past crimes not being greater then my present griefs, I still hope in the
conclusion to reconcile my self again to your favor

He, replied the Prince, that is conscious of so much guilt, and can hope for a
reconciliation, adds to his other faults a presumption unpardonable. But
proceed without reply, for I will be as just in my censure, as severe in the
prosecution of my revenge.

Whereupon reassuming his discourse, the King, said he, at last perceiving, and
too late repenting the error he had committed in conferring so unlimited a
power upon a subject, began seriously to reflect upon his condition, which by
his too much facility he believed was almost become desperate.

His chief Counselors, Affrodartus, and Evaldus, were already made a sacrifice
to the public hate, the authority of the Flamens, Theodora having taught us
that it was not devine, without scruple absolutely abollished, his friends as
suspected, removed, or apprehending their own danger, fled from him; all the
strength and Treasure of the Kingdom in my hands, and nothing wanted to the
consummation of his ruin, but by sending back the Princess Theophania, and
declaring war against the Emperor, to deprive himself even of all hopes of
support.

Reduced to such extremity, to prevent so fatal a mischief, with a resolution
desperate as fortunes, but with a courage great as his birth, he resolved, if
he must perish, to perish like himself. To secure his Crown, and his Countries
peace, he was content to be unkinged, and he would now be a King again, though
to the uttermost hazard of both.

Wherefore departing from Parlermo with a numerous Court, under pretense,
according to the agreementr, of conducting the Princess Theophania to the
seaside, being a days journey from the City, with a small train he took the
rout of where being arrived with the Queen and Princess in safety, having
proclaimed me and my adherents Traitors, he began presently to levy Forces for
his own and their defense.

This was the period of all my wishes, and I now applauded the influence of my
stars, that I should at length come to a contestation worthy of my self, for to
speak truly, though I were content to make use of them, those dissimulations
and stratagems with which I had proceeded hitherto, were arts, that in my
nature I utterly abhorred: But to come to the decision of a pitched battle,
though the hazard were more, the undertaking was more honorable, and in
conquering a King, and then to lay the Conquest at his feet, the glory would be
infinite.

Wherefore flattering my self with these Chimerical imaginations, having put
the Army in a readiness, which consisted of fifty thousand foot, and ten
thousand horse, I began to advance toward Cornavij; yet being within two days
march of the Kings quarters, and understanding by my Scouts, that he had not
above ten thousand men together, seeking only for honor, I disdained such an
advantage, which, if I had harbored the same thoughts as most of my adherents,
I might then have pursued to his final destruction; whereas on the contrary,
knowing his weakness, whilst he marched away with that inconsiderable number,
under feigned pretenses, I drew farther off, giving him all the opportunity
himself could desire to assemble his friends, who perceiving my slackness, and
seeing him go on with so undaunted a courage, flocked to him in his retreat
from all the Provinces of the Kingdom.

The first Rendezvous was at Mottingham, where Philocles Prince of Thessalie
met him, though without any aid saving his own valor; but at the same time
Selindus, a Prince of long experience in the Grecian Wars, came in with eight
thousand foot and two thousand horse, so that advancing to Vriconvi, the Gates
were immediately opened to him, and the Citizens having at their own charge
raised six thousand men, gave besides such ample testimonies of their fidelity,
that considering the commodity of the Haven, and if any accident should happen,
that it lay open to the sea, having appointed Ismenus, a Soldier of approved
trust, to be their Governor, and Vitellio with five hundred choice horse to be
a guard for the Queen, he left her and the Princess Theophania there, as in a
place of undoubted security.

Then having constituted Selindus his Lieutenant General, and Philocles General
of the horse, himself with all the expedition he could make, marched toward
where Maxentius a Prince of the Blood Royal, received him with five thousand
foot well armed, and four thousand Lances; Fulvio likewise brought six hundred
barded horse, Petruchio eight hundred Cross-bows, Cardenius a thousand horse
lightly armed, Martianus a thousand expert slingers, besides two thousand more
armed only with short Swords and Targets of beasts skins, and Protomanthius
Prince of Bernicia two thousand Archers, and eight thousand resolute horse
commanded by himself, and his four sons, the eldest whereof was not above
nineteen years of age, yet I must confess, both for their virtue and courage,
the admiration of Armies.

Besides the forces of these generous Princes, there were three thousand
Gentlemen, the chief flower of the Nobility, who choosing Albinius, Julianus and
Bernardo, three Noble youths, the brothers of Maxentius for their Captains,
served as a peculiar guard for the Kings own person.

Having thus assembled a considerable power, confident in his own strength,
without regarding my motions, he marched into the Province of Coritani, and as
he advanced, daily increased in numbers. But though I had all this while
remained in a manner quiet, yet I was very careful to observe his proceedings,
and being particularly advertised by my spies of all occurrences, knowing the
advantage was not great on either side, having received a fresh supply of ten
thousand men from Palermo, I advanced upon the same rout he had taken, and he
being resolute for the encounter, staying for me, encamped with his whole Army
in a large Campaign at the foot of Trapanio, having the Mountain for shelter on
one side, and a small River for defense on the other.

The Armies being now in sight of each other, seeing the advantageous Post of
the enemy, I thought it impossible to attain them without too evident a hazard,
and therefore ranging my Batalies, stood as in a posture of defiance, ready to
fight; which Antiochus perceiving, either impatient of delays, or disdaining to
be so braved by a Subject, passed the River, and Selindus, like an expert
General in the ordering of his men, showed himself worthy of that Authority.

The King had the advantage of horse both for number and courage, being for the
most part composed of Gentlemen of the chiefest quality in the Kingdom; but my
Infantry were both better disciplined and more resolute for the combat.

To be short, both sides showed such an ardor to meet, that they prevented the
directions of their Officers, and the charge was so furious, that they ran
together pel mel without any distinction of Commanders, and even the King
himself fighting in the melle as a common Soldier; so that though before the
Armies joined I had given a strict command not to endanger, but if it were
possible, to seize upon his person; yet in so general a combustion, he ought
his preservation only to his own valor, showing such an invincible strength in
his arm, that the brandishment of his Sword was no less terrible, then if Jove
himself to support the glory of a triple royalty, had armed him with his
threefold Dart, to the amazement and confusion of his enemies.

Prince Philocles likewise by his surpassing courage showed himself animated
with the blood of Antiochus, and after a brave contest, at length totally
routed the whole body of our Cavalry, but transported with a youthful ardor,
was so eager in the pursuit, and afterward his men, believing they were
absolute victors, so abandoned themselves to the plunder of our baggage, that
in the mean while my rescue commanded by Pratinus, charing them afresh, made a
horrible slaughter amongst the foot, which would rather have appeared a
massacre, if the King having a vigilant eye in every place, with the three
thousand horse of his guard, and a thousand more under the conduct of
Prontomanthius, had not come oportunely to their rescue.

But upon his appearance, the soldiers who before having seen the fall of
Selindus, were ready to shrink, renewing their vigor, the fight began to be
bloody, and the victory wavering, sometimes inclined to the one side, and
sometimes to the other; When Corinnus a daring Soldier, making his way with
his sword through the thickest of the Enemy, having killed Enaruius the Bearer,
seized upon the royal Standart, which being thrown down had undoubtedly put an
end to the dispute; if Iurius as bold in his attempt, had not by the death of
Corinnus recovered that lost Ensign, with which he again raised the courage of
his party.

But once more Fortune seemed inclinable to favor ours, when the King spyed me
single, in a sudden rage spurring on his horse, so far engaged himself, that he
was presently invested round, with a yet entire Troop that came to my succor,
who notwithstanding my order, to secure themselves from the fury of his blows,
to endeavor the preservation of their own; for death attended upon his
strokes, and the fire darting from his eyes, was no less killing then his
sword.

Nevertheless he must at length have been oppressed with multitudes; if the
three gallant brothers Albinius, Iulianus, and Bernardo, with the resolute
Prontomanthius, perceiving the danger of their Prince had not like lightning
flown to his aid.

Albinius first making his way over heaps of dead bodies joined with the King
at the same instant that his horse was killed under him, who presently mounting
him again on his own, fought himself on foot, till with his death he gave the
last testimony of his loyalty. But Iulianus, Bernardo, and Prontomanthius
having despite of all opposition by this time forced their way through our
Troops, environing their Sovereign, gave some respite to his almost wearyed
force, yet it was my chance with the force of a batle-axe to throw the young
Bernardo on the earth, and I was now engaged with Iulianus who fought gallantly
to revenge his brothers death, when the Kings guards of Cavaliers coming
furiously on to their succor, ended this cruel conflict by forceing us to
retire.

Nevertheless though they secured the person of the King, and carried off
Iulianus, and Prontomanthius, yet both those latter dyed shortly after of their
wounds; and the night now coming upon us, both sides were rather tired, then
either of them victorious.

Wherefore by a mutual consent sounding a retreat, we both drew off, uncertain
which side had gained the advantage, only this I must confess, that what the
Enemy only doubted, we absolutely believed, and therefore the King retyring to
the other side of the river kept the Field, and in the darkness of the night, I
having rallyed my Troops the best that I could, withdrew to Cornavii a strong
Town, some three hours march from the place of battle, leaving it as yet
disputed who bore away the honor of the day, which for my part I will not take
upon me to decide, your selves weighing the circumstances will be the most
competent judges.

On our side the horse were absolutely defeated, the baggage taken, and many of
our choice Commanders, besides common Soldiers slain; On the other, the number
of their dead was many more, the foot almost either all killed or routed, and
besides Selindus who commanded in chief under the King, and those already
named, a great number of the Nobility likewise lost their lives.

Indeed it is true, besides the honor of the remaining last in the field, the
King the next day, seeing no Enemy appeared, marched directly toward Palermo
the chief fortress of our strength, though being within four leagues of the
City, the principal Burgers, who were faithful to my designs so prepossessed
the people with the bloody cruelty of the Royalists, that to prevent his nearer
approach they issued out in multitudes against him; Insomuch that Antiochus
apprehending I might likewise advance upon him in the rear, having passed only
some light skirmishes with those swarms of Citizens, he retreated in very good
order to Nicosia; which being in the heart of the Kingdom, and the Province
abounding with all manner of provisions was thought the fittest place to make
his chief residence, and therefore applying himself to the care of rendering
that City defensible the winter growing on, for the present, desisted from any
further enterprise; and his Majesty thus establishing himself, I having not a
power to impeach his design, with the residue of my broken Army, retired for
shelter, and to recover new force, into Palermo.

This was the event of the first battle in this bloody war, which I have
related thus punctually; because your Highness being then too young to use the
exercise of arms, has not perhaps been fully informed of some passages that I
have now noted unto you: but in the ensuing treaties of peace, and all actions
that have occurred since, having been your self either present, or a principal
actor, I shall pass them over with silence, and come now to that last point,
which has been to me so disastrous, and is of greatest consequence to your
self.

The Armies therefore being withdrawn into their winter quarters, the King, to
ingratiate himself with the people, offering a general pardon, proposed certain
Articles of agreement; but some of my party having farther designs, hindered
the effect thereof, persuading me that though they intended nothing more then
the preservation of the royal dignity in a well grounded peace; yet no peace
could be secure till the prosperity of our affairs made us able to prescribe
the conditions, insomuch that by degrees engaging my self, I was insensibly so
far ingulfed in a disturbed sea, that it was indeed impossible to return again
to the harbor.

Wherefore after the various successes of seven years war, growing at length
sensible of those miseries in which through ambition, I had involved my native
Country, I resolved at last in the hazard of one battle, both to put a period
to my own hopes, and to the lamentable distractions of the whole Island.

To which purpose raising a mighty power, and through an experience of his
conduct and courage, having constituted Corastus my Lieutenant General, who
having cunningly insinuated himself into all my Councels, though I were not
ignorant his Principles squared not altogether with mine, yet being acquainted
with the secret of my intentions, he so well dissembled the rancor of his
heart, that I conceived not the least suspicion of his treacherous
machinations; and therefore understanding that the King returning victorious
from the siege of Dobuni, at once to put a foil upon his conquests, and
likewise to intercept his passage, the whole Army not being yet ready to move,
I left Corastus to hasten their dispatch, and my self only with twelve
thousand foot and six thousand horse, advanced to the borders of Coves, where
his Majesty then lay to refresh his Army, with an intent as soon as the rest of
my forces came up to give him battle, and in the mean while to hinder those
supplies that might come to him from Nicosia, or the other Garrisons remaining
in his obedience.

But whilst secure in the fidelity of Corastus, and boasting the hoped for
success of this last enterprise, I contrived the way how to manage the conquest
to my greatest glory, he most deceitfully, not only retarded the advance of
those supplies; but having infused into the Soldiers his own Principals,
employed them perfidiously to my destruction: For publishing to the world, I
aspired only by subduing Antiochus, to set the Crown upon my own head, and to
continue, if not increase the slavery of the people; having expelled those of
my party, he rendered himself master of Palermo, and by the advertisements of my
friends, I knew it was in vain either to expect aid from a new enemy, or to
attempt any thing against Antiochus, who having likewise intelligence of this
rupture amongst our selves, though I offerred upon conditions to submit, and to
join with him against the common Enemy; yet the propositions which seemed
necessary to me for my security, appearing to him insolent and unreasonable, he
resolved to give us battle; and I through the exigence of my affairs sought
not to avoid the encounter, the issue whereof hung some time in suspense, and
the victory without flattery, ought wholly to be attributed to your own
valor, for when you charged our horse, they retired upon the foot, put all
into such a confusion, that never was a more absolute defeat, nor ever any
General from so much greatness reduced to a more miserable condition.

Wherefore being distitute of all hopes to restore my fortunes, or by death to
finish my disgraces, I abandoned the field, and have ever since wandered up and
down, as much as was possible avoiding the society of men, thinking my self
only happy in having no witnesses of my shame.

But in this sollitary perigrination often reflecting upon those discourses
with which Corastus frequently entertained me in private, though I thought them
then rather matters of argument, then settled maxims by which he would govern
his actions, yet by what he has now done, the perniciousness of his designs
is too manifest, and by his betraying of me, and the suppression of my party,
he only endeavors to make his way more easy to the ruin, not only of
Antiochus, but by cutting off the Royal line of the Regal Authority.

This is no aspersion of malice that in revenge I seek to lay upon my
adversary, in discovering to you his transactions and proceedings, I shall
manifest the true drift of his designs, and free my self from that suspicion,
wherefore having now ended the story of my misfortunes, which I hope has in
some sort mittigated the height of your indignation, though I have nothing more
then what you may collect from the circumstances thereof, to alleadg in my
excuse, yet when I have represented to you the condition of your affairs, which
through a partiality of Councels, perhaps you do not rightly understand,
embracing the interests of the Crown, I doubt not but you will rather pardon my
transgressions, though never so great, then by nourishing a vindicatiue humor,
abandon your own cause.

Whereupon Alexandro casting his eye upon Ervillius, smiled a little, but
perceiving by an alteration in his countenance, that with so long sitting up he
began to be weary, with exceeding show of mildness he desired Cenodoxius to
reserve the conclusion of his discourse till some other opportunity.

Whereupon Nicander entering into the room, presented a packet newly come from
Palermo to Synesius, who immediately taking Cenodoxius with him, retired to his
own appartment, leaving Ervillius to his repose, and the two Princes to
entertain themselves with descanting upon the several passages of Cenodoxius
story.

But the time of day inviting them to a repast, after a short refection they
parted for the present, Alexandro to commune with his griefs, and Demetrius to
cherish his hopes with a successful progress in his love, since he had already
gained such an advantageous friendship.

End of the Sixth Book.
THEOPHANIA
BOOK VII.
THe whole company being withdrawn to their several retirements, Alexandro,
whose griefs through a forced compliance, had been so long suppressed, were now
grown to such a height, that his swollen breast was ready to break with
anguish:wherefore descending into the Garden, invited by the murmuring of the
fountains that seemed to sympathize with his complaints, he threw himself at
his length upon a seat at the entrance of a grot, with his head, though his
back were toward it, leaning upon a Marble Pillar that supported the Arch
which lead into that pleasant solitude; and then casting up his eyes to heaven,
and often repeating to himself the name of Theophania, he began with sighs and
tears to give a vent to his passions.

When as ecchoing his groans, from the inmost part of the Cave issued a
mournful sound, which by exceeding attention he perceived to proceed from the
sad accents of two women's discourse, but they were so far within, and the
running of the water made such a hollow noise, that he could scarcely
distinguish the articulation of their words, much less collect from them any
connexed dependence; yet imagining he often heard pronounced the names of
Alexandro and Demetrius, leaving his place with a curiosity to approach nearer,
he entered softly into the grot, and being more careful to conceal himself, then
mindful of his steps, treading by chance upon a loose quarrie in the pavement,
artificially placed so on purpose, at the pressing thereof a great stream of
water hit him with such a force just in the face and eyes, that whilst he dried
himself with his handkerchief, the Ladies, who were not willing to be seen,
pulling down their vails, had an opportunity without being descerned, to step by
him, and through a door that entered into the Park, which in their passage they
made fast, conveyed themselves out of his sight, though not so nimbly but that
turning about, he discovered in them both such a perfect shape and proportion,
as drew after them his admiration: The one attired in great mourning, by that
habit testified the nature of her griefs, and the other was so suitably clad,
as showed she accompanied her in sorrow, but that the occasion thereof was not
of so near a relation.

The Prince remaining astonished at so rare an accident, and to have heard
himself and his friend named, as he thought, by persons of that sort, in a
place where the one was an absolute stranger, and both of them relying upon the
fidelity of Synesius concealed from the knowledge of any but those to whom
they, had discovered themselves: sometimes he blamed his modesty that he had
not laid hold on them as they passed by him, but then checked his thoughts, for
suggesting to him an action of so much rudeness, and in this confusion walking
to and fro, returned again to the consideration of the desperateness of his
fortunes in the prosecution of his love, which removed from his memory the
novelty of this late encounter with the two ladys: when Synesius advancing
toward him, after an excuse for so bold an intrusion upon his privacy,
presented him a Letter, that at their parting had been delivered to him by
Nicander, which coming from a person of eminence, and the Contents thereof
relating to his affairs, he desired him to peruse; Wherefore taking the benefit
of a seat under the shade of a large Palm, and having placed Synesius by him,
he read these ensuing lines.

PERSIANVS to SYNESIVS.
I Need not tell you that Cenodoxius incited by a natural vanity, and the
disgraces cast upon himself and his Family, under pretense of the public
good, together with his revenge, sought the advancement of his own greatness:
And that though many of us perceiving the drift of his designs, nevertheless
favored his proceedings, it was still with a hope by those means to recover
that dignity, of which, Kings fearing our power, have by degrees, and to their
own ruin, inconsiderately deprived us.

But whilst by force and policy we thus strove to satisfy our ambition, in
contending for more then we had, we shall probably loose that little which
remained. For Corastus considering with what facility we brake those bands that
tied our obedience to the Crown, and being a diligent observer of the
dissimulations, arts and stratagems, by which we sought to compass our ends,
inspired with more generous thoughts, he thought it a virtue, which perhaps
Cenodoxius calls treachery, to separate himself from such partial Interests.

Without fraud or deceit he declares his intentions to the world, and with an
heroic resolution professes himself an open enemy to Antiochus, who deriving
his Title from the power of the Sword, he esteems it no injury, by the same
power to dispossess him of it: And having no other end then to redeem the
people from slavery, pretends no farther honor then to become the Protector of
their Liberty.

His secret Councels, as appears by the effects, have been managed with such
wisdom, and the candor of his actions in the prosecution of them, promises so
happy a success, that confessing my former error, I am ready to embrace the
same cause; but having ever in matters of consequence, been directed by advice,
I will not absolutely engage till by the concurrence of your judgment I am
either confirmed in that resolution, or by considering your reasons to the
contrary, may steer such a course, as shall be most agreeable to the strict
rules both of Justice and Honor.

PERCIANVS.


Alexandro having read the Letter, I see, said he, the heavens are just in
making our enemies the active instruments to destroy each other; and though
Corastus at length supplant me in my right, I shall not lose my revenge.

The heavens, replied Synesius, afford you other comforts, then to make your
greatest and most dangerous enemies, the Umpires of your Cause.

The greatest perhaps, said the Prince, but not the most dangerous: A plain
thrust, though directed by a stronger arm, is easilyer avoided then a cunning
feignt, which offering at the foot, is aimed at the heart.

Force may repel force, but dissimulations, plots, and impostures, noble
spirits know not how to encounter, because they are not exercised in the
management of such arms.

Corastus cannot be truly said to rebel against the King, but rather to have
suppressed a rebellious Usurper, and by what I understand, the frankness of his
proceedings is so generous, that whatsoever are his pretenses, if it were
possible to come to an agreement, I had rather to enjoy a divided Empire with
him, then be fully restored by the assistance of Cenodoxius; for his
proceedings under specious pretenses of reformation, and dissembled
protestations to advance the interests of the Crown have been so injurious both
to King and people, that by his wicked practices they are now almost
irreconcileably engaged in one another ruin: Yet I must confess if he had
avowed his cause, I should not have been so much offended with his actions, nor
altogether so averse from a reconciliation: For great men that are sensible of
their own dishonor, are the fittest Ministers for Princes, and being
cherished the chief supports of the Crown.

Your wisdom replied Synesius, so far exceeds your graces, that if your
conduct be equal, though you should be overcome, whilst you maintain such
gallant principles, your fall will be more glorious then others conquests; and
even your enemies in the height of their prosperity will lament the misfortune
of their victories, that in the just pursuance, as they call it, of their
liberties, they were forced to be so unseasonably virtuous.

I wish, said Alexandro, I may deserve your praises, for I had rather have my
memory preserved with the attribute of good, then fortunate: But fortune is
commonly an attendant of prudence, and wise Councels will add rigor to my
arms, therefore since your advice may be far more beneficial to my affairs,
then your commendations, though I accept the one as an effect of your civility,
I shall hearken to the other as to an Oracle.

Whereupon Synesius glad of the occasion presently answered. They presume with
too much vanity upon their own sufficiency, that intrude themselves into the
Councels of Princes, but to every one, when commanded to deliver his opinion,
it is an obligation of duty; yet I should now be sparing of mine, because I
perceive your judgment is already biased another way, and Cenodoxius having
desired me, as a mediator, to deliver what he has more to say, I may perhaps
incur the censure of partiality.

However since in obeying your commands, I cannot but satisfy his request, I
shall the more boldly hazard my self, with a hope to content both; and craving
pardon for my presumption, desire the liberty to utter my thoughts freely, as
well concerning the more remote originals, as the present remedies, which if
prudentially applied, may appease the raging of these our horrible
distractions. Whereupon the Prince having assured him that he expected not
less, nor desired nothing more, with a composed gravity, he entered into this
ensuing discourse.

Cenodoxius in his story has pointed out diverse things, which like still
gliding streams searching the defects, have in succession of time undermined
the banks that preserved our peace from all perils of inundation.

The popularity of Theodora; the contempt of all things sacred; The too
peaceful inclinations of Seleucus; The unlimited power of favorites, the
unseasonable mildness of Antiochus, pardon me if I mention it, his too great
indulgence to Eudoxia; Her slighting of the Nobility, and through a fond
aversion to war a general neglect of our security: But in these latter times
nothing has been more prejudicial to the Kingly dignity, then by seeking with
rewards to appease the turbulencie of factious discontented spirits: For every
weak capacity perceiving that was the way to advancement, studying nothing more
then to shock the royal authority, easily arived at those honors that were
above their deserts, and so disencouraged the loyal endeavors of those, who
truly reverencing their Sovereign as they ought, would not by meriting his
hate, assure themselves of his avour.

Besides the examples already produced, look into your fathers Court, and you
will there find many that may be brought into this number, and not a few of
greatest credit, and power, who even in the beginning of the troubles, were
either partisans, or busy agents to advance the interests of Cenodoxius.

The old Gibideus now a great Counselor, through hate to Clearchus laid the
slander of a horrible paraside upon his Master; Ergogius his Son, the now only
confident of the Court, through ambition was a fierce persecutor of
Affrodartus; Iolcandus though more to show his wit, then out of design, a
bitter enemy both to himself and Evaldus; and Probus to boast his eloquence a
frequent declamer against. I those who, though perhaps too partially, upheld
the Prerogatives of the Crown.

These, with many more, who not being so eminent, I purposely omit, were the
first industrious instruments to shake the foundations of our Government, and
therefore, some in derision have been pleased to say, they are still entrusted,
as in a matter of far less skill, to repair the breaches thereof; for they
fondly believe it was so strongly cemented together, and the superstructure so
firm, and solid, that to all humane apprehension it was beyond the power of
art or policy to endeavor its ruin, which they conceive good conduct, with
the help of the sword, or which is more to be desired, a happy peace,
notwithstanding the many terrible batteries it has endured, may as yet prevent.

But this is an error too manifest to every common understanding, for our
disorders have proceeded not only from the inclinations or imbecility of some
few Princes, or the corruptness of their Ministers, in this latter age, but if
you coms^^^^ the management of affairs in the whole series of our Kings since
the first original of this Monarchy, you may observe such a strange defect of
judgment, as if from the beginning the heavenly powers depriving us of the use
of reason, had ordained us for destruction.

All other Nations in the world, when they first established their Empire,
aiming at continuance, prescribed to themselves certain fundamental laws, as
well concerning the succession as the Government, which should remain immutable
to all posterity; and considering their own true proper interest, in relation
to other people, proposed a certain end, and ordained pollitick maxims, by
which those that are entrusted with the management of affairs must direct
their councels for the advancement of that interest, So that whosoever is
ambitious to participate the honors of the Commonwealth frames his studies and
actions wholly according to those Principles, and they being unalterable, the
State is never destitute of able, and expert Ministers.

By these Maxims still tending to the same end, that State which had no other
Original, then a small company of fugitives in a few scattered desolate
Islands, has justly obtained the title of the Virgin Commonwealth, still
flourishing and increasing, and never receding from her first Principles, never
suffering any change either in her customs or government.

The Grecians by a renowned constancy, and preservation in their designs have
gained such large limits, that the Sun never sets upon their Dominions.

The Romans by adhering so firmly to their own constitutitutions, have so many
ages, had such a swaying influence upon most Kingdoms of the world; and though
their Emperors be Elective, and often chosen out of Families of different
interests, yet once elected, embracing resolutely those of the Empire, though
himself slept, and his Ministers were wallowing in those luxuries of which they
are so frequently accused, yet their affairs, continuing in the same settled
course, would still prosper with the same success, and their greatness be the
envy of all other Nations.

The Sicilians who are condemned of so much levity, notwithstanding by the like
constancy to their first institutions, have many hundred years enjoyed a vast
Territory, with an uninterrupted succession of their Monarchs: And even
Peloponesus a poor inconsiderable corner of Greece, inhabited by a rude boarish
people, and besides a mighty Emperor, having the Sea a continual enemy, is
notwithstanding, by remaining true to their Maxims, in a short time become a
potent State, and as they all find by experience, a terror to its Neighbors.

Only the Sicilians confident of their own strength, and the natural defense
of the Sea, despising all rules, and contemning their wisdom and virtue, have
by degrees embraced the imperfections and vices of all other Nations. The pride
of the Grecians, The luxury of the Romans, The intemperance of the
Peloponesians, The levity of the Sicilians, and in conclusion whatsoever may
render them contemtible, or contribute to their own ruin.

Our Ancestors indeed since the entrance of this last race, for I will look no
higher, not yet declined into vice, nor softened with the delicacies of these
modern times, with an invincible courage, I confess, but with a kind of a
rude barbarous fiercenese, not only preserved their own limits entire, but
frequently invading the territories of their Neighbors, brought other Nations
into their obedience.

Nevertheless wanting a good foundation, and not directing their actions to any
certain end, they could neither long enjoy those conquests, nor maintain any
lasting peace amongst themselves.

For what fruit remains to us of all those famous victories in Galia, but the
reproach of not being as prudent in preserving what we had gotten, as we were
fortunate in the acquisition? And the frequent bloody strifes between our Kings
and the Nobility, with those more lasting and more devouring between the two
pretending families to the Crown, were but the necessary consequences of an ill
composed government in the first institution, which neither sufficiently
declaring in whom consisted that supreme authority, which is necessary to the
preservation of every Commonwealth, nor yet fully determining the right of
succession, left a liberty to subjects to enlarge their privileges by force,
and to every one, as he had most power, the arbitrament of his own interest.

But not to be tedious in producing examples of our inconstancy; The often
changing of alliances, and confedaracies, the uncertainty of our Councels, and
the daily introducing of new customs; there is no greater testimony of the
defect in our primitive constitutions then the practice of this latter age,
wherein the public affairs have been still sweyed by the interests or
inclinations of particular persons.

Eumenes, whilst he bore the sway, being by birth a Cyprian, reguardless of the
honor, neglected the interest of our Sicely.

Clearchus that great example of fortunes power, and impotency, who when she
thought she had raised him to a secure height, in the favor of two mighty
Monarchs, that constantly defended him from the rageing malice of the people,
could not protect her so much beloved darling from that fatal stroke which was
given by one of her most contemptible Vassals; was, though worthy of all his
greatness, too much biased by his own affections, and measuring all men's
sufficiency, and integrity, by a submiss compliance to his will, admitted none
to the management of affairs, but those who were absolutely obedient to his
commands.

Eurideus succeeding in the Ministry, proceeded by other principles.
Affrodartus despising the conduct of his predecessors, laid new foundations;
and Evaldus differing from all others, not considering whether the ground were
good, raised a glorious structure of imaginary greatness upon a devouring
quicksand, so that any the least mark remains of that great design, which was
beheld with such general admiration by the whole world.

Thus, what one built, another presently destroyed, and those active spirits,
who sought to prefer themselves, neglecting the interests of their Country,
applied themselves only to those studies that might render them most grateful
to the present favorites, who being most powerful, were most likely to advance
their fortunes; Or if any with their own fortunes, industriously endeavored
the advancement of the public good, the chief work masters so often failing,
and every new one serving himself with new instruments, and new materials, the
old ones were either altogether useless, or through disesteam, or want of
compliance, not regarded.

That Country which is so unhappy to be governed by such depraved Councels,
must of necessity be a nursery of factions, and discontents, which through
those errors, and defects so abounded amongst us, that it was impossible they
should be long contained within the bounds of duty: And Cenodoxius moved by the
sense of his disgraces, finding the humors of men so congruent to his designs,
through Vanity and Revenge, engaged us all in a miserable war, of which as he
was himself the first Author, so himself has first felt the cruel effects
thereof.

He has freely confessed the fault, and you acknowledge his provocations have
been great, wherefore if satisfied with the punishment he has already
suffered, and what he alleges as an excuse, can move your judgment to a
mitigation of his offense, I fear the Arguments are pregnant enough to persuade
you for the future to embrace his Amity.

If it were possible, as you seem to intimate such a desire, to come to an
agreement with Corastus, I should acquiess in that opinion, for he indeed so
openly discovers his intentions, and those who adhere to his party, are a
people of so much greater integrity, then either the Cyprians, or those of our
own Nation, which favor Cenodoxius, that probably the Peace might be lasting,
though obtained upon hard conditions.

But the freedom of his declaration, manifests the firmness of his resolution;
neither is it reasonable to suppose, that he, who has undertaken so great an
enterprise, and, without doubt satisfied in the justness of his proceedings,
having such powerful means to effect it, the chief strength of the kingdom in
his hands, a mighty formidable Army, and in the possession of Palermo, an
inexhaustible treasure, will easily abandon such advantages, when the success
promises so great a reward.

On the other side in his strength you may behold the Kings weakness, who
though he has obtained a slight victory over Cenodoxius, yet we know from
whence that proceeds, and his own force is so inconsiderable, and so destitute
of supplies to maintain the courage of the soldiers, that Corastus already
assures himself of the victory.

Wherefore your own strength not being sufficient to shelter you from so great
a storm, you must by a timely assistance seek to prevent the so much threatened
danger.

From whence then shall we expect these succors? If you depend upon supplies
from abroad, you already know by experience, the fruitlesness of those
expectations, but that you may no longer be deluded with such vain hopes,
consider with how little reason they have been hitherto entertained.

The Grecian Emperors have received so many horrible great affronts, and
indignities from the Sicilian Crown, that Andronicus who now sways that
Scepter, cannot but with pleasure behold the oppression of the royal Family.
For though Theodora during the reign of her sister, ought the preservation of
her life to the son of that famous Emperor, who devesting himself of his
royalty, added immortality to his glory; yet being seated in the Throne, she
not only refused his alliance, (which though perhaps in it self just, was a
large testimony of his affection) but in a time of Peace, not any occasion
being given, with fire and sword invaded his Dominions: And afterward,
contrary to all Laws of Equity when the Peloponesians revolted, with mighty
supplies both of men and treasure, maintained them in their Rebellion.

Neither has the King your father given less occasion of offense, where with
scorn rejecting the sister of this present Emperor, he immediately contracted
an alliance with his greatest enemy.

Nor content with that affront when one of his chiefest Provinces, shaking off
the Imperial yoke set up an usurping King of their own, he without difficulty
receiving the Ambassadors of that new created Sovereign, both justified his
actions, and allowed a power of election in the people.

Wherefore the match with the Princess Mariana, by the death of young Leonides,
taking no greater an effect, it cannot be expected now he apprehends not your
power, that he will commiserate your sufferings.

However though help fail on that side, you may imagine the brother of Eudoxia
will never suffer a King, so near an allye, in a case of such exigence to
remain destitute of aid.

Alas! He, and his great Minister, that strong support of his masters glory,
Armandus, have not contributed a little to these our disorders, though I must
confess, not without mighty provocations; for besides that never any
rebellions, as they have been very frequent, were ever stirred up by any of the
great Princes in that kingdom, but either they were fomented or strenuously
abetted by Antiochus, in their greatest extremities, when oppressed by a
foraign enemy, we have likewise, notwithstanding the alliance, and most
unexpected propositions that have been made to our advantage, refused them our
assistance.

Wherefore Armandus whose policies had a general influence, since we would not
accept of his offers, to show his friendship was not to be despised, and to let
us know, our peace proceeded not from our own prudent conduct, but from the
distractions of others; in that height of our felicity, when surfeited with
happiness, we were grown insolent, as with an unconcerned indifferency, to
behold the sword, and destruction ravageing the dominions of our neighbors,
yet neither through generosity, nor compassion, endeavoring to appease them,
He by his practices kindled that fire in the Cottages of Cyprus, which has
sin^s consumed, and laid desolate, many of the stateliest Palaces: And though
by this time, perhaps, satisfied with their revenge, they would prevent our
final ruin, they are now so assaulted on every side themselves, that it is not
in their power.

The Peloponesians likewise forgetting they owe their liberty to our
predecessors, moved with some slight injuries, and loving your enemies money
better then your cause, are corrupted to be spectators of the Tragedy.

For the Romans your self too well know the terms we stand upon with them, in
consideration of the Princess Theophania. Other Princes are so remote that they
are unconcerned in our differences. And to conclude having in our prosperity
separated our interests from all the world, and never had a feeling of others,
we ought not to expect that any should have a sense of our miseries.

Since then in this necessity of friends, there is no variety of choice, there
need no other motives then the consideration of your own security, to persuade
you to a reconciliation with Canodoxius.

But though all neighboring Princes were ready to afford you their best
assistance, foreign forces are so odious to your own subjects, that they would
little advantage your cause.

Besides you need not doubt of the fidelity, and real engagement of the
Cenodoxians, for they very well know, if you receive them not into favor, they
are absolutely ruined, and though moved principally by their own interest, they
fight in your defense, yet a Prince who is deputed by Heaven, to exercise a
kingly power upon Earth, ought in this to imitate the supreme Divinity, that
though the people only through fear of punishment are obedient to his Laws, yet
whilst they perform their duty, he refuses them not his protection.

Whereupon the Prince perceiving he made a stop; it is enough said he. I
confess my self vanquished; and furnished with these reasons shall easily
induce the King to embrace your advice. But my dear Synesius, my Father; my
Oaacle, is it not possible, though not the affection you bear to Alexandro yet
the duty that you owe to your Country, should withdraw you from this
retirement? Though you have made no mention of them, I am not ignorant of your
sufferings, and the Heavens be so favorable to Alexandro, as he will be just
in the reparation of them.

Sir, replied Synesius, this retirement is an effect of my obedience, and in
obeying my Sovereign, I at once testify my loyalty unto him, discharge the
duty I owe to my Country, and best merit your favor.

They had entered farther into this obliging discourse, but interrupted with a
sudden noise, they went both to see what should be the occasion thereof; when
passing through the great Hall, toward the Gate, they were encountered by a
multitude of country people, all armed with rustic weapons, and some bearing
in several parts of their bodies, the fresh bleeding marks of a terrible
scuffle; but as a token of their victory, they lead pinioned amongst them nine
or ten men, who by their appearance seemed to be soldiers, and by their sad
dejected countenances, sensible of their disgrace.

By this time Demetrius, with Lysander and the rest, were run to the bruit, and
the Peasants as soon as they saw their Lord, making a stand, without any
confusion, which commonly accompanies such assemblies, gave way to a young man,
a rich Farmers son of the Village, that bore a great sway amongst them, who
stepping forward, whilst the rest were silent, with a very good grace, and in
terms better then his habit promised, said,

Having some days together repaired to the adjacent woods in search of cattle
that were straied, these two last, I observed diverse soldiers likewise
frequented the same whom I met sometimes two, sometimes three, and once
discovered twelve together refreshing themselves by a spring, whether unless by
some extraordinary chance, not any man ever resorteth. Wherefore seeing them
lie so concealed, I supposed they were either the consorts of those that had
caused the late disorder, or else were appointed for some more mischievous
intentions: so that possessed with this apprehension, having advertised my
neighbors thereof, we surprised them this day again in the same thicket
feeding upon such provision as they carried about them, and though unarmed,
every man laying hold of his Sword, they made so stout a resistance, that many
of my companions bear, as you see, the marks of their valor. But at length
being hedged in on every side, and three of their associates already slain; the
rest throwing down their weapons, yielded themselves all, saving that (pointing
to one who held by half a dozen, was stronglyer fettered then all the rest) I
know not whether to call him, more, or less then man; for though in his defense
he showed a courage more then humane, yet so obstinately to resist such a
multitude, was rather the testimony of a savage fierceness, then of a courage
guided by reason. His looks threatened to devour, and when moved by compassion
to see so much valor so desperately employed, entreating him to yield, we
offered him his life, disdaining our courtesies, as assured of the prey, he ran
more furiousty upon his assailants.

Nevertheless he was at the length overthrown by his own strength, for with a
prodigious force directing a blow at my self, missing his aim, and following
his stroke, his feet failing, he fell to the ground; whereupon half a dozen of
our most resolute men at the same instant falling upon him, he was rather
catched as in a toil, then taken.

What himself and his fellows did intend, we know not, nor were we so over
curious to seek to force that from them which they seemed so resolute to
conceal; but by preventing of danger, in bringing them thus captived into your
presence, we conceive we have performed our duty.

The Princes exceedingly attentive to this relation, with curious eyes observed
the comely personage of the valiant prisoner, who all this while never lift his
eyes from the earth, till being asked by Synesius, with such civility as might
oblige him to a reply, what he was? With a stern regard he boldly answered, A
Soldier.

I suppose no less, said he, But how came you hither? when with a disdainful
smile, he replied, Has not this gallant champion, who with his quaint
Rhetoric calls valor brutality, already told you? By the vile cowardice of my
companions, who basely yielding themselves, betrayed me into the hands of this
rabble.

It is not my intent, continued Synesius, to irritate you with unseasonable or
impertinent demands, I mean, what designs brought you into these Quarters? My
revenge, replied the Soldier, which since I have failed of accomplishing upon
my enemies, if I did not still retain hopes to satisfy, I would presently
execute upon my self.

Whereupon Alexandro steping forward, said, so great a courage ought not to be
vanquished by despair; if your quarrel be just, you shall not want the liberty
in a noble way to prosecute your revenge, nor yet friends that will readily
embrace your cause: But before we proceed any farther, tell me freely whose
Soldier you are?

When the Prisoner looking steadfastly upon him, with a more submiss, but with a
countenance expressing something of disgust, answered, Should any here but your
self, by asking that question, have dared so much as in thought, to doubt of my
loyalty, my hands in despite of these fetters, without other reply, should
soon have forced him to learn that truth, which by a natural sympathy with my
heart, is so plainly charactered in my face.

This answer discovering to Synesius that the Prisoner knew Alexandro,
presently causing him and his companions to be loosened, with great
commendations, and many thanks, especially to the young Farmer, he dismissed
the Country people; and the Prince with his company retiring into another
room, whether the Soldier was commanded to follow, after they were seated, he
told him, I perceive you know me so well, that you cannot but know the respect
you are obliged to bear me, yet I will not now use my power, but with
entreaties persuade you to lay aside your fierceness, and in compliance with my
curiosity, to acquaint us both what you are, and with the cause of your
discontent.

I dare not, said the Soldier, disobey so great an authority, though to any
else I might justly excuse my self, in the renewing the remembrance of my
griefs, not to add to my torments; But since so sad a Story cannot but make
impressions in a Princely heart, it will be some comfort to my miseries, that
they have been honored with so noble a compassion. When breathing forth a
mighty sigh, which like a sudden tempest, ended with a few dissolving drops,
after a little pause he entered into this tragical Relation.

The Story of MONELIA.
IT is no boast to say my descent is noble, nor have my actions, though they
merit not the report of fame, rendered me unworthy the name of Clorimanthes;
what wants in performance, has been supplied by loyal intentions, for since I
was first able to wield a sword, I have employed mine in the service of my
Prince, under the command of that renowned Captain Honorius, who for his
signalized fidelity is entrusted with the Government of that impregnable
Citadel which awes the inhabitants of a City six Leagues from hence, and
though not great, the most considerable place next Nicosia, that now remains in
the Kings obedience.

To this City, drawn by the worthy esteem of the Governor, resorted diverse
young Cavaliers, under his discipline to pass their noviciat in the War; but
amongst the rest, none better employed his time, or arived at a higher degree
of perfection in all martial exercises then Perrotus, who by the advantageous
endowments both of body and mind, gained an absolute dominion over the
affections of all those that had the honor to know him; for my own part, I was
so true an admirer of his virtues, that his heart was the treasury of mine, and
he was so faithful a Steward, that he both preserved the principal, and paid
me such a large proportion of Interest, that our friendship being observed, was
paragoned with the best examples of ancient times.

We consorted our selves together in all actions either of danger, or
recreation: our thoughts were so uniform, that whatsoever pleased the one, was
the delight of the other, and even our loves, which it was impossible to
separate, by the secret sympathy of our souls, were without jealousies or
emulation, directed both to the same object.

Our Academie of Mars was not without a Temples of Venus, to whom all his
Disciples offered the devotion of their hearts.

A virgin, besides the advantages of her birth, which, being the sole heir of
the illustrious Family of the Amelfi, gave her the pre-eminence, both for
nobility and wealth, adorned with such a resplendant beauty, that her tragical
end may be thought to proceed from the malignity of the heavens, through envy
that the earth should enjoy another Sun.

The day of our horizon brake from under that aromatical cloud, her Ivory
forehead, and set in an ocean of tears flowing from those eyes to whom she
obscured her self.

When Monelia, so was this Luminary called, was pleased to enlighten the air
with her presence, all that beheld her, astonished with so much brightness, to
avoid a sudden dazzling, fell prostrate on the earth as she passed by; or if any
were so presumptuous to fix his view upon her face, if her eyes by chance
encountered his, they darted forth such beams, as at once confounded his sight,
and in punishment of his temerity, kindled a consuming fire in his heart.

In the sacred Temple of Jupiter, assisting at the pomp of her Fathers Funeral,
Perrotus and my self, being inseparable companions, first beheld this miracle
of Nature, and whilst kneeling before the Hearse, with tears of piety she
expressed a sorrow worthy so dear a loss, by the interposition of that watery
cloud; we were able with less dazzling to gaze upon her perfections.

Perrotus after a long contemplation, first discovering his wound, brake out
into these expressions, Oh the supernuatural power of a filial affection, that
from the elemental purity of two such glorious flames, whose spendor might
afford light to the Universe, can extract such Cataracts, as rather threaten an
inundation, and yet not be themselves extinguished!

More miraculous, said I, is that contrariety, and even a prodigy in nature,
when fire and water yield a mutual nourishment to each other.

Those Torches of love, are the fountains of those pious tears, and every one
of those cristal drops, is fuel to kindle the triumphant fires of love.

You heated by those showers, already burn, and I chilled by those flames, at
the same instant feel my heart oppressed with a cold damp of despair.

Ah Clorimanthes, replied he, do not yet despair, for then, such is the
influence of our stars, which has ordained us both to the same martyrdom, that
it will be impossible for me to hope, and depriving me of that consolation,
thou will at once become the author of my death, and which is more cruel,
injurious to our friendship.

Srange effect of an unparalelled amity, to desire a rival in the contests of
love, to animate those thoughts which are diametrically opposite to our
happiness, to aim at fruition, in opening a way to another possession, and to
seek a partner in those joys, which are only perfect whilst they are not only
communicative.

But Perrotus by my concurrence, judged the worthiness of his affection, and
because with such a discerning judgment, he placed his affection upon the
divine Monelia, I thought him the more worthy of my esteem: So that the ardor
of our loves, was the cement of our friendship, and by cherishing that Noble
flame, as our desires increased, we grew more enamoured of each others virtue.

This was the original of that fatal love, which beginning in the sad obsequies
of a dead Father, had likewise a most lamentable conclusion.

Nevertheless at the present we flattered our selves with the hopes of a far
better success, when the ceremonies being ended, and Monelia supported by two
of her nearest allies, returning out of the Temple, and stopped by the crowd of
people, made a stand just at the Pillar, which during the solemnity, had been
our station, and offering her the convenience of that place to repose her self
from the press, with a gracious bending of her body she accepted of our
civilitie.

There at a nearer distance, but through a scarf of thin black Tiffany, we
surveyed those perfections, which believing immortal, we were ready to adore,
till perceiving our boldness, she pulled down her great vail; and when with one
offended look, she might as easily have struck us both dead, was pleased only
with that gentle cruelty to check our presumption.

But the throng once passed, being retired to her Palace, she was so strict an
observer of the rules of mourning, that many weeks after not stirring abroad,
nor admitting any visits but the condoleances of her kindred, we could not
possibly arive at that felicity, to be blessed with the sight of her fair eyes,
much less by any assay of our fortunes, to begin the progress to our happiness.

We daily visited those Walls which enclosed the habitation of our Deity,
whether multitudes of souls continually flocked to offer up their devotions; We
went frequently to the Temple to reverence those stones which she had hallowed
with her tears; we presumed to possess that seat, which was the throne wherein
with such mildness she reproved our audacity, and at length one day as we sat
thereon, discovering of that passage, we perceived walking by us, attended only
by two maids, the Saint that we adored.

It was the first time after her retirement, that she appeared again to the
world, and therefore as others out of custom, she through a devout zeal made
her motions to the Altar; at the steps whereof whilst in an humble posture she
implored the protection of the God, Perrotus, transported with I know not what
rapsodie, not saying any thing to me, went directly to the degrees, and
kneeling close by her, with his eyes fixed upon the holy Image, but with his
heart directed to Monelia, in a low tone, yet so that she might easily hear
him, formed his orizons after this manner.

Hail blessed Deity! Thou celestial purity, the Sovereign of my heart, the
period of my desires, the soul of my li^e, my only good! Though I dare not
presume to exalt my eyes to the Majesty of such a heavenly beauty, vouchsafe to
turn thy favorable regards upon the wretched captive Perrotus, either ease him
of his torments, or in compassion end them with his life.

This short supplication was uttered with such fervency, as sufficiently
expressed the zeal of the supplicant; but the boldness of the attempt so
surprised Monelia, who very well perceived to whom it was addressed, that
remaining a while immovable, she appeared as one through excess of order in
her devotions ravished into an ecstasy, wholly alienated from her senses.

Nevertheless recovering her self, she presently rise, and glancing a look on
him, which he could not interpret other then a messenger of her displeasure,
beckning her Maids, who waited at a distance, hasted out of the Temple, but
through disorder, and confusion, leaving a scarf upon the Pavement, which he
instantly with a trembling hand took up, that favor of hazard, made him give
it a contrary construction.

Wherefore with infinite content, but with a pale discomposed countenance
returning again to the place, where with admiration I beheld the extravagance of
his proceeding, he recounted to me the particulars, and success of his audacity.

I must confess, though I conceived his indiscretion unpardonable, yet not to
cast him into despair, I dissembled my opinion, which at length I found was
indeed erroneous. For frequenting all public assemblies, that we might have
the opportunity to meet Monelia, and to insinuate our selves into her
conversation, she cast such favorable regards upon my friend, that I, who
observed all her gestures, perceived she was not displeased with his
observances.

Notwithstanding fearing her blushes would betray more then her modesty was
willing to discover, she avoided as much as was possible, all opportunities of
discourse; which she not only graciously afforded me, but would oftentimes her
self minister the occasion, and one night at a Ball, being seated just behind
her, whilst Perrotus danced with a young Lady, her most intimate confident,
turning about to me; I wonder, said she, that so hardy a Cavalier as Perrotus
has not yet by his addresses showed a particular inclination to some choice
beauty; Or does he display that black ensign, meaning the scarf, which he
concontinually wore about his arm, to show that his heart is dead to love?

Rather, replied I, the fair one that bestowed it upon him, meant it as an
emblem of her cruelty, as willing to afford him no other favor but the livery
of despair, for aspiring to a fortune so far above his merit; and in
acknowledging his crime, to mourn for his presumption, in having dared to
boldly to declare his passion.

These words, perceiving to what they tended, made her whole face appear a
garden of full blown Roses, wherefore apprehending to be too far engaged upon
that subject, converting her blushes into a smile, she asked me if being
perhaps more discreet, I were not more fortunate in my love?

To which I presently returned answer; If never to have presumed to say I love,
be free from offense; Or if to enjoy all that ever I may pretend, be a
happiness, I may justly vaunt my self both discreet and fortunate.

However though I dare not by an unworthy mention, profane her name, who
vouchsafes to afford me such comfort, I I may without endangering her
despleasure tell you, that I have a competitor in my love, yet, which perchance
you will think a miracle, his rivality, though I were assured he would arive at
his desires, can no way traverse my pretenses.

But to solve this Enigma, a secret instinct of nature works such a Sympathy
between Perrotus and me, that one divine beauty is the center of both our
ambitions, her whom he admires, I admire, The object of my delight is the soul
of his content, and the Sun that yields him light, by the same virtue inspires
me with life. Only in this we differ, that his desires, with a noble ardor,
aim at a chaste fruition, but my flame is so pure and sublime, that it has
purged the dross of all low sensual appetites; And whilst he with uncertain
hopes pursues the dictates of that generous passion, I, approaching her person,
and admitted to a familiarity of conversation in contemplating her better part,
her soul, enjoy a happiness which it is as impossible should suffer any
diminution, as it is that she should decline from her virtue.

Wherefore though the influence of our stars, in submiting us both to the same
fate, threatened the dissolution of a loyal friendship, the supreme powers,
protector of such holy leagues, have, by regulating our affections, more firmly
united our hearts and the Goddess to whom we direct our addressess, when she
frowns upon the one, torments the other, and if she would be so gracious, in
satisfying both, can offend neither. But whilst they contendingly submit to
each others merit, may by the beams of her favor communicate to the one all
earthly joys, to the other more sublimed pleasures, till their souls
Evaporating in those amorous delights, ascend to a perfect fruition of her
celestial perfections.

So whilst the glorious light of the world, into the displayed bosom of the
amorous Heliotropian, darts his directests beams, his cherishing warmth affords
likewise beauty, and sweetness to the neighboring rose, yet both growing on to
perfection, flourish without emulation, till the same power which gave them
being, greedy of their precious odors, with ardent Caresses extracting their
vital moisture, they expire, a sacrifice of perfume to the adored author both
of their life and death.

Thus Mone^ia in declining the discourse of Perrotus temerity, found her self
more embrased with this submiss declaration, of my no less temeratious, though
more refined passion.

Notwithstanding the assembly then breaking up respited the doom I expected
from so rigorous a Judge, and in the mean while, what I had said, made such
happy impressions, that consulting with her thoughts, and finding her charity
could not be prejudicial to her honor, through a generous compassion she
afforded relief to our sufferings, so that at length Perrotus became possessor
of that rich mine of treasure, which yielded me abundance of wealth, yet
diminished nothing of his own store.

A Diamond abates nothing of his hardness, receives no stain, nor is of less
worth the owner in being considered by a skilful Lapidary, who understanding
the true value thereof, with admiration contemplates its oriental luster. No
more did Monelias perfections receive any change or blemish, nor were less
esteemed by her dear Perrotus, because I paid them that reverence which was due
to their incomparable worth, but he in the possession, and I in the
contemplations of her divine excellencies, enjoyed such an absolute content
that it wanted nothing of perfect but immortality, till the supreme powers to
show a great example to the world, that there is no true felicity, but in their
celestial mansions, from that height of happiness suffered us to be
precipitated into a bottomless sea of misery, which the two peerless lovers
have already dyed with their blood, and wherein I yet struggle for life, only
through a desire, if the heavens will so permit, by a dire revenge to appease
their incensed ghosts.

But whilst we lived favored by fortune, though Perrotus was indulgent to his
love, he was not neglected of his honor, nor was I so ravished with the
contemplation of virtue that I wholly neglected the practical part thereof:

Being by profession Soldiers, we are obliged in the occasions of war to
pursue glory, of which we were the more ambitious that we might in some degree
correspond with the merits of Monelia, and by our powers gain laurels not to
crown our own brows, but to plant her an ever flourishing garden of delight.

Wherefore though whilst we were Probationers in that noble science, we ever
fought under the same Ensigns, yet grown more mature in practice, being
honored with several commands, we were many times separated as the service of
our Prince required; and whilst I was employed in this last expedition against
Cenodoxius, Honorius being avertised that the two sons of the Lord Synesius,
Philemon and Gernolanus, two persons of such excellent judgment, and conduct,
that being fallen from their first Principles, they were no less esteemed by
Corastus, then dangerous enemies to the King, either to raise new forces, or
for some other pernicious design, under pretense of a visit to their father,
received harbor in this Palace, being persons of such consequence, and of a
known courage, Perrotus, with what Troops he should think necessary for the
enterprise, was appointed either by force or surprisal to bring them prisoners
to

Which charge he willingly undertook because he was well acquainted with the
Country, and being to enter into the enemies quarters, having besides an
intention if the first design succeeded, or not, to make some other attempt, he
marched out two thousand strong, the gross whereof he left in a valley some two
leagues from hence, whilst with one choice Troop he advanced to a Wood at the
entry of the Park, where commanding them to lie concealed under the covert
thereof, having chosen out three small parties of his most experienced men, he
sent two of them under the command of Diphilus and Erato, two Cavaliers of a
tried courage, by several ways through the Park, and himself with the third
went a little compass about, through the Wood, where we encountered that rabble
of Peasants, with a purpose that none might escape, to surround the house, and
so without farther violence, unless they met resistance, to require the two
brothers to be delivered into their hands.

Erato taking the lower way in a solitary remote walk, met two Gentlemen, one
whereof by the description had been made to him he conceived was Philemon, who
being unarmed without any difficulty suffered himself to be taken, and Erato
sending him guarded to the Wood, went with this good news to seek Diphilus,
whom he found engaged, close by a Grot, upon the Mount with one of an
invincible courage, who by the like mistake he believed to be Gernolanus, but
with the loss of both his hands, the death of Erato, and two or three more of
his companions paid the forfeiture of that error, wherefore not able longer to
withstand so great a force, his soldiers fled with him toward the Wood,
whether being eagerly pursued by the Conqueror, surrounded by the Troop that
lay there in ambush, he was forced to yield; when supposing themselves
possessed of the prey that they hunted after, they presently marched away to
their main body, where by some of the principal Officers, the two prisoners
were soon known to be Prince Philocles and his servant Cleanthes, who
notwithstanding the mischief he had done them, was received with great shouts
and acclamations of joy, neither was Philocles displeased though he very much
regretted the misfortune of Diphilus and Erato, to find himself secure amongst
the Kings friends.

But this mutual rejoicing was turned into a general consternation, when the
remainder of Perrotus party flying from the fury of the two enraged brothers,
whom it was his chance to encounter in the adjacent Wood, related the miserable
fall of their valiant Captain, the only mirror for Lovers, the envy of
husbands, the soul of all Society, and a miracle of friendship.

Whereupon sighs stopping the current of his speech, the Princes and Synesius
looking sadly and with astonishment one upon another, they all knew by the
circumstances, that Alexandro had been a principal actor in this Tragedy, yet
remaining silent: Oh mighty Jupiter, continued he, do thou now rather seek
the attribute of powerful, then equitable, by such extraordinary means, (for it
was not their courage alone could protect them from the justice of his sword,)
to support Traitors and Rebels against an unequalled example of Obedience, and
Loyalty! Where shall Virtue, and Truth seek for refuge, if thou suffer them
thus in their followers, to be prosecuted and dishonored? for in depriving us
of Perrotus, thou have deprived us of all that in man could be called excellent.

But not to give farther vent to my griefs, the mournful nevvs of his death
being by his dejected Troops carried to Palermo, he was bevvailed as a public
loss: but ariving at the ears of his so dearly cherished spouse, though she
appeared a little surprised therevvith as first, contrary to all expectation,
she was so far from abandoning her self to sorrovv, that she scarce expressed
so much grief as was decent; but instantly calling for Lucius, one of Perrotus
his servants, who had been present in the action, as if unconcerned, or
delighting in her loss, made him relate every particular passage of that fatal
encounter, and as though she doubted they had not been sufficient, curiously
informed her self how many wounds he had received, in what part of his body,
which was the most deadly, and whether Philemon, or Gernolanus had given that
mortal stroke.

When having satisfied her as far as he was able, and to justify himself,
showed her the yet fresh bleeding testimonies of his fidelity; she with a kind
of smile, telling him they were but scratches, which would serve him to boast
of as marks of honor, amongst his companions, dismissed him her presence; and
I the same day returning from the Army, not knowing any thing of this disaster,
but hasting to embrace my friend without stopping, rid directly to his Palace,
and dismounting at the gate, encountered that faithful servant, with tears
flowing in his eyes, his countenance pale, and his limbs trembling, descending
from his Ladies Chamber: At which ghastly sight, presaging the worst, I began
not to be a little perplexed, but was wholly confounded, when at once telling
me of his Masters death, and his Ladies indifferency, crying out he had lived
too long, to be the witness of such a monstrous ingratitude, through excess of
grief, and want of spirits, which had issued out with his blood, embracing my
knees, he fell immediately dead at my feet.

Good heavens! how at this mutation of fortune, rage, grief, and pity, at once
struggling together in my bosom, destroyed each other, yet neither obtained the
victory! In beholding that sad spectacle of a loyal servants fidelity, I was
all compassion, then reflecting on the bloody slaughter of my friend, I thought
I saw his gaping wounds crying out to me for vengeance, which at the instant
inflamed me with an unquenchable fury; but then considering, that by a
prodigious change, Monelia was now no more the same, but the sepulcher of her
own virtue, senseless of pity, and regardless of revenge through extremity of
anguish, I was ready to sacrifice my own, life in expiation of her inconstancy,
to the grieved ghost of her noble husband; yet aiming a poignard at my heart,
the other passions were so strong, that they withheld my arm, and I remained
the prey, of their cruel contestation.

Had not Lucius avouched it with his death, and had not his death been a
testimony of his truth, I could not possibly have credited such an unnatural
failing; Nevertheless having something recollected my self, I resolved once
more to see her, and to persuade her, though she had lost her virtue, not to
bring an infamy upon the whole sex, by a too open manifestation of her frailty.

Wherefore using my former liberty, without a guide, I ascended the degrees,
and passing through the outward room, approaching softly to the chamber door,
which being open, in putting by the Tapistrie, I perceived her sitting at a
Table, with her back toward me, as in a posture of writing.

I must confess, finding she neither saw, nor heard me, I could not but make a
little stand, to observe with what an undisturbed tranquillity of mind, she
busied her self in such unseasonable employments: But I was astonished, when on
a sudden she cried out, I come Perrotus; and at the same instant that she
spoke those words, rising from her seat, and aided with a more then masculine
courage, she plunged a Dagger into her bosom, found an easy passage to her
heart.

Oh Heavens! how my blood chilled when I beheld her fall? At the noise whereof
a maid that waited in another room, came running, though in vain, to her
assistance, whilst I through amazement, knew not whether to believe Lucius
death a dream, or this Tragical Scene a vision.

But approaching nearer, I found it was indeed the very same, Constant, Chaste,
Monelia, in this last act of her life, displaying the crimson Ensigns of a
Triumphant Virtue.

I cannot say which was greater at the present, my joy, to be so undeceived, or
my grief to see the world bereaved of so glorious an ornament.

Whilst I bathed her wound with my tears, through which her precious life
expired, I kissed that heroic hand, which still grasped the reeking
instrument, that had freed me from my fears.

But in applauding her resolution, and in bewailing her cruel fate, she became
sensible of my expressions, for opening her fair eyes, with a smiling
countenance she embraced me, and pointing to the Table, without saying a word,
and without either pang or groan, but still and quiet, as the gentle calm of a
sweet spring-tide-evening, that fair Sun set in the vermilion cloud.

Thus deprived of my light I was seized with a kind of horror and my feeble
limbs being scarcely able to support the burden or my greifs, leaning against
the table, I perceived lying thereon a paper directed to my self, written with
carracters of blood which I still preserve about me as the warrant I have to
live til her commands be fulfilled. Whereupon drawing it forth of his bosom, he
delivered it to Prince Alexandro who whilst he disburdened himself of a world
of sighs, read aloud this short Billet.

Billet of Monelia to Clorimanthes.
THis Paper stained with those tears which I shed for Perrotus, will testify
the purity of my chaste love; being a woman, I can only accompany him in death,
to thee I leave the honor in the punishment of his murderers, to show thy self
worthy the name of friend, and the esteem of

MONELIA.


Having finished the reading hereof, now, said Clorimanthes, judge of the
equity of my cause, and I doubt not but you will give me leave to prosecute my
revenge, which, though in the presence of Synesius, I dare avow, can never be
satisfied, but with the blood of his own sons.

This sad tragedy moved a wonderful compassion in the hearers, and
exceedingly augmented the griefs of Alexandro, who perceiving Synesius expected
he should say something to appease the causeless hate of Clorimanthes, taking
him by the hand, and embracing him, The heavens, said he, Clorimanthes, are
witness, with what a true sense of sorrow, I have heard the woeful story of your
unfortunate friends: I confess as well to satisfy your own honor, as the
commands of Monelia, you are obliged to seek revenge upon the authors of their
death, and I confirm my promise to aid you in the pursuit thereof; but you must
first find out who they were that have offended, and against whom you are so
justly incensed, for I can assure you upon the word of a Prince, that neither
Philemon, nor Gernolanus, are the persons at whom you ought to direct your fury.

Therefore if you esteem your honor, or desire a certain revenge, rest
satisfied with this truth, till I present your enemies before you, which though
perhaps you may think strange, if you observe my commands, and respect the Lord
Synesius as one highly in my esteem, I will not fail in a short time to perform.

Whereupon Clorimanthes, who durst do any thing but disobey his Prince, having
promised an entire submission to his will; Alexandro went presently to acquaint
Ervillius with the occasion of their late encounter, who being then accompanied
by Cenodoxius, he showed him such civilities, as assured him that Synesins had
dealt effectually in his affairs, who when the others retired, being desired to
stay, gave the Prince a full account of that passage concerning Philocles,
which Clorimanthes had touched on in his discourse, and then, it being already
far advanced in the night, left him to his privacy.

FINIS.
HIEROCLES COMMENTARY Upon PYTHAGORAS's GOLDEN VERSES; Translated by JOHN HALL
of Gray's Inn Esquire; are ready for the Press, and will be published next Term.


