Sacramental Discourses, ON SEVERAL TEXTS, BEFORE, and AFTER THE Lord's Supper.

By JOHN SHOWER.

LONDON, Printed for Abr. Chandler, Sam. Clements, and Sam. Wade, at the
Chirurgeons-Arms in Aldersgate Street, the Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard, and
Bible under the Piaza of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. MDCXCIII.

portrait of John Shower Mr: John Shower


THE PREFACE.
THERE are Three Things especially requisite unto a Worthy Communicant; to
believe and own the Truths, which our B. Lord would preserve the Memory of by
this Institution; and to have a lively sense of the Comforts, and
Encouragements that may arise from thence; and then to perform those Duties of
Love and Gratitude, and faithful Obedience, which result from our Covenant
Relation to him, and the open Profession of it. The Doctrines, and the
Encouragements, and the Duties of Christianity are admirably connected, and
joined together. The Principal of all these we are called to consider in this
Sacred Ordinance. Which yet is shamefully neglected by many, who would take it
very ill, not to be thought good Christians: who live from year to year in the
Omission of it; who make no Conscience of Remembering the Death of Christ in
this manner. As if they had no Savior who dyed for 'em; or he had not
Appointed this way of Remembering his dying Love; Or as if the Command, Do this,
in Remembrance of me, because spoken to the Apostles, did only concern them,
and the Ministers of the Christian Church. Whereas though our Lord sat down with
the Twelve, the Command is given to them as Disciples, and Representatives of
all his Church, rather than as Apostles. Or if the latter, He gave it to them,
to d spense it afterward unto Others: (not excluding their own Communicating;
for they who deliver the Elements as Ministers, do partake of 'em as Disciples,
and Christians, and Brethren,) What I have received of the Lord, that also I
deliver unto you, says the Apostle: and if Ministers are bound to Deliver it,
the People are bound to Receive. If our Savior's words, Do this in Remembrance
of me, relate to Ministers as such, it is a Command for them to Administer the
Lord's Supper; and the same Command must be supposed to bind the People to
Receive it, that does oblige Ministers to Deliver it.

There be some who omit it from Superstitious, unbecoming Fears, and Scruples,
as if our Lord were more to be Honored by our absenting from his Table, than
by frequenting of it. Many, on the other hand, are guilty of Presumption, and
Rashness, by careless, unprepared Approaching to it. Several Cases are here
spoken to, which relate to both sorts, though many more should be added.

As to the manner of performing this Duty, we cannot come too humbly, in a
sense of our Ignorance, and Weakness, and Sinfulness; owning, that we are
nothing, and have nothing, and can do nothing, without his Grace, that may be
pleasing to him: and that we have done very much to dishonor and provoke him,
(especially by our late Transgressions,) that we deserve to be cast out of his
sight, and denied the Privileges of his House and Family, never to taste of
the Childrens Bread. But having renewed our Repentance, before we come, we are
called to express our Love, Gratitude, and Joy. When we view a Dying Savior, a
Crucified Jesus before our eyes, lifted up upon the Cross, drawing all Men to
him, bowing down his Head, and stretching out his Arms to embrace us; as he
appears all bloody to fright us from our sins, so he opens his side, that we
may see his Heart flaming with Love. He calls us to behold his wounded body,
with Hearts wounded with a Penitent Sense of Sin, and a growing Love to the
Redeemer. He calls us to seal a Covenant of Fidelity to him, and to accept the
Purchased Benefits of a Gracious Covenant, sealed back from him to us.

Here we behold the Lamb of God a Sacrifice for those sins, we have so lately
Repented of; removing that Wrath which we so lately trembled at, as having
justly deserved; and therefore we should Approach this Table with Gladness, and
Rejoicing. Here we are called to give public Expressions of the Love and
Honor we bear to the Remembrance of Christ. We do it in Thankfulness to him,
for all he has done, and suffered for us. Here we profess our Faith, and Hope,
and Trust in a Crucified Savior. We own him for our Lord, and our Jesus; we
declare we are not ashamed of his Cross, or of any Difficulties, Trials, or
Sufferings we may be exposed to, for his sake.

He needed not have cared whether we were Saved, or no: And yet how low has he
condescended to purchase our Happiness and Salvation; and to Assure us of it?
What manner of love is this? that the Eternal Son of God, Incarnate, should
endure a Painful, Ignominious, cursed Death for us, that we might not dye
Eternally? How wonderful and incomprehensible is this love! How pleasant should
be the contemplation of it! Here is an Abyss of Love, of Adorable, Allmighty
Love, (on this side Heaven, but leading to it,) which we cannot fathom, but are
called to admire.

A Crucified Jesus represented, and commemorated, as a Sacrifice for us! What
more Glorious Sight can we desire to see? How should this awaken all our
Affections, and, in some respect, puzzle not only our Passions, but our Faith
too? As an Object too large for our narrow Thoughts, too high for our Finite
Minds, too Great for our Wonder, and for our little Love, and Joy. How
delightful is it, to be thus even lost in the consideration of this matchless
condescension, and Grace of our Redeemer? When the Object is too big for our
highest Raptures, and Transports, and we are swallowed up in silence, and
astonishment.

How should this Love constrain and draw forth ours? When we consider for what
vile and sinful creatures the Son of God gave his life and made his Soul an
Offering. How his Love to us Enemies and Rebels, was stronger than fear, or
shame, or death, without bounds, and without example. When we Feast on this
Sacrifice, what can we do less, in requital for this Infinite love, than devote
our selves, Souls and Bodies to him, as the Purchase of his Death? And lay all
our Affairs, and dearest concernments at his Feet to be disposed of as he
pleases? How can it be, but our love to him must be kindled, maintained, and
increased by such an Institution? Remembering, and considering his love to us,
till we are brought practically to conclude, and determine, that our love to
him is too little, if we love any thing besides him, except it be by his order,
for his sake, and to his Glory; except it be according to the prescribed Rules,
and limits he has set us.

And how proper is it here to Renew our Baptismal Covenant? faithfully to
promise to be entirely the Lord's, to be obedient and resigned to him to be
Treacherous to him no more, but steadfast and resolved in his Service? taking
his Law as our Rule, his will to be our will, to love what he loves, to hate
what he hates, to have the same Friends and Enemies with our Blessed Lord. For
here we put God in mind of his Covenant with us through Jesus Christ, and our
selves in mind of our Covenant with God. And upon renewed Repentance for any
sins we have committed, after any Instance of Unfaithfulness to our Solemn
Engagements, by unsuitable walking, we here implore his Mercy and Grace to
pardon us. We declare at the same time, that we desire to take hold of his
Covenant, that tho we are Sinners, we are not Apostates, we confess our sins,
and beg Forgiveness, and repeat our Resolutions of Fidelity to him. We trust in
the unshaken Faithfulness, and Truth of God to his gracious Promises: We place
our hope and confidence in the stability of his Everlasting Covenant, which the
Blood of Jesus, (the Blood of the Covenant) has confirmed, and made
Everlasting: Not Trusting in our own Faith, but in his Free Mercy, and
invariable Truth; not in our Repentance, but his Gracious Pardon; not in our
own Preparations, but his Merciful Acceptance of us in his Beloved Son; not in
any thing we our selves can do, but in the Merits of Christ, the Fruits of his
Death, and the Purchase of his Cross, as dispensed and applied according to the
rule, method, and tenor of the Gospel-Promise.

This is our Privilege, and this our Employment at the Table of our Lord. And
there is hardly any Subject will better bear to be treated of in several
different methods, than this; or upon which, repeated Discourses, by several
Persons, may be more useful. I grant there are many Excellent Books already
written, to Instruct Men in the Nature, and to direct and assist their
Devotion, in the Observation of this Holy Sacrament. I design not to wrest them
out of their hands, into whose this may fall. I pretend not to add, but to urge
and prosecute the same Great End; and sometimes by the same Arguments and
Expressions. I acknowledge my having profited by the Writings of others; I hope
it is what they designed. These Discourses were acceptable to many, when
Preached, and being since reviewed (some of them with some Enlargement) I hope
they may be of use, at least to those who heard 'em, and desired their
Publication. And it must be granted, that what is of so Universal, and
Important a Concern, as a due Participation of this Ordinance, ought to be
Treated and Inculcated, in as many different ways, as may best suit the Various
capacites of several Persons. It may be, a shorter Account of the Doctrine of
the Lord's Supper, with Meditations and Devotions adapted thereto, would be
more proper for the Younger, and more Ignorant Sort: this I have promised, and
intend, but have not yet had time to perfect. The Lord follow this, and all
Endeavors, for the Furtherance of Real Godliness, with an Abundant Blessing.

London, May 9th. 1693. J. S.

THE CONTENTS.
The First Discourse. OF Union to Christ, and the New Creature: Or a
Preparatory Sermon to the Lord's Supper, on the First Day of the Year. From 2
Cor. 5.17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature, p. 1. The Second
Discourse. Of Christ's passing over the Brook Kedron, and entering into the
Garden of Gethsemine. After the Lords Supper. From John 18.1, 2. When Jesus had
spoken these words, he went forth with his Disciples over the Brook Cedron,
where was a Garden, into which he entered, and his Disciples: and Judas also
knew the place; For Jesus often times resorted thither with his Disciples, p. 49.
The Third Discourse. Concerning Spiritual Washing, the Nature, Means, and
Evidences of it. Before the Lords Supper. From 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some
of you, but you are washed, but you are Sanctified, but you are Justified, in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, p. 89 The Fourth
Discourse. Of the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood. After the Lord's
Supper. From 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, Is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? p. 129 The Fifth Discourse, The Sin and Danger
of Unworthy Receiving. Before the Lord's Supper. From 1 Cor. 11.29. He that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself, p.
163 The Sixth Discourse, Of Christ's Last Passover, And its Accomplishment.
After the Lord's Supper. From Luke 22.15, 16, 17, 18. With desire have I
desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. For I say unto you, I
will not many more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God.
And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and said, Take this, and divide it among
your selves. For I say unto you. I will not drink of the Fruit of the Vine,
until the Kingdom of God shall come, p. 199 The Seventh Discourse, Before the
Lord's Supper. From Cant. 2.4. He brought me into the Banqueting House, and
his Banner over me was Love, p. 243 The Eighth Discourse, After the Lord's
Supper. From St. John 20.27, 28. Then said he unto Thomas, Reach hither thy
Finger, and behold my Hands; and reach hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my
Side, and be not faithless, but believing. And Thomas answered and said unto
him, My Lord, and My God, p. 281
A Paraphrase of the Lord's Prayer. Our Father, etc.

The First Discourse, Of Union to Christ, and the New Creature. OR, A SERMON
Preparatory to the Lord's Supper. On the First Day of the YEAR.
From 2 COR. V. 17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature.


THROUGH the Merciful Forbearance of God, we now begin another Year; and have
outlived several, who, a twelve month ago, were as like to have seen this New
years-day, as any of us. That we may begin it with some Serious Reflections,
suitable to the beginning of the Year, and the approaching Solemnity of the
Lord's Supper, I have chosen these words, as proper unto both. They are brought
in, as one Inference among others, from the constraining Love of Christ, which
the Apostle had mentioned in the 14th Verse. Many useful things might be
observed, in explaining the Context, and showing the Connection of this, with
the preceding Verses. But I shall at present consider them more absolutely, and
in the General.

If any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature: or, Let him be a New Creature.
He ought to be so. The Original will bear either sense; The words may be taken
imperatively, or affirmatively: For we find not Is in the Original. It is true,
that whoever is in Christ, is a New Creature; And it is true, that he is
obliged thereby to prove his Union to Christ, he ought to be a New Creature.
Neither sense is to be excluded, That the State of such as are in Christ, and
likewise their Obligation, may be comprehended. It is the Character, and
Qualification of such as are in Christ, and it is their Duty. So that we may
consider these words, either as a Doctrinal Assertion, That such as are in
Christ Jesus, are always New Creatures: Or, as a Seasonable Exhortation, That
they should manifest that they are in Christ, by discovering themselves to be
New Creatures.

In both senses the New Creature is a necessary Consequent of Union to Christ.
The connection is inseparable between these two. So that we may truly affirm,
That all such are so; And we may rationally exhort all, that pretend to such a
Privilege, that they would be so, and show it. But whether considered, as a
Doctrinal Proposition, or as an Exhortation; whether considered as a Command
from God, or as a wish and Prayer of the Apostle; There are three things
obvious enough to be explained, and spoken to. 1. Something concerning this
Privilege of being in Christ, and the import of it. 2. Concerning this New
Creation, which is to be Connected with it. And, 3. Of the Connection between
them, and the Universal Obligation upon all that are in Christ, to be New
Creatures; That if any Man be in Christ, he is, he must be a New Creature; or
where there is no such Change, it is in vain to pretend to be in Christ; Or he
that is not a New Creature, he is not in Jesus Christ; he has no part in him,
and shall have no benefit by him.

Every Man's Title and Claim to a special Interest in Christ, and Relation to
him, must be tried by this Rule. This is more fully expressed, Ephesians. 4.20, 21,
22, 23. But you have not so learned Christ, if so be you have been taught of
him, as the Truth is in Jesus, that ye put off concerning the former
conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts:
And be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind: And that ye put on the new man,
which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness.

1. If any man be in Christ. Something it will be necessary to speak concerning
this Union to Christ, from which we are said to be in him, as sometimes Christ
is said to be in us. And both are sometimes joined together, John 6.56. He that
eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him.

There are three sorts of Union which we cannot sufficiently admire. The first
from all Eternity, in the impenetrable Secrets of inaccessible Light. The
second, in the fullness of Time, in the Womb of the Virgin. The third is made
daily by the Spirit and Grace of Christ. The first of these is the Essential
Union between the Eternal Father, and the Eternal Word, in the Adorable Mystery
of the ever blessed Trinity. The second, is the Personal Union of the Humane
Nature with the Divine, in that unspeakable Mystery of the Incarnation. The
third, is the Spiritual Union between Christ and Christians, which depends on
the two former, and has some dark resemblance of them. Concerning which, let
me mention a few things.

1. That there is a real Union between Christ and the Souls of Believers, how
difficult soever it be to understand the manner of it. He is not only Emanuel,
God with us, as partaker of Flesh and Blood, having assumed our Nature; He is
not only for us, in the Work of Redemption, by giving himself to God a Ransom
and Sacrifice for us: But he is said to be in us, and to dwell in our hearts;
and we are said to be in him, and dwell in him, as the Branches are in the
Vine, and by many other Images and Idaea's of Union is this set forth by
Allusions and Metaphors, and Similitudes of many sorts, to signify and
represent to us this blessed Union between Christ and real Christians. And as
he did partake with us of Flesh and Blood, Heb. 2 14. We are said to be made
partakers of Christ, Heb. 14. as the Principle and Measure of all Mr. Polhill,
Christus in Cord, p. 10.12.
our Spiritual Enjoyments and Expectations. And to be in h m that is true in
Jesus Christ, John 1.5.20.

It is sometimes set forth by the natural Union between Head and Members: At
other times, by the Marriage union; and both are discoursed of together. Ephesians
5.25.30. We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones; By
Allusion to what is said of Eve as to the first Adam. He is set forth as a
Foundation for never failing Support, as a Husband for the dearest Love; as a
Vine, as an Head, for Vital Influence; as Food, and Nourishment, for the most
intimate Conjunction. He is said to be one flesh with us, and we are said to be
one spirit with him. Yea, as Christ is said to be in the Father, Believers are
said to be in him, and he in them, John 14.20. Yea further, he is said to be
one with them; as he and the Father are one, John 17.21. And he is said also to
live in them, and they to live in him, Gal. 2.20. Insomuch that sometimes the
Scripture speaks of Christ and the Church as of one Person, 1 Cor. 12.12. where
the Church is called Christ.

How amazing and admirable is the Expression, Christ in us, and we in him! What
Riches and Glory is there in this Mystery! as the Apostle speaks, 1 Colos. 27.
Who ever heard before of a Servant's being in his Master, or a Disciple in his
Lord, or the Members being in the Head? But here is a Mystery of Divine Love
and Grace, which the Apostle seems with some kind of Affectation to speak of,
at every turn, and upon every occasion; to mention it several times in one
Chapter, in one Verse; yea and over and over in the same Verse: So unfeigned
and so fervent was his Love to Christ, if he fight or triumph, it is in Christ
Jesus; If he bless God, or God bless him, it is still spoken of as in Christ
Jesus: He speaks, as if he could do nothing without him; His Life, his Motion,
his very Being is to be in Christ.

We must silently Adore this Wonder of Divine Love, and cover our Faces in
humble Adoration for such an Honor, which the blessed Angels might envy, if
they were capable of it: For however Christ be there Head, they are yet at his
Feet, they are not in him, as Believers are. It is true, the Angels serve him,
and worship in his presence; they follow him by Millions, they encompass his
Throne with Flames of Love, they quit Heaven to obey his Orders, they fly
swift as the Wind to execute his pleasure; But Christ is not in them, as he is
in us; nor they in him, as we are said to be. The Name Emanuel, is to them an
inexpressible Name; they cannot say, God with us, in the sense that we can: For
he took not the Nature of Angels at first, and he has not taken them into such
an union with himself, as he has the Sons of men. But,

2. That you may not mistake, remember that all Christians are not in Christ in
a like manner. Some are so only by Baptism, and a visible profession, others by
a living union. Such a difference our Savior makes, John 15. v. 6. where he
tells us, there are some Branches of a Tree that have only Influence enough to
bring forth Leaves, and no Fruit and are cast off as Branches, (...); They
seemed to be Branches in Christ, they appeared as Branches; they professed union
to him, but were not what they seemed to be. In this sense I understand the
being in Christ spoken of, Gal. 1.22. I was known by face to the Churches that
are in Judea, that are in Christ Jesus: That is, to the Body of professing
Christians there, as distinguished from the Jews, though there were many rotten
Members amongst them, that were not in Christ by a lively Faith. Therefore,

3. The great Bonds of Union between Christ and real Christians, or true
Believers; are, the Spirit on his part, and Faith, and Love on ours. On which
account, Christ is said to dwell in us by his Spirit, and we are said to dwell
in him by Faith. By the Spirit he comes down to us, by Faith we ascend up to
him. It is by Faith we are joined to Christ as our Foundation, 1 Pet. 2.6. And
by the Spirit we are built together for an habitation of God, Ephesians. 2 v. 22.
And, he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit with him, 1 Cor. 6.17. Our
Union unto Christ immediately arises from the Communication of his Spirit to
us; and our Participation of the same Spirit with him, by which Spirit the
Divine Nature, as the Image of Christ, is formed in us, 2 Pet. 1.4. Gal. 4.19.
And the Introduction this new spiritual form, gives denomination to the Person.
Christ enters into us by Faith and inhabits in us by his holy Spirit. And of
these two Bonds, the Spirit is the primary one, as being the Author of the
other. And therefore Believers are said to live in the Spirit of Christ, and to
walk in the Spirit, and after the Spirit, and to be led by the Spirit. Hereby
says the Apostle, We know that we dwell in him, and he in us because he has give
us of his Spirit, 1 John 4.13. 2 Corinthians 13, 14.

I confess it is hard to conceive any Union nearer than that between God and
every creature: For God as Creator is as near to every Creature, as that
Creature is to it self, and yet distinct from that Creature, for that Creature
is not God. But the different sort of Union must be distinguished by different
Operations. God is nearer to Creatures in their Natural State, works on them
as the God of Nature. Christ is nearer to the Souls of Believers by his Spirit,
works on them as an Head of holy gracious Influences. The different
Operations make the great difference. Though we shall not fully understand
this, till we come to that Place and State, where that which is imperfect shall
be done away. However we are said to be built on him, as on a Foundation; to be
inserted into him, as Branches into a Vine,; to be incorporated with him as an
Head; and what words can be used more significant of an Intimate Union?
Therefore,

4. We may add, That it is more than a Relative and Political Union, such as is
between King and Subjects. It exceeds it in the Intimacy of the Union, as well
as the Benefits of it. The Similitude between Head and Members, making one
Natural Body, amounts to more. Besides, his Kingdom is not of the same sort;
and he rules his Subjects after another manner. And the Mystery of the Trinity
in Unity, to which it has some Resemblance, carries it yet higher and further.
It is therefore a most near and immediate Spiritual Union; whereby every
particular Believer is joined to the Lord. This is a Great Mystery, Ephesians.
5.32. Oh how Mr. How Is Funeral Sermon of Mrs. Baxter, p. 10.
mysterious and ineffable is this Union of the Lord and the Soul! Who would not
admire at their proud disdainful Folly, that while they cannot explain the
Union between Soul and Body, are ready to jeer at their just, humble, and
modest Ignorance, who call this other, a Mystical Union: Or, because they know
not what to make of it, would make nothing; and will not allow there should be
any such Thing at all, or would have it to be next to nothing. But have those
words no sense belonging to them, or not a Great Sense? 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is
joined to the Lord, is one Spirit. This is a Mystery, says the Apostle, that
has Riches of Glory in it, 1 Col. 27.

And that Union is the Foundation of Fellowship and Communion with him, as the
Apostle speaks, 1 John 1.3. That he may have Fellowship with us, and truly our
Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. That is, That you
may have like Fellowship with God and Christ, as we have. Not that our Union
and Communion is first with the Church, and then with Christ, as some of late
have Argued; though therein they contradict a Learned Man, whose Opinions, in
other Instances, they are very fond of; I mean Episcopius. For upon that place
he says, That this sense is carefully to be avoided, That we are first united
to the Apostles, and then to God and Christ. It is both absurd in it self, and
of very ill consequence. It is in it self absurd, because we, and the Apostles
themselves are but Brethren, in respect of Union unto Christ; They are united
to him in the same manner with us. And there are very ill consequences would
follow from that Opinion: For then there must be Union and Communion with some
Men and Company of Men, before we can have Union and Communion with Christ,
which Error, by degrees, was serviceable to introduce the Papacy. Let me add,

5. This Union is not to be supposed without Regeneration, without the
Renovation of our corrupt Nature by the Spirit of Christ, in order to Communion
with him. The Union otherwise between Christ and us would be like
Nebuchadnezzar's Image, the Head of gold, and the Arms of silver, and the Feet
of clay. If there be not Spiritual Life from Christ by the quickening Spirit,
the Body of Christ would be partly dead; And who would ever endure a dead Body
to be joined to him, though it were the Carkase of one he never so dearly loved?

6. This must also be remembered, That this Union between Christ and us, is to
be brought about by mutual consent, and therefore often set forth by the
Conjugal Union, to which Consent is necessary. Our Lord has laid the
Foundation, and declared his readiness to receive us into Union with him, by
the publication of his Gospel; And it is the work of his Spirit, to make us
willing to yield our selves to the Lord, that we may enter into Union with him,
and be brought under the Bond of the Covenant; We must know him, choose him, and
accept him for our Teacher, Savior, and Lord, by a present compliance with his
Terms. We must devote and give up our selves heart^ly, and unfeignedly, and
unreservedly to be his; And then we may say, My Beloved is mine, and I am his;
I am in Christ, and Christ in me.

And here is the great Office and Work of Faith in this World, to bring Christ
and our Souls into this blessed Union; Upon which Account we are now in him, as
hereafter we shall be with him. When the work of Faith is over, and we are
brought to Glory, we shall be with Christ, and shall be ever with the Lord; But
now we are said to be in him.

It is true, we are now said to sit in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus; But
hereafter it is promised, we shall sit down on his Throne with him. Now he
dwells in us, and we in him; Hereafter we shall be with him, to behold his
Glory. For so he Prays, John 17. And he promised the Penitent Thief, that he
should be with him that day in Paradise. Our spiritual life is now hid with God
in Christ, as to present Union by Grace; but it is hid with Christ in God, as
to eternal Glory. The expressions are observably different; In Christ now, with
Christ hereafter; Now united with God in Christ, Hereafter with Christ in God;
In Christ upon Earth, In God in Heaven. For to be in Christ, refers to the
Mediator, and is by Faith; But Faith shall cease in Heaven, and the Mediator
deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, that God may be all in all. Thus for a
brief Explication of the Privilege of being in Christ.

II Let us consider what is affirmed of those that are in Christ, or what they
are exhorted to; What they are, if they be in Christ; What they must manifest
themselves to be, if they will prove an Interest in such a Privilege; that is,
New Creatures. If any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature; Or a New
Creation, for so the Original will bear. And it is not in this place only, but
several others, where the like Expressions are used concerning that great
Change, that is made by the Grace of God on the Souls of Men. It is termed a
Creation, for the greatness of the Change; and a new Creation, for the
Excellency of it.

One may be apt to think, That the Extraordinary Conversion of the Apostle
Paul, made so great a Change in him, that it is on that Account he so often
speaks in such terms; that he mentions so often old things done away, and the
old Adam put off; That he speaks of a New Man, a New Creation, and New
Creatures, and a Spiritual Resurrection from the Dead, and the like; As that
Glorious Light, which shone round about him, when he was struck to the ground
in the way to Damascus, might occasion him so often to use the expression of
Light; for, at every turn, he speaks of the Father of Lights, the Armor of
Light, the Kingdom of Light, the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, of
Illumination, of opening the Eyes, etc. But how fit a representation is this of
the Change by converting Grace, as might be illustrated, by considering the
state of Spiritual Death, that we are in before, and by considering the nature
of the Change it self, and the Effects and Operations that do afterward
manifest and discover it.

We are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, begotten again, born from
above, quickened and made alive, who were dead in trespasses and sins. Several
words are used, according to the several Powers of the Soul, and according to
the different objects the New Creature is conversant about: For as this Change
discovers it self in the Understanding, it is a translation from darkness into
Marvelous Light, and brings us to the true and saving knowledge of God in
Christ The f^rst thing that God created in the Natural World, was Light, 1 Genesis
3. 2 Cor. 4.6. 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. As in the Will, it is a choice of God, and full
purpose of heart to cleave to him. And as to the different objects it has also
other names; As referring to Christ dying, it is Faith; To Christ living, it is
Love; To Christ ruling and commanding, it is New Obedience.

But here it is called a New Creation. Not as if it were a removal of the old
Substance, or any of the Powers of the Soul; But a rectifying, a sanctifying of
them, by setting up a new light in the Understanding, giving a new Byas and
Inclination to the Will, turning the Heart from Sin and the World, to God and
Christ, to Holiness and Heaven. Not changing the Nature of our Affections, but
curing the Corruption and Disorder of them, and changing the Objects about
which they are conversant.

Some think the Metaphor is taken from the Proselytes to the Jewish Religion,
whose Conversion to Judaism was accounted a kind of New Birth, and they
reckoned New Creatures. Which our Lord seems to allude to, in his Discourse
with Nicodemus, and wonders such a Doctor in Israel should be ignorant of it.
Others think it may allude to the Jewish Custom, with respect to their
children, They taught them to read at three years old, and then instructed them
till five, then put them to School, where they learned the Law of Moses till
Ten, and for three years more they applied themselves to understand the Jewish
Traditions, and the Mysteries of the Synagogue; and when that time was expired,
at the Age of Thirteen, they said a Child was a New creature; that is,
sufficiently instructed how to live and please God, alleging Isa. 43.21. This
People have I formed, or created for my self.

Our state of nature and sin is ordinarily expressed by the Metaphor Dr.
Hammond's Sermon. on Gal. 6.15.
of Old Age, our natural Corrupt Affections, that are born and grow up with us,
are called the Old Man; as if since Adam's Fall we were decrepit, and feeble,
and Aged as soon as Born; as a Child begotten by a Man in a Consumption, never
comes to the strength of a Man, is always weak, and crazy, and puling, has all
the Imperfections, and Corporal Infirmities of Age: before he is out of his
Infancy. And accordingly, all that is opposite to this old, corrupt, decrepit
state, is termed New. And so we read of a New Doctrine, and New Covenant, New
Tongues, a New Commandment, New Man, Mark 1.27. Chap 16.17. John 13.34. Ephesians.
2.15. and the state of Grace expressed by this, All things are become New. The
Man, when old, has entered a second time into hi^ Mothers Womb, and is born
again, and is become a glorious, beauteous New Creature, so that you would
wonder to see the Change. You have heard in the Primitive Church of a Grain of
Faith removing Mountains; The work of Regeneration, the bestowing of a
Spiritual Life on one dead in Trespasses and Sins, the making of a Carcass
walk, the Natural Old Man to Spring again, and move spiritually, is as great a
Miracle as that.

Therefore called a Creation, because of the necessity of Divine Grace, and the
power of the Spirit of Christ, (that Power that made us at first, and raised
Christ from the Dead;) It Is the necessity of that Power unto this Change, that
is the principal ground of this term Creation. The Efficiency of it, by the
power of victorious Grace, making us a willing, and holy People, in the day of
his Power, comprehending habitual Sanctification, as the root and life of
actual holiness. The Excellency and Extent of this, I might show, as to the
inward and outward Man, Heart and Life; all the Powers of the Soul, and Members
of the Body, and our whole Carriage, Course, and Behavior; And that this is
common unto all the Children of God, all that are created again in Christ
Jesus, all that are born from above; If any Man be in Christ, he is a new
creature. To this end,

III. Let us consider the certain and inseparable connection between these two,
That all who are in Christ are, and must be new Creatures. Every real
Christian, he is in Christ Jesus, his Union to Christ does constitute him a
living Member, and his being a New Creature does prove it. The one is the
Essence, the other his Property, but they are inseparable.

What makes a Man, but the Union of Soul and Body? What makes a Christian, but
the Union of the Soul with Christ? How know we that a Man has a Soul, but by
the Motions, Actions, Operations of a Reasonable Soul? How know you that such a
Professing Christian is United to Christ by his Spirit, but by the Effects and
Operations of this Spirit, making such a Change in Heart and Life, from which
they may be denominated New Creatures; Therefore they are said to walk in the
Spirit, and after the Spirit: And at other times, as the Foundation of this, to
be born of the Spirit, and born from above; so as the Divine Life, and Likeness
is introduced. But more particularly;

1. They who are thus spiritually united to Christ, they must be new creatures,
because they partake of the Divine Spirit? the same Spirit that formed Christ
in the Womb of the Virgin, has formed the new Creature in all that are in
Christ: the same Spirit that quickened the dead Body of Christ, and raised him
from the Dead, imploies the exceeding greatness af his Mighty Power toward
them that believe, and by Faith are united to him: the same Spirit that carried
out the Soul of Christ to go to God as a Father, does enable Believers to cry
Abba Father. For the Spirit of Christ, is the Spirit of Adoption, Gal. 4.6. The
same Spirit that led Christ into his Trials and Temptations, and brought him
off with Victory, does the like for all the Followers of Christ. They are
partakers of his Spirit. The blood of Christ cannot save those who are
destitute of his Spirit.

The same Spirit of Holiness conforms them to the Image and Life of God; they
are under the conduct of the same Spirit of Humility, Meekness, Love, Charity,
Prayer, Courage, Resignation, and the like, which acted in Christ; And this
makes them like to him; like him in their Judgments and Opinions of things;
like him in their Affections, like him in their Designs and Ends, and like him
in a course of Actions, by which they prosecute those Designs for the Glory of
God. I might show their Resemblance and conformity in Graces unto Christ, in
the Rise of them, in the Kinds of them, in the Exercise of them: All which
depends upon their Participation of the same Spirit.

2. They must be new Creatures if they are in Christ because the new Creature
is an Imitation of Him. It is a little Module of Christ in its Birth, and a
conformity to his Pattern in its Growth, and fully so in its Perfection. And
therefore we read of coming to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of
the fullness of Christ, Ephesians 4.12. All that are united to Christ are conformed
to him. Every Branch in him answers to the Root; every Member suits to the holy
Head in Heaven, and in some measure does resemble him. That the Members of
Christ should be of a contrary Temper to their Head, is utterly impossible.

I might here urge the Imitation of Christ, as becoming those who profess to be
in him, in several Instances: as in the inward Delight which he took to do the
will of his Father, in his active Zeal for his Father's Glory, in a patient
submission to the hand of his Father, though never so heavy, in his firm Faith
and Dependence on him under all Discouragements; and in his Constancy and
Perseverance to do good, notwithstanding all the Hatred and Malice of the
World, etc.

3. Because the New Creature is Represented in Scripture as a Conformity to the
Death and Resurrection of Christ, Philip. 3.10. By putting off the old man, we
dye unto Sin; by putting on the new, we are alive to God, and live to
Righteousness. We are hereby changed into the Image of Christ, and that good
work begun, which is to be finished and consummated in the Day of Christ Phil.
1.6. There is a Conformity to his Death and Sufferings, in the mortification of
Sin. Our old man is crucified with him, Romans 6.6. Gal. 5.24. And a conformity
to his Resurrection, in Heavenliness of Mind, Col. 3.1. and in Newness of Life,
Romans 6.4.

4. Because nothing else will so prove our Union to Christ, as to enable us to
take Comfort in such a Privilege; no external Advantages whatsoever will do
it. For neither circumcision, nor uncumcision avails any thing, but a new
Creature, Gal. 6.15. The highest Profession of Religion without such a Change,
will not save thee. Except a man be born again, or from above, he cannot enter
into Heaven, John. 3.5. Neither can he be accepted of God, or have fellowship
with him, 1 John 3.2.

No External Duties or Performances will avail you without this: You may Read,
and Hear, and Pray, and give Alms, and do many other things, and yet not be in
Christ; if you are not Regenerated, Renewed, and inwardly changed, by the Power
of the Divine Spirit: If you are not made New Creatures, you can never prove
that you are in Christ You may be Baptized in the Name of the Sacred Trinity;
you may continue in the Bosom of the Church; hear the sound of the glorious
Gospel, and receive the Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper, and yet not be
united unto Christ. You may have some lesser change from the grosser Pollutions
of the World; you may have some partial Reformation, which is far short of
being new Creatures; some outward temporary change, in your carriage and
conversation, while the Heart is unrenewed. In a word, our present Fellowship
and Communion with God, our after Service and Obedience in the Fruits of
Righteousness, to the praise of God, and our final Blessedness in the enjoyment
of him, do all depend upon this Change, this new Creation; And therefore be
assured, None can be in Christ without it; none in Christ, so as to have any
special, distinguishing, saving Benefit by him.

Application 1. Are none in Christ but new creatures? How many then must be
excluded? How many of excellent and laudable Qualifications, of great
Seize and high Professions, and moral Accomplishments, must yet he
excluded and shut out from having any part in Christ; because they are yet
Strangers to this New creation; and consequently are not in Christ, but under
condemnation. Mere Civility, and a plausible inoffensive Carriage is quite
another thing. We need but view the Lives and Actions of the generality of such
as are called Christians, to confirm this, That the Number is but small of
those who are in Christ: How few have had any awakening Convictions about these
things? and many such miscarry.

2. How miserable is the condition of all unrenewed Souls; without a change,
they are excluded from all saving benefit by the Redeemer. They are not in
Christ, and therefore are under the Curse and Condemnation; which by union to
Christ we are delivered from, Romans 8.1. Know ye not, that Christ is in you,
except ye are Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.6. All our hopes of Life and Salvation by
Christ depend upon it: The Guilt of all our Sins does otherwise lie upon us;
And all the black Clouds of Divine Vengeance hang over our heads; The Wrath of
God bides upon us; as if there were no Christ, no Gospel: And there is nothing
between us and Everlasting Ruin, but a little Breadth.

3. Then none but New Creatures have a Right to the Lord's Table; For the
invited Guests are such who are in Christ. The Covenant of Grace cannot be
sealed in that Ordinance, to those who are not under the Bond of the Covenant;
The Benefits purchased by Christ are not confirmed at his Table unto those, who
are none of his: I grant there is an Unworthiness, as to present frame, that
even those who are in Christ may have; but it is the Unworthiness as to state,
that I am speaking of: Such as are not in Christ, having nothing to do to eat
his Flesh, and drink his Blood, lest they eat and drink Judgment and
Condemnation to themselves: He that does not truly Repent, cannot be truly
Interested in the Promise of Pardon, and therefore cannot have a Right to the
Seal of it. They are dead in Sin, cannot receive Nourishment by this spiritual
Food. The least that can be said, as one observes, is this; That it is in vain,
and to no good purpose; for such can no more receive Christ in the Sacrament,
than a Chicken that should come into the Assembly, and pick up some of the
crumbs of the bread from the ground, after Consecration, can be said to receive
the Body of Christ. But the Danger is unspeakable of Eating and Drinking
unworthily, for such eat and drink Judgment to themselves, not discerning the
Lord's Body.

You may desire to come to this Table, and you may say enough, it may be, to
satisfy a Minister of Christ, who cannot judge of your Heart and Conscience,
does not know the whole of your Life; But you your selves must look to it, that
you be in Christ, and that you evidence you are so, by being New Creatures. We
can but Warn and Admonish you, and offer our Assistance and help: At your own
peril be it, if you come, and yet live in any known Sins, and cherish the
Enemies of Christ, though you profess to be his, and presume upon all the
Privileges of his House and Family, as real members of it. But,

I will yet add, That those who are in Christ, if they would have Assistance
and Grace from the Spirit of Christ, to walk as New Creatures, they ought, on
the other hand, to take heed how they absent themselves from that Ordinance. If
they would either have the comfort of their being in Christ, or would have
supplies of Grace, to walk as New creatures, they should be frequent and
serious in Sacramental Duties. Have you not weak Graces to be strengthened? and
manifold Corruptions to be more subdued? Inordinate Love to this World more
Crucified? Do you not need more Ability, to discharge several Duties, and
overcome diverse Temptations? Do you not desire to be more Partakers of the
Image, and Life, and Spirit of Christ? Is your likeness to Christ so complete,
your Faith, in all its branches, so active and firm, your Love to Christ so
warm, your Heavenly Desires so fervent, your Patience and Resignation so
perfect, your Obedience so exact, your standing so sure, that you need no more
Influence of the Spirit of Christ? Should not your own necessity oblige you to
be frequent in this work; besides the Authority of your Lord, which is motive
enough to those that are in Christ? And he requires, you should remember his
Dying Love this way, and show forth his death ti^l he come. It is proper work
for us to begin the year with; To renew our Covenant with the Lord by partaking
of the Symbols of Christ's Body and Blood; giving up our selves again to be the
Lords, with renewed Repentance for the sins of the Year past, and repeated
Exercises of Faith, for Pardon, and Peace, and Grace, and Righteousness, and
Life.

4. The next Use may be of Examination, To try whether we are in Christ, or no,
by inquiring, whether we are New creatures, or not. Your Love to Christ, your
Likeness to him, your Subjection to him, your Fruitfulness in him, will
discover it. Are old things done away with you, and all things become new? Is
there still the old Darkness and Blindness that was upon your minds? or, Are
you Light in the Lord? Does the old Deadness, Security, and Carelessness remain
upon your Hearts and Consciences? old Thoughts, and old Designs, old Discourses
and Conversations, as little Savor in the things of God as ever? As little
Victory over the Temptations of the World, and the Flesh, as formerly? Are your
Wills as rebellious and stubstorn as ever? Are your Desires after Vanity, and
your Affections toward Earthly Things, the same as formerly? So for your Hopes
and Fears, Joys and Sorrows, What Change has been wrought? Does fleshly
Appetite, and Sense, and Carnal Interest sway, and govern as much as ever? Or
is there a New Creation wrought in you? Have you a new Mind and Judgment, a new
Heart and new Affections? Do you walk in Newness of Life? Is your Internal
Principle changed, and the External Rule of your Actions changed too? Are you
no longer conformed to the World, but transformed by the renewing of your
Minds? Romans 12.2. Is that sin hated and crucified, that before was indulged? Is
that Savior prized, [for to them that believe, he is precious, and the
Chiefest of ten thousands,] that before was slighted? Do you delight in the Law
of God, after the Inward Man? Do you find the Holy Law of God written in your
Hearts, setting you against every sin, in your selves and others? Do you walk
in the Spirit, and after the Spirit of Christ, and not after the Flesh, or
according to the course of the World, as formerly? Is the Life you lead in the
Flesh by the Faith of the Son of God?

How do you stand affected as to inward Spiritual Duties, that concern the
inward workings of your Thoughts, and Conscience, and Affections, and such
things as none but God and you do know of? Is it as great a burden and trouble
to your Souls, to act contrary to the renewed Nature, as before to contradict
the Inclinations of the Flesh? Is Prayer your daily work, and delight? Do you
cherish and promote the new Creature? Are you restless after you have fallen
into Sin, till by Repentance you recover Pardon and Peace? Do you grow up daily
into greater Conformity to Christ, and Imitation of him? Desiring nothing more
than that his Image may be drawn more lively on your Hearts, and expressed more
fully in your Lives according to the various Providence of God that call for
the exercise of such and such Graces, and according to the various Institutions
of Christ, wherein such and such Holy Affections are to be employed? The
knowledge of this Union to Christ upon examination, will give us the Comfort of
all those Privileges which result from it.

Examine how matters are with you as to these things, and what care you take to
maintain the bonds of Union: to strengthen Faith, and obey the Spirit; and
whether it be better now than it was a year ago. While Merchants, and Tradesmen
cast up their Books, and make up their Accounts, at the end of the Year; let us
not neglect the like work, as Christians, with reference to our Spiritual
State: Let us not be less concerned to know, whether we Thrive or Decay,
whether we advance and go forward, or else decline.

5. The next Use may be of Comfort to such as are in Christ. Our Union to him
is the Foundation of all our Fellowship with him, and after supplies of Grace
and Life. If we are in Jesus Christ, he is made of God unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Such shall be
delivered from Wrath, entitled to Eternal Life, have the Pardon of all their
Sins, Christ as their Advocate pleads for 'em in Heaven, in him they are
Adopted, and have free access to God, his Spirit dwells in them, their Services
are accepted, etc.

If we are in him, there is no condemnation unto such, Romans 8.1. Such a man is
not condemned, is not in a state of condemnation for the present, John 3.18.
And such a Member of Christ cannot Perish, who by Union to him, is United to
God, the Fountain of Life. Our Lord speaks of the Union of the Father unto him
as Mediator, and his Union unto us, as both in order to our Perfection, and
eternal Felicity, John 17.20, 23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may all
be made perfect in one. But there is no Reconciliation to God, no Remission of
Sins, no Adoption, no Salvation by Christ, but for such as are in him. Whereas
all things are yours, even Life and Death, things present and things to come,
when you are Christ's.

There is a Train of invaluable Blessings follow this new Creation, and Union
to Christ, where it is truly wrought, See Mr. Polhill 's Christus in Cord,
chap. 8.
2 Ephesians. 13.14* 1 Cor: 3.22. You are brought under the bond, and blessing of
the New Covenant, Jer. 31.33. You are dignified with a new Name, Romans 2.17. You
are begotten to a new Hope, entitled to a new Inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.3. 1 John
12.13. And you shall be preserved and kept by the powerful Grace of Christ unto
the full possession of it.

None shall pluck you out of his hands, because he lives, you shall live;
nothing shall be able to separate you from him. If you are planted into the
likeness of his Death, for the destruction of the Body of Sin, you shall grow
up with him, in the likeness of his Resurrection. Romans 6.5, 6. Not only shall
you receive Influence of Spiritual Life from him, while you live, but by virtue
of this Union, you shall dye in the Lord, and sleep in Jesus, Rev. 14.13. 1
These. 4.14. You shall be with him in Glory, and your Bodies shall be raised by
him, and be made like his most glorious Body, Romans 8.11. But,

Lastly, Let me close with Exhortation. 1. Unto all, to labor after Union to
Christ. 2. Unto those that have good hope through Grace that they are in him,
and profess to be so. Let me exhort them that they would live as new Creatures.

1. Labor after Union unto Christ. How earnestly should this be desired, how
diligently pursued? For we can have no Communion, no Adoption, no Freedom from
Condemnation, without it. Faith on our part, and the Spirit on Christ's, are
the Bonds of Union. Let us carefully make use of the Word and Prayer, in order
to both, waiting and begging, of God, and using all the hopeful means that are
in our power in order to it. How earnest should be our pursuits of this
Privilege, how fervent our Prayers, and constant our Endeavors after it?
Never leave soliciting the Throne of God, till the Creator and Father of
Spirits have created another breath into your nostrils, another spirit into
your Souls, even the Spirit of Christ, whereby we are united to him; lay your
self at his feet, and with all the violence and importunity, and humility, that
your distressed case may prompt you to, beg the holy spirit to over shadow
thee. And yet learn so much Patience from thy beggarly state, as not to
challenge him at thine own times, but wait his leisure, and observe his
motions; doing all that possible thou can in the use of common Grace, to
prepare the room against his coming, and continue in Prayer, watching thereunto
in the use of all the out means, which God has afforded thee.

2. Be exhorted to live as New creatures. You are obliged to it by your
Baptism, and by your Profession of Christianity. You that come to the Lord's
Table are especially obliged, That old things should be done away, and all
things become New. You consider his Sufferings from time to time, as
represented in that Ordinance. You there feast upon his Sacrifice, and consider
the cause of his Sufferings, your own Sins; and the end of them, your
Redemption from the Guilt, and Filth, and Power of Sin. Can you do this, and
not feel the Obligation to live as New creatures, and resolve upon it? Do you
not there renew your Covenant, and engage your selves afresh to walk as the
Redeemed of the Lord, unto all well pleasing? Do you not there cast your selves
into the Arms of a Crucified Savior, and plead the Merits of his Death, and
beg the Supplies of his Spirit, and bind your selves to strict fidelity to him,
as long as you live, under a grateful sense of his kindness, who has loved you,
and washed you from your sins in his Blood, that he might redeem you to
himself, that he might purchase to himself a People zealous of good works?
False are we to all this, if we do not walk as New creatures. There are but two
Motives with which I shall enforce this. The Text furnishes me with one, And
the Season of the Year with the other.

1. The Motive in the Text, Old things are done away, Behold all things are
become New. I shall not consider it as amplifying the other expression, and so
refering to the Change of those that are i^ Christ, and consequently of like
import with the Phrase a New creature; but as an Argument to urge and enforce
it: And accordingly understand these words, as relating to the Obligation of
the Law of Moses; That that is now ceased; Those old things are now done away;
The Shadows of the Ceremonial Law are expired, at the coming of the Substance
which is Christ, Colos. 2.20. We are said to be dead with Ch is it, from the
Rudiments, or Elements of the World, Respecting material and worldly things,
either to do, or forbear them: For of that kind were the Ordinances, and
Institutions of the Ceremonial Law. They were the first and lowest Lessons,
fitted to the Infancy of the Church; But now the Kingdom of Heaven is come, by
the Erection of the Gospel Church, a Kingdom which shall not be shaken, and the
Orders and Institutions of it never be changed. Now a more noble and spiritual
worship is to take place, those old things are past away. No wonder if the
Scaffolds of Ceremonies be taken down, when the Church of God, the Spiritual
Building, is brought by Christ to its full height.

Now all things are become new by Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant. The
Testament he left us is a New Testament. He rent the Vail of the Temple in
twain when he died, and put an end by his own Sacrifice of himself, unto all
the Sacrifices and Services of the Jewish Temple; And therefore it is
observable, that the first time he spoke of his Death, was in the Temple; But
after his Death, he never entered into it, though we read that he was in
Jerusalem after his Resurrection. We have a New Sanctuary, an Heavenly one; A
New High Priest, of a better Order than that of Aaron; New Heavens, and a New
Earth, as the. Gospel State is called; A New Light, to inlighten the World even
the Knowledge of God in the Face of Christ; A New Sun, even Christ the Sun of
Righteousness, with healing in his Beams; A New Adam, after the Image of God,
the express Image of his Person, and the Brightness of his Glory, in whom all
fullness dwells. We have a New Celestial Paradise, into which the Old Serpent
shall never enter: A New Tree of Life, whose Leaves are for the healing of the
Nations: A New Eve, the Church of Christ, Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his
Flesh, formed of his Blood, and animated by his Spirit. We have New Sacrifices,
New Sacraments, a New Circumcision, a New Passover, a New Jerusalem, a New
Temple. Behold all things are made New. And shall not we, that profess to be
the Disciples, and Followers of Christ, by whom all things are thus made New,
Answer all this, by being New creatures, that we may serve him, in the newness
of the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter, Romans 7.6. That is, that we
being delivered from the manifold difficult Impositions of the Mosaic Law, all
which we could not fulfill, and from the Curse upon those which did not, we
should now serve God, with new Hearts, and Lives, by the Spirit of Christ,
according to the Law of Grace.

2. There is yet another Argument, from the Circumstance of ^ime, In the
beginning of the New Year, which makes the Exhortation seasonable, to press you
to be New creatures. And when may I expect to be attentively heard upon such a
Subject, if not at such a season, when I may hope several of you have had
serious reflections, this very Morning, upon Time and Eternity, from the
Conclusion of the last Year, and the beginning of another; to awaken your
Thankfulness for the Mercies of the year past, and your Repentance for the sins
of it, and your good Resolutions and Self-Dedication to the Lord for the future?

It will be sad, if the Experience of another Year do not teach us some
Understanding, when day unto day utters Knowledge, and night unto night might
teach us Wisdom. The very thoughts of our hasty Time, measured by Years, and
Months, and Weeks, and Days, should put us upon considering how irrevocable,
and past recovery is the last year, and all our former years, it being utterly
impossible to call back Yesterday. Almighty Power may stop the course of the
Sun, as in the time of Joshua; but to make that which is past, to be present,
and not past, is a Contradiction, and cannot be done. And oh how small a point
does separate and distinguish that, which is past, from that which is yet to
come! They are divided by one Moment, by an Instant that is almost nothing; by
that which we cannot speak of without losing, it being gone while we open our
Mouths to say the least word about it. So near is Death to Life. The very
nature of Time it self may teach us this.

And certainly the changes of the year past should be very instructive, and
give us many Reflections, according to our Sins, and Mercies; according to the
Trials, and Exercises we have been carried through, this last year. May not all
of you look back upon many Changes the preceding year, of several kinds; those
especially which God has made amongst us by Death? We are called to review,
how many of them we knew, and were acquainted with, with whom we familiarly
conversed, not a Year since, are now silent in the dust: While their immortal
Spirits are some in Heaven, and others in the place of Torment. And of the
multitude that have dyed this last year, could we but separate the corrupted,
putrefying Relics of those Persons, whom we Honored, Valued, and Loved, from
the rest of the Deceased, and view their Bodies, as now they are; How affecting
would be the Spectacle? to think what they were, less than a year ago; and to
consider, what now they are, as to their Bodies; and the greater change there
is as to their Souls. But even as to the former, let us compare in our thoughts
the Figure they lately made, while acting their Parts upon this Stage, as
living Men and Women amongst us; What a Change is made in a few Months, as to
every of them? And the like may be our own Case, within a few Months from this
moment, long before the end of this year we now begin.

For consider it, Christians, This last year, that is now ended, is one great
step we have every one made toward the Grave. Another such may bring us home.
O that we may be found ready! Who knows, but as the last Year carried off many
of our Acquaintance, and Friends, but that our Names may be amongst those who
shall not outlive this? It is true, It may be, you shall live to see the
Conclusion of this New-year, but, it may be, you shall not live till Midsummer.
It may be, I may Preach a Twelvemonth hence; but peradventure you may hear a
Sermon occasioned by my Death, before that time; Or your own ears may be
stopped, if my mouth be not: You may die, if I should live yet a few years more.

I cannot look round on this Assembly, but I must conclude, that of all this
number, it is past doubt, but some one or more will dye before this year be
over; I believe I need not scruple to pronounce it. There is none can question,
but if the number were much less, one or more would dye within a year.
Therefore the Voice of God is to every one of you, Awake and mind your Work;
Turn to the Lord, and seek after Union to Christ, and see that you be New
creatures, for you shall die before another year.

But you will almost All be ready to say, To whom, in particular, do you speak
this? Sure not to me. Yes, I speak it to you, to every of you, whether in Youth
or Age; To you Parents, and to you that are Children; To you Masters, and to
you Servants; To you Husbands, and to you Wives; To you before me, and to you
on either hand; This Call of God is to every one of you in particular, See that
you be found in Christ, for you may not be found alive, at the end of this year.

Oh but I hope the contrary, say such and such; As for me, I hope I have many a
fair year to come; I am in sprightly vigorous Youth, or I am in settled
confirmed Stength, and Health, or I am but just entered into the busy World; or
just now entering upon it, etc. But, How many younger, and more likely to live,
have died this last year; and therefore why may not you be one of those, who
shall dye this?

Nay, Elder Persons are ready to excuse themselves and say, They have many
Seniors to go before them; That many who are Elder than they, they see, do yet
hold out year after year. Their inward thought is, that they have escaped many
Dangers, and been recovered from many Sicknesses; And though they are but weak
and crazy, and have many Infirmities, and Pains, to presage their Dissolution;
Yet notwithstanding these, they make a shift to live, and have rubbed on for
several years, under such weakness; And several of their Acquaintance, as weak
and sickly as they, have continued a good while for all that. And so, neither
Young, nor Old, will admit the Supposition, as to their own case; Nor You, nor
You, nor any body, will believe they shall dye this year. And so the next year,
I doubt not, your Hearts will say the same as now; for there will be the same
pretense: And therefore it is not unto you I must speak of Death, but rather
wish you Joy of the long Life, which with so much confidence you reckon upon.
Well, Shall I say then, Go and enjoy this World, and live as you list, if you
durst put it to the Venture; Go, and gratify your Senses, Appetites and Lusts,
for this year, as you did the last; and never think of Death, or fear it: You
are not like to dye this year, or the next? But, How unreasonable is such
Security, when some one or more of this Assembly, you grant, will probably, or
most certainly dye this year: And how can you be certain, that you shall be the
Exempted Person; Or that your nearest Relations, and those you love best, That
they shall not dye this year? Your Parents, your Pastors, your Husbands, and
your Wives, and your Children; and your Bosom Friends; you will as hardly admit
the thoughts that they shall dye this year; But if some or other of those, that
now hear me, that now look upon me, that now listen, and attend to what I say,
should be called away to Judgment before another year; Why may not you in
particular be the Persons, or the Desire of your eyes, those whose Lives are
dearest to you?

Certainly To begin the year with such a Thought, can do you no harm, but may
be improved to many useful purposes. However, I must tell you, If, after all
the Changes which we have seen within a Twelve month, (and which every year
brings fresh experience of,) we will not look forward to our own great change;
If we will not heartily concern our selves for our greatest, truest Interest,
and prepare for an Everlasting State, by voluntary, vital Union with the Son of
God; I must tell you, for a Conclusion, That God changes not. And if neither
the Voice of his Providence, nor the Voice of Conscience; If neither the Calls
of the Word, nor the Motions of the Spirit; If neither the Experience of others
nor so much as we have had of our own, will awaken us to change our course. You
must know, that the Holiness of God, his Justice, and his Truth, are
unchangable: He will not alter the terms of Life for you and me, He will not
find another way, for us to escape Condemnation, than by being in Christ, and
being New creatures. Therefore look to it that you be found such. And in
wishing, and praying you may all be Such, I do not only wish you a happy New
year; But a happy Life, if it be for many years, And withal, a Blessed Eternity
after Death, which such as are now in Christ, shall then Enjoy with him, when
Days and Years, and Time, shall be no more. God grant it for Christ's sake.
Amen.

The Second Discourse, ^ Christ's passing over the Brook, and Entering into the
Garden. After the Lord's Supper.
From JOHN XVIII. 1, 2. When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with
his Disciples over the Brook Cedron, where was a Garden; into the which he
entered, and his Disciples; And Judas also which betrayed him, knew the place;
For Jesus often times resorted thither with his Disciples.


UPon Thursday, the Day before the Crucifixion of our Lord, he goes to
Jerusalem from Bethany, and there eats the Passover with his Disciples; at the
end whereof he institutes the Sacrament of the Supper, and then makes a large
Pathetical Discourse, contained in the 15th and 16th Chapters. Upon which
followed his admirable Mediatory Prayer in the 17th Chapter.

Now having said, and done this, having said these words, and sung an Hymn with
his Disciples, he goes forth with his Disciples over the Brook Cedron, etc.

The Jews, it is true, did not go out of their Houses that Night, after the
Celebration of the Passover, Exodus 12.22, 24. Because of the Angels passing by
the Houses of the Israelites, when the first born of the Egyptians were to be
cut off; That the Israelites might not mix with the Egyptians at that time, but
sprinkle the Blood of the Paschal Lamb on their own Door-posts, as a Mark of
Distinction. Whereas our Lord having abrogated the Passover, and instituted his
Supper to succeed in its room; all the Precepts that concern the Jewish
Passover, with all the Appendixes belonging to it, were made Null, and of no
Effect; and consequently our Savior might go out that Evening; especially when
the Jews tarried within door, to avoid suffering the Wrath of the Angel; but he
goes forth that Evening to meet with suffering: For he knew that Judas would
betray him that Night, and that he was well acquainted with the place he went
to; for he was wont to retire thither with his Disciples.

He went forth when he was to be betrayed and taken, as afterward he suffered
Death without the Gate of the City. He went out of Jerusalem, thereby
declaring, it is thought, That the Gentiles had an interest in his Sufferings,
as well as the Jews; That it was not that particular People alone he was to
suffer for, but the rest of the World were to be equal Sharers in the Benefits
of his Passion. He went forth with his Disciples, over the Brook Cedron, where
was a Garden, into which he entered, etc.

In these Two Verses we may consider, 1. The Place he passed over, the Brook
Cedron. 2. The Company that was with him, his Disciples. 3. The Time, after he
had eat the Passover, and instituted the Supper. 4. The Place he retired to,
that was the Garden of Gethsemane. 5. The Reason why he chose this Place, for
Meditation and Prayer, the beginning of his Passion. 6. His Custom to retire
there, He was wont to do so.


And lastly, I shall consider what Practical Instructions may be gathered from
the whole, for our own Use.

1. The Place over which he passed, the Brook Cedron; a little Rivulet of that
name, between the Temple of Jerusalem, and the Mount of Olives, that ran
through a dark deep Valley. In Summer it was often dry, and in Winter, or after
the fall of any considerable Rains, it was full. The cursed things were burnt
here, when Hezekiah and Josiah purged the Temple and City of Idolatry. The
Filth and Uncleaness of the Temple was cast into this Valley, through which
this Brook ran, that our Lord passed over. Which may mind us of his being made
Sin, and a Curse for us, to abolish the Curse of the Law, to purge us from our
Filthiness, and to bring about everlasting Righteousness for us.

As hardly Two Circumstances of our Savior's Passion, but had a Type; so in
this, for instance, we have an eminent one, in David's going over the Brook
Cedron, when, by the Rebellion of his Son Absolon, he was forced to quit the
City of Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 15th Chapter. David was then forsaken by his own
Subjects, as Christ was rejected by his own Countrymen; and as He, and all the
People wept, when they went over the Brook Cedron, to the ascent of the Mount
of Olives; Our Lord, when he went over this Brook, retired to a Garden on a
part of that Mount, and there prayed himself into an Agony, and wept Tears of
Blood. As soon as David had passed over this Brook to the Mount of Olives, he
worshipped God, and poured out a Prayer, recorded in the 3d Psalm. So did our
Lord pour out strong Cries and Intercessions to God, on the same Mountain, when
he had passed over this very Brook Cedron.

From this first Particular, before I proceed further, we may learn to expect,
in imitation of Christ, to follow him in the like path; to go through the dark
Valley of Suffering, before we come to God's holy Mountain. As he passed over
the Brook Cedron, to the Mount of Olives, we must ascend likewise by the Cross,
to God's holy Hill. But for our Encouragement, we may consider too, That he
having drank of the Brook by the war, has sanctified the bitterest Cup of
Affliction unto us. This little Brook, this Rivulet, would never have been
fordable for us, but we must have been drowned in the Waters of Cedron, if he
had not passed over before us. But now a Cup of Consolation is put into our
hands, he has prepared a Path for us to Mount Olivet, he has smoothed our way
to God's holy Hill, by his own Sufferings and Death; so as we need not fear to
walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death.

2. Let us consider the Company, wherewith our Lord passed over this Brook,
with his Disciples. There may be Two Accounts of this, the one, in reference to
their future preaching of the Gospel; the other, for their more resolute and
courageous suffering for it.

1. As to their future preaching of the Gospel. It was fit and necessary the
Disciples should be Spectators of the most considerable Passages of our Lord's
suffering; Not only because some of them were to write the History of his Life
and Death, and transmit this Everlasting Gospel to future Generations; But they
were also to Preach to Jews and Gentiles, in the Name of Christ; and what more
powerful Argument could they use to gain Credit to what they said, than by
being able to attest the Truth of their History by their own Evidence, and to
say upon their own Knowledge, We speak that which we have seen and heard. The
Apostle Peter, and the Evangelist John we find insist much on this, We cannot
but speak the things which we have seen, Acts 4 10. 1 John 1.2.

2. Hereby they might not only be the better fitted for their Ministry to
Preach in his Name, but be thereby the better prepared to suffer for his sake.
His Example of Patience, and Meekness, and Resignation, might be of singular
Use to them upon that account. He had foretold and forewarned them by his
Discourse in the way, That they must expect to suffer. He had told them, that
when the Shepherd was smitten, the Sheep should be scattered. And what more
likely to animate them to Patience and Perseverance, than the Example of their
Lord's Voluntary Suffering? especially if in any measure they understood the
Design and Reason, and End of his Suffering: For if he drank of the Brook in
the way, they might well expect to taste of it; If he traveled through the
dark Valley, they could not expect a smooth and a pleasant Path to Glory; if he
endured the Contradictions of Sinners against himself, they could not think
that they should escape Opposition. Let us remember this, and not think it
strange, if we meet with such Usage as our Lord and his Followers have already
done.

1. We may learn from the Influence their Presence with Christ might have upon
their future Ministry, by being eyewitnesses of the Truths that they
delivered, That if ever Ministers would persuade others to believe any
Doctrine, the best Expedient is to endeavor to be fully persuaded our selves
of the Truth and Certainty of those things that we deliver. No wonder if other
Men are not persuaded by us, if we speak to them such things as we believe not
our selves; or do either Preach, or live in such a manner as to give them
reason to think so.

2. From the other Reason, to encourage them to patient suffering, we may
observe, That the Example of Christ's Courage and Constancy should be very
influential upon all his Followers; and if duly considered is like to be so.
For he is our Captain and Forerunner, we are to follow him, and fill up that
which remains of his Sufferings. All that we can suffer is but the gleaning of
the Vintage, after he has trodden the Wine Press alone. God has spoken it
once, yea twice have we heard it; that is, in the Old Testament, and in the
New, That Sufferings are the way to Glory; That many are the Afflictions of the
Righteous; That through many Tribulations we must enter into Heaven, etc.

3. The Circumstance of Time is next to be considered, When our Lord passed
over the Brook Cedron, viz. After he had instituted the Sacrament of the
supper, After he had spoken those words of Consolation, and Instruction to his
Disciples, and of Petition to his Father, Then he walked over the Brook Cedron
with his Disciples. He went forth to meet with sufferings, and his Disciples
were with him. How admirable is the Wisdom and Condescension of our merciful
Savior, thus to antidote and sore-arm his poor Disciples, thus to prepare and
dispose his faint hearted Followers to be Witnesses of his sufferings and
Partakers of them: For after such a blessed Preparative, what should be able to
sink their Spirits? After they had Joined in such an Ordinance, as the Lords
supper, administered by Christ himself; After they had received such excellent
Instructions, and heard such a sermon from his own Mouth; After they had been
present, when he put up such a Prayer to God, as that recorded in the 17. of
John* what could dishearten them, or damp their Courage?

We may hence take notice, That the participation of Solemn Ordinances, and
Communion with God therein, is an excellent Preparative to more than ordinary
Trialls What better preparation for patient and courageous suffering for
Christ, than the Lords Supper, wherein we remember his dying Love that should
engage us to it? And so for other Afflictions, even the Calamities common to
men, The Sacramental Bread may be our staff, and strength to fortify, and
confirm our Minds against all Difficulties; The sacramental Wine may be a
Cordial to our fainting Spirits, to inbolden us against all Discouragments. On
this Account, they that neglect this Ordinance are wanting to themselves, as to
preparedness for, and support in a time of Affliction. And for this Reason, we
may suppose, the primitive Christians did communicate so often, every Lords
Day, sometimes every Day, whenever they met for public Worship, because they
were in continual Jeopardy of their Lives: And the multitude of Martyrs in
those times, and their invincible Patience, and Perseverance, was much owing to
this, and influenced by it.

4. Let us consider the place he retired to, when he went over the Brook
Cedron, viz: The Garden of Gethsemane. The word Gethsemane signifies an
Oile-press. It was a little village situated at the foot of the Mount of
Olives, on which Mountain there were many Olive Trees, and so many Oil-presses
in that Village. The Mount of Olives has its name with relation to this; and
the Jewish writers call it sometimes the Mountain of Unction, sometimes the
Mountain of Light, sometimes the Mountain of Health, because of the use of Oil
as to all these.

This Garden of Gethsemane, as some think, was first planted by David, or
Solomon, and then enlarged and beautified by succeeding Princes, for their
Recreation and Delight. If that be true, where they took their pleasure, the
Messiah, the true Son of David, began his Passion; in memory whereof Hellen,
the Mother of Constantine the Great, afterward built a Chapel there, which
was visible in the days of Jerome; and some affirm the Virgin Mary, the Mother
of our Lord, was Buried in, or near this place. But to pass that as doubtful,
it is very probable, that in or near this Village, (near Jerusalem,) many of
the rich Citizens had their Gardens, and Country-Houses, and among them some of
Christ's Followers, who gave him and his twelve Disciples Entertainment,
therefore it is said, he often resorted thither, with his Disciples. But,

5. Why he did so is more to our purpose to inquire: Why our Lord chose this
place to prepare himself for his suffering, and to begin his Agony. And this
may be answered in three particulars.

1. The first sin was committed in a Garden, and therefore the beginning of our
Lords Passion, for the expiation of sion, did very fitly begin in a Garden too.
It was in a Garden that man began to sin, and in such a place, the Son of God
began his Sufferings. The first Adam incurs the Wrath and Displeasure of God in
a Garden; The second Adam trembles, and groans, and sweats, and prays, for the
turning away of that Wrath from us in a Garden too, he there began his Passion
for our Recovery. Our first Parents lost the Image of God by their
disobedience, and heard the Sentence of Condemnation in a Garden, our Lord
comes to restore the Divine Image, and reverse the Sentence of Condemnation, by
his bloody sufferings, and Death, which begin in this Garden of Gethsemane, as
the Promise of it was first made in the Garden of Eden, that the Seed of the
Woman should bruise the Serpents-head.

Compare Eden and Gethsemane. We were first seduced by the old Serpent in the
Garden of Eden; and his Head was bruised by the Agony, and Bloody Passion of
Christ, which began in this Garden of Gethsemane. In the one Garden, the Devil
conquered the first Adam; but is overcome by the second Adam in the other, when
he resolved to drink the cup, saying, Not my Will, but thine be done. In the
first Garden, that of Eden, man surfeited on the forbidden Fruit, and fell from
God, for which our blessed Redeemer had a bloody Sweat in the Second, the
Garden of Gethsemane. We were turned out of the earthly Paradise by sinning in
the first; we have the Purchase of the heavenly Paradise by our Lord's
Suffering, which began in the second. The beginning of our Calamity, and of all
the miseries of Mankind, had its rise in the Garden of Eden: And the beginning
of the Messiah Passion for our recovery, was in the Garden of Gethsemane; There
our Lord signed the Decree for his own Crucifixion by his bloody Sweat, as the
Pledge and earnest of his shedding his Blood, the next day, upon the Cross.

2. Another, and more evident Reason, why our Lord chose this Garden, was
because it was a solitary place, fit for Meditation, and Prayer, and the more
solemn Preparation of himself for his Crucifixion, which was now so near. He
was now in prospect of his approaching Death, he knew that within a few Hours
he should be Apprehended and Taken, Judged, and Condemned to a shameful Cross;
and therefore retires here for Meditation, and Prayer in order to it. To bear
the Curse of the Law, and strugle with the Wrath of God, the due Wages of our
sin, which he undertook to expiate; And to Conflict with all those Sufferings,
Antecedent and Concomitant to such a Death, needed such Preparation. Yea, the
solemn Resignation of himself to the Will of God, by Prayer, in this Garden,
before he Offered himself upon the Cross, was necessary, as the accomplishment
of a legal Type, that prefigured it: For all the Levitical Sacrifices were
first consecrated by Prayer, before they were burnt upon the Altar. This Lamb
of God, the truth of all those Sacrifices, the Substance of all those Types,
was first to devote himself to God by Prayer, before he was nailed to the
Cross; And this Garden of Gethsemane, being a solitary Place, was fit for that
purpose.

3. I may add another reason, He went thither because it was a place that Judas
knew of, where his Enemi^s might be sure to find him, and so accomplish the
eternal Counsels of God concerning his sufferings and Death. Several times
before this, they endeavored to lay hands on him, but his hour was not come;
But now he was willing, and resolved to dye; And therefore knowing that Judas
would betray him, and having bid him do quickly what he intended to do, he does
not go about to abscond, and hide himself to prevent it; He retires to this
Garden which the Traitor was well acquainted with: And when he comes with a
Company to take him, he tells them more than once, He is the Person they seek
for.

Let me make a few Reflections on this particular. As 1. Since our Lords Passion
began in a Garden, Let me caution you not to abuse your Gardens, and places of
Retirement, and Recreation, to vanity and sin; but improve them by holy
Meditation, when you are walking there. How often is Christ dishonored in such
places, either when you are in Company, or when are alone? In company, by
intemperance in Banqueting, or by vain or wanton Discourses, or by uncharitable
and backbiting Stories of others etc. Or when you are alone, by wanton and
lustful thoughts, by speculative uncleanness, wicked projects etc. But thus to
retire into a Garden, is to retreat from men, and fall into the hands of the
Devil. Such persons imitate their Mother Eve in the Garden of Eden, and hold a
Dialogue with the old serpent.

Others, who are less criminal, are yet to be reproved, that make no holy
improvement of such places, but only for Recreation and Pleasure, to gratify
their Senses. Every wise and good man loves sometimes to be alone, and ought to
be so, for serious Meditation: Now a Garden is a fit place for such a purpose,
and may be of excellent use to such an end; And there is no Object can meet our
Eyes, or affect any of our senses there, without giving us some Notices of God,
and directing us to some useful Instructions in reference to our selves, if we
did not want a holy heart and spiritual wisdom to improve them.

Especially in your Garden walks Meditate on the Garden of Eden, and think of
this Garden of Gethsemane. Consider how Man sinned in the one, and how Christ
suffered in an Agony in the other. First, From the Garden of Eden, you may take
occasion to contemplate the State of Innocence, the Entrance of Sin, the Fall
of our First Parents, the Subtilty of the Tempter, the Danger of Gratifying the
Sensual Appetite, from their Example in Eating the Forbidden Fruit; the
prevalency of Temptation, when a near and Beloved Relation is the Instrument of
the Devil, to urge it, etc. Secondly, Think of the Garden of Gethsemane too,
when you are delighting your self in some pleasant Walk in your own Garden.
Think how the Son of God lay prostrate on his Face in an Agony, in this Garden
of Gethsemane. When you look upon a Fruit-tree, especially a Vine, or taste of
a Grape, remember the Blood of Christ, that trickled from his Sacred Body. If
you are sometimes merry and cheerful with your Friends in a Garden, forget not
how your Savior was exceeding sorrowful; My Soul is exceeding Sorrowful unto
Death. When you are cooling your selves in the Shade, remember his Agony, and
Bloody Sweat, under the Apprehensions of the Wrath of God, due to your sin; How
his Soul boiled up, as one of the Greek Expressions does signify, and his
Blood broke out at every part of his Body, with the extremity of the Heat. You
may consider how the First Adam was Tempted by an Evil Angel in the Garden of
Eden, and the Second was Comforted in his Agony by a Good one. Adam's Sentence
in the former, was, to get his living by the Sweat of his brows; Christ, by his
Bloody Sweat, in this procures our Life. And let not such places be abused to
sin and vanity, that may so easily be improved, to put us in mind of such
Important Truths.

2. In that this was a Solitary Place, we may observe, That it is fit to retire
for Meditation and Prayer to some Secret Place, from the Company, and
Observation of others. There are many things, which are proper enough, and may
become us in an Affectionate Prayer in secret, especially for a Penitent, which
are not allowable in Social Worship, or Public Prayer with others; As
Prostration of our selves on the Ground, Beating the Breast, Extraordinary Sobs
and Sighs, Plentiful Tears, and Passionate Expostulations with God, etc. which
either Modesty, or Prudence may restrain in public, may be used with greater
Liberty in Secret, where is no Temptation to Hypocrisy, or vainglory to abuse
them. And therefore our Lord directs us, Math. 6. That we enter into our
Closets, and shut the door, and then pray to our Father, who is in Heaven, who
sees in secret, and will reward us openly.

3. In that Christ retires here, to prepare himself, with the greater
Solemnity, for his approaching Death; We may learn, That whenever we have a
Prospect of our Change at hand, we should not content our selves with habitual
preparation, but use a more solemn, distinct, and actual preparation for it.
Our Lord, no doubt, was always in a Readiness, for that which he knew was the
great end of his Incarnation: And yet the night before his Sufferings, he
retires into this Garden to prepare himself for that hour. We should always so
live, as to be fit to die, because every hour we make some steps toward the
Grave: Every thought, every word, is a Sand running from the Glass of Time: We
sleep every night in the outer Chambers of Death, and should, by Prayer,
prepare our selves for it, even for that Image of Death: And shall we not, much
more, for Death it self, when we have a Prospect of its approach? in whose Arms
we must rest Prisoners, till the great Morning of the Resurrection?

If God give us Notice and Warning by Old Age, or a dangerous Sickness, or a
languishing Body, or by any other method, that we shall shortly leave this
World; Solemn, actual Preparation in such a case is fit and necessary; If God
tell any of you by a Bodily Sickness, your Change is near; If the Decays and
Infirmities of Old Age, (the most incurable of all Diseases,) tell you, That
you have not long to live, that it is high time to set your Hearts, and your
Houses in order; You ought actually to prepare, solemnly to do so. You that
have one foot in the Grave already, forget not this, least the Devil trip up
the other before you are Ready. But you that have served the Lord from your
Youth, and have the comfortable Review of your past sincerity, in walking with
God; you may rejoice upon any such Summons, that your Race is almost run; Your
warfare will shortly be accomplished; you have but a few steps more of your
pilgrimage to make; a few Temptations more to resist; a very little time longer
of trial and conflict; before you shall receive the End of your Faith and Hope,
and be for ever with the Lord. Should you not then, with such a warning, stir
up the Grace of God, quicken holy Desires, strengthen Faith, and exercise it
about the Invisible World, and solemnly resign your selves into the Arms of the
Redeemer?

4. Because this was the place that Judas knew of, were he might find our Lord,
and betray him; Let us take notice of Christ's willingness, and Resolvedness to
suffer Death, and what an Obligation it lays upon us of Love and Gratitude to
this Merciful Savior. This I shall a little urge, as suitable to the past
Solemnity of this day to make us Thankful, who have been Partakers of the
Memorials of his dying Love, in the Sacrament of the Supper.

He was free and voluntary in Suffering. He went to the place which Judas knew
of, though he knew Judas would come, and betray him. He freely offered himself
in the Council of God, to undertake our Redemption; He voluntarily quitted his
Fathers Bosom in the fullness of Time, to assume our Nature, and therein suffer
and die. He was not forced into a State of Poverty and Humiliation; but for our
sakes became poor, that we through his poverty might become rich. The necessity
of his Death arose from his own holy will, his free Act and Undertaking; which
does not lessen his Willingness, but heighten the Obligation of it. It had been
Injustice to punish an Innocent, who was unwilling to suffer in the place of a
Criminal; But he gave himself a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling Odor unto God
for us. He was not driven by force and violence, as the legal Sacrifices unto
the Altar; But, he comes to the Door of the Tabernacle, he enters into this
Garden that Judas knew of. He endeavors not to go out of the way, to escape
their Malice, but chooses a place that the Traitor was acquainted with. He had a
Baptism to be Baptized with, and he longed for its Accomplishment. He walked
forth of his own Accord, over the Brook Cedron, with his Disciples, into this
Garden, where he knew he should be taken: And when they came to take him, he
permits Judas to kiss him, which was the sign he had given them to distinguish
the Person; He twice tells the Officers, That he was He whom they sought for.
He would not suffer an Apostle to use a Sword in his Defense, though he could
have commanded Legions of Angels for his Guard. He proves, that he might have
escaped if he would, for he speaks but a mild word, saying, I am he, and they
all fall to the ground, as if he had come to apprehend them, and not they him.
After this, he would not work a Miracle to gratify the Curiosity of Herod, and
make him his Friend, in order to his Deliverance. Yea, he was silent under all
the Accusations of the False Witnesses, and afterward bore his own Cross, as
far as he was able, toward the place of Execution; And then he poured out his
Soul unto Death, and rendered up his Spirit to his Father, saying, It is
finished, It is finished.

And that last Circumstance is very considerable to prove his Willingness: For
we read, that when they came to break his bones, and found him dead, which
prevented the breaking of his Bones, and accomplished the Prophecy concerning
him, which says, A bone of him shall not be broken, they wondered he was dead
so quickly; So quickly indeed, when immediately before he gave up the Ghost, he
cried with a loud Voice; Which sufficiently declared, that no man took away his
Life, but that he voluntarily laid it down: For having cried with a loud Voice,
and thereby given sufficient Proof, that his strength was not gone, that his
Spirits were not exhausted, but he might have continued longer alive; he then
bowed his head, in token of Reverence to his Father, and gave up the Ghost:
which was a Circumstance so considerable, that a Centurion, who stood by
observing it, was thereupon converted, and gave God the Glory.

But it may be objected, though his coming into this Garden might be a Proof of
his Willingness, yet what passed there, seems to intimate the contrary; why
else does he pray so earnestly, that the Cup might pass from him, if he was
willing to drink it?

I answer, That even in the Time of his Agony, when he seemed most Unwilling,
as Man, even when he prayed, that the Cup might pass from him, yet was he still
willing, as Mediator. The Text says, he began to be exceeding sorrowful, and
sore amazed, saying, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. The
Original words are very emphatical, to express Sadness, and Fear, and such
Affections of the Soul; His Soul, not his Body; nor his Soul with Sympathy only
with his Body: For he was here alone in the Garden, crucified, as it were,
without a Cross. His Body here suffered by reason of his Soul. The whole Nature
of Man had sinned, and the Soul being the Principal in the commission of Sin,
the Redeemer, who was to expiate sin, suffered in his Soul; My Soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even to death; Insomuch that Clods of Blood dropped from
him, though there was no visible hand to strike him: Which makes him pray and
cry in such a manner to his Father for the passing away of the Cup, Father, if
it be possible, let this Cup pass from me? Father, save me from this hour! Oh
what Pain, what Fear, what Horror, what dismal Apprehensions, and cruel
Sufferings, must force such words of complaint from such an Heart as his! But,
no wonder his Cries were so strong, his Prayers so earnest, his Complaints so
loud, and the Comfort of an Angel not sufficient for his support; when the
greatness of his Agony, and the extreme Sufferings of his Soul are above our
thoughts to conceive, who understand so little of the evil of sin, and the
vengeance due to it, so little of the Terror of the Lord, and the Power of his
Wrath as a Righteous Avenger.

However there is a great difference between what Christ suffered, and what the
Damned in Hell suffer. For they hate God, and Holiness, and are hated of him,
and forsaken by his Holy Spirit, and are under the power of sin, and are
tormented by the Conscience of their Personal Guilt. But what Christ suffered
was for us, and he was still in the Love of God, and continued to love him, etc.

Let us consider him encompassed with Grief, and seized by sorrow, appaled with
Fear, lying prostrate on his Face on the ground, deprecating that Cup of
vengeance, which the Justice of God had mingled, saying, Father, if it be
possible let this Cup pass from me!

He Prays again, a second time, in the same place, to the same purpose, Abba
Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass. He adores his Majesty, he owns
his Omnipotence, he takes hold of his Power, he pleads his filial Relation,
with all imaginable earnestness, submission, and importunity; Father, if it be
possible, and with thee all things are possible: Abba Father, Holy Father, let
this Cup pass from me; And then he groans, and sweats, and his sweat was as it
were great drops of blood falling to the ground.

He prays again, the third time, using, in effect, the same words; as if
nothing else would, yet his Importunity might, prevail for the removal of the
Cup. And yet notwithstanding all this, he was then Willing; All the struglings
of his Innocent Nature issued in this, That the Will of God should be done, and
his Glory be accomplished. Holy Father, glorify thy self; Not my will but
thine be done. It was for this end I came into the World, for this end I came
unto this hour. The desire of his Humane Soul submits, and yields to the
determination, and Will of his Father. And therefore those words, if it be
possible, must be explained by those other, If thou will, if it be most for thy
Glory; of a possibility in respect of the Divine Will, and Glory, rather than
of the Divine Power. And having two Natures, he must needs have two Wills, he
could not else be the true Son of God, and true Man. He desires to decline his
Sufferings as a Man, for so they were against Nature; But as they were the
means, to reconcile us to God, he is willing, as Redeemer, to undergo them. We
may abhor a Medicine as bitter, and yet resolve to take it as wholesome. So that
after all the reluctance of his Humane Nature, he was still willing; and his
entering into this Garden, when he knew that Judas was acquainted with the
place, and would find him there, and betray him, is a proof of it.

6. Our Savior's Custom to retire to this Garden, He was wont to resort
thither with his Disciples. This Garden of Gethsemane was on the side of the
Mount of Olives, and that we are told was at the distance of a Sabbath Days
Journey from Jerusalem, Act. 1.12. If we reckon from the foot of the Mountain,
or the (...) part of it unto the City, it is tho^ght to be about five or six
(...) thousand (...) ^ting by (...) measured. And it is most probable, that the
People in the Wilderness were to keep from the Tabernacle, at the distance of
two thousand Cubits; And, on that account, this distance is supposed the
measure of a Sabbath Days Journey, when they went to the Ark to Worship. It is
an ordinary Tradition among the Jews, That it was not lawful on their Sabbaths
to walk above two thousand cubits, which seems to be founded on that Text,
Josh. 3.4. where the People are commanded in their March after the Ark, and on
either side of it, to keep at the distance of two thousand cubits; and when
they encamped, did usually pitch their Tents at that distance from the Ark: And
so the Custom arose of traveling but 2000 cubits on their Sabbath Days, which
is reckoned not above half a mile. It may be, for this reason, the Holy Ghost
measures the distance between Jerusalem, and the Mount of Olives, by a
Sabbath Days Journey, and not by so many Furlongs; Because, in fair Weather,
many devout Jews were wont to retire thither for Meditation, after the Public
Worship was over. From hence let me make two Reflections for our own practice,
and so conclude.

1. Since our Lord was wont to retire from Jerusalem to the Mount of Olives for
Meditation and Prayer; Let me hence take occasion to press these Duties. It is
certainly one of the best Evidences of an Upright Christian, to be serious in
this secret work. It is of mighty advantage to our growth in Grace, to the
Evidence, and Comfort of it; And he deserves not the Name of a Serious
Christian, who can pass whole days and weeks contentedly without Meditation and
secret Prayer. Our stedfastness in the ways of God, and our daily walk in holy
Security and Peace, is manifestly assisted by it. Such a course cannot consist
with regarding and indulging deliberately any known sin. This will be a good
Argument of our Integrity before God, this constant intercourse and Communion
between God and us; These frequent visits to Heaven will be so, conversing with
God, and pouring out our hearts before him in Secret, retiring, as it were, to
the other World, so as no temptation of Applause, or Reputation from Men, can
be thought to bias or mislead us; when no eye sees us, but the great searcher
of hearts; when no ear hears us but that of our Invisible Judge; when no hand
can reward us, but the Omnipresent Lord, our Father and our Redeemer in Heaven,
who sees in secret, and will reward us openly. You have been often told, That
the Conscientious performance of Secret prayer, will make you leave sinning, or
a Course of sin will make you desist daily serious praying.

2. I infer from this example of our Lord, That after the participation of
solemn Odinances, especially on the Lord's Day, it is very fit and useful for
Christians, to retire by themselves, to spend some time alone, in Meditation
and prayer; To call your selves to an Account, to reflect on your ways, and
frame, to make a trial of your State, and Temper; to observe your Spirits, how
they have been influenced, or not, by the Divine Spirit, in the Solemn Duties
of Worship; to humble your selves before God for the sins you are convinced of,
such especially as other Men cannot charge you with, but God and Conscience
know you are guilty of: To thank God for his numberless Mercies, to beg the
suitable supplies of his Grace, and whatever Blessings you stand in need of,
for you and yours. This is the right improvement of Sabbaths, and Sacraments,
and such seasons of Mercy, as God is pleased to continue to us, in order to
Eternal Life: And without something of this kind, tho you frequent the Public
Assemblies, and sit before him as his People, you do but mock God, and trifle
with Heaven, while you pretend to Religion, and assume the Name of Christians:
You act a Scene, and a Part, and have only a Form of Godliness, but must expect
to pay dear for your Solemn Hopocrisie.

Let me therefore Advise you to three things, in your Retirement, after the
Public Worship, and Solemn Ordinances of Christ, as the End, and Reason, for
which I will press it. 1, That you retire in order to the confession of Sin,
and the Exercise of Repentance. That when you have finished the public work of
a Sabbath, or come from any special Ordinance of the Gospel, by after
Meditation, you would reflect upon your selves, and take notice of your
Defects, and Failings, Discomposures, and Distempers of Mind; What
unsuitableness of Spirit there has been to heavenly Mysteries, or what
unprepared Addresses we have made to the Majesty of Heaven and Earth, the
roving of our Fancies, the vanity of our Thoughts etc.

We should humble our selves on such Occasions, That we attended with no more
Reverence and Diligence to the Word of God; That we did not receive the Truth
in the Love of it; That it was not mixed with Faith; Tnat we did not make
particular, and close application of it to our selves; That our Hearts were not
l^ft up in the ways of the Lord, and our Souls under an awe of God in Prayer,
with becoming Affections, and suitable Exercise of Grace, under the influence
of the Divine Spirit, and in the Name of the Mediator. That we approached the
Table of the Lord, with no more Examination of our Hearts and Ways, before we
came, with no more Repentance for our past Guilt, no more hungering after the
Bread of Life, no more spiritual Thirst for the Fountain of Living Waters. That
we beheld the Memorials of a broken, bleeding Savior, with no more Contrition,
and Brokenness of Heart; That we received the Seals of his dying Love with no
more raised Affection; That we remembered the Agonies of his Soul, with no more
correspondent Impressions upon our own. In a word, we may lament (for the most
part I fear we may) after such Ordinances, that our Spirits were but in a
common frame, our Repentance so partial, our Love so cold, our Faith so weak,
our Hope so low. Desires so faint, Charity so narrow, Thankfulness and Joy so
little, in the Participarion of such Glorious Mysteries, in conversing with
such adorable Objects, under the Offers of such rich Grace, under the loud
Calls to such manifest Duty, under the Assurances and Expectations of such
great and blessed things, as the Word and Sacraments propose and Seal.

2. Another Reason, and Ground of this Retirement, is in order to Petition and
Intercession, for needful Mercy to our selves and others. Have we been
convinced of any Duty we had formerly neglected? Shall not the Reflection on it
excite us to beg Wisdom and Strength to perform that Duty? Has any sin been
called to remembrance, by the preaching of the Word? Should we not beg
Forgiveness, and Grace to leave and forsake it, as the best Testimony of our
Repentance? Have we joined in Prayer and Supplication with others for the
greatest Blessings, and are sensible we are undone if God deny us; and shall we
not beg the same things again in secret? Have we renewed our Vows, and entered
into fresh Obligations to be the Lords; and shall w^ not beg that God would
heal our ^^st ^a^k slidings, and confirm our holy Resolutions, That having
sworn, we may perform it, that we will keep his righteous Judgments?

You therefore, who have this Day been at the Table of the Lord, let me beseech
you, in a special manner, to retire when you come home, and think of these
things, that you may wrestle with God in secret for a further blessing. O, what
can he deny you, when he has given you his Son, and sealed that Gift in so
solemn a manner? Go therefore, and represent to him all your Necessities and
Wants, all your Griefs, and Groans, and Complaints, and Fears, and secret
Desires. Pray earnestly for your selves, your Families and Relatives, for your
Ministers and Fellow Christians, for all that have communicated this day with
you, and in other Assemblies; and for all that desired to do so, that were
providentially hindered; for all your Brethren, for all the Churches of Christ
throughout the World, especially for those in this Nation; for those in others,
which are oppressed by the Tyranny of the Sons of Violence, for all actual
Believers, for all those for whom Christ died, for your Friends and Enemies,
for the whole World.

3. Retire in secret to express your Gratitude and Thanksgivings to God, for
Mercies received, and hoped for. Thank him for the Liberty of his Sanctuary,
for Public Assemblies of Social Worship, for Sabbaths, and Sacraments, and the
Ministry of the Gospel, considering how the Case now is with our Brethren, and
Neighbors in other places. Thank him for another Opportunity, for the
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, and for so much health as to be able
to partake of such a Privilege in a public Solemnity. But above all, as the
Foundation of all the rest, for that inestimable Blessing of Divine Love, the
Gift of his Son, for the inexpressible Love of Christ, in giving himself for us
Sinners, and Enemies, and while we were so.

Thank him for the Means of Grace, and the Hopes of Glory, for any good Hope
through Grace, of present Pardon, and Everlasting Communion with God in Heaven;
for the Offer of Forgiveness by a Covenant of Grace, for the Promise of Eternal
Life by Christ, purchased by his Blood, confirmed by the Word and Oath of God,
who cannot lie, witnessed to many ways by the Holy Spirit, made sure by the
Everlasting Covenant, and that sealed by Baptism, and by the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper.

Yea, let us thank him for another such solemn Occasion, of paying Homage to a
Crucified Christ, and of holy Fellowship with the Father, and the son, by the
Spirit, which this day has been afforded us. Praise him for any A^sistance of
his Grace, in the actual Celebration, and for any help in our preparatory Work;
for reviving any of our Convictions, awakening our Repentance, strengthening
our Faith, animating our Hope, quickening our zeal, exercising and increasing
our Love to Christ, clearing our Adoption, dispelling our Doubts, scattering
our Fears, warming and filling our Desires. Let our Souls, and all within us
bless him, for any Beams of his Heavenly Light, for any Glympse of his
reconciled Countenance, for any token of his Love to us, any expression and
exercise of our own to him.

Let us thank him for what he has given us, and sealed to us, and promised to
give us; for what we have already received, as the first Fruits; and the
Earnest, and the Pledge of a great deal more.

We may Express our Gratitude and Joy, to some such Purpose, as this, almost in
the words of Mr. Baxter.
which follows;

O my gracious God, thou have surpast all humane Comprehension in thy Love! Is
this thy usage of unworthy Prodigals! I feared lest thy wrath, as a consuming
Fire, would have devoured such a Guilty Soul; but while I condemned my self,
thou have forgiven, and justified me; and surpised me with the sweet
Embracements of thy Love. I see now thy thoughts are above our thoughts and thy
ways above our ways, and thy Love above the Love of man, even more then the
Heavens are above the Earth: with how dear a Price have thou redeemed a Wretch
that deserves thy Everlasting Vengeance! With how precious and sweet a Feast
have thou entertained me, who deserved to be cast out with the workers of
Iniquity! shall I evermore slight such Love as this? shall it not evercome my
Rebelliousness, and melt my cold and hardn'd heart? Angels are admiring these
Miracles of Love and shall not I admire them? Their Love to us does cause 'em
to Rejoice, while they stand by, and see our Heavenly Feast; and should it not
be sweeter to us that are the Guests who feed upon it? O my God, how dearly
have thou Purchased my Love! how strangely have thou deserved and Sought it?
nothing is so much my grief and shame as that I can answer it with no more
fervent and fruitful Love. Oh what an addition would it be to all this precious
Mercy, if this Love poured out might draw forth mine, and my soul might flame
by approaching unto these thy flames? and that Love drawn out by the sense of
Love might be all my Life? O that I could love thee, as much as I would Love
thee! yea as much as thou woulst have me love thee! but this is too great an
Happiness for Earth: Thou have showed me the place where I may attain it. My
Love is there in full Possession, who has left me these pledges, till he come
and fetch us to himself, and feast us there in our Masters joy. O Blessed
Place! O Blessed Company, that see his Glory, and are filled with the streams
of those Rivers of Consolation! yea happy we, whom thou have called from our
dark and miserable state, and made us Heirs of that Felicity, and Passengers to
it, and Expectants of it, under the Conduct of so sure a Guide? O then we shall
love thee, without these sinful pauses and defects, in another measure and
another manner than now we do. Till then my God, I am devoted to thee; by Right
and Covenant I am thine! My soul bears witness against my self, that my defects
of love have no Excuse: Thou deservest all, if I had all the love in Heaven and
Earth to give thee. What has this vain world to do with my Affections? what
is there in all the sufferings, that man can lay upon me, that I should not
joyfully accept them, for his sake that has redeemed me from Hell, by such
matchless voluntary sufferings? Lord seeing thou so regardest so vile a Worm,
my Heart, my Tongue, my Hand confess that I am wholly Thine. O let me live to
none but thee, thy service, and thy Saints on Earth! O let me no more return
unto Iniquity: nor venture on that sin, which killed my Lord? And now thou have
chosen so low a dwelling, O be not a stranger to the heart thou have so freely
chosen! O make it the daily Residence of thy Spirit! Quicken it by thy Grace,
adorn it with thy Gifts, employ it in thy love, refresh it with thy joys, and
the light of thy Countenance? and destroy this Carnality, selfishness, and
unbelief! and let the world see, that God will make a Palace of the lowest
Heart, when he chooses it for the place of his own abode.

To conclude, Did we thus retire at the close of every Lords day, after the
Participation of solemn Ordinances, to renew our Repentance, to beg needful
Mercies, to offer the sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgivings, for the Blessings
we have and hope for; the Advantages of such a Course would be so many, and so
considerable; the Consequences would be so comfortable to our own Souls, and so
beneficial unto others; it would be so influential to exercise, and increase
our Grace, to promote our Assurance, to secure our Establishment and
Perseverance, to render us useful in the World, for the Honor of Christ and
his Gospel, and the credit of our holy Profession; That it surpasses the
possibility of an exact Description, and reserves its full Discovery to be the
reward of Experience.

Blessed be God for Jesus Christ.

The Third Discourse, Concerning SPIRITUAL WASHING, The Nature, Means and
Evidences of it. Before the Lord's Supper.
1 COR. VI. 11. And such were some of you, but you are Washed, but ye are
Sanctified, but ye are Justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God.


OUR Lords condescension to wash the Feet of his Disciples, and the discourse
between Him and the Apostle Peter upon that occasion, contains many things very
observable and Instructive unto all Christians. S. Peter is astonished at his
Master's Proposal to wash his feet: he wonders he should ever design or attempt
so low a service, He cries out as a man amazed 13. John 6. Lord do thou wash
my Feet? words that savor of humble respect. and Reverence unto Christ: and had
he proceeded no farther, it had been very commendable, for these expressions
seem to proceed from a true sense of his own unworthiness, considering both
himself, and our blessed Lord, and the meanness and inferiority of the action,
which he offered to do toward him. Unto which our Lord Replys. What I do thou
know not now, but thou shall know hereafter. i. e. when the Spirit shall be
more abundantly poured out. as it was upon his Ascension into Heaven. But
Peter is not satisfied with this, but peremptorily refuses to submitt to an
order which he did not yet understand the Reason of, and therefore replies
again, Thou shallt not wash my Feet. or far be it from me, that thou should
wash my feet.

This gave occasion for that severe Rebuke and Threatening, which went to his
very heart in those words of Christ, If I wash thee not, thou have no part in
me, no Intrest in me, no communion with me. It cannot well be thought that the
external washing, should be the only thing here meant, for Judas was partaker
of that as well as the Rest: and yet our Lord says, at the tenth verse, ye are
clean, but not all. Upon this we find the Apostle Peter submitts to his
Savior, and instead of denying that he should wash his feet, he passionately
cries out, not my Feet only, but my hands and head too, i. e. Lord wash me all
over, Hands, Head, and Feet, the three most visible parts of the body for the
whole: our Lord tells him, that was not necessary, for he that washes, need
not but to wash his feet, verse 10. as one that comes out of a Bath, may have
contracted some Filth in walking out of it, and therefore needs only to have
his feet washed; alluding to the Custom D. Lightfoot.
of the Jews, as to those who did officiate in the Temple, who after having
been purified and Washed in the morning, as often as they came out, and
returned again, did only wash their Feet. Doubtless therefore the necessity of
inward Purification and Holiness must be comprehended, as the import of this
washing: The being sanctified in Soul, Body and Spirit, as necessary unto all
that are accepted of God, and in a Covenant Relation with Christ: necessary to
a saving intrest in Him, and Communion with him. And such a Change as this some
of the vilest, and worst of sinners have experienced, upon true Repentance and
an unfeined Faith. This the words I have read give us an account of. And such
were some of you etc.

In the beginning of this Chapter, the Apostle reproves a very unwarrantable
Practice among these Corinthians, to implead one another in matters of Right
and Wrong, before the Heathen Tribunals: which seems to blemish the Christian
Profession, and contradicted the prescribed Rule of our Lord. Matthew. 18.15.
they were also Injurious, and Unjust in their Carriage to their Brethren: from
which he Endeavors to deter them. 1. By that dreadful threatening, verse. 9.
Know you not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven? And
for the farther confirmation of it, enumerates several kinds of such Persons;
and bids them look well to it, and not deceive themselves (though one would
hardly think that men should be deceived in so plain a case) as if their
profession of Christianity would save them, while they lived in any such
wickedness. Be not deceived neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers
in any, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

He then adds another argument in this Text, to diswade them from such an
unchristian Behavior, viz. from the mighty Change, that had been wrought upon
several of them, by their Conversion to the Faith of Christ. And such were some
of you but ye are Washed, etc.

The Change is represented by three several expressions: and the Means by which
it was brought about is double viz. In the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God.

1. The mighty Change which was wrought upon them by their Conversion to the
Faith of Christ, in those words, But ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but
ye are Justified; some would consider these three expressions, as a regular
Gradation, and make this Washing to signify the first Change by Regeneration,
or the new Birth: and being Sanctified, to denote the further progress, measure
and Degree of the spirit of Holiness: and being Justified follows, as that,
which by a real change of Heart and Life is evidenced, and cleared, to the
comfort of Believers. Others think we may consider this being Washed as the
general Term comprehending the other two, Sanctification, and Justification.
For we find that expression used in both senses: for our deliverance from the
Guilt of sin, by pardoning mercy; and from the impurity and stain, the power,
and filth of sin by renewing grace. David beggs to be Washed and made Clean in
both respects 51. Psalm 2.7.10. And our Lord is said to have loved us, and
washed us from our sins, in his own blood! Rev. 1.5. Which comprehends both
the forgiveness of sin, and the sanctifying influence of the spirit of Christ.
Others think all the three terms Washed, Sanctified, and Justified, are here
Synanimous: as significant of the great Change, that is wrought by the renewing
and converting grace of God; and that Justified in this place is not to be
taken in a Le Blank, Theses theol. de usu and acceptatione vocis Justificandi
etc. p. 256.. 6.8.9. Answered by Dr. O. of Justification. p. 179.
Forensick or Law sense; but has the same import with the other two
expressions, Washed, and sanctified, so the expression 12. Dan. which we render
turn many to Righteousness, in the Original is Justify many.

So Sanctification they think may be comprehended under the term Justified,
Romans 8.30. Or else one of the greatest Advantages we enjoy by Christ is not
there enumerated. So here where our Justification is ascribed to, the holy
Spirit, whose office and work it is inwardly to renew and change us: and
whereby those Corinthians, who were vile and impure before, are now qualified
for the Kingdom of God, Tit. 3.5.6.1. However I exclude not our being washed
from the guilt of sin, as part of the Sense of this Text; but it is the other
Washing by Sanctification, of which I would speak at this time.

2. You have the double means, whereby this is brought about. In the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, etc. 1. In the Name of the Lord
Jesus, or by, and through the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Greek
Particle does often signify. For it is the same in the Original, in both
Clauses. The first may as well be rendered, By the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ: as the other, By the Spirit of our God. The same Preposition being used
in both. Referring the whole to Sanctification. In my present Discourse I shall
not need to Assign Reasons, why the word Justified is put last, or search for
the like Instances of an (...), or (...), tho such may be given, to vindicate
the order of the Expressions; and why the Name of Christ, which especially
refers to Justification, should be mentioned before the Spirit of our God,
which especially refers to Sanctification, which yet is named before our being
Justified.

In the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, or by his Name, may import, in the
General, for the sake of Christ, upon the account of his Merit, and Mediation:
and so we pray in the Name of Christ, and beg Mercy for his sake. But more
distinctly, the Name of Christ may be considered,

1. In relation to his Office of Mediator, and the Sovereign Authority of it:
he is the Jesus, the Savior; this is the Name, that is given him above every
Name, and so in, by, or through the Name of Christ, does signify, through
faith in him, as the only Mediator between God and Man. In several like
Expressions we must grant that Faith must be supposed, when it is not
expressed: As when we are said to be Baptized in the Name of Christ, for the
remission of sin, Acts 2.38. i. e. believing on his Name.

2. It may be considered in relation to the Truth of his Doctrine, and the
Divine Authority of that Revelation, which he made from God to the World, upon
which his Name is engraven: As when we read of suffering for the Name of
Christ, i. e. for owning the profession of the Christian Religion. To this
purpose our Sanctification is said to be by the belief of the Truth, John
15.3.17. chap. 17. 1 Pet. 1.22. 2 These. 2.13. Ye are clean through the word
that I have spoken to you, says our blessed Lord. And in his Mediatory Prayer
to the Father, Sanctify them by thy truth, thy word is truth. Accordingly we
find Sanctification is ascribed unto Faith in Christ, as the true Messiah, or a
sound Belief of the Revelation he has made, Act. 15.9. Purifying the heart by
Faith. So that we are washed, and sanctified, through the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, or by Christ known, and believed on, as one means of it, and by
the Efficiency of the Spirit of God, as the other; which I shall afterward
speak of. In the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

In discoursing of these words I shall therefore, First, Give some brief
account of the Nature of this Change, here expressed by being Washed, Sanctified
and Justified. Secondly, Of the two great Means, whereby it is brought about,
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and the Spirit of our God. Thirdly, Make some
Improvement, by Application: especially to assist you, in examining your
selves, in order to the Lord's Table; that we may know, whether we are in the
number of such, upon whom this Change is passed. Whether we are Washed,
Sanctified, and Justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the
Spirit of our God.

1. Concerning the nature of this Change. It is evident, that the defiling
nature of Sin is here supposed: there could not otherwise be any need of
Washing. And we find it represented in Scripture by Spots, and Blemishes, by
Mire and Vomit by the Blood and Pollution of a Newborn Child, by the most
filthy dung and Excrements, and whatsoever is reckoned the most vile and
abominable. Therefore whatsoever Excellencies and Ornaments, whatsoever
Privileges and Advantages, an Unsanctified Person may partake of, to recommend
him to the eyes of the World, he is yet a Vile Person, loathed and abominable
in the sight of God.

2. Consider, that by Nature we are All as an Unclean thing. That which is born
of the Flesh, is Flesh; and, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean,
John 3.6. Romans 3.10. Job 14.4. All the Purifications and Washings under the
Law, did suppose our inward Defilement, and represent our need of Cleansing.

Whatever was enjoined by the Mosaic Institution of this kind (which we find
was very strictly charged, and earnestly pressed, and indispensably required, and
the neglect of it most severely punished:) yet did but signify and represent
this. Which proves our Sanctification necessary, Tit. 3.5. He saved us by the
washing of Regeneration, and by the renewing of the Holy Ghost. All Men are
Defiled, and Unclean by Nature, and need to be Washed.

3. We are all over Unclean, from the Crown of the Head, to the Sole of the
Foot; Universally diseased and polluted, and so need to be Sanctified in Soul,
Body, and Spirit, Ephesians. 5.26. 1 These. 5.23. Isa 1.6. we read of the filthiness
of the Flesh and Spirit, from which we are to be cleansed, 2 Cor. 7.1. All the
Powers of the Soul, and all the Members of the Body are tainted; Heart and Hand
must be Cleansed; the inward and outward Man Sanctified. Cleanse your hands ye
sinners, and purify your hearts ye double minded, Jam. 4 8.

4. The Change therefore by Sanctification, must be Universal, in heart and
life. By the knowledge of God, and affection to him (of whom we were Ignorant,
and to whom before we were Disaffected) by the Image of God recovered; by
participation of the Divine Nature, and Life; by the Law of God written on the
Heart, and expressed in the Conversation. Holiness and Love to God must be the
frame and temper of our Souls; so that the Actings of it become easy,
pleasant, and delightful. The Old Man must be put off, the New put on Old
things be done away, and all things become new. New Principles, new Ends, new
Motives, new Rules, new Comforts, which will make an unspeakable difference
between this Change, and that Negative Religion, and common Honesty, which many
may pretend to, who are strangers to Regeneration. There were many Philosophers
and Sophists among these Corinthians, who boasted of Purity and Reformation,
which came unexpressibly short of this Sanctification which I am now speaking
of, as owing to some other cause than the Spirit of Christ, unto whom the
production, continuance, and progress of this Sanctification, is alone to be
ascribed.

5. It may farther be considered in its Beginning, or Progress, or Consummation.
As begun by the Spirit of Life and Power from Christ; as maintained and carried
on, by a continual influence from the same Spirit and the diligent use of God's
appointed means. Whereby the Lineaments of the Divine Nature are rendered more
clear, holy impressions more powerful, and efficacious; Whereby we go from
strength to strength, and are enabled to perfect holiness in the fear of God;
pressing on toward perfection, to the fullness of the stature of the Man Christ
Jesus, till it be consummate in Heaven: when, by seeing Christ as he is, we
shall be made like him, and be presented to the Father without spot or wrinkle,
or any such thing.

6. For the sake of those who intend to come to the Lord's Table, let me add,
That such Washing and Sanctification is requisite to our Communion with Christ
in the special Ordinances of the Gospel, particularly that of the Lord's
Supper. This is intimated by our Lord in the 13th of John, v. 7, 8. in his
words to Peter, If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me. It must have a
Spiritual meaning, because notwithstanding the external Washing, Christ says,
All of them were not clean. And soon after this, he instituted his Supper, to
the due participation whereof, it is necessary we be Washed and Sanctified. For
we cannot otherwise have a Right to the Benefits purchased by his Blood, which
are Sealed to us in that Ordinance; and we can have no Communion with him
there, till partakers of the Spirit of Christ. Unless we are Sanctified by that
Spirit, we have no interest in him, no Right to his Supper, and so we can have
no Communion with him: if we are not cleansed from our Filthiness, if we have
spots upon us that are not the spots of God's Children, unto whom this Feast
does particularly belong. And therefore I may say, as Peter to Simon Magus,
Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right with
God, neither can it be, if this Change do not precede. The Enquiry therefore is
highly seasonable, whether we are thus Washed, and Sanctified, or not? But
before I give the Characters of such Persons, it will be expected, I should
speak somewhat concerning the double means of this Change, In the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God.

II. The double Means of this Change, by the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God.

First. We are Purified, and Washed, By the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, or
by Faith in him.

To this purpose, Consider,

First. That all the Arguments laid down in Scripture, to press Sanctification
and Holiness of Heart and Life, have influence and force according to our
Faith. The Arguments from God, from Christ, from our selves, from the Divine
Nature, from the Example and Life of Christ, from his redeeming Grace, and
dying Love, from his precious Promises, etc. They all depend upon our Faith;
and have no force, or power, any further than we believe in Christ, and
heartily embrace the Gospel-Revelation.

Secondly. It is by the Name of Christ, or by Faith in him, that we are
Sanctified, because in order to our Sanctification, Christ is to be eyed, and
improved several ways.

First. The Blood of Christ must be eyed in order to our Sanctification. Our
Faith must be employed upon a Crucified Savior. As his Blood is able to
cleanse us from all sins. Who loved us and washed us from our sins, in his own
Blood; Who gave himself for us that he might sanctify and cleanse us, by the
washing of Water by the Word, Rev. 1.5. Ephesians. 5.25. For, as the Apostle
argues, from the taking away of Ceremonial Uncleanness by the Legal
Purifications; If the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer,
sprinkling the unclean, availed to the purifying of the Flesh, how much more
shall the Blood of Christ, who by the Eternal Spirit offered up himself to God,
purge our Consciences from dead Works, Heb. 9.13. Accordingly we find, The
Sanctification of the Spirit, connected with the sprinkling of the Blood of
Jesus, or, as the purchase of his Blood, 1 Pet. 1.2.

Secondly. Faith makes use of the Intercession of Christ, and his Prayer in
Heaven, for this Effect. The whole fruit of the Death of Christ, whereof the
Sanctifying Spirit is one Principal part, is given out by the Father upon the
Intercession of Christ. What he merited on the Cross by his great Sacrifice, he
prays in Heaven may be applied to Particular Souls, as the fruit of it: and
upon the account of the everlasting value of his Death, his Intercession
founded on it, is always Prevalent.

Thirdly. His Promise and Covenant, whereby he has engaged to cleanse us from
all Iniquity, and to sprinkle clean Water upon us, Ezekiel. 36.25. He has
promised his Blood shall be a Fountain open for sin and uncleaness, Zach. 13.1.
That Christ shall save us from our sins, and be exalted to give Repentance, and
to turn us from our Iniquities, and bring us back to God, etc.

Fourthly. Hereupon our Faith must eye the Spirit of Christ, as the great
Sanctifier of Souls, and the Author of all our Purity. This great Benefit,
which is promised in the Word, purchased by Christ upon his Cross, and
bestowed, granted, and given out upon his Intercession, is applied by the
Efficiency of the Eternal Spirit. He Sanctifies our Hearts and Natures, and
continually vouchsafes holy Influences of Light, and Life, and Power,
answerable to the Duties, Difficulties, and Necessities of particular Souls, in
every Age and Place of the World. This brings me to consider the other means of
our Sanctification, viz.

Secondly. By the Spirit of our God: And that he does two ways; First, By
removing our Defilement and Pollution, and Secondly, As the Author of Actual
Grace and Holiness. First, by the removing our defilement and pollution; and
accordingly he is promised sometimes as a Refiners Fire, and Fullers Soap, Mal.
3.2. and sometimes under the notion of Water, Isa. 4.4. Because all things
under the Law, were purged from their Typical Uncleanness, either by Fire, or
Water. What would abide the Fire, was to be Purified by Fire: and what would
not, was to be Cleansed by Water. Numb. 3.23. And here I might consider a
Threefold Defilement, wherewith we are chargable. First, That of our Nature,
by Original Sin. Secondly, That which is contracted by Actual Sin. Thirdly. The
Pollution and Defilement that cleaves to our best Duties. So far as we are
delivered from our Pollution, as to either of these, The Holy Ghost, in the
virtue of the Blood of Christ, is the Author of it.

Secondly. We may consider the Holy Spirit, as the Author of Positive Holiness,
and Grace in the Soul; and show,

First, How he convinces us of our need of it:

Secondly, That he enables us to pray for it.

Thirdly, To believe the Value and Virtue of the Blood of Christ, as able to
procure it.

Fourthly, How he makes use of the Word, as the ordinary means of our
Sanctification.

And Fifthly, Sometimes enables us to improve Afflictions, to promote the
influence and efficacy of the Word, to this purpose.

APPLICATION.
First, From the consideration of what these Corinthians were before this
Change, we learn, that some of the Worst and Vilest of sinners may be called,
and sanctified, and find Mercy with God: Such were some of you, such Idolaters,
such Drunkards, such Extortioners, such Adulterers, etc. (...), such things,
such sins, were some of you, to express the height of their Wickedness. Sins
of a Crimson and Scarlet Die may be cleansed and forgiven. The most polluted
sinner may be purified by the Blood of Christ. The most loathsome Diseases may
be healed by our heavenly Physician. The most unpolished Stones may be framed
by the Spirit, for a spiritual Building; a Manasses, a Mary Magdalen, may be
changed and justified; God will hereby magnify the Truth, and Authority of his
Word, and the Power of his Spirit. He will hereby bear Testimony to the
Freeness of his Love, and the Riches of his Grace. He will hereby hearten and
encourage the greatest Offenders to hope for pardon, upon Repentance, Isaiah
55.7. Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and
turn to the Lord, and he will abundantly pardon him. He will hereby encourage
Ministers in their Work, though among a dissolute, and perverse People: For we
preach in Hope, that if the vilest of Men can but so far break the Snare of the
Devil, as to hear the Word, we preach to them in hope of success. We know not
whose Hearts God will touch. It may be the most Unlikely Person in the whole
Assembly shall feel the Power of the Word.

Secondly, What Love and Thankfulness do we owe to Christ? And how should we
Admire and Praise him, for his Blood and Spirit, unto which we owe this great
Blessing of Sanctification? That there is a Fountain opened for Sin and
Uncleanness, for the Men of Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem: for all
Sorts and degrees of Persons, and kinds of Sins. That His Blood cleanses from
all sins: Not only did so formerly, but does so still.

Thirdly, Learn where to go for this Benefit even to Jesus Christ. Beg to be
Sanctified through the Merits of his Death, and the Influence of his Spirit;
endeavor to be sensible of thy Filthiness, and cry out, Unclean, unclean:
Lord, wash me thoroughly from my sins, and purge me from all my pollutions.
Apply the Word of God, and especially the Promises of the Gospel, in order to
thy being cleansed from all the Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1.

Fourthly, What a Difference does the Grace of God make upon the Hearts and
Souls of Men, from what they were, and what others are. You were some of the
most Abominable Sinners; but ye are washed: You were carnal, but you are
spiritual; you were proud, but now are humble; you were Darkness, but now are
Light; You were earthly and sensual, but now are heavenly; You did wallow in
all manner of Impurities, but now are Holy: You were sick, but now are healed:
You were defiled, but now are cleansed: You were at Enmity with God, and Haters
of him, but now you love him, and his love is shed abroad in your hearts: You
did love and delight in Sin, and Sinners, you now disaffect and loath it, and
them; and are ashamed to think of those things, wherein you once took pleasure.
Such were some of you, but you are washed. You were careless and vain, and
wordly as others, but are now a selected, chosen, peculiar people, zealous of
good works. You could before live without Prayer in your Clossets and Families,
for many Weeks, but now dare not live a day without it. You were glad when the
Sabbaths were over, and the Seasons of holy Worship gone, but now you are as
glad when they approach, and think with pleasure beforehand that they do so,
etc. Oh the mighty Difference that the Grace of God has made, between what you
were, and what you now are: What manner of thankful Rejoicing in God, have such
cause for, as are thus washed? But this will lead me to the Principal Use, viz.

Fifthly. To Examine and Enquire, whether we are in the Number of such. Whether
any such Change of Heart and Life, any such cleansing from the filthiness of
Flesh and Spirit, has been experienced by us. To assist you a little to
understand this, Consider, First. What have you ever experienced, and known of
any humbling Convictions of your own Pollution, and Defilment by sin? How
loathsome to God sin has made you: How odious and abominable to God's Holy
Eye? Have you been made to Loath and abhor your selves, as in dust and ashes,
before God? trembling before his Holiness, and Majesty, who hates your sins
with a perfect hatred? being covered with shame and Confusion of face, to think
of your own vileness? That your Hearts are so disaffected to him, the Author
of your Being, and the Fountain of your Felicity: That you have so often
affronted; and provoked him to Anger, by violating his Authority: That you have
Lived so long as without him in the World: and would ^e content to live such a
stranger to the God, that made it and you. That your corrupt Inclinations,
contrary to his Holy Nature, Image, and Law, so long remained uncured: That you
have gratified those Inclinations so often, for so many years, etc. Have you
thereupon been heartily desirous to be purged, and cleansed, to be Sanctified,
and renewed, to be delivered from the Power, and Pollution of sin, as well as
from the Damning-Guilt of it? If you have known nothing of such kind of
Convictions, you have no reason to conclude that you have been Washed.

Secondly. What is your practical Judgment concerning Holiness, and the Divine
Image, and Life? and what Prevalency has it with you? Do you esteem, and yield
conformity to the Image of God? Is Holiness accounted your Honor, your Glory,
your Pleasure, as unspeakably preferable to all the Riches, and Pleasures, and
Dignities of the Word? Is this your fixed Judgment? and does it put you upon
the diligent use of Gods appointed Means, to recover this Image, and to be made
partaker of his Holiness? Does it make you watchful over your Hearts, and
sensual Appetits, Passions, Words, and Ways, so far as ordinarily to prevail
against the Power of Worldliness, and sensuality? I do not ask, whether it
keeps you from every sin but whether it prevail so far, that you regard no
Iniquity in your Hearts. Is there no secret way of Wickedness you Indulge, and
continue in? But you loath your selves in the Presence of God, and Mourn in
secret for those sins, that none but God and Conscience can charge you with?
and carefully watch, and Walk, as believing sin to be the greatest Evil? Is
this your Habitual Frame, and ordinary Course? If it be thus, you are Washed,
and sanctified.

Thirdly. Examine your selves, from what Motives, and upon what Principles, you
abstain from those Sins, you are otherwise inclined and tempted to. Is it from
the Fear of God, and Love to him? Is it from the awe of his Authority? and
gratitude for the Innumerable Obligations you are under by his kindness and
Grace? Is it because sin is hateful and displeasing to God, and Christ, as well
as because of its miserable and destructive Consequences and Effects to you? Is
it from an inward Ruling Principle, that makes the pleasing of God your daily
and delightful Work?

Fourthly. How do you stand Affected to the Impurities, and Sins of Other Men?
Are you grieved at the Dishonor of God, by the sins of others. Do you pity and
pray for your sinful Neighbors, Relations, and Acquaintance? Especially when
they fall into the same sins, that you your selves have formerly committed, and
repented of. And therefore endeavor what you can to promote the Repentance,
and Salvation of others, in your place and station?

Fifthly. How are you Affected to Heart sins? and to the Remainders of Impurity
in your own souls? If the Fountain be cleansed, and the Heart purified, the
inward motions of sin will be abominable and hateful to you. Do you feel the
Burden of the Body of sin and Death, and complain of it? Do you walk humbly
under the sense of your remaining Pollutions? The more you are Washed, and the
more Assurance you have of it, the more you will mourn for your remaining
Uncleaness. Ezekiel. 36.25.31. I will sprinkle clean water upon them, and they
shall be clean: I will give them new Hearts, and new Spirits, and they shall
remember their evil ways, and doings, and loath themselves for all their
Transgressions.

Are you Diligent in the use of all Means, for further Purification of Hearts?
Is it the grief of your souls, that there is so much Filth yet remaining; Do
you not find, that you are not cleansed enough? Do you not go to Sermons and
Sacraments, with this Desire and Design* and Hope, That you may be more
Sanctified in Soul, Body, and Spirit. Do you not beg that all Providence may
be blessed, and improved to that Purpose? Can you not thank God for such
Afflictions, as you hope have been serviceable to this end. etc.

Sixthly. How are you affected toward the Temptations, that would ensnare you,
and defile you again? He that is truly cleansed, will take care to keep himself
Clean. If Conscience be not tender to make you watchful, and circumspect to
avoid being defiled, it is a sign you were ever truly washed. If you can make
as bold with Temptation as ever, and are not afraid of entering into it, and
being overcome.

Seventhly. How are you Affected toward Christ, by whose Blood and spirit we
are Sanctified and cleansed? He loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his
own Blood: And if he have applied it to you in particular, you cannot but
adore, and Love him, and delight in Communion with him: Love him, and love his
Image wherever you see it: Love him, and have the same Friends and Enemies with
him: Love him, and prize your part in Christ above all things in this World.
And if you love him you will watch and observe his Carriage and Behavior;
whether he smile or frown; whether he be angry or pleased; more than what all
the World can say, or do, for you, or against you. If you are washed by Christ,
it must needs be so.

And the sense of his redeeming Love, and pardoning mercy, and Sanctifying
Grace, will so raise your Love to him, as to increase your hatred and
detestation of sin. You will remember, and be confounded, and melted, and
ashamed* and humbled for sin by the sense of his being pacified toward you, and
having washed you in his Blood; For so is the Promise, 16. Ezekiel. 63. That thou
may Remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because
of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou have done, says
the Lord God. The experience of Christians confirms it.

Eighthly. How do you stand Affected as to your Company. Washed Persons will
delight in clean Company. They that are the sheep of Christ, washed in the
Blood of Jesus, cannot take delight in the Company of Swine. Nothing but
necessity, or the design and hope of doing them good, will bring you into such
Company. You will not choose it, and take pleasure in it, as formerly; or make
such your Familiars.

Ninthly. I might add, that such will long for the Perfection of Holiness; when
they shall be perfectly cleansed and purged from sin. It will be their daily
work to purify themselves, as Christ is pure, by the hope of seeing him as he
is, 1 John 3.3. the thoughts of Heaven, as a state of Perfect Purity, in
conformity to the Image of Christ, will be very delightful: and Death it self,
as the way to it, will lose it terrors, and become desirable.

Sixthly. The next use I would make, shall be for the Encouragement of
repenting Sinners, and returning Backsliders. How vile soever they have been,
through Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus, they may yet be
washed, Sanctified and Justified. If you are under a serious Conviction of your
Guilt, and Filthiness; and ready to cry out O God, I am ashamed and blush to
look up because of my Iniquities, or with the Prophet, We lie down in our
shame, and our confusion covers us, for we have sinned against the Lord. Jer.
3.5. Yet turn to the Lord, and he can Heal, and Cleanse, and Pardon, and
Sanctify. Tho your sins be as Crimson, or Scarlet, they shall be as Snow and
Wool. The Blood of Jesus can cleanse from all sin. That Fountain is yet open.
Forgiveness and Sanctification may yet be had. He is willing to receive and
accept you if you are but heartily willing to forsake you sins* and turn to
him, Who is like unto our God, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgressions of his heritage, Mich 7.18.

Object. I. But some of you. may be ready to reply, I have broken my Vows. and
greatly backsliden from God, after I had returned to him: I have defiled my
Garments, after having been washed: I have turned with the Dog to his vomit,
and with the sow, that is washed, to her wallowing in the mire: Surely God will
never be reconciled to me, or gracious to me more. I have known somewhat of the
truth of Christ, and tasted of the good Word of God, and had some experience of
holy Walking, and the pleasure of it. and gave up my self again and again to
the Lord, at his own Table; and yet I have revolted from him since. My
Conscience flies in my face; I durst not go to God, as formerly: He may Justly
upbraid me, and say, what Iniquity did you find in me, that you have left me?
Was I a barren Wilderness, or a Land of Drought? That you thus forsook me: Was
I an unlovely God, that you could not like me? Was my Arm shortened, that I
could not help you? or have I ever failed my word, that you might not trust me,
etc. How then shall I look him in the Face, after such Apostasy? How shall I
ever hope to be washed again, that have so defiled my self, after having been
washed?

Answ. But have you not an express Call, and Promise from God to encourage you
to Return? Jer. 3.22. A Promise worth Millions of Gold and Silver. Turn unto me
ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your backslidings. Do but turn, and I
will help you. He calls you Children, and you must call him Father, as you can;
and not turn your backs upon him, v. 19. I said, says God, Thou shall call me,
my Father, and shall not turn away from me, even though I said, for thy
backslidings, How shall I put thee among the Children?

Object. 2. But you will say, I have wounded my Faith, as well as my
Conscience: I read a Promise, but it yields me no Comfort. I hear of the
Fatherly Mercies of God, but I cannot apply them; for I have forsaken God, and
he may justly forsake me. My Heart misgives me, I cannot go to him as to a
Father. I question whether ever I was a Child or no: I fear my spots are not
the spots of his Children.

But consider this: If thou be a Returning Backslider, God can see the truth of
thy Grace, when thou can not discern the truth of his Love. Thy Father sees
and knows thy Heart; and if thou truly Repent, and Return, he will accept
thee. He can behold a Child through a Backslider. When thou can not look up
to him, as to a Father, there is yet ground enough for thee to Return, that he
may heal thy Backslidings.

Object. III. But I have little hope, that such a Treacherous Backsliding
Heart, as mine, should ever be healed. If I should be washed now, I shall again
defile my self. If I should once more be received to mercy, I should backslide
again: And as good never come, as to come to no purpose. If I return to him,
and continue not with him, it will but be the worse in the latter end.

Answ. If God undertake the Cure, he can purge away thy Iniquities, as well as
forgive them. Destroy the power of sin, as well as remove the Guilt. He can
heal thy Backslidings, in the Root, and Cause, and Principle of them; so as
thou shall not turn aside from him, as formerly. He can establish, and
strengthen thy Heart, and give thee more stedfastness, and he calls thee to
Turn, in order to it. Therefore turn to the Lord.

Object. IV. O But I am never healed, till I Return, I must die of my wounds. I
shall perish in my filthiness, if I am never washed, till I come, as I ought,
to the fountain opened. For my Heart is hard and impenitent; I feel it so. I
have not such an heart to turn to God as I should: It is the grief of my soul
that I find it thus. I am without strength, and unable to turn.

Answ. But have thou no Strength, no Power to consider whence thou art fallen?
and how low thou art sunk, and to bewail the wretchedness of thy present Case,
which thou beginnest to be sensible of? Can thou not lament the hardness of
thy Heart, which thou ownest to be thy grief? Can thou not consider thy past,
and present c^ndition, and thereupon Cry to God for help? and a little thing
will save a Man that is Drowning. One look from Christ made Peter remember the
Warning, he had before given him, and go out and weep bitterly. Can thou not
reflect, and consider? how much better it was with thee formerly than now? when
thou had good hopes, through Grace, of Divine Acceptance; when thou could
go to God with Comfort, and pour out thy Heart before him with freedom: But
now, since the breach thou have made upon Conscience, if thou come at all
into his Presence, thou art dragged by fear, and hardly know what to do, when
thou art there. Art not thou ready to cry out, O the Communion with Christ that
once I had, in such or such an Ordinance; but now it is lost. He is a stranger
to my Soul. He has justly withdrawn himself. If I seek him where I was wont to
find him, I find him not. My Peace, my Joy, my Light, my Strength, is gone.
Therefore let me return to my first Husband, for it was then better with me
than now, Hosea 2.6, 7. Can you not thus reflect, to awaken your Repentance,
and assist your Resolution to return, and stir up your selves to call upon God
for healing Mercy?

Object. V. But some may say, If God should again receive such a returning
Backslider, Will he not bear me a Grudge for it? Will he not hereafter upbraid
me with it? I shall hear of it again the next Sacrament besure, or under the
next Afflicting Providence.

Answ. No, says God, turn, and I will heal your Backslidings; I will receive
you graciously, I will love you freely, I will be merciful to your Iniquities,
and remember them no more, Hos. 14.1, 2, 3. Did he upbraid the returning
Prodigal, and say, Where have thou been? Resolve, therefore, O Backsliding
Children, to return to your Father; to be again Washed, Sanctified, and
Justified. Whatever Discouragement be in the way, you may hope for welcome. For
you are Children still, though Backsliding Children. And remember he is your
Father, though you have displeased him. For,

First. If it be said by the Devil, or an accusing Conscience, How dare thou
take the Name of Father into thy Mouth, since thou have so dishonored him, and
grieved his Spirit by thy Revolt? A Returning Backslider may say, he is A
Father still; and the Love of a Father is unmeasurable; measurable; the
kindness of a Father is infinitely Tender. Though his Paternal Justice may
Correct me with a Rod, he will not take away his Loving Kindness utterly from
me. I will, therefore, go to my Father; though he frown upon me, though he
chastise me, though he threaten to turn me out of doors; I will yet Return and
go to my Father, for I must be there. I will dye in his Arms, or I will dye at
his feet; I will Return. But,

Secondly. What will thou venture to go presently, all in Rags, like a Beggar,
rather than a Child, all in thy filth and dirt? thou will shame thy Father's
House, and discredit his Family, if such a one as thou should come, and call
him Father. Notwithstanding this, I will return presently to him, says the
penitent Backslider; for* the longer I delay, the more hardness shall I
contract, and the greater will my sin be; and every day I shall be exposed to
further sin; and the same Duties now lie upon me, as before, which I cannot
perform duly, except I Return; therefore I will return presently. This Dr.
Preston, upon 1 Samuel 20.21. advises, as the wisest and best way, after the
Commission of any great Sin, or the Guilt of any great Backsliding.

Thirdly. But it will be said, thy Work is great and difficult, before ever thy
Peace can be made, thou must mourn and weep, and Repent in dust and ashes, and
be humbled to the very mouth of Hell, before thou and thy Father be Friends
again.

And will not that discourage thee?

No, says the Returning Backslider, I will vet go to My Father; I will own,
that I deserve to be rejected for ever; but I Will plead the Mercifulness of his
Nature, and the freeness of his Covenant Love, and Promise; you shall never
beat me out of it, I will return to my Father. I know he will meet me half way;
yea, he has met me, and prevented me by his Grace; He put it into my heart to
return, therefore he will accept me.

I easily foresee what will be Objected against all this. That no Backslider is
able thus to argue; He is holden in the Chain of his own Sins; He durst not use
such Language.

I grant, that while he is under the full power of Backsliding, he cannot thus
speak, and act.

But, to a Returning, Penitent Backslider, that begins to be Awakened, who
feels the burden of his sin, and seeks after God, the Relation of a Father, is
an unspeakable Support. And notwithstanding his late Backslidings, he may make
out his Relation to God as his Father, when once he is awakened to Repentance;
Partly by his Mourning, and Godly Sorrow for Sin; Partly by the remembrance of
his former Covenant, and Communion with God, which, when he returns by
Repentance, may yield him comfort, though before it could not; Partly by the
Inward Motions of the Spirit, which he finds lusting against the Flesh; Partly
by his vigorous importunate Desires to turn to God, and be at Peace with him.

When it comes to this, he may take Heart, and ought to receive Encouragement
by the Promise and Call of God, Turn you Backsliding children, and I will heal
your backslidings.

The Fourth Discourse, After the LORD's SUPPER. OF THE Communion OF Christ 's
Body and Blood.
From 1 COR. X.xvi. The Cup of Blessing that we bless, is it not the Communion
of the Blood of Christ?

The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ?


WHen the Apostle would Reform the Church of Corinth, as to that profane
liberty which some of them took, boldly to meddle with the Mysteries of
Paganism, and to Eat of things offered unto Idols; He gives an Account of the
Nature of this Divine Institution of the Lord's Supper, and leaves it to
themselves to judge, whether they did not do very ill, to be present at the
Feasts upon the Heathen Sacrifices, and to eat of things that were offered unto
Idols I say, he leaves it unto themselves, Verse 15. I speak as unto wise men;
Judge ye what I say.

That was the Case amongst many of these Corinthians, they did not scruple to
accompany their Unbelieving Neighbors and Acquaintance, to the Banquets that
they made in Honor of their false Gods; They did not scruple to Eat with them,
of those things that were taken from their Execrable Altars, as a Part and
Remnant of those Sacrifices to Idols, which were performed in the City of
Corinth with all the Pomp of an Abominable Superstition. This the Apostle shows
to be unsuitable to their Profession of Christianity, and that it could not
agree with the Honor they had, of eating at the Table of the Lord: For these
Heathens were seduced by Satan to make those Sacrifices, and they were Devils
whom they Worshipped, as supposed Demigods, and in such Feasts they had a
familiar Communion with them. And I would not, says the Apostle, that you
should have fellowship with Devils, Verse 19, 20, 21. You cannot drink of the
Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils: You cannot be partaker of the Lord's
Table, and the Table of Devils.

In the Words of the Text, he leaves it to them to judge, Whether it be not a
most horrid Impiety, to pretend to join these Two together, the Divine Body and
Blood of Christ, with the Impious Sacrifices of these Idolaters. For he makes
the partaking of the Lord's Table, not only a Testimony of our Union unto
Christ, and our Communion one with another, as his Members, but also a
Testimony of our Disunion and Separation from all Idolatrous Worship.

The Cup of Blessing that we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of
Christ? And the Bread that we break, etc. Where we are to consider: 1. The two
Sacramental Signs, the Cup, and the Bread. 2. What is to be understood by the
Body and Blood of Christ. 3. What by Commmnion in them. 4. How the Cup and
Bread in the Sacrament of the Supper, are the Communion of the Body and Blood
of Christ: And then I shall help you to Apply it.

1. Concerning the Sacramental Signs, the Cup, and the Bread. The Cup for the
Wine in it, by an ordinary Figure: and the Bread which we break. These are the
two outward Elements in this Institution, and neither of them must be omitted.
Whereas in Baptism there is but one outward Element, here are two. And there is
good Reason for it.

1. Because this Represents the Violent Death of Christ, wherein his Blood was
shed and separated from his Body. It is therefore necessary there should be one
Sign to Represent his Body, and another Sign to Represent his Blood, there
having been a Separation by Death, which is here to be Represented.

2. The Lord's Supper being the Mystery of our spiritual Nourishment by Christ,
it was proper to employ both Eating and Drinking, which are the two parts of
our Corporal Nourishment, and that could not have been entirely Represented by
either of them alone.

The Cup of Blessing, or Benediction, which we bless, or give thanks for, i. e.
Which we set apart by Prayer, and Thanksgiving, Blessing, and giving of Thanks
being often put one for another, 1 Cor. 14.16. And in the Evangelical History,
Matthew. 26. and Mark 16, What one Evangelist calls Blessing, another calls
Thanksgiving. By virtue of which Blessing, or Prayer by a Minister of Christ*
in his Name, and according to his Example and Order; That which before was
common, is set apart to an holy use, and becomes the Sign and Seal of the Body
and Blood of Christ.

The Cup of Blessing. The Jews were wont at the Passover Feast, or rather after
it, to drink of a Cup which the Master of the Family did bless, i. e. Did pray
over it, or concerning it. To distinguish this from that, the Apostle says, The
Cup of Blessing, which we bless, which we Christians set apart in our
Assemblies, to show forth the Lord's Death by. And from this Passage of the
Apostle, this Ordinance is called by the Ancients, the Eucharist, upon the
account of the Blessing, or giving of Thanks. Justin Martyr who lived but Fifty
Years after the Death of the Apostle John, calls it the Bread of the Eucharist,
in memory of the Passion of Christ. Nay the Greek word for Blessing, in this
Text, (...), as well as the other, (...), giving of Thanks, is sometimes used
by the Sea Mr. Daille in loc.
Ancients, as the Name of this Institution. Among others, Cyril Bishop of
Alexandria does often call it by the Name of (...).

The Cup of Blessing which we bless, and the Bread which we break. At the Feast
of the Passover the Jews made use of such Bread, as was flat and round, and so
was to be broken, and cut asunder: And the unleavened Bread among the Jews to
this very day is of this kind. Now our Lord Instituting his Supper, the same
Evening after the Celebration of the Passover, we may suppose made use of the
same sort of Bread: That is, As he changed the Signification of this Bread,
from that of their unleavened Bread, to be a sign of his Body; so he employed
the breaking of this Bread, to signify his cruel Sufferings in that body upon
the Cross.

This Cup, and this Bread, even after Consecration, (For the Bread is not
broken till after that) is said to be the Communion of the Body and Blood of
Christ, not his real Flesh and Blood. For, besides the Vanity of such a Sense,
and the Indecency and Uncomeliness of it; yea, the Contradiction, and
Impossibility of it; It is against the express Testimony of the Apostle here,
and in other Places. According to the new Doctrine of Rome, Instead of saying
here, The Cup that we bless; He would have said* The Cup that we
Transubstantiate, and change into the proper Substance of the Body and Blood of
Christ: The Cup, in which we leave not one drop of Wine; But, by pronouncing
four or five little words, fill it with the Body of Christ. And is not this a
strange way of blessing a Person or Thing? to destroy the very Nature of the
Thing; that it shall be no longer what it was before? The Bread was not
blessed, that it might be destroyed; nor given to be eat^^^ that it might cease
to be before it was eaten. It Is to suppose God to put forth Miraculous Power,
to make his own Command (of eating the Bread) impossible. The Bread that we
break; it is therefore Bread after it is broken, after the Consecration and
breaking, it is Bread still: For the Transubstantiation, if there be any, is
upon the Consecration, before it be broken. But I hope most English Protestants
are pretty well Instructed in this Truth, and therefore I need not insist
longer upon it.

2. What are we to understand by the Body and Blood of Christ, of which this is
said to be the Communion? How is Christ's Body and Blood present in this
Ordinance? Our Lord is Ascended into Heaven with his Human Body, and the
Heavens are to contain him, till the Restitution of all things. And therefore
as the Bread and Wine are not annihilated, or not destroyed, nor changed into
the Flesh and Blood of Christ, according to the Romanists; So, nor present
with, in, and under the Bread, and Wine according to the Lutherans. So that we
need not say, that the Body and Blood of Christ are at all present there, for
they are in Heaven: But the Bread and Wine are the Signs and Memorials of the
Sacrifice and Sufferings of Christ. The Death of Christ, and his Sacrifice upon
the Cross, with the Fruits and Effects thereof unto us are especially to be
understood by his Body and Blood: And it is in these that we have Communion in
the Ordinance of the Supper.

The Expressions therefore which some Protestant Writers have used about the
Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in this Sacrament, are very See a
Tract on the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, by Mr. John Hales of Eaton
College, in Oct.
unwary. For thereby they seem to make Mysteries where there is no need at all
of any. It is true, in the next Chapter it is said of the Bread, This is my
Body; that is, the Sign and the Memorial of it: Yet here the Bread broken, is
said to be the Communion, or the Communication of his Body; that is, A Solemn
Rite instituted by God to communicate to us the Fruits and Benefits of Christ's
broken Body, or of his Sacrifice and Sufferings Represented by it; That as
verily as we are Treated at the Table with Bread and Wine, so the worthy
Receiver shall share in the Benefits of Christ's Death. This is Intelligible
and Plain.

3. This will help us to understand what is meant by the Communion of the Body
and Blood of Christ; By this (...), or Communication, as it may as well be
rendered, that we have in the Body and Blood of Christ, in the Ordinance of the
Supper: Two Things may this Import.

1. Our Participation of the Fruits of Christ's Death and Sacrifice: That we
share in the Privileges of Reconciliation to God, Forgiveness of Sin, Peace of
Conscience, and the Promise of Eternal Life, by Virtue of Christ's Death.

2. That Others share with us therein, or that we Partake of these Benefits
with others. For so it follows in the next Verse; That though many Members, we
are all one Body, and one Bread, for we are all Partakers of that one Bread.
That is, We are all one Church, and one Body of Christ, by Covenant Union unto
him; And of him we do all Sacramentally and Spiritually partake in this
Ordinance: As many Grains of Corn make one Loaf, and many Members one Body.

We being many, are one Bread and one Body. The Church of Rome, from that
Expression, might have as well argue, That all Christians are substantially
changed first into the Bread, and then into the natural Body of Christ, by
partaking of this Sacrament; As well as that the Bread is changed into the Body
of Christ: for all Christians are said to be but one Bread, and one Body, by
virtue of their Communion in this Ordinance.

4. Hereby also we understand, how we have Communion in the Body and Blood of
Christ, by the Lord's Supper: How we and others partake in the Benefits of his
Death and Passion. And that two ways: As this Sacrament is a Sign and a Symbol
of it; and as it is a Means.

1. It is a Sign of it. All that eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, do
thereby Commemorate the Death and Passion of Jesus Christ, and profess to own,
that the Body and Blood of Christ, offered upon the Cross, is the Food and
Nourishment of their Souls to Eternal Life: That Christ is their Savior and
Redeemer; That they hope for all their Acceptance with God in both Worlds, only
upon the account of the Sacrifice of Christ. They professedly declare, that
living and dying, they are, and will be his: They hope for Victory over Death
and the Devil, by the Cross of Christ, and for a Glorious Resurrection from
Death, as the Fruit of his Death and Resurrection.

2. These Words do import further, That the eating of this Bread, and drinking
of this Cup, are the Means appointed by Christ for our Communion in his Body
and Blood. We share in the Benefits of his Death and Sacrifice; and by due
Attendance upon this Ordinance, the precious Fruits of his Death, and the Gifts
and Graces of his Spirit, are augmented and increased in us, in order to our
full and final Blessedness in the other World, which this is preparatory to, and
fits us for.

As the partaking of things sacrificed to Idols, was a Fellowship with Devilss,
1 Cor. 10.20. So the partaking of that which was sacrificed to God, is a
Fellowship with him. See Mr. Charnock 's 2d. Vol. p. 759. And of the Divine
Attributes, p. 638.
Prayer is an Act of Homage, and Praise of Gratitude; but we have not so near a
Communion with a Person, either by Petitioning for somewhat we want, or by
returning him Thanks for a Favor received; as we have by sitting with him at
his Table, partaking of the same Bread, and the same Cup. In all Nations the
nearest Fellowship consists in things of this nature. Take, Eat, manifests a
Communion.

It would be an empty Mystery, and unworthy of an Institution by Divine
Goodness, if there were not some Communion with God and Christ in it. There
would be some kind of Deceit in the Precept, Take, Eat, and Drink, this is my
Body and Blood; If there were not a Conveyance of Spiritual, Vital Influences
to our Souls: For the narural end of Eating and Drinking is the Nourishment and
increase of the Body and Preservation of Life, by that which we Ea and Drink.

I might consider this Ordinance as a Sign, and Means of our Communion in the
Body and Blood of Christ; or of our sharing in the Fruits of his Death: And
amplify it several ways.

1. By considering on what Accounts this is a likely Means of such a Communion.
And,

2. How Faith must be acted, that it may be so, as to us. As to the former, 1.
As this Ordinance is Commemorative of the Sacrifice of Christ, and being to be
observed in Remembrance of him. 2. As it is an open Profession of the Cross of
Christ: that we glory in it, and therefore show forth the Lord's Death that
way, professing our selves not to be ashamed of our Character, as the Followers
of a crucified Jesus. 3. As it is a Renewal and Confirmation of the Covenant
between God and Us, through Jesus Christ; Renewing our Engagements and
Obligations to be the Lord's for ever. In the Celebration of this Ordinance, we
have a Special Opportunity for this: it is a principal part of our Work at this
Table. 4. As it is a fit Season for extraordinary Thanksgiving and Praise,
blessing God for Jesus Christ; Which Thankfulness for Christ disposes and fits
us for the Reception of further Grace, as the Fruit and Purchase of his Death;
and so is the Means of our Communion in his Body and Blood. Thus it is the Cup
of Blessing and of Thanksgiving that we there Receive: which Cup of Blessing,
upon such Accounts as these, is our Communion in the Blood of Christ.

2. You will hereby the better perceive, what is to be done on our part in
order to this Communion.

1. Our Faith must Eye the Authority of Christ enacting it. We must act in
Obedience to an Institution and Appointment of Christ. It was a Remarkable
Instance and Act of his Kingly Office, to enjoin this Memorial of his dying
Love. And the Season of its Institution is the more observable, viz. In the
close of his Public Ministry, of his Prophetical Office upon Earth, and in
his Entrance upon the Execution of the Principal part of his Priestly Office,
by being made a Sacrifice: between both of these; And to render both Effectual,
our Lord interposed an Act of his Kingly Office in the Institution of this
Ordinance. Accordingly it should be eyed, and owned by us, in order to our
Communion with him therein.

2. The Love of Christ must especially be Eyed and Attended to, in this Supper,
as Expressed by his Death and Sufferings. Of this we have here the most lively
Representation, with the Glorious Effects of that Love, which are not
Represented with such a Beauty and Luster by any other Ordinance, as by this.
The constraining Love of Christ in his whole undertaking, is better discerned
and tasted in this Ordinance, than as it is proposed (...) several parts in the
Holy Scripture: Here we are called to the particular Application of it, He
loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20 Rev. 1.5.

3. The Sovereignty, and the Wisdom of God, in Instituting these External Signs
and Elements, of Bread and Wine, must also be Eyed, and Attended to. They most
fitly Signify, and Represent the great Things they are designed for, and yet
without a Divine Institution could have no Relation to the Thing signified.

How suitable is the plain matter of this Sacrament unto the holy Author of it.
We remember in this Supper his Body hanging on the Cross, and therefore it was
not fit the Sacrament of his Body should be sumptuous and rich upon the Table.
Nevertheless by Bread to strengthen, and Wine to comfort, all the Benefits of a
crucified Savior are fitly Represented, and much better, than they could have
been by the choicest Delicates.

In order to this Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, we must take heed
to our selves, not to rest in the External Signs; but to discern the Lord's
Body, to apprehend the Spiritual Import and End of this Divine Institution;
That by Faith we may Receive Christ, and feed upon him, so as to Experience the
Communications of his Grace, and Receive fresh Influences of his Spirit: That
we may Accept all the Benefits of the New Covenant, which are here Offered and
Sealed to us; and that we may Devote, Resign, and Dedicate our selves afresh to
be the Lord's; to Obey him, and serve the Purposes of his Glory, while we live,
in hope of the blessed Recompense which he has Purchased and promised, and is
gone to prepare, and which he will not fail to come again and bestow. Until
which time this Ordinance is to continue in the Church, To show forth the
Lord's Death till he come.

Use 1. The first Reflection I would make on this, is upon the Sacrilegious
Confidence of those Men, who deny Christians the Means of their Communion in
the Blood of Christ; who rob them of one half of this Sacrament, by denying the
Cup of Blessing to the Laity. The Cup is the Communion of the blood of Christ,
says the Apostle. Drink ye all of it, says our Lord. And yet the Church of Rome
will not suffer the People to taste it. But as one Error makes way for
another, they pretend that by the New Doctrine of Concomitancy, the Bread, or
the little Wafer, which is not broken neither, according to the order of
Christ, but put whole into the Peoples Mouths, by the hands of the Priest; This
Wafer shall be enough for the People, and by the help of a strong Imagination
of the Authority of their Church, the very Body, Blood, and Bones of Christ
shall be contained under the Form and Appearance of Bread.

One would wonder how any Thing can be plainer, both in this and the next
Chapter, and in the Institution it self, as Recorded by the Evangelists, than
the Universal Obligation upon Christians to partake of the Cup, as well as the
Bread. And what Authority can any Man, or Number of Men, have to alter such a
Constitution? May they not as well take away the Bread from the People, as the
Cup? They will grant that for a Thousand Years after Christ, it was the Sense
and Practice of the Christian Church, that the People should partake of the Cup
too; And for Fourteen hundred Years, it can be proved that they did, even from
the Apostle's Time, down to that of Thomas Aquinas in the latter end of the
Thirteenth Century. Justin Martyr, Cyprian, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, and all the
most considerable Writers of the Ancient Church, are express in their Testimony
for it. But what need we concern our selves about the Judgment of Antiquity?
When there is a Positive Institution of Christ, and in a large Account thereof
by the Apostle Paul in the Eleventh Chapter, he speaks but one word of the
Consecration of the Bread, but uses diverse Expressions, to signify the
Excellency of the Cup.

This is my Blood, says Christ, The Blood of the New Testament, shed for the
Remission of Sins of many. His sufferings and the reality of his Death are in a
most lively manner set forth by the shedding of his Blood. Not to insist upon
his bloody sweat in the Garden, You know when he was whipped, and scourged, and
crowned with Thorns, he then shed Blood! Blood issued from his hands and Feet
when he was nailed to the Cross; and from his side, when he was pierced by the
Roman Soldiers. By the shedding of his Blood he lost his Life and without
shedding of Blood there could be no Remission. So that to deprive the People of
the Cup, is to take away the most lively, and the most essential Representation
of the Sufferings, and Death of Christ.

The Doctrine of Concomitancy will not avail in this Case, The partaking of
the Bread only is not sufficient whereby to remember his Death: For the
Separation of his Blood from his Body was the means of his Dying. This destroys
the Distinction between the two Symbols, which yet are very different in their
Names, in their Properties, in their Use, and in the Time of receiving them.
Besides, it is contrary to all the Rules of Language, to say, I drink, when I
only eat. But there is worse in it still; For they seal up the Fountain of
Christ's Blood from the People, They pour it back again, as it were, into his
Body, and shut up his wounds; as if his Blood were not shed for any but the
Priests. God has appointed the double Elements to increase the Consolation of
Christians. And we should not marvel, says one, that they who deny the
Certainty of Grace, and the Possibility of Assurance, should deny the People
the double Elements: By their Doctrine they Preach but a half Comfort to Souls,
and by their Practice they administer but a half Sacrament to the Laity.

It is true, They tell us, that we read of this Ordinance under the Name of
Breaking of bread. We grant it, But they may as well conclude, That when Joseph
Feasted and entertained his Brethren, that he gave them nothing to Drink,
because it is only said, That they did eat with him. Can any one doubt, but
when we pray for our daily bread in the Lord's Prayer, that we ask what is
necessary for the Relief and Satisfaction of our Thirst, as well as Hunger, in
that Petition?

Notwithstanding all that may be said, against their Practice of denying the
Cup to the People, we read in the History of the Council of Trent, when
Communion in both kinds was proposed by those who were sent from France; In the
Reply made to that Motion, They called the Cup for the Laity, a Cup of Poison:
And among other Anathema's in the Council of Trent, there is one against all
those that shall say. That the Church had not good reason to take away the Cup
from the People; And yet they assign no Reason at all, when there is manifestly
as much Reason for drinking of the Cup, as for eating of the Bread; the same
Authority requiring both, The Cup of Blessing which we bless is the Communion
of the Blood of Christ.

2. With what humble Thankfulness should we use this Privilege, and obey this
Order of our Lord, Remembering him in this manner, since thereby we have
Communion in his Body and Blood.

The Night before he was betrayed, he took Bread, and took the Cup; He
Instituted the Feast, and bid us Celebrate it in Remembrance of him. You, my
Friends and Followers, as if our Lord had said, I am now about to leave you,
for the hour is at hand, when I shall be Apprehended, Bound, and Judged,
Condemned, and Crucified; and then I shall Rise again, and go to my Father and
your Father, to my God and your God; E're long I shall be received out of your
sight, you shall see me no more on Earth; you shall not eat and drink with me
any more as you have done; But let me not be out of your mind, when I am gone.
I have loved you, and I will love you to the Death; And to morrow you shall see
the proof of my Love to you, and to the lost World, when I shall offer my self
a Sacrifice for sin, and lay down my Life for you; And will you forget me? That
you may not, I do institute and appoint this Solemn Memorial of my Death, and
leave it in Charge upon you, and my whole Church to the end of the World, upon
all my Followers in all Ages, to do it in Remembrance of me; As often as you
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of Blessing, that you show forth my Death
till I come. Accordingly the first Disciples of Christ did every Lord's Day
make it a part of their Public Worship; But as the Zeal and Fervor of
Christians abated, the Frequency of Celebrating this Feast did abate too.

But some will be ready to say, The Privilege is so great I durst not
adventure. It is the Communion of the body and blood of Christ, I am not fit
for so great an undertaking; My Conscience tells me I am utterly unworthy of so
high a Favor; My sins are so many, and my frailties so many, I durst, by no
means, as yet, adventure to come.

I Answer, 1. That Sense of our Unworthiness and Unfitness, which keeps us from
the performance of a plain Duty, is not true Humility. It is not Presumption to
do what we are required, and to come when we are bidden, though we are Unworthy
to come. We are unworthy of Food and Clothing, Will you therefore starve your
selves, or go naked? Remember you are Invited, and your Refusal thereupon may
proceed from Pride, if the Sense of Unworthiness hinder your Obedience to the
Call of Christ. It is a bold thing, you think, for you to come; But is there no
faulty Boldness in your neglecting to come, when Christ has bid you remember
him this way? For this is not a Privilege only, but at the same time it is a
Duty too; And if your sense of your Unworthiness help you to come humbly and
better prepared, it is one of the best Characters of a worthy Receiver, but it
ought not to keep you from receiving altogether.

2. You say you are unfit. It may be you say true. Will you continue so from
year to year? Is it not a Duty to fit and prepare your selves, to repent of all
sin, and give up your selves to God in Christ, as your God and Savior, and
then renew your Covenant? Do not you know, that the Ignorant and the
impenitent, who are unfit to come to the Lords Table, are unfit to die, unfit
for Heaven? And will you continue in such a state wherein you are unfit to die?
And yet are uncertain to live an hour. Your unfitness is your sin, and will you
turn it into an Apology for your other Sin? It is the Duty of all real and
unfeigned Christians, to come to this Ordinance; And it is the Duty of all to
be such, that they may come. Not to Commemorate the Death of Christ this way,
as he has appointed it, is one sin; To live in the neglect of due Preparation
for it, is Another. Will your being Unprepared excuse your not coming, when it
is your duty to be such as may come? How can you think God will forgive one
sin, because you commit another? How can you expect he should pardon your
neglect of his Table, when all that you can say, is, that you neglect to fit
your selves for it? Men will not do their duty in other things, and so are
unfit for this. Therefore,

3. How is it that you are not as much afraid of disobeying this Command of
thus Remembering the Death of Christ, as you are afraid of doing it Unworthily?
You are afraid you should offend God by coming; But ought you not to fear, lest
you offend him by staying away? Should not a total neglect be apprehended a
Fault, as well as an undue Performance? You do well to fear Unworthy receiving;
O be but as fearful to continue Unworthy, and Unfit to receive! This equal fear
of Caution on both sides, would make you diligent and solicitous to fit and
prepare your selves. And this concerns those, who have formerly been at the
Lord's Table, but very often do tarry away, though they have time and
opportunity, as being afraid to come by reason of their own Unworthiness.

4. Consider further, What are those sins that you charge your selves with, as
the ground of your Unfitness. They are either of Weakness, or of Wilfulness;
Either such as can hardly be avoided by the Care and Watchfulness of Good Men,
as sins of daily infirmity. These do not make you unfit for the Lord's Table:
For if they did, who at all would ever be fit? If a perfect sinless Fitness
were necessary, none could come aright. And by such a thought we make Christ an
hard Master. But if they be sins of Wilfulness, you are Self-condemned if you
do not Reform. And yet how many are there, concerning whom we may charitably
judge, that they do not allow themselves in wilful sins, that do yet tarry away
from this Table?

5. Let me ask you further, Have you ever tried to fit and prepare your selves,
as worthy Receivers of the Lord's Supper? Have you endeavored, in the use of
all God's appointed Means, to obtain that Knowledge, Repentance, Faith, and
Love, which should fit you for this Ordinance? If you have never used the Means
that God has appointed; if you have never seriously and in good earnest set
about the Work of Preparation, How can you say that you never shall, or can be
fitted for this Privilege? What Minister of Christ have you ever consulted
about it? It may be you mistake the very Notion of the Lord's Supper, and
understand not the True Nature and Design of it. Have you set apart time, to
search your Hearts, and examine your Consciences, and Repent of all Sin, and
give up your selves to God in Christ, and beg the help of Ministers and Friends
to that purpose?

6. Therefore let me ask you again, Is not your Unfitness from sloth and
Idleness, or the distracting hurry of Worldly Affairs, that you cannot be
brought to spare so much time, as is necessary for this Work? How will you
Answer this at the Great Day? Will you then have the Courage to tell the Lord
Redeemer to his Face, what this Pretense amounts to? Will you tell him in that
Awful Solemnity, Lord, I would not have omitted the Ordinance of the Supper,
but have remembered Thee, and thy dying Love, by breaking of bread; But, I was
unfit for it, altogether unfit, because my Mind was distracted with the cares
of the World: I had so much of other matters all the Week, from Month to
Month, to take up my Thoughts and Time, that I had no leisure for serious
Preparation. What self-condemning Excuses will these prove at last?

Lastly. Is there not yet something worse at the bottom, viz. That you are
unwilling of that strictness and seriousness, that you think such are obliged
to, as come to the Lord's Table? Unwilling of that circumspect walking which
such, of all others, should be exemplary in? Are you not afraid, that if you
come, you must abridge your selves of some Liberties, that you now take? That
you must be more constant in secret Prayer; That you must set up daily Family
Prayer in your houses; That you must spend more Time in Reading; be more
careful of your Company, and be more faithful and exact in your Dealings, and
do many things that now you neglect?

How dreadful is the Import of such an Excuse for not Coming? of such a Ground
for staying away. For it seems to lie in this, That Men are resolved they will
live at large, and not be bound up by the Rules of the Gospel; That is, They
never mean to take upon them the Yoke of Christ, or to live as his Disciples;
If they would speak it out, it must signify thus much; Thou shall not be my
Lord and Redeemer, I will not deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and live
Soberly, and Righteously, and Godly, in this World; Notwithstanding my baptism,
whereby I have sworn Fidelity to Christ, he shall not reign over me. This is
practically, and, in effect, their Sense: For this Command and Order, to do
this in Remembrance of Christ, is as much a Law of Christ, as any in the Bible;
And yet many refuse to obey this Command, lest they should be obliged more
strictly to obey all the other. How little do such Professors consider, how
unbecoming it is to call themselves Christians; or that they are, (Antecedently
by their Baptism and Christian Profession) bound to obey Christ in all these
Instances: And at the Lord's Table we do but renew the Obligation upon our
selves to do so. We are bound to obey Christ as our Ruler, and to yield
Obedience to all the Laws of Christ, whether we come to this Table or no;
Though we are also bound to come, and to profess and promise Obedience there.

There are other Objections I may consider hereafter, and therefore shall now
close with a few words of Counsel.

1. Let those of us, who have eaten of this Bread, and drunk of this Cup, and
so have professedly had Communion in the Body and Blood of Christ; Let us
Examine whether we have really and truly had any Fellowship with him in this
Ordinance, or no; Whether we have only partaked of the outward Signs, and been
present at such a Feast of Love, without any Spiritual Nourishment to our
Souls. Without attending to this, the Design of the Institution is overlooked,
and all the Genuine Advantages of it will be lost. Without this, we have but
played the Hypocrites, and Acted a Part, and shall pay dear for our Solemn
Trifling, as having slighted the Redeemer's Love, and made our selves Guilty of
his body and blood.

If we have not labored to see the Evil of Sin, and to have our hatred of it
increased. If we have not found our Hearts set more against it, and our
Resolutions confirmed to forsake it. If we have not felt the Attractive
Influence of the Love of Christ, to bring us to Adore him, and Magnify his
Condescension and Love If we have not had Admiring Thoughts of the blessed God,
of the Purity of his Nature, the Justice of his Government, and all his
Excellent Perfections, which are so highly honored in our Redemption by the
bloody Sacrifice of Christ. If we have not been cordial and unfeigned in the
Dedication of our selves to him, and all we have, and are, to be at his Dispose
and Order for the rest of our Time. If we have not had our Thoughts raised up
to Heaven, to a risen glorified Redeemer on his Throne, as triumphing over all
the Adversaries of our Salvation, as able to save to the uttermost All that
come to God by him, as faithful to complete what he has begun, and to preserve
what is committed to him, and to give us the full purchase of his Meritorious
Death in the Heavenly Kingdom.

And if we have not been melted under the sense of pardoning, Mercy to our
selves, and brought to a better Temper of Mind, as to the Forgiveness of
Others. If we have not had Love to our Fellow Christians more excited in us, to
all that are Members of the same Body; though they err and mistake, though they
diner from us, though they be angry with us, though they think hardly of us,
and speak hardly against us: Yet if we have not had our Spirits brought to a
Temper able to forgive them, to pray for them, and be ready to do them good,
etc. We cannot say, we have had Communion with Christ in his Ordinance. For
such Effects as these will follow upon it; Or rather it is in these things,
wherein a great part of our Spiritual Communion does consist.

2. If there have been any thing of this kind, bless God for such a merciful
Season: For this is the Real Advantage and Good of any such Ordinance, when it
Rectifies our Spirits, and betters our frame, and subdues our Corruptions, and
recovers us from our backslidings, and gives us any thing more of the Divine
Image and Likeness, and makes us hate Sin more, and love God and one another
better. This is the Real Advantage of such Seasons; These are gainful
Opportunities indeed, where these Things are Attained, where in any measure
there are such Consequences of Approaching to the Lord's Table.

3. Let us endeavor hence-forward to walk worthy of such a Privilege, and
long for the Repetition of it. Let us watch our Spirits this Evening, and to
Morrow, and the following Week and Month; that we may not presently lose the
Savor of these things, by secular and common Discourse, and vain Converse:
When we go away from the Public Worship, let us spend the Remainder of the Day
in such Offices, and Exercises of Religion, as may Assist us to prosecute our
Great Design, and may strengthen the Vows of God, into which we have newly
entered.

And let us show we like his Fare, and are pleased with the Entertainments of
his House, by desiring more such Opportunities, and by Improving them whenever
they return. One thing have I desired of the Lord, says the Psalmist, and that
will I seek after, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord for ever. By this
means we should endeavor to become growing, thriving, fruitful, humble,
self-denying, heavenly, exemplary Christians, walking worthy of our High and
Holy Calling, purifying our selves more and more from all filthiness of Flesh
and Spirit. That our Hearts may be more fixed for God and Christ, against all
Competitors, and under all Discouragements. That Christ Jesus may have the more
entire Possession of our Souls, and the Service of our Lives. That his Love
being shed abroad in our Hearts, nothing may ever be able to separate us from
it. That whether we live or dye, Christ may be All in All to us. Who has loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. To Him be Glory, throughout
all the Churches for ever. Amen.

The Fifth Discourse, Before The LORD's SUPPER. THE Sin and Danger OF Unworthy
Receiving.
From 1 COR. XI.xxix: He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself.


SO deep and General is the Corruption of Mankind, that it may truly be said of
very Many, whose Carriage and Conversation is fair and unspotted, that they are
rather restrained by the Fear of Punishment, than of Guilt; of being Sufferers
rather than of being Criminal. Such an Error, it is true, is injurious to the
Dignity of the Divine Law, and to the Honor and Authority of God's Government:
Nevertheless God does so far Accommodate himself to our State, as to Rule us by
Moral Arguments, that are proper to Influence our Hopes and Fears; and
therefore employs Threatenings as well as Promises, and punishes some, as
Examples of Severity, to warn others from the like Transgressions.

This Method the Apostle makes use of, in this and the foregoing Chapter, when
he designed to Reform the scandalous Abuse of the Lord's Supper, which these
Corinthians were guilty of. After he had Explained the Nature of the
Institution, and opened the Design and End of it, he had Represented it, as the
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ: He tells them what most manifestly
follows from thence, viz. The Greatness of the Sin, to eat of that Bread, and
drink of that Cup unworthily; that if they do it without Self Examination, they
are guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord; They offend against the Lord
Redeemer, who has appointed this Sacred Rite, and even against his Body and
Blood, which are Signified and Represented by the Bread and Wine, as the
Memorial and Sign of it.

This, to those that have any due Regard to the Authority and Love of a dying
Savior, one would think should be Argument enough; But least it should not,
besides the Declaration of their Sin, he Denounces the Punishment of it in
these Words; That such do eat and drink Damnation to themselves.

Wherein we have First, The Description of their Punishment, who do unworthily
partake of the Lord's Supper, That they eat and drink Damnation to themselves.
Secondly, the Reason of that Punishment, intimated in the Nature and kind of
their Sin, That they discern not the Lord's Body.

Before I consider the Punishment of Unworthy Receivers, it will be proper to
open a little the Nature of their Sin, mentioned in the latter part of the
Verse, Not discerning the Lord's Body. This may refer to the foregoing
Expression, of being Guilty of his body and blood; and the one Phrase will give
light to the other: Such as receive Unworthily, are Guilty of the body and
blood of Christ, because they do not discern, and distinguish it aright; They
do not think of it as they ought; They do not carry it suitable to its
Excellent Nature and Use; and so they eat and drink Judgment to themselves, by
not discerning the Lord's body; And thereby are Criminal against the Person of
the Redeemer, as clothed with Human Nature, and as giving the Memorials of his
body and blood separated, to betoken his Death and Sufferings. For so we
remember a crucified Savior in this Ordinance. It is therefore no wonder, if
such a Fault be severely punished.

That which we Translate Discern, it is well known, signifies to make a
difference between one thing and another; as Acts 15.19. So, not to discern the
Lord's body, is not to difference and distinguish concerning it, to look no
further than the outward sense, not to make a difference between common and
sacramental bread, not to eye the body and blood of Christ, as signified by the
Sacramental Elements; not to remember or consider his cruel Sufferings, which
this should put us in Mind of. This, be sure, is not to discern his body.

But few can be supposed so ignorant, as not speculatively to discern and
distinguish in this case. But practically to do so, is a greater matt^r; it
Imports, to mind, to attend to, to esteem, to honor; to apply, to use the
body, and blood of Christ, and the sign, and the Memorial of it, according to
its Dignity and Excellency: And thereupon to compose the outward and inward
Man, in partaking of this Ordinance, as those that know we have to do with
Christ himself, and that the body and blood of Jesus Christ, is Referred to by
the Bread and Wine. Such a discerning of his body would help to compose us to
serious Reverence, would awaken suitable Affections. would excite the Exercise
of Repentance, Faith, Love, Thankfulness and Joy, answerable to the Nature of
this Feast of Love, upon the Sacrifice of Christ. This would Regulate the
Behavior of our Bodies, and the Temper of our Spirits, the Government of our
Thoughts, and the Motions of our Affections, and make us Worthy Receivers. The
Neglect of this, the not thus discerning the Lord's body, is the Sin here
mentioned, and thereby they are Guilty of the body and blood of the Redeemer,
i. e. They are Profanely Injurious to the very Person of Christ, they treat his
sacred body and precious blood unworthily, and with Contempt. It is a Guilt
like theirs, that abused and crucified the Lord himself, when he was upon
Earth; It is a Sin against the body of Jesus Christ, against his Humanity;
which of all Creatures that ever were upon Earth, or that are now in Heaven, is
the most Sacred. The Affront, Contempt and Injury, Redounds to the blessed
Redeemer, as God Incarnate, as having our Nature now in Heaven: it is an Injury
to the body of Christ: That Body wherein he bore our Sins upon the Cross;
wherein as a Sacrifice for Sin, he offered himself to God; That Body that was
prepared for him, and formed by the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin; that
was afterward Gloriously raised from the Dead to a Divine Life, and is now in
Heaven, the Wonder and Admiration of the blessed Angels, and Raised to a State
of Glory there, as the Pledge and Earnest of our Resurrection and Bliss. The
not discerning the Lord's body, has such a Guilt as this Employed in it.

2. The Punishment of this Sin of Unworthy Receiving, (expressed by not
discerning the Lor'ds body,) is here set forth by Eating and Drinking Damnation
to our our selves, or Judgment to our selves. That is, As sure as he eats and
drinks, if he do it unworthily; So certain it is, that Judgment shall follow;
he eats and drinks Judgment to himself. That Addition, To himself, may denote
two Things:

First, That the whole blame should be laid upon our selves; If such a Divine
Institution, designed for the Spiritual Good and Advantage of our Souls, do
prove to our Detriment and Damage: In such a case, it is we our selves that are
the sole Cause of it.

Secondly, The Expression may Import further, That such as Receive Unworthily,
they only hurt and defile Themselves, but not other Men that communicate with
them. You may partake worthily, and to Edification, while Another, by unworthy
Receiving, that sits in the same Pew, may Eat and drink Judgment and
condemnation; but he eats and drinks Judgment to himself only, not to You.
Ephesians. 4.5. Every man shall bear his own burden: Let every man prove his own
work. It cannot be thought, that our Lord was defiled by coming to the Baptism
of John, when there were such a Generation of Vipers who came to it, as well as
Christ: Or that our Lord and the Eleven Apostles were defiled by the company of
Judas at the Passover-Supper: For there be sure he was; The Lord's Supper was
at the close of it: And for his being present at that also, many contend,
though See Mr. Charnock, Of the Lord's Supper, 2d. Vol. p. 7^3 Compared with
Mr. Kettlewell, Of the Lord's Supper, 12o 1687. p. 387, 388, etc. The one for
his being Present, the other against it.
Others think it probable, that he went out before.

But the presence of some unworthy persons is made an Argument by many against
their Partaking of the Lord's Supper, in such or such a particular Church, as
if their presence would defile and infect them.

This therefore I shall consider as one Objection, which several are apt to
make against the Performance of this Duty, Of frequent remembering the Death of
Christ at his Table.

And then, Secondly, Consider the other Objection, from this Text, viz. From
the Danger of Receiving Unworthily, lest they should Eat and Drink Damnation to
themselves. And,

Thirdly, What many more are wont to plead, That the Danger being so great,
they durst not Adventure, till they know that they are Believers, or such as
are Invited: For, it is Children's bread, and they durst not come till they are
Assured of their Regeneration and Adoption. I shall therefore enquire, Whether
any ought to come to the Lord's Table, till they have Assurance, or while they
want it.

1. It is Objected by many, That they do not Communicate, because there are
such and such Admitted, who ought not to come to the Table of the Lord: Such as
walk disorderly, who discredit their Profession, and are as bad as any of their
Neighbors, and Acquaintance. And the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 5.10. That with such
we should not so much as eat. That we should have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. That we should withdraw, and
separate, and have no free familiarity with such. 2 These. 3.6. 2 Timothy 3.5. 2
Cor. 6.17.

I Answer, First, That the Separation from Wicked Men required in such Passages
of Holy Scripture, refers to our intimate Converse and Familiarity with such,
who live in notorious and scandalous Sins, and do not Testify their
Repentance; We must avoid their company lest we be Infected: And there is much
more danger of Infection, by Familiarity with them in daily Converse, than by
joining with them in Religious Duties. But we must be careful not to call those
Ungodly, whom we cannot prove to be so; we should rather hope they are not,
unless we can prove the contrary. What Sins are there, that even a good Man, by
the surprise of a Temptation, may not commit, who yet mourns in secret, and
truly Repents? It may be you may have heard of the Sins of many, of whose
Repentance you have not heard; And yet they might truly Repent, and you might
know it, if you would enquire. But where the mixture of the ^ares and the Wheat
is such, that the one cannot be pulled up without the other; both must grow
together till the Harvest. Such a Difference as God will make at the last Day,
cannot now be made by us.

We may safer let the Righteous and Wicked go together, as if all were
Righteous, when we cannot prove the contrary; And we do not therein make a
false Judgment: we do not judge, that it is certain that such and such are
Sincere, and truly Godly, but that it is probable they may be so. And we may
have a stronger Confidence concerning the Sincerity of Some, while we have only
probable Hopes of Others; yea with such Hopes there may be some Fear of their
Hypocrisy joined, when yet there is not sufficient Evidence against such to
bar them from the Lord's Table; much less to exclude them after once they are
Admitted to such a Privilege. A seemingly serious Profession, if not
contradicted by a contrary Profession of Words or Actions, is the Evidence of
Men's Interest in Church Priviledges, See Mr. Baxter's third Disput. Of Right
to Sacraments, 410.
in Foro Ecclesiae. Charity believes all things, and hops all things.

2. You ought first in Charity to reprove the guilty Persons, as you have
opportunity, and to acq^aint the Pastors of the Churches, that they may deal
faithfully with them in order to their Repentance* and Several by such means
may be brought to give you Satisfaction concerning their true Repentance, and
Amendment. But there are many who are so far from this, that, on the contrary,
they solicit and tempt men to Sin, if they know they come to the Lords Table,
that they may find occasion to reproach Re^igion: and others applaud and
consent with such as do this, that they may shame Religion by the
Irregularities, and Excesses of some that profess it. Such have a dreadful
Account to give to God. And so have they, who come to the Lords Table, and yet
by their Drunkenness, or Unfaithfulness, their Worldlyness, or Unrighteousness,
or any disorderly walking, do give occasion to such an Objection, and open the
mouths of Enemies to reflect Dishonor, and Reproach upon the Profession of
Religion in General, and upon that particular Church or Congregati^n, unto
which they are joined. Such have a double Guilt to answer for, and woe be to
them, if they do not Repent. Such as these we often warn not to come to the
Lord's Table, till they give some good Testimony of their Repentance, and so
far as they are known, they ought to be refused.

3. If you know of a purer Communion, where there are none but Saints, at least
such as you are strongly confident to be so; rather go and join with them, and
communicate there, but do not live in the neglect and omission of this Duty.
For I am not pleading for any particular Church, or Society of Christians, but
only speaking of the Duty in general, of all sincere Christians, to join
somewhere, for the Participation of this Ordinance. If you are scrupulous as to
the Company admitted in some Christian Assemblies, and know of Others, which
you think are purer, where you believe you can statedly communicate more to
your Edification, do it without Delay. You are allowed by God, (and at present
by the Laws of the Land too) to choose your own Pastor.

4. However you ought to consider, That it is impossible but some Hypocrites,
and false Professors* will be Admitted to the Lord's Table. Not only as Pride,
and Covetousness, and Envy, and some such Sins, are hard to be defined, so as
to convince a particular Person, that in a prevailing Degree he is guilty of
these: Not only as it is hard to determine what particular Acts, now and then,
of grosser Sins, are consistent with true Grace: But because the Tares and
Wheat are mixed together in the visible Church, and All are not Israel that are
of Israel. If we will Communicate with none but Saints, there is no Church on
Earth we can join with, without Fear and Doubting. So that if the Errors and
Faults of the Pastors, or of the People, with whom we join in the Worship of
God, do defile us, and make us guilty,; or if our Communion with them upon that
account, be a Sin, we should join no where at all.

It Is true, If the Doctrine, Ordinances, and Worship of any Church be so
corrupted, as that the Substance of the Worship is unlawful, Separation is a
Duty: For when any Thing sinful is required of us, as necessary to our
Communion; in such Cases, Separation is a Christians Duty. See Mr. Vines, On
the Lord's Supper, Chap. 20.
But to keep from the Ordinance, because some come unworthily to it, has no
Order or Command of Christ to warrant it. Though he had many Things against the
Seven Asian Churches, Rev. 2.3. yet he did not call them to separate; but there
are Promises to them, if they keep themselves pure.

5. If it be unavoidable to Communicate with some such, as are not sincere
Christians, then to do so is not unlawful. Every one is to Examine himself; so
says the Apostle to these Corinthians, among whom there were so many unworthy
Communicants; and if they Eat and drink unworthily, they did Eat and drink
Judgment to Themselves. Though the Apostle speaks of the Profanation of that
Ordinance by Some, he does not bid Others Withdraw, and Separate upon that
Account. Christ has commanded thee to Examine thy self, and so eat; but it is
not necessary thou should Examine and know the fitness of all Others. How
would you know when to Communicate, if we may not do it, till Others be
prepared as well as we. Great Strictness, and Severity should be used in
Judging of our selves, and our own Case; but we must use Great charity, and
tenderness, as to the case of Others; and not conclude them Hypocrites, when we
cannot tell but they truly Repent. But if they do not, their Presence cannot
pollute me, if I endeavor to discharge my Duty, by personal private Reproof;
and then if that be unsuccessful, with Others, and afterward by acquainting
the Pastors of the Church, etc.

If I have Right to come to the Lord's Table, shall the coming of Another that
has none, bar my Right? Shall I sin in keeping from the Ordinance, because
another sins in coming to it? Or because the Church, or the Pastor sins in not
Exclu^ing of him? The power of the Keys is not in my hand, I have no Authority
to cast out such a Member. And though that particular Pastor, or Church should
be faulty in not doing of it, it is not yet a sufficient ground o^ my
Separation, Rev. 2.14.15.20. It I have a Wedding Garment, I will come to the
Marriage Feast, though there should be Others there that have none. Should not
I offer my Gift at the Altar, because my Neighbor comes there with me, who
should first go, and be reconciled to his brother? I may relish and digest my
Food, though there is one who sits by me, who has a weak Stomach and a bad
Digestion. If I am duly prepared, it will not hurt me that Another is not:
Whilst I partake not of other Men's Sins, surely I may join with them, in the
Performance of necessary Duties.

I say not, That the Wicked and the Unregenerate ought to come; you often hear
me declare the contrary, such are forbidden to come. But if they will come
under a false profession, and show of Religion, after having been forewarned of
their Danger, and been faithfully told their Duty: It is at their own Peril,
and they eat and drink Judgment to themselves, and to no body else: For,
neither a Minister of Christ, nor a private Christian, can deny Communion with
several persons, who if they would judge righteous Judgment concerning
themselves ought to tarry away: As having no Right before God to come to the
Table of the Lord, as the Case is with them at present.

In short. It is unlawful to Communicate with Wicked Men, if they be so bad,
and their Number so great, as that it is our Duty to forsake such a Church: If
Heresy and Impiety be justified by the Major Vote, and bare down Faith and
Godliness, then that particular Society is incapable of the Ends of
Church Communion, and so to join there would be sinful. But in Cases of lesser
Irregularity, if we do not sin by the Neglect of our Duty, it will be no sin of
ours to Communicate with that Church, though Unworthy Persons be Admitted. The
Sins of the Pastor, and of particular Delinquents, are not ours; much less may
we refuse Communion upon the account of other Men's Faults, when we have not
done our Duty in order to the Remedy and Cure of them.

2. Object. But others will say, I am truly afraid to venture; the Danger of
Unworthy Receiving is so very great, that it makes me tremble to consider it. I
have been many years frighted with your Text, That he that Eats and Drinks
Unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself.

Answ. 1. The Word which we translate Damnation, signifies only Judgment, or
Punishment in the general, and so is used in several places. What Judgment
therefore is meant, the Context must determine; And that speaks principally of
Temporal Punishments; for such are mentioned, Verse 30. as inflicted on the
Corinthians, for the Profanation of this Ordinance. For this cause some of you
are sick and weak, and many are fallen asleep. Besides, the Reason that is
assigned for these Punishments, or Judgments, was, That they might not be
condemned with the World, Verse 32. For when we are judged, says the Apostle;
It is the same word; it may be as well Rendered Damned, as that in the Text,
Damnation. But when we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we may not
be condemned with the World. God did thus judge, or punish the Corinthians in
this World, that they might be Reformed, and not perish Eternally. So that he
who Eats and drinks unworthily, may fear lest his Contempt and Profanation of
the Ordinanance, be followed by some Remarkable Jugdment of God, at least it
was so in the Apostle's time.

2. Conside^ (...) That the Disorders committed by the Corinthians, and
occasioned by their Love Feasts that preceded the Lord's Supper; They were such
as were peculiar to those Times, and are now Abolished and disused. Christians
then Feasted by themselves in their Religious Assemblies, in Imitation of what
the Heathens did in their Idol-Temples. The Rich sent in their own Provisions,
and every one contributed to this Feast, by bringing some Portion; but there
they banded into several Parties as they came, without tarrying one for
another, and feeding lovingly together: Every one fell to that Portion of Meat
which he brought, as if they were at home, when it should have been divided in
Common, and the Poor have had their share: Whereas, says the Apostle, Some are
hungry, and others intemperate, and drunken. This they are taxed with in the
22. Ver. What, says he, have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? They made
little or no Difference between these Love Feasts, and the Lord's Supper at the
close of them; between these Sacred Symbols of our Lord's Body, and Blood, and
common Food and Drink. They were in the House and Worship of God, just as in
their own, and made no Distinction between this and a common Meal. Nay, it was
worse, They turned this Ordinance into a drunken Club, or a Riotous
Entertainment, making it an Instrument and Occasion of Debauchery. This was
Eating and Drinking Unworthily indeed; and no wonder if God did so severely
punish them for it. The Apostle Jude taxes these Love Feasts, Verse 12. But
there is no danger of such Excesses at the Lord's Table now, or of eating and
drinking Unworthily in the same manner as the Corinthians did.

3. If we take Damnation for Eternal punishment, which Unworthy Receiving does
without Repentance expose to: Yet consider, that the Wages of every Sin is
Eternal Death. And you have the same Reason to be afraid of Other Sins, because
you run the same Hazard. The Sacrifices of the Wicked God abhors; And the very
Prayers of the Hpocrite, are an Abomination to him. But,

4. Consider, That by eating and dri^king his own Damnation, the Apostle does
not mean, that every such Person shall certainly and inevitably be damned; but
that (without Repentance) it is a damning Sin: Unworthy eating is so, and so is
sinful abstaining too, without Repentance: And why so much Tenderness in the
one Case, and not in the other? No Man needs be blamed for being unwilling to
Damn himself: But why should Men be fearful of it in this Instance, and not in
others? Infidelity, Disobedience, and Impenitence, will as certainly expose a
Man to Damnation, without the Sacrament, as with it. And they cannot fairly
urge the Fear of Damnation against coming to it, who are not restrained thereby
from other sins, as damning as this.

5. That therefore which the Apostles words will most properly infer, and
direct us to is this. That si^ce we are required, i^ Obedience to Christ, to do
this in rememb ance of him, and yet such severe Punishments are threetned to
those that do it unworthily; The plain consequence is this, That we should not
omit it, beca^se of the Command; nor yet carelessly undertake it, because of the
threatened Ju^gment. But it will by no means excuse, or plead for the total
neglect, and omission of it.

It Is plain, the Apostle never thought that the sin and danger of doing a Duty
amiss, might be made an Exception against the doing i^ at all; or that
threatening Damnation to eating a d drinking unwo thily, should f^are Men from
eating and drinking at all. He takes what care he can, that the Duty may be
performed* and the Err r in doing it, may be effectually prevented: But never
makes the Danger of the one a Dispensation from the other. He tells them of the
sin, to eat and drink unworthily and of the punishment it makes 'em obnoxious
to, but he does not therefore tell 'em, they may stay away from the Sacrament,
for fear of committing the sin, or of incurring the Danger: Not even in that
case, where they were actually Guilty, and really Punished.

6. You ought to consider, That you will but increase your Sin and aggravate
your Damnation, by all the other Duties of Religion, and other parts of Divine
Worship, if you continue Impenitent. You are often told, that you ought not to
come to this Table, till you Repent, and turn to God in Christ with all your
heart and give up your selves entirely to be the Lord's: But if you do not
Resolve to do so, the same Argument will hold for the neglect of Prayer, and
other parts of Divine Worship: All these will aggravate your sin; But the
Possibility of doing other Services of Religion amiss, is not counted a
sufficient Reason for the not doing 'em.

After all such pretenses and excuses, there is too much Reason to think, that
the most are afraid of coming to this Ordinance, lest the preparing for it, and
the consequent Duties which they know are required, should interrupt their
Sensual Pleasures, or their inordinate Prosecution of the World, and oblige
them to leave their sins, which, as yet, they have no mind to part with. Such
as these ought not to come indeed, they have other work first to do: They are
first called to Repentance, and Faith in Christ, and afterward to the
Communion of his Body and Blood. They are called to understand and own their
Baptismal Covenant by the Answer of a good Conscience, and then to renew it at
the Table of the Lord; This Privilege belongs not to them, till they have
truly repented, and forsaken sin, and yielded themselves to be the Lord's.

3. Object. But others are ready to say, I would come, and have had many a
Thought about it; But I doubt of my own Sincerity, and the truth of my Grace; I
know it is Childrens Bread, and I am not certain I am one of that number. And
does not the Apostle tell us, That he that doubts, is damned if he eat? Now I
doubt whether I am passed from Death to Life or no; May such a one as I venture
to come, who have no Assurance that I am in a State of Grace? Are all those
unworthy, and unfit to come, who come in any other State of Soul, than they
think they may safely dye in?

Several things may be said in Answer to this.

1. That many mistake the Nature of true Faith and Sincerity, and think, if
they have not Assurance of the Love of God, that therefore they have no true
Faith. They make saving Justifying Faith to consist in believing the special
Love of Christ to their Souls, in believing that their sins are pardoned, and
that they are in Christ. But this is a dangerous Mistake, which one would
wonder, under such clear Light as we enjoy, should be so common.

For how unspeakable is the Difference between the Truth of Grace, and the
Knowledge of its being true; between a hearty Consent to the Terms of the
Covenant, and the Reflex Act of Faith, so as to be able to say, I know my
Interest in the Covenant. Many a false Professor may flatter himself, that his
Faith is true, when it is not; and many an Upright Christian may doubt and
question, Whether he be one or no? But the Latter shall one Day be ashamed of
their Fears, as the Former of their Hopes. The Lord knows who are his, when
many that are His, do not know it themselves. And if a Minister of Christ will
ask a few home close Questions of such doubting, trembling Christians, by which
their hearty consent to the Covenant may be judged of: Their Answers plainly
show, That they believe in Christ, and love him above all the World, and regard
no Iniquity in their hearts; And yet will continue to doubt of their Integrity,
though the Bent of their Hearts, and the Endeavors of their Lives, do
abundantly prove that they are Sincere.

2ly. However, it may ordinarily be known whether your Faith be of the right
kind or no; and whether you are Upright toward God or no. We are bid to
Examine, and Search, and try, and prove our selves, in order to it; that we may
find the Mark and Impress of God upon our Souls, the Fruits of the sanctifying
Spirit there, and so have Rejoicing in our selves, and not in another. It is so
far from being unlawful to collect Comfort from the Marks and Signs of our
Sanctification, and to prove our Union to Christ, and Justification that way;
that it is the very Method of the Gospel, to direct us to know our State
toward God, by thus looking inward, to find the Image of Christ upon the Soul,
and by observing the Fruits of the Spirit in a godly Conversation.

Such doubting Christians would do well to Consult some Faithful Minister of
Christ, and Represent the State of their own Case, what they feel; that so they
may be told what it does signify, and be helped to judge of themselves.

It is granted, that you know how it is with you, better than any Minister can
do: For, as Mr. Baxter.
One well expresses it, A Patient knows better than any Physician what he
feels; but a Physician when he hears it, can tell from what Cause it comes, and
what is the Nature of the Disease, and what is like to come of it, and what is
the proper Method for a Cure.

There is a great deal of Reason, why you should expect and hope for the
Resolution of your Doubts in such Cases, by consulting some Minister of Christ;
especially him, under whose Ministry you have chosen to place your selves, as
the Helper of your Faith, and Joy.

3. The Penitent Christian, though he want Assurance, is Accepted of God, and
has Right to this Ordinance, whether he believe it or no. If you unfeignedly
consent to the Covenant of Grace, and with an humble penitent Sense of your
past Sins, are willing and desirous to close with Christ, on the Terms of the
Gospel, That God shall be your God, and Christ your Redeemer and Lord, and the
Holy Spirit your Sanctifier and Guide; If you are willing, heartily willing, to
give up your selves to be instructed, ruled, and saved by him: This is the very
Heart of saving Faith. And if this be your Character, you are the Members of
Christ, and ought to come to the Lord's Table: For though your timorousness,
and present Scruples may make you Suspend for awhile, they cannot deprive you
of your Right to the Ordinance; nor disoblige you from the Duty of coming to
it. For All such who unfeignedly consent to the Covenant, they may, and ought
to come, to signify their Consent, and to receive the Seal of the Covenant.

4. Every Christian ought to endeavor to know his State; lest they be
distracted between the Hopes of God's Acceptance of them on the one hand, and
the Fears of coming Unworthily on the other. Because they doubt of their
Worhtiness, they fear to come: And because they have some good Hope, they dare
not stay away, lest they neglect their Duty.

The proper Remedy, is to Resolve Unfeignedly to please God, and obey him in
this, and all other Instances; and then do this in Remembrance of Christ, as
what all his Followers are obliged to do. It may be that Ignorance of thy
State, from whence thy Doubts proceeds, is owing to the Neglect of Self
Examination, and the use of proper Means to know thy Self.

5. It may yet be Advisable for some melancholy tempted Persons, under some
perplexing Doubts, to stay away for awhile, till they have competently
overcome their Fear; lest they should get more hurt than good, and be even
swallowed up with Desperation, should they come; while they use better Means to
be acquainted with themselves. It is better for them to do so, than that all
the Hypocrites, and Impenitent persons in the Congregation, should be told it
is their Duty to come to the Lord's Table, if they can but make themselves
uncertain, whether they be Impenitent or no.

6. However, he that, upon the best Search and Examination of himself, as to
his Heart and Life, can say, That it is true, I am not certain, that my Heart
is sincere with God in his Covenant; yet I must say, (and blessed be God that I
can say it,) that as far as I know my own Heart, I think I do truly Repent of
all my past Sins, and that I do unfeignedly consent to the Covenant; I am not
fully sure, but so far as I know my own Heart, I do. Such a one may come to the
Lord's Table, and find Welcome.

And the Truth is, if None should come but such as have full Assurance, and a
Certainty of their Salvation; I think in most places there would be very few
Communicants: very many of you that do come would tarry away, and ought to do
so, and I should be one of the Number.

7. As to the Apostle's Expression, Romans 14.24. He that doubts is dam^ed if he
eat. In the Original it is, Is self condemned. But it is not meant of eating at
the Lord's Table, but of eating Meats, which he doubts whether it be lawful to
eat of, when at the same time he knows it is lawful to forbear. In cases of
such indifferent things, the safest course is to forbear; but in a case of
Duty, your doubting alone will not disoblige you: Else Men might give over any
Duty, without sin, if they are but blind, or erroneous enough to doubt whether
it be a Duty. If thou art a real upright Christian, though a doubting one, thy
doubts will not make the neglect of this Ordinance not to be a sin.

8. Be sure of this, He that endeavors not, to know his State, and to be
prepared to come to this Ordinance, he lives in continual sin. Let them
consider it, who fright themselves with the danger of coming unworthily, but
seldom think of the sin and danger of not coming at all. He that continues in
his sin, and will adventure to eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, he
shall be judged and punished; and so shall he that stays away, and will not pay
this part of Homage and Worship unto Christ, which he requires of all his
Followers, in Remembrance of his dying Love: He who is not fit company for
Christ, and the Faithful, at this Feast of Love, cannot be in a good and safe
condition; his Business is to Repent, and to get Ready.

9. Let weak Christians, who have some Doubts remaining, consider, That this
Ordinance is appointed for an help to weak Faith. The Seals of the Covenant are
for greater Confirmation to us, That the Heirs of the Promise might have
abunddant Consolation. In this Sacrament God speaks more solemnly, more
particularly, more affectionately to us, for the help of our Faith. A sealed
Pardon is here offered to every one by Name. That which is spoken in general by
the preaching of the Word, is here particularly applied to individual persons.
And usually the sincerely Penitent get Relief and Comfort, against their
Doubts, and Jealousies, and Fears, by Obedience to Christ in this Ordinance. To
Allude to that Expression, Luke 24.30. Christ was known to his Disciples in
breaking of Bread. I say Allude to it, for I question whether that was
Sacramental Bread; though Dr. Bury, and others.
some plead strongly for it.

Lastly, If we have any good Hope through Grace, notwithstanding some Remaining
Doubts and Fears; though we cannot come with Assurance, we may come humbly and
penitently. We may give up our selves again to God in Christ as his Servants,
though we cannot say certainly, that he is our Savior. We are Sinners, and
need a Pardon; we are penitent Sinners, and are desirous of one. If we do not
know we are pardoned Sinners, yet let us come penitently, humbling our selves
before him, under the sense of our Vileness, as knowing we need a Savior to
Reconcile and Justify us. Let us look upon him as the Savior, whom we have
pierced whom we have crucified, if we cannot look upon him as Ours in special
Covenant. Let us take shame to our selves, and acknowledge the Guilt of our
Sin, though we cannot apply the Comfort of his Salvation. You may come ( Dr.
Manton.
says One) with brokenness of Heart for Sin, when you cannot come with the Joy
and Rejoicing of Assured Believers. You may hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, and have earnest, eager, fervent Desires after him; though you
cannot, dare not, Glory in him as yours.

Let us therefore Apply our selves to him as we can, though we cannot Apply him
to our selves as we would. Let us stir up the Grace that is in us, do our best,
use the weak Faith we have, and say, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief. I
cannot say, it may be, with the Apostle, That the Life I live, is by the Faith
of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me: But I can say with
the same Apostle, in another place, That this is a Faithful Saying, and worthy
of all Acceptance, That Christ came into the World to save Sinners, of whom I
am Chief. I cannot say as yet, My beloved is mine; But I must say, I will say,
that I am his; I resolve to be so, wholly, only, entirely, unreservedly,
everlastingly his. Lord, I am thine, says David; O save me, for I am thine. It
would be more comfortable if we could say, Lord, thou art mine; Thou have
accepted me in thy Christ, Thou have placed thy Image and Love upon me, and
Adopted me into thy Family. But though I cannot say, Thou art thus mine; yet
this I can say, I am thine by my own choice, I am thine by the Resignation of
my self, and all I have to thee; I am thine by entire Devotedness to thee, and
sincere Desire to please thee: I am thine, and if thou cast me off, and reject
me, and I perish for ever; there shall one perish that was heartily resolved to
be the Lord's; and this I hope, believe, and know, shall never be.

To conclude therefore, You that want Assurance, who are filled with Doubts and
Fears concerning your State, and therefore keep from the Lord's Table, you must
endeavor to come in this manner. For my own part, I must profess, (though I
hope it is better with some stronger Christians) that this last mentioned
Particular is very often to me, the Support and stay of my Soul. And thanks be
to God, if in the Sincerity of our Hearts we can reach this; we may then expect
to meet with Welcome, and Consolation. But if we do not, though we should never
have sensible Consolation, and full Assurance, and raised Joys, at the Table of
the Lord, never while we live; yet the Authority of Christ requiring us, To do
this in Remembrance of him, should be enough to determine our Practice, against
all the little Cavils and Objections, that may be made against it. O let us not
be wanting in our Duty, and the God of Love and Grace, who is the Father of
Mercies, and our Gracious Redeemer, of whose Compassion we have had such large
and dear Experience, will never be wanting to those, who diligently and
sincerely seek him.

THE END.
The Sixth Discourse, After the LORD'S SUPPER. OF Christ's Last Passover, And
its Accomplishment.
From LUKE XXII. 15, 16, 17, 18. With desire have I desired to eat this
Passover with you before I suffer.

For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in
the Kingdom of God.

And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and said, Take this, and divide it among
your selves.

For I say unto you, I will not drink of the Fruit of the Vine, until the
Kingdom of God shall come.


GReater Love has no Man than this, says our Blessed Lord, than to lay down
his Life for his Friend; To part with that for Another, which, of all things,
is the dearest and the most valuable to himself. In all Ages of the Christian
Church, there have been some, ready to give this Proof of their Love to Him who
spoke these words, by not loving their Lives unto the Death, when they stood in
Competition with their Fidelity to Christ. And with how much the greater
Cheerfulness and Alacrity, Willingness and Desire, they did it; by so much the
more powerful, and constraining was the Principle of Love. By this we may make
some Judgment, what manner of Love it was, wherewith the Lord Redeemer loved
us, when he gave Himself for us an Offering, and a Sacrifice of a sweet
smelling Odor unto God. The Voluntariness of his Sacrifice argued the
Excellency of his Incomparable Love.

Though his Death was Necessary, with respect to the Eternal Purpose and
Appointment of Heaven, For it was by the determinate Counsel of God, that the
Messiah should suffer Death; And though it were Violent, with respect to the
Instrumentality of Men in his Crucifixion, they did it with violent hands: Yet
with reference to himself, his Death was voluntary, He made a willing Sacrifice
of his own Life; He laid it down; None else could have taken it from him. He
gave himself a Ransom, He became Poor, He made himself of no Reputation, He
poured out his Soul unto Death, It was not rent from him. He was obedient to
Death, even the Death of the Cross. This gave an extraordinary value to his
Sufferings: Upon this depended the Merit of his Sacrifice, and the Efficacy of
his Blood. And this is one endearing Circumstance, which heightens his Love,
and calls for our thankful Admiration.

He willingly offered himself in the first Council of Peace about our
Redemption, and undertook to suffer for us, and make satisfaction to Divine
Justice. And after his Incarnation, he always knew, and frequently foretold his
own Sufferings and Death. He reproves Peter, as if he acted the Devil's part,
when he would have dissuaded him from it. Yea, he most earnestly desired this
most bloody Baptism, I have a Baptism to be Baptized with, and how am I
straitened till it be accomplished? Luke 12.50. The night before his Sufferings
he makes his last Will and Testament, and leaves it with his Disciples, Giving
his blood to drink in the Sacrament, to show, h^w willingly he would pour it
out the next d^y upon the Cross. And on this Account he so earnestly desired to
eat this Passover, which the Text speaks of, because it was the last, before he
should suffer Death. And afterward, even the same Evening he goe^ out into the
Garden, where he knew he should be betrayed; And so in effect, he brings
himself to the Door of the Tabernacle, to be offered to God a Sacrifice for us.

With desire have I desired to eat this Passover with you, before I suffer. As
if he had said, The Sufferings I have so often spoke of, are now approaching;
The hour is at hand, when I shall be betrayed, and Crucified; This is the last
Passover I shall ever keep with you, before I am lifted up from the Earth; And
therefore I most earnestly desire it, because it is the last, that will precede
my Death: Whereby I shall put an end to these legal Services, which have all
along referred to me, and to the Sacrifice and Oblation I am to make for sin.
Henceforth I will eat and drink no more of the Passover Supper, for my own
Sufferings and Death is that which they signified, and related to. I am the
true Paschal Lamb, All the Rites and Observances about the killing, and eating
of it, were but Typical of my Passion, and shall now be fulfilled.

And here, 1. I shall consider the Passover, which our Lord desired to eat of.
2. His ardent Desire to eat of this Passover, and the Reason of it. 3. The
Company with whom he desired to eat it, With you. 4. The Time when, Before I
suffer. 5. The Accomplishment of it in the Kingdom of God. What we are to
understand by the Kingdom of God, and what by the fulfilling of it therein. 6.
His Resolution and Declaration, That he would eat and drink no more so, till it
were Accomplished. Lastly, Some Reflections, as the Application of the whole.

1. Concerning the Feast of Passover. You have the Institution of it, Exodus 12.
the beginning. Where we find, that it was appointed by God, as a Memorial of
the Israelites slavery in Egypt, and their Deliverance out of it. Former
Miracles having been unsuccessful upon Pharaoh, God intends to slay all the
Firstborn of Egypt in one Night; whereby, in part, the Curse of God pronounced
on Cha^^, is exec^ted on his Posterity* viz. the Egyptians; in destroying All
the Firstborn of bot^ Man and Beast. The Israelites were ordered by Moses to
slay a Lamb, on the Fourteenth day of the First Month, which answers to our
March, and to Sprinkle the Posts of their Doors with the Blood of that Lamb,
and to feed upon the Flesh of it, in their several Families. That very Night
the destroying Angel strikes the Firstborn of every Family, where this
Command, of sprinkling the Door-posts with the Blood of the Lamb, was not
observed. On this, you know, they were delivered out of Egypt the Egyptians not
only giving leave, but d^siring them to be gone. And this Deliverance being the
Foundation of the Jewish State, was to be perpetually observed by them in their
Generations, and to be an Ordinance for ever, Exodus 12 42.

The whole Institution of the Paschal Lamb is called by the Name of the
Passover, though it refer especially to the first Lamb in Egypt, whose blood
was sprinkled on the Door-posts of the Israelites Houses, when the destroying
Angel passed them by. And the Reason of that Name, Passover, is because of the
Angels passing by their Houses, and their consequent Deliverance out of Egypt,
passing out of the House of Bondage into Liberty. And nothing is more usual,
than to give to the Cause the Name of the Effect. Upon which Account Christ is
called our Righteousness, Wisdom, Resurrection, and Life, etc. But the same
Name, Passo^er, is also given to those Lambs which were slain every year
afterward: This Feast being Annually obser^ed, in remembrance of that
Deliverance of theirs out of Egypt. This being a constant Memorial of the first
Passover, has the same Name given it, with that to which it re^ated. And this
also is common in Scripture, to give the Name of the thing signified, to the
Sign which represents it. So the Jews are said to k ll the Passover, that is,
the Paschal Lamb, which was in remembrance of the Angels passing by their
Houses, and their consequent Deliverance out of Egypt. Thus Circumcision is
called the Covenant of God, And the Rock in the Wilderness is called Christ,
And the Seven Candlesticks in St. John's Vision, are the Seven Churches, That
is, These are signified, and represented by them.

It Is therefore very absurd for the Romanists to insist upon these Words, This
is my Body, to prove, that the Substance of Christ's Flesh and Blood is in the
Sa rament. They may as well argue, That the Paschal Lamb that Christ did eat
with his Disciples, was the same with that which was slain by the Israelites in
Egypt; Or that it was not an Animal, because it is called a Passover; Or that
the Paschal Lamb was Transubstantiated into the Flesh of Christ, because Christ
is called our Passover, and sometimes called the Lamb of God, as well as the
Bread in the Sacrament called his Body, and the Wine his Blood.

Before I leave this Head, I might mention the Historical Evidence, that agrees
to that of the Holy Scriptures, concerning the Israelites Passover in Egypt and
the sprinkling of their Door-posts with the Blood of the Lamb, in that
Memorable Night of their Deliverance. For the better understanding whereof, we
may consider,

1. That the Jews, after the Death of Moses and Joshua, were several times in
Subjection to the Neighboring Nations, and could not have had the Confidence
to keep up such a S^lemn Memorial of this thing every Year, if the matter of
Fact had not been known to the Egyptians, and their other Neighbors ^ound
about, to be true; which yet the Jews continued to observe every Year, till
heir last General Dispersion: And to this day they have something in Imitation
of it, wherever they are scattered upon the Face of the Earth. Besides this,

2. The Tribe of Levi were set apart by God, and Consecrated to him in a Solemn
manner, in stead of the Firstborn of the People of Israel, that were preserved
in Egypt, as you read, Numb. 3.12, 13. For when I smote all the Firstborn in
Egypt, I hallowed unto me all the Firstborn of Israel. They are mine, and the
Levites instead of them. So that every Levite was a living Memorial of that
Miracle.

3. Besides the constant Law enjoined upon the Jews, and observed to this day,
concerning the Redemption of every, Firstborn among them, and of unclean
Beasts, Numb. 18.15.

4. The Memory of the Death of the Firstborn in Egypt, which gave occasion to
the Ceremony of the Passover, continued among the Egyptians even after the
Death of Christ. For Haeres. 18. advers. Nazaraeos.
Epiphanius relates, That at the same time of the Year, the Night before the
Israelites went out of Egypt, when the Firstborn in Egypt were slain, the
Egyptians were wont to mark their Houses, their Trees, their Sheep, etc. with
red; by that, as by a kind of Talisman, thinking to avoid some such Mischief
and Calamity as their Fathers experienced at that time, and which the
Israelites escaped, by following the Advice of Moses, to Sprinkle the
Door-posts of their Houses with Blood. Some such Custom as this continued in
Egypt, even after the Incarnation of Christ.

II. Having spoken thus much concerning the Jewish Passover, Let me now
consider our Lord's desire to eat of it. With desire have I desired to eat of
this Passover before I suffer. With desire have I desired. An usual Hebraism,
to signify the earnestness, and vehemence of his Desire. The Evangelist Luke
has many Instances of this, agreeable to other Expressions in other places, as
Heb. 6.14. In blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I w^ll multiply
thee. The Zeal, and Earnestness, and Ardency of his Desire is expressed by it:
Agreeable to that forementioned place, which referred to his Death and
Sacrifice, Luke 12.50. I have a Baptism to be baptized with, and how am I
straitened till it be accomplished. As if he could not live in Ease, have no
Rest or Quiet, till he was made a Sacrifice. And that is the first and great
Reason of desiring this Passover,

1. Because this was to be the Last before he Suffered. Therefore he so
earnestly desires it. The near approach of his Sufferings did not at all abate
his Resolution, and Desire of S^ffering, but rather gave an Edge to his
Affection. He was so far from being disheartened by the near Prospect of his
Crucifixion, that the nearer he comes to it, the more he desires it; And
therefore desires to eat of this Passover, which was to be his last: And then
makes his Last Will, and Institutes this Supper the same Evening, being
desirous every thing should be dispatched, that was necessary or fit to be done
before he Suffered.

It was the Last Night of his Life, and the Night wherein he was to be Betrayed
and foreknew he should be so. Other Passovers Prefigured his Death, this did
both Prefigure and Accompany it: for his Death was now in a manner present.
'Twas this that made him long, and desire to eat this Passover, Though at the
same time he had so near a Prospect of his Amazing Sufferings in the Garden
that Night, and on the Cross the next day. Could we understand the Agonies of
his tormented mind, that made him complain, That his Soul was sorrowful even
unto death, and Pray with doubled and trebled Importunity, that the Cup might
pass from him; we may then judge of his Love in desiring to eat of this
Passover, for this reason, because his Last.

2. Another Reason may be, To give us an Example of Obedience: And therefore,
being made under the Law, he would exactly observe it; And so for our sakes
fulfill all Righteousness, as in many other Instances, of Subjection to his own
Creatures, of paying Tribute to his own Subjects, etc. And, to teach us
Humility, a little before this, he would wash the Feet of his own Disciples,
with those hands, which, just after this Passover, had all Power in Heaven and
Earth Solemnly given into them.

And not only as to the Moral Law, But he stooped down to the very Fringes of
the Ceremonial Law, as an Example of Obedience. And therefore the Skin of his
Flesh was Circumcised, and his Holy Mother Purified; And he that was the true
Passover, would keep the Typical one; And so, as one well expresses it, did
obediently stand under his own Shadow.

3. One Reason of his Desire to eat of this Passover, might be, to put an end
to the Sacraments of the Legal Institution. And therefore after the eating of
the Passover, he instituted the Lords Supper, which succeeds in its room; Which
is a Feast upon the Sacrifice of Christ, the True Lamb of God, the true
Christian Passover, in Remembrance of our Deliverance by Him from Sin and Hell,
from Death and the Devil. Those things therefore that were but Types and
Shadows of Him, must cease after his Death, the Truth and Substance of them
being now Accomplished, as I shall show presently.

4. Another Reason might be, That he might have Fellowship and Communion with
his Disciples. And that leads to the consideration of the Third thing.

III. The Company with whom he desires to eat this his last Passover, With You.
The Jews tell us concerning the Number of those that were to eat the Passover,
That it was not to be under Ten, for the whole Lamb was to be eaten: Nor above
Twenty, lest they should need two Lambs. Therefore our Lord sent word to one of
his Disciples, to prepare every thing for that Solemnity; that the House might
be searched if there were any Leavened Bread left in it; Which they were wont
to do very carefully in every corner, saying, Blessed art thou, O Lord, who
have Sanctified us by thy Precepts: And then throwing a little Dust into the
Air, they used these words, or the like, If there be any leavened Bread in this
House, let it be as this dust, cast into the Air. But the principal Reason of
sending word beforehand, might be, because the Persons in the Family were to be
numbered. And it is not improbable, but there were more Men than the Apostles
and our Lord, who were present at the eating of this Passover, and it may be
some Women too. For,

1. It is probable, That the Man and his Family, in whose House it was, did eat
of the Passover with Christ and his Apostles. Secondly, The Expressions of the
Evangelist are very considerable, concerning him that should betray him. There
is a Threefold Gradation; He says, first, in the General, One of you shall
betray me: And afterward he comes nearer, and says, One of the Twelve; Or, of
my Apostles, often so called: So that at the eating of this Passover, there
seemed to have been more present than the Twelve Apostles. And afterward he
particularizeth the Person, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish.
Thirdly, We read that the Virgin Mary, and two or three other Women, did
usually accompany him, and were then at Jerusalem to eat the Passover: For the
next day the Virgin Mary was standing by the Cross, when our Lord was
Crucified: And it being the Jewish Custom for the Relations to join together at
the Passover Supper, it is not unlikely that she did eat the Passover with
Christ; And it being in the House of one of his Disciples, she might tarry
there that night, while he went out from thence about Eleven or Twelve a Clock
at Night into the Garden, where he was betrayed and taken; And she hearing of
his being taken, might go to the High Priests Hall, and be at the Cross the
next Morning, at Nine a Clock.

With desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you, before I suffer.
With You, You, my Disciples and Friends, with whom I shall never eat another
Passover. Notwithstanding the Prospect of his Approaching Sufferings and Death,
He did not decline, but earnestly desire Communion and Fellowship with them in
such an Ordinance.

When he gave 'em the Cup, it is observable he bids 'em divide it among
themselves. The Scripture says not, that he gave the Elements into every one
of their particular hands, much less into their mouths, without their touching
the Bread or Cup with their own hands, except we will admit that Christ changed
the posture he was in, and always used at Meals (and the Scripture says not he
did,) how could he reach it to so many as Eleven Persons in the same Posture?

IV. Let us consider the Time when, Before I Suffer. There is a great
Controversy about the Time of this Passover. It was certainly upon
Thursday-night, He being Crucified on the Friday in the Forenoon, though he did
not give up the Ghost till Three in the Afternoon. But the Question will be,
whether it was at the same Time, that the Jews kept their Passover, or a Day
sooner; And if it was a Day sooner, How could the Paschal Lamb be killed, which
was to be brought to the Temple, and be killed by the Priests, between the two
Evenings of the Fourteenth day, the first whereof began when the Sun began to
decline, or as soon as Midday was past; The other Evening was after Sunset.
Some Learned Men think it is plain, That the Time when our Lord did eat this
Passover with his Disciples, was the day before the Generality of the Jews kept
theirs, from Joh. 18.28. Chap. 19.14.

For the better understanding of this, you must know that the Time for the
Observation of the Jewish Festivals, was Regulated by the Appearance of the New
Moon. They had not Almanacks Dr. Wallis of the Christian Sabbath, in Answer to
Mr. Bampfield, Page 13.
in those days, as we have now, to tell us beforehand when will be a New Mood.
But (if we may believe the Jewish Writers) about the time when they expected a
New Moon, they sent Men to watch for it on the Top of some Hill, or High place;
and he who could first discover a New Mood, was to tell the Priest, and he to
Blow the Trumpet, to give the people notice, that there was a New Mood. But, in
case of Cloudy weather, if in Three days time, from their first expectation, no
Man could see a New Mood, they did then venture (but not before) to blow the
Trumpet without seeing it, which must needs cause a very great Uncertainty, and
the same Moon be sooner seen at one place then at another, and the Passover
kept accordingly.

So that sometimes there was a Mistake of One day, or more. Now it has been
Dr. Cudworth's Notion of the Lord's Supper, Page. 50, 70, etc,
proved, out of Epiphanius, and others, that there was a Contention and Tumult
amongst the Jews, at this very Passover, concerning the Time, or the Day,
wherein it was to be observed, and that the Senate had appointed a Day too
late, and had not determined according to the True Phasis, or Appearance of the
Moon: It Is manifest our Savior kept the Passover on one Day, and the
Generality of the Jews on another (perhaps he, about a Fortnight before, might
see a New Mood, a Day sooner than they did.) And therefore we may suppose our
Lord, and the more Pious Jews, did not Approve of that Order of the Sena e, but
followed the true Appearance of the Moon, confirmed by sufficient, and assured
Witnesses; The Passover being to be kept on the Fifteenth Day, from the
Appearance of the New Mood.

But you will say still, How could that Lamb be brought to the Temple, and
killed there, if it were not on the same Day the Jewish Passover was generally
Observed? Unto which it is Answered, That either the Master of the Family might
be permitted on that day to kill the Lamb; Not all the Lambs, to be eaten by
the Paschal Societies, were to be killed by the Priests at the Temple, and
their blood poured out upon, or at the Foot of the Altar; but some of 'em in
stead of All. Or that as to this and other Feasts, whose Time depended upon
this Determination, that it was usual, in Doubtful Cases, to permit the Feast
to be Solemnized for two days together. Many Instances can be brought of this
out of the Writings and Practices of the Jews, and it is probable it was so
now. It is certain it was the Night before he ^^^^^red that he did thus eat the
Passover, and the Day wherein Israel went out of Egypt. And it is a Tradition
among the Jews, says Grotius, That then Israel should be delivered and redeemed
in the Days of the Messiah, even on the same day wherein they were delivered
out of the House of Bondage in Egypt. Thus admirably did the Wisdom of God
concur, to make the Antitype agree with the Type, as will appear more
distinctly under the next Head.

V. The Accomplishment of this Jewish Passover in the Kingdom of God. For I say
unto you, I will eat no more thereof, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of
God. Which denotes it should be accomplished very shortly in that Kingdom. But
Until will not argue, as if he should have afterward eaten of it again. That
will not follow, any more than that Michal Readiness Daughter had Children after
her death, because it is said, She had no Child till the day of her death.

1. What is meant by the Kingdom of God?

2. What by the Fulfilling of the Passover therein? And how, or wherein it was
then Accomplished, and Fulfilled?

1. W^ are we to understand by the Kingdom of God, or the Kingdom of Heaven?
Sometimes the expression is used for the Kingdom of Glory. Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of God. Sometimes for his Providential
Government, His Kingdom rules over all. Sometimes for the Execution of
Judgment on the Nation of the Jews, Mark 9.1. Some standing here shall not
taste of Death, till they see the Kingdom of God come. But most usually it is
taken for the Kingdom of Grace, in General, The Messiah's Kingdom, with what
belongs thereto. The outward Means of Salvation are sometimes so called, Math.
21.43. If I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, then is the Kingdom of God
come unto you. The Internal Renovation of the Soul is also so expressed, The
Kingdom of God is within you, and comes not with observation, Luke 17.20, 21.
The Essentials of Christianity are also expressed by this Phrase, Romans 14.17.
The Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy
in the Holy Ghost. But the Church State, or the Evangelical Dispensation by the
Messiah, is most commonly understood; As when the Kingdom of God is said to be
at hand, by the Preaching of Christ, and his Apostles. And no greater Prophet
than John the Baptist, yet the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, or the meanest
Minister of the New Testament, who Preaches the Accomplishment of those
things, which the Baptist saw but the beginning of, is greater than John the
Baptist, for he died before the Sacrifice of Christ. So in this Text, our Lord
says, He will eat no more of the Passover, and drink no more of the Fruit of
the Vine, till it be accomplished in the Kingdom of God; that is, till what was
represented in the Figure, and Type of the Jewish Passover, was really
fulfilled by the Messiah's Offering himself a Sacrifice upon the Cross. Which
Sacrifice and Death of Christ was supposed, and anticipated in the Lord's
Supper, as the first Institution of this New Kingdom, or Gospel Dispensation,
My body broken for you. And this brings me to consider,

2. The Fulfilling of this Passover, in the Kingdom of God, Or the
Accomplishment of the Legal Passover, when Christ, the Lamb of God, who takes
away the Sins of the World, was Sacrificed for us. And here we may consider in
the General, 1. That something more than the History was intended. 2. That
these things did refer to the Messiah. 3. That the Faithful under the Old
Testament did so regard them.


1. It is certain, that somewhat more than the History was designed. All the
Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Mosaic Institution, were but Shadows of good
things to come, But the Substance is Christ, Colos. 2.17. He is so even of the
Jewish Passover: For the Jews can never assign any pertinent and solid Reason
of the Passover-Rites, if there were no Reference to the Messiah. What need of
the Choice and Separation of a Lamb in that manner? What Virtue could there be
in the killing of one, and the Sprinkling their Door-posts with his Blood? What
Influence could That have on their Deliverance out of Egypt? Could not God
distinguish the Houses of the Israelites, from those of the Egyptians without
this? No Reason can well be assigned of such Rites and Orders, but by the
Doctrine of the New Testament: These things are thereby discovered to be
Excellent Emblems of the great Mystery of our Lord's Death.

2. The whole Design therefore of this Paslover-Feast, had an Aspect upon the
Messiah, and does Admirably Represent the Death and Sufferings of Christ, the
Lamb of God, Sacrificed for us; By whose Blood we have a Spiritual Deliverance
from Sin and Satan; as by the Blood of the Paschal Lamb, they had a Deliverance
from the destroying Angel; and afterward a Deliverance from the Egyptian
Bondage. Even the History of the Institution of this Passover, shows a manifest
Reference to Jesus Christ: For we read, Exodus 12.46. concerning the Paschal
Lamb; Neither shall ye break a Bone thereof. And this is said to be fulfilled
in Christ the Antitype, as if pronounced immediately of him, John 19. When the
Soldiers found him dead, they brake not his Bones, as of the other two. And it
follows These things were done, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which
says, A Bone of him shall not be broken.

The Faithful under the Old Testament did so regard these Things: And therefore
Moses, who esteemed the Reproach of Christ as greater Riches than the Treasures
of Egypt, and therefore did know him, is said to have kept the Passover in
Faith, Heb. 11.28. In which Chapter, the Apostle speaks all along of Faith in
the Mediator, and not of Faith in God simply. But,

2. Let us consider more particularly, how these Things, with Relation to the
Jewish Passover, were accomplished by Christ, as the Lamb of God to take away
Sin. And that will appear, if we consider four Things.

1. The Person of Christ as our Passover, or Paschal Lamb 2. His Sufferings,
and Sacrifice. 3. The Fruits and Benefits of them to us. 4. The way and manner
of our Participation of these Benefits.
1. The Person of Christ, who is the true Paschal Lamb. I shall not stay to
consider the Resemblance of his Character, to a Lamb for Meekness, for
Patience, for Submission, and Obedience: He was brought as a Lamb to the
Slaughter, and as a Sheep before the Shearers is dumb, so he opened not his
Mouth. Nor that the Pas^hal Lamb was to be without blemish, sound and entire,
without Bruise or Maim; Thus holy was Christ in his Conception, and Birth, and
in all the Actions of his Life; A Lamb without blemish, and without spot, 1
Pet. 1.19. Holy, harmless, and undefiled, separate from Sinners, Heb. 7.26. Nor
how the Lamb was set apart, and chosen for three days, and killed the fourth;
answered by Christ's being set apart to his Prophetical Office, wherein he
manifested himself for about three years, before he offered himself a Sacrifice
in the fourth year. Those that write concerning the Types, are large upon this
Subject.

2. We may consider his Passion, and Sufferings, the Fulfilling of it as to his
Death, and the Time of it. The Paschal Lamb was to be Roasted with Fire; Which
might not only put them in Mind of the Hardships they endured, in the Brick
Kilms of Egypt; but Prefigure the Sufferings of Christ, as crucified and
pressed, when his strength was dried up like a Potsheard, and his Tongue did
cleave to his Jaws, Psalm. 22.15. The Time also of his Suffering agreed with
the Time of the Jewish Passover, About the Ninth Hour, or Three a Clock in the
Afternoon, the usual Time that the Passover was to be Killed.

3. As to the Fruits and Effects of his Sacrifice, there is a further
Accomplishment of the Type: For the destroying Angel is diverted from the
Israelites Houses. The Blood of a Lamb could not Merit, or procure this, but as
it Represented the Blood of the Messiah: Whereby the Wrath of God is quenched,
and we delivered from Satan the great Destroyer. And as this was the Earnest of
their Deliverance from their Bondage in Egypt; By the Death of Christ we are
set free from a much worse Slavery.

4. Consider the manner how we partake of the Benefit, and Fruits of Christ's
Sacrifice. Our Hearts must be sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, as the
Israelites were to sprinkle, the Blood of the Lamb, on the Door-post of their
Houses. They were to feed upon the Flesh of the Paschal Lamb; We are in a
Spiritual sense to do so with Reference to Christ, John 6.53. They were to eat
it with sour Sauce, with bitter, or wild Herbs: Repentance for Sin must be
joined with Faith, in a Savior. Unleavened Bread was to be thrown out of the
House, And you know how the Apostle applies this, unto those who are called to
keep the Feast, even that Feast upon the Sacrifice of Christ, at his own Table,
1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Not with the Leaven of Malice, and Wickedness; But with the
Unleavened Bread of Sincerity, and Truth.

It was Remarkable as to the first Passover, It was to be eaten in have, with
their Loins girt, Shoes on their Feet, and a Staff in their Hand: As Pilgims
and Strangers here, who are hastening to a better Country, which God has
promised, and which their Canaan may Mind us of, and make this also Applicable
to our Case: Which will bring me to the Sixth, and last thing.

Sixthly and lastly, The Resolution amd Declaration of Christ, to eat and drink
no more of this Passover, till it be accomplished. Some think that the 18th
Verse, I will drink no more of the Fruit of the Vine, till I drink it new with
you in my Fathers Kingdom, is misplaced and ought to come in after the
Institution of the Lord's Supper, as it is placed by the Evangelists, Matthew
and Mark. 83. Homil. in Matthaeum.
Chrysostom thinks it Refers to his Eating and Dr^nking with his Disciples,
after his Resurrection in this World; That he would not any more Eat and Drink,
till he had suffered Death, and was risen again: And then, to manifest the
Truth of his being Risen, he did condescend to satisfy, and convince them in
that manner. But there is little ground for that Interpretation.

It is not improbable, but our Lord may Allude here to the Custom of the High
Priests, who coming out of the Holy of Holies, did keep a Feast of Joy with his
Friends: For if he were a Wicked Man, say the Jews, he died in the Place; If a
good Man, he came out safe: And then he Rejoiced with his Friends, and kept a
Feast, where they were wont to drink New Wine. To this Custom our Lord may
Allude in this Expression, thereby telling his Disciples, That he should not
sink in the Performance of what he underto k; Dr. Allix.
in the great Offering that he was to make to God his Father; but come off with
Success: And then they should Rejoice, and Feast together; He would drink new
Wine with them in the Kingdom of his Father.

Some think the Evangelist Luke, as to Christ's drinking new Wine, Refers to
the Lord's Supper that was to follow. And as he Recites the Words, they are
more Intelligible, than as they are mentioned by St. Matthew, or Mark. He
Annexes them to the Passover Cup, though the other Recite this Passage after
the Cup in the Lord's Supper: But the Words might have been spoken by Christ
before. And it is easier to Transpose the Words in Matthew and Mark, to the
unmentioned Occasion, which was immediately before the Lord's Supper, than to
Transpose the whole 19th and 20th Verses in Luke, before the 17th Verse, which
would also make it a Tautology.

By the Kingdom of God, all the Evangelists seem to mean the Gospel
Dispensation which was to Commence in the Lord's Supper, as the first of that
sort; for the Baptism of John, and of the Disciples of Christ, before his
Death, was different from Baptism since, the New Testament Baptism, Acts 19.4,
5. The Lord's Supper by Anticipation did signify, and show forth the Lord's
Death. This is my Body broken for you. He supposed it broken, and himself
sacrificed, and the Passover fulfilled: Jesus Christ being the Lamb of God
Typified, and Presignified by the Paschal Lamb, till his Sacrifice of himself.
And so to put a Period to the former Economy, on which the Gospel Dispensation
did ensue.

The Term New, (till I drink it New,) may be accounted for; and that some of
the Evangelists say, that Day, I Will drink it New; though it were the same Hour,
because it Refers to a different Period, and Dispensation, viz. The ceasing of
the Mosaic, and the beginning of the Evangelical one. In the like sense the
same Word is used in other Places, as Zach. 14 6, 7. And that which answers to
the Word New, is that it is opposed to the old Dispensation; that it serves to
Divine Purposes, by a new Institution, and so is made New: And it declares that
the N w Gospel Dispensation, to which it is appropriate, is now beginning, or
to commence. I Will not drink of it, till I drink it New with you in my Father's
Kingdom, or in the Kingdom of God, i. e. In the Lord's Supper, which is my
Gospel Institution, and the Beginning of the Peculiar Kingdom of God, as
dispensed after my Actual Death and Sufferings.

No question but the Sense is very safe, to consider it with Reference to the
Heavenly Glory, as it is usually understood, when all the Blessings of this
Passover shall be fully Accomplished in the Heavenly Canaan.

Neither is it strange or unusual for the same Ancient Type, or Figure, to
respect to several Objects, and so have several Degrees of Accomplishment. Les
OEVRES Posthumes de Mr. Claude, Tom. 2. l. 4. cap. 9. traite de J. Christ.
This of the Paschal Lamb might not only have Relation to the Angel's passing
by the Houses of the Isrelites in Egypt, and their passage out of Bondage into
Liberty, by the Deliverance that followed; but unto the Absolution and
Deliverance of Believers by the Blood of Chrsst, and unto the Deliverance of
Christ himself out of the Grace, and from a state of Humiliation, to that of
Glory; and to the passage of the Church Militant upon Earth, to a state of
Triumph in Heaven.

The Blessedness of Heaven is frequently set off by this Metaphor of Eating and
Drinking. And at the Lord's Table, which was Instituted at the close of the
Passover Feast, the Thoughts of Heaven are proper. We meet at this Table, as
those who hope to sit down with all the Children of the Kingdom at the last
great Supper of the Lamb.

This Ordinance is a lively Resemblance of the Heavenly Feast, and should
assist our Meditations on it. Our Lord does here speak to us such kind of
Language: Ere long we shall Feast together in Heaven: What is now done in
Emblem, shall be then done in Reality. You have here the Earnest Pledge and
Assurance of it.

This Table is a Preparatory Entertainment for the Eternal Supper. Bishop
Parick, Mensa mystica, chap. 18.
It is some foretaste to stay our Longings, and yet excite our Desires after
the Heavenly Feast above. Here we break our Fast (as I may say) but are made
thereby very Hungry, till that Great Supper come. Here we have but a
Praelibation, a little short Antepast of some Rare things to come; yet seeing
it is an Earnest of those Things, it creates in an holy Soul a wonderful
Contentment, both from its own Sweetness, and the Hopes wherewith it feeds us.
It nourishes in us most Delicious Longings, it makes the Soul even swell with
Comfortable Expectations: And we Receive it not only as a Remembrance of what
was done, but as a Pledge of what shall be. We taste not only what he is to our
Souls at present, but what he shall be for ever.

If it be a Privilege to be Admitted to sit at his Table, and to have his
Covenant sealed to me by the outward Ordinance, and his special Love by his
Spirit to my Heart. All the Life and Comfort of these, is, That they Declare
and Assure me of more and better Comforts hereafter. Their Use is darkly to
signify, and seal higher Mercies When I shall Drink with Christ of the Fruit
of the Vine renewed. How pleasant a Feast will that be? O^ the Difference, Mr.
Baxter.
as One has well expressed it; O the Difference between the last Supper of
Christ on Earth, and the Marriage Supper of the Lamb at the Great Day! Here he
is in an Vpper-Room accompanied with Twelve poor selected men, feeding on no
curious Dainties, but a Paschal Lamb with sour Herbs, and a Judas at his Table,
ready to betray him. But then his Room will be the Glorious Heavens; his
Attendants, all the Host of Angels and Saints; no Judas, nor unfurnished Guest
comes there; but the humble Believers must sit down by him, and the Feast will
be their mutual Loving and Rejoicing.

You know nevertheless that when the Israelites were got out of Egypt, and
delivered by the Blood of the Lamb, and had a Promise of Canaan, they had yet a
Wilderness to pass through; many Enemies to Encounter, and Difficulties to
overcome, before they entered into Canaan; though God protected, and maintained,
and supplied them in the Wilderness, all that while. So is it with us
Christians, though we recover our Spiritual Liberty by Faith in the Blood of
Jesus, and are made a peculiar People unto God, a Nation of Kings and Priests
unto the most High, and are marching toward the Heavenly Canaan, and have the
Promise of it; We have yet a Wilderness to pass through; We have Adversaries on
all sides to resist; We need a Pillar of Cloud, and of Fire to direct us, and
Manna from Heaven to supply us: And this we shall have from time to time, till
we come to Canaan; and then our Lord will eat and drink with us after a better
manner; we shall have New Wine in his Kingdom: He is gone to prepare a Feast
for us; to make ready the great Supper of the Lamb, for all the Children of the
Kingdom.

After he was Sacrificed as the Lamb of God, he tarried Forty Days upon the
Earth, from his Resurrection till he Ascended into Heaven: As the Jews after
their Passover in Egypt, wandered 40 years in the Wilderness before they entered
into Canaan. But all Believers, after a few Years Difficulty and Trials in this
World, with the Presence of God to Conduct, and Guide them; shall at last sit
down for ever with Christ, to Reap the full Harvest of his Sufferings, to
receive the complete Deliverance, which he has procured, to enjoy all the
blessed Fruits of his Death, all the Purchase of his Redeeming Blood; This he
will come again to bestow, upon those who believe, expect, and prepare for it.

Some Inferences of Truth and Duty, may be collected, as the Application of
what has been said.

1. That Believers, under the Old Testament and under the New, have the same
Object of Faith. They did eat the same spiritual Meat, and drink the same
spiritual Drink Their Sacraments and ours have different Signs, but in
Substance were the same: Theirs having Relation to Christ, the Messiah, as well
as ours. Accordingly we read of Circumcision, and the Passover, in a spiritual
sense under the Gospel; And that which answers to Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper with us: Even they, under the Old Testament, had. 1 Cor. 10.2, 3. They
were under the Covenant of Grace, though not so clear a Dispensation of it as
we; They were to be Saved by Faith in a Mediator, as well as we: The Gospel was
preached unto them, as well as unto us.

2. Did Christ desire Fellowship with his Disciples, Friends, and Followers in
the Passover; What shall we think of those that despise such Institutions, and
look upon themselves as above such Ordinances, as if they had a nearer, and
better way of Communion with God and Christ; then this Remissness and
Indifference, as to these things, Neglect and Carelessness in Preparation for
them, is likewise a degree of Contempt, that deserves to be Reproved.

3. Was Christ so desirous to eat his last Passover before he suffered for us,
because of his Willingness to Suffer? What Ingratitude does this imply in our
Backwardness, and Cowardice, when we are called to suffer for him?

4. Did our Lord desire to eat this Passover, because it was the last, and
consequently was Willing to be a Sacrifice for us? What an Argument of his
endearing Love does this afford us? And how should it Inflame ours to him? It
was not from Ignorance of what he was to Suffer; he fully knew what he had
undertaken, he perfectly understood what his Baptism of Blood did signify; and
yet he earnestly desired it, and was straightened, till it was Accomplished. He
knew the Burden of Sin that he was to Expiate, as a Sin-Offering, when he bore
our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, as a Sacrifice to Divine Justice for us:
He knew the bitterness of that Cup, which he was to drink of beforehand; and
yet for our sakes he desires it: What Thankfulness do we owe for such
inestimable Love!

He was willing to submit to such difficult Terms to bring about our
Reconciliation to God: He was willing to be obedient to Death, even the Death
of the Cross, to turn away the Divine Displeasure from us, and to restore us to
the Divine Favor, and Image again. He was willing to be a Sacrifice for sin,
that we might be made the Righteousness of God, through Faith in him. He was
willing to bear the Curse, that the Blessing of Abraham might come upon us. He
was willing to be our Paschal Lamb, to be slain and sacrificed for us, that by
the sprinkling of his Blood we might be delivered from Sin and Hell, that by
feeding on him as our Passover, we might be Partakers of Spiritual and Eternal
Life. And even in the midst of his Agony in the Garden, notwithstanding the
struggling of his Humane Nature against the bitterness of the Cup, which made
him pray for the passing of it away; yet as Mediator he was willing, and
therefore adds. Not my Will, but thine be done; Father glorify thy self.

O matchless and incomprehensible Love! How should our Souls be Ravished with
the Contemplation of it! How hard and insensible are our Hearts, if they feel
no constraining Virtue in the Consideration of such Love! If we do not
Sacrifice our Lusts in Requital of his being a willing Sacrifice for us. Shall
not the Love of Christ, which bubbles up in every Drop of his Blood, and made
him willing, and resolved to shed it on our Account, make us hate that Sin,
which he died to Atone for, and to destroy. Can we consider him, Groaning,
Sweating, Bleeding, Dying for Sin, and yet Retain an Affection to it? And rush
into it through the Wounds, and Blood, and Agony, and Death of our Redeemer?
Shall that ever be sweet to us, which put so much Vinegar and Gall into his Cup?

Let me add a few Words for Counsel and Direction.

1. Did Christ earnestly desire to eat this Passover, and have Communion with
his Disciples therein? How earnestly should we desire to have Communion with
him in that Ordinance that succeeded to it, which was Instituted by Christ
himself the same Evening, in the close of the Paschal Supper! Is not a
Spiritual Communion with him, now he is in Glory, as desirable, as his Bodily
Pr^sence was, when in a state of Humiliation? Is it not the Spirit and Temper
of all the Disciples of Christ, in every Age of the Church, to value, and to
desire such near Approaches to him? How did the believing Jews prepare
themselves for such a Solemnity as the Passover? How did David's Heart pant,
and faint, and long for Communion with God in the Services of the Temple? Psalm
27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may
dwell in the House of the Lord, all the days of my life, to behold the Beauty
of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

The Israelites were to eat the Passover in haste, with greediness of desire;
Non lento Cord, non languido Ore: And is it not a Shame to us to have no
Appetite for such a Feast? Is ^t not for want of such Desires of Communion with
Christ, that we meet with so little Satisfaction when we come? Let him that is
a thirst, come, and such shall be filled, when others shall be sent empty away:
but the hungry Souls shall not be sent empty away, from the Lord's Table.

We may likewise heighten our Desires and Appetites when we come to this Table;
by considering, For ought we know this may be the last Communion with Christ in
such an Ordinance, that we shall ever enjoy, before it be fully accomplished in
Heaven.

2. Let us imitate Christ as our Passover; Both in his Readiness to Suffer, and
in his Character and Qualification, as the Spotless Lamb of God, in Meekness
and Patience, and Submission, etc. Without this we can never prove our Interest
in him.

3. Let us thankfully Contemplate this Lamb of God, as desiring to be
Sacrificed for us. Let us seriously and often consider the Voluntariness of his
Death, and Sacrifice; the Fruits of his Suffering, the Merit of his Cross: How
Acceptable his Sacrifice was to God, how beneficial unto us; What a Deliverance
we have by it, what a Bondage we are saved from, what a Glorious Liberty he has
purchased, what a complete Salvation we expect, when all shall be fulfilled in
Heaven. These are proper Thoughts for those of us this Evening, who have
Feasted this Day on the Sacrifice of Christ. Every one of us in particular, not
only in public, but in secret, should bless God for Jesus Christ, Admiring the
Matchless Grace and Love of the Redeemer, in being thus a Willing Sacrifice for
us, and calling us to Feast upon it, having Instituted this Ordinance on
purpose for that very end.

Lastly, Live in the Daily Exercise of Faith on the Blood of Christ, as the
Lamb of God Sacrificed for us. It was the sprinkling of the Blood of the
Paschal Lamb, that was the Mark of the Israelites Deliverance; So the shedding
of the Blood of Christ, with particular Application by Faith, is a^ necessary
for us; Without it we cannot escape the Stroke of the destroying Angel; Without
it, the Blood of Christ will call for Vengeance, and his very Sacrifice and
Sufferings plead against us.

We should every Day, by fresh Acts of Faith, Apply this Blood for our
Encouragement, and Consolation, as the Purchase of our Peace with God and as
that whereby we have Peace with Conscience. All the Blessings we receive are
owing to this Blood. All the Services we perform, must be Accepted through the
sprinkling of this Blood, and our Faith in it. Let us therefore continually
apply, and plead it. The Virtue of it is still the same, as when it was at
first shed. We need not doubt but it is as Acceptable to God now, and of as
sweet smelling a Savor to him as ever. Therefore the Life that we live in the
Flesh, should be by the Faith of the Son of God, having daily Recourse unto his
Blood for Pardon, and cleansing, and strengthening Virtue. The Lord teach us
this Great Mystery of Godliness.

THE END.
The Seventh Discourse, BEFORE THE Lord's Supper.
From CANT. II.iv. He brought me into the Banqueting House, and his Banner
over me was Love.


I Shall not need to spend Time to prove this Book to be Canonical, and of
Divine Auuthority: It was never questioned to belong to the Jewish Canon,
though some other of the Writings of Solomon have been doubted of. The whole is
an Allegorical Description of the mysterious Union between Christ and his
Church, as Represented under the Persons of a Bridegroom, and Bride: Which
Metaphor is pursued in several other Places of Scripture, and alluded to by
Christ and his Apostles in the New Testament. The 45th Psalm is in some sort an
Epitome, and Abridgment of this Song of Solomon; And that by all Interpreters,
even the Jews themselves, is acknowledged to speak of the Messiah.

In this Chapter, Christ and the Church seem to strive, who shall outvie each
other in their Encomiums, and Commendations. In the Two first Verses Christ
speaks: In the following you have the Voice of the Church, or the Language of
sincere Christians; They Praise, and Magnify, and Extol the Lord Christ in the
Fourth Verse, for his Bounty and Magnificence, in making such Rich Provisions
to Feast and Entertain them. She had said before in the Third Verse, That She
sat under his Shadow with great Delight, and his Fruit was sweet unto her
Taste: And thereupon adds this Commendation of his Rich Provisions, He brought
me into the Banqueting House, etc.

Where, 1. She describes the Place, or the Means of such a Spiritual Feast, The
Banqueting House.

2. The Welcome she met with there, His Banner over me was Love. Under the first
Expression, is Represented the Excellent Provision, which our Lord makes, to
Entertain the Souls of Believers: He led me to the House of Wine, the Place
where the Master of the House was wont to entertain his Friends; Where the Wine
is drank, or the Entertainment made; for so the Word signifies. Some understand
it of the Places where Christians Assemble and meet together, to Worship
Christ, and Receive the Communication of his Grace; the Places where the
Ordinances of the Gospel are Dispensed. But there is more than the Places of
such Communication, here meant, viz. All the special Means, and Instruments of
Blessing unto the Souls of Believers. It may comprehend the Holy Scriptures,
the Ministers of the Word, the Sacraments, the public Assemblies for Worship,
and all the Institutions of Christ. But amongst them all, none more fitly, or
exactly answering to the Allegory, than the holy Supper of the World, the great
Feast on the Sacrifice of Christ, where we hope to be Entertained to Morrow.

2. The Welcome she met with, His Banner over me was Love. His Standard toward
me, by the lifting up whereof I was invited, and drawn to come over to his
side, to yield to him, to give up my self to him. The Love of a Crucified
Savior is displayed like a Banner, to invite and draw Souls to Christ.
Therefore it is promised, Isa. 49.22. I will lift up my Hand to the Gentiles,
and set up my Standard to the people. Christ the Captain of our Salvation,
lifted up upon a Cross, Displays a Banner of Love to all the World, to invite
them to come to him. And the Motto of his Banner is nothing but this, Dying
Love Victorious; Or, The Crucified Jesus Loving us to the Death; And by his
Love conquering our Hearts, and constraining us to be his, to love him, and
live to him, and even dye for him.

1. We may observe, That our Lord has his Banquet, and Feast, whereunto he
leads, and where he Entertains the Souls of his Followers.

2. That the Display of Christ's free, and glorious Love, is of all things the
most proper to Invite, and Attract the Souls of Men.

1. That Christ has his Banquet, and Feast, unto which he leads, and where he
entertains the Souls of his Followers. Under this Metaphor of a Feast, or
Banquet; all the Spiritual Blessings of the Gospel-State are often Represented.

Thus when we Read of the Invitation to come to the Marriage Feast of the Kings
Son, Mat. 22. All the Graces and Comforts of the Spirit are meant; forgiveness
of Sin, the Promise, and the hope of Eternal Life: These are the Provisions of
this Feast, which in the Word and Sacraments we partake of. In this Mountain
shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all people a Feast of fat things, of Wine on
the Lees well refined, Isa. 25.6. It is a Promise concerning the Days of the
Gospel. In this Mountain, In Mount Sion, In the Church, God will make a Feast
for all people, for the Gentiles, as well as the Jews.

1. It Is Literally true of Mount Sion at Jerusalem, (in which sense it must be
understood in the next Verse,) This was the first Place; this Mount Sion,
whence the Christian Law was to be given out, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. There the Holy Spirit fell upon the Apostles at Pentecost: And there
the Apostles began their Preaching after the Descent of the Holy Ghost, with
Wonderful Success. So Psalm 36.8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the
Fatness of thy House; Thou shall make them drink of the Rivers of thy
Pleasures. The like in Prove. 9.2. Where Wisdom is said to have killed her
Beasts, and mingled her Wine, and furnished her Table. The Revelation of the
Gospel, etc. All kind of Gifts, and Graces, and Comforts, distributed by the
Ordinances of the Gospel, are to be understood. Especially that part of our
Spiritual Provision, which is said to be Meat indeed, and Drink indeed: I mean
the Crucified Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Blood shed for the
Remission of Sins. That Institution therefore has the very Name of the Table
of the Lord, 1 Cor. 10.21. We cannot be Partakers of the Lord's Table, and the
Table of Devils. It is called a Feast on the Sacrifice of Christ, 1 Cor. 5.7,
8. Of which I shall have occaison to speak afterward. There being all Things
there that are necessary to a Feast; And a Feast for all People for the
Gentiles, whom the Jews despi-, sed, and counted as Dogs, and who were Vile
and Miserable in themselves, without God, and Christ, and under gross Idolatry.
This Feast is for us Gentiles. Which I shall first particularly Explain, and
Prove, and then Apply.

1. In this Spiritual Feast, or Banquet, are the Choicest Provisions that can
be, for the Nourishment of our Souls. There is Spiritual Food for the
satisfaction of Spiritual Hunger where we may eat and be satisfied, and find
that which is sweeter than Honey, the Love of Christ better than Wine, Psalm.
22.6. Cant. 1.2. Wine, that is said to cheer, and delight the heart, Eccles.
10.19. To lift a Man above sad, and melancholy Thoughts, Make a Man forget his
Affliction, and Misery, Prove. 31.7. Give Wine to him that is of a heavy heart,
Let him drink and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more. It may
much more be said so of this Sacramental Wine, exhibiting the Love of Christ to
the Soul. And though Wine be put for all manner of Delicacies, Isa. 25.6. Yet
the Love of Christ is better than Wine, Cant. 1.4 His Blood is Drink indeed,
and his Flesh is Meat indeed, John 6.55. Far beyond Manna, which yet is called
Angels Food. He is Manna for Food, the best Bread; And He is Wine for Drink.

And the Blessedness of the Heavenly State, whereof this Feast is the Earnest,
is set forth by the Pleasures of eating and drinking, Luke 22 30. That you eat
and drink at my Table in my Kingdom. O the Satisfaction and Delight that holy
Souls experience, in tasting of those Provisions, when they come with that due
Preparedness which they ought! All the Delights of this World are not to be
compared with one hours Enjoyment of Christ in this Ordinance: One hour, one
half hour of Communion with the Father, and the Son, by the Spirit, in such a
Duty, is more delightful, than all the Pleasures of the Palate and Taste; It is
a nobler, a purer, a sweeter, a better kind of Content and Satisfaction, that
we here meet with. I may appeal to the Experience of Serious Christians, for
the Truth of this.

2. At a Feast there are All Sorts of Provision; Not only the Choicest and the
Best, but there is Variety. It i^ a Feast of Fat things full of Marrow, of Wine
on the Lees well refined. And it is suitable to every Condition, to every
Relation, to every Necessity. Grace for Grace, out of his Fullness, that is, All
manner of Supplies of Grace, John 1.16. Forgiveness of Sin, to take away our
Fear of Hell; And the Assurance of Eternal Life, to answer our Desires of
Happiness: And therefore answerable to all the Exigencies of our Case. For what
can we need but may be received from Christ, who of God is made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption? His precious Blood can wash away
the stains of our blackest guilt; and his perfect Righteousness be the Covering
of our Naked Souls; by Meriting and procuring our Pardon, by Purchasing and
applying the Spirit of Holiness, Light, Strength, Stability, Comfort. Whatever
we need we may receive from him, among the Provisions of the Gospel, in this
Spiritual Feast.

We may apply to the Heavenly Nourishment of this Table, what the Jews say of
their Manna in the Wilderness; It was sent down by God from Heaven to them; It
contained, they tell us, all the Tastes that any Man desired or longed for; It
was suited to every Palate, and to every Constitution; That none could fail of
being Bp. Patricks Christian Sacrifice.
fed and pleased, though they were of never so different Tempers. It is called
the bread of Heaven, Exodus 16.4. And the Taste of it is said to be like Wafers
made of Honey, Verse 31. And yet in Numb. 11.8. the Taste of it is said to be
as the Taste of fresh Oil. Now, How can all these be true? How can they all
Agree? that this Manna should be like Bread, and like Honey, and like Oil too?
The Jews Answer, That the Young Men tasted in it Bread, the Old Men Honey, and
the Infants Oil. We may Accommodate this to the Divine Food of the Lord's
Table, which is suitable to every Complexion of Mind, and Temper of Spirit. The
Infant Christians are there cherished and encouraged, they having the Oil of
Joy and Gladness poured upon them: The Young Men have Strength and Power by
this Bread of Life, to overcome the Wicked One: The more Aged, the more
Exercised Christians, they find such Relish in it, that they can say, Thy
Commandments are sweeter than the Honey, and the Honeycomb, and in keeping of
them there is great Reward; Being a little Earnest, and Pledge, and Foretaste
of the Joys of the Heavenly Feast. For therefore Manna in the Wilderness had
the Taste of Honey, say the Jews, that it might be an Earnest and
Representation of the Land of Canaan, a Land flowing with milk and honey, unto
which they were now going. In a word, Young and Old, Weak and Strong,
Christians of all Sizes, and different Stations, may receive Nourishment,
Refreshment, and Advantage by this Heavenly Food of the Table of the Lord.
There is great variety at this Feast, to suit every ones Palate and Temper.

3. At a Feast, as there is Rarity, and Variety, so Plenty and Abundance, that
none need go away hungry or empty, complaining or discontented. Here are
Riches, unsearchable Riches of the Grace of Christ. We have here All things
given us, richly to enjoy. And the Sanctifying Gifts and Graces of the Spirit
are said to be shed on us richly, or abundantly, through Jesus Christ our
Savior, Tit 3, 6. There is a Fountain of Grace that will not have the less for
us, by supplying the wants of others.

4. There is a Mirth, and Cheerfulness at this Feast, which is another
Concomitant of a Banquet. A Feast is made for Laughter, and Wine makes Merry,
Eccles. 10.19. When prodigal Sinners first return, their Father has Mirth, and
Music to entertain them. Luke 15.24. Let us kill the fatted Calfe, and make
merry; For this my Son was lost, and is found; was dead, but is alive. And
shall not the Reconciliation between God and our Souls through Christ, when it
is solemnly professed, and avowed at the Table of the Lord, be accompanied with
Joy and Mirth? The Jews were not to Afflict their Souls in any of their Feasts,
Religious or Common. Thou shall Rejoice in thy Feasts, Deuteronomy. 16.14. We are not
called to the House of Mourning. You may eat this Bread with Joy, and drink
this Wine with a Merry Heart, in hopes of God's Acceptance of you, and your
Sacrifice, Eccles. 9.7.

Our Redeemer seems to speak to those who are Disconsolate at his Table, and if
he see us Sad and Melancholy, to use some such Language,

What, Do you not know where you are? Do you not understand what I have done to
you, and for you? What I have done upon the Cross, and what at the Table?

O did we but understand it better, and consider it more, what he has done and
Suffered, purchased and Promised; we should come to this Feast with a Gladsome
Merry Heart. All the Music and Melody that the Feasts of Sensual Men are
attended with, wou^d be nothing to it. Therefore take heed of mistaking the
Nature of this Ordinance, so as to come like Mourners to Morrow to a Funeral:
It is to no such Solemnity, but to a Feast, that you are invited, to a Royal
Feast: And therefore your Hearts and Lips should be full of the high Praises of
God, and Thankful Admiration of Christ, and his Redeeming Love and Grace; I
will bring them to my Holy Mountain, and make them Joyful in my House of Prayer.

5. At a Feast there is Good Company. Now there is no such Company in all the
World, as is to be found at Christ's Table. While the King sits at this
Table, Cant. 1.12. Christ himself is there present, and the Father also; For in
this Ordinance especially we have Fellowship with the Father, and the Son,
through the Spirit. A Communion with them supposes the Presence of Father, and
Son. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is the Communion of Christ's Blood,
and the Bread we break, the Communion of his Body, 1 Cor. 10.16. We are invited
Guests by Christ, and treated as his Friends; We are entertained with Kindness,
and Familiarity, which is an Honor we ought to value* in his own House we are
treated; and have the same Fare with the best of his Friends, who are Invited
with us. We sit down with him, at his own Table, in the best Company, that we
can desire. Haman expresses it as an Honor, that the Queen let none come to
the Banquet but himself: And to morrow, says he, I am invited also with the
King, Esth. 5.12. If the Father, and the Son, and the Children of God that are
his special Favorites, and Heirs of the Heavenly Inheritance, if these are
Good Company, you may have it at the Table.

6. At a Feast there is Welcome Expressed, and give^, by the Master of the Feast.
Such an expression we have of it, Psalm. 23.5. Thou preparest my Table for me,
and Anointest my Head with Oil, or with Aromatical Ointments, formerly used at
great Feasts, as a token of Respect* and Kindness. Thou biddest me to a Feast,
and biddest me welcome; Alluding to the Custom of the Eastern People, and of
the Jews particularly, who expressed the h arty w^lcome they gave their Guests,
by pouring some precious Ointment on their Heads, Psalm. 92.10. Luke 7.39. A
very usual See Bp. Patrick's Christian Sacrifice, p. 100.
Festival Solemnity.

Therefore, when you come to morrow to this Feast, you must think, and believe,
that Christ speaks to you, when you behold the Symbols of his Body and Blood.
For you are not to consider the broken Bread, and the Wine poured out, as dumb
signs, no, they speak very distinctly to all the Communicants; but come with a
cheerful Wedding Garment, hearing the Voice of your Redeemer, as if Christ
should say to you, That you were welcome to his Table, and that he is pleased
that you accept his Invitation. Come, My Brethren, as if he should say, for so
he calls us, when he Ascended to his Father, John 20.17. Go and tell my
Brethren, that I Ascend to my Father, and their Father, to my God, and their
God. Come, my Brethren, does he say, I sent and commissioned my Ministers to
call you to my House, solemnly and earnestly to Invite you to my Table; You did
well that you are come, I take it kindly that you did not reject my Invitation;
I am glad you are come, to Remember my Love, and to show your selves my
Friends. I have no other Design in sending for you, but to make you more
sensible of my Love, and to give you Fresh Tokens of it; to repeat the pledge
and assurance of my Dying Kindness. Do not despise the Entertainment I here
give you, though you see only Bread and Wine; Open the eyes of your Minds,
and let your Faith discern, that this Bread is my Body, my crucified Body, my
Body broken for you; And this Wine poured out is my Blood, my Blood shed for
you. Oh see how I loved you! see what my Love to you brought me to undergo;
Consider how I was used for your sakes, to procure your Peace, and to purchase
your Reconciliation. I have nothing to desire of you, but that you would
continue in my Love; and then I promise you the Love of my Father, and that
your sins shall be forgiven, they shall not be remembered against you, you shall
not come into Condemnation; And all your wants shall be supplied. Nothing you
can need but I have purchased, nothing you can want but I will give. Till I
have fitted you for my Presence above, till you come to be with me in the
Heavenly state; You shall receive it all from time to time. Come, take the
Pledge, and the Assurance of this, by doing this in Remembrance of me.

Come therefore, says Christ, Take and Eat; Eat, O Friends, drink abundantly, O
Beloved. Take, eat this Morsel; as little and inconsiderable as it seems to be,
it cost my Life: I give it to you as a Token of my Love, and of my Fathers
Love. Take it, and Remember both. I say the same for the Cup of Blessing, Drink
it in Remembrance of me; Come pledge me, This is Wine of my own making, when I
trod the Wine Press of my Father's Wrath alone. This will strengthen and revive
thy fainting Spirit; This will cure the Ulcers of thy Heart, This will give
thee Boldness, and Courage to enter into the Presence of thy Father, etc. Thus
does Christ give Welcome to his prepared Guests.

7. And Lastly. This is a peculiar sort of Feast, viz. a Feast upon a
Sacrifice; A Feast that betokens a Covenant, and Reconciliation between God and
such as are Invited Guests at this Table. I often take occasion to mention
this, because I judge it the true Notion of the Lord's Supper, and the sense of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.8. Christ our Passover was Sacrificed for us, Let us
therefore keep the Feast, with the Unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth,
which is spoken of the Feast, from which the Corinthian Church, by the
Authority of Christ, was to bar and seclude the disorderly Person.

It is well known, that Sacrifices were wont to be attended with a Feast. The
Peace Offering under the Law was to be brought on the top of the
Burnt-offerings; No burnt offerings were without some peace offerings; And
having offered them to the Lord, they were to eat their part cheerfully among
their Friends. For then they had, as it were, one Dish sent them from God's
Table. One part of the Offering, viz. God's, was consumed upon the Altar;
Another part, the Priests had by God's Appointment; And a Third, the Offerers
had to Feast upon. Christ's Offering up himself upon the Cross, is the Great
Sacrifice: This Banquet at the Table of the Lord is a Feast on that Sacrifice,
Psalm. 50.5. Gather my Saints together, who have made a Covenant with me by
Sacrifice.

The Offering a Sacrifice was a Foederal Rite, whereby God and his People
became one. Upon which account Salt was used in Sacrifices by God's own
Direction, Lev 2.13. All Nations looked on See Dr. Hammond on Mark 9.50. And P.
Fagius in Levit. 2. And more largely in Dr. Cudworth's Notion of the Lord's
Supper. Bishop Patrick's Christian Sacrifice; and Dr. Pel^ing of the Sacrament,
Chap. 1, 2, 3.
Salt, as a Token of Love, a Pledge of Friendship, a Symbol of Peace. And
Feasting on a Sacrifice was a Rite of the same Nature with Sacrificing; It
being but the Complement, the Close, the Finishing of the Sacrifice. In this
sense some understand those words, Psalm. 50.16. Unto the wicked, God says,
What have thou to do, to declare my Statutes, and that thou should take my
Covenant in thy Mouth, i. e. Eating the Signs and Symbols of the Covenant,
partaking of those Sacrifical Banquets, which were a Token of God's Covenant.
Thus when the Covenant was renewed between God and the Children of Israel;
Moses and Aaron, and the Seventy Nobles of the Children of Israel went up to
God, and saw his Glory on the Mount, and after their burnt-offerings and
peace offerings are Sacrificed, they did eat and drink, Exodus 24.11. The eating
of the Passover was such a Foederal Solemnity, and therefore no Stranger was to
eat of it, Exodus 12. It did not belong to those who did not belong to that
Covenant, which God had made with his Peculiar People the Children of Israel.

This Evangelical Feast at the Lord's Table is of the like nature and
signification. Besides, the Analogy and Resemblance between these, the words of
Institution do sufficiently prove it; for speaking of the Cup, or the Wine in
the Cup, Our Lord said, This is my blood of the New Covenant. It is the
Representation of that Blood, which is the Seal of the New Covenant: As
Circumcision is called the Covenant of Circumcision, Acts 7.8. because it was
the Token and Seal of the Covenant between God and Abraham.

Eating and Drinking together was always reckoned some token of Friendship, and
Accord; Especially when there is a Solemn Feast on purpose to express, and
signify this Agreement; And when it follows after Disagreement and Variance,
it amounts to a covenant, or league, which the Parties enter into to be
henceforward Friends. As Genesis 26.28, 29, 30, 31. Verses. Let us make a covenant
with thee, etc. And then it follows, He made them a feast, and they did eat and
drink. But in the present case, there is yet more, for it was a more sacred way
of Covenanting, when they Feasted upon part of the Sacrifice, that was made to
God, of which I shall speak more presently. And usually it was accompanied with
an Oath, in the presence of God.

Now at the Lords Table, Do we not profess our owning the New Covenant, made
between God and us? And do we not there renew our Baptismal Covenant? Do we not
accept of Christ, and all the Bl^ssings of the Covenant of Grace? Do we not
Resign our selves, and all we have, to be his, according to the Tenor and
Terms of it? Do we not receive the Pledge, and Assurance of his Love to us, and
Engage our Faith that we will be his Servants; Binding our selves to all the
Duties of the Covenant, as God does oblige himself to bestow all the Blessings
of it?

2. Having thus explained somewhat of this Banquet, or Feast, I might consider
the Reasons of its Appointment, and the excellent purposes it serves for;
Besides the known, express, and principal one, of being a Memorial of Christ's
Love, that we may remember him Crucified for us; there may be other
Considerations, partly with respect to God and Christ, partly with relation to
the Souls of Believers.

1. To represent the Royalty, and Magnificence of God, and the Transcendant
Riches and Glory of the Grace of Christ. Accordingly we Read, that Princes and
Potentates, and Great Men, upon such Accounts, were wont to make Sumptuous
Entertainments, Esth. 1.3, 4. He made a Feast unto all his Princes, and his
Servants, to show them the Riches of his glorious Kingdom, and the Honor of
his Excellent Majesty.

Partly with respect to us. First, To encourage us in the difficult Services we
may meet with. To animate and embolden us to hold on our way, and work, of
doing and suffering the Will of God, in obedience to Christ. The burden of
Affliction would be much more heavy, and our Spirits more like to faint, were
it not for some Refreshment, Quickening, and Comfort, now and then in such
Ordinances of the Gospel: But the Pledge of the Love of God, and the
everlasting Love of Christ, the Earnest of Heaven, and the Hopes of it, that we
should Sin, and Suffer, and Sorrow no more, makes outward Afflictions
tolerable: For if God be reconciled to us, and pleased with us; If the Redeemer
shine upon us, and say he is ours; If his Love be shed abroad in our Hearts,
and ours kept alive to him; we can bear any thing, o^ lose any thing, and not
despond. Besides, the Solemn Dedication of our selves, and all we have unto
Christ, which we there make, helps to awe our Hearts, and check our impatient
murmurs; when by any severe Dispensation of Providence he does but take us at
our word. For he can only Take that, which we Resigned to him before; and when
he does, he tries whether we were Hypocrites, or Sincere in our Resignation.

2. It may be considered, That at this Feast we have the nearest Fellowship,
and sweetest Communion with God, and Christ, of almost any Ordinance of the
Gospel; And the continuance of such a blessed Intercourse between God and our
Souls, was another ground of his appointing it. Which will appear more plainly,
by considering Another end of it, viz. to ratify and confirm the Covenant
between God and us. This is one special design of thus eating and drinking in
his Presence, to confirm our Covenant. It was very usual, especially in the
Eastern parts of the World, to ratify Contracts and Covenants, by eating and
drinking together. Thus in the forementioned Instance, Abimelech and Isaac
celebrated such a Covenant-Feast, Genesis 26.30. as a Token of Friendship between
them. Laban's eating with Jacob on an heap of Stones, was a Foederal Rite, Genesis
31.46. The Israelites eating of the Gibeonites Victuals, was the contracting a
League with them, Josh. 9.14. When David speaks of his Friends Treachery (in
words very applicable to Judas) Psalm. 41.9. he says, My own Familiar Friend,
in whom I trusted, who did eat of my Bread, has lift up his Heel against me:
He meant one who had entered into Covenant with him by a Feast (as you find that
Abner did, 2 Samuel 3.20.) Therefore, in stead of a Friend, it is otherwise
rendered in the Margin of our Bibles, The Man of my Peace, or the Man that was
at Peace with me. Hence the Hebrew word, which signifies a Covenant, is derived
from a Root, which signifies to Eat. And hence too we read of an Idol among the
Sichemites, which was called Berith (or the God of a Covenant) because the
People of that Place were wont, when they made Covenants, to eat and drink with
their Confederates in the House of that God of theirs, as you find they did,
when they entered into a League with Gaal, and made him their Head in Opposition
to Abimeleck, Judge. 9.27.

Humane Writers afford many Instances of this Nature, how People were wont
anciently to make and ratify Covenants between Nation and Nation, between
Party and Party, and between Man and Wife, sometimes by eating Bread, sometimes
by drinking Wine, and frequently by partaking of both together. Which shows,
that it was the General Custom of Mankind to Contract, and Covenant with one
another by the Visible Rites of Feasting, and Banqueting together. The Old
Heathens had many Religious Feasts before their Idols, whereby they Covenanted
with those Imaginary Deities. The Israelites are charged with Idolatry, for
complying with such Pagan Rites, Exodus 32.6. 1 Cor. 10.7. When the People made
an Altar to the Golden Calf, they bring their Peace Offerings, and Celebrate a
Religious Banquet upon the remainders thereof. They sat down to eat and to
drink, (to Feast together before the Golden Calf,) and rose up to play. This
they did in Imitation of the Egyptians, among whom they had lived so long. So
by the Persuasion of the Moabites, they joined themselves to Baal-Peor, entered
into Communion with that Heathen Deity, that was Worshipped on Mount Peor, by
eating the Sacrifices of the Dead or Seldom de Diis Syris. Syntagm. 1. cap. 5.
such things as were offered in the Memory of the dead, Numb. 25.3. Psalm.
106.28.

And the Apostle calls the eating of the Heathen Sacrifices, a Fellowship with
Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20. There were some in the Apostles time did go and eat of
those Idol Sacrifices, 1 Cor. 8.7. To prevent which a Canon was made at the
Council of Jerusalem, that Christians should abstain from Meats offered unto
Idols, Acts 15. Because by sitting at Meat at the Idols Temple, they made
themselves partakers of the Table of Devils. And the Apostle shows the
Inconsistency of this with the participation of the Lords Table, because this
is a Sacrifical Banquet, proper and peculiar to us Christians, as the
Idol-Feasts, were Sacrifical Banquets proper to the Pagans, and the Mosaical
ones to the Jews, 1 Cor. 10. As Jews and Heathens were wont to feed upon a
Sacrificed Beast, we Christians do feed upon a Sacrificed Redeemer, by eating
and drinking in Commemoration of his Death and Sacrifice, and thereby Renewing
our Covenant with him, as his avowed, sworn Servants, and Disciples.

4. Another Design of this Feast may be, to wean us from the Vanities of this
World, by tasting these Spiritual Provisions, and therein how gracious the Lord
is: That by eating of this Bread, and drinking of this Wine, we may hunger and
thirst no more after Sensual Delights, That we may not care to feed on Husks,
when we eat of this Bread in our Fathers House.

5. That our Thoughts of the Heavenly Glory, and our Desires after it, and
progressive Meetness for it, may be excited and promoted. And no Institution of
the Gospel is so proper for this, so well Adapted for this purpose, as were
easy to show, and your own Meditations can sufficiently enlarge.

Use 1. Has the blessed God his Feast, and Banquet to Entertain such wretched
Creatures as we? Let us sit down, and Admire his Adorable Condescension, That
the Lord of Glory should make a Feast for such Beggars, such Worms, such Vile
Sinners as we! That we should be called to the Privileges of Children, to sit
down at his Table; We that deserve not the Crumbs with the Dogs under the
Table: That he does not only richly Feast us, but stoops to Treat us in our own
way, in a manner so sensible, and easy, and plain; that we may see, and taste,
to our fuller satisfaction, that he is Gracious: That the outward Signs and
Symbols are so plain, and obvious, when the great Things signified, and
represented, are fit to employ the deepest Meditation, and surpass all that our
most comprehensive Thoughts can reach.

2. Does God make such a Feast? Then let him never Invite, but be you willing
and ready to come; Take heed how you slight the Invitation, and Call of God. It
is a dangerous thing, I grant, to come unprepared, and unready; and so is it to
tarry away, and to refuse Obedience to the Command of our dying Lord, who the
same Night in which he was betrayed, Instituted this Feast, and calls us to do
it in Remembrance of him. They that come without a Wedding Garment, they are
said to be Unworthy, and to eat and drink unworthily: And they that refuse to
come to the Gospel-Feast upon Christ's Invitation, they are said to be Unworthy
too, Matthew. 22.8. You little mend the case, if, when you hear of the Danger of
coming unworthily, you will not come at all: For that Impenitence, and Unbelief
that makes unworthy Communicants, will not excuse your Neglect of the Duty; You
must Repent and believe in Christ, and so come prepared. He that eats this
Bread, and drinks this Cup unworthily, he eats and drinks Judgment to
himself: It Is certain he is guilty of a Sin, that without Repentance, will damn
him; and he is in danger of some Calamity, Sickness, or sudden Death: Such as
was inflicted on the faulty Corinthians: But he does not so eat and drink
Damnation, as that such a Sin is Unpardonable, and shall certainly be followed
with Hell: For it is not the Sin against the Holy Ghost, which is never
Repented of. If the fear of Damnation have influence in the one Case, it should
have in the other: because to neglect this Duty, is a Sin, as well as to come
unprepared; we ought to do neither.

You therefore who are to come, look to it that you come worthily, lest you be
Guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord; Lest you be Guilty of the Murder of
Christ, and of Self-murder at once, by eating and drinking your own Damnation.
Ignorant persons, scandalous persons, Hypocrites, and false Pretenders to
Religion; such as intrude rashly, and come impenitently, with the habitual love
of Sin, without true Repentance: All who come ignorantly, or hypocritically;
who cannot discern the Lord's Body, or come with a design to cover some secret
Lust: Let these beware, for they come, as it were, with a Knife in their hand,
to kill the Redeemer in his own House, to stab him at his own Table, and
Crucify him afresh; They are Guilty of his Body and Blood, which in stead of
pleading on their behalf for Mercy, will cry against them for Vengeance.

You will hereupon, I doubt not be glad of a little Advice, and Direction, that
you may come worthily, and be duly prepared, that you may avoid so great a
hazard. And because you have many good Books on this Subject that will Assist
you in this Matter, I shall only put you in mind of a few Things: As,

1. That you take some convenient Time for solemn and serious Preparation. They
especially should do so, who have never come till now; And they who for some
considerable time have neglected it, with whom several Months have past, since
they have been at the Lord's Table; Either through their own Neglect, which
they must Repent of, or for want of Opportunity. God expected and required
solemn Preparation, for the Passover Feast, Exodus, 19.10. He does so for this
Feast, upon Christ our Passover, sacrificed for us. Therefore take some time to
consider what you are about to undertake, Beg of God a prepared Heart; and by
Reading, Meditation, and Prayer, endeavor to bring your Spirits into a
suitable Frame for such solemn Work. He brought me into his Banqueting House.
Christ himself, by his Spirit, must lead his own Guests to his own Table; He
must awaken and excite all those Graces that are to be exercised in this Feast.
Therefore beg a prepared Heart, and do what you can by other means to endeavor
it.

2. Renew your Repentance for all the Sins of your Life. Do not come with
filthy Hearts and Hands to the Table of the Lord, no more than you would in
filthy Rags to a great Man's Table. Lay aside all Filthiness, and Superfluity
of Naughtiness; Purge out the Old Leaven of Hypocricy and Malice, of Ignorance,
or Envy, and Wickedness of every sort; that you may come with penitent, humbled
Hearts, and so with a thankful, receptive Frame, consenting to all the Claims,
and Purposes of this Ordinance.

3. Therefore Examine your selves afresh, that you may thus come. Review the
State of your Souls, see how it has been, and is with you, as to Heart, and
Life, State, and Frame. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, 1 Cor.
11.28. Examine your selves about your Knowledge, and your Faith, to understand
the meaning, and the very mystery of this Table; that you may firmly Assent to,
and heartily believe, what is Represented, and exhibited here; And have right
Apprehensions of those Doctrines, that Explain this Ordinance, as concerning
our State of Apostasy, concerning the Method of our Recovery by Christ, and our
Faith in him, as Teacher, Savior, and Lord, in all his Offices. The like might
be said concerning Repentance, or Godly Sorrow for Sin, hatred of it, and
hearty forsaking of it; Whether you can penitently, believingly, seal back your
part of the Covenant, (when God sets the Broad Seal of Heaven unto his part;)
when he says, I will be thy God, and I will remember thy sins no more; I will,
with my Christ, freely give thee all things: This I promise, this I seal to
every of you, says God, I here deliver it as my Act and Deed. Now can you seal
back your part of the Covenant? Lord, I will be thine, henceforth I desire, and
resolve to be entirely thine, thy sealed Fountain, thy sealed Garden; I engage
henceforward to be the Lord's; This I deliver as my Act and Deed.

In a word, Examine your selves, Do you believe the Gospel of Christ to be
true, and heartily consent to the Doctrines of it? Do you resolve to be
Governed by Christ as your Lord, and consent to the Terms of his Gospel? Do you
take him for your only Savior, and look for all your Acceptance with God, and
hope of Pardon, and Life, only for his sake, and upon his Account? Do you
consider the Vow you made in Baptism, of Fidelity to Christ, and resolve to be
true to it? Do you here seriously Renew it, and will you now again promise
Faithfulness to him, to your Life's end? Do you value his Favor, and Grace
above all things? and come to remember his dying Love, and receive the
Communications of the purchased Spirit, with this Desire, Design, and Hope,
That you may love him, and obey him better, and that you may live in Love, and
Charity toward your Brethren, and all Mankind, etc.

4. Look to the Inward part of the Ordinance, and labor to Appropriate, and
Apply Christ to your selves. Here is a Covenant confirmed by Sacrifice, by
Blood, by the precious blood of Christ; I am called, O my Soul, to feat upon
it. This Blood was shed to Reconcile me to God, I will drink of it in token of
such a Reconciliation made, as a Testimony that I have Recieved the Atonement
made by that Blood. My Body was broken for you, says Christ, Take, and eat it.
My Blood was shed for you, Take, and drink it. Apply it to your selves, every
one to his own Soul, saying, He loved me, and gave himself for me.

5. Endeavor to fix your Purposes and Resolutions of faithful Adherence to
Christ, whatever it cost you. Tell him that you distrust your selves, and are
afraid of Temptation. Tell him in Prayer, You are almost ashamed to come to his
Table, you are such vile unworthy Sinners, and are afraid you shall not keep
the Covenant, that now again you desire to renew: But bewail your selves, as
sensible of your sins, and weary of them. Tell him, that you hate them, and
resolve against them, or else you durst not have the face to ask forgiveness,
and receive the Seal of it. Therefore Resign your selves into his Hands: Beg
that the Holy Spirit would take possession of you, that you may not backslide,
and wander as you have done. Tell him, that you renounce all Confederacy with
his Enemies, you would fain be more steadfast in the way of the Lord: It is the
desire of your Souls that you may not violate this Covenant; but having sworn,
that you may perform it, to keep his Righteous Judgments; and that you hope you
are ready, through his Grace strengthening you, to do, and suffer any thing for
him.

Therefore penitently, and humbly offer up your selves to be his for ever;
saying, Lord, I present thee with what thou have so dearly bought: And here
without reserve, I give up my self to be Thine. O do not reject a broken, and
contrite Heart, that desires to be employed, and used as may best please, and
serve thee. Lord! I am nothing, I have nothing, I can do nothing, I deserve
nothing, I desire nothing; but to love thee better, to be more filled with thy
Grace, to partake more of thine Image, to be enabled to honor thee now, and
enjoy thee for ever. Grant me this, Lord, and do with me what thou will. Accept
the Sacrifice I make of my self unto thee, of Soul and Body, of all I have,
without any Exception or Reserve, to thy holy will and pleasure.

Lastly, After all this, Remember that Thanksgiving and Joy, is a principal
part of our Work at this Table. Let our Souls, and all that is within us then
praise the Lord, giving Thanks to the Father of Mercies, for this unspeakable
Gift; Blessing the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for all the Riches
of his Grace in him. The very Name of this Sacrament, the Eucharist, imports
this, That Thanksgiving is our principal Work. He took the Bread, and he took
the Cup, and he gave Thanks, say the Evangelists, indifferently of the one, and
of the other, Blessing, and Giving of Thanks, being the same. This Food is
hallowed by Thanksgiving, and if ever the High Praises of God should be in our
Mouths, it ought to be so upon this Occasion. Praising God for parting with his
only Son, not sparing him, that we might be spared. Thanking our Lord Redeemer,
for leaving the Right Hand of his Father, and the Glory of Heaven, to come and
Tabernacle amongst us, and take our Nature, and Dye for us. Lord Jesus! Who are
we? What am I? that thou should part with the Glory of Heaven, and part with
thine own Life, upon the accursed Tree, for such a Wretch as I am? Was I dearer
to thee, than thine own Heart-blood, that thou did freely shed it upon the
Cross for me? How Amazing is thy Love! How do I rejoice in it! With what
Thankfulness do I reremember it! How am I ashamed of my self, that I love thee
no more! O that I might feel the Constraints of thine Endearing Love! to warm,
and quicken my cold, and dead Heart; that so I might speak thy Praise? And let
Heaven and Earth, and Angels and Men, for ever Extol thy Matchless Grace, and
Love, which passes Knowledge, but calls for Everlasting Thanksgiving.

With such a Frame as this, let us endeavor to Come, and we shall find that
His Banner over us will be Love.

THE END.
The Eighth Discourse, AFTER THE Lord's Supper.
From St. JOHN xx. 27, 28. Then said he unto Thomas, Reach hither thy Finger,
and behold my Hands; and reach hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my Side, and
be not faithless, but believing.

And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord, and my God.


A Strange and surprising Spectacle, to see an Apostle of our Lord carry it
like an Infidel, an Unbeliever; To behold one of the Twelve, that was to spread
the Faith of Christ throughout the Universe, to want that Faith, which he was
to persuade others to. To hear the great Article of the Resurrection, one of
the most deeply Fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion, to be
obstinately denied by those Lips, that were to Publish the Gospel of Christ:
And this as the Sum of it, That he is Risen from the dead. What more likely to
scandalize the Weak, to stagger the Faith of many, not yet confirmed Disciples,
and to hinder the belief of Christ's being Risen, than such an Example of
Incredulity in one of his Apostles?

But the permission of such Falls, and the raising a Revenue of Glory to the
Redeemer by them, is one of the Secrets of Predestination, that will be
Eternally Adored. This is sufficiently manifest in this very Passage, relating
to the Apostle Thomas; whose Infidelity, as one of the Ancients observes, has
proved as serviceable to Christianity, as the Faith of the other Apostles. His
Incredulity strengthens our Faith in the Resurrection of our Savior, as it
gave occasion to his Appearing another time for the Cure of his Unbelief: And
because, after so much Obstinacy, and pertinacious Doubt, he at last yields,
and acknowledges the Truth of Christ's Resurrection, and makes a Glorious
Confession of his Faith: Whereas, if only a few credulous Men, men of an easy
and hasty Faith* had assured us of it, their Testimony had been more liable to
suspicion.

The Wisdom of God has Recorded the Faults, and Miscarriages of the Apostles,
for our Instruction and Use. These Suns enlighten us, not only by the Luster of
their good Examples, when they shine in Grace and Holiness; but even by their
Eclipses too. Their Cowardice, their Rashness, their Presumption, their
Unbelief, is of use to be considered. Our Heavenly Physician Extracts some of
the best Medicines, out of the most deadly Poison, to caution, and warn, and
instruct, and Edify us, by the Miscarriages, and Faults of David, of Peter, of
Thomas, and the like.

Let us therefore view this Passage, and consider what Reflections may be made
upon it: And the whole may be comprehended under these Four Heads.

1. The Incredulity of this Apostle, he could not believe, without seeing, and
feeling, and having the Testimony of Sense. Except I shall see in his Hands the
print of the Nails, and put my Finger into the print of the Nails, and thrust
my Hand into his Side, I will not believe, Verse 25.

2. The Condescension and Kindness of Christ, in appearing to him another time,
and granting it, Verse 26, 27.

3. The Cure of his Unbelief, and the Excellent Confession of Faith, which
thereupon he makes, Verse 28. And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord,
and my God.

4. The useful Admonition which our Savior gives us concerning Faith, that
though Thomas having seen him, had believed, yet Rather blessed are they that
have not seen, and yet have believed.

1. Concerning the Incredulity of this Apostle, the Evangelist gives us an
Account, that on the First Day of the Week, toward Evening, our Lord being
Risen from the Dead, early in the Morning, when the Disciples were met
together, and had shut the Door for fear of the Jews, Ver. 19. He suddenly
presents himself amongst them, saying, Peace be unto you. He assures them of
his being Risen from the Dead, imparts to them the Holy Ghost, and gives them a
Charge and Commssion, to act as Apostles, in Remitting, or Retaining Sins. But
Thomas, whose Greek Name was Didymus, both signifying Twins, was not present at
this Assembly: But as soon as the other Disciples met him, they tell him, They
had seen the Lord, that Mary Magdalen had seen him, that Peter had seen him,
and the two Disciples going to Emaus, and then all the Ten, and had full
Assurance that he was Risen. This makes little Impression in order to his
believing it; for no Eyes will serve him but his own. Though Faith comes by
hearing, he professes he would not believe, except he saw; Except I see in his
hands the print of the Nails, and put my Finger into the prints of the Nails,
and thrust my Hand into his Side, I will not believe.

O suspicious incredulous Man! Who will be the Loser, if thou will not believe?
But wherefore do thou doubt? How is it that so many Eyes and Tongues are not
as credible, as thine own Eyes and Hands? Shall the World be Proselyted to the
Faith of Christ, upon the Testimony of these Witnesses, and wilt not thou
Assent? Did not thy Lord foretell his own Death, and Resurrection? Did thou
not hear him declare, that he must be Crucified, and that afterward on the
Third Day he would Rise again? Is there any thing we Attest concerning his
Resurrection, but what was promised, and foretold? Why may not we be credited
in our Report of a Matter of Fact, whereof we have so plain and full an
Evidence? What ground is there to disbelieve so many Eyewitnesses: If there
had been none but the Women, who saw him, yet having themselves seen him, their
Testimony in that case might have been credited: But here are Ten Disciples
that say, We have seen the Lord. Had they been Ten Strangers, there were little
reason to Reject the Testimony of Ten Persons, to one Point which they had the
Testimony of Sense to assure them of: But here are Ten of thy Companions, and
Brethren, and Apostles, of whose Capacity, and Probity, and Faithfulness, thou
can not doubt: And they all agree in this Testim^^y* We have seen the Lord.
Shall every Word be established in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses, as says
Moses, and will thou not believe, when the Number is so much grease? No, except
I see the print of the Nails, etc. I will not believe.

In this Unreasonable Distrust, and Sullen Unbelief, he continues for a whole
week; obstinately professing, That, without such an unreasonable Condescension
of Christ, to convince his very Senses, that he will not acknowledge his being
Risen. It is strange, that one of the Twelve, an Apostle of our Lord, after
Three Years Conversation in his Family, should be so Incredulous, as to believe
nothing but what he saw; and that he should refuse to believe on such ample
Testimony; especially when it was an Article that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
Job, and David, believed concerning the Messiah, whom they never saw.

It is the more surprising too in this Apostle, because he had not only been
eminently called by Christ, and long conversed with him, been brought up in his
Company, and was one of his House; but on a former Occasion, this Apostle had
declared more zeal than the Rest of them; when they Hesitated concerning the
Proposal Christ made, of his going into Judea to raise Lazarus, upon the
account of the hatred of the Jews against him, John 11.16. Then said Thomas to
the other Disciples, Let us also go, that we may die with him. Tho some think
he spoke this with another Air, and in another Sense, than is commonly thought;
as if he would say, Since we cannot persuade him, let us even go and perish, if
it must be so; Perish we must, and there is an end.

But, to take the words of this Apostle in the most Charitable Sense, he
professes his zeal for Christ beyond his Fellows, and a Commendable Forwardness
to suffer with him: But now the Death of Christ seems to have swallowed up his
Faith and Courage; now he will not believe except he can see, nor then neither,
unless he can thrust his finger into the print of the nails; Which was a bold
prescribing to God, and contained a great deal of Absurdity, and of mischievous
consequence in it: For it intimates, as if we were not obliged to believe
Christ is Risen, and Alive, nor any such matter of Fact, upon the Testimony of
Others, unless we our selves may touch and see, and have the Evidence of our
own Sense. Whereas, How then could Thomas himself believe the Scriptures of the
Old Testament? How could he be satisfied that there was such a Man as Moses, or
David, or of the Truth of any of those things related concerning the Ancestors
of the Jews, in Egypt, the Wilderness, or Canaan, which he himself did not see?

This is further aggravated, by considering the Nature, and Import of this
Article, which he refuses to believe: Not only as that which was foretold
concerning the Messiah, by the Scriptures of the Old Testament, but as the
Basis, and Foundation of our Religion, as that wherein the Glory of Christ is
principally concerned; as that which removes the Ignominy of his Cross; And
therefore the Jews, who set themselves to oppose the Belief of his
Resurrection, were thereby, in some respects, more Injurious to Christ, than by
their Crucifixion of him: For they do what they can to deprive him of that new
Life he had, when he was Risen; and they kill him a Second Time. This therefore
aggravates the Fault of Thomas, that by his Unbelief, he Subscribes to the
Calumnies of the Jews; He takes their part, and joins with them; He disowns,
condemns, and denies, that which Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men, had
testified and published, and born witness to, even the Resurrection of Christ
from the Dead.

Before I proceed to his Cure, and Recovery, let us consider what Instructions
may be learned from the Incredulity of this Apostle. As,

1. That Faith is no such Easy Matter as some persuade themselves. Unbelief is
strangely Rooted in the Hearts of Men, and very difficultly cured. I will not
believe, except I see; nay, I will not believe my Eyes, unless I touch, and
thrust my Finger into the print of the Nails, and my Hands into his Side. Our
First Parents Sinned by Unbelief; Adam fell by Incredulity, and has left the
Fatal Impression of that Poison upon all his posterity. But where is the Eve?
Where is the Apple, and Serpent, in this case? There needs no other Eve to
tempt to the sin of Unbelief, than the sin of our own Flesh, and any kind of
Temptation is enough to draw us to it. The Devil does not tell Thomas, as he
did our First Parents, You shall be as God's, You shall not dye; But rather on
the contrary, You shall be as Beasts, You shall die, and never Rise more: For
if Christ be not Risen, we in vain expect to Rise; his Resurrection being the
cause, and pattern of ours.

Now under this Temptation, this Holy Apostle fell; and if he, who had true
Love to Christ, and was a True Disciple, was yet so Incredulous; it is less
strange that the greatest part of the World, as to Divine Things, are so
Unbelieving; when the Corruptions, and Passions, and evil Inclinations of Men,
have such a Power and Influence upon their Minds. There needs therefore the
Exercise of a mighty power to produce Faith in the Heart; And accordingly we
read of the exceeding greatness of that mighty Power, which raised Christ from
the dead, employed toward them that believe, Ephesians. 1.19, 20.

It is observable, That nothing but the Presence of Christ himself, could cure
the Unbelief of this Apostle; Till then, the Testimony of Mary Magdalen, and
all that Peter, and John could say, all the Discourses of the other Apostles,
had no effect. And so it is still, that without the Presence, and Power of
Christ to Accompany the Ministry of the Word, they who are Unbelievers will
continue in their Unbelief. But a few plain words, accompanied with the Power
and Efficacy of the Spirit of Christ, shall make the most obstinate Unbeliever
sall down on his Face, and cry out with this Apostle, My Lord, and my God.

2. In that his Unbelief is attributed to his Absence from the other Disciples,
when they Assembled together, We may learn to value the Assemblies of
Christians, in hopes of the Presence of Christ, and the Manifestation of
himself. It Is true, it is said, that the Two Disciples returning from Emaus to
Jerusalem, found the Eleven gathered together, Luke 24.33. How then if Thomas
were absent, are they called Eleven, after the Death of Judas, and before the
Choice of Matthias. I Answer, Dr. Lightfoot.
When the Eleven are mentioned, we must not suppose it exactly meant of the
Number of the Apostles then Present, but of the present Number of the Apostles.
By his Absence from them, he not only missed the good News that Mary brought of
the Resurrection of Christ; But he lost the comfortable Sight of Christ
himself, and so was left in Doubts and Unbelief, which they were delivered
from. The Apostle, Heb. 10.25. cautions against See Dr. Owen on Heb. Chap. 10.
Verse. 25.
Forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is. Not
only that which is Total, which is the Fruit and Evidence of Absolute
Apostasy; but that which is Partially only, in the want of Diligence, and
Conscientious Care, in a Constant Attendance on Christian Assemblies, according
as the Rule, and their Institution do require: Whether it proceed from Fear of
Suffering, or from Spiritual Sloth, with the Occasions and Affairs of this
Life, which come in Competition. This is the first way, for the most part,
whereby an Evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the living God, does
evidence it self unto others. Forsaking of Church Assemblies is usually an
Entrance into Apostasy.

Believe it, Christians, you cannot but be Losers by your Absence from the
Public Assemblies, especially on the Lord's Day, as this was when the
Disciples met together, and Christ was with them: And if Thomas had not come
amongst them the next Lord's Day, he might have continued longer in his
Incredulity. He had met with the Presence of Christ, if he had not forsaken the
Assemblies of the other Disciples. You must not expect to have the same
Presence of Christ in Solitude, or alone, as in the Public Assemblies, where
his Special Presence is Promised, and usually Found. They who pretend, for the
better Enjoyment of the Divine Presence, to retire into Deserts, and
Hermitages, to Monasteries, and Cloisters; they greatly mistake and deceive
themselves: for in stead of retiring out of the World, they retire out of the
Church, and forsake the Company of the Saints; They quit the Presence of
Christ, and lose the Opportunities of beholding the Wonders of his Grace, and
of receiving the Influences of his Presence, and Spirit.

Therefore do not discontinue your Attendance on Public Worship, when you have
Opportunity. Do not say, We can Read as good a Sermon at home, or Pray as well
at home. If you absent from the House of God, you must not think that Christ
will follow you to your own Houses, while you refuse to visit him in his. If
you are not with your Brethren, when they Assemble together, you will not find
such Manifestations of Christ to you, as others Experience. You displease him
by imitating the Example of Thomas, and may expect to be assaulted, and
staggered by Temptations to Infidelity, and all other sins, which only the
Presence of Christ, and his Grace can cure: For where two or three are met
together in the Name of Christ, he has promised to be with them. It is in the
Assemblies of his People, that he manifests himself; it is there he makes known
the Power of his Death, a d the Glory of his Resurrection; it is there he
dispenses the Gifts and Graces of his Spirit; And they that absent themselves
out of Choice, they are voluntarily deprived of these Blessings.

Suppose you should spend your time on the Lord's Day at home, in Prayer,
Reading, and Meditation, yet there is little reason to expect God should accept
you therein, while it signifies a Neglect, if not a Contempt of Public
Worship, which is more for his Honor, and is expressly required, by the
Institution of such Assemblies, and Apostolical Practice agreeable thereunto.
You cannot reasonably hope for such Effusisions of the Divine Grace and Spirit,
in a secret corner, as in the Congregation of the Faithful. There is room and
time enough for Private Devotions, without the neglect of the Public Worship.
And God has promised to be present in Christian Assemblies: And his
Institutions are never without a Blessing, when there are Subjects capable of
receiving it. You should therefore be glad of an Opportunity, and Call, to Meet
your Brethren in the House of God.

3. I observe further, that what we have found of the Presence and
Manifestation of Christ, we may Communicate in order to the Conviction of
Others, and the Assistance of their Faith. All the Disciples endeavored to
persuade Thomas of Christ's Resurrection, they All told him, We have seen the
Lord; and no doubt they urged him, with all the Circumstances of it, to
convince him of the Unreasonableness of his Obstinacy, who would not believe,
except he could see. How unreasonable was it, might they tell him, that Christ
should appear again upon his Account, merely to comply with his Curiosity? And
if he should appear again, how unlikely it was that he should be privileged
more than they, who had only a bare sight of him; Why should he have more? Why
should he be permitted to thrust his Hand into our Lord's Side, and his Fingers
into the Print of the Nails? He might expect rather that he would say to him,
as to Mary, Touch me not, for I am not yet Ascended: And so, if he should
appear, and be seen of him, he might still continue an Infidel.

This kind Office they did for him; thus doubtless did they endeavor to
convince him, though without success, they tell him, what they have seen. And
they that have any sight of Christ, or Experience of his Presence, as they
cannot but be willing to impart it to Others, so they may, and ought to do it,
in order to their Conviction. Only let us take heed, that such Communications
be done with all possible Wisdom, and Humility.

4. That it is Unreasonable, and Provoking, to refuse to Believe the Truth of
any thing, merely because we have not the Testimony of Sense, to confirm it.
This was the Apostles Fault, I will not believe, except I see, and feel the
Print of the Nails. This is to make Terms with the Blessed God, to limit the
Holy One of Israel, and unreasonably to Expect, that what is the Object of
Faith, should come under the View of Sense.

5. I may observe further, that Peter was one of these Witnesses, that had seen
the Lord; and yet Thomas does not hearken to Him neither, nor regard what he
says, more than what the other Apostles said. What little ground is there to
think then, that he had any Supremacy above the rest of the Apostles, and that
he was the Prince of them? If he were so, Why did he not do his Office? Why did
he not show his Authority? Here is a fair Occasion for him to make use of the
Authority of his Keys, to stop the Mouth of this Unbeliever, who says, he will
not believe, except he see. Why does not Peter define, and determine the
matter, that was questioned, doubted, and denied by Thomas? There is nothing of
all this, however proper the occasion might have been.

6. In that this Incredulity of the Apostle was overruled to so much good, for
the further Confirmation of the Great Doctrine of Christ's Resurrection, let us
admire the Divine Wisdom, and Goodness in the Government of the World; who, tho
he cannot be the Author of Sin, does yet overruled it, to his own Glory. He
has done so in many Eminent Examples, and he did so in this?

Hereby the Honor of Christ is the more advanced by his open Confession of him
afterward, as Lord and God: and the Truth of his being Risen is the better
confirmed, and so the Faith of others assisted by his Fall. It was well for the
Apostle, and it was well for Us, that he did not believe presently: He was
afterward brought to the most admirable Exercise, and Declaration of his Faith
in Christ, not only of his being Risen, but of his being the Eternal Son of
God, and of his happy Interest in him, and Relation to him, as his Lord, and
his God: And we have a greater Evidence thereby of the Truth of Christ's
Resurrection.

Doubtless this Fall of Thomas was also a Motive to his greater Diligence in
the Service of Christ, and Zeal for his Glory; as it was with the Apostle Paul,
and Peter, and others.

7. Let us not rashly judge of Men by a single Act. Thomas had true Faith,
notwithstanding this Fit of Doubting, and Unbelief; which revived upon the
Sight, and Presence of Christ, within a few Days. Many, that in a fit of
Temptation, we may think, have no Truth of Grace; yet if we stay a while, do
soon discover it: Some special Ordinance, or Providence brings them to
themselves, and suddenly shows the Reality of that, which did not Appear, but
the contrary Corruption.

2. Having thus considered the Unbelief of this Apostle, let us now observe the
Compassion, Condescension, and Kindness of Christ to this Incredulous Apostle.
Eight days after, the Disciples being together, and Thomas with them, Jesus
came and stood in the midst of them, saying, Peace be with you; and says to
Thomas, Verse. 27. Reach hither thy Finger, and behold my Hands; and reach
hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my Side, and be not Faithless, but
Believing.

What Injustice, if our Savior had left him to his own Pertinacious
Incredulity? Whom could he have blamed but himself, if he had continued in his
Unbelief? But our Lord came and showed him his Hands, and Feet, and bids him do
what he desired, for his Conviction. How mercifully does he pity us, in our
Errors, and Infirmities? With what Tenderness and Compassion does he reclaim
us? And this when he was Risen from the Dead, after he was declared to be the
Son of God with Power, when he was to receive the Recompense, and Reward of his
Death, and Sufferings; when his State of Humiliation was over. And yet, How low
does he stoop for the sake of this Apostle? when so unreasonable a thing too
was demanded, as the Condition of his Believing? But such is the Admirable
Bounty and Condescension of Christ, that he will not refuse him, even this.

Since you will not believe otherwise, O my Apostle, I consent; Behold my
Wounds, Behold the Print of the Nails; And if the Sight of them be not enough,
to cure thine Infidelity, Come, Reach hither thine Hand, thrust thy Finger into
my Side; I care not what I do, or how low I stoop, rather than not convince,
and heal thee: If the Evidence of one Sense be not enough, I will yield
further, and let thee have more.

Our Lord might have convinced Thomas by the Powerful Influence of his Spirit,
without all this; But he condescends thus far for our Sakes, that We, and
Others, might have a clearer Evidence and Proof of his Resurrection, and
likewise of his Divinity: For his fixing upon Thomas in this Assembly, and
speaking to him such Words, does plainly manifest, that he knew his Heart, and
understood what Discourse he had had, and what Objections he had made, and what
was the Inward Sense of his Soul; which he could not have done, without being
Omniscient. Little did this Apostle think, his Lord had heard him, or believe
that he knew his Sin. But, Come hither, says Christ, behold my Hands; Reach
hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my Side. He condescends to Grant that,
which it was the Apostles Fault to Ask.

We see, by these Words, our Risen Lord retained the Marks of the Wounds, the
Prints of the Nails, and Spear in his Body, after the Resurrection, to
manifest, with greater Certainty, the Truth of it. It is likely he preserved
them at his Ascension too, as the Evidence of his past Sufferings, and the
Ensigns of his Victory. And let us not imagine, if he retains them in Heaven, to
the Admiration of Angels, and the Joy of the Redeemed, that it will be any
Disparagement to the Beauty, and Splendour of his Glorious Body, but rather
contribute to it, in the Day of his Appearing, when every Eye shall see him,
and they also which pierced him.

3. Let us Consider the Faith of Thomas hereupon, ver. 18. He answered and
said, My Lord, and my God. He not only believes with the Heart, but confesses
with the Mouth: He owns both the Divinity of Christ, and his Dominion, and that
with an Appropriating Faith, My Lord, and my God. There is a great Sense in
these few words, for,

1. Here is an Evidence of the Truth of his Repentance, of his Love, and of his
Zeal. The very Sight of Christ and the Print of the Nails, and the Mark of his
Wounds, shames him for his Sin, and makes him sensible of his Incredulity.
Behold, says Christ, the print of the Nails; Think what I have suffered for
Thee, for the Expiation of thy Sin; Think how I have loved Thee to dye for
thee, And will thou not believe that I am Risen? This awakened his Repentance,
and made him abruptly cry out, My Lord, and my God. Two words sometimes are
more significant than an Hundred, and express the Desires of the Heart, more
than a large Discourse.

The Kindness and Condescension of his Lord overcame him, and by these words he
proves the Cure of his Infidelity. Before, he would not believe Christ to be
Alive; now, he confesses him to be God. Before he reckoned him under the Power
of Death, now he acknowledges him as the Lord, and Prince of Life. Before he
believed less than any of the other Apostles, now he confesses more than All of
them.

My Lord, my God. Thou art the Anointed of God, the King, the Head of the
Church, the Expected, Promised Messiah. If thy Death had staggered my Faith,
thy Resurrection has established it. My Lord, my God. I adore thy Compassion,
and Condescension, that thou would Appear to me, who so justly forfeited such
a Favor. I implore thy Grace, I beg thy Pardon, I now unfeignedly acknowledge,
own, and avow Thee, for my Savior, my Lord, my God.

Though he professed his Unbelief in larger Words, Except I see the print of
the Nails, and thrust my Finger, etc. Yet this Expression of his Repentance is
equally significant* He only stammers out two or three words, My Lord, my God;
But such as prove his Conversion, and his Cure: As the voice of the Patient,
will sometimes discover the Cure of a Disease in the Head. When the Heart is
full, the Expressions are many times short and abrupt. The Groans, Desires, and
Inward Affections of the Soul, are unutterable. He had much more to say, but he
could not bring it out; His Penitent shame on the one hand, and his Zeal, and
Admiration on the other, stopped his Mouth. But the little he does say, is very
much to the purpose; He calls him Lord, and God; which, upon the Resurrection
of Christ, every Tongue was to Confess.

The Truth of his Repentance, Love and Zeal, he afterward more abundantly
proved, by labor, and diligence, and traveling up and down the World to
spread the Gospel into See Dr. Cave's Life of St. Thomas.
Parthia, and afterward among the Medes and Persians, passing through the
Asian Ethiopia, says Chrysostom, and, at last, came to India, persuading them
to Renounce their Idolatry, and receive the Faith of Christ; Some Remainders of
this, there are in some parts of India to this day. And at last he was thrust
through with Lances, by the Command of an Indian King.

If we may believe the Account of some of the Jesuits, Relatione della Cina del
P. A. Semedo, 12. Part Prima, cap. 31.
and other Missionaries of the Roman Church into China, and those parts, they
do Ascribe the Preaching of the Gospel there to this Apostle, and his
Followers. And the Chaldee Books concerning the Indian Christianity, Cultivated
by his Means, are mentioned to this Purpose, and Preserved to this Day by an A.
Bishop of Granganour, or Della Serra, and Translated into Latin by a Jesuit.
One of those Books is a Breviary, wherein are these words, By the Means of St.
Thomas, the Errors of the Idolatry of the Indians were scattered: By the Means
of St. Thomas, the Chinese, and the Aethiopians were converted to the Truth:
By the Means of St. Thomas they obtained the Virtue of Baptism, and the
Adoption of Sons; and kept the Faith, which they promised to God. By Means of
St. Thomas, the Beams of the Knowledge of Life enlightened all India: and the
Kingdom of Heaven entered into China. And presently there follows an Antiphona,
which says, The Indians, the Chinese, the Persians, and other Islanders,
those of Syria, Armenia, Grecia and Romania, in Commemoration of St. Thomas, do
offer their Adoration unto thy Most Holy Name, O Great God.

2. Let us Consider the Reality of his Faith, in this short Confession of it.
For, upon these Words, My Lord, my God, our Savior owns, in the next Verse,
the Truth of his Faith. Blessed art thou who have seen, and have believed:
Though a more ample and abundant Blessing be pronounced on such as did also
believe, without that help of Sight and Sense.

But here is an Excellent Faith, and all the Essential parts of it,
comprehended in this Expression, My Lord, my God.

1. An Assent to this Truth, that Jesus is the Christ, the true Meissah, who
had Risen again as he foretold.

2. An acknowledgment that this Jesus is both Lord, and God: that absolute
Supremacy, Power, and Dominion belong to him, that he is true God.

3. An Appropriation of him to himself, as his Lord, and his God; which
following upon the former two, contain the Essentials of true Faith.

4. In this Expression, we have an Evidence of the Two Natures of Christ; the
Reality of his Humane Nature, and the Truth of his Divine.

1. The Reality of his Humane Nature. The Method our Lord uses to prove his
Resurrection to this Apostle does suppose that he was true man, Partaker of
Human Nature; that his Body was of such a kind, that our Senses might judge of
it; for else he would not have bid Thomas behold him, and reach hither his Hand.

This may easily be improved to overthrow the Popish Fancy of
Transubstantiation, that the Body and Blood of Christ are in the Lord's Supper,
under the Accidents of Bread and Wine. For at that rate Thomas might have still
objected, That what he saw and touched was not the Body of Christ, but the
Accidents of it, and that he was not obliged to believe on the Testimony of his
Senses, that the Body of Christ was present. But his Obligation so to believe,
is employed in our Savior's Words, Reach hither thy Hand, and be not faithless
but believing. And on the same Testimony of Sense, we are bound to believe,
that it is Bread after Consecration, and not Flesh, that it is Wine, and not
Blood.

2. The truth of his Godhead is also evident, that he is really, and truly God.
This Title, My God, as well as My Lord, is very observable, because it has the
Article before the Word, God. And it is commonly granted by the Adversaries of
the Deity of Christ, that wherever the Word God is used with the Article
before it, it there imports the True and Eternal God. So is the Expression
here, which our English Translation does not reach; for it may rather be read,
The Lord mine, the God mine.

My Lord, my God. From his Office, as Lord, and Christ, he Rises to his Divine
Nature, and the Dignity of his Essence. He had reason to own him to be Christ
the Lord, by his Resurrection, and other things which he had observed before;
and from that Dignity he owns him to be true God, worthy of the Highest Homage
and Adoration.

Had it been otherwise, the Apostle would not have given the Title of God, unto
Jesus Christ, nor would he have received it: For the Greater any Person is, the
greater Danger there is of giving him such Titles as belong not to him. As to
give to One that is next to the King, the Title of King. Especially to ascribe
Divinity, and Godhead to a Creature. What can be more provoking to him, who is
Jealous of his Honor, and will not give his Glory to another, Isa. 42.

It cannot well be supposed that See Placaei disput. in loc. Tom. 3. 4to.
Thomas, who was brought up in the Jewish Religion, could be ignorant of the
Doctrine of the Unity of the Godhead; He must needs know what Moses, and the
Prophets tea^h concerning it; Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord,
Deuteronomy. 6.4. This was one of the Sentences written on the Fringes of their
Garments, and quoted by Christ, as a known thing, Mark. 12.32.

Neither can it be imagined that our Savior would have permitted such a thing,
without Rebuking him, if he had not been true God, as well as real Man. But so
this Apostle does acknowledge him, and so must we: And every Dr. Manton, on
Colos. 1.19. p. 202.
Office of Christ, as our Prophet, Priest, and King, does suppose and require
that he be true God, as well as true man,; or he could not discharge those
Offices to any Saving Purpose for us.

4. Let us then Imitate the Faith of this Apostle, in contemplating the Death
and Resurrection of Christ, that we also may say as he did, My Lord, and my
God. And that will include both a Claim of Interest, and special Propriety in
him, and imply the Dedication of our selves to his Use, and Service. The one of
these will follow upon the other. When God says, I am thy God; we cannot but
answer, That we are his Servants, and resolve to be so: And if we are his, and
Devoted to him, we may infer that he is Ours, for the Covenant is mutual.

But if we cannot, as sometimes we cannot, so clearly, and comfortably say, My
God; We may yet humbly, and resolvedly say, My Lord; that is, I am thy Servant,
I am Devoted to thy Fear, I am resigned and given up to thee; I have chosen
thee for my Portion, and I have dedicated and devoted my self for ever to be
thine, etc. The more serious we are in this, the more likely are we to come to
this Claim, and Appropriation, and special Interest in God, and Christ as ours:
And till we Arrive to some Degree of this, we are Strangers to the most
comfortable part of the Christian Life: For this is a great ground of our
Confidence, and a main Spring of our Joy. My Beloved is mine, and I am his. He
loved me, and gave himself for me. This attracts our Love, this wins our
Hearts, and fills us with Joy unutterable, and full of Glory.

If Christ, by the Presence of his Spirit, would visit our Souls; we should
then be able to use such Language of Faith. If he will visit us, as he did the
Disciples, when Thomas was with them; his Presence and Power can produce such a
Faith; And if he please, he can enter and do this, though the Doors be barred,
and shut never so close. For he, can open them, as he did the Heart of Lydia.
Though they be of Stone or Iron, he can break, he can soften, he can make them
Hearts of Flesh. Let us beg he would so visit us, by his Spirit.

Though we have not the Privilege to touch him on Earth, as this Apostle, yet
we may behold him, as the holy Martyr Stephen, in Heaven. We may Contemplate
him by Faith, as at the Right hand of God: And so we may behold the print of
the Nails, and thrust our Hand into his wounded Side, and hear his Voice, yea
taste, as well as touch his very Body and Blood, feed upon him. We have some of
us so done this Day. And after such a Sight, and such a Taste, shall we not cry
out; My Lord, my God. O my Lord, what have I done? O my God, what shall I do? O
my Lord, my dear Lord Jesus, who am I, that thou have loved me, so as to dye
for me, so as to give thy self a Sacrifice for me? O my God, what shall I
render to thee? How shall I express my Gratitude? What shall I do to honor
thee? O my Lord, thou have Redeemed me at a costly price. O my God, give me of
the Spirit of Grace, to renew thine Image, subdue my Lusts, and assist mine
Obedience. My Lord, my God, the King of Saints, the Prince of Peace, the First
Begotten from the Dead, the First Born of every Creature, the First Fruits of
them that sleep, the true and only Potentate, the great Immanuel, God with us,
true God, and true Man: Whom have I in Heaven but thee? etc.

Let us labor aft^r such a Faith, and beg it of the God of all Grace; and
never desist, till in the use of that, and other means, we are brought to use
such Language too.

Lastly, As to you, my Brethren, who have been at the Table of the Lord;
Consider, what have you been doing? Your great Business has been, or should
have been this Day, solemnly to Renew the Covenant between God and you; in such
Appropriating Language of Faith, as these words of Thomas: For Christ, and all
his Benefits are offered to you, by the Distribution of the Elements. Behold
me, I am yours; Accept me, Take me, says Christ. You by Receiving them, say,
Lord, I am thine, Accept me, Possess me for thine own. The Lord's Supper, is
the New Testament, or Covenant in the Blood of Christ; you there Ratify the
Baptismal Covenant; he says, I am thine; and you say, You are his. This
inward, personal Covenanting between Christ and you, is the great Thing to be
minded, and this amounts to the same, with My Lord, my God, acknowledging his
Right, by the one Expression, and professing your own Interest by the other.

This was Virtually done in our Baptism, this was actually done at our first
Turning to God, when we entered into Covenant to be the Lords; And this we
professedly Repeat, and publicly Renew, every time we come to this Table. We
have this Day acknowledged him to be our Lord, we have entered into a solemn
League of Subjection, and Fidelity to him; we have taken on us a solemn Bond,
and Obligation of Duty, and Service; And if we are Unfaithful, every Communion
will come in against us, as so many Oaths that we have broken. For by Feasting
on this Sacrifice this Day, we have again Sworn at the Altar, we have said it
in our Hearts, My Lord, my God; And we have professed it by our Actions. We
have played the Hypocrites, and acted the part of Children, and Fools, if we
did not mean it. And if we do not stand to it while we live, we are Rebels; and
add Perjury to our Rebellion, by violating our Bond, Covenant, and Oath. And if
we do so, we have imprecated a Curse upon our selves, even all the Curses of a
broken Covenant, and so have sworn to our own Condemnation.

You therefore who have this Day Avouched the Lord for your God, and have said
to Christ, My Lord, my God; Remember that he is both: And don't expect he
should be thy God, thy Portion, thy Happiness, thy Heaven, if he be not thy
Lord. Don't think he will be thy Jesus, thy Ransom to save thee from Hell, if
he be not thy Lord to govern thy Heart, and Life. He is the Author of Eternal
Salvation only to those that Obey him: an Everlasting Savior to them only, to
whom he is a Lord. Don't expect that the saying Lord, Lord, either now, or
hereafter, will be enough, if thou be a Worker of Iniquity, and do not what he
Commands thee; if his Interest in thee, and Authority over thee, will not
prevail more than the Entreaty of a Friend, or than the gain of a little Money,
or the Allurement of a little Pleasure, or the Inticement of a Lust, or the
Temptation of a Devil.

But if you sincerely, and unfeignedly take him for your Lord, he will then be
your God: And all Blessings, Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal, are comprised in
that. You are then his Jewels, his Treasure, his Portion, his Inheritance, his
peculiar People: If he be your God. O how dear, how valuable, how precious are
the Relations, Privileges, and Blessings, that this contains! What need you
fear? What can you want? What can you ask more? What can dismay, afflict, or
trouble such a Soul? Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? Why art thou disquieted
within me? May you say: If you can say with David in another place, The Lord is
my Portion, and the Lot of mine Inheritance. Or if you can say with Thomas
here, My Lord, my God. All things then are yours; his Spirit, his Providence,
his Attributes, his Promises; Life, Death, Things present, Things to come;
Grace here, Heaven hereafter; All things yours, if you be Christ's, and he be
your Lord, and your God.

Blessed then are you, though you have not seen him with your bodily Eyes, or
thrust your Hand into his Wounded Side, or felt the print of the Nails in his
Crucified Body: Yet having now by hearing, believed on him, and loved him, you
shall see him hereafter in Glory, and Triumph, and be for ever with him, to
behold his Glory, and to partake of it.

Amen.
A PARAPHRASE OF THE Lord's Prayer.

A PARAPHRASE OF THE Lord's Prayer.
Our Father.
O Most Merciful, and Gracious Father, who have made us out of nothing, by thy
Powerful Word, and formed us after thine own Image, but we sought out Sinful
Inventions, and might justly have perished in our Apostasy; We owe Thee Homage
as the Father of our Spirits, as the God of our Lives, as the Author of our
Beings; much more as thou have called us into thy Family, and Favor, by Jesus
Christ; as Redeemed by him, and Regenerated by thy Spirit, and Privileged with
the Dignity of Children, and may call Thee, Our Reconciled Father.

Oh what manner of Love is this, that such Rebellious, Miserable Creatures, as
we, should be called the Sons of God, and treated as such! Holy Father! we have
sinned against Heaven, and before Thee, and are utterly Unworthy to be
entertained as thy Servants, much more to be cherisht, and spared, and pitied,
and provided for as thy Children, and have the promise, and hope of the
Heavenly Inheritance. As the Children of the First Adam, we are Children of
Wrath, and Heirs of Hell, in Bondage to Sin, and serving diverse Lusts; the
Works of our Father the Devil we have done. But by thy Redeeming Love and
Grace, through Jesus Christ* we are set Free from that Slavery, and partake of
the Liberty and Privilege of Sons in thy House and Family. Oh let the Spirit
of thy Son, breath continually in our hearts, and teach us to cry, Abba,
Father, as created by thy Power and Goodness, and reconciled, and saved by thy
Mercy, after we had undone our selves. Give us that Faith, and humble
Confidence in Prayer, by the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, that we may go
to thee in all our Necessities, as Children to a Father, and come with boldness
to a Throne of Grace. We beg the Holy Spirit of Grace to that end, which thou
art more ready to give to them who value it, and ask it earnestly, as sensible
of their need of it, than any Father on Earth is to give Bread to his Children
that ask it of him.

O let this Name of Father, and our consequent Relation to thee, be our Glory,
and our Refuge, our Defense and Guard, the Principle of our Obedience and Love
to thee, and of Charity, Kindness, and Affection to all our Brethren, who are
Children of the same Father, and Adopted Heirs of the same Inheritance. And let
all those, whom thou will own for thy Children, most Gracious Father, be united
to thee, and to one another, in holy Bands of Love and Concord; bearing with
one another wherein they differ, let them heartily join together to advance the
Honor of thy Holy Name, to celebrate thy Praise, and promote thy Truth and
Worship. Grant unto them and us, the help of thy Spirit that we may so Pray,
and Live.

O God of the Spirits of all Flesh, the Father of Glory, the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, teach us so to ask, as thou may please to grant teach
us to Worship thee in Spirit and in Truth, that our persons may be wellpleasing
in thy sight, and our Prayers be accepted through the Great Mediator. We would
ask nothing but in his Name, for the manner, so nothing but what he has
advised and taught us to Desire, and Seek.

Who art in Heaven.
And since thou dwell in Heaven, (though the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain thee,) that is thy Throne, and the Earth thy Footstool; thou beholdest
whatsoever we do, or say, or think, and wilt call us to an Account; Let us
reverence thy Glorious Majesty, Thine All-seeing Eye, and thy Sovereign Power.
And raise our Affections above Earthly Things, that we may seek Heaven as our
Country, where our Father is, and our Redeemer, and where we hope to possess
the Inheritance prepared for us by Everlasting Love, through the Purchase and
Merit of thine Eternal Son, who owns himself our Elder Brother; and who, when
he was on Earth, was concerned for nothing more than for the Glory of Thy Name.
Therefore in Imitation of his Example, in Conformity to his Counsel, and
Obedience to his Command, we beg Thy Name may be Sanctified,

Hallowed by thy Name.
Thou have proclaimed thy Name unto the World, and they who know it, will trust
in Thee, to be a God Gracious and Merciful, slow to Anger, and of Great
Kindness, Abundant in Goodness, and in Truth, keeping Mercy for Thousands,
forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, and that will not utterly destroy
his People, though he do correct. Thou art worthy of all our Honor, Homage,
and Obedience, and that all the World should Adore thee, and Glorify Thy Holy
Name; that every Creature in Heaven and Earth should tremble at thine
Irresistible Power admire thine Eternal Wisdom, and love thine Infinite
Goodness. O that the Glory of thy Holy Name may extinguish in us the Desire and
Love of Worldly Honor, and Inteterest; that we may (...) it our highest
dignity, to ad^ (...) serve the Purposes of thy Glory, as the Ultimate End of
all Things. Let us be deeply sensible of thy Dishonor in the World, by our own
sins, and the sins of Others. Let us Grieve and Mourn to observe the
Profanation of thy Name, and the Violation of thy Authority; when thy Laws are
transgrest, thy Institutions despised, thy Orders contradicted, thy Majesty
Affronted, thy Glory bespattered, and trampled on.

The Desire of our Souls is to thy Name, and the Remembrance of Thee. In thy
Name we Rejoice, and put our Trust. O let us not dishonor it by unsuitable
Affections, and Actions! Let our Lives be answerable to the dignity of our
Relation, and to what we know, and profess to believe of thy Adorable
Perfections; that we may so Glorify thy Name in the Eyes of the World, that
others seeing our Good Works, may Glorify Thee our Father, who art in Heaven.
To this end, Let thy Kingdom come.

Thy Kingdom Come.
O Thou who Reignest among the Armies of Heaven, and over all the Inhabitants
of the Earth, rule in our Hearts by the Power of thy Word and Spirit: Subdue
every Lust, and inordinate Affection in us, Mortify all the Rebellion of our
Wills* and the Enmity of our Carnal Minds and Hearts; that we may no longer be
in Slavery to the Devil, and to foolish, Criminal Passions, but our
Understanding, Will, Affections, Conscience* and Conversation, be more entirely
Conformed to thy Holy Pleasure, and Precept. And after the Establishment and
Advancement of thy Kingdom of Grace in our Souls, perfect it in due time* by
admitting us to thy Kingdom of Glory.

And let all the Kingdoms of the World submit to the Scepter of our Lord
Redeemer; that he may Rule to the ends of the Earth. Let all the People praise
thee* and Worship thee, O God, let all the People Praise thee. Let not Satan,
the Usurping God of this world, Tyranize over so great a part of this Earth:
But let the Kingdom of thy Grace be enlarged, and thine Authority be more
generally submitted to in all the World. Let the everlasting Gospel of the
Blessed God be published, understood, believed, and obeyed, from the Rising of
the Sun, to the setting of the same. And as the Effect of the Coming of thy
Kingdom in Power,

Let thy Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven.

Thy Will be done.
Thy Will, O God, is the Measure of Holiness and Peace, the Rule of Justice,
Truth, and Perfect Wisdom; Oh that it may be the Rule of our Desires; that our
Will may be entirely conformed to Thine. All thy Works are Wisdom, and all thy
ways of Providence are Judgment: Let us adore thee as Infallible in all the
Revelations of thy Mind, and as Wise, and Good, Just, and Holy, and True in all
Thou do. Let us acquiesce in thy good Pleasure, as knowing, nothing can be
better done, than what thou orderest. In Fullness, and in Want, in Joy and
Sorrow, in Life and Death, thy Holy Will, O Lord! be done.

Let us obediently comply with thy Preceptive Will, in all thou have commanded,
and humbly submit to thy Providential Will in all thou shall appoint; and be
satisfied with our Portion, Station, and condition here on Earth. Let us be
governed in all things by thy Holy Will with Cheerfulness, and Readiness, and
Faithfulness, and Zeal, without Deceit, Delay, or Murmuring Complaints. That we
may observe, and please thy Will on Earth, as the Angels do in Heaven: where
thou art loved, delighted in, and obeyed in Perfection. And let all the World,
we beseech thee, join with us and them, to praise and glorify thee, with one
heart, and one voice, and one consent, and be the Servants of thy Holy Will for
ever. But our Satisfaction in thy Declared Will does not hinder, but we may
Ask the necessary Supports of Life, We pray thee therefore,

Give us tbis day our Daily Bread.
Thou take Care of our Souls, provide also, we beseech thee, for our Bodies.
Prolong our Lives, till we have finished the Work of Life, and answered the Ends
of Living. Continue a suitable and convenient Supply for the Necessities of our
Nature: Give us that Health, Protection, Peace, and Plenty, which may best
assist us in our present Duty, and tend to our Comfortable Account in the Day
of Reckoning. Thou have directed us not to Choose either Poverty, or Riches,
because of the Temptations of either extreme: Give us therefore Food
Convenient, according to that Rank, and State, and Condition thou have placed
us in, or may hereafter do. That so the Temptations of the Right Hand, may
not make us Wanton, Secure, and Proud, forgetful of Thee, and our Selves, and
the greater Concerns of Eternity, or our Hearts be set to make Provision for
the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. And that on the contrary, by the Snares
of Poverty, and pinching Straits, we may not be tempted to doubt, or deny Thy
Providence, or quarrel with it; that we may not be exposed to Contempt, and
Misery, and thereby to Impatience, Distrust, and Despair. Keep us from undue
Solicitude about these things, and give us Contentment with our present
Condition. Grant us that measure, and proportion of Temporal Blessings, which
may enable us the better to serve and glorify thee. And whatever thou do with
us, let us be Calm and Quiet, and Thankful, and never admit any dishonorable
Thoughts of thy Rule, and Government. Let us own Thee, as the Original and
Fountain of all our Good, and faithfully depend on Thee for the Supply of all
our Wants. But whatever thou give us of Earthly Good Lord, what will it avail
us, when our Sins are so many and great, unless thou Forgive and Pardon us?
Therefore we beseech thee, O Lord, to

Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us.
Look upon us with a Merciful Eye, for we are here before thee in our
Trespasses. Forgive our Sins of Ignorance, and of Wilfulness, those of
Presumption, and those of Infirmity, secret and open, in heart, and word, and
deed; the Vanity of our Minds, the Carelessness of our Spirits, the Wickedness
of our Hearts, the Irregularity of our Affections, the Folly of our Lips, and
all the Omissions, and Commissions of our past Lives, from our Birth, and
Infancy, to this very hour. Look not upon our Offenses, but cast our sins
behind thy Back, Remember 'em not against us, to our Punishment and Condemnation

We beg this, for the sake of our Blessed Savior, who has made Expiation for
Sin by his Cursed Death. For his sake, be Reconciled to us, and remember our
Iniquities no more, and seal to us the free and full Forgiveness of them, by
the Witness of thy Holy Spirit, that we may Rejoice in God, through Jesus
Christ, as having received the Atonement.

Enable us by a large and Evangelical Charity, heartily to forgive all those,
who have any way troubled, or injured, or offended us; lest our Prayer be
turned into sin, and thou deny us that Pardon, which we deny to our Fellow
Creatures. That having, by thy Grace, this Character of thy Disciples, and
Children, we may reap the Benefit of thy Pardoning Mercy here, and in the other
World. But because, tho we should be forgiven for the Time past, we shall run
into the like sins again, and contract New Guilt, and fall an easy Prey to
Temptation, we beseech thee preserve us from being tempted, or overcome when we
are.

Lead us not into Temptation.
Lord, we are Weak, and Ignorant, and Inclined to that which is Evil; and our
Adversary the Devil goes about like a Crafty Serpent, and a Roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may deceive, and destroy; let us never be Careless, Secure, and
Confident of our selves. He is a Malicious, Experienced, Watchful, Envious,
Unwearied Enemy, let us not be Ignorant of his Devices; Enable us to Mortify
the Love of Sin, and Inward Lust, and diligently avoid the Occasions, and
Appearances of Evil, the Incentives, and Provocatives to Wickedness. And suffer
us not to be Tempted above what we are Able. Order our Conditions, and Affairs,
so as we may be free from great, and Dangerous Temptations. Help us, that by
taking to us the whole Armor of God, we may be able to withstand the Wiles,
and Assaults of Satan: that by the Protection, and Guidance of thy Providence,
the Ministry of thine Angels, and the Aids of thy Good Spirit, we may not enter
into Temptation, and yield to it; that Such as we cannot avoid, may not prevail
against us, to thy Dishonor, and our Eternal Ruin. Deliver us from the Evil of
every Temptation, and from the Evil One, the Tempter, and from other Evils, to
which we are Incident.

But deliver us from Evil.
Forgive what is Past, Remove what is Present, Prevent what may otherwise be to
come: from Sin, and Shame, from the Malice of the Devil* and the Falsehood and
Treachery of Men, from open Enemies, and unfaithful Friends, from the Deceits
of the World, and the Lusts of the Flesh, but above all, from thy Wrath and
Vengeance due to our Sins, We Beseech thee to deliver, and save us. Pardon us
so freely, that all the Sufferings of this Life may be turned from Evil to
Good; that if thou smite us here with the Rod of a Father, thou may spare us
hereafter; That all things may work together for our Advantage, and that in
every Condition we may be kept from Sin.

To that end Deliver us from the Evil One, the Great Enemy of thy Glory, and
our Salvation. Let us resist him sted^astly in the Faith, that he may flee, and
we may Conquer. We acknowledge our own Weakness, and desire to be sensible of
it, and therefore humbly Invoke thine Aid and Help. O save us from an
Impenitent hard Heart, while we live; and let us Finish our Course in thy Fear
and Love; let us dye the Death of the Righteous, and not have our Portion to
all Eternity, in that Region of Darkness, and Torment, which thou have prepared
for the Devil, and his Angels.

For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever.
Thou art able to do all this for us, as the All-mighty, Wise, and Holy Lord,
and Governor of the World, whose Glorious Perfections are displayed, and
honored in all thy Works. We hope the granting these our Supplications, will
advance the Mightiness of thy Kingdom, and Manifest thy Power, Mercy, and
Truth, For, of thee, and to thee, and through thee, are All Things, to Thee be
Glory, for ever, and ever.

Amen.
As Thou say, so it is. As Thou have Promised, So it shall be. And as we
have Prayed, we Beg it may Be,

Amen, and Amen.

THE END.

