CASES IN PARLIAMENT Resolved and Adjudged, UPON Petitions, and Writs of Error.

-- Quicquid sum Ego, quamvis
Infra Lucili censum ingeniumque tamen me
Cum Magnis vixisse, invita fatebitur usque
Invida --
Horat. LONDON: Printed for A. and J. Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row, MDCXCVIII.

TO THE READER.
NO Collection of Cases adjudged in Parliament having been yet published, a
Preface seems necessary to bespeak the Reception of that which is now presented
to the World.

To commend or excuse the Collector, will not perhaps be a method to introduce
it most to advantage: what may be spoken in favor of his diligence or
capacity, will be censured vain, and if any excuse be offered for his inability
to have done it better, some will be ready to take him at his word, and think
the Performance comes from a careless or unskilful Hand.

Whatever the Author is, there needs no Apology to be made for the nature or
design of the Work it self; for the Subject Matter will be useful and
entertaining to all Ranks of English Men, to whom Books are so; that is, to all
such as understand and love Literature.

Here is our Municipal Law, and the reason of it, Equity and the Law of Nations
interspersed; here is the manner of arguing, and the language of the Bar
briefly touched; here are the Forms of Proceedings sometimes mentioned, but then
again those Forms are superseded by the Original and Eternal Rules of Justice.

By the Debates and Arguments here reported, you may be acquainted in some
measure with the Rights of the Peers, and their incapacity to alien such their
Rights; with the nature of Slander, and some Rules concerning it; the Course of
Equity in respect of Penalties and Costs.

The Law of Average in the Case of Partial Losses at Sea; the Circumstances
upon which Relief may be had in Equity against hard or unreasonable Agreements;
the Construction of Wills to charitable Uses, where the Estate intended is
greater in value, then the particular Bequests amounts unto; the Power of a
Council of State to commit; with variety of Matter concerning Pleading; and the
Plantations belonging to England; and the Privileges and Birthrights of the
English Subject by the Common Law, and how far that Law extends.

The nature of Colleges, Hospitals, and other Elemosynary Foundations, and the
Authority and Power of Visitors, and the Methods of their Proceedings; the
Court of Chivalry or Honor, the extent and boundaries of its Jurisdiction,
before whom held, and when and in what Cases a Prohibition lies to it; the
power of Lords of Copyhold Manors to refuse Petitions for the Reversal of
Recoveries in their Courts, and the Judgment of Equity upon such occasions; the
right of Dower, and the efficacy of a Term attending the Inheritance to prevent
its enjoyment, and the opinion of Equity thereupon.

The Preference of an Outlawry upon mesne Process to a Judgment not extended,
and the practice and reason of the practice of the Court of Exchequer in that
case; the Consideration which a Court of Equity ought to have of Bonds, Bills,
or Promises made or given upon Condition or Consideration of promoting and
procuring Matches.

The dependency which Ireland has upon England, and her subordination to it,
and the Authority of the House of Peers in This, over the Proceedings in the
Chancery of That Kingdom; the opinion of Equity upon Conditional Limitations,
and what will be a Performance of such Conditions, and to whom the Profits
shall go during the intermediate time, etc.

The qualification requisite in a Presentee to a Benefice, and the power of the
Ordinary to refuse for defect of Knowledge, and how that defect is to be tried;
the Construction of Law upon a Deed leading the Uses of a Fine of the Wives
Land to the Heirs of the Husband's Body, the Husband dying afterward before
the Wife; the right of the half Blood, in the distribution of an Intestates
Estate, and unto what Share; the right of nominating to the Office of chief
Clerk for inrolling of Pleas in B.R. and to whom it belongs; the nature of a
Bill of Exceptions, and the Proceedings thereupon, and in what Cases the same
may be refused, and if any Authority in the Lords over the Judges in case of
such refusal.

The Punishment of Treason by the English Laws, and the Form of Judgments in
that case; the nature of contingent Limitations after a Fee, and if they may be
allowed upon Contingencies to happen at any time after the decease of Persons
then in being; the manner of declaring the Uses of a Fine, and by what Deed or
Writing; the nature of Wills, and of the revocations of them, and if a Will,
whereof the Contents are unknown, may revoke a former; the efficacy of the acts
of one that is Non compos mentis; and if, and how far void; what Deeds altering
the Estate of a Testator, shall revoke a solemn Will.

The nature of the Office of a Clerk of the Peace, and by whom grantable, and
for what Interest, and how removeable; the Prerogative of Presenting to
Benefices made void by Promotion, and if such Prerogative be served or
fulfilled by a Commendam; and whether it can operate upon a new created Parish
or Rectory; the formal reason and essence of Treason, and wherein it consists,
and what is necessary to be alleged in Indictments for that Offense; the right
of Tithes for Herbage or Agistment of Cattle grazed and fed for Sale, though
formerly used to the Plough.

The Exposition of a Will of a Native of France, and by what measures a
Judgment ought to be made of the meaning of Phrases used by such Persons, in
that Language, upon such an occasion; the Construction of the word Share in a
Will, concerning the New-River Water; the force or validity of a Grant or
Assignment of Land (in which the Grantor had a very long term) to hold from and
after the Grantor's decease; the Title of Knight, if, and how, part of the
Name, and what Allegations in a Count in a Quare Impedit are not needful to be
answered to, and what may be traversed, and what Grants of the Crown shall be
good notwithstanding some, and what Misrecitals.

These and many other Particulars, worthy of most Men's notice, are here
debated; and it may reasonably be supposed, that none will be Enemies to the
Design and Publication, but those who mislike the small Remainders, we have
left us, of the Aristocratical part of our Government: the Gentlemen who do so,
must be unacquainted with the Grecian and Roman Story, as well as with our own,
or else have read it but superficially; for even the most perfect of the
Grecian Commonwealths were somewhat Aristocratical. That which may be called
such, is Sparta, which, though it had some Laws we cannot account for, yet during
several Centuries it maintained its own Liberty, and assisted its Neighbors to
preserve theirs.

And notwithstanding some Men may think the contrary, Democracy was not the
only Favorite Model of the Ancient Legislators. The wise Solon, who founded
that Popular Government of Athens, was not so fond of his own Frame, as to
recommend it to other places, though he believed that it suited best with the
Infirmities of the People: And even in Rome, before she acquired any great
Reputation, there was a Senate, under Kings it had one, nor does it appear that
a Senate was adjudged useless, when it became and was called a Commonwealth.
And as soon as the Senate lost its Authority, a Tyranny was set up: This may be
called their Aristocratical Part; and whosoever reads the Lives of those Roman
Worthies, Cato Vticensis, etc. that nobly attempted to defend the Liberties of
their Country, will find, That it was for the upholding the Authority of the
Senate, that they contested, fought, and died.

Machiavel indeed, in his Discourses upon the Decades of Titus Livius, has
strained almost every thing in favor of Democracy, and with extreme Art and
Labor, has illustrated a Popular State, and made Rome the Example of it; and
yet even in those Discourses, he sometimes shows the Necessity of an
Aristocratical Mixture, to make a just and regular, and happy and lasting
Government.

Nay, Algernoon Sydney himself, that famous Assertor of Liberty, does almost
every where prefer the Aristocracy; and he was confirmed in that Sentiment, by
the Views he had taken of former and present Governments, and by the Knowledge
he had of what formerly was our own Constitution, till Henry the Sevenths
Reign: For that Prince (as the Lord Bacon rightly observes) was rather cunning
in relation to his own Times, then a Person that had a full prospect of what
would afterward be the Consequence of his Measures, or that had a due regard
to Posterity: No Man can wish, that the House of Lords should be made Ciphers;
if they could once again be made the Natural Balance between the King and
People.

There drop, even from Mr. Sidney's Pen, Expressions enough to prove, that a
just Composition of the Three Powers, Monarchical, Aristocratical, and
Democratical, would have been reckoned even by him an equal Government.

Such a Mixture even our Government was; and though some, perhaps out of mere
Ignorance, have disputed the Democratical, and others the Monarchical part of
our Constitution; yet no Body ever to this day could pretend, that our Barons,
those Majores Regni, had not originally a Share both in the Legislature and
Administration within this Kingdom: The Fact is not necessary to be proved,
because it is not denied; and the reasonableness of it is apparent.

There Is no occasion to Complement them for what their Ancestors did in
procuring of Magna Charta (which the judicious and indefatigable Antiquary Sir
Henry Spelman, says, was only an Ascertainment or Recompilement of our Old
Laws).

It would be of Public Service, to have a just State of the true Powers of the
House of Lords in their Judicial and Legislative Capacities, according to the
true English Constitution; that we might be familiarized to the almost
antiquated Notions of the Aristocratical part of our Government; and so may
neither be overrun with the Schemes of Absolute Monarchy-Men, who would have
all Judicial Power, even the Dernier Resort lodged in the Crown, or in
Delegates appointed by it, and not in the Parliament, nor be crumbled into the
Disorders which must follow the Notions of those who aim at a pure Democracy.

But to write an Exact Discourse upon this Head, would require more Lines then
can become a Preface: The Reader therefore must not here expect an Account of
the Growth and Decays of their Power, and the true Reasons of Each; and the
Regulations or Restrictions that will be needful, if they ever happen in any
degree to be restored to the Pre-eminence and Authorities, which they formerly
enjoyed among us.

It is enough for the present to say, That all the Measures taken and used in
the Exercise of their Judicature, are observed without Doors, especially by the
Persons concerned, their Relations and Friends: That the Errors in such
Exercise (if any) are only to be corrected by themselves, and no ways proper or
fit to be suggested by any private Person, much less to be published in Print.

However, it may be hoped, that these Reports may probably convince the young
Nobles of this Realm, and all who are employed in and about their Education,
that some general Knowledge of the Laws of England, and some Acquaintance with
History and other Learning, cannot be unworthy the Ambition of every
Noble-man's Son, who has any hopes to sit as Judge in that August Assembly;
where the nicest of Questions, in Cases of the greatest Consequence, and
between the greatest of Subjects, and many times between the King and his
People, do frequently come under Consideration.

And these Papers may likewise remember them, what just Liberty of Arguing and
Debating has been allowed to Counsel, and with what Candor and Patience they
have been heard, even in the most tender Points: As also show them what
Resolutions were taken upon those Debates and Arguments, that the Law may be
consistent with it self, and remain (as it is) a certain Rule of doing Right.

As to the present Performance, the Reader is desired to pardon all Mistakes in
Grammar, and in the Figures of Folio's and Pages, and other common Errata of
the Press, which by reason of multiplicity of other Business, could not easily
be attended to and observed.

-- Omari Res ipsa negat -- THere will shortly be Printed, The Historical
Library of Diodorus the Sicilian, the whole Fifteen Books, Translated from the
Greek, with all the Fragments; And will be Sold by Awnsham and John Churchill
in Paternoster-row.

Dominus Rex, and Viscount Purbeck.
UPON a Petition, the Question was in the House of Lords, Whether the Dignity
of a Viscount could be surrendered to the King by a Fine? And it was Argued at
the Bar by three Counsel for the Petitioner, and by the Attorney General for
the King. It was urged on behalf of the Petitioner, That a Dignity cannot be
surrendered to the Crown; and that for these Reasons:

1. It is a Personal Dignity annexed to the Blood, and so inseparable and
immovable, (See Ratcliff's Case 3 Rep. Rutland's Case 6 Rep. 53.) that it
cannot be either transferred to any other Person, or surrendered to the Crown;
it can neither move forward nor backward, but only downward to Posterity; and
nothing but a Deficiency or a Corruption of the Blood can hinder the Descent,
as if the Ancestor be Attainted of Treason or Felony, etc. For in that Case,
the Heir conveying no Inheritable Blood, cannot make any Claim to that which is
annexed to the Inheritable Blood; and besides, there is a tacit Condition of
Forfeiture annexed to those Dignities, by the Breach of which Condition the
Dignity is determined; but by the Act of the Party there can be no
Determination of it, unless there be an Attainder which corrupts the Blood: And
he took a difference between Ancient Honors and Dignities which were Feodary
and Officiary (as Earl Marshal of England) which have a Relation to an Office
or Land, for such are Transferrable over; and such Dignities as are only
Personal, Inherent in the Blood, and only favor quasi of the Reality, of which
no Fine can be levied, as it is of an Annuity to a Man and his Heirs, no Fine
can be levied.

2. A Dignity was neither subject to a Condition at the Common Law, nor
intailable by the Statute de Donis, etc. nor barrable by the Statute of Fines:
Indeed, in Nevil's Case, something which favors of the contrary Opinion is
said; but the Question there was, Whether 'twas forfeitable by Treason? And
therefore the present Question is very foreign to the Matter there debated. A
Dignity differs from other Inheritances, being an Honor Personal affixed to
the Blood, cannot be forfeited by a Nonperformance of a Condition, except that
Tacit Condition in Law, and consequently cannot be intailed; and though the
Title of a Viscount be of a Place, yet it is only Titular, for it is often
taken from the Sirnames of Families.

3. The Title of Viscount, etc. is not so much a private Interest as a public
Right, for Peers are born Counselors of State, and one part of a Senatory
Body, and therefore cannot be renounced without the Consent of all those who
have interest in it; they cannot, without the Consent of the whole Body,
whereof they are so considerable Members, cut themselves off from the Body; and
so the Objection of quilibet potest Juri suo renuntiare is easily answered.

'Twas further argued on the same side, That

1. An Honor goes not according to the Rules of the Common Law, nor is it
governable by them, it is not therefore pertinent to argue from those Rules
which hold in Cases of other Inheritances, for a Dignity descends to the
Half-blood, there is no Coparcinership of it, but the Eldest takes the whole; a
Fee-simple will go to a Nobleman without the word (Heirs) 1 Inst. 27. It
differs from Estates in Land in the Intrinsic Matter, as well as the Manner of
the Limitation, because it is given for two Reasons, for Counsel and Defense;
and it is a Civil Interest, appointed by the Civil Constitution of the Realm,
which goes with the Blood, and is inherent in the Blood, insomuch that it is
agreed on all hands, that it cannot be transferred to a Stranger; and till
Nevil's Case, 'twas doubted whether forfeitable for Treason; if a Lord die, his
Son shall be introduced without the Ceremony usual at the first Creation; a
Peer's eldest Son, and all Minors, sit behind the Chair of State, to prepare
them for the Sitting in the House as Members, and because they have some Title
to the Honor they are called Nobiles Nati, for the first time they fetch
breath they have Nobility in them: So that he that Surrenders by Fine, must not
only extinguish his Estate in the Honor, but also the Nobility of his Blood.

2. Every Lord is not only a Lord for himself, but also has a Right of
Peerage, and is a Peer of the Realm, and therefore a Peer for every one of the
House, and therefore has the Privilege to demand his Writ Ex debito
Justitiae, and is to be tried by his Peers in Capital Crimes; and that appears
farther from a Matter which happened in this House, 16 Car. 2. There was an
Order mentioning the Bishops to be Lords of Parliament, not Peers; at which the
Lords wondering, ordered a Committee to examine the reason of it; which proves
that Lord is not so high nor inclusive as Peers: So that if the Fine have any
Operation, it takes away not only his Right, but also the Right of the House of
Lords.

3. The trial of Baron or no Baron upon Issue in any Court of Judicature is by
the Records of Parliament; but if a Fine may be levied in the Common Pleas, the
Trial is drawn ad aliud Examen, and must then be by the Records of that Court.
The Clerk of the Parliament always certifies if he be a Baron, because he has
the Record before him; but he cannot certify he is no Baron, because he has
not the Record thereof before him.

4. No Fine can be levied of a thing Personal, as an Annuity to a Man and his
(Heirs), but a Dignity is a thing Personal; and so he took notice of the
difference betwixt the Honors of Peerage, which are Personal, and the Honors
that are Feodary and Officiary, which have reference to an Office or Land.

5. He did argue ab inconvenienti that this Opinion can be no Inconveniency to
the Crown; but the contrary makes Nobility a mere Pageantry, by putting it into
the Hands of a weak and angry Father, to dispossess an hopeful Son of that
which is his Birthright: The Titles of Esquire and Gentleman are drowned in the
greater Dignity of that of a Peer, and when the greater are gone, the other
must go with it: And then from being a Nobleman to day, he and the rest of his
Family must be below all Nobility, and be called Yeomen or Goodman Villers to
morrow, which may bring great Confusion to a Noble Family and all its
Relatives; and surely this House will not put such a public Disrespect on such
a Family, by agreeing to so unjust an act of one Man. And that which was most
relied upon, was a Resolution of this House in Stafford's Case, Anno 1640.
which no Man without Indecency can question; it passed not sub silentio or
obiter, but upon debate; neither could it be any way invalid upon account of
the Times, for it was in the Infancy of that Parliament, and that wherein a
Peer's Case, who sits now in this House, was judicially before them; and
therefore there is no reason to shake that Judgment more than any other
Judgment of that time. My Lord Cook in his 4 Inst. Chapt. of Ireland, is of
Opinion that Honors cannot be extinguished but by Act of Parliament. Then as
to the Precedents that have been urged on the other side, there are none
directly to the Point; for as to Nevil's Case, there are very few Cases cited
there aright, and are not to be looked upon as Law. The Case of my Lord of
Northumberland in 3 and 4 Phil. and Mar. was by way of Creation, and so was the
Case of Dudley. And Dugdale in his Baronage of England, page 270. gives an
account of it; and the rest of the Precedents are above Two hundred years old,
which passed sub silentio, and are not to be vouched unless they were disputed.
The first is Bigod's, who in the time of Edw. 1. surrendered the Honor of
Earl-Marshal of England to the King, who granted it to him in Tail: This Honor
is Officiary, and therefore nothing to the purpose; and the Surrender was made
through fear, Walsingham 95. The next is the Earl of Pembroke's Case, who in 8
Edw. 4. was made Earl in Tail, and by this he had the Grant of the Town of
Haverfordue; the King afterward inclining to dignifie his Son with that Title,
procured him to Surrender by Deed, and bestowed on him another Title, and gave
a greater Estate, and an ancienter Honor. Here was an Estate Tail surrendered
by Deed; it might work a kind of Discontinuance, but no legal effectual
Surrender. And for the Case of Chapter Brandon, who in the time of H. 8. was
created Viscount Lisle, afterward he surrendered that, and got a Dukedom; now
no Man ever questioned the efficacy of this Surrender, for he himself had no
reason to question it, for 'twas to his advantage; and none other could
question it, for he died without Issue, and his Honor with him: And so in the
Case of my Lord Stafford, he surrendered, and got a new Honor. So that it
appeared all these Cases were either Honors referring to Offices and Lands, or
else such as were for the re-granting of greater Dignities, which they had no
reason to question, and so they passed sub silentio: But here is not one
Precedent that they did ever Surrender to the Prejudice of their Blood, or move
themselves quite out of the House by Fine or Deed. And further, If Precedents
be good for the Surrender of an Honor by Fine, why not also for Transferring
of it to another? for of this we have some Precedents, Daincourt's Case, 4
Inst. 126. One Branch of the Family sat in the House by virtue of a Grant from
the other Branch from the Reign of Ed. 2. to Hen. 6. and the Case of the
Earldom of Chester, first granted 17 H. 3. n. 25. and transferred 39 H. 3. And
there was an Attempt made in the Lord Fitzwater's Case, to make a Baron by
transferring of the Dignity; but you will find all these Precedents disallowed:
And 'twas said that no Man ever met with any Case where any Nobleman by Fine
levied, or other Conveyance, became a Yeoman or Ignoble.

'T was argued by another much to the same effect, That Baronage and Peerage is
to be determined by the Records of the Lords House, and if any other way be
given, as there must be, if a Fine be allowed to bar, then the old true way is
gone: This was not a Fine Conditional at the Common Law, and therefore not
within the Statute De donis Conditionalibus, and an Honor being a Personal
Dignity, is not to be barred ( Jones Rep. 123.) by Fine, being inherent in the
Blood, etc. The Duke of Bedford was by Authority of Parliament degraded, and
that was for Poverty, and by Act of Parliament, and not by Surrender: Therefore
Judgment was prayed for the Petitioner.

The Attorney General argued pro Domino Rege upon these Reasons:

1. There is but a defective Proof of the Creation of this Honor, no Letters
Patents, no Records of the Inrollment produced, nor any Entry in any Office of
such a Patent, as is usual; all that is pretended is, That he sat in some
Parliaments afterward as Viscount Purbeck; but that will not be accepted for
proof; for no Man can be created Viscount but by Letters Patents: a Writ of
Summons will be an Evidence of a Creation, but will not amount to a Creation;
there is a Ceremony equal almost to that of an Earl, there must be a Coronet;
all which must be performed, or he must have Letters Patents to dispense with
it, which being Matter of Record, must be produced. 18 Hen. 6. Beaumont was the
first created Viscount, but there was never any since, nor then without Letters
Patents; for he is to take place of some, and therefore he must have something
to show for his Precedence; but a Baron is the lowest Dignity, and therefore
may be created by Writ: Neither can it be presumed that they were lost, for
except it be produced it makes no Title; except they be produced, it shall not
be intended there was any; neither can it be helped by any concurrent Evidence,
for if there were ( Page's Case 5 Rep. 53.) a true Creation, there would be
some Evidence in some of the Offices; but there is not in any of them the least
vestigia of proof to ground a presumption.

2. Dignities, as well as other Inheritances, must be limited according to the
Rules of Law; the Dukedom of Cornwall (in 8 Rep. the 1. the Prince's Case) was
limited according to the strictest Rules of Law. And whereas it has been said
that Dignities differ from other Inheritances, that is where there is some
particular reason for it, as in the case of Transmission or Alienation, which
depends not upon the Manner of Creation, as shall be shown afterward: And for
the Case of 1 Inst. 27. which was that an Inheritance of a Dignity may be
created by other words than other Inheritances are, as an Estate Tail without
the words of this body, there is not any such thing in the Book: It Is said
indeed, that if the King for reward of Services done, do grant Armories to a
Man and his Heirs Males, it is an entail of the Coat without saying of his body;
but I think that will not be taken for the Case of a Dignity; the Statute De
donis Conditionalibus extends to Honors; the word terram would be thought an
improper word to comprehend all things tailable, yet said to extend to all, and
to Honors too, 1 Inst. 20. and if an Honor cannot be entailed, then no
Remainder can be limited; and yet there be many Lords that sit in this House by
Remainder by good Title. The Statute of 26 Hen. 8.17. says, That if a Man be
Attainted of Treason, he shall forfeit his Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments:
Now it is adjudged that the word Hereditaments comprehends Honors; which show
that they are subject to the same Rules of Law that govern other kind of
Inheritances, and are comprehended with other Particulars without general
words. This being premised, it is a known Maxim in all Laws, Nihil rationi magis
consentaneum quam rem eodem modo dissolvi quo constituitur, which Rule is so
general, that the highest Authority, i. e. the Parliament is not exempt from
it; for it is not possible to establish any thing so firm by Statute, which
cannot by another Statute be annulled. Now in the Creation of a Peer there are
three things; the Person that creates, the Person that is created, the Matter
of Record whereby he is created. Now if the King, who is the Person that
creates, and his Successors agree with the Person that is created Peer, and his
Successors, the one to undo their parts, and the other to give away their
parts, and there is a Matter of Record of as high a nature concurring to effect
this Dissiolution, etc. in some Cases it is in the power of an Ancestor, by his
own act, to destroy a Patent; as if a Scire Facias in Chancery be brought
against his Patent, and Matter is suggested whereby to avoid it, this shall (
Bro. tit. Patent. 37, 97.) vacate whatsoever was created by the Patent, and
yet' it is there in the power of the Ancestor, by good Pleading, to have
supported the Patent, and by bad pleading to destroy it; and therefore when the
Foundation, which is the Patent, fails, the Honor, and whatever it be that is
erected upon it, shall fail also: Every Estate by the consent of all Persons
interested and concerned in the thing, may be taken away, for the Law is so set
against Perpetuities, that a Clause intimating it is void, and though an Honor
is not ( Jones Rep. 109, 123.) assignable, yet it may be extinguished. It Is
true, if a Man has but a part of an Estate, as only an Estate for Life, he
cannot alone pass away the whole Estate, but none who has the Inheritance in
Tail or in Fee, but he may destroy the whole, and though any one have but part,
yet by the concurrence of all that are concerned, the whole may be destroyed:
It is admitted if he commit Treason, and is attainted thereof, he loses the
Honor for himself and his Posterity; now 'twas in his power to do this act
overt; and if by an act unlawful he has power to defeat the descent of the
Intail upon his Issue, there is the same reason that by a lawful act he should
part with it; there are two Acts of Parliament in force which fortify the
Fine; it must be granted that those Honors are within the Statute de Donis,
and then there can be no reason they should not be within the Statutes of
Fines, 4 Hen. 7. and 34 H. 8. which say that Tenant in Tail may levy a Fine of
all things that are intailable within the Statute de Donis, whatever therefore
is within the one is within both: and it is not sufficient to allege that it
is inconvenient that it should be within the Statute of Fines; for there is an
Act of Parliament, and without an Act of Parliament to exempt it, it cannot be
exempted: It may be proved by great variety of Precedents to have been the
practice in former times, anciently nothing more frequent than to release
Hoours. See Selden's Titles of Honors 730. it was as frequent as to grant
them: In latter times ( Delaval's Case, 11 Rep. 1.) it has been the Judgment
of the Lords that Honors may be extinguished, which in 1668. was certified by
all the King's Counsel Learned in the Law to be good Authority. But to go a
little higher, Andrew Gifford Baron Pomfret in Fee, 4 Hen. 3. Rot. 100.
surrendered to the King: so 23 Hen. 3. Simon Mountford Esquire; Earl of Leicester,
having a Mind to take an Honor from his eldest Son, and confer it upon his
younger, and so it was surrendered and regranted accordingly. Seldom seems to
construe this to be by way of Transmission and not Surrender; yet others of
later Authority (as Cambden's Britan. Title Earl of Leicester) say expressly
that he did Surrender it; and Seldom himself says it was by Concurrence of the
King: King Hen. 3. ( Rot. Cr. 24. men. E. 1.) created one Earl of Richmond, and
he surrendered to the King ( Cambden's Brit. Title Earl of Richmond.) Roger de
Bigod surrendered not only the Office of Earl Marshal, but also the Earldom of
Norfolk. William Duke of Juliers, whose Father came in with Edw. 3. was created
Earl of Cambridge (40 Edw. 3. m. 21.) in Fee, his Son surrenders to the King,
which Record we have here: So Edward the Third made his Son John of Gaunt (See
Cambden's ubi supra) Earl of Richmond, who surrendered it to the King. And
lastly, in the Years 1639, 1679. Roger Stafford, whom the King intended to make
a Viscount, by the Advice of the Learned Men levied a Fine thereof, by which
it is now enjoyed. Lastly, he argued ab inconvenienti, for no Lord in the House
will be in safety if it should be other ways, there being many sitting in this
House by virtue of Surrenders from other Lords in former days, and perhaps some
of their Heirs are alive; and so if these Surrenders be adjudged invalid, it
would shake your Lordships own Possessions, and make it dubitable, whether
Foreigners and Persons unknown may not come and thrust them out; but if not
so, it may cause Confusion amongst themselves, their former Honors having been
surrendered to accept of others, and perhaps some, not thinking their Titles
secure, will stick to the former, and so occasion Dispute and Confusion about
Precedence; and lastly, it will put a great Disgrace upon your Ancestors
proceedings, who deemed this Course legal: and those must show very good
Precedents that it has been disavowed, if they will encounter such constant
Practices.

In the next place 'twas answered to their Arguments and Objections: and as for
that first Argument, That an Honor is inherent in the Blood; he answered, That
this Inherency in the Blood is not essential to Honors, for an Honor may be
created for Life, and then none of the Posterity or Blood of the Peer is
thereby enobled: It may be limited to the Heirs Males of the Body, so that an
Honor may touch and enter far into the Blood, and yet not run with it; and
farther, it may be limited to the Heirs by such a Wife, there the Issue by the
second Venture shall never inherit the Dignity, and yet is as near to the
Father, as those that are by the first, so that it is no true ground that they
go upon, that Nobility is inherent in the Blood; and for what was alleged as
to the Inconveniency of Surrendering Dignities, he answered, That there may be
necessary Reasons for the extinguishment of an Honor, and it may be for the
benefit and advantage of the Party and his Posterity; as if it do happen that
the Family do fall into Poverty, and be not able to support the Honor of
Peerage with decency, and so this Honor would perhaps be a Disgrace to the
rest of the Lords; and in a Child's Case, it may happen to a Noble Family to
have those Afflictions, that to continue the Honor would expose the Family to
Infamy; and therefore some times, to prevent the Son of Adultery from his
succeeding to the Dignity, it may be convenient to surrender it; and yet this
cannot be without the concurrence of the Prince, who being the Source of
Honor, can best judge of the Reasons for stopping the Stream; and it cannot
seem an harder Case to disinherit him of the Honor then of the Estate, which
he may do; and if he leave his Honor without his Estate, it will be a Burden
on his Shoulders which he will be unable to bear; and seeing it is necessary
that there be a concurrence of the Prince, it is undecent to suppose so vile a
thing of the Crown, as to comply with the Peevishness and Simplicity of the
Parents, where there is no reason for it: And as for what has been alleged
for the Invalitity of those Precedents that they were in Cases of New
Creations, and were in nature of Transmissions, he answered, That when an
Honor is Surrendered, and a new Honor granted, the former is either
extinguished, or not, before the other takes effect; if not, then the Party
has both together against the will of the Donor; and perhaps the new Honor
may be of that Name and Place, and those Persons may be concerned in it, that
will not permit it to be effected; and if it be in the power of the Ancestor,
for the advantage of his Posterity, by the Surrender of one Honor to take a
greater, it may be also in his power to do it for his prejudice. As to the
Objection, That by the same Reason an Honor may be extinguished it may also be
Transferred; he answered, That there was a great disparity betwixt them; for as
to Alienations of Honors, there is a great reason they should be disallowed,
for they all flow from the Prince, and therefore it is not fit they should be
conferred on any but by the Prince; though the King's of England have granted
power to a General to give the Honor of Knighthood, etc. in the Field, for the
Reward and Encouragement of Valor; yet this granting of Nobility is a
Prerogative peculiar to the King's Person alone; no Man else can ennoble
another: Time was indeed, when the Earls of Chester, having Counties Palatine,
by virtue of their Jura Regalia did create Barons, yet they never sat in
Parliament as Peers, because Peerage being a thing of so high a nature, cannot
be given by any but a Sovereign, and is given as a Trust and Obligation, so
that common Reason says they are not transferrable. It is said in our Law,
that where Offices are granted to a Man in Fee (See Jones 122, 123.) he may
grant it over; yet in some Cases they are so near to the Crown, that they
cannot be transferred, but must descend with the Blood, upon the same Reason no
Man can ever transfer an Honor for the near Relation which it has to the
Crown; but in case of Extinguishment that Relation and Trust cease, and so
they are different Cases. Then lastly, as to the great Objection of the
Judgment of the House of Lords in Roger Stafford's Case Anno 1640. he answered,
That notwithstanding that Case, their Lordships had given him leave to argue
it, and therefore they intended not that should be any Impediment. 2. That is
no Judgment; for they being a Court of Judicature, do as other Judges, judge of
the Matter before them only. Then the Question was, Whether an Honor could
descend to the half Blood? They refetred it to the Judges, who were of Opinion
that it should. Thereupon arises another Question, Whether a Man might Convey
or Transfer his Honor to another? 'Twas resolved he might not. This drew
another Question; whereupon they resolved that a Lord could not Surrender his
Dignity; the Original Cause was about a Descent to the half Blood, the
Resolution is he cannot Surrender; how then can they pretend that to be a
Judgment, when the Question in point of Judgment was not before them. Suppose
it had been resolved (and it is a wonder it had not all that time) that a Lord
could not forfeit, and that had been a third step to have made it a perfect
Business; for considering the times, it had been a most convenient Resolution:
But besides all that, the King's Counsel were never heard in the point, and the
rejecting the Opinions of Learned Men, shows it was no Resolution of the whole
House, though entered upon the Journal, and therefore he prayed Judgment against
the Petitioner.

The Earl of Shaftsbury spoke in the House for the Petitioner.

The stress of the Argument for the King in this Case is founded upon these two
Assertions:

1 That Honors are taken to be within the Statute de Donis, etc. and the
general Rules of that Statute;

2. And then secondly, That Honors are to be governed as other Inheritances,
by the Rule of the Common Law.

As for the first, it has not been proved; for the Resolution in Nevil's Case
2 Jac. was Extrajudicial, and no Judgment of any Cause before them; and in such
Cases the Judges do not hold themselves to be upon Oath; and if there be two or
more of another Opinion, they do not refuse to sign the Resolution of the major
part, and so it goes under the denomination of all the Judges; but if it were a
Judgment of them altogether, they could neither alter nor make new the Law,
neither could they make that intended within the Statute de Donis, etc. which
was not in being till many Ages after, Beauchamp in Richard the Second's time
being the first Honor that was entailed by Patent.

2. The second Assertion is contrary to the Opinion of the most Learned Men,
the Honor and Dignity of the House, the constant practice of Westminster Hall,
and the direct Evidence of the thing it self. Justice Berkley, a very learned
Judge, declared his Opinion Febr. 6. 1640. as appears by the Records of this
House, That Honors descend from the first that was seized of them; contrary to
the Rules of other Inheritances; and that Honors are not governed by the Rules
of the Common Law. Justice Dodderidge, in Jones 207. is of opinion, That
Honors are Personal Dignities which are affixed to the Blood; the Lords never
yet suffered their Honors to be tried at any Court at Law, or any other where,
save before themselves, though their other Inheritances are tried there as well
as other Men's: So possessio fratris holds of Lands, but not of a Dignity, which
is not disposed of as other Inheritances, nor will it be guided by the strict
Rules of Law. The Lord Coke is of Opinion in Bedford's Case, That an Honor
could not be taken away but by Act of Parliament; therefore it will be allowed
that the concurrence of all Parties concerned may extinguish this as well as
other Inheritances, but the Concurrence of all cannot be without Act of
Parliament; for the whole Kingdom have an Interest in the Peerage of every
Lord: It is a dangerous Doctrine to say our Judicature and Legislature is our
own only. The House of Lords is the next thing to the Crown, though that be far
above them; yet those that reach at that, must take them out of the way first;
they were voted useless and dangerous before the Crown was laid aside; and as
in Descent of the Crown the whole Kingdom has such an Interest in it, as the
King cannot Surrender or alien it, so in a proportionable degree, though far
less, the King and Kingdom have an Interest in their Lordships, and Dignities,
and Titles. It is true they may be forfeited, but it does not follow that they
may be extinguished by Surrender. There be two Reasons for the Forfeiture:

1. There is a Condition in Law that they shall be true and loyal to the
Government.

2. Honors are inherent in the Blood, and when that is corrupted, that which
is inherent is taken away; but in case of a Surrender these Reasons do not
hold; there is no Breach of any Condition in Law, nor any Corruption of the
Blood; for these Reasons Felony without Clergy forfeits Honors; whereas other
Inheritances, though Fee-simple, are lost but for a year and a day, and so are
Freeholds for Lives; which is another clear Instance that Honors are not
governed by the Rules of Law. It is pressed as a known Law, that Honors are
grantable for Lives; a Point of greater Consequence than the Thing in debate:
It Is not a fair way of arguing, nor to be allowed of. As for the Precedents
that are Seldom 730. is expressly against them; for it says that the Honor of
Baronages were in Abbots only in right of their Abbeys, not inherent in them:
So that it is plainly inferred that other Honors are Personal Dignities. The
Lord Delaware's Case 11 Rep. makes nothing for them; for it does not follow,
that because he could not Surrender that which was not in him, therefore he
might Surrender that which was in him. As to the other Precedents, he gave
these three Reasons:

1. They were bare Surrenders, no Fines.

2. All those were made by Persons that had advantage by them, having greater
Honors granted unto them; or such whose Interest was beyond the Seas, and
therefore were willing to quit their Dependencies here upon good Considerations
that pleased them: Et volenti non sit Injuria.

3. All these Surrenders passed sub silentio, and never admitted of any
Dispute: But as for the sole melancholy Precedent of Roger Stafford 1638. which
was condemned in Parliament 1640. it is to be observed that Resolution cannot be
condemned because of the Times, for the Affront to the Lords, in taking such a
Fine, was in 1638. and when could it be more properly remedied then in 1640.
except it be expected there were a Prophetical Spirit of Judgment against a
thing not in being; there were 94 Lords present; and the Vote was Nemine
Contradicente, which gives it as great an Authority as any Resolution that ever
was. The King's Counsel were not heard in the Case of Ship Money, nor
Knighthood-money, where they had more right to claim to be heard than in this
Case. To conclude, a Fine is a Judgment in the Common Pleas, and your Lordships
Honors are not triable in that Court below in Westminster Hall; but if this
Fine be allowable, they must be triable there as well as other Inheritances.
And as to what has been said, That some of your Lordships sit here by
Remainders, and they are in danger, if Honors be not allowed, to be intailed,
it is denied; and if they be intailed, it is not of the same nature with other
Inheritances; neither does any Lord sit here by Title of a Remainder, but by
Virtue of a new Grant in the same Patent.

'Twas afterward declared, That the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled, upon a very long Debate, and having heard his Majesty's Attorney
General, are unanimously of Opinion, and do resolve and adjudge that no fine
levied, or at any time hereafter to be levied to the King, can bar a Peer's
Title of Honor, or the Right of any Person claiming such Title under him that
levied, or shall levy such Fine.

Duval versus Price.
WRit of Error on a Judgment in the Court of Exchequer affirmed on a Writ of
Error before the Keeper of the Great Seal, etc. in an Action of the Case for
Slander: The Writ was to this Effect, Gullelmus and Maria, etc. These. and
Baronibus de Scaccario suo salutem, quia in recordo and processu ac etiam in
redditione judicij loquelae quae fuit in Cur' nostra de Scaccar' coram
Baronibus nostris praed' de Scaccar' nostro praed' per Billam inter Edward'
Price Arm' debitor' nostr' and Johan' Duvall Arm' de quadam transgression'
super casum eidem Edwardo per praefat' Johannem illat' super quo judicium in
Curia nostra de Scaccar' reddit' fuit pro praefat' Edwardo versus dict' Johann'
qua quidem record' and process' causa Erroris intervenient' in Camera Consilij
juxta Scaccar' vocat' le Council Chamber coram Domino Custod' Magni Sigilli
Angliae and vobis praefat' These. venire facimus and jud' inde versus praefat'
Johann' coram, etc. affirmatum est, and quia in affirmatione judicij praed'
versus praed' Johannem coram, etc. Error' intervenit manifestus ad grave dampn'
ipsius Johannis sicut ex quaerela sua accepimus, quos Error' si quis fuerit
modo debito Corrigi and eidem Johanni plenam and Celarem justitiam fieri
volentes in hac part, vobis Mandamus quod si judicium coram praefat' etc.
affirmatum est, tunc record' and process' tam judicii quam affirmation' praed'
cum omnibus ea tangentibus, quae coram vobis jam resident' ut dicitur nobis in
Parliament' nostro, viz. 17 die Septembris prox' futur' distinct and aperte
mittatis and hoc Breve, ut inspectis record' and processu praedict' ulterius
inde de assensu Dominor' Spiritualium and Temporalium in eodem Parliamento
Existent' pro Errore illo Corrigend' fieri faciamus, quod de jure and secundum
legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Anglie fuerit faciend' Test nobis ipsis
apud Westm' 8 Maii Anno 6.

Record' and Process' de quibus in Brevi de Errore huic Schedule annex'
specificat' fit mentio, sequitur in haec verba, Placita coram Baron' de
Scaccar' etc. Midd' Memorand' quod alias scilicet, etc. And by the Bill, Price
complains of Duvall, praesent' hic in Cur' eodem die de placito transgr' super
casum pro eo, viz. quod cum he was a good Subject, and free from all Suspicion
of Treason, and was a Justice of Peace in Radnor and Montgomery-shire, and well
performed his Duty, and well-affected to the King and Queens Government, and
ready to oppose all their Enemies, etc. the Defendant maliciously designing to
prejudice the Plaintiff, and to bring him into the Displeasure of his Prince,
etc. did tali die and anno apud Westm' in Com' Midd' habens colloquium of the
said Plaintiff, say these English words of him, He (meaning the Plaintiff) is
disaffected to the Government, (the Government of the King and Queen meaning)
and having other Discourse of the Plaintiff, and of the Government of the King
and Queen, did say of the said Plaintiff these other words, viz. He (meaning
the Plaintiff) is disaffected to the Government, (the said Government of the
King and Queen meaning) By pretext of which said words, he was injured in his
Credit, and fell into the Displeasure of their Majesty's; and his Office
aforesaid, by reason thereof, did totally lose, and remained hitherto daily in
danger of a severe Prosecution as an Enemy to the King, etc. ad damp' mill'
librar', quo minus He can satisfy the King and Queen the Debts he owes them:
Et inde producit sect' etc. pleg' etc.

The Defendant pleads Non cul, Jury find pro quaerent', and assess Damages 200
l. and Judgment accordingly; posteaque scil. 6 Julij Anno 5. iidem Dominus Rex
and Domina Regina Mand' hic Breve de Errore Corrigend' sub Magno Sigillo Anglie
These. and Baron' de Scaccar' suo direct' in haec verba, directed These. and
Baronibus suis de Scaccar' suo, quia in recordo and processu, etc. Error'
intervenit manifestus ad grave damp' etc. sicut ex querela sua accepimus, ac
cum in 31 Edw. 3. inter cetera concordat' and stabilit' fuit, quod in omnibus
casibus Regem aut al' personas tangent' ubi quis queritur de Errore facto in
Scaccario Cancellar' and These. Venire fac' coram eis in aliquam Cameram
Consilij juxta Scaccar' record' and process' hujusmodi extra dict' Scacc' and
assumptis sibi justic' and al' peritis tal' qual' sibi videbitur fore assumend'
vocari fac' coram eis Barons de Scaccar' praed' ad audiend' Informationes suas
and causas judicior' suor' and super hoc negotium hujusmodi debite facer'
Examinari, Et si quis Error' invent' fuer' illum corrigend' and rotulos
Emendari, ac postea eos in dictum Scaccar' ad Execution' inde faciend' remitti
fac' sicut pertinet, prout in eodem Statuto plen' Continent' Nos igitur
volentes errorem si quis fuit' juxta formam Statuti praed' corrigi and partibus
praed' plenam, etc. Vobis mandamus quod si judicium inde reddit' sit, hinc
record' and process' praed' cum omnibus ea tangentibus coram Domino Custod'
Magni Sigilli Anglia and vobis praefat' These. in Camera Consilij juxta Scaccar'
praed' vocat' le Council Chamber die Martis, viz. 31 Octobris, prox' futur'
Venire fac' ut idem Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli Angliae, and vos praefat'
Thesaur' Visis and Examinatis, etc. ulterius in hac part de Concilio
Justiciar' and al' peritor' hujusmodi Fieri fac' quod de jure and secund'
formam Statut' praed' fuit faciend' Test' nobis ipsis apud W. etc.

Ad quem diem Martis, viz. 31 die Octobris coram Johanne Summers Mil' Domino
Custode Magni Sigilli Angliae (nullo Thesaur' adtnuc Existent') hic scil' in
Camera Consilij apud Westm' praed' venit' praed' Johannes Duvall per S. A.
Attorn' suum. Et praed' Thesaur' and Barons record' and process' praed' cum
omnibus ea tangentibus tunc hic Venire faciunt, Et super hoc the said J. Duvall
assigns the General Error, and the said Price pleads In nullo est Erratum; and
after several Curia advisare's, and days given, super hoc visis and intellectis
omnibus and singulis praemissis per praefat' Dominum Custodem Magni Sigilli
praed' (nullo Thesaur' adtunc Existent') maturaque deliberatione inde habita
assumptis sibi J. Holt Mil' Capital' Justiciar' etc. and G. Treby Mil' etc.
Vocatisque coram eo Baronibus de Scaccar' praed' auditisque rationibus Baronum
praed' Visum est praefat' Custodi Magni Sigilli praed' (nullo Thesaur' adtunc
Existent') de Concilio Justiciar' praed' quod in record' aut processu praed'
vel redditione jud' praed' in nullo est Erratum Ideo consideratum est per
praed' Custodem Magni Sigilli Anglie (nullo Thesaur' adtunc Existent') quod
judicium praed' in omnibus affirmatur, etc.

Upon the General Error assigned here in the Judgment, and Affirmance
aforesaid, the single Query was, If these words, He is disaffected to the
Government, be actionable? And it was argued by the Counsel for the Plaintiff
in the Writ of Error, that they were not, because they are general and
uncertain, do not import any particular Crime which exposes to any particular
Penalty, and they carry no Reference to his Office; and though he be alleged to
be a Justice of the Peace, yet there is no Colloquium laid concerning his
Office. To make words actionable, they must either tend to the Scandal and
Discredit of the Party, or such, if true, as must bring Damage to the Party, of
whom they are spoken: otherwise, without special Damage laid and proved,
there is no reason for the Jury to give Damages, because he suffers none. In
ancient time these Actions were rare; the Year-Books are little acquainted with
them; and though latter Ages have countenanced them, yet it has been under
certain Rules and Limitations, as that they ought to be particular and clear;
for if they are so general as to be ambiguous, no Action is warrantable upon
them; and therefore they must be of a single and known Sense, and such against
which no other Intendment can reasonably be admitted; Slander raised by
Argument, or Implication, or Inference only, is not enough to maintain an
Action: And though the Causa dicendi be not inquirable now, after a Jury has
found them spoken as laid, viz. maliciously, yet if the words themselves do not
imply Malice and Damage, the use of those Adverbs which are commonly mentioned
in such Declarations, will not alter the Case; for Men are to be answerable
only for their own words, and not for words expounded or described in another
manner than the Speaker intended: Here the word disaffected is none of the
plainest; nor is the word Government much plainer; the first is only a
Negative, and to say He is not affected to the Government, goes only to a want
of Zeal, or an indifference of Temper, and does not carry in it any treasonable
Intent or Purpose, much less any Act done.

And as to the pretended Special Damage, in the loss of his Prince's Favor, or
incurring his Displeasure, that is such an Allegation as should not have been
made, it is neither mannerly nor justifiable in the Plaintiff to affirm such a
thing upon Record. And as to the loss of his Office, that can be no Damage, the
same being no Place of Profit, but merely of burden and trouble. 'Twas further
urged, That if these words were allowed to be actionable, Tory, Whig, or
Jacobite, or any other common, rude, uncertain Terms in Discourse might pretend
to it, according to the respective Turn of Times, and consequently no Body
would know what Discourse is allowable: As ill Tongues were to be corrected, so
care is to be had of Liberty of Speech, not to make every thing a Cause of
Action; and to justify this, on the same side were quoted multitude of Cases,
too many to deserve a remembrance.

It was argued on the other side, That these words touched the Person in the
most tender point, viz. his Loyalty; That it carried Scandal in it self, not to
be zealously affected to the Government, which protects the whole; that it was
equivalent in Common Understanding, to the calling him Traitor or Rebel: That
this was much more, than affirming one not to be a good Man; that disaffected
employed somewhat positive; it is meaning was, that the Party has an aversion, a
fixed, settled Enmity to the Government; that this was spoken of an Officer of
great Trust; that 'twas a Reflection upon him with regard to his Office, for
Loyalty is as necessary as Justice in such a Post; that to slander him in the
one, ought to be as actionable as to slander him in the other; which is allowed
it will, because of the Reference to the Office in the nature of the words,
without any Special Damage: that to deny these words to be actionable, would
tend to encourage Breaches of the Peace, by provoking Challenges, etc. for
that, if Men cannot relieve themselves by Law, they will be tempted to do it of
themselves in other methods; and that these words were a Reflection on the
Government, which employed Men thus disaffected; and abundance of the Common
Cases upon this Subject were quoted, to show what words would bear an Action in
respect of Officers and Allegiance: And then 'twas argued strenuously, that
this was a Special Damage, viz. to lose the Prince's Favor, which every Man
ought to covet, and to lose a Place of Honor and Command, both which the Jury
have Found.

It was replied on the behalf of the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, That as to
the Reflection on the Government, it might perhaps warrant an Information or
Indictment, but not an Action: That as to Challenges, there were vast variety
of words which are reckoned provocative in the highest degree, As the giving
the Lie, calling a Man a Coward, and the like, and yet will bear no Action: And
at last, upon Debate, the Judgment was Reversed.

John Duvall and Elizabeth his Wife, Appellants, Versus William Terrey of
London Merchant, Respondent.
THE Appeal was to be relieved against a Decree in Chancery: The Case was, That
the Appellant Elizabeth had entered into a Bond of 140 l. Penalty, conditioned
for the payment of 72 l. on the Twentieth of April 1676. and by reason of
several Promises and Delays of Payment, and insisting upon Privilege, and
other like Occasions, it was not put in Suit till lately, and then the
Respondents were Arrested: And upon a Declaration, the Appellants pleaded
Payment at the Day. And after Issue joined, and notice of Trial, upon some
discovery of a Defect in the Evidence to prove the Bond, Motion was made in the
King's Bench to alter the Plea; which denied, a Bill was preferred in Chancery,
on suggestion that Elizabeth had never Executed it, or that 'twas obtained by
Fraud, and that there was no Consideration for the same; and the Respondent
preferred a Bill, praying a Discovery if such Bond, etc. Upon Examination of
Witnesses, and after publication passed, the Cause was heard; and upon the
hearing, 'twas ordered, That the Appellants should not be relieved, save
against the Penalty of the Bond; and that it be referred to one of the Masters
to compute the Principal-money and Interest due thereon, and to tax for the
Respondent, his Costs, both at Law and in that Court; and that what should be
found due for the Principal, Interest, and Costs, be paid by the Appellants at
such Time and Place as the Master should appoint, who computed the Principal
and Interest at 154 l. and the Costs at 67 l. and to be paid the Twentieth of
October following.

Upon the hearing of this Appeal, there were two Queries made, 1. Whether,
there being some difference in and about the proof of the Bond, the Court ought
to have made a Decree without directing a Trial at Law upon the validity of the
Bond: But 'twas held, That the Bond not being denied in pleading upon the Issue
at Law, the Chancery had done right, and could not well have directed any other
Issue than what the Parties themselves had joined in at Law; and though 'twas
pretended that the Attorney ha^ pleaded thus without direction, the Court did
not much regard that pretense, because of the proper Remedy which the Law gives
against such an Attorney, if the pretense were true, and therefore they did not
much consider that.

Another Query was, Whether the Court of Equity could justly award more than
the Penalty? and objected, that the Order being to save against the Penalty, no
more ought to have been decreed. But 'twas said, That notwithstanding that,
when the same was referred to a Master to tax Principal and Interest, the Order
bound the Party to pay both, though it amounted to more than the Penalty; and the
meaning of the first part was only to relieve against the Penalty, in case the
Principal and Interest came to less than the Penal Sum; especially the same
coming to be heard upon cross Bills, and as this Case was circumstanced, after
such delay and such pleading in the Court of King's Bench: And as to Costs,
held no cause for an Appeal in this Case; nor in truth was it ever known to be
a Cause, if the Merits were against the party Appellant. And so the Decree was
affirmed in the whole.

William Dolphin and Katharine his Wife, Appellants, Versus Francis Haynes
Respondent.
APpeal to be relieved against a Decree in Chancery made by the Master of the
Rolls, Nov. 10. 1696. The Case was thus, That one Paris Slaughter of London,
being Guardian to Katharine the Appellant during her Infancy, he placed her
with his Kinsman Chambers Slaughter near Worcester, and sometimes boarded her
in that place for her Education; and the Respondent and the said P.S. being
Correspondents, Paris Slaughter ordered the Respondent to pay the said Chambers
what Sums should be called for upon the account of Katharine: In pursuance
whereof several Sums were paid upon her account, and the same were allowed
again to the Respondent by P. S. The Appellant Katharine having just attained
her Age, she came to the Respondent, and desired more Money, as by the Order of
P. S. and accordingly two several Sums were paid her, and Receipts taken from
her, as by the Order of P. S. The Appellant Katharine did afterward come to an
account with P. S. which was fairly stated in Writing, and they executed
General Releases each to the other: But the said two Sums, not being entered in
the Books of P. S. were not accounted for by the Appellant Katharine; and the
Respondent not having received any Allowance from P. S. in his Life time, nor
having, as he thought, any sufficient Orders to charge the Executor of P. S.
with, he prefers his Bill against the Appellants, and by her Answer she owned
the Receipt of the two Sums, but by order of P. S. and afterward, upon hearing
of the Cause, The Court declared that there appearing no positive orders from
P. S. for these two Sums, the Appellants ought to pay the Principal, Interest,
and Costs: And a Decree was made accordingly.

And now it was argued on the behalf of the Appellants, That this was not just,
because the Respondent never paid any Money to any Body while Katharine boarded
with him, or afterward, but by the Order and upon the Credit of P.S. and
charged it to his Account; and the Respondent did not pretend but that all was
repaid him, excepting these two Sums; that the Respondent and Katharine had
never any Account or Dealings together upon her Credit; and it is to be presumed
that the Respondent has charged these Sums upon the Account of P. S. and not
to her Account, because the Receipts are so worded; and that Katharine had
released P. S. on their accounting together, and therefore she could not charge
the Executor of P. S.

On the other side, it was argued, That here was a Badge of Fraud in the
Appellant K, that upon her Account with P. S. no mention was had of these Sums;
that the Debt was originally hers; that she was obliged to pay it, either to
Slaughter or to Haynes; that not having paid the same to Slaughter, and
Slaughter having released to her, she was discharged from all Demands on that
side, and therefore 'twas the more reasonable it should be answered by her to
the Respondent; that though the Credit might be at first given to Slaughter, yet
the Money being paid to her, and not by her paid to Slaughter, Haynes had a
fair Claim against her, even to avoid circuity of Suits; for if this were
otherwise, 'twould only turn Haynes upon the Executor of Slaughter, and that
Exeecutor upon Katharine the Appellant again in Equity to set aside the
Release, and to have an allowance of these Sums; and that in Justice and Equity
the Charge was placed upon the proper Party, who at first was the Debtor for
what she thus received: And accordingly the Decree was affirmed.

Dormer Sheppard and al' versus Joseph Wright and al'.
APpeal from a Decree of Dismission of a Bill preferred in the Court of
Chancery: The Case was thus,

The Appellants did in the Year 1693. load on Board the Ship Union at Gallipoly
210 Tuns of Oils, of which Ship the Appellants were Owners; and the Respondents
loaded on Board her at Messina 85 Bales of Silk, upon Freight by Contract both
to be delivered at London. The Ship homeward bound was chased into Malaga Mould
by one of the Thoulon Fleet, who were three or four days in sight, then stood
in for that Port, as if designed to attack the Fort; and thereupon the Master
discoursed the Owner's Factor, who sent him off a Lighter to save what they
could of the Ships Cargo; and because the Silk was of the greatest value, the
Silk was put on board the Lighter, and carried ashore; and to come at the Silk,
(for it lay beyond the Oils) they were forced to rummage the Ship: In saving of
which, and some small part of the Oils, many hours were spent, and by the
Seamen only, and at Night the French left the Port, whereupon no more was
landed. But about six days afterward the French Fleet appeared again before
Malaga, and then all Endeavors were used to save the Oils, but were prevented
by the Boats which the French Men of War sent into the Harbor, and the Enemy
forced them to their Guns, and when they could defend the Ship no longer, they
bored holes to sink her, but the Oils kept her from sinking, and the French
took her, and carried her away. The Bales of Silk were afterward put on board
another Ship, and delivered to the Respondents at London, for which they paid
the Freight, etc.

The Appellants pretending that they ought to have a share of the Silk which
was saved, in proportion to the value of the Ship and Oils which were lost,
they exhibited their Bill in Chancery, to enforce the Respondents to come to an
Average with the Appellants for the loss of their Ship and Oils. And after
Examination of Witnesses, on the hearing of the Cause, the Bill was dismissed.

And it was argued on the behalf of the Appellants, That this Dismission was
not justifiable by the Rules of Equity; for that it must be agreed, If Goods
are thrown overboard in stress of Weather, or in danger or just fear of Enemy,
in order to save the Ship and rest of the Cargo, that which is saved shall
contribute to a Reparation of that which is lost, and the Owners shall be
Contributors in proportion; and that there was the same Reason here; that by
preferring the salvage of the Silk (being the best of the Cargo) before the
Oils, the Owners were deprived of the same opportunity for the salvage of the
Oils; that as the Sea-law in Extremity directs the Master to preserve the best
of his Cargo, and the Goods saved ought to contribute to the loss of the Goods
Ejected; so where one is preferred before the other in case of Extremity, there
being not time to land the whole, average is just and reasonable. And as to the
six days time, there was then no apprehension of danger, and consequently the
Master could not justify the landing of any thing after the reason of their
Fears were removed.

That the prudence of their Master in saving the Silk before the Oils, ought
not to be to the prejudice of the Owners interest, the Oils lying next to be
preserved; that the pretended neglect of the Master, in not landing them during
the absence of the Enemy, is no Excuse, because then there was no danger; that
the saying that the loss of the Ship and Oils did not contribute to the salvage
of the Silks, is no reason, seeing the salvage of the Silk (which had otherwise
been lost) deprived the Owners of the same opportunity for the salvage of the
other Goods; that in such Adventures, as the danger is common, so ought the
loss or damage to be common and equal; that the Master is equally entrusted by
and for all; and were it otherwise, it had been the Duty, and will be the
Interest of all Owners of Ships to order their Servants in Extremity to
preserve their own Goods; that the Silk, being of the greatest value, it was a
National Service, to preserve that before the Oils, and therefore equitable
that all who embark in the same Bottom, should share alike in the Service done
for Salvage, etc. And further, that if in Extremity, the safety of the best of
the Ships Cargo is not preferrable before that of the meaner value, it will be
of ill consequence; and therefore the Sea-law provides first for the Safety of
the best of the Cargo, and the Master acted accordingly and that it is the
Opinion of those who are learned in the Maritime Laws, That where Freighters
Goods are equally in danger, and a like opportunity for the salvage thereof, if
the safety of the one be preferred, and the other comes to be lost, such
preference obliges the Goods preserved to contribute to those which are lost;
it being a General Rule in Causes Maritime, That one Man's Interest ought not
to suffer for the Safety of another.

On the other side, it was argued with the Decree, That this Pretense was new;
that 'twas a Notion unpresidented; that the Rule of Averidge went only to the
cases, where the loss of one Man's Goods contributed to the safety of another,
as by Lightning the Vessel, etc. and not to this Case; that here each Man was
to undergo the Peril of his own Goods; that in case of Damage to Goods within
the Vessel, other Goods were not contributory, but the Owner must endure his
own loss, and had only his Remedy against the Master, if it were occasioned by
his Defect or Miscarriage: that the reason of Averidge was a meritorious
Consideration in the common Case, because there the loss of one did actually
save the other; but here was no such thing: The loss of these Oils did not save
the Silk, nor did the saving of the Silk lose the Oils; for if the Silk had not
been saved, the Oils had been lost, for they were so bulky that they could not
easily be removed without further time; and if part only be saved, it is to the
advantage of the Owner; and where all cannot be saved at a time, the Benefit is
accidental to him, whose Goods the Master's discretion directs to be saved: And
in this case here was no such Commodity, as could contribute to the loss of a
Ship, if it had been kept on Board; for the Silk, if on Board, had not assisted
to her sinking. But besides, here were six or eight days between the landing of
the Silk and the seizing of the Ship by the French, in which time all the Oils
might have been landed, and thereby both them and the Ship saved; and the
apprehension of the Danger could not so soon be removed by losing sight of the
Enemy in the Morning, and therefore there was no reason for the Master
immediately to forbear landing his Oils. Therefore 'twas prayed that the Appeal
might be dismissed, and the same was accordingly done, and the Decree of
Dismission below affirmed.

Whitfield and Ux' and al' Appellants, versus Paylor and Ux' and al'
Respondents.
APpeal from a Decree in Chancery: The Case was thus, Sir Lawrence Stoughton, a
young Baronet in Surrey, having an Estate of near 1000 l. per Annum, was a
Servant to the Respondent Mary, the Daughter of one Burnaby a Brewer, reputed
to be very rich. Upon the first Proposal of Marriage, Burnaby did agree to give
5000 l. certain, and insisted to have a Jointure of 500 l. per An. settled, and
that she should have the Inheritance of the Jointure, if he died without Issue.
Sir Lawrence did refuse to agree to this; but afterward he renewed the Treaty
himself, and accepted of Articles for payment of 5000 l. Portion, and made a
Settlement of a Jointure of Lands worth 500 l. per Annum; and likewise made
another Deed in the nature of a Mortgage of all his Estate, as well the
Reversion of her Jointure as the rest, for securing the payment of 5000 l. to
her in case Sir Lawrence died without Issue; and died within a Fortnight after
Marriage, without Issue. The Lady Stoughton prefers her Bill, and prays the
Appellants might be fore-closed of the Equity of Redemption on Failure of
Payment. The Appellants exhibit their Bill to be relieved against this as a
Fraud; and upon hearing of these Causes before the Master of the Rolls, the
Appellants were decreed to pay the 5000 l. by the first Day of Hillary Term,
1695. without Interest, but with Costs: And in default, the estate to be sold
to raise it with Interest from that Day: And upon a re-hearing before the Lord
Keeper, his Lordship confirmed the Decrees, and gave a Twelve-months further
time for payment.

And now it was argued for the Appellant, That it was proved in the Cause, that
Sir Lawrence was a sickly weak Man; that on his Deathbed he declared he had
made no such Agreement; but that the 5000 l. was to pay his Debts, and no part
of it was to return to his Wife, and his Wife present, and not contradicting
it; that it did not appear, that he had any Counterpart of this Deed, or that
he ever advised or acquainted any of his own Relations with it; and the Draught
of the Deed was confessed to be burnt. And further, that the Agreement in its
own nature was unreasonable; that she should have both Portion and Jointure;
and that one was a merit for the other; but that both should be vested in the
same Person, the Portion returned, and the Jointure enjoyed, was very hard, and
therefore to be set aside: That Equity was to relieve against such pretended
Agreements, as things done without any Consideration inducing them, and
therefore void.

On the other side, 'twas insisted on for the Decree, That the Man was of Age;
that there were two Treaties of Marriage, which shows a deliberation; that here
was no mis-representation or imposition; the Bargain in it self might be upon
good reason; the Gentleman being sickly; and the Money was to be returned only
upon a Contingency of his dying without Issue; that in case of his having
Issue, the Agreement was common; that perhaps she had the worst on it under all
Circumstances; that all Bargains are not to be set aside, because not such as
the wisest People would make; but there must be Fraud to make void their Acts;
and his forgetting that he had done such an Act, when on his Deathbed, is no
reason for to annul it; and the Marriage had been a good Consideration for a
Jointure of it self: And reasonable or unreasonable is not always the question
in Equity, if each Party was acquainted with the whole, and meant what they
did; much less is it sufficient to say that 'twas unreasonable as it happened in
event; for if at the time 'twas a tolerable Bargain; nay, if at the time this
Bargain was the meaning of the Parties, and each knew what was done, and
neither was deceived, the same must stand: And accordingly the Decree was
affirmed.

Thomas Arnold Appellant. Versus Mr. Attorney General, Respondents. Matthew
Johnson Esquire; Respondents. Thomas Bedford Gent. Respondents.

APpeal from a Decree in Chancery: The Case was thus, One Edmund Arnold
Proctor, being seized in Fee of the Manor of Furthoe to the yearly value of
240 l. per Annum, and also of some Personal Estate; but having no Child or
Brother living, made his Will in writing, and thereby, amongst other Legacies,
to many other Persons, he gave to the Appellant, by the Name of his Kinsman
Thomas Arnold, the Sum of 40 s. all to be paid out of his Personal Estate; and
then proceeds in these words, Being determined to settle for the future, after
the death of me and my Wife, the Manor of Furthoe, with all the Lands, Woods,
and Appurtetenances to charitable Uses. I devise my Manor of Furthoe, with the
Appurtenances, unto Sir Lionel Jenkins Knight. William Dyer, Matthew Johnson, and
Thomas Bedford, and to their Heirs and Assigns for ever, upon trust, that they
or their Assigns, after the death of him and his Wife should pay and deliver
yearly for ever, several particular Sums to Charitable Uses therein mentioned:
All the Particulars amounting in the whole to 120 l. per Annum, and charged
nothing further on the said Manor, but the Expenses of the Trustees in the
Execution of the said Trust. The said Arnold soon affter died; the Wife is also
since dead. Sir Lionel Jenkyns and William Dyer also dead.

In Trinity 1692. the Attorney General prefers a Bill against the Appellant as
Heir at Law to settle and establish the said Charities, and to enforce the
Trustees to act or to transfer their trust Estate. To which they answer, and
the Heir by his Answer claimed as Heir at Law, the Surplus of the Charity
Estate over and above what would satisfy the yearly Payments expressed in the
Will, and the Charges of executing the said Trust; upon a Reference to a
Master, to ascertain the Court of the yearly value of the Manor; he reports it
worth 240 l. per Annum, and worth the same at the time of making the Will. And
on hearing the Cause, the Court declared, That all the Profits of the
Premises, ought by the purport and intention of the Will, to be applied to the
Charities therein mentioned; and that the Appellant Arnold the Heir at Law is
totally excluded from the Surplus, with direction how the Surplus should go in
augmentation of some of the Charities; nevertheless, in case the Appellant
should Seal and Execute to the Trustees a Release and Conveyance of the
Premises, according to the Decree, then he to have his Costs out of the Sale
of Timber, and that the Trustees be indempnified.

And it was argued on behalf of the Appellant, That this Decree was not
equitable. Some Questions were made about the distribution of the Surplus
amongst only some of the Charities, and about the value; but a Surplus was
agreed to be in the Case; and 'twas chiefly insisted upon, that the Surplus
ought to go and be to and for the use of the Heir at Law; for that the Estate
is not increased by any subsequent or accidental Improvement, and so not like
the Case of Thetford School; but here at the time of making the said Will, was,
and now is, of a good value beyond the Sums given, and was so known to be by
the Testator; and the particular Charities given by the Testator are
particularly and expressly named and limited, and do amount only to so much, as
is less than the value of the Land; and thS urplus is not disposed of, and
consequently ought to be the Heirs: For as at the Common Law in a Will, what is
not given away must descend, whether you speak of Land, or the interest in it;
so in Equity, whatsoever Trust, or part of a Trust, is not declared and
expressed, the same shall be for the benefit of the Representative of the
Testator, either Heir or Executor, as the Case may happen: Then these Bequests
or Devises being particular and express, they do and will control and expound,
nay restrain and qualify the meaning of general precedent words: That
Expression of his being determined to settle his Manor to charitable Uses,
will be qualified by the Particulars afterward, as is Nokes's Case in 4 Rep.
and many others in the Books. Besides, it is not accompanied with any term of
Universality, that excludes the Construction contended for; and if it had been
so largely expressed, those general words of his designing to settle the whole,
may be intended only as a Security, that the particular Charities may be
certainly answered: And by such Construction all the words of the Will may be
satisfied; and then the Trustees may convey the Premises to the Heir at Law,
and take Security for the same, saving and reserving all the said Charities
devised, with all reasonable Charges and Deductions, without prejudice to the
Will of the Testator, or to the said Estate, which must nevertheless be liable
to answer and make good the same; so that there can be no Damage done to any of
the Parties or Interests concerned, by this Construction; nay, it is the adding
a further Security for their payment. Now it is plain, he designed the Sums
given to the particular Uses, and no more, for that they are all so particular
and express; and it is pursuant to the Rules of Law and Equity, in all doubtful
Cases, to adjudge in favor of the Heir at Law, and not to extend the general
words of a Will, to enlarge a Charity beyond the intent expressed, especially
against a near Relation and Heir, as this is, viz. his Brother's Son. Besides,
the Testator was bred a Civilian, and as such, knew how fully to express
himself, if he had intended the Overplus to go in increase of the Charity: Or
if he had intended them more then is mentioned, he would have declared himself
in such manner as should exclude all doubt.

On the other side, it was argued, That the Testator's intent plainly appeared
by his Will to dispose all his Estate wholly to charitable Uses; and that the
words of the Will were sufficient to carry the whole Estate to that purpose;
and that it did not appear by his Will, that 'twas his intent to give his Heir
at Law any thing out of his Real Estate; that his determination to settle his
Manor, with the Appurtenances, was to settle the whole; that what is not
disposed of in Particulars, is to be directed by the Court of Chancery; that
that Court has done right in directing it in augmentation of the Charities
mentioned, because the Testator's intent was most in favor of those which are
so mentioned: That if the Query were asked, What shall be done with the Surplus,
if any? The Answer is natural, viz. I am determined to settle the Manor, that
is the whole, on Charitable Uses: That the Testator by his Will expressed some
Care for his Sister, and for John Boncher his Nephew, and other his near
Relations; but neither by any Expression or Implication, points at any
provision designed for his Heir at Law; but for the Excluding him of all
Pretenses, has bequeathed him 40 s. and no more: that the other is to
contradict his plain Intent; it is to make a new Will for him, contrary to the
determination which he says he had made: And accordingly the Decree was
affirmed.

Sir Richard Dutton Plaintiff, Versus Richard Howell, Richard Gray, and Robert
Chaplain, Executors of Sir John Witham deceased.
WRit of Error on a Judgment given in B. R. for Sir John Witham and Sir Richard
Dutton, and the Award of Execution thereof upon Scire Fac' brought by the
Defendants, as Executors of Sir John Witham; and affirmed in the Exchequer
Chamber in Trespass and False Imprisonment. The Case on the Record was thus;
The Plaintiff William did declare versus Dutton, for that he with Sir Robert
Davis Baronet, Sir Timothy Thornhill, Henry Walrond, Thomas Walrond, and Samuel
Rayner, did 14 October. 36 Car. 2. at L. in Par' and Ward' etc. assault, beat,
and wound the Plaintiff, and imprisoned him, and his Goods then found did take
and seize, and the Plaintiff in Prison, and the Goods and Chattels from the
Plaintiff did detain and keep for three Months next following, by which the
Plaintiff lost the Profit he might have made of his Goods, and was put to
Charges, etc. Contra pac' and ad damp' 13000 l.

The Defendant pleads Not Guilty as to the Venir' vi and armis, and all the
Assault, Imprisonment, and Deteiner in Prison before the Sixth of November, and
after the Twentieth of December in the same Year; and as to the beating, and
wounding, and taking, seizing and detaining his Goods, and thereupon Issue is
joined; and as to the assault, taking and imprisoning the Plaintiff the Sixth
of November, and detaining him from thence until in and upon the Twentieth of
December. The Defendant does justify, for that long before, viz. the 28th of
October. 32 Car. 2. by his Letters Patents shown to the Court, did constitute and
appoint the Defendant his Captain General and Chief Governor in and upon the
Islands of Barbados, and etc. and the rest of the Islands lying, etc. and
thereby commanded him to do and execute all things that belonged to that
Government, and the Trust in him reposed, according to the several powers and
directions granted to the Defendant by the Letters Patents, and Instructions
with them given; or by such other powers or instructions as at any time should
be granted or appointed the Defendant under the King's Sign Manual, and
according to the reasonable Laws, as then were, or after should be made by the
Defendant, with advice and consent of the Council and Assembly of the
respective Islands: appoints twelve Men by name, viz. Sir P. L. H. D. H. W. S.
N. T. W. J. Witham the Plaintiff, J. P. J. S. R. H. E. S. T. W. and H. B. to be
of the King's Counsel of the Island, during the pleasure of the King, to be
assistant to the Defendant with their Counsel in the management of the Things
and Concerns of the Government of the said Island, in relation to the King's
Service and good of his Subjects there, and gives power to the Defendant, after
he himself had taken the Oath of Office, to administer to every Member of the
Council and Deputy Governor the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the
Oath of Office: with further power to the Governor, by advice and consent of
Counsel, to summon and hold a General Assembly of the Freeholders and Planters
there, and to make Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances for the good Government of
the Island, and to be as near and consonant, as convenlently may, to the Laws
and Statutes of England, which Laws were to be transmitted, to be allowed by
the King here; with power also, by advice and consent of Counsel, to erect and
establish such and so many Courts of Judicature, as he shall think fit for
hearing and determining all Causes, as well Criminal as Civil, according to Law
and Equity, and to appoint Judges, Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, and other
necessary Officers, for administering of Justice, and putting the Laws in
execution, provided Copies of such Establishments be transmitted to the King to
be allowed; and with further power to the Governor to constitute and appoint
Deputy Governors in the respective Islands and Plantations, which then were,
or should be under his Command, to all and every which respective Governors,
the King by these Letters Patents gave power and authority to do and execute
what should be commanded them by the Governor, according to the power granted
to him by this Commission: And the Governor's Authority to continue during the
good will and pleasure of the King.

The Defendant further pleads, That after the making of the Letters Patents,
and before the time of the Assault and Imprisonment, viz. 1 Mart. 33 Car. 2. he
arrived at Barbados, and by virtue of the Letters Patents aforementioned, he
took upon him and exercised the Government of that and the other Islands, and
continued to do so till the first of May, 35 Car. 2. when he had license to
return to England.

That he, before his departure, by virtue of the said Letters Patents, by a
certain Commission under his Hand and Seal, did constitute the Plaintiff, in
his absence, to be his Deputy Governor in the said Islands of Barbados, to do
and execute the Powers and Authorities granted to the Defendant by the said
Letters Patents.

That the first of August following, the Defendant arrived at London in
England, that the fourth of May, 35 Car. 2. after the Defendants departure, the
Plaintiff took upon himself the Administration of the Government of the Island
of Barbados; that the Plaintiff, not regarding the Trust reposed in him by the
Defendant, nor the Honor of that Supreme Place and Office, did unlawfully and
arbitrarily execute that Government and Office to the Oppression of the King's
Subjects, viz. apud Lond' praed' in Par' and Ward' praed'.

That after the Return of the Defendant to the Barbados, viz. 6 Nov. 35 Car.
2. at a Council holden, for the Island of Barbados, at St. Michael's Town,
before the Defendant H. W. J. P. E. S. T. W. F. B. which five are of the twelve
named Council in the Letters Patents, and Sir Timothy Thornhill and Robert
Dawes, Counsel for the Island aforesaid, the Plaintiff then and there was
charged, that he in the absence of the Defendant misbehaved himself in the
Administration of the Government of the said Island; Non tantum, in not taking
the usual Oath of Office, and not observing the Act of Navigation: And by his
illegal assuming the Title of Lieutenant Governor, and altering and changing
Orders and Decrees made in Chancery of the said Island, according to his own
will and pleasure, at his own Chamber, and altering the Sense and Substance of
them, from what was ordered in Court by and with the consent of the Council:
upon which it was then and there ordered in Council, by the Defendant and
Council, that the Plaintiff Sir John Witham should be committed to, etc. until
he should be discharged by due Course of Law: by virtue of which Order the
Plaintiff, the said sixth of Nov. was taken, and detained until the 20th of
Dec. upon which day he was brought to the Court of the General Sessions of Oyer
and Terminer, and then by Court recommitted, which is the same Assault, Taking,
and Imprisonment, and Traverses absque hoc, that he was guilty of the
Assaulting, Taking, or Imprisoning him within the time last mentioned at
London, or elsewhere then in the Isle of Barbadees, or otherwise, or in other
manner then as before.

The Plaintiff demurred, and the Defendant joined in Demurrer, and Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff; and a Venire awarded tam ad triand' exitum quam ad
inquirend' de dampnis, etc. and the Issue was found pro quaerent', and 6 d.
Damages, and on the Demurrer 500 l. Damages, and Judgment for Damages and Costs
amounting in the whole to 590 l.

The Plaintiff, Sir J. Witham, dying, Trin. 2 Will. and Mar. the Judgment was
revived by Scire Facias brought by Howel, Gray, and Chaplain, Executors of Sir
J. W. quoad omnia bona and catalla sua, except one Debt due by Bond from Henry
Wakefield. And at the Return of the Scire Fac', the Defendant appears and
demurs to the Scire Facias, and there is an Award of Execution, and thereupon a
Writ of Error is brought in the Exchequer Chamber, and the Judgment was
affirmed. Then a Writ of Error is brought in Parliament, and the General Error
assigned.

And here it was argued on the behalf of the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error,
that this Action did not lie against him, because it was brought against him
for that which he did as a Judge, and so it appeared on the Record, according
to 12 Rep. 25. that the Rule seems the same for one sort of Judge, as well as
for another; that this Person was lawfully made a Governor, and so had all the
Powers of a Governor; that this was a Commitment only till he found Security,
though not so Expressed; that this is not counsable here in Westminster Hall;
that he was only censurable by the King; that the Charge is sufficient, in that
Sir J. W. had not taken the Oaths; that male and arbitrarie executus fuit, is
Charge enough to warrant a Commitment; that this was a Charge before a Council
of State, and there need not be all the Matters precisely alleged to justify
their Acts; and by the same reason Actions may lie against the Privy
Counselors here, and enforce them to set forth every particular, which would
be of dangerous Consequence; the Plea might have been much shorter, as only
that he was committed by a Counsel of State, and the addition of the other
Matters shall not hurt; and that the Charge was upon Oath shall be intended; no
Presumption shall be, that the Supreme Magistracy there did irregularly; it is a
power incident to every Council of State to be able to commit: This action
cannot lie, because the Fact is not triable here; the Laws there may be
different from ours. Besides no Action lies unlefs 'twere a malicious
Commitment, as well as causeless: and that no Man will pretend that an Action
can lie against the chief Governor or Lieutenant of Ireland or Scotland, and
by the same reason it ought not in this Case; he had a power to make Judges,
and therefore he was more than a Judge; and they have confessed all this Matter
by the Demurrer. The Statute of Car. 1. which restrains the power of our
Council of State, supposes that they could Commit; that in case of Crimes there
they are punishable in that place; and in Sir Ellis Ashburnham's Case there was
a Remanding to be tried there, and if so, it cannot be examinable here; and if
not, this Action will not lie. And further, that what was done here, was done
in a Court; for so is a Council of State to receive Complaints against State
Delinquents, and to direct their Trials in proper Courts afterward; that there
was never such an Action as this maintained; and if it should, it would be
impossible for a Governor to defend himself: First, For that all the Records
and Evidences are there. 2. The Laws there differ from what they are here; and
Governments would be very weak, and the Persons entrusted with them very
uneasy, if they are subject to be charged with Actions here for what they do
in those Countries, and therefore 'twas prayed that the Judgment should be
reversed.

On the other side, 'twas argued for the Plaintiff in the Original Action, That
this Action did lie, and the Judgment on it was legal: That supposing the Fact
done in England, the Plea of such Authority so executed at Plymouth, or
Portsmouth, or the like, had been ill; for that Liberty of Person by our Law is
so sacred, that every Restraint of it must be justified by some lawful
Authority, and that Authority must be expressly pursued: That here was no
Authority to commit; for that must be either as a Court of Record, or as
Justices of Peace, Constable, or other Officer constituted for that purpose;
that the Letters Patents are the only Justification insisted on, and that gives
none; it is true, the power of Committing is incident to the Office of a Court;
here is only the Government of the Place committed to Sir Richard Dutton, with a
power to erect Courts, and appoint Officers, but none to himself: He in Person
is only authorized to manage and order the Affairs; and the Law of England
takes no notice of such an Officer, or his Authority; and therefore a Court of
Law can take notice of it, no further, or otherwise, then as it does appear in
pleading: The Council is not constituted a Court; they are by the Letters
Patents only to advise and assist the Governor; and the Governor has no
power to commit or punish, but to form and establish Courts to do so; which
imports the direct contrary, that he had no such power: The Ends of appointing
the Council, as mentioned in the Letters Patents, are quite different, viz. to
aid the Regent by their Advice, not to act as of themselves; and if neither the
Governor of himself, nor the Council of it self, had such a power, neither can
both together have it: A Court of Justice is not to be intended, unless the
same be specially shown: Excepting the Case of the common known general Courts
of Justice in Westminster Hall, which are immemorial; if any thing be justified
by the Authority of other Courts, the same must be precisely alleged, and how
their Commencement was, either by Custom or Letters Patents: Here it appears by
the Plea it self, that they had Justices of Oyer and Terminer appointed: It
does not appear that he or the Council were Judges of things of this kind.
Besides, when a Council is constituted, as here was Twelve by Name, that must
be the Majority, as is the Dean and Chapter of Femes Case, Davis's Rep. 47. and
that is Seven at least, which are not in this Case. There must be a Majority,
unless the Erection did allow of a less Number. The practice of the Courts of
Westminster Hall do not contradict this, for there it is a Court, whether more
or less, and so it has been time out of Mind. But here is a new Constitution;
and the Rule holds so in Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, if the direction be
so: as is the Case in Plowden 384. the Earl of Leicester's Case. If a Mayor and
three Aldermen have Conusance of Pleas, what a Mayor and two does is null and
void. And if there be no direction in particular for the number, the Law
requires the majority. So that here was no Council, because but five of them
present.

The Council have not the power, but the Governor with the Advice and Assent
of the Council; and so ought their pleading to have been according to their
Case; That if a Man justifies as a Judge to excuse him from an Action, he must
set forth his Authority, and the Cause must appear to be within his Conusance;
and so are multitudes of Cases, 3 Cro. 130. 2 Leon. pl. 43. and 1 Cro. 153,
557, 579, 593. 12 Rep. 23, 25. Mod. Rep. 119.

But taking it as a Council, neither Person nor Thing are within its
Jurisdiction; for if their Doctrine be true, that by being Governor, he is so
absolute, as to be subject only to the King; then what Sir John Witham did,
being while, and as Deputy Governor, which is the true Governor to all
purposes in absentia of the other, is not examinable by a Successor. But
admitting for the present, that by the Law one Magistrate may be punishable
before his Successor for Miscarriages which were committed color Officii; yet
here are no such Miscarriages sufficiently alleged to be charged on him. 1.
There Is no pretense of an Oath, nor Circumstances showing a reasonable Cause of
Suspicion, one of which ought to have been. 2. In pleading no Allegation is
sufficient, if it be so general, as the Party opponent cannot in reason be
supposed capable of making an Answer to it; and that is the true Cause why our
Law requires Certainty: He did male and arbitrarie execute the Office to the
Oppression of the King's Subjects. No Man living can defend himself on so
general a Charge as this is: for if Issue had been taken thereon, all the Acts
of his Government had been examinable, which the Law never allows: Then the
Particulars are as general; 1. That he did not take the usual Oath; and it does
not appear what Oath, or if any was requirable of a Deputy Governor, nor who
was to administer it; so that non constat, whether 'twas his Fault or the
Governors; besides, that is no cause of Imprisonment, for any thing which
appears in the Plea. 2. Assuming illegally the Title of Lieutanant Governor;
that is so trivial, as it needs no Answer; for Deputy Governor and Lieutenant
Governor are all one, locum tenens is a Deputy, and e contra. 3. Altering of
Orders at his Chamber ad libitum, which were made in Court; not said that there
was any such Court, or what Orders, or where made; and non tantum without etiam
or verum etiam, is not a sufficient positive Allegation: not said that he was
guilty, but only charged; and not said how charged, whether with or without
Oath, in writing or by parol: nor said to be in any such manner as that the
Council ought or might receive it: though Oath be not necessary to be mentioned
in the Commitment, yet it ought to be alleged in pleading, because it is
necessary to warrant the Commitment, as was held in the Lord Yarmouth's Case in
B.R. It could not be to secure his answering the same, for not so expressed;
and it is not said that Sureties were demanded or denied, or that he had notice
of the Charge; and surely this was bailable.

As to the Query, If conusable here; 'twas argued, That they had not pleaded to
the Jur', nor any Matter to oust the Court of its Jur': If they intended by
this Plea to have done that, they should have given Jur' to some other Court in
some other place, but this is not done; for if an Injury, it is relievable
somewhere in the King's Dominions; and whether it be so, or not, is examinable
somewhere: Now here is a Wrong complained of, as done by one Englishman to
another Englishman, and a Jur' attacht in the King's Bench, both of Cause and
Person, by the Bill filed, and his Defense to it: besides Jur' could not be
examined in the Exchequer Chamber, because both the Statute and the Writ of
Error expressly provide against it, and. this Writ of Error is founded upon that
Affirmance, and therefore questionable, whether that could be insisted on here?
But supposing it might, 'twas argued that the Action lies, for that it is a
transitory Action, and follows the Person wheresoever he comes under the power
of the Common Law Process: and that a Man may as well be sued in England for a
Trespass done beyond Sea, as in Barbados, or the like place; as for a Debt
arising there by Specialty, or other Contract, that no Body but Prynne ever
denied it, and he did so only in case of Bonds dated there: That many Actions
have been maintained and tried here for Facts done in the Indies,
notwithstanding special Justifications to them, and the Trials have been where
the Actions were laid: There was quoted Dowdale's Case, 6 Rep. 47, 48. and 7
Rep. 27. and if otherwise, there would be a failure of Justice in the King's
Dominions, 32 Hen. 6.25. vide Jackson and Crispe's Case, Sid. 462. 2 Keeble
391, 397.

'Twas then argued, That whatsoever question might be made about the Trial of
the Issue, if one had been joined; yet now Demurrer being to the Plea, if that
Plea be naught, then the Plaintiff is to have Judgment upon his Declaration,
and that is all right.

It was further said, That the Justification of such a tort or wrong ought to
be according to the Common Law of England, for that Barbados is under the same
Law as England; and if 'twere not, upon his pleading it must be intended to be
so; and though they should be intended different, yet the Defendant in the Action
was obliged to the same Rules of Pleading: for though the Matter may justify him
for an Act done there, which would not justify him for the same Act done here,
yet he must show that he has pursued the Rules of Law in that place; or in
case of no positive Laws, the Rules of Natural Equity: for either the Common
Law, or new instituted Laws, or natural Equity, must be the Rule in those
places.

'Twas agreed, That according to Calvin's Case, 7 Rep. 17. upon the Conquest of
an Infidel Country, all the old Laws are abrogated ex instanti, and the King
imposes what he pleases; and in case of the Conquest of a Christian Country, he
may change them at pleasure, and appoint such as he thinks fit; though Coke
quotes no Authority for it, yet 'twas agreed, that this might be consonant to
reason. But 'twas denied that Barbados was a Conquest, 'twas a Colony or
Plantation, and that imports rather the contrary; and by such Names these
Plantations have always gone in Letters Patents, Proclamations, and Acts of
Parliament. But whatsoever may by some be said as to Statutes in particular
binding there, the Common Law must and does oblige there, for it is a Plantation
or new Settlement of Englishmen by the King's Consent in an uninhabited
Country; and so is the History of Barbados written by Richard Ligon, Printed
at London 1673. page 23. says he, 'Twas a Country not inhabited by any, but
overgrown with Woods. And page 100. They are governed by the Laws of England.
And Heylin in his Geography, lib. 4.148. says, The English are the sole Colony
there; they are called the King's Plantations, and not his Conquests; and he
neither could, nor can now impose any Laws upon them different from the Laws of
England. 'Twas argued that even our Statutes do bind them; and many of them
name these Plantations as English; they have some Municipal Rules there, like
our Bylaws in the Stanneries or Fenns; but that argues nothing as to the
general; which shall prevail when the one contradicts the other, may be a Query
another time.

By the 22 and 23 Car. 2. cap. 26. against the planting of Tobacco here, and
for the Regulation of the Plantation Trade, the Governors of those Plantations
are once a Year to return to the Custom-house in London an Account of all Ships
laden, and of all the Bonds, etc. And they are, throughout the whole Act,
called the King's English Plantations, Governors of such English Plantations,
to some of the English Plantations. And Paragr. 10. it is said, Inasmuch as the
Plantations are inhabited which his Subjects of England; and so it is in 15 Car.
2. cap. 7. sect. 5. and in 12 Car. 2. cap. 34. they are called Colonies and
Plantations of this Kingdom of England. From all which it is natural to infer,
That the Rules in case of conquered Places cannot prevail here; Conquest est
res odiosa, and never to be presumed; besides, it is the People, not the Soil,
that can be said to be conquered. The reason of a Conquerour's Power to
prescribe Laws, is the Conqueror's Clemency in saving the Lives of the
conquered, whom, by the strict right of War, he might have destroyed; or the
presumed Chance of Subjection, which the conquered Prince and People threw
themselves upon, when they first engaged in the War. But this is not pretended
to here, though all the Cases about this Subject were put below stairs: Then
taking it as the truth is, certain Subjects of England, by consent of their
Prince, go and possess an uninhabited desert Country, the Common Law must be
supposed their Rule, as 'twas their Birthright, and as it is the best, and so to
be presumed their Choice; and not only that, but even as obligatory, it is so.
When they went thither, they no more abandoned the English Laws, then they did
their Natural Allegiance; nay, they subjected themselves no more to other Laws,
than they did to another Allegiance, which they did not.

This is a Dominion, belonging not only to the Crown, but to the Realm of
England, though not within the Territorial Realm. Vaughan 330. says, That they
follow England, and are a part of it. Then 'twas argued further, If 'twere
possible that it should be otherwise, when did the Common Law cease? On the Sea
it remained in all Personal Respects; If Batteries or Wounds on Shipboard,
Actions lay here: Then the same held when they landed there, and no new Laws
could be made for them but by the Prince with their consent.

Besides, Either the Right of these Lands was gained to the Crown, or to the
Planters, by the Occupancy; and either way the Common Law must be their Rule:
It must be agreed, that the first Entry gained the right, and so is Grotius de
jure Belli and Pacis, lib. 2. cap. 8. sect. 6. and these Lands were never the
Kings, though they afterward submitted to take a Grant of the King. It Is true,
in case of War, what is gained, becomes his who maintained the War, and does
not of right belong to that Person who first possessed it, Grot. lib. 3. cap.
6. sect. 11. But in case it be not the effect of War, but only by force of
their first Entry, it must be considered what Interest they did acquire, and
certainly 'twas the largest that can be; for an Occupant does gain an
Inheritance by the Law of Nations, and the same shall descend; then by the
Rules of what Law shall the Descent be governed? it must be by the Laws of the
Country to which they did originally, and still do belong. But then supposing
the Lands gained to the Crown, and the Crown to distribute these Lands, the
Grant of them is to hold in Soccage, and that is a common Law Tenure; why are
not their Persons in like manner under the Common Law? When a Governor was
first received by, or imposed upon them, 'twas never intended, either by King
or People, that he should Rule by any other Law than that of England. And if it
had been known to be otherwise, the number of Subjects there would have been
very small. In these Cases their Allegiance continues, and must be according to
the Laws of England; and 'twas argued, that ex consequenti the protection and
rule of them ought to be by the same Laws, for they are mutual and reciprocal,
unum trahit alterum; and that Law which is the Rule of the one, should be the
Rule of the other; besides, it is the Inhabitants, not the Country, that are
capable of Laws, and those are English, and so declared and allowed to be; and
consequently there is no reason why the English Laws should not follow the
Persons of Englishmen, especially while they are under the English Government,
and since the Great Seal goes thither. And further, a Writ of Error lies here
upon any of their ultimate Judgments; so says Vaughan 402. and 21 Hen. 7.3.
that it does so to all Subordinate Dominions; and though the distance of the
Place prevents the common use of such Writ, yet by his Opinion it clearly lies;
and he reckons the Plantations part of those Subordinate Dominions. Now a Writ
of Error is a remedial Writ, whereon Right is to be done, and that must be
according to the Laws of England; for the King's Bench, in case of a Reversal
upon such Writ, is to give a new Judgment, as by Law ought to have been first
given. Vaughan 290, 291, says, It lies at Common Law to reverse Judgments in
any inferior Dominions; for if it did not, inferior and Provincial
Governments might make what Laws they please; for Judgments are Laws when they
are not to be reversed. It lay to Ireland by the Common Law, says Coke 7 Rep.
18. though there had been no Reservation of it in King John's Charter. Then 'twas
inferred, that the lying of a Writ of Error proves the Laws to be the same,
i.e. in general the Common Law to govern in both places, from the difference
assigned between Ireland and Scotland; it lies not to Scotland, because a
distinct Kingdom, and governed by distinct Laws; and it lies to Ireland,
because ruled by the same, and consequently if a Writ of Error lies on the
final Judgment there; it is a good Argument that the same Law prevails there.
These Plantations are parcel of the Realm, as Counties Palatine are: Their
Rights and Interests are every day determined in Chancery here, only that for
necessity and encouragement of Trade and Commerce, they make Plantation-Lands
as Assets in certain Cases to pay Debts; in all other things they make Rules
for them according to the common Course of English Equity: The distance, or the
contiguity of the thing, makes no alteration in the Case. And then 'twas said,
as at first, That this then was the same case, as if the Imprisonment had been
in England or on Shipboard, as to the Rules of Justification; that if there
were another Law, which could justify it, the same ought to have been
certainly pleaded.

As to the Instructions, those do not appear, and therefore are not to be
considered in the Case, and they should have been set forth, and no
extraordinary Power is to be presumed, unless shown, for every Man in pleading
is thought to make the best of his own Case, and consequently that if 'twould
have made for him, the same would have been shown; and because they are not
shown, they must be thought directive of a Government according to the Laws of
England, since it is to a Subject of this Realm to govern other Subjects of this
Realm, living upon a part of this Realm, and from the King thereof, who must be
supposed to approve those Laws which make him King, and by which he reigns.

Then 'twas argued, Suppose this Governor had borrowed Money of a Man in the
Island, and then had returned to England, and an Action had been brought for
it, and he had pretended to ustifie the receipt of it as Governor; he must
have shown his Power, the Law, and how he observed that Law; the like for
Goods; the same reason for Torts and Wrongs done vi and armis.

Now the Court below could consider no other Power or Law to justify this act,
but the Common Law of England, and that will not do it for the Reasons given;
and if it be justifiable by any other, it must be pleaded; and what he has
pleaded is not pursued, etc.

As to the Commitment by a Council of State, what it means is hardly known in
the Law of England; and that Authority which commits by our Law, ought to be
certain, and the Cause expressed, as all the Arguments upon the Writ of Habeas
Corpus in old time do show; but here is no Council: and it is not said so much,
as that he was debito modo onerat': And as to the Demurr', that confesses no
more then what is well pleaded: And as to Consequences, there is more danger to
the Liberty of the Subject, by allowing such a Behavior, then can be to the
Government by allowing the Action to lie: And therefore 'twas prayed that the
Judgment might be affirmed.

It was replied on behalf of the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, That
notwithstanding all that had been said, the Laws there were different, though the
Foundation of them was the Common Law that they would not enter into that
Question, What sort of Title at first gave Right to these Lands? but that this
was a Commitment by a Council of State: And, as to the Objection of too general
Pleadings in male and arbitrarie exercendo, etc. though the inducement of the
Plea was so. There were other Matters more particularly pleaded; the altering
the Decrees in his Chamber, which was sufficient: And as to the Objection, That
it is not alleged in the Pleadings, that the Charge in Council against Wytham
was upon Oath; they answered, That it is not effential, though prudent, to have
the Charge upon Oath before Commitment; Matters may be otherwise apparent. And
as to the Objection, That the Warrant of the Council for the Commitment was not
shown; they said that it lay not in their power, because 'twas delivered to the
Provost Marshal, as his Authority, for the Capture and Detention of him, and
therefore did belong to him to keep: And that the Council, though they were not a
Court, yet they had Jurisdiction to hear the Complaint, and send him to another
Court that could try the Crime; and though it did not appear that the King gave
any Authority to the Governor and Council to commit, yet it is incident to
their Authority, as being a Council of State; the Council here in England
commit no otherwise: and where the Commitment is not authorized by Law, the
King's Patent gives no power for it: But the Government must be very weak,
where the Council of State cannot commit a Delinquent, so as to be forthcoming
to another Court that can punish his Delinquency: And therefore prayed that the
Judgment should be reversed, and the same was accordingly reversed.

Philips versus Bury.
WRit of Error to reverse a Judgment given for the Defendant in the Court of
King's Bench, where the Case upon the Record was thus; Ejectione firm on the
Demise of Painter as Rector, and the Scholars of Exeter College in Oxon, for
the Rector's House. The Defendant pleads specially, That the House in question
is the Freehold of the Rector and Scholars of the College; but he says, That
he, the said Dr. Bury, was then Rector of that College, and that in right of
the Rector and Scholars he did enter into the Message in question, and did
Eject the Plaintiff, and so holds him out; absque hoc, That Painter the Lessor
of the Plaintiff, was at the time of making the Lease, in the Declaration,
Rector of that College, and hoc paratus est verificare, etc.

The Plaintiff replys, That the Message belongs to the Rector an Scholars, but
that Painter the Lessor was Rector at the time of the Lease: and hoc petit quod
inquiratur per Patriam, etc. and thereon Issue is joined, and a Special Verdict.

The Jury find that Exeter College is and was one Body Politic and Corporate,
by the Name of Rector and Scholars Collegij Exon' infra Vniversitat' Oxon',
that by the Foundation of the College there were Laws and Statutes by which
they were to be governed; and that the Bishop of Exeter, for the time being,
and no other, at the time of founding the College, was constituted by virtue
of the Statute concerning that Matter hereafter mentioned, ordinary Visitor of
the same College, secundum tenorem and effectum statut' eam rem concernent',
That the Bishop of Exeter, who now is, is Visitor according to that Statute.
Then they find the Statute for the Election of a Rector prout, etc.

Then they find the Oath required of the Rector, That so long as he should
remain in that Office, he should be true and faithful to the College, and its
Lands, Tenements, Possessions Ecclesiastical and Secular, Rights, Liberties and
Privileges, and all its Goods, moveable and immovable, would keep and defend,
and all the Statutes, Ordinances, and Customs of the College he would observe,
and endeavor that they should be observed by all Scholars, Graduates and
Under-graduates, etc. That he would occasion no Trouble or Grievance to any of
the Scholars contra justitiam charitatem and fraternitatem, But according to
the best of his Judgment and Conscience, he would cause due Discipline to be
used according to the form of the Statutes of the College: That he would
maintain and defend all Suits for the College, but never begin one wherein any
Disadvantage or great Prejudice may happen to the College, without the
deliberate consent of the major part of the Fellows. And if any variance happen
between him and the Scholars, and the same be not ended within ten or twenty
Days, by the Sub-rector, Dean, and three Senior Scholars of the College, that
then he would stand to the direction of the Chancellor, or in his absence, of
the Vice Chancellor or his Commissary, and his Award would faithfully observe,
and si contigerit me in posterum propter mea demerita, seu causas in statut'
content' juxta formam statorum ab officio me^ expelli seu alias amoveri,
omnibus and singulis juris and fact' remediis per quae vel quae petere me
possim reconciliari vel in integrum restitui circa praemissa quantumcunque
aliis probitat' and vitae merita mihi Suffragentur in vim pacti renuncio in his
scriptis, and that he would observe the Statutes, according to the plain
Grammatical Sense, etc.

Then they find another Statute, Si quis Scholarium vel Electorum, be convict
of Adultery, Incontinency, heresis pertinacis, wilful Homicide, manifest
Perjury, frequent Drunkenness, alteriusque publicae turpitudinis, before the
Rector, Sub-rector, Dean, and five other Senior Scholars, or the major part of
them, with the consent of the said Rector, he shall be ipso facto expelled,
nulla alia monitione praemissa. And in the same Statute (which is entitled de
causis propter quas Scholares privari debeant, and de dissentionibus sedandis)
it is farther established, quod si aliqua discordia ira, rixae ant dissentionis
materia (quod absit) in dicto Collegio suborta sit, qualitercunque inter
quoscunque Scholares, aut alios in dicto Collegio morantes, nisi sic
dissentiones intra unum diem intra se concordent tunc celerius cautius and
melius quo fieri potuit per praedict' Rectorem, vel in ejus absentia
Sub-rectorem, and tres Scholares, ex praesentibus in Collegio omnino Seniores
intra bidnum sedetur and pacificetur hujusmodi dissentio; si vero ipsi ad eand'
sedand' non sufficiant, tum Rector (assumpto sibi Sub-rectore, Decano, and
aliis quinque Scholaribus omnino Senioribus per quos veris' sedari poterit)
summarie and de plano eam examinat sicque finis discordie, ire, dissentioni,
and jurgij hujusmodi, favore, partialitate, ira, odio, and invidia quibuscunque
cessantibus intra tres dies lapsum illius bidui immediate sequentes imponatur:
and quicquid Rector cum praed' vel major' part corundem duxerit ordinandum and
agendum per parts discordantes firmiter in virtute eorum juramenti observetur
and executioni absque contradictione cujuscunque demandetur: nec liceat alicui
de dicto Collegio cujuscunque gradus aut status extiterit occasion rixae
jurgij aut dissentionis intra dictum Collegium aut extra intra eosdem orte vel
mote prosecutionem facere, aut litem aliquam movere vel aliquem impetere, aut
adjudicium trabere, coram aliquo judice extrinseco Ecclesiastico vel Secular'
sed volumus omnino quod hujusmodi jurgia ire rixe discordia and dissentiones
(quae per Dei gratiam raro aut nunquam contingent) per personas praedict'
aliqua ordinatione bona seu concordia terminentur and finientur.

The Jury finds, That from the Foundation of the College there was, and yet
is, quidam ordo Scholiarium, vocat' very and perpetui Scholares, and that by
the Statutes, every Scholar who has passed his Probation Year, and is approved
to be a true and perpetual Scholar, shall take an Oath before the Rector, or in
his absence before the Sub-rector, etc. to observe the Statutes of the
College, and to endeavor that others observe them too, or otherwise to
undergo the Penalties on them inflicted, without contradiction, according to
the true form and effect of these Statutes: To obey all Injunctions,
Expositions, and Constructions by the Reverend Bishops, Successors of the first
and original Founder, super dubiis Statut' emergentibus ad eosdem Episcopos ex
consensu Rectoris and majoris partis Scholarium delat' faciendis: to be true to
the College, neither to do, nor wittingly to suffer to be done, any Prejudice,
Damage, or Scandal to the same, to obey, assist, and reverence the Rector,
Sub-rector, etc. and other Superiors, Scholars in licitis ac honestis and
maxim in eorum conventionibus and in negotiis Collegij quatenus Statuta jubent
aut requirant effectually to obey all Directions and Orders of the Rector,
Subrector, etc. to maintain and defend the Rights and Liberties, the honesty
and good fame of the College, and its Scholars, etc. Item si contingat me
posthac per Rectorem aut in hujusmodi rebus habentes interesse corrigi, and
puniri, aut a dicti Collegii sustentatione ejici and expelli, excludi, privari,
vel amoveri praeter mea forsan demerita, ipsum Rectorem seu alias personas seu
eorum aliquem, occasion expulsionis vel correctionis hujusmodi nunquam
prosequar', molestabo, vel inquietabo, per me alium vel alios, sen ab aliis
prosequi vel molestari seu inquietari ea de causa quautum in me fuerit
permittam: sed sponte simpliciter vel absolute, omni actioni, contra Rectorem
aut alios dicti Collegij Scholares quomodo libet appellationi and querelae in
ea part faciendis, ac quorumcunque literar' impetrationi precibus principum,
praelatorum, procerum, magnaium, and aliorum quorumcunque quibus post ad jus
titulum and possessionem vindicandum reconciliari, ac quibuscunque juris and
facti remediis per que me petere possem integrum restitui, quantumcunque alias
mihi probitatis and vitae merita suffragantur, in vim pacti renuntio: To be
just and impartial in Election of Scholars, not to reveal the Secrets, etc. not
to desert the College to be of another, without license, etc.

The Jury further finds, That according to the Statutes there are probationary
Scholars, who are to be such for a Year, before they be admitted to be true and
perpetual Scholars, and that every one chosen in for a Probationer, shall swear
that he cannot certainly expend above four Marks per Annum; to be true to the
College, and not to reveal Secrets to its scandal, prejudice, or danger; not
to make or procure any Conventicles, Conspiracies, or Contracts against the
Ordinances and Statutes of the College, or the honor of the College or the
Rector, etc. to promote Peace there, and si conting at me (quod absit) juxta
formam and exigentiam Statutor' a praedict' Collegio expelli seu amoveri per
Rectorem and alias person' in hujusmodi expulsione interesse habentes, etc. in
like manner as the perpetual Scholars swear.

Then the Jury find the Statute de Visitatione, reciting how prone Mankind is
to Evil, and Time changes the best things, and that it is impossible to make
Laws, but by Mis-construction, Fraud, or other Practice may be dissolved, that
he confided in the Bishops of Exeter his Successors (quos dicti Collegij
Patronos and visitatores relinquimus) that those who are brought thither
through fervent Charity, being inflamed with Christian Faith, might watch to
the preserving that Nursery, that the Statutes and Ordinances of the College
might be studiously observed, Virtue and Learning be nourished, their
Possessions and Goods, spiritual and temporal, may flourish, their Rights,
Liberties, and Privileges may be defended: Ea de causa liceat Domino Episcopo
Exon' qui pro tempore fuerit, and nulli alij nec aliis quoties per Rectorem
dicti Collegij and in ejus absentia Sub-rectorem and quatuor alios ad minus ex
septem maxim senioribus Scholaribus fuerit requisitus, necnon absque
requisitione ulla de quinquennio in quinquennium semel ad dictum Collegium per
se vel suum Commissar' quem duxerit deputandum, libere accedere; cui quidem
Reverendo -- He gives full power upon all Articles in the Statutes contained,
and other Articles concerning the Estates, Honors, or Profits of the College,
to interrogate and examine the Rector, Scholars, and elect, and to compel them
by Oath, and Censures if need be, to say the Truth, and all Crimes and Offenses
of the said College whatsoever, Commissa and in ea visitatione Comperta,
according to the quality of the Offense to punish and reform, and to do all
things requisite quoad eorum correctionem and reformationem etiamsi ad
deprivationem seu amotionem Rectoris Subrectoris aut alterius cujusquam ab
administratione sua vel officio sive ad amotionem alicujus Scholaris vel Electi
ab eodem Collegio, Statut' and Ordinationibus id exigentibus, procedere
contingat: Stat' insuper, that none in dictis visitationibus in dicto Collegio
faciend' contra Rectorem Sub-rectorem aut aliquem alium ipsius Collegij
quemcunque dicat deponat seu denunciat nisi quod verum crediderit seu de quo
publica voxvel fama labor averit contra eundem in virtute juramenti ab eo prius
Collegij praestiti: Ordinantes praeterea ut Dominus Episcopus Exon cum in
persona propria visitare aut praemiss' facere dignatur, Rector and duo
Scholares ex praesentibus maxim Senioribus unam in Collegio refectionem
quadraginta solidor' expensas non excedentem eidem Episcopo humiliter and
reverenter offerent. Commissario autem cum praemissa fecerit duas refectiones
in Collegio vel viginti solidos per manus Rectoris de bonis Collegij persolvi
concedimus pro omnibus laboribus and expensis in hanc Causam tam in itinere
quam in Vniversitate tempore hujus visitationis. Itaque Dominus Episcopus
quadragint' solid' Commissarius vero viginti solid' in uno and eodem anno pro
actu visitationis ad sumptus Collegij non excedat; nec inceptam aliquam
visitationem ultra duos dies proxime sequentes, aut ex causis urgentissimis and
rarissimis ultra tres dies prorogari aut continuari ullo pacto volumus sed
lapso and acto illo biduo and quando de causis praedict' ulterius prorogatur
triduo transacto ea ipsa visitatio illa pro terminata and dissoluta habeatur.

Et si quae in ea comperirent corrigenda and reformanda que brevitate temporis
corrigere and reformari non potuerint, ea rectori in scriptis tradat, qui ea
omnia secundum formam and exigentiam statutorum sine dilatione quantum in eo
erit corrigere and reformare tenebitur sub poena contemptus: Then in the Name
of Jesus, and as they will answer it at the last Tribunal, that neither for
fear, hatred, favor, illwill, vel prece, vel pretio, they do or neglect to do
any of the Premises, etc.

Statuimus preterea, ut Rector subrector scholares aut alius quispiam
cujuscunque sortis dicti collegii super Excessibus vel delictis in
Visitationibus and inquisitionibus per dictum Episcop' Exon vel ejus
commissarium ut permittitur faciendis accusatus vel detectus copiae compertorum
vel detectorum hujusmodi tradidi aut ostendi aut nomina detegentium non
ostendantur: sed sup' iisdem compertis aut detectis statim coram Episcop' vel
ejus commissario personaliter respondeat ac correctionem debitam subeat pro
eisdem secund' tenor' statut' cessantibus quibuscunque provocationibus
appellationibus querelis and aliis juris and facti remediis per quae ipsius
correctio and punitio deferri seu impediri valeat.

Si tamen ad privationem aut inhabilitatem rectoris aut expulsionem scolaris
alicujus per Episcop' aut ejus commissarium agatur: tum ostendantur ei delicta,
quibus si non potuerit rationabiliter and honest respondere suamque
innocentiam probabiliter ostendere, and sese super objectis just purgare,
amoveatur sine appellatione aut ulteriori remedio; Dummodo ad ejus expulsionem
concurrat consensus Rectoris and trium ex septem maxim senioribus Scholaribus
tunc in universitate praesentibus; sine quorum consensu irrita sit hujusmodi
expulsio and nulla ipso facto: and in sup' si contra Rectorem ad amotionem ab
officio per hujusmodi Domini Episcop' commissarium, etiam consentientibus
quatuor ex septem maxim senioribus supradictis procedat' non negamus ei omnes
exceptiones defentiones justas and honestas, apud ipsum Dom' Episcopum Exon
dummodo ulterius non appellat, non obstante hac ordinatione praedicta aut aliis
quibuscunque.

The Jury further find, that in another Statute, propter quas causas Rector
officio privari debet. It is thus, Cum bono providoque Rectore nihil sit
utilius; and imprudenti, inepto, indigno, penitus inhabili, criminoso nihil sit
detestabilius: statuimus ut Rector quicunque propter terrarum, tenementorum,
reddituum, possessionum spiritualium aut temporalium sua culpa diminutionem seu
alienationem, vel propter detractionem ablationem alienationem illicitam
bonorum and rerum ipsius Cellegii, infamiam, adulterium incontinentiamque
negligentiam intolerabilem, heresin pertinacem homicidium voluntarium,
perjuriam manifestum, crebram ebrietatem, and propter longiorem absentiam a
Collegio quam Statuta permittunt, vel procurationem sui sibi officii per
largitiones inhonestas datas dandas vel promissaes, vel quacunque via aut modo
illicito, and propter usuram, simoniam, aliamve causam ipsum Rectorem reddentem
criminaliter irregularem vel aliter penitus inhabilem; necnon propter
infirmitatem infectivam and contagiosa' perpetuam, cujus occasion non poterit
absque scandalo officium hujusmodi exercere, ab eo penitus amoveatur, Ad cnj^
amotionens hoc modo procedatur, viz. ut statim vel saltem inter quindecim dies
postquam aliquid premissor' commiserit vel in eorum aliquod inciderit, primo
per sub-rectorem, assistentibus ei quinque scholaribus maxim senioribus dicti
Collegii moveatur Rector eique bonis rationibus suadeant ad voluntary cedendum
officio: quod si sponte inter triduum cedere noluerit, tunc intra octo dies
post hujusmodi monitionem subrectoris assensu and testimonio omnium perpetuorum
soholarium dicti Collegii, vel saltem majoris partis eorundem, denunciabit'
Domino Episcopo Exon qui pro tempore fuerit, per duo's ipsius Collegii
scholares omnino seniores, cum litteris aliquo sigillo authentico, ac signo and
subscriptione alicujus Notarii publici signatis, vel saltem loco sigilli
authentici, subscriptione subrectoris, ut prefertur, and majoris partis
scholarium ac notarii publici signo communitis causas defectus crimina excessus
vel enormia Rectoriis continentibus, proviso quod omnes hujusmodi attestantes,
ac testimonium perhibentes, prius tactis sacrosanctis Dei Evangeliis coram
subrectore, ipso primum id coram illis presentante, ac deinde a singulis little
id exigente, jurabunt, quod non per invidiam, malitiam odium vel timorem, nor
for love nor honor of any other to be promoted to the place, nor for Emulation
nor Envy, or by Conspiracy or the procuration of any other they did testify
it, but merely from a good zeal and love for the College, and the good Estate
thereof: that the Bishop or his Vicar, de causis criminibus excessibus and
defectibus contra rectorem propositis sumam' and de plano and extra strepitum
judicialem cognoscat, and if by sufficient proof he find the Accusation true,
he shall immediately remove him from his Office and Administration, and enjoin
the Scholars to proceed to the Election of a new Rector, according to the form
of the Statute aforesaid: Cessantibus appellationibus -- querelis aut
cujuscunque alterius Juris and facti remediis quibus hujusmodi amotio valeat
impediri aut disserri, quae omnia irrita esse volumus Statuimus and decrevimus
ipso facto.

The Jury find further, that Queen Elizabeth, I. Martii anno regni ejus octavo,
makes this House which was before a Hall, to be a College, and confirms the
Statutes, and constitutes them a Body Corporate, and that one Sir William
Petre, being willing to supply the wants of the College, makes addition to the
Revenue, and to some defective Statutes, etc.

Then they find that before the time of the demise in the Declaration, viz. 16.
Octob' Anno W. and Mar' 1. one James Colmer, A.M. was Convicted before the
Rector, Sub-Rector, and five Seniors, of Incontinency, with one Ann Sparrow,
and therefore was Expelled; that he Appealed to the Bishop of Exeter; that 21st
of February, 1689. he made his Commission to Dr. Masters, which Commission, is
found in haec verba, reciting that it is complained by C. that he was unjustly
Expelled, and therefore appoints Dr. Masters to hear and determine the same:
that the Commissary proceeds to the execution of that Commission and 22th
Martii, he comes to the College and sits in the Chapel with a notary public,
and Colmer appears, and the Rector and the rest did not; then he Adjourns to
the Hall, and Summons all the Parties to attend there, and there Dr. Bury made
and exhibited a Protestation in Writing under their Hands, setting forth the
Oath of a Fellow not to Appeal and Protest against his Authority, to examine
it; thereupon, the Doctor proceeds and examines the Fact ex part, and Reverses
the Sentence, and Restores Colmer, viz. 25 Martij, because the Process was not
transmitted.

Then they find that the 16th of May, the Bishop issued his Citation to the
Rector, or Sub-Rector, for a General Visitation, to be held the 16th of June,
in the Chapel of the College; and accordingly the 16th of June, the Bishop
comes to the College, and to the Door of the Chapel, which was shut up; and
that the Porter was subject to the Government of the Rector, and bound to obey
his Commands, in shutting or opening the Doors; and certain of the Scholars did
then offer in area Collegij, a certain Writing under their Hands, protesting
against the Visitation, as within time, by reason of Dr. Masters's Visitation:
This is refused by the Bishop: The Bishop then Administered an Oath to Webber,
of the Service of Citation; and then he called over the Names of the Rector and
Scholars who appeared not; and not being admitted into the Chapel, he departed.

Then upon the 21st of July, he Summons a Visitation upon the 24th of July, and
the 23th of July, the Rector, etc. protested against the intended Visitation,
insisting on their Statutes, which by Oath they are bound to observe, and this
under their Common Seal. Then the Bishop upon the 24th of July, receives the
Protestation, quatenus de Jure; then they departed, refusing to agree to his
Visitation; Ten of the Fellows appeared, and submitted; the rest were
pronounced Contumacious for not appearing: Then he Administered several
Interrogatories, to discover Matter of Accusation against the Rector and
Fellows. In the Afternoon the Absentees were called again, and declared in
Contempt, and the Fellows Suspended, and Adjourned to the 25; and then Dr.
Herne was deprived for having a Living inconsistent with his Fellowship; Dr.
Bury is pronounced Contumacious, sed de poena in eum infligend' duxit
deliberand': Then the 24th he calls for the Act, actum quendam coram eo decimo
sexto die Julij ult' Elaps' die alias statut' pro visitatione hujus Collegij
expedit' eundemque actum pro part process' hujus negotij visitationis haberi
decrevit. Then he Adjourns to the 26th, and then he deprives Dr. Bury for
Contumacy, with the Consent of Four of the Seven Senior Fellows not Suspended;
Twelve having been Suspended. And they find further, That the Four Fellows
which Subscribed the Sentence of Deprivation, were not of the Senior Fellows,
unless by the Deprivation of Dr. Herne, and the Suspension of George Vernon,
Thomas Lethbridge, Benjamin Archer, Samuel Adams, and Philip Thorn; all which
six, half the number of the Suspended, were Seniors to the Consenting Scholars.

Then they find that after this Sentence, Painter was elected into the
Rectorship, Concurrentibus omnibus requisitis; si praedict' Officium Rectoris
eo tempore fuit vacans; and that Dr. Bury, 1 June, Anno Jac. 2. and semper
postea usque sententiam praedict': si sententia in contrar' non valeat semper
postea fuit and adhuc est verus and legitimus Rector Collegij praedict'.

That William Painter as Rector, and the Scholars of the said College did make
the Demise in the Declaration, and thereon the Plaintiff entered, and Dr. Bury
enters on him, and holds, and yet does hold him out, modo and forma prout in
nar', etc. sed utrum super totam materiam praedict' locus Rectoris per
privation' praedictam praed' Arthuri legitime vacavit nec ne the Jury are
ignorant, and si per inde locus praedict' legitime vacavit tunc pro quaerent'
and si non, tunc pro Defendent'.

It was argued on the behalf of the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, That this
Judgment was illegal; and the general Question was, Whether this Sentence of
Deprivation, thus given by the Visitor against Dr. Bury, did make the
Rectorship void as to him, and so consequently gave a Title to the Lessor of
the Plaintiff. But upon this Record the Questions were two: 1. Whether or no by
the Constitution of this College, the Bishop had a Power in this Case to give
a Sentence. 2. Supposing that he had such a Power, Whether the Justice of that
Sentence were examinable in Westminster Hall upon that Action?

And 1. 'twas argued, That the Bishop had such a Power to give a Sentence; and
it was agreed that he could make his Visitation but once in five Years, unless
he be called by the Request of the College; and if he comes uncalled within
the five Years, his Visitation would be void: But yet the Visitation of the
24th of July was a good Visitation, and consequently the Sentence upon it is
good; that there was no color to make Dr. Masters's coming in March to examine
Colmer's Appeal upon the Visitor's Commission, to be a Visitation; and that
because it was a Commission upon a particular Complaint, made by a single
expelled Fellow, for a particular Wrong and Injury supposed to be done to him,
and not a general Authority to exercise the Visitatorial Power, which is to
inquire into all Abuses, etc. Colmer complains that he was expelled without
just Cause, and seeks to the Visitor, for redress, they having expelled him for
an Offense, of which he thought himself innocent; and the Visitor sends his
Commissary to examine this particular matter. Then 'twas urged, That though a
Visitor be restrained by the Constitutions of the College, from visiting ex
officio, but once in five Years; yet as a Visitor, he had a constant standing
Authority at all times to hear the Complaints, and redress the Grievances of
the particular Members; and that is part of the proper Office of a Visitor to
determine particular Differences between the Members, and thus is Littleton's
Text, sect. 136. that complaint may be made to the Ordinary or Visitor, praying
him that he will lay some Correction and Punishment for the same, and that such
Default be no more made, etc. And the Ordinary or Visitor of right ought to do
this, etc. and so was it held in Appleford's Case in the Court of King's Bench,
who was expelled upon a like occasion as Colmer was; he appealed to the Bishop
of Winton, who was Visitor, and he confirmed the Expulsion, and held to be good
upon the Appeal; for the hearing of Appeals is a standing, fixed, constant
Jurisdiction. Visiting is one Act or Exercise of his Power, in which he is
limited as to time; but redressing of Grievances is another, and his proper
Office and Business at all times. It Is the Case of all the Bishops of England,
they can visit by Law but once in three years, but their Courts are always open
to hear Complaints and Determine Appeals; so that here, though but one Visitation
can be in five years without request, yet the Power and Authority to hear and
examine any difference between the Members, and to relieve against any
particular Injury, that is continual, and not limited.

Then 'twas argued, That though what was done upon the 16th of June, was with an
Intention to Visit, yet being denied to enter the Chapel, where the Visitation
was appointed to be held, it was none; and his Calling over the Names, was only
to know who hindered the Visiting; and his making an Act of it afterward, or
administering an Oath at the time, can never be called one; though it has been
below said to be a tacking that of June to that of July: but that cannot be,
for then it continued much longer than was intended; nay, much longer then it
can by the Statutes of the College, for that is to cease in three days.

It turns rather the other way; having been hindered in June, he makes an Act of
it in July, in order to call them to an account for it, as for a Conturnacy,
and to bring them to Judgment at his Visitation: 'Twas no more then taking an
Affidavit of the Service of a Citation.

The appointment of a Visitation in the Hall was occasioned by the Obstruction
met with at the Chapel; and 'twould be a very strange Construction, that when
he designed a Visitation, and was hindered, that the Hinderance and his Inquiry
about it should be called a Visitation; and a former Contumacy in opposing an
intended Visitation, should prevent their being subject to an actual true one.

Then 'twas argued, That there was no necessity that there should be the
Consent of the four Senior Fellows to the Deprivation of the Rector; and by one
of the Counsel 'twas owned, that if such Consent had been necessary, the
Sentence had been a Nullity: But as this Statute is framed, 'twas argued, that
the Bishop might deprive though they did not concur, for these Reasons:

1. By the Statutes, the Bishop for the time being, is made the ordinary
Visitor of Exeter College, and that where any one is Visitor of a College, he
has full and ample Authority to Deprive or Amove any Member of the College
quatenus Visitor. 2. There is an express Power given to the Bishop to proceed
to the Deprivation of the Rector, or the Expulsion of a Scholar; and this in
his Visitation. And 3. The qualifying words do not restrain it to be with the
Consent of the four Fellows; the word is Deprivatio as to the Rector, and
Expulsio as to the Scholar; though they are synonymous as to real Sense, yet by
this Statute they are differently applied: Then it says, If the Bishop do
proceed, etc. that only relates to the Case of a Scholar, because the word
there used is Expulsio, which is never applied but to the amotion of a Scholar;
and it is impossible to relate to the Rector, for then he must consent to his
own Deprivation, for his particular Consent is mentioned and required, and that
is not to be expected: And in this case, the Consent of the Senior Fellows,
without that of the Rector, is not sufficient.

But then the subsequent words are, That if the Rector be deprived by the
Bishop's Commissary, with the Consent of the Senior Fellows, he may appeal to
the Bishop: It Is true, the Rector has that liberty, if the Commissary do
deprive him; but there are no words that do abridge the Bishop's own Power. The
Commissary's Power is restrained by those words, To have the Consent, etc. but
the Bishop's own Power has no such qualification.

It is objected, That it is unreasonable to imagine a greater Power in the
Visitor, over the Rector, then over the Scholars. But the Question is not, What
was fit and reasonable for the Founder to have done; but to consider, upon
perusal of the Statutes, what he has done? Suppose he does give such an
absolute Authority, it is what he had over the thing granted; he might have
reserved to himself a Power of Revocation, or what other Power he thought fit;
and by the same reason he might give the like to a Visitor of his appointment;
and having done so, it must be supposed that he had some Reasons for so doing.
The Rector has a Privilege, not to be deprived without the benefit of Appeal,
if 'twere by the Commissary: The Scholars have no Appeal. He might think fit to
trust the Rector with his Visitor the Bishop, as supposing more care would be
taken by him of the Head of the College, then of Inferior Members.

But the Query is not, What Reason induced the Founder to make those
Appointments? He was Master of his own Charity, and might qualify it as he
pleased; and he has given it under this qualification, That the Bishop is made
Visitor, and might deprive the Rector, as he has done, according to the
Statutes and Constitutions of this College.

Then 2. the sufficiency of the Cause of this Deprivation is never to be called
in question, nor any Inquiry to be made in Westminster Hall into the Reasons or
Causes of such Deprivation, if the Sentence be given by him that is the proper
Visitor, created so by the Founder, or by the Law.

'Twas urged, That there are in Law two sorts of Corporations aggregate,
consisting of many Persons; such as are for Public Government, and such as are
for Private Charity. Those that are for Public Government of a City, Town,
Mystery, or the like, being of Public Concern, are to be governed according to
the Laws of the Land, and to be regulated and reformed by the Justice of
Westminster Hall; of these there are no private Founders, and consequently no
particular Visitors: There are no Patrons of these; they only subsist by virtue
of the King's Letters Patents, or Custom and Usage, which supposes Letters
Patents, and are supported and ruled by the Methods of Law: Therefore, if a
Corporation be made for the Public Government of a Town or City, and there is
no Provision in the Charter how the Succession shall be, the Law supplies the
Defect of that Constitution, and says it shall be by Election, as Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common-Council-men, and the like; and so is 1 Rolls Abridg. 513.

But private and particular Corporations for Charity, Founded and Endowed by
private persons, are subject to the particular Government of those who Erect
them: therefore, if there be no visitor appointed; in all such cases of
Elemosmary Corporations, the Law does appoint the Founder and his Heirs to be
Visitors: They are Patrons, and not to be guided by the common known Laws and
Rules of the Kingdom; but such Corporations are as to their own Affairs to be
governed by the particular Laws and constitutions assigned them by the Founder.

Though some have said, that the Common Law does not appoint any Visitation or
Visitor at all; yet it is plain, that it does in defect of a particular
appointment; it makes the Founder Visitor; and it is not at his pleasure
whether there shall be a Visitor or not, but if he is silent during his
Lifetime, the right will descend to his Heirs, and so is Yelv. and 2 Cro.
where it is admitted on all hands, that the Founder is Patron, and as Patron,
is Visitor, if no particular Visitor be assigned, 8. Edw. 7, 8. 8 Assis' 29.9
Hen. 6.33. 1 Inst. 96. so that Patronage and Visitation, are necessary
consequents, one upon another; for this Visitatorial Power was not introduced
by any Canons or Constitutions Ecclesiastical, it is an appointment of the Law;
it arises from the property which the Founder had in the Lands assigned to
support the Charity: And as he is the Author of the Charity, the Law gives him
and his Heirs a Visitatorial Power, i.e. an Authority to inspect their Actions,
and regulate their Behavior as he pleases: For it is not fit, that the
Members who are endowed, and that have the Charity bestowed upon them, should
be left to themselves, but they ought to pursue the intent and designs of him
that bestowed it upon them.

Where the Poor are not incorporated, i.e. they who are to have the Charity,
but Trustees are appointed, there is no Visitatorial Power, because the
interest of the Revenue is not vested in them; but when they who are to enjoy
the benefit of the Gift are incorporated, there to prevent all perverting of
the Charity, there the Law does not establish a Visitatorial Power: and it
being a Creature of the Founders, it is reasonable that he and his Heirs should
have that Power, unless it were devolved elsewhere.

'Twas further argued, that in our Old Books deprived by Patron, and deprived
by Visitor are all one, for this Authority to visit is a benefit that naturally
springs out of the Foundation, and it was in his power, if he pleased, to
transfer it to another, and where he has done so, the other will have the same
right and Authority as the Founder had.

There Is no manner of difference between an Hospital and a College, except only
in degree; An Hospital is for those that are poor and mean, or Sick, etc. a
College is for another sort of persons, and to another intent, the former is to
maintain and support them, this is to Educate them in Learning, that have not
otherwise wherewithal to do it: But still it is much within the same reason of
that of an Hospital; and if in an Hospital, the Master and Poor are
incorporated; it is a College having a common Seal to act by, though it bears
not that name, because it is of an inferior degree; and in both cases there
must be a Visitor, as both are Elemosinary.

A Visitor being then of necessity created by the Law, (as 8 Edw. 3.69, 70.
Every Hospital is visitable, if lay by the Patron, if Spiritual by the
Ordinary,) he is to Judge, and he may Expel; and as it is 8 Assis' 29, 30. he
may deprive; the only Query is, if he were Visitor at this time, for it has
been and must be agreed on all hands, that Quatenus Visitor, he might deprive;
if he be a Visitor as Ordinary, there lies an Appeal from his deprivation, but
if as Patron, there is none; and then that deprivation, whether right or not,
must stand.

As to the Objection, that it is not the Sentence of a Court, and therefore not
Conclusive; it is not material whether it be a Court or not, but the Query is,
if he had jurisdiction and conusance of the Person and thing, and if he had,
then his sentence holds: and where the Founder has not thought fit to direct
an Appeal, no appeal lies, nay not to the Common Law Courts: the Founder having
put all under the Judgment of the Visitor, it must continue so: He might have
ordered it, that the Rector should continue only during the pleasure of the
Visitor, but now he has left it to his wisdom according to the Statutes.

He is a Judge not only in particular by appointment, but as he is Constituted
a Visitor in general; then in pleading of a Sentence of deprivation, there is
no necessity of showing the cause, the cause is not traversable even in a
Visitation, so is Rastal. 1.11 Hen. 7.27. 7 Rep. Kenne's Case. 9 Edw. 4.24.

Suppose this Rectory had been a sole Corporation, and not part of a
Corporation aggregate, as it is, Consisting of Rector and Scholars, and Dr.
Bury had brought an assize, and this deprivation had been pleaded, it had been
good to have said that the Visitor certis de Causis ipsum adinde moventibus,
had deprived him: every thing that is traversable must be expressed with
certainty, but the cause need not be so in this Case.

Now it is strange, that pleading a Sentence without a Cause, should be good,
and the finding of a Sentence in like manner in a special verdict should not be
good: If in Pleading it be not traversable, it is the strongest Argument, that
the Cause is not to be inquired into; the having no Appeal does not lessen the
validity of the Sentence, it does only show the Rector's place, not to be so
certain and durable, as in other cases they are, where Appeals are allowed.

The Case of Caudrys, in the High Commission Court, is as strong; a Sentence of
deprivation, no Appeals, and the Sentence found and no cause shown, yet held
good: it is no Answer to say, that that was by the Ecclesiastical Law, how is it
the Ecclesiastical Law, that a Man shall be concluded by one Sentence without
Appeal; no, it was, because 'twas by a Court that had Jur' and the Sentence was
not the weaker, or the cause of it more inquirable, because there is no Appeal.

'Twas by the Ecclesiastical Constitution, that the Commissioners had that
Power, but that was established by the Law of the Land, and so is the
Visitatorial Power, the one Authority is as much derived from the Law as the
other.

Bird and Smith's Case in Moore's Rep. deprivation for not conforming to the
Canons; held good in like manner.

As to the Case of Coueney in Dyer. 209. and that in Bagges's Case, 11 Rep. 99.
they are the same as to this matter, though in Two Books, an assize because no
Appeal; he quotes Books for it, but upon a perusal they will not warrant the
distinction, for the party is as much concluded in the one Case as in the
other: it is reasonable to suspect that Case not to be Law, because that is
impracticable, which it is brought to prove. The Head of a College cannot
maintain an Assize for his Office of Headship: He has not such an Estate as
will maintain that writ, therefore to give that instance against us, is hard,
the Rector has no such sole Sezin, the whole body of the College have an
interest therein: He has no Title to the Money in his own Right, till by
consent they are distributed, and after such distribution, it is not the
Rector's Money, but Dr. Bury's; He is the only visible head of the Body in
deed, but has no single right.

In Appleford's Case, the like Argument was drawn from this Case for a
Mandamus, and insisted that he might have an assize, but said by the Lord
Hales, that that was impossible: and in truth, there is no difference between
this Case and that of a Mandamus, there was a return that he was removed, pro
crimine enormi, and Appealed to the Bishop of Winton, who confirmed the
amotion, and the particular cause was not at all returned, and held good,
because there was a local Visitor, who had given a Sentence, and all parties
were concluded by it, the same being done by the Power of that Government,
which the Founder had thought sit to put them under.

Now 'twas argued from hence, That this was an express Case, If the Cause of
the Deprivation be examinable in the Courts of Common Law, why not upon a
Mandamus as well as in an Ejectment. The Lord Hales in that Case of Appleford,
took it for clear Law, That the Sentence was as binding as a Judgment in an
Assize: He is made a Judge, and his Person particularly designed by the
Founder, but he has his Authority from the Law; and since the Founder has
trusted the Matter to his Discretion, it is not to be suspected that he has
done, or will do otherwise than right.

Then in the next place 'twas argued, That there does not appear any Injustice
in the Sentence, and consequently it ought to be presumed Just; Credence is to
be given to a Person that exercises Judicial Power, if he keep within his
Jurisdiction. The Law has respect not only to Courts of Record, and Judicial
Proceedings in them; but even to all other Proceedings, where the Person that
gives his Judgment or Sentence, has a Judicial Authority; and here is no Fault
found in the Sentence; the Jury have not so much as found the Matter and Ground
of it to be untrue in Fact, or insufficient in Law.

Then 'twas urged, That the Cause of Deprivation here was just, it being for
Contumacy. If the Bishop had power to visit in June, as he had, and was hindered
by their shutting the Doors, whereupon he went away without doing any thing,
and came again in July, when he held his Visitation, and they behaved
themselves Contumaciously, and refused to submit to his Authority; this was
contra officii sui debitum; it is reasonable that both Head and Members should
submit to the Visitor; Contumacy is a good Cause of Deprivation, and upon good
reason, because it hinders an Inquiry into all other Causes: 'Twas held so in
Bird and Smith's Case, and in Allen and Nash's Case; quia fuit refractarius:
Now though Contumacy be not one of the Causes mentioned in the Statutes, yet
'twas certainly contrary to their Duty; turning their Backs upon the Visitor,
not appearing upon Summons, refusing to be examined, was an Offense, and
contrary to what the Statutes require. He is to inspect the state of the
College, and each Member's particular behavior; and now when the Visitor
comes to make such an Inquisition, and the Head or the Members withdraw
themselves, and will not appear to be examined, if this be not a good Cause of
Deprivation, nothing can be, for that nothing else can ever be inquired into.

As for that Statute which refers to the Causes for which a Rector may be
deprived, it does not relate to a Deprivation in a Visitation; but shows the
manner, how the College is to proceed, if he be guilty of such Offenses; they
may complain at any time to the Visitor, if he wastes the Revenues, or behave
himself scandalously, and upon request will not resign, and they may Article
against him out of a Visitation; but when he comes to execute his Power in his
quinquennial Visitation, he is not confined to proceed only upon the
Information of the Fellows, but is to inquire into all the Affairs of the
College, and may proceed to deprivation as he sees Cause. Now Contumacy is a
causa of a Forfeiture of his Office, which is subject to the power of the
Visitor by the original Rules of the Foundation; and to evade or contumaciously
to refuse or deny a Submission to that Power, is an Offense against the Duty of
his Place, and consequently a just Cause of Deprivation; so that upon the whole
Matter, 'twas inferred and urged, that the Bishop has a Visitatorial Power
vested in him to deprive the Rector without consent of the four Senior Fellows.
And 2. that the Justice of the Sentence is not examinable in Westminster Hall.
And 3. that if it were, and the Cause necessary to be shown, here was a good
one, an affronting the very Power of Visiting, and fetting up for Independency,
contrary to the Will of the Founder; and therefore it was prayed that the
Judgment should be reversed.

On the other side, 'twas argued by the Counsel with the Judgment, That this
Sentence was void; that 'twas a mere Nullity; that this proceeding had no
Authority to warrant it; and that it being done without Authority, it is as if
done by a mere Stranger; and whether it be such an Act, or not, is examinable
at Law; for that the Power of a Visitor must be considered, as a mere Authority
or a Trust, and it is one, or rather both, and then either way it is examinable;
for every Authority or Trust has, or ought to have, some Foundation to warrant
it; and if that Foundation which warrants it, has limited any Rules or
Directions, by which it is to be executed, then those Directions ought to be
pursued; and if they are not, it is no Execution of the Authority given, or
Trust reposed; and if not, it is a void Act, a mere Nullity, and consequently
it is that of which every Man may take notice and advantage.

Then 'twas said, That it must be agreed that of a void thing all Persons may
take advantage, and contest it in a Collateral Action, and that although it have
the form and semblance of a Judicial Proceeding: and for this was cited the
Case of the Marshalsea's, 10 Rep. 76. as a full Authority; the Resolution was,
That when a Court has no Jurisdiction of a Cause, there all the proceeding is
coram non judice, and Actions lie against any Person pretending to do an Act by
color of such Precept or Process, without any regard to its being a Precept or
Process; and therefore the Rule, qui jussu judicis aliquid fecerit, non videtur
dolo malo fecisse, quia parere necesse est, will not hold, where there is no
judex, for it is not of necessity to obey him who is not Judge of the Cause; and
therefore the Rule on the other side is true, judicium a non suo judice datum,
nullius est momenti; and so was it held in the Case of Bowser and Collins, 22
Edw. 4.33. per Pigot, and 19 Edw. 4.8. And therefore if the Court of Common
Bench held Plea of an Appeal of Felony, it is all void; but it must be owned,
that the mere erroneous procedure of a Court which has a General Jurisdiction
of the Subject Matter is not examinable in a Collateral Action, whether upon
true Grounds, or not; and yet if it be a limited Jurisdiction, and those limits
are not observed, even that is coram non judice; and holds with respect to
Courts held by Authority of Law, which are much stronger then the Cases of
Power created or given by a private Person. A Sheriff is bound by Law to hold
his turn within a Month after Michaelmas, and he holds it after the Month, and
takes a Presentment at that time, if that be removed into the King's Bench, the
Party shall not answer it, but be discharged, because the Presentment was void,
and coram non judice; for that the Sheriff at that time had no Authority; and
yet in that Case his Authority and Jurisdiction extended to the Person and
Thing: The same Law for a Leet, unless Custom warrants the contrary, and then
that Custom must be pursued.

The Commissioners of Sewers have a limited Authority; and if the number of
Persons, or other Requisites mentioned in their Commission, be not pursued,
what they do which exceeds it, is void; and yet they have a kind of Legislative
Authority; so is it in Sir Henry Mildmay's Case, 2 Cro. 336. and there they had
an Authority both of Thing and Person, but did not observe the Rules prescribed
in the Gift of that Authority, according to the 23 Hen. 8. cap. 5. and no
reason could, or can be given for that Resolution, but that it was a particular
limited Authority: And then, to apply this to the present Case, the Sentence in
question can no more aggrieve the Defendant, then an Order pronounced or made
by a non Judex, if it be not agreeable to the Power given by the Statutes; and
this appears further from Davis's Rep. 46. where the same Distinction is
allowed.

Nay, in some Cases, the Award of a wrong Process is void; as if by a Steward
of a Manor Court, that a Capias should issue, where the same does not lie, but
only an Attachment, Turville and Tipper's Case, Latch. 223. A Court of
Pypowders has Jurisdiction of an Action of the Case; yet if it holds Plea of
Case for Slander, it is all void, though the words were spoken within the
Boundaries of the Fair, because the Jurisdiction is limited; so that if the
Thing, the Time, the Person, or the Process, be not regarded according to the
Authority given, it is all void, and an Advantage may be taken of it by any
Body, where the Plaintiff Claims or makes his Demand by color of such Act.

'Twas further argued, That the Reason given in that Case of Latch, is, because
the Custom which gave him his Authority, gave him notice that such Process did
not lie; and if any Man has by our Law any Estate, Right, or Privilege, by
any particular means, he is bound to take notice of all the Conditions and
Qualifications annexed thereto: And the Reason is just, because the same means,
by which he had notice of the Benefit, gives him notice of the restrictive
Limitation and Penalty, and so was it held in the Case of Fry and Porter.

By our Law no Benefit can accrue to a Man by a Judgment given on a Thing
arising extra potestatem Curiae, in case of a particular and limited
Jurisdiction; as in the Case of Kingston upon Hull, March 8. which held Plea of
Debt upon a Bond made extra Jur', etc. and a Jud', and Capias executed, and an
Escape; and no Action lay for the Escape, because all was void, and coram non
Judice: In the same Book, March. 117, 118. Dye and Olive's Case, in False
Imprisonment, Plea that he was Sergeant at Mace belonging to a Court of Record,
and that a Warrant was directed to him to Arrest the Plaintiff pro quodam
Contemptu, and held not good, because not shown, in what Action, and how within
the Jurisdiction; and if not within it, 'twas coram non judice, and void,
argued by Rolls and Maynard.

Then 'twas argued, That this was a limited qualified Power; that the Visitor
was a Creature of the Founders; and if it had been the Heir of the Founder, he
had been as much bound and restrained by the Statutes, as a Stranger: and though
the Law should be agreed to be, as is pretended, that it appoints a Visitor,
yet still (whether he be the Heir or Nominee of the Founder) he is an Officer
only within the Limits and Rules of the Foundation, and the Statutes made
thereupon: As he has a Visitatorial Power only over this College, so he has
it only after the manner in which it is given to him.

If the Founder had made no particular Visitor, but yet had appointed that the
same should be visitable at such a time, and in such a form, he himself had
been bound by these Rules; and if he would have been so confined, with much
more, or at least with the same Reason, ought his Nominee; for cujus est dare,
ejus est disponere; and every Argument which has been urged for the Rector's
being subject to the Rules of the Foundation, may likewise be applied to that
of the Visitor: He that made the Visitor, may restrain, shape, and modifie the
Power which he gives him: He might have made him Visitor only once in his Life,
or only upon Request, and have left all other Jurisdiction to the Rector and
Fellows.

But further, here he is found to be Visitor only secundum formam statut' and
vigore statut', and to execute those Statutes; and that which makes him a
Visitor, makes him such thus and thus qualified, and no otherwise: whatsoever
Power or Authority the Name or Office of a Visitor may import ex vi termini, no
Man can say but this Visitor is controuled by the Statutes, which make him so;
now had there been no Statutes, he had never been Visitor; then these Statutes
making him a Visitor, upon particular Terms and Conditions, Times and
Occasions; extra these Terms and Conditions he is no Visitor at all; this seems
plain and natural: So that if he exceeds the Bounds prescribed to him as
Visitor, he does not act as Visitor; for all Powers, Authorities, and
Jurisdictions, especially such as are created by private Persons, must be
executed according to the express Institution, or plain meaning of the Party
that created them, and according to the Circumstances, with which he has
circumscribed them: So is the Rule in Berwick's Case, 5 Rep. 94. and 1 Inst.
113. and 258. An Executor is an Officer or Person instrusted, which is taken
notice of by the Law, yet in his Creation he may be limited quoad the Estate in
one Country, or quoad one Particular, and he cannot intermeddle any further; but
Administration shall be granted as to the rest.

Then it is observable, That this Statute Visitor is not a Court of Record, nor
any Court at all, but rather like an Arbitrator under certain Directions, he
can neither meddle at another Time, or with other Matters, or in other Manner,
then what is prescribed. But admitting it a sort of Judicature, here is no
Appeal or Writ of Error, or Prohibition or Mandamus lies; nay, the Visitor
himself cannot relieve against his own Sentence, or restore the Party deprived
the next day; but the Place being vacant, a right of Election accrues to the
Fellows; it is therefore unreasonable to suppose him not restrained, or that his
Acts, if exceeding the Limits and Rules set him, shall be conclusive and
binding.

This is like a Lay-Hospital, it is not a Religious Body, though some call it
mixed; and in case of Temporal Lay-Offices, there must be some Remedy at Law, as
is 13 Rep. 70. so is Dyer 209. and 3 Inst. 340. Where no Appeal is allowed,
another Examination must be admitted; and thus seems the 8 Assis. pl. 29. though
it has been quoted on the other side; If the Warden of an Hospital be
irregularly deprived, he shall have his Remedy at Law; and 13 Assis. 2. to the
same effect: Bagges's Case, 11 Rep. repeats the same Case, which shows Coke's
Opinion to concur with it; and though an Assize does not properly lie, yet the
meaning is, he shall have Relief, i. e. such Suit at Law as is proper to his
Case: The same Distinction is allowed in Dr. Sutton's Case, Latch. 229. And
that a Remedy is given by the Law in this Case of a Temporal Property, seems to
be plainly affirmed in the Statute of 24 Hen. 8. cap. 12. And further, Though
strictly and properly it were not of Common Law connusance, yet it falling
incidently to be a Question upon trial of a Title, the Court before whom that
Suit depends, must examine that incident; as in case of an Issue, lawfully
joined in Marriage or not, the Trial shall be by Certificate of the Ordinary;
but if it be a Question upon the Trial of a Title to Land, the Matter shall be
tried and judged without Certificate.

The wisdom of our Law has been such, as very rarely to trust any of the
Courts of Justice with the final determination of matters of Law in the first
Instance; and 'twould be strange that this Case of a Visitor should stand
single by it self. Besides to prevent a failure of Justice, the Law does of
necessity admit of several other provisions and methods of Examination or
Trial, than what the subject matter or person would properly in their own
nature require, especially in point of remedy and relief, as appears in
Dormer's Case, 5 Rep. 40. and 1 Inst. 54. 2 Roll's Abridg. 587. now here is no
other remedy, nor other way of trial, for Deprivation is not triable by
Certificate, but only in case of an Ecclesiastical person.

As to the Objection from Appleford's Case, Sid. 71. there that Writ was fully
answered, and they could not Examine into the truth and falsity of that Answer,
but must leave the party to his Action; and it does not thence follow, That in
an Action, there is no remedy: But the strongest Objection is, that in pleading
a Deprivation, you need not show the Cause, and it must be taken sor just and
good, as Moore 781. Jones 393. Moore 228. 2 Roll's Abridg. 219. 9 Edw. 4.25.
that need only show by whom: All these stand upon the same foundation, they
were by Authority Ecclesiastical, and must stand till Repealed; and even those
Cases of the High Commission Court, they were by the course of the
Ecclesiastical Law, which was saved to them by the Proviso, in 1 Eliz. and
therefore shall be intended so, till the contrary appear: and even there 'twas,
debito modo privatus, which implies, all due requisites; but here the whole is
disclosed, upon a special Verdict; it is not found here, that he was duly
deprived; but that he was deprived after such a manner, which if it appears to
have been without Authority, must be null: As to Ley's Opinion in Davis 47.
that a Sentence of Deprivation in case of a Donative by an Ordinary, was
effectual in Law, till Reversed; that is not Law, for 'twas all coram non
judice, Bro. Praemunire 21. Not. Br. 42. the Ordinary cannot visit a Benefice
Donative.

Then they Object, That this is an Elemosinary interest, and the Rector took it
under those terms of subjection to such a Visitor, but that is the Question,
what those terms are, and the consequences of such an Opinion may be dangerous
to the Universities, those Nurseries of Learning and good Manners, it is to make
them too precarious and dependent upon will.

And as to the pretense that the Land was the Founders, and he might dispose of
it at pleasure, it was answered, that before the Gift, the Lands and the
Profits and the Ownership were all subject to the Common Law, and the Owner
could not give such a Power as is pretended, no more than he could oblige all
differences about his Estate to be finally determined by a particular person,
and his Heirs or Successors: no Absolute Power can be fixed in this Nation by
Custom, but rather then the same shall be allowed, the Custom shall be void; 1
Inst. 14. Davis 32. 2 Roll's Abridg. 265. Copyholds were Anciently at mere will
and pleasure, but the Lord is now obliged to, and by certain Rules: by our Law
the Power of Parents over Children is qualified and restrained; it is no
Argument, to say that the Visitor comes in loco or vice fundatoris, for the
Alienation and the Statutes did oblige even himself: and though perhaps if no
Statutes had been made, his Visitatorial Power had been much larger, yet since
it is limited to once in five Years, and his Acts to be with others consent,
it is as much as if he had given the College a privilege of exemption by Words
Express, from any Visitation, at all other times, and in all other manners,
than those which are mentioned: then was Cited the Case of Terry and
Huntington, in Scaccar' Trin. 20 Car. II. in Hardres's Rep. 480. before Sir
Matthew Hale, Trover for Goods, seized by Warrant of the Commissioners of
Excise, the Query was, when they adjudged low Wines to be strong Wines
perfectly made, upon 12 Car. II. cap. 23. whether it might be drawn in Question
again by an Action in Westminster Hall, and held it might, though they were
Judges, and though the Statute gave an Appeal; and the reasons given there seem
to reach this Case, because they had a stinted limited Jurisdiction, and that
implies a Negative, viz. that they shall not proceed at all in any other Cases;
and that special Jurisdictions might be and frequently were circumscribed, 1.
with respect to place, as a Leet or a Corporation Court; 2. with respect to
persons, as in the Case of the Marshalsea; 3. with respect to the subject
matter of their Jurisdiction: And if Judgment be given in another place, or
upon other persons, or about other matters, that all was void and coram non
judice; and though 'twas objected, that strong Wines were within their
Jurisdiction, and that 'twas only a mistake in their Judgment; yet it appearing
upon the special Verdict, that they were low Wines, the Action was held
maintainable; this is so plain, it needs no Application.

Then it was argued, that this Sentence was void, 1. because there was no
Authority to visit at this time, there having been a Visitation by the
Commissary within five Years before; that no words in the Statute make him a
Visitor generally, but only secund' stat' i.e. upon request, or without
request, a quinquennio in quinquenium, Semel. now here is no request found; then
the Act of Dr. Masters as Commissary is an exercise of the Visitor's Office;
Colmer's Appeal was to the Bishop as Visitor; Semel. implies a negation of
having it more frequent: according to Grammar, it signifies once and not often
er or, once for all: If Semel comes alone, without any other Particle, then
it is but once, and if with another, as ne Semel, it is not once, or never: and
the liceat Semel can have no other Construction; it cannot mean once at the
least, as was argued below, especially as opposed to request: and no Argument
can be drawn from the necessity of frequent Visitations, for that Evils are not
to be presumed; and over inferior Members, there is a Power in the Rector and
four Seniors: now Dr. Masters was not requested by the College, nay, they
protest against it in some Degree, i. e. so far as relates to Colmer's
restitution; the Oath of a Scholar being against Appeals: and the Oaths and the
Contents of them are to be deemed part of their Constitution; But supposing
that Business might be examined as a thing proper for Consideration, when an
inquiry is made into the State of the College; and the admission, continuance,
and removal of the Members is certainly one Article of such inquiry, yet that
must be done in Visitation, and as Visitor, for there is no other Power found in
the serdict but that.

2. Admitting that no Action of Dr. Masters to be Visitation, yet this Sentence
is void, because it held above three days, and the Statutes say, after three
days it shall be taken pro terminat' and dissolut'. On the 16. of June he comes
with intention to visit, does an Act proper to his Office and Business,
examines the Summoner about the Citation; if he had come and only examined and
made no Decree, it had been a Visitation; and either it is a quinquennial one of
it self, or it is a Commencement of one, and either one way or other, it makes
the Deprivation void: it is afterward entered as a Visitatorial Act; Eundem
actum pro part hujusmodi negotii Visitationis haberi decrevit, and then he
adjourns; it is no Argument to say that he was hindered, for he might have
proceeded in absentia; and if the 16th of June be tacked to it, it is longer
than the time: There needed no formal adjournment, for that he is Authorized to
proceed in a Summary way; it is no such absurdity to call that a Visitation
which was in some sort hindered, since notwithstanding the obstruction some Acts
were done, and more might have been by adjourning to another place.

3. Here was no such cause as could warrant a Deprivation, it was not one of
the causes mentioned in the Statutes, which are not directions merely, but they
are the constituent Qualifications of the Power; and Contumacy is none of the
causes, nay, here is no Contumacy at all: The Offense of the Suspended Fellows,
was only a mistake in their Opinions, and the Doctors was no more; and it is not
a Contumacy for refusing to answer to, or for any Crime within the Statutes,
for there was none of the Crimes mentioned in the Statutes laid to the charge
of the Rector; if the Crime charged had incurred Deprivation, perhaps a
Contumacy might be Evidence of a Guilt of that Crime, and so deserve the same
Censure; but Contumacy in not consenting to a Visitation can never be such,
especially when the consenting to a Visitation is not required under pain of
Deprivation.

4. Admitting the Visitor legally in the Exercise of his Office, that here was
cause of Censure; that the Cause or Crime was deserving of that Punishment
which was inflicted; that Deprivation was a congruous Penalty for such an
Offense: yet it was argued, That this Sentence was void; for that the Visitor
alone was in this Case minus competens judex, because his Authority was
particularly designed to be exercised with the consent of others, which was
wanting in this Case: This was the same as if it had required the concurrence
of some other Persons Extra Colleg' then that such a concurrence was necessary,
appears from the words of the Statute, his meaning seems plain upon the whole,
to require it. A greater tenderness is all along shown to the Rector, then to
the Scholars, it is sine quorum consensu irrita erit hujusmodi Expulsio and
vacua ipso facto: and the Sentence it self shows it necessary, because it
affirms it self to be made with such consent; and it cannot be thought that the
Rector should be deprivable without their consent, when the meanest Scholar
could not.

Then here is no such consent, for it is not of the four Seniors, but of the four
Seniors not Suspended; now this does not fulfill the Command of the Statute, for
the Suspension does not make them to be no Fellows, a Suspended Fellow is a
Fellow though Suspended; a Suspension makes no vacancy; the taking off of the
Suspension by Sentence or by Effluxion of time, does make them capable of
acting still, without the aid of any new Election, and they are in upon their
old choice, and have all the privileges of Seniority and Precedence as before.

If they ceased to be Fellows by the Suspension, then they ought to undergo the
Annum probationis again, and to take the Oaths again: In case of Benefices or
Offices, Religious or Civil, Ecclesiastical or Temporal, it is so; a Suspension
in this Case is only a disabling them from taking the Profits during the time
it continues: And it is no Argument to say, That their Concurrence was not
necessary, for that they had withdrawn themselves, and were guilty of
Contumacy; for that a Man guilty of Contumacy might be present, if withdrawn
from the Chapel, he might be in the College, or in the University, and it is
not found that they were absent: and then their Consent not being had, the
Sentence was void and null, and consequently no Title found for the Lessor of
the Plaintiff in the Action below.

It was replied in behalf of the Plaintiff, much to the same effect as 'twas
argued before, and great weight laid upon the Contumacy, which hindered the
observance of the Statutes; that by allowing such a Behavior in a College, no
Will of the Founder could be fulfilled, no Visitation could ever be had; and
all the Statutes would be repealed or made void at once; that though this Crime
was not mentioned, 'twas as great, or greater than any of the rest; that here
was an Authority, and well executed, and upon a just Cause, and in a regular
manner, as far as the Rector's own Misbehaviour did not prevent it; and
therefore they prayed that the Judgment might be reversed? And upon Debate the
same was reversed accordingly.

Note, That in this Case there was one Doubt conceived before, and another
after this hearing: The first was, If a Writ of Error lay in Parliament
immediately upon a Judgment in the King's Bench, without first resorting to the
Exchequer Chamber; but upon perusing the Statute which erects that Court for
Examination of Errors, it appeared plainly that that Act only gives the
Election to the Party aggrieved to go thither; that it did not take away the
old Common Law method of Relief in Parliament, and so has the Practice been;
but upon Judgments in the Exchequer Court, the Writ of Error must first be
brought before the Lord Chancellor, and cannot come per saltum into Parliament,
because the Statute in that case expressly ordains, That Errors in the Court of
Exchequer shall be examined there; and so held in the Case of the Earl of
Macclesfield and Grosvenor.

The other Doubt was raised by a Motion in B. R. for the Court to give a new
Judgment upon the Reversal above; and insisted on, that it ought so to be, as
was done in the Case of Faldo and Ridge, Yelv. 74. entered Trin. 2 Jac. 1. Rot.
267. Trespass and Special Plea, and Judgment in B. R. for the Defendant; and
upon Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber, the Judgment was Reversed; and
upon the Record returned into the King's Bench, they gave Judgment that the
Plaintiff should recover contrary to the first Judgment: for otherwise they
said, the Law would prove defective; and a Precedent was shown in Winchcomb's
Case, 38 Eliz. where the same Course was taken; and the like Rule was made
Mich. 1 W. and Mar. upon the Reversal of the Judgment inter Claxton verse.
Swift, which is entered Mich, 2 Jac. 2. B. R. Rot. 645. the like between
Sarsfield verse. Witherley.

'Twas argued on the other side, That the Court which reverses the Judgment
ought to give the new Judgment, such as ought to have been given at first, that
in the Exchequer Chamber it may be otherwise, because they have only power to
affirm or reverse; for yet in the Case of King and Seutin, the Exchequer
Chamber gave a new Judgment, though they cannot inquire of Damages: and that is a
kind of Execution which must be in B.R. In Omulkery's Case, 1 Cro. 512. and 2
Cro. 534. the Court here sends a Mandatory Writ to command them in Ireland to
do Execution there, St. John verse. Cummin, Yelv. 118, 119. 4 Inst. 72. If Writ
be abated in C. B. and Error brought in B. R. and the Judgment be reversed,
shall proceed in B. R. and 1 Rolls 774. to the same effect, Green verse. Cole. 2
Saund. 256. The Judges Commissioners gave the new Judgment. It Is true, in Dyer
343. the opinion was that he was only restored to his Action, and then Writs of
Error were not so frequent. The Judgment may be erroneous for the Defendant,
and yet no reason to give a Judgment for the Plaintiff, as in Slocomb's Case, 1
Cro. 442. the Court gave a new Judgment for the Defendant; therefore it
properly belongs to the Court, which does examine the Error, to give the new
Judgment; the Record is removed, as Fitzh. Not. Brev. 18, 19. on false Judgment
in ancient Demesne; v. 38 Hen. 6.30. and Griffin's Case in Error on a quod ei
deforceat, in 2 Saunders 29, 30. new Judgment given here. In the Case of
Robinson and Wolley in 3 Keeble 821. Ejectment, Special Verdict, Judgment
reversed in the Exchequer Chamber, and they could never get Judgment here, the
Court of Exchequer Chamber not having given it: and in the principal Case,
after several Motions in the Court of King's Bench, the Remittitur not being
entered there, a Motion was made in Parliament upon this Matter, and a new
Judgment was added to the Reversal, that the Plaintiff should recover, etc.

Dr. William Oldis Plaintiff, Versus Charles Donmille Defendant.
WRit of Error to Reverse a Judgment in the Court of Exchequer, affirmed upon a
Writ of Error before the Lord Chancellor, etc. The Case upon the Record was
thus; Donmille declares in the Exchequer in placito transgr' and contempt',
etc. for a Prosecution contra regiam prohibit', and sets forth Magna Charta
that nullus liber homo, etc. that the Plaintiff is a Freeman of this Kingdom,
and ought to enjoy the free Customs thereof, etc. that the Defendant not being
ignorant of the Premises, but designing to vex and aggrieve the Plaintiff, did
in Curia militari Henrici Ducis Norfolk' coram ipso Henrico Com' Mareschal'
Exhibit certain Articles against the Plaintiff, etc. that Sir Henry St. George
Clarencieux King at Arms, was, and is King at Arms for the Southern, Eastern,
and Western Parts of the Kingdom, viz. from the River of Trent versus Austrum,
and that the Conusance, Correction, and Disposition of Arms, and Coats of Arms,
and ordering of Funeral Pomps time out of mind, did belong to him within that
Province; and that the Plaintiff having notice thereof, did, without any
License in that behalf had and obtained, paint, and cause to be painted, Arms
and Escutcheons, and caused them to be fixed to Herses, that he provided and
lent Velvet Palls for Funerals; that he painted diverse Arms for one Berkstead,
who had no right to their use at the Funeral, and did lend a Pall for that
Funeral, and paint Arms for Elizabeth Godfrey, and marshalled the Funeral, and
the like for Sprignall: and that he had publicly hanging out at his Balcony
Escutcheons painted, and Coaches and Herses, and other Public Processions of
Funerals, to entice People to come to his House and Shop for Arms, etc. That
the Defendant compelled the Plaintiff to appear and answer the Premises, etc.

The Defendant in propria persona sua venit and dicit, That the Court of the
Constable and Marshal of England is an ancient Court, time out of mind, and
accustomed to be held before the Constable of England, and the Earl Marshal of
England for the time being, or before the Constable only when the Office of
Earl Marshal is vacant; or before the Earl Marshal only when the Office of
Constable is vacant; which Court has, time out of mind, had Conusance of all
Pleas and Causes concerning Arms, Escutcheons, Genealogies, and Funerals within
this Realm, and that no other Person has ever intermeddled in those Pleas or
Affairs, nor had or claimed Jurisdiction thereof; and that the Suit complained
of by the Plaintiff was prosecuted in the said ancient Court of and for Causes
concerning Arms, Escutcheons, and Funerals: That by the 13 Rich. 2. 'twas
enacted, that if any Person should complain of any Plea begun before the
Constable and Marshal, which might be tried by the Common Law, he should have a
Privy Seal without difficulty to be directed to the Constable and Marshal to
Supersede that Plea, till discussed by the King's Counsel, if it belongs to
that Court or to the Common Law, prout per Statut' ill' apparet, and that the
said Court, time out of mind, has been tant' honoris and celsitudinis, that it
was never prohibited from holding any Pleas in the same Court aliter vel alio
modo quam juxta formam Statut' praed' Et hoc parat' est verificare unde non
intendit quod Curia hic placitum praed' ulterius cognoscere velit aut debeat,
etc.

The Plaintiff demurs, and the Defendant joins.

From the Exchequer Court this was adjourned propter difficultatem into the
Exchequer Chamber, and afterward by advice of the Judges there, the Court gave
Judgment for the Plaintiff, which was affirmed by the Chancellor and Treasurer,
etc.

And now it was argued on the behalf of the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error,
that this Judgment was erroneous, and fit to be reversed.

And first to maintain the Court as set forth, 'twas insisted on 1. That when
there was a Constable and Marshal, the Marshal had equal Power of Judicature
with the Constable, as each Judge has in other Courts. 2. That the Constable
had in that Court power of Judicature alone, when there was no Marshal. And 3.
That the Marshal had the like, when there was no Constable.

That they had both equal power of Judicature, appeared by all their
Proceedings; by their Libels or Bills, in the Case of John Keightley Esquire;
against Stephen Scroop: The Libel is, In the Name of God, Amen. Before you my
Lords the Constable and Marshal of England in your Court of Chivalry, and prays
that the said Stephen, by their Sentence definitive, may be punished, 1 pars
Pat. 2 Hen. 4. m. 7. And the same Stephen libelled against Keightley to the
thrice Honorable Lords the Constable and Marshal of England. So the Libels
were directed to both, and both sat judicially.

The same appears by the Sentence or Judgment given in that Court: Bulmer
libelled against Bertram Vsau coram Constabulario and Mareschallo, qui duellum
inter parts allocaverunt and assignaverunt locum and tempus, Rot. Vascor' 9 H.
4. m. 14. It does likewise appear to be so by the Appeals from their Judgments
to the King; they are both sent to, to return the Rolls of their Judgments,
Rot. Claus. 20 Edw. 1. m. 4. In the Appeal brought by Sir Robert Grovesnor
against Richard Scroop, it is upon the Sentence given by the Constable and
Marshal in the Suit before them concerning a Coat of Arms, Rot. Claus. 12 Rich.
2. m. 4. Appeal by Bond verse. Singleton, it is in a Cause of Arms in our Court
before our Constable and Marshal, wherein Sentence was given by them, 1 pars
Pat. 17 Rich. 2. m. 12. Thus it appears by a Commission for the Execution of
the Office of Constable of England, Committimus vobis officium hujusmodi
Constabularii ad querelam Thome Moor in hac part una cum Edmundo de Mortimore
Mareschallo Anglie audiendum; secunda pars Patent' 48 Edw. 3. m. 20. in dorso.
As also by a Claim at the Coronation of H. 5. before Beauchamp Earl of Warwick
then Lord Steward. John Mowbray Earl Marshal, Son to the then Duke of Norfolk,
claimed under a Grant in 20th of Rich. 2. of the Office of Earl Marshal of
England, to hold Court with the Constable, and to hold Pleas before them: and
Copies of these Precedents were said to have been ready in Court.

Further, to prove the joint Authority, were cited several of our Old Books, 48
Edw. 3. fol. 3. in a Case of Debt upon an Indenture by which P. was retained by
the Defendant, with two Squires of Arms for the War in France: Belknapp said,
of such Matter this Court cannot have conusance, but it is triable before the
Constable and Marshal. In the Case of Pountney and Bourney 13 Hen. 4.4. the
Court of King's Bench call it the Court of the Constable and Marshal: And in 37
Hen. 6.3. upon another occasion, Prisot said, this Matter belongs to the
Constable and Marshal: And Coke 4 Inst. 123. says that they are both Judges of
the Court: and that the Constable sometimes gave Sentence, is no Argument that
the Marshal was no Judge with him; it only proves him the Chief, who in most
Courts does usually give the Rule: Nor is the Earl Marshal's receiving Writs
from the Constable to execute his Commands, any Argument that he sits there
only as a Ministerial Officer, and not as a Judge; for he may be both; as in
many Corporations, Mayors are Judges of the Court, and yet have the Custody of
their Goals too, and so have the Sheriffs of London their Compters, though they
strictly are Judges of their several Courts.

2. During the Vacancy of the Earl Marshal's Office, the Constable alone had
the Judicature; as in 11 Hen. 7. on Holyrood-day, the Earl of Darby being then
Constable of England, sat and gave Judgment alone in a Cause between Sir
Thomas Ashton and Sir Piers Leigh upon a Coat of Arms: but this needs no Proof,
since it is contended on the other side, that the Court does belong only to the
Constable.

3. 'Twas argued, that the Earl Marshal has set alone and given Judgment, and
to prove that, it was said, this Court was held when there was no Constable,
before Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, Lord High Treasurer and Earl Marshal of
England, who Died 16 Hen. VIII. and next after him, before Charles Brandon,
Duke of Suffolk, then Earl Marshal, who Died 37 Hen. VIII. after him, the Court
was held and Sentences given by Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, who Died in
1512. and after him, in the 30 Eliz. the Earl of Essex sat as Earl Marshal, and
heard and determined Causes judicially, and the chief Judge sat then as
Assistant with him in Court, and then after the Death of the Earl of Essex, it
was in Commission to my Lord Treasurer Burleigh, and others, and then the great
Oase of Sir F. Mitchell, was heard and determined, at which, several Judges
assisted, and the Sentence of degradation was executed upon him, 26. April,
1621. and then was Cited the Case of Pool and Redhead 12 Jac. 1.1 Roll's Rep.
87. where 'twas held, that the proper remedy for Fees of Knighthood was to sue
to the Earl Marshal; and Coke says in the same Case, the Common Law does not
give remedy for precedence, but it belongs to the Earl Marshal: And since that
in Parker's Case, which was 20 Car. II. Syd. 353. the Earl Marshal was agreed
to have the absolute determination of matters of Honor in the Court of
Chivalry, as much as the Chancellor has in matters of Equity: And the Error on
the other side, was occasioned by not distinguishing between the Ancient
Jurisdiction of this great Court at the Common Law, and the Jurisdiction given
to the Constable and Marshal under those names by Statute: for the latter
cannot be executed by one alone; and that distinction answers the Authority in
1 Inst. 74. which grounded the mistake, that there is no Court of Chivalry,
because there is no Constable, whereas, the reason why in Sir Francis Drake's
Case, the not constituting of a Constable silenced the Appeal, was from the 1
Hen. IV. Cap. 14. which orders all Appeals of Murder committed beyond Sea to be
before the Constable and Marshal by name: But the Ancient Jurisdiction of this
Court by prescription, wherein both the Constable and Marshal were Judges
severally or together, and which each of them did and could hold alone, remains
still as much in the Earl Marshal alone, as it ever was in him and the
Constable.

Then it was argued that no Prohibition lay to this Court, because none had
ever been granted, and yet greater occasions then now can be pretended, by
reason of the large Jurisdiction, which this Court did in Ancient time
exercise: many Petitions were frequently preferred in Parliament, Complaining
of the Encroachments of this Court in Edw. I. Edw. III. Rich. II. Hen. IV. and
Hen. VIth's time, as appears in 4 Inst. 125. 2 Hen. IV. number. 79. and 99. 1
Roll's Abridg. 527. and yet no Prohibition granted or moved for; which,
according to Littleton's Text is a very strong Argument, that it does not lie.

The Statute of 13 Rich. II. 2. is an Argument against it, because after
several Complaints of the Encroachments of this Court, another remedy is given,
which had been needless, if this had been legal: nay, it shows the Opinion of
the Parliament, that there was no other way of relief: and soon after the
making of this Statute, in the same Reign two Privy Seals were sued upon it: in
the Case of Poultney and Bourney, 13 Hen. IV. 4. 5.

Besides, this might be grounded on the Antiquity and greatness of this Court:
for as to the subject matter of it, it is by Prescription a Court for
determining matters of Honor, to preserve the distinction of degrees and
quality, of which no other Courts have Jurisdiction; and the right and property
in Honors and Arms is as necessary to be preserved in a Civil Government, as
that in Lands or Goods. Then 'twas urged that this Court has Jurisdiction even
of Capital Offenses, its extent is large, it is throughout the Realm, even in
Counties Palatine, even beyond the Seas; its manner of proceeding is different,
in a Summary way by Petition, its trial of Fact may be by Duel as is 4 Inst.
125. though the Statutes of Hen. VIII. empower Commissions for trial of
Treasons Committed beyond the Seas, yet this Court does and may still take
Conusance of such Causes, 4 Inst. 124. Its Sentences are only reversable by and
upon Appeal to the King, no Writ of Error or false Judgment lies upon any of
them, which shows the greatness of the Court, and the difference of its
Jurisdiction from other Courts; which may be some of thereasons, why no
Prohibition was ever granted to it, and why the Parliament of Rich. II. gave
the Remedy of a Privy Seal: wherefore it was prayed that the Judgment should be
Reversed.

On the other side, it was argued by the Council, in behalf of the Plaintiff in
the Original Action, that this Judgment ought to be affirmed, and it was after
this manner, there seem three Queries in the Case; 1. If any Prohibition lies
to that Court; 2. If any Cause here for a Prohibition; and, 3. If there be any
such Court as that before the Earl Marshal; but another doubt was raised,
whether any of these Questions could be such upon this plea, which is concluded
to the Jurisdiction; for that seems to make only one doubt; whether the Court
of Exchequer could hold Plea of an Action for proceeding contrary to a
Prohibition already granted; but this was waved, and then it was argued,

1. That a Prohibition does lie to this Court of Chivalry, in case it exceeds
the Jurisdiction proper to it; and it was agreed, that the Office of Constable
is Ancient, and by Cambden is held to have been in Ure in this Kingdom, in the
Saxon's time, though the Office of Marshal is but of a puisne date: but however
Great and Noble the Office is, however large and Extensive the Jurisdiction is,
yet it is but limited, and Coke in 4 Inst. 123. says that it is declared so, by
the Statute of Rich. II. where it is said, that they incroached in great
prejudice of the King's Courts, and to the great grievance and oppression of
his people, and that their proper Business is to have conusance of Contracts
and Deeds of Arms, and of War out of the Realm, which cannot be determined or
discussed by the Common Law, which other Constables have heretofore duly and
reasonably used in their time; now by this Act it is plain, what the
Jurisdiction is: Contracts and Deeds of Arms, and War out of the Realm, are the
subject matter of it; and by Coke it is called, curia militaris, or the Fountain
of Marshal Law: which shows it a Court, that has its boundaries, a Court that
may incroach, nay, which has incroach'd in diverse instances belonging to the
Common Law: And that it is a Court that ought to meddle with nothing that may be
Determined in Westminster Hall: then there must be some way of restraining this
excess and these encroachments, and if the Statute of Rich. II. had not been
made, it must be agreed that a Prohibition would have lain, for else there had
been no remedy, which is absurd to affirm.

It Is no Objection that Prohibitions are only grantable to Inferior Courts,
and that this is one of the greatest Courts in the Realm, for if a Court
Marshal intermeddle with a Common Law matter, ea ratione, it becomes inferior
and may be controwled: There needs no contest about the Superiority of Courts
in this matter, it is the same here, as among private Persons, he that offends
becomes inferior, and subject to the Censure of his equal by offending; though
that Court should be reckoned so noble and great as has been represented, yet
it is only so, while it keeps within its Jurisdiction; Prohibitions are
grantable to almost all sort of Courts, which differ from the Common Law in
their proceeding, to Courts Christian, to the Admiralty, nay, to the Delegates,
and even to the Steward and Marshal, upon the Statute of Articuli super
Chartas, Cap. 3. That they shall not hold Plea of Freehold or of Trespass,
Fits' N.B. 241, 242. is an express Writ of Prohibition, though the Statute gave
no such Writ, but only did restrain the Jurisdiction of the Court; which in
truth, is the Case in Question, antecedent to the Statute pleaded.

No Argument can be raised from the subject matter of the Jurisdiction of this
Court, that it is different from the Common Law, for so is the Admiralty and the
Prerogative Courts, nor is it any Objection that upon any Grievance in this
Court, the Appeal must be to the King, for that holds in the other Courts with
equal reason: Nay, Prohibitions lie from Westminster Hall, to hinder proceeding
in Causes, which the Courts that grant such Prohibitions, cannot hold Plea of;
as to the Ecclesiastical Court which grants probate of a Will made within a
Manor, to the Lord whereof such probate belongs, 5 Rep. 73. to the Marches of
Wales, if hold Plea of what belongs to Court Christian, 2 Roll's Abridg. 313.
are several Cases to this purpose: there were also Cited, 1 Roll's Rep. 42. 2
Roll's Abridg. 317. Sid. 189. 1 Brownl. 143, 144. and Herne 543. 'twas further
urged, that there neither was nor could be any reason assigned, why a
Prohibition should not be grantable to the Court of Chancery, when by English
Bill it meddles with the Common Law, in other manner than its Ancient and
proper Jurisdiction does allow, and several Authorities were Cited to
countenance that Assertion.

Then was considered the reason of Prohibitions in general, that they were to
preserve the right of the King's Crown and Courts, and the ease and quiet of
the Subject, that 'twas the Wisdom and Policy of the Law, to suppose both best
preserved, when every thing runs in its right Channel, according to the
Original Jurisdiction of every Court, that by the same reason one Court might
be allowed to incroach, another might, which could produce nothing but
confusion and disorder in the Administration of Justice; that in all other
Writs of Prohibition, the suggestion is and with Truth, in prejudicium corone
Regis and Gravamen partis, and both these are declared to be the consequent of
this Courts excess or incroachment of Jurisdiction, even by their own Statutes:
and, when the reason is the same, the remedy ought to be so: But, it has been
pretended, That the Statute appoints a Privy Seal for to supersede, etc. and
therefore no Prohibition; to this it was answered, That this Act does not take
away the force of the 8 Rich. II. mentio ned in 4 Inst. 125. which restrains
the Constable and Marshal from meddling with any Plea, which concerns the Common
Law, and if it had a limited Jurisdiction by the Common Law, or by that
Statute, the subsequent Statute which gave a further Remedy for to restrain
them, did not take away that which they had before; and every Body must agree,
that where an Act of Parliament restrains a Jurisdiction, such Act warrants a
Prohibition, in case that restraint be broken or exceeded; it is so in case of a
limited Power at the Common Law, but much more so upon a Statute.

Besides, the latter Statute which gives a Privy Seal, does not Repeal or alter
the Law then in being, it is an Affirmative Law, and that seldom or never works
any change or alteration in what was before, any otherwise then by Addition or
Confirmation; and in truth this is only a further remedy, and is far from
declaring a Prohibition not to lie: the meaning might be to give a Privy Seal
immediately, even in vacation time; the preamble complains so much of the
Grievances, that it cannot be supposed to Design any thing in favor of them,
or to prevent the restraint.

Suppose between the 8 and the 15 Rich. II. an excess of Jurisdiction had been
usurped as in this Case, will any Man say, that a Prohibition would not then
have lain; and if it would, can any Man say, that the Statute pleaded, does
take it away, or Prohibit such Writ of Prohibition: And the 11 Hen. IV. 24.
ordains that all the Statutes concerning the Court of Constable and Marshal,
shall be duly observed; and if so, the 8 Rich. II. as well as the 15 Rich. II.
are within that ordinance; and if so, a Prohibition lies as well as a Privy
Seal; and both are little enough to keep that Court within its due bounds and
limits.

2. It was argued, That the proceeding upon these Articles, was an intermedling
with a subject matter properly determinable at Common Law; here is no contract
or deed of Arms, no Mis-behaviour in War, nothing of that nature, which their
own Statute says belongs to them: Rushworth's II. Vol. 1054. he frequented the
Court for four years together, he observed no Cases there but for Words, and
one or two as Delaware's Case, about abusing an Honorable Family, by assuming
to be a branch thereof; here is no such thing, but express Articles for
exercising of a lawful Trade; it is not causa armorum, it does neither concern
Warlike matters, nor Honor; a Funeral Ceremony can never be within their
Power; this is a plain Accusation for a wrong to one of their Officers; the
Articles charge, that Sir Henry S. George by his Office within his Province,
has the ordering of these matters, and the party has meddled therein without
his License; he says, it is lawful, and the exercise of a lawful employment;
they say, it is otherwise, because it belongs to another Man's Office; then
'twas admitted by the Council for the present to be so, that Sir Henry was an
Officer by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, (which by the way,
makes the Office and rights of it to be of Common Law Conusance) and the Patent
is set forth at large in Prinne, on 4 Inst. 64, 65. and that the King at Arms
has such a right, yet if any Man intermeddles or incroaches upon that Office;
it is not a breach of the rules of Honor, and not relating to Arms, but a plain
injury at Common Law, and an Action lies for it, as it does for the disturbance
of any other Office or Franchise.

In 4 Inst. 126. it is said, that they do upon request Marshal Funerals, but
supposing they alone ought to do it, then an Action lies: This is merely a
question, whether the Letters Patents do carry such a sole privilege, suppose
null tiel record be Pleaded to them, when Pleaded or Enrolled, and without
producing them, suppose non concessit Pleaded to them when produced, how shall
these issues be tried: Suppose they awarded a satisfaction to be made to Sir H.
S. by the gift of a Sum of Money; and he should afterward bring an Action at
Law for the same Cause, will the proceeding in the Court of the Earl Marshal be
a bar: the Fact alleged in these Articles comes within none of those
particulars supposed to be belonging to this Court, in 1 Inst. 391.

It matters not, whether these were public Funerals as was questioned in
Parker's Case, Sid. 352. and in 2 Keble. 316.322. but the Query here is, if
this be a point of Honor, or whether it be not about the right of an Office;
and if it be the latter, they have no Power to determine it.

The Heralds are Officers attendant upon that Court, but it does not follow,
that that Court can judge of the nature or extent validity or operation of
their Letters Patents; no more than the Court Christian can try the right or
Freehold of a Chancellors or Registers Office. The Earl Marshal cannot License
the doing this in prejudice of the Heralds, or acquit the party if does it, for
he still stands liable at Law; the Herald has a Freehold in it, and may bring
his Action notwithstanding.

Then, 3. 'Twas argued, that admitting that no Prohibition did lie to the Court
of Honor, or that there was no cause for such Prohibition, yet it ought to be
granted to this pretended Court, which is not within their Statute. The true
Court is before Constable and Marshal, it is a Court by Prescription, and
cannot be altered but by Act of Parliament: All our Books which describe the
Court, mention it to be before both, 4 Inst. 125. Crompt. Jurisdiction, 82. 1
Inst. 74. Stamford. 65. The Constable is the Chief, and so are the Old Books,
and 37 Hen. 6.20. expressly before the Constable and Marshal. The Statutes which
mention the Court, do all take notice of it, as held before both: the 8 Rich.
2. and that which they Plead, do describe it so: and the 1 Hen. 4. Cap. 14. the
13 Hen. 4.4.5. all Attainders are Pleaded to be before both.

Cambden (who was an Herald) in his Commentary de Etymologio, antiquitate and
officio Comitis Mareschalli Angliae, fol. 87. it is published at the end of his
Latin Epistles, which are in 4to, Printed for Chiswell, 1691. he endeavors to
advance the Office of Earl Marshal, and searches for the Etymology, and after
all, makes him but an Harbinger, and tells us when the Title Mareschallus
Angliae was first used, and how it has been enjoyed, and by whom, and of what
Families, and afterward 91. lessens his Character much, and derives the Office
of Marshal of England from that of Marshal of the Household, which he describes
to disadvantage, the same is likewise in Fleta. lib. 2. cap. 5.

But this is observable, which Cambden says, that the greatest increase of the
Authority of this Office has been, since there were no Constables, for the
Kings since that time have referred many things to them, which in former times
were proper for the Constable; neither had the Marshal any precedence in
respect of his place, until King Hen. 8. Anno 31. by Parliament Assigned him
place next to the Lord Constable and before the Lord Admiral: all which, shows
that the Earl Marshal never had that Authority time out of mind, to hold this
Court before himself alone, as is pretended, during the vacancy of the Office
of Constable.

In November, 1640. 'twas Voted by the House of Commons, upon a report from a
Committee of some of the greatest Members of the House, Seldom, Hollis,
Maynard, Palmer, Hide, etc. that the Earl Marshal can make no Court without the
Constable, and that the Earl Marshal's Court is a grievance, Rushworth 2 Vol.
1056. Nalson's 1 Vol. 778.

Spelman in his Glossary, verbo Mareschallus, seems to say, 'twas officium
primo Servile, and that he was a mere Servant to the Constable, and gives much
such another account of it, as Cambden does: and page 403. is an Abstract or
rather Transcript of all that is in the Red Book in the Exchequer about the
nature of this Office; and there it is said, that if the King be in War, then
the Constable and Marshal shall hold Pleas, and the Marshal shall have the
Amerciaments and Forefeitures of all those, who do break the Commandments of
the Constable and Marshal; and then it was further alleged, by the Council for
the Defendant, in the Writ of Error, that they knew of no Statute, Record, or
Ancient Book of Law or History, that ever mentioned the Earl Marshal alone, as
having Power to hold a Court by himself: So that taking it as a Court, held
before an incompetent Judge, a Prohibition ought to go, and the Party ought not
to be put to his Action, after he has undergone imprisonment and paid his Fine,
since it has the semblance of a Court, and pretends to act as such; and if it
be a Court before the Earl Marshal alone, in case it exceeds the Jurisdiction
proper to it, a Prohibition lies either by force of the Common Law, which
states the boundaries and limits of that Jurisdiction, or by force of the
Statute of 8 Rich. 2. which is not repealed by the subsequent Law in that
Reign, and if such Prohibition do lie in any Case, that here was cause for it,
the subject matter of the Articles being only a wrong (if any) to a private
Officer, who had his proper remedy at the Common Law; and therefore it was
prayed that the Judgment should be affirmed, and it was affirmed.

Smith and Vx' Versus Dean and Chapter of Paul 's London, and Lewis Rugle.
APpeal from a Decree of Dismission made by the Lord Jeffreys, the Bill was to
compel the Dean and Chapter, as Lord of the Manor to receive a Petition in
nature of a Writ of false Judgment, for Reversing a common recovery suffered in
the Manor Court, in 1652. whereby a Remainder in Tail, under which, the
Plaintiff claimed was barred, suggesting several Errors in the proceeding
therein: And that the said Lord might be commanded to examine the same, and do
Right thereupon.

To this Bill, the Defendant Rugle demurred, and the Dean and Chapter by
Answer, insisted, That 'twas the first Attempt of this kind, and of dangerous
consequence, and therefore conceived it not fit to proceed on the said
Petition, unless compelled thereto by course of Law: That Rugle being the
Person concerned in interest to contest the sufficiency of the Common-recovery,
they hoped the Court would hear his defense, and determine therein before any
Judgment were given against them, and that they were only Lords of the Manor,
and ready to Obey, etc. and prayed that their rights might be preserved: This
demurrer was heard and ordered to stand.

And now it was insisted on by the Council with the Appellant, that this was
the only Remedy which they had, that no Writ of Error or false Judgment lies
for Reversing of a recovery or Judgment obtained in a Copyhold Court, that the
only method was a Bill or Petition to the Lord, in nature of a Writ of false
Judgment, which of common right he ought to receive, and to cause Errors and
defects in such recovery or Judgment to be examined, and for this were Cited
Moore 68. Owen 63. Fits. N. B. 12. 1 Inst. 60. 4 Rep. 30. is such a Record
mentioned to have been seen by Fenner, where the Lord upon Petition to him had
for certain Errors in the proceedings Reversed such Judgment given in his own
Court, 1 Roll's Abridg. 600. Kitchen. 80. 1 Roll's Abridg. 539. Lanc. 98.
Edward's Case, Hill. 8. Jac. 1. by all which, it appears, that this is an
allowed and the only remedy; Then it was argued, That in all Cases where any
Party having a Right to any Freehold Estate, is barred by Judgment, Recovery,
or Fine, such Party of common Right may have a Writ of Error, if the same be in
a Court of Record; and a Writ of false Judgment, if in a Court Baron or County
Court, and reverse such Judgment, Recovery, or Fine for Error or Defect: and
there can be no reason assigned why a Copyholder (especially considering the
great quantity of Land of that Tenure in England) should be without remedy,
when a false Judgment is given; and the rather, for that in Real Actions (as
this was) the Proceedings in the Lord's Courts are according to those in
Westminster Hall; and now though a Common Recovery be a Common Assurance, yet it
was never pretended that a Writ of Error to Reverse it was refused upon that
pretense; and if the Lord of a Manor deny to do his Duty, the Chancery has
such a Superior Jurisdiction as to enjoin him thereto. It Is the Business of
Equity to see that Right be done to all Suitors in Copyhold Courts, Fitsh.
Abridg. Subpena 21. 2 Cro. 368. 2 Bulstr. 336. 1 Rolls Abridg. 373. If an
Erroneous Judgment be given in such Court of a common Person's, in an Action in
the Nature of a Formedon, a Bill may be in Chancery in nature of a false
Judgment to Reverse it; and Lanc. 38. Tanfield says that he was of Counsel in
the Case of Patteshall, and that it was so decreed, which is much more then
what is here contended for; and though Common Recoveries are favored, and have
been supported by several Acts of Parliament; yet no Parliament ever thought
fit to deprive the Parties bound by such Recoveries, of the benefit of a Writ
of Error.

On the other side, 'twas urged in defense of the Dismission, That the Person
who suffered this Recovery had a power over the Estate, that she might both by
Law and Conscience, upon a Recovery, dispose of it, as she should think fit;
that she has suffered a Recovery, and that it was suffered according to the
custom of the Manor, though not according to the form of those suffered in
Westminster Hall: That the suffering of Recoveries in any Court, and the
Methods of proceeding in them, are rather notional then real things; and in the
Common Law Courts they are taken notice of, not as Adversary Suits, but as
Common Assurances; so that even there, few Mistakes are deemed so great, but
what are remedied by the Statute of Jeofailes, or will be amended by the
Assistance of the Court: And if it be so in the Courts at Westminster, where
the Proceedings are more solemn, and the Judges are Persons of Learning and
Sagacity, how much rather ought this to stand, which was suffered in 1652.
during the Times of Disorder, and most Proceedings informal and in the English
Tongue, in such a mean Court where are few Precedents to guide them: where the
Parties themselves are not empowered to draw up their own Proceedings as here
above; but the whole is left to the Steward, who is a Stranger to the Person
concerned; and therefore it is hard and unreasonable, that Men's Purchases should
be prejudiced by the Ignorance, Unskilfulness, or Dishonesty of a Steward or
his Clerks; that there is scarce one Customary Recovery in England, which is
exactly agreeable to the Rules of the Common Law; that the questioning of this,
may in consequence endanger multitudes of Titles which have been honestly
purchased, especially since there can be no aid from the Statutes of Jeofailes,
for they do not extend to Courts Baron. 'Twas further urged, That there was no
Precedent to enforce Lords of Manors to do as this Bill desired; that the
Lords of Manors are the ultimate Judges of the Regularity or Errors in such
Proceedings; that there is no Equity in the Prayer of this Plaintiff; that if
the Lord had received such Petition, and were about to proceed to the Reversal
of such Recovery, Equity ought then to interpose and quiet the Possession under
those Recoveries: That Chancery ought rather to supply a Defect in a Common
Conveyance (if any shall happen) and decree the Execution of what each Party
meant and intended by it, much rather, than to assist the annulling of a Solemn
Agreement, executed according to Usage, though not strictly conformable to the
Rules of Law. For which Reasons it was prayed that that Appeal might be
dismissed, and the Dismission below confirmed, and 'was accordingly adjudged so.

The Countess of Radnor, versus Vandebendy and al.
APpeal from a Decree of Dismission in Chancery, the Case was to this effect;
The Earl of Warwick, upon Marriage of his Son, settles part of his Estate upon
his Lady for a Jointure, and after failure of Issue Male, limits a Term for 99
years to Trustees to be disposed of by the Earl, either by Deed or Will: And
for want of such Appointment, then in trust for the next in Remainder, and then
limited the whole Estate in such manner, as that a third part of a Moiety
thereof came to the Lord Bodmyn (the Appellants late Husband) in Tail general,
with the Reversion in Fee to the Earl and his Heirs. The Son died without
Issue, the Earl by his Will appoints the Lands to his Countess for so many
years of the Term as she should live, and to her Executors for one year after
her Death, and charges the Term with several Annuities, some of which remain in
being. The Respondent's Father purchased part of these Lands from the Lord
Bodmyn after his Marriage, and had the Term assigned to him. The Lord Bodmyn
dies, the Appellant brings her Writ of Dower in C. B. the Respondent pleads the
Term for 99 years; and she Exhibits her Bill, praying that she may, after the
discharge of the Earls Encumbrances, have the benefit of the Trust as to a
third of the Profits of this Term; and upon hearing the Cause, the Lord
Chancellor saw no cause to give Relief, but dismissed her Bill. There were many
Particulars in the Case, and many Proceedings before, both in Law and Equity;
but this was the whole Case as to the general Question, Whether a Tenant in
Dower shall have the benefit of the Trust of a Term which is ordered to attend
the Inheritance, against a Purchaser after the Marriage? The Lord Chancellor
Jeffryes had been of opinion with the Appellant, but the Cause coming to be
heard again, a Dismission was decreed, and now it was argued against the Decree
on behalf of the Appellant, that Equity did entitle her to the Thirds of this
Term; that a Tenant by the Courtesy is entitled to it, and br the same reason a
Tenant in Dower; that the Term created by the Settlement, was to attend all the
Estates limited by that Settlement, and in Trust for such Persons as should
claim under it, which the Appellant does as well as the Respondents; that it
was in consequence to attend all the particular Estates carved or derived from
the others; the Term was never in its creation designed for this purpose, to
prevent or protect against Dower; that in the Case of Snell and Clay, the
Tenant in Dower had it in Chancery against the Heir at Law, and that this was
the same Case, a Purchaser with notice of that Encumbrance of Dower, the Vendor
being then married; this was an Estate of which the Husband was full Owner, and
received the whole Profits; that in proportion, it is as much a Trust for her,
for her Thirds during Life, as it is a Trust for the Respondents for the
Inheritance; she claims under her Husband who had the benefit of the whole
Trust: If there be a Mortgage by an Ancecestor upon the whole Eqinty will
permit her to redeem, paying her proportion, according to the value of her
Thirds for Life; and the same reason holds in this Case; and there is no
Precedent in Equity to the contrary: And many Precedents in favor of Tenant in
Dower were cited, and much Reason well urged from parallel Cases, to entitle
the Lady to her proportion of the Trust of this Term.

On the other side, 'Twas said that Dower is an Interest or Right at the Common
Law only; that no Title can be maintained to have Dower, but where the Common
Law gives it, and that is only to have the Thirds of that which the Husband was
seized of; and if a Term were in being, no Feme was ever let in but after the
determination of that Term; that this is the first pretense set up for a Dower
in Equity; the Right is only to the Thirds of the Rent reserved upon any Term;
and it is a new thing to affirm, that there shall be one sort of Dower at Law,
and another in Chancery; that it is, and always has been, the common received
Opinion of Westminster Hall, and of all Conveyancers, that a Term or Statute
prevents Dower, that if a Purchaser can procure it, the same becomes his
Defense; that this is what the Wisdom of our Forefathers thought fit to use,
and though some Men's reasoning may render it in appearance as absurd, yet the
consequence of an alteration will be much more dangerous than the continuance
of the old Rules; that though this Lady's Case be unfortunate, yet the multitude
of Purchasors, who have bought upon full consideration, and have been advised,
and still conceive themselves safe under this Law, will be more unfortunate, if
the Law be broken. Then 'was argued, That there could be no Equity in this
Case, for it must be not only from the Party Appellant, but also against the
Respondent, and that it is not, because he bought the whole: Her Portion, her
Quality, and her being a Wife, create no Equity as to the Purchaser, 'twould
perhaps be prevalent against an Heir, but not against him: here is no Fraud or
ill Practice, etc. Then if the nature of the thing be considered, the Demand is
of a Right, not arising by Agreement of Parties, but by Operation of Law; if
the former, Chancery might perhaps construe and enlarge it, so as to fulfill the
utmost Intention: but here, her title is the Marriage, the Seisin, and Death of
the Husband: And there never was a time when, if her Lord had died, she could
have had immediate Dower, for even the Term had been pleadable by an Heir of
Law to a Writ of Dower: Now what does give her an Equity against the
Respondent? Her Claim is by, from, and under her Husband, as having a Right to
a Proportion of what he had, that is a Right by the Law: where is the Equity
that should improve or mend this Right? Perhaps it must be agreed, That if the
Husband had just before Marriage made a long Lease on purpose to prevent Dower,
and the Woman expecting the Privileges which the Common Law gives to Women
married, had survived him, Equity might have interposed; and yet even this was
practiced by a Reverend Judge of Equity, Mr. Sergeant Maynard, who made such
Lease to his Man Bradford, the day before his last Marriage: but here is no
such Action, 'twas an old Term created by the old Earl of Warwick.

As to the Case of the Mortgages, The Feme entitled to Dower is let in,
because the Person who is the Mortgagee has no Interest but to have his Money;
and Equity is to execute all these Agreements, but never where there is a
Purchaser, or where the Interest of the Mortgage is assigned to the Heir:
Between her self and the Mortgagee, she comes in place of her Husband, and the
Husband could redeem, and so may the Wife; but against a Purchaser she has no
more Equity then her Husband had, and that is none at all. If she has a Legal
Title antecedent to the Purchasers, as Marriage and Seisin, where there is no
Term standing out, that shall prevail, and Equity shall not help the Purchaser
against her: so where the Purchaser has a Legal Title as by a Term precedent,
Equity cannot relieve her. And whereas it was objected, That there was no Case
adjudged in Chancery against the Appellants pretense; the Answer is plain, The
Common Law is against it; and if no Precedent in Equity, the Common Law ought
to stand: It Is nothing but Precedent that Consecrates half the Decrees in
Equity: And no Man will say, that ever any Woman was endowed in Equity of a
Trust Estate. If a Man has a Term for Ten thousand years, and be entirely and
properly owner of it, though the same be equal in value to a Feesimple, for the
Reversion after it is worth little or nothing, yet no Dower can be claimed in
Equity; nay, If the Husband be seized together with another Person, and not
sole seized, yet no Dower, even in Chancery, can be claimed against the
Survivor: So that Equity does not exceed the Rules of Law in advancing the
Right of Dower. It Is true, unless Fraud be in the Case, (according to the Case
of Nash and Preston in Cro. Car. 190, 191.) Relief in Equity shall not be given
against a Legal Title to Dower; yet it is as true, that where the Law does not
give Dower, Equity will not, unless there be Fraud and Covin used to prevent
it, and then common Reason enjoins a Court of Conscience to Relieve. If any
Allowance had been in the Purchase, upon Consideration of the Title to Dower,
the same would have been a very material Argument; but in this Case there was
none: And therefore 'twas prayed that the Dismission might be affirmed, and it
was so.

Dominus Rex versus Baden.
WRit of Error, to Reverse a Judgment given in the Court of Exchequer, and
affirmed upon a Writ of Error in the Council Chamber before the Chancellor,
with the Assistance of the two Chief Justices. The Case upon the Record was
only this; One Allen outlaws one Clerk in Debt on a Bond in Mich. 1690. on the
Seventh of Jan. 1690. by virtue of a Special Capias utlagatum, and inquisition
thereupon, seizes Clerk's Lands into their Majesty's hand. In Hillary Term
following the Outlawry and Inquisition are certified into the Exchequer, and
Allen obtains a Lease under a Rent. In Mich. 1692. Baden comes and pleads that
in Mich. 4 Jac. 2. he recovered a Judgment against Clerk for 1080 l. that in
Trinity Term 1691. he took out an Elegit, and had a Moiety of the Lands
extended, and therefore prays that an amoveas manus may be awarded. Mr.
Attorney replies, That the Lands were seized by virtue of the Outlawry and
Inquisition long before the Elegit was sued, and therefore, etc. Baden demurs,
and Judgment for the King.

It was argued on behalf of the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, that this
Judgment was Erroneous, for that there is a vast difference between an Outlawry
in a Civil, and one in a Criminal Process: That in a Civil Action, it is only a
Civil Process for the benefit of the Party; and 5 Edw. 3. cap. 12. the King
cannot pardon an Outlawry at the Suit of a private Person; that it is only to
help one Subject to his Debt from another; that the King has no Advantage by
it, and so no need of a Preference by reason of the Prerogative; that at Common
Law no Man could be outlawed; that now it is purely given for the sake of the
Plaintiff; that the common Practice is to make a Lease, or grant a privy Seal
to the Party: That by this Outlawry the King has no Interest in the Land; he
cannot cut down the Trees, 9 H. 6.20. that he cannot Plow or Sow; but only
collect and receive the Profits which arise out of the Land, Bro. tit. Outlawry
36. tit. Patents 3. that the King has not the possession of the Land, which
shows it not to be a Forfeiture to the King, but it remains the Parties still,
in respect of Ownership, he may make a Feoffment, 21 Hen. 7.7. 2 Inst. 675.
Hob. 122. by the Judgment the Lands were bound, though the Title was not
complete, till the Elegit was sued out; a monstrans de droit or Petition did
lie, and now the same Matter may be pleaded. 'Twas further argued, That great
Mischief must follow, if an Outlawry upon Civil Process may defeat a Judgment;
that Judgments with release of Errors are taken and used as common Securities;
that this is most plainly a device to avoid them; that this can be no Security,
if an Elegit may not be sued, but prevented by the Party himself, for here it
is his own default, not to avoid this Outlawry by Appearance; that no act of
the Debtor could alter the Security, and there is no reason why his neglect
should: that this Contest is between Baden and Allen; and not between Baden and
the King. Allen's Suit was but just begun, and this is merely upon his Suit; If
the Person had been taken upon this Capias, he had been the Plaintiff's
prisoner; and if he Escapes the Plaintiff had an Action for it, Yelv. 19. and
the supposed Forfeiture is only for his Interest, 3 Cro. 909. And by this
practice the King's Prerogative is to assist one Subject to deceive another: By
the Law a Judgment is preferrable to a Bond, and binds the Land, which a Bond
does not till Judgment upon it; now here the first is to be postponed, by
reason of the King's supposed Prerogative, which is only a Right in the King,
for the use of the Party to have the Profits, 2 Rolls Abridg. 808. vide
Stamford 57. 1 Inst. 30. and Hardres. 101, 176. 1 Inst. 202. Latch. 43. That
the Elegit has Relation to the Judgment, and so becomes Prior to the King's
Title, like the Relation of a Bargain and Sale to an Inrolment; and as a strong
Argument for it, the words in the Writ of Elegit were repeated and enforced,
quo die Jud' reddit' fuit, which showed a relation to that day; and
consequently did affect the Lands at a time when the King had no Interest in it.

On the other side, it was argued with the Judgment, That this was the common
Practice of the Court of Exchequer in this Case, that the Course of a Court is
the Law of that Court, and to be taken notice of by all other Courts, that it is
time out of mind, and consequently of equal duration with the Common Law, and
always deemed to be parcel thereof; that the Records and Experience of the
ancient Clerks were both concurring to prove it the common Usage in the
Exchequer, that when Lands are seized into the K's hands by virtue of an
Outlawry and Inquisition, it was never known that the King's hands, were
removed by force of an Elegit sued afterward, though upon a Judgment precedent;
that it has been their constant practice to continue the pernancy of the
Profits in the King, notwithstanding such Elegit; that 'twould be of dangerous
Consequence to alter the same by a new Opinion; that it is not so very material,
whether this practice be more reasonable then another, but whether it be
certain and known? for if it be so, it is much better to have it continued then
changed, because of the Confusion which must follow, by shaking the Rights and
Possessions enjoyed under the former Practice: That it is not in many Cases so
considerable what the Rule is, as that it be fixed and understood; and
therefore no reason to alter it, or at least not without the use of the
Legislature; for by the same color that some Judges of Parts and Segacity
shall think fit to swerve from their Predecessors, others of less capacity may
pretend to do the same, and so nothing but uncertainty would ensue.

But besides, this is not merely a Course of the Court, it is also agreeable to
the Rule and Reason of the Laws; Baden has no interest in the Land 'till he
sues his Elegit; whereas the King's Title to the Land was complete by the
Outlawry and Inquisition, which was prior to the Elegit; and a Judgment of it
self does not affect the Land, till Election made; a Judgment at Law is only an
Award of the Court ascertaining of the Debt, and declaring that the Plaintiff
shall recover. In it self it does no more assect the Land, then a Bond; it is
true, when the Suit is ended by a Judgment, the Party may resort to an Elegit
for his Execution, if he thinks fit, and can find any thing subject thereto. At
the Common Law, before the Statute of Westminst 2. cap. 18. a Subject upon his
Judgment for Debt or Damages, could not have Execution by taking away the
Possession of his Adversary's Land, because that would hinder the Man's
following of Husbandry and Tillage, which then was reckoned beneficial to the
Public: So is 2 Inst. 394. and Sir William Herbert's Case, 3 Rep. 11, 12.
nothing but a Levari or Fieri facias; then by the Statute, sit in Electione
illius, and Coke in his Comment on those words, says, After the suing of an
Elegit, he cannot have a Capias: So that by him, the suing out of the Writ, is
the determining of his Election, 2 Inst. 395. Foster and Jackson's Case, Hob.
57. Even the Elegit it self does not (when sued out) immediately touch the
Lands; for if that the Chattels be sufficient to pay the Debt, and it so
appears to the Sheriff, that thereby he may satisfy the Plaintiffs Demand,
then he ought not to extend the Land; and this appears by the frame of the
Writ, as it is in the Register 299. 2 Inst. 395. which shows that no Title can
be acquired to the Land, till the same be Extended.

The Elegit cannot by Law have relation to the Time of the Judgment, so as to
avoid the King's Title; for relation is only a Fiction, and Fiction shall never
bind or prejudice the King in his Right, much less in his Prerogative; and no
Case can be shown, where a Relation shall conclude the King: nor is it any
Objection, That this is a Prerogative for the Benefit of a Subject; for in
truth, all the Prerogatives are for the Advantage and Good of the People, or
else they ought not to be allowed by the Law. Besides Practice and Reason,
there is express Authority in our Books for it, as the Case of Masters versus
Sir Herbert Whitfield 1657. Hardres. 106. And if there were no Book for it, the
Practice is enough; for the printing of a Case does not alter or change the
nature of it: it is as much Authority if it be not published, as when it is so:
Masters recovered a Judgment against Sir Herbert Whitfield, and after the
Judgment Sir Herbert was outlawed at another Man's Suit, and his Lands seized
into the Protector's hands, and afterward Masters took out an Elegit, and the
whole Court was of Opinion, that the Lands being seized into the Protector's
hands before the Elegit was sued out, there could not be an amoveas manus
awarded, although the Judgment was prior to the Outlawry; this is the same with
the Case at Bar; and though it may be surmised, That this was an Opinion vented
in Evil Times, yet it is well known, that excepting their Criminal Proceedings
in those Times, the Law flourished, and the Judges were Men of Learning, as Mr.
Justice Twisden has often affirmed upon the Bench. 'Twas further urged, That
Prerogative was to be favored; that 'twas a part of the Law, 2 Inst. 296.
especially when 'twas used, as in this Case, to help an honest Man to his Debt;
that confessing of Judgments was oftener practiced by Fraud to cover Men's
Estates, then Outlawries were to defeat just Judgments: That if this Judgment
was just and honest, 'twas his own default, not to sue an Elegit immediately.
Then were cited many Cases to prove the King's Prerogative, as Fleetwood's
Case, 8 Rep. 171. York and Athen's Case, Lane's Rep. 20. Hob. 115. 2 Rolls
Abridg. 158. Stevenson's Case, 1 Cro. 389, 390. 'Twas argued that nothing could
be inferred from Tanfield's Opinion in 2 Rolls Abridg. 159. which is also in
Lane's Rep. 65. for there the Debt was not a Debt to the King, till after the
Death of the Testator; but here is a Forfeiture to the King before the Elegit
sued: and admitting that the King has only the pernancy of the Profits, yet
while he has so, no other Person can intermeddle, for the King is entitled to
all the Profits, even to a Presentment to a Church, which was void before the
Outlawry, as is Beverly's Case, 1 Leon. 63. 2 Rolls Abridg. 807. and Oland's
Case, 5 Rep. 116. And Process of Outlawry is to be favored and encouraged, as
it is a Means for the recovery of just Debts; and the effects of them, by
Forfeiture to the King, ought to be favored as a Prerogative, wherewith the
King is entrusted to that purpose: It Is a Penalty or Judgment upon him to be
put Extra Legem, because he contemns the Law, and will not obey it; so that as
to him, it is the greatest Justice in the World, that he should not enjoy any
benefit of his Estate by virtue of the Law, during the time that he despises
it. And as to Baden, 'twas his own default that he did not extend sooner; he
trusted the Party longer then he should, and for that he may thank himself:
Wherefore upon the whole, 'twas prayed that the Judgment should be affirmed,
and it was affirmed.

Hall and al' Executors of Tho. Thynne, Versus Jane Potter Administratrix of
George Potter.
APpeal from a Decree of Dismission in the Court of Chancery: The Case was
thus; That Thomas Thynne Esquire; having intentions to make his Addresses to the
Lady Ogle, gave a Bond of 1000 l. Penalty to the Respondents Husband to pay 500
l. in Ten days after his Marriage with the Lady Ogle; the Respondent assisted
in promoting the said Marriage, which afterward took effect; soon after the
said Thynne was barbarously murdered; and about six years after Mr. Potter
brought an Action upon this Bond against the Appellants, as Executors of Mr.
Thynne, and proving the Marriage, recovered a Verdict for the 1000 l. Thereupon
the Appellants preferred their Bill in Chancery to be relieved against this
Bond, as given upon an unlawful Consideration; the Defendants by their Answer
acknowledge the Promotion of that Marriage to be the Reason of giving the Bond.
Upon hearing the Cause at the Rolls, the Court decreed the Bond to be delivered
up, and Satisfaction to be acknowledged upon the Judgment. The Respondent
petitioned the Lord Keeper for a re-hearing; and the same being re-heard
accordingly, his Lordship was pleased to Reverse that Decree, and ordered the
Respondents to pay Principal, Interest and Costs, or else the Bill to stand
dismissed with Costs.

And it was argued on behalf of the Appellants, That this Bond ought in equity
to be set aside, for that even at the Common Law, Bonds founded upon unlawful
Considerations appearing in the condition were void; that in many Instances,
Bonds and Contracts that are good at Law, and cannot be avoided there, are
cancelled in Equity: That such Bonds to Match-makers and Procurers of Marriage
are of dangerous Consequence, and tend to the betraying, and oftentimes to the
ruin of Persons of Quality and Fortune: And if the use of such Securities and
Contracts be allowed and countenanced, the same may prove the occasion of many
unhappy Marriages, to the prejudice and discomfort of the best of Families;
that the Consideration of such Bonds and Securities have always been
discountenanced, and Relief in Equity given against them, even so long since as
the Lord Coventry's time, and long before; and particularly in the Case of
Arundel and Trevilian; betweeen whom the Fourth of February, 11 Car. 1. was an
Order made in these, or the like words: Upon the hearing and debating of the
Matter this present day in the presence of the Counsel Learned, on both sides,
for and touching the Bond or Bill of 100 l. against which the Plaintiff by his
Bill prays relief. It appeared that the said Bill was originally entered into
by the Plaintiff unto the Defendant for the payment of 100 l. formerly promised
unto the said Defendant by the Plaintiff, for the effecting of a Marriage
between the Plaintiff and Elizabeth his now Wife, which the said Defendant
procured accordingly, as his Counsel alleged. But this Court utterly disliking
the Consideration whereupon the said Bill was given, the same being of
dangerous consequence in precedent, upon reading three several Precedents,
wherein this Court has relieved others in like Cases, against Bonds of that
nature, thought not fit to give any countenance unto Specialties entered into
upon such Contracts: It is therefore ordered and decreed, That the said
Defendant shall bring the said Bill into this Court, to be delivered up to the
Plaintiff to be cancelled. Then 'twas further urged, That the Appellants had
once a Decree at the Rolls to be relieved against the Bond in question, upon
consideration of the said Precedent in the time of the said Lord Coventry and
others; and of the Mischiefs and Inconveniences likely to arise by such
Practices, which increase in the present Age, more then in the Times when
Relief was given against such Bonds: and therefore 'twas prayed that the Decree
might be Reversed.

On the other side it was urged, That the Consideration of this Bond was
lawful; that the assisting and promoting of a Marriage at the Parties request,
was a good Consideration at Law, in all Times, to maintain a Promise for
payment of Money: That this Bond was voluntary, and the Party who was Obligor
was of Age and sound Memory; that here was no Fraud or Deceit in procuring it;
that Chancery was not to Relieve against Voluntary Acts; that here was a great
Fortune to be acquired to the Appellant's Testator by the Match; that here was
Assistance given; that the Persons were both of great Quality and Estate, and
no Imposition or Deceit on either side in the Marriage: That it might be proper
to Relieve against such Securities, where ill Consequences did ensue; yet here
being none, and the thing lawful, and the Bond good at Law, the same ought to
stand; that here are no Children Purchasers or Creditors to be defeated; that
there are Assets sufficient to pay all; and consequently there can be no
Injustice in allowing this Bond to remain in force; that it was the Expectation
of the Respondent, without which she would not have given her Service in this
Matter; and that it was the full meaning of the Appellant's Testator to pay
this Money, in case the Marriage took effect; that there was a vast difference
between supporting and vacating a Contract in Chancery; that though Equity
perhaps would not assist and help a Security upon such a Consideration, if it
were defective at Law; yet where it was good at Law, and no Cheat or Imposition
upon the Party, but he meant (as he had undertaken) to pay this Money, and was
not deceived in his Expectation, as to the Success of the Respondent's
Endeavors, 'twould be hard in Equity to damn such a Security, and therefore
'twas prayed that the Decree should be affirmed.

It was replied, That Marriages ought to be procured and promoted by the
Mediation of Friends and Relations, and not of Hirelings; that the not vacating
such Bonds, when questioned in a Court of Equity, would be of Evil Example to
Executors, Trustees, Guardians, Servants, and other People having the Care of
Children. And therefore 'twas prayed that the Decree might be reversed, and it
was reversed accordingly.

The Society of the Governor and Assistants, London, of the new Plantation of
Ulster in the Kingdom of Ireland, Versus William Lord Bishop of Derry.
APpeal from a Judgment by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of Ireland in
Parliament assembled, upon the Bishop's Petition and Appeal to their Lordships
form an Order in the Chancery, touching certain Lands in the County and
Liberties of Londonderry: It sets forth, amongst other things, (after a
recital of the Proceedings in Chancery and the Merits of the Cause) that the
Appellants were advised, that no Appeal lies to the House of Lords in Ireland
from the Court of Chancery there, but that all Appeals from thence ought to be
immediately to their Lordships here, the Supreme Judicature as well for Matters
arising in Ireland as in this Kingdom: and therefore in the Conclusion, prays
that an Order might be made for the said Bishop to appear, and put in his
Answer thereto, that the Matter might be heard before their Lordships here,
when it should be thought fit, and that the Petitioners might receive such
relief as should be agreeable to their Lordships great Wisdom and Justice, etc.

Upon presenting this Appeal to the Lords here, the House appointed Lords
Committees to consider the proper method of Appealing from the Decrees made in
the Court of Chancery in Ireland, and to report, etc. Then pursuant to an Order
made by the Lords Committees, and a Letter sent to the Lords Justices of
Ireland, by Order of the House of Lords here. Some Precedents or Cases from
Ireland relating to the method of appealing from the Chancery there, were
brought before the said Committee, and reported to the House; whereupon the
House ordered that both Parties might have Copies of the same.

Then the Society took Copies, and preferred a short Petition to the House,
setting forth the said matter, and that they were ready by their Council to
offer several things, in order to their Lordship's receiving and proceeding
upon their said Appeal, whereupon, a day was appointed for the hearing of
Council on both sides, with regard to Jurisdiction.

And, It was accordingly argued on behalf of the said Society, that the
Judgments in Ireland, whether in Law or Equity, were not to be finally
Determined there, that Ireland was dependant upon England; 'twas urged to prove
it, that our Money was to be Current there, that our Laws did oblige them, that
they were governed secundum leges and consuetudines anglicanas, Davis 21. in
which Book 24. that the Easterlings in England, who first made the Money of
this Standard, (and from whose Name comes that of Sterling,) were the first
Founders of the four Principal Cities of Ireland, Dublin, Waterford, Cork, and
Limrick, and the other Maritime Villes in that Country, and were the sole
Maintainers of Traffic and Commerce there, which were all utterly neglected by
the Irish.

These Cities and Villes were under the Protection of King Edgar, and Edward
the Confessor, before the Norman Conquest, and these Easterlings in Ancient
Record, are called Ostmanni; and therefore when Hen. 2. Upon the first
Conquest, after their Apostasy, thought fit to People those Cities and Villes
with English Colonies drawn from Exeter, Bristol, and Chester, etc. he assigned
to them a certain proportion of Land, next adjoining to each of those Cities,
which Portion, is called in the Records in Ancient time, Cantreda Ostmannorum;
Davis 25. says further, that Ireland is a Member of England, and Inhabitants
ibidem legibus Angliae subjiciuntur and utuntur.

In the Statute of Faculties, 28 Hen. 8. cap. 19. it is mentioned to be the
King's Land of Ireland, and that this the King's Land of Ireland, is a Member
Appendant, and rightfully belonging to the Imperial Crown of the Realm of
England, and united to the same. And in the 33 Hen. 8. cap. 1. by which the
Style and Title of King of Ireland, was given to Hen. 8. his Heirs and
Successors; it is further Enacted, that the King shall enjoy this Style and
Title, and all other Royal preeminences, Prerogatives, and Dignities, as united
and annexed to the Imperial Crown of England.

Nay, It may be compared to a County-Palatine, Created by the King of England;
for, Davis 62. speaking of that, he says, that a County-Palatine has in it,
jura regalia, which consists in Royal Jurisdiction, and Royal Seignory. By the
first, it has all its High Courts and Officers of Justice which the King has;
and by the latter, it has Royal Services, and Royal Escheates, as the King
has; and therefore in some respects, it is separated and disjoined from the
Crown, as is Plowd. 215. yet it is subordinate and dependant; though it be said,
that breve Dom' Regis non Currit there, yet the Writ of Error, which is the
dernier resort and in like manner an Appeal, is excepted out of their Charters,
so is Dyer 321. and 345.34 Hen. 6.42. and it would be excepted, if it were not
so expressed; for to have the ultimate Judgment, is that which the King cannot
grant, for such grant, would (if allowed) alter the fundamental constitution of
the Realm. So, in Ireland, which is a Realm of it self, as Consisting of many
Counties, Erroneous Judgments given in the chief place there, shall be reversed
in the King's Bench in England; Davis quotes Bracton, lib. 3. tit' coron' cap.
8. that Comites Palatini habent regalem jurisdictionem in omnibus, Salvo
Dominio Regi sicut principi; so that by his Opinion, they are much the same;
and no Man will deny, but that in all Proceedings in Law or Equity, the last
resort is to the Parliament of England; there it is that the King's supreme
Authority is exercised.

It must not be said to be a Conquered Country, for the Earl of Stassord's
sake, though Coke and Vaughan have affirmed it so: But it may be called a
Plantation or Colony, dependant upon England, and to many purposes, parcel of
it. This has not only the same person for their King, but it is under the Crown
and Government of England; there must be in all these Cases a Superiority or
superintendency over inferior Dominions; for otherwise, (as Vaughan puts it,
401.) the Law appointed or permitted to such places might be insensibly changed
within it self, without the assent of the Dominion Superior. And, 2. Judgments
or Decrees might be there made or given to the disadvantage or of lessening
that Superiority, which cannot be reasonable, or to make the Superiority to be
only in the King, not in the Crown of England, (as King Jac. 1. would have had
it, and consulted Seldom upon the point.)

Now though the Writ of Error be only mentioned, yet the same reason holds to
both; and the true cause, why we have not so many Ancient precedents of Equity
Cases as of Law ones, is, for that in Ancient time the Equity Courts were not
so high, meddled with few matters, and in a Summary way; but since their
Authority is so advanced, and their Jurisdiction so enlarged, that most
questions of property are become determinable there, and almost every suit
begins or ends with them, to the entire subversion of the Old Common Law. It is
and must now be reasonable to have the Examination of their final Sentences in
the Parliament of England as well as of the other.

Suppose non-residence in Ireland should be pretended, a Forfeiture of the
Estate to the next remainder Man or to the King. Can it be safe for to entrust
them with a conclusive Opinion in this matter. When Calais was in our hands,
Writs of Error lay thither, 21 Hen. 7. fol. 3. As to the pretense, that the
orders of this House cannot be executed there; it is very vain, for if the
King's Bench Command their Judgments to be executed there; this House may order
theirs; and in like manner as they do to the Chancery here.

In 15 Rich. 2. numb. 17. in the Abbot of St. Osithe's Case, the Lords here
made an Order, and charged the Lord Chancellor that he see it performed; and
this has been constant practice.

It has been imagined, That the Jurisdiction of this House in matters of this
kind, is dated from the 21 Jac. 1. as to the proceedings in Chancery; but that
is not now to be disputed; for, the Commons in Parliament Assembled, did agree
it to be the Right of this House; in the Case of Skinner and the East India
Company; and in the Book about it, supposed to be written by that Noble Lord,
the Lord Hollis, 105. it is said, that where the King's Sovereigntydoth not
reach, the Jurisdiction of this House cannot; the contrary is implied, that
where the King of England's Sovereignty does extend, the Jurisdiction of this
House does so too; and no Man will affirm, That Ireland is out of or beyond the
limits of the Sovereignty of the English Crown. And as to the exercise of this
Judicature by the Lords here, nothing can be stronger for it, then the 1 Hen.
4. numb. 79. So it is in the Record, though in Cotton's Abridg it is 80. the
Commons declare that all Judgments Appertain to the King and Lords, and not to
them; Skinner's Case, 199, 200. 4 Inst. 349, 353, 354.

It was further argued, That Protection commands a due Subjection, and that
these people who insisted upon this independency, had forgot the English
Treasure and Blood, which had been spent for their preservation.

That they are part of England and subject to its Laws, appears from the common
Case of an incumbency here, being made void by acceptance of a Bishopric in
that Colony: Besides, that in Ancient time the Archbishop of Canterbury was
Primate of Ireland, and had the Confirmation and Consecration of Bishops there,
Cambden's Britt. page 735. and 765. 4 Inst. 360. then 'twas urged that the
Question now was, whether it were a Dominion inferior, or equal to and
independent upon the Realm of England: That the constant practice had been for
the Lords here to examine the Decrees in their Court of Chancery, that the
refusing of this Appeal, would shake all those Cases thus determined; that
every Appeal-here from their Equity Sentences, (which have been very many) was
an Argument against the Order of their Lords, and for the receiving of this
Appeal here: That this thing has been acknowledged, even by the Rebels there;
for in Sir John Temple's History of the first Progress of the Irish Rebellion,
written 1641. page 141. amongst the several propositions made by the Irish
(then in a general Rebellion) these two are mentioned.

1. That by several Acts of Parliament to be respectively passed in England and
Ireland, it should be declared, that the Parliament of Ireland had no
subordination to the Parliament of England, but should have supreme
Jurisdiction in that Kingdom, as Absolute as the Parliament of England here
has.

2. That the Act of 10 Hen. 7. called Poyning's Act, and all other Acts
expounding or explaining that Law, should be Repealed; both which with their
other dangerous propositions were justly rejected: however, it shows their
Opinion, that at that time the Law was, or was taken and deemed to be against
them in this point: and there is as much reason for keeping the final
Judicature here, as there is for maintaining the Superiority and Obligatory
Power over them in the legislature.

'Twas farther urged, That the with holding the Irish Lords from having the
like Jurisdiction in their Parliament as the Lords in England have, in Judging
upon Appeals and Writs of Error, was absolutely necessary for the preserving of
the Possessions of the English in Ireland; for those of that Country must be
supposed to incline to their own interest, and cannot be supposed so much
inclined to love and affect the English amongst them: And that this Power of
Judging here is Co-eval with the very Constitution of the Government.

'Twas further urged, That their Precedents returned, did or concern the point
in Question, except the two or three Cases in 1661, and 1662. and two Appeals
lately in 1695. that their Case of the Prior of Lauthony in 8 Hen. 6. Prynnes
Animadversions, 313, 314 was against them; the Prior having removed a Judgment
in the King's- Bench in Ireland, into the Parliament there, which affirmed it,
did bring a Writ of Error in the King's- Bench in England, and they refused to
meddle with it; the reason was, because the Writ of Error before the Lords
there did not lie, and that it ought to have come hither immediately; and all
the rest of their Quotations in their Printed Case either prove nothing at all,
or too much; for they are against the allowance of Writs of Error in the
King's- Bench in England, and against the Legislature of England's being able
to oblige the people of Ireland, both which have been approved by constant
practice, and therefore it was prayed, that the Appeal here might be allowed,
and the Order of the Irish Lords might be vacated.

On the other side, it was argued, from 1 Inst. 141. Prynne's Animadversions,
286. and 4 Inst. 12. that their Parliaments had the same Authority there in
respect of making Laws for that Country as the Parliaments have for England;
that they have ever since, 10 Hen. 7. Re-enacted there such subsequent Acts of
England, as they thought good for them; and that they had the like Power of
Appeals, Writs of Error and Impeachments, etc. and, that the Cognizance of such
Appeals in England would produce great inconveniences, by making poor people
to attend here; whereas, they might with less trouble and expense have Justice
at home; that this did agree with the reasons of that Ancient Statute, 4 Inst.
356. that persons having Estates in Ireland, should Reside in that Kingdom,
else half of their Estates should go to maintain the Forts there: That this
practice of receiving Appeals here would be vexatious to the people of that
place; and that no Court could have Jurisdiction but by grant or prescription,
and that there could be no pretense for either in this place.

Then was it ordered in these or the like Words;
Whereas, a Petition and Appeal was offered to the House the -- Day of -- last,
from the Society of the Governor and Assistants London of the New Plantation
in Ulster, in the Kingdom of Ireland, against a Judgment given by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal of Ireland, in Parliament there Assembled, on the -- day
of -- last upon the Petition and Appeal of William Lord Bishop of Derry against
the Decree or Orders made in the said Cause in the Court of Chancery there:
Whereupon a Committee was appointed to consider of the proper method of
Appealing from Decrees made in the Court of Chancery in Ireland; and that
pursuant to the Orders of the said Committee, and a Letter sent to the Lords
Justices of Ireland, by Order of this House, several precedents have been
transmitted to this House, by the said Lord Justices, Copies whereof were
ordered to be delivered to either side: After hearing Counsel upon the Petition
of the said Society of London, presented to this House, praying that they might
be heard as to the Jurisdiction of the House of Lords in Ireland, in receiving
and judging Appeals from the Chancery there, as also Counsel for the Bishop of
Derry; after due Consideration of the Precedents, and of what was offered by
Counsel thereupon; It is ordered and adjudged by the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the said Appeal of the Bishop of Derry,
to the House of Lords, in Ireland, from the Decree or Orders of the Court of
Chancery there, made in the Cause, wherein the said Bishop of Derry was
Plaintiff, and the said Society of the Governor and Assistants London of the
New Plantation in Ulster in Ireland, were Defendants, was coram non judice, and
that all the proceedings thereupon, are null and void, and that the Court of
Chancery in Ireland, ought to proceed in the said Cause, as if no such Appeal
had been made to the House of Lords there; and if either of the said Parties do
find themselves Agrieved by the said Decree or Orders of the Chancery of
Ireland, they are at liberty to pursue their proper Remedy by way of Appeal to
this House.

Sir Caesar Wood alias Cranmer versus Duke of Southampton.
APpeal from a Decree in Chancery, the Case was thus; Sir Henry Wood, the
Appellant's Uncle, makes a Settlement, in Consideration of a Marriage to be had
between his Daughter Mary and the Duke, etc. to the uses following, i.e. in
Trust, to Receive and Pay out of the Profits 450 l. a Year, to the Lady
Chester, for the Education and Maintenance of his Daughter, till twelve years
of Age, then 550 l. a year till Marriage, or Seventeen years of Age, which
should first happen: and in Trust to pay the Residue of the Profits to the Duke
after Marriage, he first giving Security to the said Trustees to provide
Portions and Maintenance for the Daughters of the Marriage equal to the Sum he
should receive; and in case there should be none, then the same Money to remain
to the Respondent, and if the said Mary should die before Marriage, or Age of
Seventeen years, to such Uses as Sir H. W. should appoint. And if Mary, after
Sir Henry's death, die under Sixteen, the Respondent then unmarried to any
other Woman, or after and before Seventeen, the Respondent then living and
unmarried; or if before Seventeen she should marry any other, or if she should
refuse the Respondent, then 20000 l. out of the Profits to the Duke.

But if the said Marriage shall take effect after Mary's Age of Sixteen years,
and she shall have Issue Male by the Respondent, then for the better Settlement
of the Premises upon the Issue Male, and a more ample Provision and
Maintenance for the Respondent and his Wife, and the longest Liver of them, in
Trust for the said Duke and Mary, for and during their Lives, and the Life of
the longer liver of them; and after their Deaths, to the first Son, etc. in
Tail Male; and for default of Issue Male to the Daughters. And for default of
such Issue in Trust, for such Persons only as Sir Henry should appoint, and in
default thereof to the right Heirs of Sir Henry.

Sir Henry W. at the same time, makes his Will, though dated after the
Settlement, reciting that he had settled the Premises upon the Duke and Mary
for their Lives, and the Life of the Longer liver of them, etc. and confirms
it; and in Case the said Martiage should not take effect, according to the
Limitations of the Settlement; or if the said Respondent should die without
Issue by Mary; or if he have Issue by her, and that Issue die without Issue,
then the Remainder to Mary for Life, and afterward to her first Son; and after
several mediate Remainders, then to the Appellant for Life, etc. and after to
Thomas Webb, etc.

Sir Henry Wood dies, the Marriage between Mary and the Duke afterward takes
effect upon her arrival to years of Consent: and they lived in that state, till
she was near Seventeen years of Age, and then she dies without Issue.

The Court of Chancery decreed the Profits of the Estate to the Duke for Life.

It was argued for the Appellant, That here was a precedent Copulative
Condition; that if the Marriage take effect after Sixteen, and there be Issue,
then to the Duke; and neither of these being in the Case, the Decree is not
consistent with the positive words of the Settlement, for that the Duke was to
have it upon no other terms: That by this Settlement the Duke was thus provided
for:

1. If the Marriage did not take effect, by Mary's refusal or taking another
Husband, the Duke was to have 20000 l.

2. If the Marriage did take effect, and Issue was had, then the Duke was to
have an Estate for Life, but not otherwise; that the words are plain and
certain, that there must not only be a Marriage, but Issue Male between them;
that though it should be agreed to be a good Marriage within the intention of the
Settlement, she living till after Sixteen years of Age, yet when a Condition
Copulative, consisting of several Branches (as this does) is made precedent to
any Use or Trust, the entire Condition must be performed, or else the Use or
Trust can never rise or take place: And it is not enough that one part only be
performed.

As to the Objection from the intention of the Parties, 'twas Answered, That no
such Intention did appear, or reasonably could be collected from any thing in
this Deed or Will: and it would be too great a violence to the words, to break
that Condition into two, which is but one, according to the plain and natural
Contexture and Sense of it.

It has been said, That if the Duke cannot take an Estate for Life in the
Trust, unless he had Issue Male by the Duchess, then she her self could not
take for Life by that Trust, unless there were Issue Male, for that their
Estates are limited together; and then the Consequence would be, That if there
were Daughters and no Sons, the Daughters would have the Trust of the Estate in
their Mother's Life time, and their Mother nothing, which could not be the
intent of Sir Henry Wood.

To this it was answered, That the same arises from a plain Mistake, and a
Supposition that the Daughters (if any) should take, though there never were a
Son; whereas the Limitation to the Daughters is under the same precedent
Condition, as the Limitation to the Duke and Duchess is: For the precedent
Copulative Condition ushers in the whole Limitation of the Trust, so that the
Trust to the Daughters could no more arise, without Issue Male born, than the
Trust to the Duke and Duchess.

And whereas it is pretended, That at this rate the Duke and Duchess were to
have had no Subsistence, till the Birth of Issue Male, which might be many
years: it was answered, That this was a plain mistake of the Law; for this
Trust being by the Deed and Will thus limited upon this precedent Condition of
having Issue Male, they whose Estates in this Trust are thus limited upon this
Condition, can take nothing till the Condition be performed by Marriage and
Issue Male; and then by the Rules of Law, till some of those Persons to whom
the Trust was limited, could take, the Trust of the Estate descends to the Heir
at Law, and she was entitled to the Profits, till the precedent Condition
should be performed, or become impossible; and if the Condition had been
performed, the Trusts would have taken effect; and being not performed, but
becoming impossible by the Dutchesses death before she had Issue, the
subsequent Trusts take effect upon her death. Besides that, it is pursuant to
the Rules of the Common Law, which gives to the Husband no Estate for Life in
the Wives Inheritance, unless he have Issue by her born alive; wherefore it was
prayed that the Decree might be reversed.

Then it was argued on the behalf of the Respondent, That Sir Henry Wood by the
same Settlement directs, that if the Duke died before his Marriage with her,
then the Trustees should dispose of the Profits of the Premises to the Lord
George Palmer, the Duke's Brother (in case the Brother married her) and to the
said Mary for their Lives, and the Life of the longer Liver of them: And from
and after the decease of the Survivor of them, then to their Issue in Tail
Male, etc. without adding any words of a preceding Condition; and yet says, In
like manner, and for the like Estates, as he had appointed for his said
Daughter and the Duke, in case of their Marriage; which plainly evidences his
intention to be, That the said Duke and the Lady Mary should have the Profits
during their Lives, although they should never have Issue Male, as the Brother
would have had in case he had married her.

Then 'twas urged, That Sir Henry Wood's appointing the Surplus of the Profits,
over and above her said Maintenance, for the benefit of the Duke, until his
marriage, shows the intent, for that it cannot be imag ined that he should be
provided for before his Marriage, and left destitute of all Support after it,
unless he had Issue Male by her. Nay, his intention of Kindness to the Duke was
proved further, by giving him 20000 l. in case she refused to marry him, or
died before her Marriage.

And as to the Pretense of its being a Condition precedent; it was answered,
That unless that Paragraph be made to interfere with it self, the Duke will be
entitled to an Estate for Life, if there were no other Clause in the Deed.

For first, It Is said, That for a more full and ample provision for the said
Duke and his Wife, the Trustees, etc. Which words (according to the
Construction of the Appellant's Counsel) must be useless and void, unless the
Duke were not after Marriage to have as great, if not greater Supply, then he
had before the Marriage.

Then it is said, That they should be seized in Trust for the Duke and his Wife,
and the Survivor of them, for and during their natural Lives, and the Life of
the longer Liver of them. And from thence 'twas argued, That the meaning and
import of the words (far and during) can be nothing less than the whole
Duration and Continuance of their Lives, from and after Sir Henry's Death and
their Marriage.

Then the Will of Sir Henry proves the Intention, for that it recites, That he
had settled from and after his Decease, the Premises in Trust for the Duke and
the said Mary during their Lives, and the Life of the longer Liver of them, and
takes no notice of the pretended precedent Condition; which shows that he
designed them the Profits immediately after his Decease and the Marriage.

Then in the Limitations over, they are not to take any benefit of or by the
Premises, until the death of the Duke and his Wife without Issue; therefore it
must be understood, that the Profits in the mean time should remain to the Duke
and his Wife, or the Survivor of them. And then it was further observed, That
the Duke comes in as a Purchaser upon as valuable a Consideration as any in the
Law, viz. Marriage; and the Limitation over to the Respondent is avoluntary
Settlement.

And as to the Objection of the Marriage being before Sixteen, it was not much
insisted on the other side, and in reason cannot be; because her continuing
married till after Sixteen, does fully satisfy the intent of the Deed, in
reference to this Matter. And many other Reasons were urged from the Intent of
the Parties, and the Nature of the Interest, the same being a Trust Estate, and
proper for Equity to construe. And upon the whole it was prayed that the Decree
might be affirmed, but the same was reversed.

Sir Caesar Wood alias Cranmer, Versus Thomas Webb.
APpeal from a Decree in Chancery: The Case was founded upon the next
preceding; The Respondent was one of the Coheirs of Sir Henry Wood, and claimed
a Moiety of the Profits of the Premises during the Duke's Life, and the same
was decreed accordingly: And now it was argued on the behalf of the Appellant,
That in this Deed there was no Appointment to the Respondent, till after the
death of the Appellant and his Issue; that all the pretense for Webb's Claim
was, That the Trust to the Appellant, was not to take effect till the Duke's
death, although the said Duke had no Interest in the Estate, as has been
adjudged by the Supreme Judicature of the Realm, that by the whole purport and
design of the Settlement and Will, and the positive words of it, Sir Henry Wood
intended the said Trusts in Succession and Order, as they are mentioned; that
the Design of the whole, was not to give any thing to the Respondent, till
after all the mediate Limitations were spent.

It was argued on the other side with the Decree, That this Right of the
Respondent to a Moiety as long as the Duke lives, is a necessary Consequence of
the Lord's Judgment in the other Case; that the same is founded upon fixed and
established Rules of Law; as that an Heir is not to be disinherited by
Construction or Implication, but by plain and express words; nor will the Law
give away an Estate, or make it to Commence sooner than the plain and express
words will warrant; that wherever an Estate is limited in Remainder, that
depends upon a Contingency or a Condition precedent, there, till the Condition
be performed or Contingency happens, that Estate cannot Commence; that this was
the foundation of the Argument for the Appeliant, in the other Case: And the
same Rules hold here, for here is a precedent Condition; for after the Marriage
once had, the Duke must die, and die without Issue, or that Issue die without
Issue, before the Appellant can take.

The Owner says that the Appellant is not to have it till then; that there is
not one Reason which can be urged against the Duke, but may with equal force be
urged against the Appellant in this Case; that the Respondent claims not by the
Settlement, but as a Coheir, to have that which is not disposed of; and what is
not so disposed, must descend or result for the benefit of the Heirs. Wherefore
it was prayed that the Decree should be affirmed; and it was affirmed.

The Bishop of Exeter and al', versus Sampson Hele. Writ of Error upon a
Judgment in a Quare Impedit in C. B. affirmed in B. R.
The Case upon the Record was thus:
HEle brings his Quare Impedit, as seized of the Manor of Southpole in Com'
Devon', to which the Advowson of the Church of Southpole belongs in his
Demesne, as of Fee, and so being seized, he presented thereunto, when vacant,
John Vlt. his Clerk, who at his Presentation was admitted and instituted; that
it became void by his death, and belonged to him to present; and that the said
Bishop and Gau^yn Hayman hinder him ad dampn' etc.

The Defendants came and defend vim and injur' quando, etc. and the Bishop
says, Actio' non, quia dieit, that the Church is within his Diocese, and that
he claims nothing in it but as Ordinary; that it is a Benefice with Cure of
Souls; that 15 Aprilis, Anno Willielmi and Mariae secundo, it became void by
the said Incumbent's death, he being Ordinary, after which Vacancy, and within
Six Months prox' post mortem praed' J. V. viz. 19 May, eodem Anno, the
Plaintiff presented to him one Francis Hodder as his Clerk, which said Francis
was a Person in Literatura minus sufficiens sen capax ad habend' dictam
Ecclesiam. Super quo praed' Episc' as Ordinary of the Church aforesaid, did
according to the Ecclesiastical Laws Examine him of his Ability and Fitness in
that behalf, ut de jure debuit, and upon such Examination, he found him to be a
Person, in Literatura insufficient' ac ea ratione fore personam inhabil' and
minime idoneam ad habend' the said Benefice with Cure of Souls, per quod, the
said Bishop as Ordinary did refuse him; of which, after the said Refusal, the
Bishop within the six Months, did give the Plaintiff notice, viz. 20th June,
Anno supradict' and that he might present another Person to the said Church,
that the Plaintiff did not present any other within the six Months, per quod,
it belonged to the Bishop as Ordinary of the place, to Collate a fit and proper
Person; and thereupon, he did Collate Gauwin Hayman, who was instituted and
inducted, and hoc parat' est verificare unde pet' Jud' etc.

The Incumbent pleads the same Plea, Mutatis mutandis.
The Plaintiff replies, That Hodder at the time of the Presentation, and long
before, was, Vicar of the Parochial Church of Vxborough, in Com' praed'; and to
that Vicaridge, lawfully admitted, instituted, and inducted, and homo Literatus
infra Sacros ordines constitut' and in verbo Dom' Doct' and instruct' and post
Doctrine and Literat' examen ordines Sacerdotales per ordination' Episcopalem
adeptus fuit and intuitu Spiritualis Doni and favente Deo in ea part
contingent' ad predicand' verbum Dei in and per Diocesim Exon, by Anthony late
Lord Bishop of Exon, Licentiat' curam; habens and exercens Animar' and Divino
Servitio per multos Annos assidue incumbent and Divinum Servitium Celebravit
and adhuc Celebrat, and ad Divina Servitia Celebrand' Scil' in legendo Orando,
Praedicando and Sacra Ministeria ministrand' Satis and Sufficienter Literatus
vixit apud Southpole praed' and hor' par' est ver' unde petit Jud' etc.

The Defendants rejoyn, That protestando, that Hodder was never Vicar of
Vxborough, nor in Orders, nor Licensed to Preach, pro placito; they say, that
Hodder when Presented, was a Man illiterate, and that they are ready to aver,
ubi and quando prout curia, etc.

The Plaintiff surjoyns, That Hodder was Vicar, in Orders, and Licensed, prout,
and hoe petit quod inquiratur per patriam, and the Defendant's Demur, and Jud'
pro quer' and affirm en B. R.

It was argued on behalf of the Plaintiffs, in the Writ of Error, that this
Judgment and the affirmance of it were Erroneous.

For, That the Ordinary had in this Case, a Power of examining this Presentee,
notwithstanding their pretense of Orders and License, and the former
Examination by Dr. Sparrow, late Bishop, and consequently their Replication and
Surrejoynder are naught, for they rely upon that and nothing else.

'Twas insisted on below, That a Parson once Ordained, is certainly presumed to
have sufficient Learning for any Cure of Souls; nay, that such Examination upon
his Ordination, shall conclude any succeeding or other Ordinary from Examining
such a Person when Presented to a Benefice, but this is contrary both to Reason
and Law, and so agreed by most of the Judges, who delivered their Opinions for
the Plaintiff in the Action below.

It Is against all Reason and Sense, That because one Ordinary thought him able
to take Orders and Preach in his Diocese, therefore, another must deem him able
and sufficiently Learned (though he knows the contrary) to accept a Benefice in
his Diocese; it is Absurd, that upon a Presentation, he is to be Examined, but
not refused, though found inhabilis, and this because he was in Orders, and he
could not be Presented unless in Orders, and yet though in Orders, if he be
Presented, he must be Examined, but to what purpose, passes all understanding,
if his Priesthood or Orders presumes him to be qualified! It Is likewise to
suppose Learning and Ability to be an inseparable quality; That an ordinary
Scholar can never become less so. By the Old Law, the Bishop had two Months
time to Examine, 2 Roll's Abr. 354. by Hob. 317. He has a convenient time, and
by Can. 1 Jac. 1 cap. 95. the two Months is reduced to 28 Days: And the
Ordinary both in Conscience and by the Obligations which his very Order does
import, is obliged to Judge for himself as well as to Examine; the contrary is
repugnant to his Office of a Judge, to be forced or compelled to institute
every Presentee, fit or unfit: Besides the Ordinary pro Tempore has the
particular care of all the Diocese, and during a vacancy, is to take care of
supplying every particular Cure within his District; then when he admits and
institutes, the very form of Words, is, Accipe curam meam and tuam, which
renders it more Absurd, that nolens volens, he must transfer his Cure to a Man
not able in his Judgment to execute it.

It Is against the Rule of Law, for that the Words of it are express, articuli
Cleri, cap. 13. and this Cook declares to be Affirmative of the Common Law;
Item petitur quod personae Ecclesiast' quas Dominus Rex ad beneficia presentet
Ecclesiastica si Episcopus eas non Admittat ut puta propter defectum Scientiae,
vel aliam causam rationabilem, non Subeant examinationem Laicar' personar' in
casibus antedictis prout his temporibus attentetur de facto, contra Canonitas
sanctiones, sed adeant Judicem Ecclesiasticum ad quem de jure pertinet pro
Remedio prout justum fuerit consequendo respons' de Idonietate person
presentate ad beneficium Ecclesiasticum pertinet Examinatio ad Judicem
Ecclesiasticum and ita est hactenus usitatum and fiat in futurum.

Here is Idoneitas person praesentate; and the words of the Writ, are quod
permittat praesentare Idoneam personam. And if the Presentee were not a fit
person, no such Writ can be maintained.

Then my Lord Coke in his Comment upon that Statute in 2 Inst. 631, 632. says,
that there may be diverse Exceptions to Persons presented as Bastardy,
Villenage, Outlawry, Excommunication, Laity, Under age, or Criminal and Lewd in
his Conversation, or inability to discharge his Pastoral duty, as if he be
Unlearned; and the Examination of the Ability and Sufficiency of the Person
presented, belongs to the Bishop, who is the Ecclesiastical Judge, and not a
Minister, and may and ought to refuse the Person presented; if he be not Idonea
persona: And if the cause of refusal, be default of Learning, Heresy or the
like, belonging to the knowledge of the Ecclesiastical Law; then he must give
notice to the Patron, so that default of Learning, is by him (who was no great
friend to the Jurisdiction of Court Christian) agreed to be Subject to the
Ecclesiastical inquiry, and then in Pleading, he must show the cause of
refusal, and the Party may deny the same, and then the Court shall write to the
Metropolitan, or to the Guardian of the Spiritualities, sede vacant, to
certify if the cause be thus, and his Certificate is conclusive; if the
Presentee be Dead, it shall be tried by a Jury, 15 Hen. 7.7. the Bishop is
declared to be a Judge, and not a Minister in this case of Examining a Man's
Ability; he is a Judge in this case as he is in case of a Resignation; for an
Ordinary may refuse it, and without his acceptance, it is no Resignation, and
must be so Pleaded, Noy. 147. Bro. tit Bar. 81. and 2. Cro. 197. and so agreed,
even in the Case of Leach and Thompson, in Reg. 53. is a Consultation upon this
very surmise that inability, ad Retinend' beneficium propter Crimina, belongs
to Court Christian, and that the Ordinary is Judge thereof, which is much
stronger than our case, because there was a Freehold vested by induction. But
this has been agreed by that Court from whose Judgment the present Appeal is,
that a refusal may be upon insufficiency, appearing upon an Examination, upon a
new Presentation; and constant practice proves it.

The greater if any doubt is upon the Plea, if good, it says, that he was
Examined, and upon Examination, was found incapable.

The Exception taken to it, is, that it does not set forth the particular parts
of Learning, in which he is deficient, that the Temporal Court may Judge, if it
were a sufficient cause of refusal, which is to change and turn it, ad aliud
examen, that Learning is requisite for a Presentee to be Beneficed; they would
not have the Ordinary to determine what Qualifications a person ought to have
in order to take a Benefice, but the Judges in Westminster Hall: They can have
no color for this pretense, but that the Ordinary may have refused, when
competently Learned in their Opinions, and they cannot say that the Law has
settled any Rules or measures of Learning requisite. Some say, Latin is not
requisite since the Liturgy is now in English, and therefore they would Judge
of it; others say, the less Learning the better Preacher, if can Read, and
Pray, and Preach, and be endued with Spiritual Gifts, and so is their
Replication; others say, that the Ordinary's Judgment must be submitted to the
Judge's Opinion of the proportion of Knowledge necessary; then they have a
Popular pretense, that this will give the Bishops too great a Power of refusal,
and so restrain Patrons from their privilege of Presenting, and thereby make
themselves Collators: But, there is no danger of that, because there must be
notice and a convenient time for another Presentation, and the danger of this
restraint, is as much the other way, for then the Temporal Courts are to do it,
and its much at one to the Patron, which is to declare the inability, the
Ordinary or the Temporal Courts: On both sides, it must be agreed, that default
of Literature, is a good and just cause of refusal, the Question is, who shall
judge of it; it is said, minus Sufficiens in Literatura and ca ratione
inhabilis, i.e. (it being indefinite) in omni Literatura necessaria.

But, they Cavil at the Word minus sufficiens, as if that agreed him somewhat
Learned, and forget that it is said, ac perinde incapax: And, minus sufficiens
is in Lawyer's Latin, totally insufficient, and so it is used in all Demurrers
to Declarations, Pleas, Replications, quod Narr' vel placit' pred' and Materia
in eodem content' minus sufficient' in Lege existunt ad quam vel quod, the
party, necesse non habet nec per Legem terrae Tenetur aliquo modo respondere;
i. e. it is good for nothing, it is insufficient; the Court in their Judgments
upon the insufficiency of the Plea, do always say, quia minus sufficien'
existit.

Then it was argued, That it is a good Plea to all intents and purposes, from
the nature of the thing, and the impossibility of making it more particular and
certain. 2. From the sufficiency of it to all intents and purposes of Trial. 3.
From the Precedents and those of Antiquity which warrant this form of pleading.
4. From the mischiefs and inconveniences which must follow and ensue, if a
greater particularity were required.

1. From the nature of the thing, and the impossibility of making it more
particular and certain; if the Bishop were bound to set down in particular, and
at large, every point of Learning wherein this poor wretch was and is
deficient, 'twould be a Pleading like to a justification of an Action done by a
private Person, and not like to the Pleading of the Act of a Judge, which this
is; 'twould be so large as to render it impossible for to join an Issue
thereupon; and then they would have demurred with a Cause, because multiplex
duplex incertum and perplex', and the rest of our usual Adjectives upon those
occasions; the Assignment of several and many particulars would have been
double, and good cause of Exception, because one particular might be found true
and another not, and the Assignment of one particular would have been adjudged
insufficient, for then they would have said that Learning is of a Complex
nature, and if a Man should fail in answering any one particular, though common
Question, yet he might be qualified in general: And therefore the Assignment of
one defect, though never so gross, shall not make a Clerk, minime capax, and
therefore no good Plea: For, if a particular be Assigned, that would not prove
a general Defect of knowledge, according to the words of the Law; which is the
only thing that could make him incapable, ad habend' beneficium cum Curia
Animar' and therefore the Bishop as a Judge, returns him in literatura
insufficiens and ea de causa minime capax, and the special instances would have
been Evidences upon a new Trial, or Examination before the Archbishop.

Now this cause of refusal, distinguishes the case from all others, that they
can insist upon; all other inabilities of a Clerk depend upon one single point,
as Bastardy, Villenage, Outlawry, Excommunication, Layman, Under-age, or
Ecclesiastical Infancy: So all Crimes must have their foundation from a
particular Act, as Adultery, Perjury, Simony, etc. In these it shall not be
enough to Plead that he was inhabilis generally, or criminosus, generally and
ideo inhabilis, because no body can be criminosus, but he that has done some
particular Crime, and that is to have a several Trial according to its
respective nature; if it be an Ecclesiastical Offense, then there is a
particular method of Trial; if a Temporal, then another, and so says Coke, 2
Inst. 632. and therefore a particularity is required there, but here it is all
tryable by the same way, viz. a new Examination before the Archbishop: Here
the matter it self admits of no greater certainty; for that it is a general
deficiency of Learning only, which can make an incapacity of discharging the
Pastoral Office; it is a matter that must appear by a variety of Questions, and
cannot be proved by any one single instance whatsoever.

This is the true reason and difference why in several Cases general Pleading
has been denied, and why in this Case it has been always used, and never
excepted against.

Then it was argued, That this Plea was sufficient to all the intents and
purposes of Trial and Determination.

By our Law that Plea is sufficiently certain, which may be Tried without
inveigling either Court or Jury, that is, it must be intelligible and plain;
and this surely is plain enough, the Ordinary had a Power to refuse him, for
want of Learning, sufficient to enable him to discharge his Pastoral Office; he
Pleads that he was Minus sufficien' in Literatura; this is to be tried by the
Certificate of the Archbishop, or the Guardian of the Spiritualities, during a
vacancy and that is evident, by 39 Edw. 3.1, 2. 40 Edw. 3.25. and from
Speccot's Case, 5 Rep. 7.

There never was an Objection made to the uncertainty of any Plea, if the
Matter could be fairly reduced to an Issue for a Trial; now here the Court
might certainly have written to the Archbishop to have known utrum this
Creature, were minus sufficiens in Literatura and ea Ratione inhabilis, and the
actus Curiae of the Bishop would have been Evidence before his Grace, and he
might have certified that he was, or that he was not sufficiently Learned: No,
say they, the Court must not write to the Archbishop to know that, till it be
said in what Points of Learning he was defective; and if these shall be thought
material Parts of Learning for a Rector, then they must write to know if Hodder
had them or not; but if they think them not material for the Qualifications of
a Pastor, they must not write at all: This is the true English of the Argument.
But it was argued, That the Temporal Court is only to judge, that the Cause of
Refusal, if true, was a sufficient Cause; and the Books are, that a general
default of Learning is a good Cause; and this the Archbishop is to try: And
this is certain enough for to make an Issue or Question proper for that Trial.

Besides, A greater Latitude and Generality has of late been allowed in
pleading of Proceedings in Courts, and before Judges, then formerly. In ancient
days, if a Man pleaded a Judgment in a Court in Westminster Hall, they set
forth the whole; then they came to allow of a taliter fuit processum, and an
Abridgment of the Proceedings; then came a Recuperavit only: And this was
because that all Proceedings in the Superior Courts were to be presumed
regular, till the contrary were shown: But this was denied a long while to
Inferior Courts, because these were tied to stricter forms, and therefore were
still forced to set forth the whole; then they allowed a taliter fuit processum
for them, provided still they were Courts of Record: But now they allow it in
pleading of a Justification upon a Recovery in an Hundred Court, because the
whole must be given in Evidence; so that such a formal Nicety in Pleading is
not generally required now as was formerly. Besides, In Matters triable by the
Spiritual Law, there is always less particularity required in Pleading, then in
others triable in Courts Temporal, as in Bastardy, Divorce, Deposition,
Literature, Profession, and the like: It Is enough if so much be alleged, that
they may write to know whether the Fact be so or no; and upon a Return thereof
that it is so, they can give Judgment. Now if his Grace my Lord Archbishop, in
this Case, upon Examination had returned that this Presentee was in Literatura
minus sufficiens, as undoubtedly he would, (and so the Plaintiff thought,
otherwise he would have joined Issue) and so ea occasion inhabilis, then
unquestionably Judgment must have been for the Plaintiff in Error; for default
of Learning is a good cause of Refusal, and must be agreed to be so. The Rule
laid down by my Lord Anderson, 3 Leon. 200. is, That in Matters triable by our
Law, all things issuable ought to be specially alleged, in order to have a
convenient Trial; but in Matters Spiritual the Law is otherwise, because
there is no peril in the Trial; and therefore if certain enough to ground a
Certificate it is sufficient.

My Lord Hob. 296. in Slade and Drake's Case, says, That in pleading a
Divorce, you must show before whom it was, 11 Hen. 7.27. but you need not show
all the Proceedings as you should of a Recovery at Common Law; and the Reason
why you must show before whom, is only that it may be known, who is to try and
certify it. In Burdell's Case 18 Edw. 4.29, 30. it is clear that in all
Spiritual Acts triable by the Spiritual Law, it is necessary to plead no more
than what may give the Court ground to write to the proper Ecclesiastical
Officer, and to judge by his Certificate. Now here is ground enough in this
Case for the Archbishop to examine this ignorant Person, for so he must be
taken to be; for so he is found by one Ordinary, and he refuses to be examined
by the Archbishop: he is pleaded not to have Learning enough to capacitate him
for a Cure of Souls, and that by one whom the Law has constituted his Judge:
It Is true, this is traversable and triable by the Archbishop, but all those
Instances of his Insufficiency that were taken in the Bishops Court, would be
Evidences of the same before the Archbishop, proceeding in an Ecclesiastical
manner, though not so proper, though not possible to be set forth in the Temporal
Court; this is not a General Return of a Person inhabilis, which might occasion
an Enquiry into all sort of Disabilities; but a Special Plea of inhabilis, quia
insufficienter Literatus; and therefore no further Enquiry is necessary, then
into the Learning of the Party, as Capacitates him for a Rector.

It was in the third place argued from the Presidents of Pleading in this Case,
and other Cases of Pleading upon like Occasions, and those both Ancient and
Modern.

40 Edw. 3.25. In a Quare Impedit (as this is) the Bishop pleads as here, That
he Examined the Clerk presented, and found upon Examination que il ne fuit
sufficiens Lettered, and thereupon alleges Notice to the Patron, and per
lapsum temporis, he justifies his own Presentation: Upon this, there is no
dispute but that thus far it was well pleaded; but the only doubt was, whether
the words, and so disabled, should be added to the Issue? and they were ordered
to be part of the Issue in that Case, and so they ought to be in this Case, and
so they are and ea ratione inhabilis; this Case is exactly parallel to that in
question; and upon this Plea there was Issue joined, and the Trial was directed
to be by the Guardian of the Spiritualities, vacant Sede Cantuariensi, nothing
can be offered against this, only that it is Ancient, and the Law is changed,
but by what Authority is hard to know; there is no Act of the Legislature to
alter it: much has been done to help against Niceties in Pleading; nothing to
require more. And Bro. Quare Impedit 168. they were compelled to join Issue,
able or not able, in that respect.

39 Edw. 3.1 and 2. The Earl of Arundel versus the Bishop of Chester, says the
Book, though it appears plainly to be a mis-print, from the name of the Church,
and the Trial per pais, and the Antiquity of the Bishopric it self, it must be
the same, that in the Abridgments is called the Earl of Arundel versus the
Bishop of Exeter, the Bishop pleads as here, That he examined the Clerk
presented, and found him persona inhabilis, to have a Benefice in the Church;
and Issue is joined upon that which is stronger then ours, and a Trial by Jury
is directed out of the County of Cornwall, because the Clerk was dead. Here are
two Cases in which all the different Trials are taken that can be had by the
Guardian where the Presentee was living, and by Jury when dead, because he
could not be examined: And in both these Cases Issue is taken upon this Plea,
and that in great Cases, and after long Debate. And, according to the Lord
Coke, in this Reign the Law was pure and incorrupt, and flourished.

Then were urged Modern Precedents, Mich. 15 and 16 Eliz. Rot. 1941. Molineux
versus Archiepiscopar' Ebor' in a Quare Impedit, in which the Plea of the
Archbishop is the same in totidem verbis, as here, Persona in Literatura minus
sufficiens, seu habilis ad habend' praed' Ecclesiam, and there is no Exception
taken to the Plea, but only Issue joined upon notice, or no notice, before the
Lord Chief Justice Dyer.

Another Precedent there is Hill. 6 Eliz. Rot. 646. Bodenham versus Episcopor'
Hereford', there is the same Plea in Bar as here, That the Person presented was
Persona in Literatura minus sufficiens seu habilis ad habend' aliquod
Beneficium Sanctae Ecclesiae, and then avers notice to the Patron: and no
Exception taken to the Plea, but Issue upon notice.

Pasch. 6 Eliz. Rot. 714. Paschall versus Episcop' Lond' Quare Impedit, the
Ordinary pleads an Examination de habilitate, honestate and doctrina ejus; and
pro eo quod idem Episcopus invenit praed' Christopherum fore criminosum, and de
non sana Doctrina ideo recusavit and notice; and even to that general Plea
there is no Demurrer, but Issue upon notice. It Is no Answer, that here was no
Solemn Judgment upon this very Point, for it does rather enforce the Authority
of the Precedents; it argues that the Law was taken to be so clear for the
validity of this Plea, that no Lawyer would venture upon a Demurrer, but rather
would trust to a Jury upon the Evidence of notice, it argues it so constant a
Course and Method of Pleading in these Cases, that none was so hardy as to
dispute it.

38 Edw. 3.2. Perjurius was alleged by the Bishop in the Presentee, and held
to be well enough, but nothing of manner, time and place, nor any Conviction of
it mentioned, and yet this was admitted a good Plea, 2 Rolls Abridg.
Presentment 356. and so says Rolls, it shall be, though in a Suit between the
Ordinary himself and another, Dyer 293. it is cited Bro. Quare Impedit 170.
Justice Rhodes 3 Leon. 100. vouched a Case in 30 Edw. 1. out of a Manuscript of
the Lord Catlins, wherein upon a Quare non Admisit, the Defendant pleaded that
the Presentee was Schismaticus and Adulter, and the Court commanded that he
should hold to one or other of them, for which he said Adulter; from hence it is
manifest, that the Court did not dislike the Plea for the generality, but the
doubleness.

And then it was said, That after all these Presidents on this side, and many
others which might be Cited of the like generality in other cases, 'twill be
difficult to show one single Instance or Case in which this matter of general
defect of Learning was ever pleaded otherwise, or any one Judgment against any
Bishop whatever, upon such a Plea; for though in some Cases, which they say are
parallel and similar, though in truth they are not, as Criminosus and
Schismaticus has been adjudged too general, yet this Plea of Minima in
Literatura sufficiens ac ea ratione incapax, as it has always been used,
without alteration of words, so has it never yet been excepted against, and in
these Presidents of Edw. 3. before cited, has been thought good, and Issue
joined thereupon.

This was the ancient form of Pleading, and (as all those ancient Pleas were)
founded upon Reason, being such as the Subject Matter is capable of.

In the Case of a Coroner it is a good Cause to remove him, quia fuit minime
idoneus ad exequendum officium istud, and no charge of any particular
insufficiency assigned, Fitzh. Not. Brev. 163. and there is no question but
that 'twould be a good Cause, and sufficiently certain, in a Scire Facias to
repeal, vacate, or cancel Letters Patents for an Office in the Law, to say in
Legibus hujus Regnt Angliae minus sufficient' instructus, without assigning any
particular Case or Statute that a Man blundered at, or was ignorant in. Suppose
an Office in the Law, to which the King or a private Person has the
Nomination, and the Court refuses to admit a Man so named, and an Action
brought for that Refusal, etc. would it not be a good Plea to say the Party was
minus sufficiens in Scientia Legum and ea Ratione inhabilis; and particular
Instances are Evidences.

This is in the Negative, like a non fuit dampnificatus, and there you never
need to show how; unless 'twere a particular Encumbrance at the time of the
Contract; otherwise it is always a good Plea.

In Non Compos it is never shown in particular wherein, or what Feats of Frenzy;
Non compos implies that he had a general Defect, disabling him at that time to
do an Act obligatory and valid; and that resembles this, for you need not show
wherein; but the Particulars are Evidence.

The Reason of the thing proves the Convenience and Solidity of the distinction
between Pleading a Negative and Affirmative: For instance in this Case, the
Negative pleaded implies an entire denial of sufficient Learning to qualify
him for a Cure of Souls, and that justifies the Ordinary; and our Law Books are
full of this Distinction; Mode and other Circumstances of Quality, Time, and
Place, are requisite in Affirmative Pleas, none of which are necessary in
Negatives. There might be cited infinite numbers of Cases to that purpose, as
Mauser's Case 2 Rep. 4. Broughton's Case 5 Rep. 24. Aston and Hill 3 Cro. 253.
Hutchinson versus Lowson, 3 Cro. 393. Wild and Dowse, Latch. 159. And as the
Foundation of all those, is the 40 Edw. 3.30. which is the ground of all these,
and many more subsequent Authorities to the like effect: But besides, there is
one modern Case, it is Church versus Brunswick, Sid. 334. Bond to pay from time
to time a Moiety of all such Moneys as from time to time he should receive; and
payment of a Moiety generally, without showing the particulars in certain, was
held a good Plea; and the reason of that Judgment maintains the Rule now
contended for, which was, because it is of what he should receive from time to
time; otherwise if those words had been omitted; because in that Case there
would be a stuffing of the Rolls with a multiplicity of Particulars; and the
same Reason holds in the Case at Bar.

Then it is considerable, and deserving of a Thought, That if Learning be
requisite to an Office Temporal, for a Slander in which an Action lies, there
these very words would bear an Action. As to say of a Judge, or the like, the
very words here mentioned, with reference to his Office, 'twould be deemed
Scandalous and Actionable: Now our Law will not allow uncertain, doubtful, and
ambiguous words to be so.

Even in Affirmatives our Law allows of general Pleading, where Particulars
would be many: As in Bond for performance of Covenants upon an Apprentices
Indenture for finding him Meat, Drink, Washing, Lodging, and other Necessaries,
held that invenit Meat, Drink, Washing, Lodging, and alias res nocessarias, is
a good Plea, though entirely uncertain what or how much; and the Reason is not
only, because it is in the words of the Covenant, for that Reason does not
always hold, for many times you must show how, and are forced to vary from the
words of the Covenant in the Breach; as in case of quiet Enjoyment, Breach must
allege how and by whom, and under what Title the Man was disturbed; but
there is another Reason, because the Particulars would be many.

Cryps versus Sir Henry Baynton, 3 Bulstrode 31. Case sur assumpsit, That J. S.
being a Friend of the Defendants, and coming to the Plaintiffs House, he fell
sick; the Defendant, in consideration that the Plaintiff would provide for him
such Necessaries as he should want, he would been and fideliter solvere
proinde: The Plaintiff shows that he lay there two Months; that the Plaintiff
provided him Necessaries amounting in value to, etc. and held good without
showing the Particulars to avoid a multiplicity of Reckonings; so it is for a
Surgeons or Apothecary's Cure.

Another Rule in Pleading there is, That a Certainty, or a Generality in
Pleading shall be required, according to the nature of the Subject Matter
pleaded. In pleading of Breach of a Statute Law, it is enough to use the
Negative of the words of such Statute, as it is in Case of a Covenant; and by
the same reason in this Case, where a Statute says the Bishop may refuse
propter defectum Scientiae, it is enough to say in Literatura minus sufficiens,
especially when it is added ac perinde inhabilis.

Then were urged the Mischiefs and Inconveniences which must ensue and follow
upon the Construction which they would make, that this Plea is uncertain; for
their Reason only can be, as was said before, that the Court may judge if it be
such a Deficiency of Learning as disables to hold a Curacy of Souls; and this
is the Reason all their Cases go upon, and the Reason insisted upon below; i.
e. in effect that they must try it, not the Archbishop. The same Pretense is
applicable to any other defect, and 'twill in Consequence confound
Jurisdictions; 'twill make an Enlargement of the Temporal, and Diminution of
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, though both are founded upon the same English
Laws, and of equal Age and Authority: Nor is it any Answer which they have
alleged against this, That the Judgment at Law is not that this Hodder shall
have Institution, but that a Writ shall go to the Metropolitan to require him
to admit a fit Person upon Mr. Hele's Presentation; and that if Mr. Hodder be
presented, the Archbishop may refuse him as insufficient; and so the Archbishop
is still Judge of the Sufficiency. This looks plausible: but they omit or
forget the Consequence, that if this Judgment stand, then if the Archbishop
refuse, the Temporal Courts must Judge upon another Writ, Whether the Cause of
Refusal were in a point of Learning, which they think requisite, for he must
not plead a general Defect of Learning, but mention Particulars, that they may
judge of them; this is to subject even his Grace the Metropolitan to their
Opinion, in an Affair within his own Jurisdiction and Conusance. It is at last
to enforce the Episcopal Judges to contradict their own Opinions, and to admit
Persons which they think not sufficiently Learned; though the first Judgment does
not directly place in Hodder, yet the next will, if the Archbishop prove of the
same mind: Now this is apparently the Consequence, from the pretended Reason of
the Judgment for them; and it is in effect to deny the old Law, that a defect
of Learning is a sufficient Cause of Refusal; and that the Ordinary is Judge of
that Defect, and not the Temporal Court.

And then as to the Cases objected Dyer 254. the Bishop of Norwich's Case in a
Quare Impedit, which is likewise in 2 Rolls Abridg. 355, where the Bishop
pleads that the Presentee was a common haunter of Taverns and other Places, and
Games unlawful, ob quod and diversa alia Crimina consimilia praed', the
Presentee fuit Criminosus and sic inhabilis and non idonea persona, and this
was held an ill Plea: But the Grounds and Reasons of that Judgment were not for
the generality of the Plea, but because the defects specially declared before
were not sufficient to make the Presentee and sic Criminosus, as being not Mala
in se, but prohibita by particular Laws under certain Penalties. Nay, the
Argument they would make from the general word Criminosus, will not hold in the
Case in question, but is clearly distinguishable from it; because one single
Act, one Crime specially set forth, would disable the Man; but in this case
Ignorance, that works a Disability, must not be of any one particular thing
whatsoever, but a general defect of Knowledge. And another Reason against their
Inference from these and the like Cases, is this, they belong to a different
Examen, and upon that they require (as was said before) a different pleading.

The great Case, and the only one that can be pretended to come near this, is
Speccot's Case, mentioned in every contemporary Report of that Age, as a new
Case; and a new one it is; and the Reasons of it are differently reported in
diverse Books; and in truth, the Reasons of the Judgment do not warrant it, nor
make it applicable to the Case at Bar.

The Authority of it is questionable, for they agree, Schism or Heresy, which
the Judges there take to be all one, a Cause of Refusal; and others said, they
did not know what was Schismaticus inveteratus; but they did not consider that
the Archbishop might, though they did not; but perhaps the Ordinary may judge
that to be Schism which is not: and therefore the Temporal Courts are to judge
what is Schism; and in the enforcing of this Case below, they said the Ordinary
is Judge only of Matters of Fact, not if the Fact be Schism; which is somewhat
strange.

The Reports of that Case are 5 Rep. 57. 1 Anderson 189, 190. Gold. 36, and 52.
and 3 Leon. 198, 199, and 300. in that Case the Bishop pleaded that the
Presentee was Schismaticus inveteratus and ideo non habilis: upon the validity
of this Plea there were diverse Arguments; Two of the Judges, says my Lord
Anderson, were for the Plaintiff, and two for the Defendant; and for the
Decision of the Matter, the Opinion of the other was asked, and by the greater
Opinion Judgment was given pro quer.

Then were repeated my Lord Anderson's words, fol. 189. the Instances that were
urged, were, says he, Criminosus and Perjurus, but they are Matters triable
both by Law, Spiritual and Temporal, and the Coment, or how is necessary to be
shown to determine the Trial; but Schismaticus in the principal Cause shall be
tried only by the Spiritual Court, and not by the Temporal, as that of an
Heretic may be generally pleaded: And diverse Cases were put to prove General
Pleas and Issues triable at Common Law, and yet says he Judged pro Quer'.

This is my Lord Anderson's Opinion of that Case, and whether the Ancient
Authorities vouched in that Case, do warrant that Judgment, must be submitted.

Besides, by our Law it is not any one Opinion, though judicially delivered, that
can make or alter the Law, nay, it does not oblige any further than the reason
of it is considerable, and agrees with the constitution and the Rules of Law;
my Lord Vaughan always declared in favor of Reason and Authority, and that in
Honor of our Law, for the contrary is to say, it is founded upon no Reason;
then 'twas urged, that this Judgment was when the Courts below were in struggle
with the Ecclesiastical, and the then High Commission Courts Erected by 1 Eliz.
had given some provocation; which, with frequent Prohibitions, gave occasions
to the Disputes between the Bishops and the Judges, in the beginning of the
Reign of K. Jac. 1. But admitting the Case to be Law, the same is easily
distinguishable from this, and founded upon different Reasons which cannot
govern or influence this.

'Twas urged first in that Case there was some possibility for the Bishop to
have set out the Heresy certainly and particularly, for all Heresy must be
founded upon some particular Tenet, that is Repugnant to the common received
and Orthodox Doctrine. Now in this Case, say they, the Heresy ought to be
Assigned, that the party may Traverse it, and purge himself, and the
Archbishop not to be inveighled and obliged to run over all the species of
Heresy, which, say they, may be almost impossible, but may have only one
particular Opinion to Examine, whether the Presentee did obstinately maintain
it, for if the Temporal Court had been of Opinion, that such Tenet in
particular was not Heresy, though the Ordinary thought it so, yet then they
would have overruled the Plea, and not have wrote to the Archbishop at all:
This is the sole cause of that Judgment, and then the consequence will be as
was observed before. But their own reason fails in this Case, for here the
sufficiency of Learning is Traversable; for as has been shown it has often
been Traversed, and as to the ea Ratione inhabilis, no Objection can be to
that, for the old Authorities Cited do warrant, nay, require it; and all Pleas
of Special non est fact' as by breaking of a Seal, and the like are in the same
manner.

Then besides the very words of the Law of Articuli Cleri, are very much worthy
of consideration; it impowers the Bishop to refuse a Clerk, propter defectum
scientiae and alias Causas rationabiles, now all these Causes of Refusal,
mentioned in their cases, comes under the causas Rationabiles, and causa vaga
and in certa estnon Rationabilis, now want of Learning is not included by
intendment, but by express words, and therefore need not otherwise be set
forth; take it for granted, that as they would have it, the Temporal Judges are
to Judge what is a reasonable cause of Refusal; yet they are not to Judge, if
defect of Learning be a cause or not, for in that the Statute is positive; then
if said to be deficient in Learning, and ea ratione inhabilis, they had nothing
to Judge upon, they were only to write to the Archbishop to know if the Fact
were true, if he were deficient, and therefore it need not be set forth any
otherwise, then as the Statute expresses it; though in that case, they say, there
are diverse sorts of Schisms and Heresies in Doctrines on which the Bishop might
warrant his Refusal, yet it is not so much as once pretended, there are any
Opinions delivered in those cases, that deficiency of Learning is subject to
the same Rules of Pleading.

Then the Plea is in the Negative, as was showed before, which is more than
enough to make a good difference; and Negatives in a Bar are always allowed to
be more general because most favored, and especially here, where the matter
and person to which the words are applied, do sufficiently restrain and
determine the seeming uncertainty of it.

Nothing can be pretended to reduce this to a greater certainty, but the Canons
or the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 12. or other Laws of the same nature, 1 Canons
of King Jac. 1. made in 1602. and they were made pursuant to Canons made, 1562.
by which, no Man was to be admitted, nisi rationem fidei juxta Articulos
Religionis in Synodo Episcoporum and Cleri Anno, 1562. approbatos Latin
reddere and eandem Scripturae testimonio Corroborare possit Can. 3, 4.
Conditiones in ordinandis requisit', this is merely a Negative injunction on
the Bishop never to confer Orders upon any Man that cannot do this, it is not
mandatory upon him to ordain every Man that can do this, nor does it any way
lessen or diminish the Authority or Judgment of the Ordinary in Examination of
the fitness and Learning requisite.

So is the Statute of 13 Eliz. the same induces an incapacity on those that
shall not subscribe the Articles, but it leaves all things else to the
Ecclesiastical Law; neither the Canon nor the Statute are Derogatory from the
Old Ecclesiastical Law, they both leave it in Statu quo to the Ecclesiastical
Judges; no Man will pretend that these are a Repeal of the Statute of Articuli
Cleri; so that the Law remained as it did with more Latitude indeed to the
Bishop, but not with more favor to the Clerk.

They objected, that here was not convenient notice to the Patron, and the
usual pleading of it is the same day.

But surely that is well enough, and so was it held by all the Judges that
favored their side in this case, and it is apparent, that he had above four
Months time to have presented another, besides, the Judges declared below, that
if not a convenient time, it ought to have come on their side, but they admit
notice by their Replication, and insist upon his Orders as an Estoppel to say
that he was Illiterate.

They pretend, That he is still under the Bishop's Jurisdiction, and that he
may deprive him for the same Cause, if sufficient, after Institution, but
that is a great mistake; for, there may be a cause of Refusal, which is not of
Deprivation, for, he may become Learned that was not so, and besides, the Rule
is false, after induction, they would then be discoursing about Freehold, etc.
a Man may be refused, because non compos, but he cannot be deprived for that
Cause, though the Bishop may provide a Curate, etc.

As to the pretense of six Months notice, from the time of the Refusal, 'twas
never insisted on at the Bar in C. B. or B. R. and the Judge who doubted, did
only say, he was not fully satisfied with the current Opinion of the Books; his
doubt arose upon this, That the cause of Refusal was not within the Partron's
knowledge. Suppose the Man had not Episcopal Orders, but pretended to them, and
the Patron knew nothing of the matter, should this Presentation prevent lapse,
and the rest were all of another Opinion and the Books are full to this effect,
for the Patron ought to present a Man qualified, otherwise it is as no
Presentation, and then lapse in course. Suppose he had presented a mere laicus,
it is as none; suppose he had presented a Woman, as idonea persona, it is as
none; and these instances may seem Trivial, but our Books do mention them.

2 Roll's Abridg. 364. Kelway 49.59. 34 Hen. 7.21. 14 Hen. 7.21. and Dyer 227.
and Sir Simon Degges Parson's Gounsellor.

Upon the whole, the Question is, whether a Court of Law shall Repeal the
Statute of Articuli Cleri, whether the Plea shall be adjudged ill, which is in
the very words of that Statute; when the same Fact was never pleaded otherwise,
nay, when it has been pleaded thus often times, and never excepted against
till now.

Wherefore it was prayed that the Judgment might be Reversed.

On the other side 'twas argued, That the Bishop's Plea below, was too general,
and the Plaintiffs Replication good; that his being Ordained a Priest, and a
Licensed Preacher is enough, that this is an Answer to the Allegation of the
Minus Literatus, his being a Priest is a kind of a supersedeas to his
Examination, that there was no Learning requisite to his having a Cure of
Souls, which was not Antecedently necessary to his receiving of Orders: That he
ought not to be admitted into Orders, unless he be assured of or named to some
Curacy, all which, supposes the Qualifications Requisite for a Benefice with
Cure of Souls; then 'twas urged, that here was not notice sufficient, for it is
not till many days after the Refusal, for this might have put Hele the Patron
beyond the possibility of making a new Presentation: And in all pleadings of
this sort, the notice is generally alleged to be the same day, or within a day
or two at the most; That certainly it ought to be with convenient notice. But
then it was urged, That the six Months ought not to be from the Death of the
last Incumbent; if there be a person Criminal presented, which the Patron does
or may know, as well as the Bishop, there the six Months must be from the
Death; but if it be upon a refusal for a Cause which lies only in the Bishop's
knowledge, then it must be only from the notice, and that notice ought to be
personal; but if the Months incur from the Death, the notice should be in
conveient time, and what that is, the Court must Judge.

Then it was urged from Speccot's Case, That this Plea is too general and
uncertain, that a Temporal right being concerned, the Bishop ought to have set
forth more particularly and distinctly the cause of his Refusal, 8 Rep. 68. the
certain cause of a Divorse must be shown, 11 Hen. 7. 27. 2 Leon. 169. The
Ordinary is a Judge only of the matter of Fact, if true, not if this matter
pretended be a cause of Refusal, he ought to allege that so particularly, as
to manifest it to the Court, in which the Suit depends; That it is a legal cause
of Refusal. He is not a Judge, whether Hodder's insufficiency in any one point
of Learning be a good cause of Refusal; for, if it should be so, the Temporal
Right of Patronage would be very precarious. The Court ought to have enough
before them, whereon to Judge of the Cause, as well as that on Issue may be
joined and tried; here it is only said that he is less sufficient, not that he
is altogether illiterate; this will put it in the Power of the Ordinary to
refuse for want of knowledge in any Learning as he thinks fit, as Mathematics
or Anatomy, without which, a Man may be well Qualified to be the Rector of a
Benefice, and the consequence of such Opinion will be much to the prejudice of
Lay Patrons; that certainty in Pleading ought to be encouraged for the
prevention of the exercise of Arbitrary discretionary Power, that the Wisdom of
the Common Law is to reduce things to single Questions, that the Determination
upon them may be plain, and certain, and known, and the reasons of such
Determinations may appear, which cannot well be done, if general Allegations or
Pleadings be countenanced, for which; and other Reasons urged by the Counsel,
who argued with the Judgment, 'twas prayed that the Judgment might be affirmed.

It was replied on behalf of the Plaintiff, in the Writ of Error, that the
Books were very plain, that the six Months were to incur from the Death of the
Incumbent, and then, if there were not notice in convenient and due time, in
order to enable the Patron to present again, that this ought to come on the
other side.

That to require Learning in Presentees to Benefices, would promote the Honor
of the Church, nay, of the Nation in general. That every Man who knew this
Presentee and his Ignorance, even as to the Latin Tongue, must acknowledge,
that the Reverend Prelate who refused him, had done worthily, and becoming the
Character of his Order, Family, and Person, and therefore 'twas prayed that the
Judgment should be Reversed, and it was Reversed.

Robert Davis versus Dr. John Speed.
WRIT, of Error on a Judgment in Ejectment in the King's- Bench, for certain
Lands in Hamp-Shire; the Declaration was upon the Demise of Francis Cockey: The
Verdict finds, that William Horn and Ann his Wise were seized of the Lands in
Question, in their Demesne as of Fee in Right of the Wife, that they made and
executed a Deed, Covenanting to Levy a Fine thereof, to the use of the Heirs of
the said William Horn, lawfully begotten and to be begotten on the Body of the
said Ann his Wife, and for default of such Issue, then to the use of the right
Heirs of the said William Horn for ever, and a Fine was Levied accordingly to
these uses; that William and Ann were seized, prout Lex postulat, that they had
Issue, William Horn their Son, who Died without Issue in the Life of William
and Ann, that she Died, and William the Father, and Husband Survived her, that
then he Died without Issue, that the lessor of the Plaintiff is Sister and Heir
of the said William Horn, that after his Death, she entered and was seized
prout Lex postulat, that Elizabeth, Joanna, and others, were Coheirs of the
said Ann, that their Estate and Interest came by mean conveyances to the
Defendant Speed; That he was seized prout Lex postulat, that the Lessor of the
Plaintiff entered and Ousted the said Speed, and made the Demise in the
Declaration, and that the Plaintiff entered and was Possessed, till the
Defendant entered upon him, and Ousted him: And if it shall appear to the
Court, that the Desenant's entry was lawful, they find the Defendant not
Guilty, and if, etc. upon this special Verdict, Judgment was given in B. R. for
the Defendant.

And now it was Argued on the behalf of the Plaintiff, in the Writ of Error,
that this Judgment was Erroneous, and ought to be Reversed, for that these
Lands belonged to the Heirs of the Husband by force of this Deed and Fine; that
this was in the Case of an Use, which was to be construed as much according to
the intent of the Parties as a will; That if by any construction, that intent
could be fulfilled, it ought: That the intent of the parties here was plain to
give this Estate to the Husband and his Heirs, that uses are to be governed by
Equity, and that therefore the meaning of the persons concerned, was to be
pursued; That the Woman intended to take nothing her self, nor to reserve any
thing, but to part with the whole: That here was an use by implication in the
Husband, though none could result back to the Husband, because he had none
before; but that in this case as in that of a Will, an use might by implication
very well be raised to the Husband, and then this might be good by way of
Remainder, after the Death of the Husband; or create an Estate Tail in him, by
coupling the use implied to him for Life, with that to the Heirs of his Body;
and that if it were not so, then that it was good as a springing contingent use
to the Heirs of the Body of the Husband, etc. and that in the mean time till
that Contingency happened, the same was to the use of the Wife and her Heirs;
And that this Construction contradicted no Rule of Law; That it was no more
than was allowed in case of a Will, by way of Executory Devise, according to
Pell and Brown's Case, in 2 Cro. that the Estate should remain in the Wife and
her Heirs, during the Life of the Husband, that this was never designed to take
effect as an use to be vested immediately, and it was no more then if the Deed
had declared the use to be after the expiration of twenty Years, or at other
future time, to the Heirs of the Body of William Horn, and for default of such
Issue, to his right Heirs, and that such time had happened, the use would have
vested in the Heirs of his Body, or in his right Heirs, if he had Died before
that time: That it is true, there must be a person capable of taking at the time
when the Contingency happens, and so there was here, at the time of his Death;
That it could never be intended that the Heirs should take immediately, for
that then there was no such person in being, there could be no Heirs during his
Life: That this was like the Case of Webb, and Sir Caesar Cranmer, where the
Trust of the Estate during the Life of the Duke of Southampton, was adjudged to
remain in the Heirs of the Devisor; the Duke himself not being capable to take
it; That here being no person able to take under this Deed and Fine during the
Husband's Life, it shall be construed to remain as it was before, till that
Life ends, and then the use ought to take effect: for otherwise, both the Deed
and Fine are to no purpose, they are all in vain, and the intent of the parties
to it is defeated. And there were Cited the Lord Paget's Case, in 1 Anderson,
and Woodlett, and Denny, 2 Crook 439. and 1 Leon 256.

On the other side, it was argued with the Judgment, that this Deed and Fine
can raise no use, to the Heirs of the Husband, according to the Rules of Law.
It was insisted, That if Husband and Wise do levy a fine of the Wife's Land,
and no uses are declared, or such uses are declared, as are void and can never
take effect; such Fine is to the use of the Wife and her Heirs, that in such
case the Estate remins' as it was, or if the Fine Operates any thing it shall
be for the benefit of the party to whom it did belong before.

Then it was urged, That this was designed to raise an use immediately to the
Heirs of the, etc. and that there was no person capable of taking at the time
of levying this Fine, the common Maxim in the Law proving it, quod nemo est
here is Viventis; that the name and nature of an Heir import a successor after
Death, that this being designed to raise an use, ex presenti, and no person
being capable of taking at that time, the same must be void: That this is the
case of a Deed, executed in the Lifetime of the parties, and not a Will, where
large allowances are often made in favor of supposed intentions, by reason
that persons are often surprised by Sickness, and presumed to want the
assistance of Counsel, but the Rules of Law are always allowed to govern in
Construction of Deeds. Then it was urged, that nothing was ever designed to the
Husband himself by this; that no words in the Deed can favor such a
presumption, that this must either work as an Estate in present, or by way of
remainder; if the latter then by the known Rules of Law, there must be a
particular Estate to support it, and such particular Estate must be either
expressed or implied; here is none expressed, and if implied, it must be in the
Wife, and if in her, then she dying before the Husband, her particular Estate
did determine before the remainder could take place, and consequently by all
the Rules of Law, it can never take place; and no particular Estate can be
implied, in or for the Husband, for that there is nothing said showing such
intent, and if the Construction of Law be to prevail, then as was urged before,
that is in favor of the Wife. But here, it was plainly designed to take effect
immediately, and therefore void, because there was no person in being, capable
of taking at the time the Estate was intended to vest, and no uses are to be
executed by the State, which are limited against the Rules of the Common Law,
Chudleigh's Case, 1 Rep. 129. if the limitation of an use be at this day to A.
for Years, and afterward to the use of the Heirs or Wife of B. which shall be,
this is void, because 'twould have been void, if limited, in possession, Dyer
190. the Earl of Bedford's Case in Popham, 3, 4. and 82. resolved in like
manner to be void, because would have been so in an Estate conveyed at
Common Law: And, all that can be objected, is, that then this is all void,
which is no more than may be pretended upon every imperfect conveyance, but
here the Case is in a Court of Law, and the Defendant is a Purchaser who has
been Thirty Years in Possession, though that does not appear in the Case.

And it was said, That as to the Notion of a springing contingent use, it is
hardly intelligible in it self, and by no means applicable to this Case,
because here are no words in this Deed, that carry any relation to a future
time or Contingency, and the Objection is only this, That the Conveyancer was
mistaken in his Judgment, or that the parties knew not what they meant, or that
they meant to create such an Estate, and in such a manner, as the Law will not
allow; and neither of these are Reasons sufficient to prevail for the Reversing
of a Judgment given according to the Rules of Law, by which Men's Inheritances
have all along been governed, and upon which, many Estates do now depend.

'Twas further urged, That the contrary Opinion, which must be advanced to
annul this Judgment, would reder the Law and Men's Conveyances, as doubtful and
uncertain as last Wills and Testaments, and submit Men's Titles to the
Arbitrary Power and Will of those that shall Judge of them; It is to empower
them to suppose intentions where not expressed, and to raise uses by
Implication, where they were never designed: And in short, 'twill destroy all
the difference between good and bad Conveyances, and enable Men to limit uses
and raise Estates contrary to, and in different manner from what the Law has
hitherto allowed; it will render Purchases more uncertain than they are at
present, and that is more than enough already, and the consequence must be to
produce a confusion in property, etc. wherefore, upon the whole, it was prayed,
That the Judgment might be affirmed, and it was affirmed accordingly.

Watts and al' versus Crook.
APpeal from a Decree in Chancery: The Case in short was this; That Peter
Crook and Elizabeth his Wife, who was Sister of the half Blood to George
Watts, claimed to have an equal share with John Watts and Elizabeth Camfield,
who were Brother and Sister of the whole Blood to the Deceased, of his Personal
Estate; and a Decree was made in Chancery in favor of Crook and his Wife.

It was argued on behalf of the Appellants, That the half Blood ought to have
but a half share: That in the Case of Inheritances, the whole Blood was
preferred; and that, though such Rule could not govern entirely in this Case, yet
it showed which ought to have the preference; that the true Reason of
Distribution was this, The Law was to give in like manner, as he might
reasonably be supposed willing to have given his Estate, in case he had made a
Will, and had not been surprised by a sudden Death; that every Man was supposed
to favor his next of Kin; that the Statute of Distributions did the same
thing; and then that the whole Blood was nearer of Kin, because did partake of
both the Stocks from whence he came; that the Relation or Kindred in this Case
entirely came from the Parents; that this was not an Alliance by his own
Contract as Marriage, or the like; that the Inclination was supposed to arise
to them from the Natural Love he bore to the Common Ancestors; that such
Inclination could never be supposed equal, where the Party was only of the half
Blood: And much to this effect, and many Arguments drawn from the Civil Law,
were urged in favor of the Appellant, and several Presidents cited, where it
had been judged since the Statute for the half Blood to have but a half share,
by Sir Richard Lloyd.

On the other side it was argued, That the half Blood is as near a Kin to the
Intestate, as the whole Blood, and ought to have an equal Share of the Personal
Estate, with the whole Blood; that the Party must be presumed equally inclined
to each Parent; that the Brother of the half Blood was as much a Brother as one
of the whole; that the whole Blood was preferrable in Descents, but that was
only upon account of a Maxim in the Law; whereas here they are equally of Kin;
the whole Blood is no more a Brother than the half; in the same Relation there
can be no difference or degree; it might as well be pretended to have a
difference allowed upon the account of Seniority; that Opinions and Practice
had been with the Decrees; that this has been taken to be the Law in
Westminster Hall. Before the Statute, 'twas held that a Sister of the half
Blood is in equal degree with the whole, Brown versus Wood, Allen's Rep. 36.
and so cited in Smith's Case, Mod. Rep. 209. So in the Case of Milborne and
Milborne, 30 March 1671. before the Lord Keeper Bridgman: W. M. had by Will
devised all his Lands in Trust to pay every Brother and Sister he had living 40
l. per Annum each, and he had several Brothers and Sisters, both of the half
and whole Blood; the Brothers of the whole Blood did oppose the payment of the
40 l. per Annum to those of the half Blood, but 'twas adjudged and decreed,
that they are equally entitled to the 40 l. per Annum a piece, and enjoyed
accordingly: Farmer versus Lane and Nash in Chancery, 26 October. 1677. declared
and adjudged by the Lord Chancellor Nottingham, That the half Blood are in
equal degree of Kindred with the whole Blood, and ought to have an equal Share
of the Personal Estate. The like was in the Case of Stapleton and the Lord
Merion against the Lord Sherrard and his Lady in Chancery by Judge Windham, 13
June 1683. the Case was thus, Robert Stapleton had a Sister of the whole Blood,
and a Brother and Sister of the half Blood, and died Intestate: Administration
was granted to his Wife the Lady Sherrard, who claimed a Moiety of the Personal
Estate by the Custom of the Province of York, and a quarter of the other Moiety
by force of the Act for Distribution of Intestates Estates, and adjudged that
the Wife should have only one Moiety, and the other Moiety to be divided
equally between the Brothers and Sisters both of the whole and half Blood. This
Cause was Reheard the Seventh of May 1685. by the Lord Guilford, upon the
Certificate of his Grace the Lord Archbishop, to whom it was referred to
certify the Custom of the Province of York; who certified that the Wife shall
have only a Moiety, and the other Moiety shall be divided amongst the next of
Kindred, and adjudged that the half Blood shall have an equal Share with the
whole, and so the former Decree was confirmed.

The same was adjudged by Mr. Justice Charlton, June 30. 1685. in the Case of
Pullen and his Wife against Sergeant, in the Court of Chancery.

The like was, amongst other things, declared and decreed by the Lord Jessryes,
Febr. 19. 1686. in the Case of the late Lord Winchelsea against Noraliff and
Wentworth; upon which Hearing were present and assisting the then Lord Chief
Baron Atkyns, and Mr. Justice Lutwich; and so was it Nov. 20. 1689. between
Stephens and Throgmorton in Chancery.

It has likewise been held so in the Ecclesiastical Court, and accordingly
adjudged by Sir Richard Raynes upon Solemn Argument, by the most eminent
Counsel, both of the Civil and Common Law, in the Case of James Storey, Febr.
26. 1685. and in the Case of George Hawles, by the same Judge, upon June 1.
1687.

Then it was urged, That the Statute of Jac. 2. for reviving and continuance of
several Acts of Parliament therein mentioned, proves this; for it is enacted,
That if after the Death of the Father, any of his Children shall die intestate,
without Wife or Children, in the life time of the Mother, every Brother and
Sister, and the Representatives of them, shall have an equal share; and that a
Brother of the half Blood, is a Brother to the Intestate as well as a Brother
of the whole Blood, and therefore ought to have a share, and an equal share
with the rest. And upon consideration of all those Presidents, and there being
no Practice against it, except that of Sir Richard Lloyd's, it was prayed that
the Decree might be confirmed, and it was confirmed.

Lee Warner Versus William North.
APpeal from a Decree of the Lord Chancellor, which overruled the Exceptions
taken by the Appellant, to a Decree made by Commissioners for Charitable Uses,
concerning a Gift by Bishop Warner's Will; and the same was received, and the
Parties ordered to answer. And each side being heard by their Counsel, the
Decree was affirmed. Vide the Statutes concerning Charitable Uses and the
Delegates; and query how they differ: And whether an Appeal does not lie upon a
Sentence by Delegates, as well as on a Decree of Chancery upon a Decree of
Commissioners for Charitable Uses?

Briggs versus Clarke.
WRit of Error on a Judgment in B. R. affirmed in the Exchequer Chamber, upon a
Verdict in Debt for the Escape of one Cook; and none appearing for the
Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, the Judgment was affirmed with the increase of
Forty pounds in Costs.

Vide the Case of Ellison and Warner, Mich. 18 Car. 2. B. R. 2 Keeble 91.
Whether a Writ of Error lies in Parliament after Judgment affirmed in the
Exchequer Chamber? Or if that proceeding in the Exchequer Chamber does not come
in lieu of Error in Parliament, according to the Statute of Eliz.?

William Bridgman and al' Versus Rowland Holt and al'.
A Writ of Error and Petition in Parliament. The Case below was thus: William
Bridgman brings an Assize for the Office of chief Clerk for inrolling of Pleas
in the Court of King's Bench; and the Plaintiff declares that the Office of
chief Clerk for inrolling of Pleas in the Court of King's Bench, was time out
of mind granted and grantable by the Kings and Queens of this Realm; and that
King Charles the Second, by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England,
Dated the Second of June, in the Five and twentieth Year of his Reign, (after a
Recital that Robert Henley and Samuel Wightwick were duly admitted to this
Office for their Lives) granted this Office (upon the Petition of Eliott) to
Silas Titus, so soon as it should become void; and that Wightwick was dead, and
Titus had surrendered his Patent, did, in consideration of Service done by the
Earl of Arlington, grant this Office to the Plaintiff and his Heirs, for the
Lives of the Earl of Arlington, Duke of Grafton and Duchess of Grafton, and
the longer liver of them, from and after the Death, Forfeiture, or Surrender of
Sir Robert Henley, and that Sir Robert Henly was dead, and that thereupon the
Plaintiff became seized, and was seized of the Office till the Defendants did
disseize him, etc.

The Defendants pleaded that they did not wrong or disseize the Plaintiff.

Upon the Trial of this General Issue at the Bar of the King's Bench, before
the three puisne Judges, the Chief Justice then sitting near the Defendant's
Counsel upon a Chair uncovered, the Plaintiff gave in Evidence the Letters
Patents of 2 June, 25 Car. 2. Then it was proposed by the Counsel for the
Defendant, That they would prove their Allegation, that the Office was
anciently granted by the Kings and Queens of England, as was declared; but no
Evidence was given besides this Patent of Car. 2.

Then the Counsel for the Defendant waving the just Exception which they might
have taken to the Plaintiff's Grant as to him and his Heirs, which ought not to
be of such an Office, for that by that means it might come to an Infant: They
insisted upon the mere right of Granting the said Office, viz. that it was not
grantable by the Crown, but was an Office belonging to the Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, and grantable by him.

Then to prove this, it was shown, That this Officer is to Inroll Pleas between
Party and Party only, and had nothing to do with any Pleas of the Crown or
Criminal Matters; that all the Rolls and Records in this Office were in the
Custody of the Chief Justice; that all the Writs to certify or remove the
Records in this Clerk's Office, are directed to the Chief Justice; and from the
nature of the Employment, 'twas insisted, that in truth he was but the Chief
Justices Clerk, and that consequently the same must be granted by the Chief
Justice.

And for further proof, it was shown by the Records of the Court, that for the
space of Two hundred thirty five years past, this Office when void, had been
granted by the Chief Justice, and enjoyed accordingly under such Grants. In
Trin. 36 Hen. 6. Rot. 36. inter placita Reg. Anno Dom. 1458. It is enrolled
thus, Be it remembered, that the Tenth of July this Term, in the Court of our
Lord the King at Westminster, came William Sond, chief Clerk of our Lord the
King, for inrolling Pleas, before the King himself, in his proper Person; and
in the same Court of his Free Will did surrender his said Office into the hands
of Sir John Fortescue Knight. Chief Justice of that Court (to whom of right it does
belong to grant that Office to whomsoever he pleases, whenever that Office
shall be void, during the time that the said Sir John Fortescue shall be Chief
Justice) and that Office does resign and relinquish to the use of William
Brom; and the said Chief Justice does accept the said Surrender, and does the
same day grant the said Office to the said William Brom, who is presently
admitted into the said Office for his Life, and sworn accordingly.

Mich. 1. Edw. 4. Rot. 51. Upon Brome's Surrender to Sir John Markham then
Chief Justice, the Chief Justice grants it to Mr. Sonde, who is admitted for
Life, and sworn.

Mich. 8 Edw. 4. Rot. 26. 1467. Upon the Surrender of William Sonde to the said
Sir John Markham then Chief Justice, he grants it to Reginald Sonde, who is
admitted and sworn.

Reginald Sonde enjoyed this Office till the time of Henry the Seventh, and
then Bray came in, and was Clerk till the 13 H. 7. and then came in Roper.

Hill. 9 Hon. 8. Rot. 3. Anno 1518. Upon the Surrender of this place to Sir
John Fineux Chief Justice, by John Roper, the Chief Justice grants the Office
to Sir John Roper and William Roper, who are admitted for their Lives and sworn.

Hill. 1 and 2 Edw. 6. Anno 1547. Upon the Surrender of William Roper (Sir John
being then dead) to Sir Richard Lister then Chief Justice, he grants the Office
to William Roper and Rute Heywood, and they are admitted and sworn.

Hill. 15 Eliz. 1573. Upon the Surrender of William Roper ( Heywood being dead)
to Sir Robert Catlin then Chief Justice, he granted this Office to John Roper
and Thomas Roper for their Lives, and they are admitted and sworn.

Mich. 14 Jac. 1 Rot. 2. Anno 1616. Upon the Surrender of John Roper ( Thomas
being dead) to Sir Henry Mountagne then Chief Justice, he grants the Office to
Robert Heath and Robert Shute for their Lives, who are admitted and sworn
thereupon.

Hill. 18 Jac. 1. 1620. Shute being dead, upon Sir Robert Heath's Surrender to
Sir James Leigh then Chief Justice, he grants the Office to Sir Robert Heath
and George Paul for their Lives, and they are sworn and admitted in Court.

Mich. 5 Car. 1. Upon the Surrender of Sir Robert Heath and Sir George Paul to
Sir Nicholas Hide then Chief Justice, he grants it to Robert Henley and Samuel
Wightwick for their Lives, and they are admitted and sworn.

Trin. 1654. Upon Wightwick's Surrender to H. Roll then Chief Justice ( Henly
being then under Sequestration) the Chief Justice grants it to Sam. Wightwick
and to Robert Henly Junior for their Lives, and they are admitted and sworn.

Mich. 12 Car. 2. Upon the Surrender of Samuel Wightwick and Robert Henly to
Sir Robert Foster then Chief Justice, he grants it to Henly and Wightwick for
their Lives, and they are sworn. Wightwick died soon after, and Sir Robert
Henly enjoyed it under that Grant 32 years.

And it was observed on behalf of the Defendant, That in all these Records
produced and read in Court, after the mention of the Surrender to the Chief
Justice, there are these words, To whom of right it does belong to grant that
Office whenever it shall be void.

It was then further insisted on and proved, That there are in the nature of
Clerks, three considerable Officers of the Court of King's Bench: The first and
chiefest is the Clerk of the Crown, called sometimes Coronator and Attornat'
Domini Regis, etc. his Business is to draw all Indictments, Informations, etc.
in Pleas of the Crown. This Officer being the chief Clerk in Court, is always
made by Patent under the Great Seal. The second Officer is this, the
Prothonotary or chief Clerk for inrolling Pleas between Party and Party in
Civil Matters: He and his Under-Clerks do inroll all Declarations, Pleadings,
etc. in Civil Causes, especially where the Proceedings are by Bill. This Clerk
files in his Office, all Bills, Declarations, etc. and all the Writs of this
Court in Civil Matters, are made by him and his Under-Clerks, and tested by the
Chief Justice. And he has the custody of all Returns of Elegits, Executions,
Scire Facias's, and the filing of all Villes; every of which are in the Eye and
Judgment of the Law, in the hands of the Chief Justice, whose Clerk this
Officer is.

The third is the Custos Brevium, who keeps all the Rolls and Records of
Judgments in this Court, which are also said to be in the custody of the Chief
Justice: And this Office, when void, is in his Gift and Disposal.

It was further shown on the behalf of the Defendants, That in the Statute of
Edw. 6. against the Sale of Offices, there is a Salvo to the two Chief Justices
and Judges of Assize, to dispose of the Offices in their disposition, as they
used formerly. And ever since that Statute, these two Offices of chief Clerk to
inroll the Pleas, etc. and the Custos Brevium, have without control been
disposed by the Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench. And it is also
observed, That in the Grant of this Office to Mr. Bridgman the Plaintiff, it is
recited that Henly and Wightwick were debito modo admitted to this Office, and
yet they never had any Grant from the Crown, nor any other Grant, except that
from the Chief Justice before mentioned.

Then to prove the Defendant's Title to the Office, the Grant of the now Chief
Justice to them for their Lives, was produced, and read, and proved, that they
were admitted and sworn.

To answer all this Evidence, there was produced the Copy of an Act of
Parliament which was made in 15 Edw. 3. to this effect: It is consented, that
if any of the Offices aforesaid (which are other great Offices mentioned in the
Act) or the Controller or chief Clerk in the Common Bench or King's Bench, by
Death or other Case be ousted of their Office, the King, with the consent of
the great Men, etc. shall put another fit person in such Office. From whence
the Plaintiff's Counsel would have inferred, That the King had a right to grant
this Office, and that this Act was declaratory of such his Right; and that all
the Grants from the Chief Justices ever since that Act, were but Usurpations on
the Crown; and that no Usage of granting it by the Chief Justices, could
prevail against the King's Right.

To this it was replied, That the Act was repealed, as did appear by the Record
it self, as well as by their own Copy produced. And for a further Answer, 'twas
said, That the Office in question was not the Office mentioned in that Act, for
that Act mentions the chief Clerk of the King's Bench, which is the Clerk of
the Crown, and so called in the 2 H. 4. the Statute against Extortion; and he
is in reality the chief Clerk in that Court, and has precedence of this
Officer both in Court and elsewhere: And that this Officer is not called chief
Clerk in the King's Bench, although he is the chief for inrolling of Pleas Civil
in that Court: And the constant. Usage explains the meaning of that Act. And
that the Officer called chief Clerk was meant to be the Clerk of the Crown; for
that that Office has been always granted by Letters Patents, according to that
Act: And the Office in question was never enjoyed one day by virtue of a Grant
from the Crown.

The Defendants did further insist, That it was a Scandalous Imputation upon
all those chief Justices, who were Persons of Probity and Virtue, and had clear
Reputations, to surmise that they imposed and usurped upon the Crown, as they
must all have done, if the right of granting this Place be in the King: And Sir
Robert Heath, that was the King's Attorney, took a Grant of the Office in
question from the Chief Justice; and upon his Admittance, the right of the
Chief Justice to grant it is affirmed upon Record.

Then all this Evidence on both sides being given, and the same being strong on
the Defendants behalf, the Court proposed to the Plaintiff's Counsel to be
Nonsuit, which they would not, but prayed the Court to direct the Jury, some of
them saying that they would take another Course: And then the Court did briefly
sum up the same, and particularly the Evidence of the Act, 15 Edw. 3. and what
was urged from it by the Plaintiff, and the Answers made thereto, and left the
Matter to the Jury upon the whole. The Jury withdrew, and after some time, gave
a Verdict for the Defendants.

Upon this Verdict the Counsel for the Plaintiff prayed leave to bring in a
Bill of Exceptions, and produced in Court, and tendered to the three Judges to
be sealed, a Parchment Writing in form of such a Bill; in which, after a
Recital of the Declaration, and Issue in the Cause, it is alleged, That the
Plaintiff's Counsel produced in Evidence the Grant of the Office to the
Plaintiff; and that they showed to the Court and Jury, that the Office is of
the Grant of the Crown: And that to make out the Right of King Charles the
Second to grant this Office to the Plaintiff, they gave in Evidence the 15 Edw.
3. which in the Bill is set out at large (and is in Substance, as is before set
forth.) And it is further alleged in the Bill, That the Justices refused to
allow, admit, and receive the Allegations and Matters given in Evidence, as
sufficient to prove the Plaintiff's Title to this Office, by reason whereof the
Jury found, That the Defendant did not disseize the Plaintiff; and prays that
the Justices would put their Seals to it, according to the Statute of
Westminster 2. cap. 31.

The Justices upon reading this Bill, did refuse to Seal it,

1. Because it is asserted therein, That the Plaintiff's Counsel did show that
this Office was of the Gift and Grant of the King, whenever it should be
void; whereas there was no such Evidence to show any such Right in the King
offered, or pretended to, besides the Patent in question, and the Act of Edw. 3.

2. That the Judges refused to allow, admit, and receive the Allegations and
Matters given in Evidence for the Plaintiff, as sufficient to maintain his
Title; whereas they were given in Evidence and considered; and if it be meant,
as a sufficient Evidence to control and overruled all other, that does not
belong to the Court in Trials to determine, unless referred to them upon
demurrer to Evidence, but is the proper business of the Jury; and if the Party
be aggrieved, the Remedy is an Attaint. Nor can it be pretended that the
Defendants Evidence was admitted to overruled the Record produced, because no
Objection was made to the Defendants Evidence at the Trial, and the same was
all given before the Record of 15 Ed. 3. was produced, and consequently the
Jury must consider the force of it; for Evidence on both sides being given, by
the Law of England, the Decision of the Right belongs to the Jury; and the Act
of Edw. 3. being repealed, it is no Matter of Law, but the most which could be
made of it, was, that it was Evidence, which must be left to the Jury, together
with the Defendants Evidence. But no Bill of Exception will lie in such a Case
by the Statute, when the Evidence given is admitted as Evidence, and left to a
Jury; and where no Opposition was made to the Defendants Evidence, as here in
this Case; and therefore in this Case a Bill of Exception could not be
warrantable, because the Plaintiff's Evidence was not refused or overruled;
nor was the Defendant's Evidence fit to be rejected, or so much as opposed by
the Plaintiff. And as to the Allegations made by the Counsel, and not proved,
those never could be an Exception. And for these and other Reasons the Judges
refused to Seal their Bill.

Upon this a Writ of Error is brought, and a Petition was exhibited to the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, in the Name of the Lady
Isabella Duchess of Grafton, and William Bridgman her Trustee, showing that
King. Charles the Second granted the Office in question to W. B. for the Lives
of Henry Earl of Arlington, Henry Duke of Grafton, and of the Petitioner the
Lady Isabella in Trust for the Duke, his Executors and Administrators, to
commence after the Death of Sir Robert Henly; that upon the death of Sir Robert
Henly, the Petitioner by virtue of the said Grant, was well entitled to the
said Office, but was interrupted in receiving the Profits by Rowland Holt Esquire;
Brother to the Lord Chief Justice Holt, and by Edward Coleman Gent. who
pretended to be admitted thereto by some Grant from the Chief Justice; that
thereupon an Assize was brought for the said Office, which came to Trial; and
the Petitioners Counsel insisted upon an Act of Parliament, proving the King to
have the Right of granting the said Office, which the Judges would not admit to
be sufficient to prove the King's Right to grant the same. That the Petitioners
Counsel did thereupon pray the benefit of a Bill therein to be allowed, and
sealed by the Judges according to Law. And the Petitioner's Counsel, relying
upon the said Act of Parliament as sufficient proof of the King's Right, duly
tendered a Bill of Exceptions before Judgment in the Assize, which the Judges
upon the Trial said they would Seal, yet when tendered to them in Court before
Judgment, would not Seal the same. Thereupon Judgment was entered against the
Petitioners Title in the Assize by default of the Judges not allowing and
sealing the said Bill, according to the Duty of their Office by Law, whereby
they are hindered from making the Matter of the said Bill part of the Record of
the said Judgment now brought and depending before your Lordships, upon a Writ
of Error in Parliament, for reversing the said Judgment in the Assize, and so
are precluded from having the full benefit of the Law by the said Writ of
Error, to examine, reverse, and annul the said Judgment: Wherefore the
Petitioners prayed that their Lordships would be pleased to order the said
Judges, or some of them, to Seal the said Bill of Exceptions, to the end the
said Case might (as by Law it ought) come entirely before their Lordships for
Judgment, etc.

Upon reading this Petition, 'twas ordered that the Lord Chief Justice, and the
rest of the Judges of the Court of King's Bench, should have Copies of the
Petition, and put in their Answer thereunto in Writing on..... next.

At the Day appointed there was delivered an Answer in these, or the like
words: The Answer of William Dolben, William Gregory, and Giles Air Knights,
three of their Majesty's Justices, assigned to hold Pleas in their Court of
King's Bench at Westminster, to the Petition of the most noble Isabella
Duchess of Grafton, and William Bridgman, exhibited by them to your Lordships.

THese Respondents by Protestation not owning or allowing any of the Matters of
the Petition to be true, as they are therein alleged, and saving to themselves
the benefit of all the several Statutes herein after mentioned, and all the
Right they have, as Members of the Body of the Commons of England, to defend
themselves upon any Trial that may be brought against them, for any thing done
contrary to their Duty, as Judges, according to the due Course of the Common
Law, which Right they hold themselves obliged to insist upon, in answer to the
said Petition, think themselves bound to show, and offer to your Lordships
consideration,

That the Petition is a Complaint against them for refusing to Seal a pretended
Bill of Exceptions, contrary to a Statute in that behalf, as the Petition
pretends, without setting forth the tenor of the said Statute, or what that
pretended Bill was; whereas that Statute is the Statute of Westminster 2. cap.
31. and does enact, That if any impleaded before any Justices, does offer an
Exception, and pray the Justices to allow the same, and they refuse so to do,
the Party offering the Exception, is thereby to write it, and pray the Justices
to Seal it, which they, or one of them, are thereby enjoined to do: So that if
the pretended Bill was duly tendered to these Respondents, and was such as they
were bound to Seal, these Respondents are answerable only for it by the Course
of the Common Law, in an Action to be brought on that Statute, which ought to
be tried by a Jury of Twelve honest and lawful Men of England, by the Course of
the Common Law, and not in any other manner.

And the Respondents further show, and humbly offer to your Lordships
consideration, That the Petition is a Complaint in the nature of an Original
Suit, charging those Respondents with a Crime of a very high Nature, in acting
contrary to the Duty of their Office, and so altogether improper for your
Lordships Examination or Consideration, not being any more triable by your
Lordships then every Information or Action for breach of any Statute Law is,
all which Matters are by the Common Law, and Justice of the Land, of Common
Right to be tried by a Jury.

And the Petition is wholly of a new Nature, and without any Example or
Precedent, being to compel Judges, who are by the Law of the Land to act
according to their own judgments, without any Constraint or Compulsion
whatsoever, and trenches upon all Men's Rights and Liberties, tending manifestly
to destroy all Trials by Jury.

And it is further manifest, That this Complaint is utterly improper for your
Lordships Examination, for that your Lordships cannot apply the proper and only
Remedy which the Law has given the Party in this Case, which is by awarding
Damages to the Party injured (if any Injury be done) for these are only to be
assessed by a Jury. And they, these Respondents, are so far from apprehending
they have done any wrong to the Petitioners in this Matter, that they humbly
offer, with your Lordships leave, to wave any Privilege they have, as
Assistants to this Honorable House, and appear gratis to any Suit that shall
be brought against them, in Westminster Hall, touching the Matter complained of
in the Petition.

And they further, with all humility, offer to your Lordships Consideration,
That as they are Judges, they are under the Solemn Obligation of an Oath to do
Justice (without respect of Persons) and are to be supposed to have acted in
this Matter with, and under a due regard to that Sacred Obligation; and
therefore to impose any thing contrary upon them, may endanger the breaking of
it, which they humbly believe your Lordships will be tender of.

And they further humbly show to your Lordships, That by a Statute made in the
25th of Edw. 3. cap. 4. it is enacted, That from thenceforth none shall be
taken by Petition or Suggestion to the King, or his Council, unless by
Indictment or Presentment of good and lawful People of the Neighborhood, or by
Process by Writ Original at Common Law; and that none shall be put out of his
Franchise or Freehold, but by the Course of the Common Law. And by another
Statute in the 28th of Edw. 3. cap. 3. it is expressly provided that no Man
shall be put out of his Lands and Tenements, nor imprisoned or disinherited but
by due Process of Law. And by another Statute made in the 42 Edw. 3. cap. 3. it
is enacted, That no Man shall be put to answer, without Presentment before
Justices, or Matter of Record on due Process and Original Writ, according to
the old Law of the Land.

And the Respondents further say, That inasmuch as the Petition is a Complaint,
in the nature of an Original Cause for a supposed Breach of an Act of
Parliament; which Breach (if any be) is only examinable and triable by the
Course of the Common Law, and cannot be so in any other manner, and is in the
Example of it dangerous to the Rights and Liberties of all Men, and tends to
the Subversion of all Trials by Juries, these Respondents conceive themselves
bound in Duty (with regard to their Offices, and in Conscience to the Oaths
they have taken) to crave the benefit of defending themselves touching the
Matter complained of in the Petition, by the due and known Course of the Common
Law; and to rely upon the aforesaid Statutes, and the Common Right they have of
Freeborn People of England, in Bar of the Petitioners any further proceeding
upon the said Petition, and humbly pray to be dismissed from the same.

Then it was after Debate ordered, That Counsel be heard at the Bar of the
House on the said Petition.

And afterward upon the Day appointed for the hearing of Counsel, it was
insisted on, in the behalf of the Petitioners, That here was a Right, and a
Right proved, and no ways to come at it but this; that if a Bill of Exceptions
be tendered and refused, this House can command them to do it; that this
proceeding of the Judges is to stifle the Matter of Law; the Writ upon the
Statute must be returnable here, and cannot be otherwise; that this follows the
Judgment into Parliament; that this House is to judge of every thing belonging
to that Judgment; that if this cannot be done, there will be a failure of
Justice; that there have been Writs of Error upon Judgments, with the Bill of
Exceptions annexed; that Damages to be recovered in an Action, gives no
Reparation for the Office; that the Action must be brought before the Judges,
and so it must be a Dance in a Circle; that as to the Judges Oaths, the
Justices of Peace are upon their Oaths, and yet they may be committed; that
this is not fit for a Jury to try, Whether the Judges have done well or ill in
refusing to Seal this Bill of Exceptions: This Refusal is the way to keep the
Law within the Bounds or Walls of Westminster Hall, and effectually to prevent
its ever coming hither; that this was not a Complaint of the Judges; that as
yet they would not accuse them of a Crime, they only said, fac hoc and vive;
that the Court of King's Bench below does the same thing to the Judges in
Ireland; they command others, and ought to be commanded; that they themselves
send Mandatory Writs, as the Cases are in Yelvert' and Cro. Car. That the Lords
had directed the Judges in many things; and so they did in Jeffrey Stanton's
Case; that by Command under the Privy Seal things have been done, which
otherwise would not; and my Lord Shaftsbury was remanded to the Tower upon the
Authority of that Case, 15 Edw. 3. the Statute says that the Peers shall
Examine; for by great Men are meant the Peers.

Then were urged certain Cases, where the Lords had commanded the Chancery to
proceed speedily, and to give Judgment, etc. Earl of Radnor's Case; Englefield
and Englefield, and other like Cases were quoted; and from thence they argued
the Power of the Lords to command the Judges to do the thing desired.

'Twas argued on the other side against the Petition to this effect, That this
was a Cause of great consequence, in respect of the Persons concerned, as also
of the Subject Matter, it being the Complaint of a Noble Peeress against three
of the Judges, before whom she was lately a Suitor; and concerning the
Jurisdiction of this House: That this Petition was the most artificial which
could be contrived to hinder the Justice of the Law, and to procure a
Determination in prejudice of Two hundred thirty five years enjoyment; that it
is designed to get a Cause to be heard and adjudged on a Writ of Error by the
Evidence onone side only, or rather by that which was no Evidence at all, if
the Copy produced at the Trial was true: for now upon the return of what they
desire, nothing of the Defendants Evidence would or could appear. When a Bill
of Exceptions is formed upon the Statute, it ought to be upon some point of
Law, either in admitting or denying of Evidence, or a Challenge, or some Matter
of Law arising upon Fact not denied, in which either Party is overruled by the
Court. If such Bill be tendered, and the Exceptions in it are truly stated, then
the Judges ought to set their Seal, in testimony that such Exceptions were
taken at the Trial: But if the Bill contain Matters false or untruly stated, or
Matters wherein they were not overruled, then they are not obliged to affix
the Seal; for that would be to command them to attest a falsity; a Bill is not
to draw the whole Matter into Examination again; it is only for a single point;
and the truth of it can never be doubted after the Bill is sealed; for the
adverse Party is concluded from averring the contrary, or supplying an Omission
in it.

This Bill was without Foundation; the Plaintiff was not overruled in any one
Point of Law: It Is true, the Counsel desired the Opinion of the Court after all
the Defendant's Evidence had been heard, concerning their Record, and the
Judges did declare, that they thought it did not extend to the Office in
question, but to the Clerk of the Crown, who is the chief Clerk in Court, and
has precedence; and the Grant of that Office by the King, both before and
since that supposed Act, proves that to be meant, and not the Office in
question, which has always been granted by the Chief Justice: and this was
afterward left to the Jury. Here was no cause for a Bill of Exceptions, the
Judges at the Counsels desire gave their Opinion upon the thing, but did not
overrule them; for that the Act being repealed, could make no Point of Law, but
only be Evidence for the Jury to consider.

Besides, this Act, though repealed, is inserted in the Bill as an Act in force;
And if an Act be set out, and no repeal appears, it must be understood to be in
force; and if the Bill had been sealed, it must have been taken as in force,
and the Defendants could not here upon the Writ of Error have shown the repeal,
which was in the 17 Edw. 3. and appeared so upon the Evidence; from whence
'twas inferred, That this Bill was too artificial. If any point of Law had
arisen upon the whole Evidence (and a particular point there was none) the
whole ought to have been inserted in the Bill, or at least all that which
concerned that Matter.

If this should be allowed, 'twould be in the power of any Counsel to destroy
any Verdict; as in case of a Title by Descent from Father to Son, and a Will of
the Father had been produced and proved at the Trial, and a Bill had been
sealed, only showing the Seisin and Descent, the Son must prevail, though he had
no Title. This is enough to show that the Judges are not obliged; nay, are
obliged, not to Seal this Bill.

Then it was argued, That the present Complaint is beneath the Honor, and
besides the Jurisdiction of the House of Peers; that this was a Complaint of a
Default in the Judges, which cannot be tried in this place; that MagnaCharta
was made for them as well as for others; that if they offend against any Rule
of the Common Law, or particular Statute, whether in their Personal behavior,
or as Judges, they are triable only by their Peers; that Peers are only such
qui pari condition and lege vivunt; that the Crown and Constitution of England
had so far exalted their Lordships in their State and Condition, that it is
beneath them to judge or try Commoners; that all Powers and Privileges in this
Kingdom, even the highest, are circumscribed by the Law, and have their limits:
That this is a Complaint of a great Crime in the Judges, a Breach of their
Oaths, and with the insinuation of Partiality to one of themselves; which if
true, incurs loss of their Offices, and Forfeiture of their Estates by Fine,
and of their Liberty by Imprisonment; and all this to the King; besides Damages
to the Party grieved; and therefore it concerns them to have the benefit of the
Law.

That this comes not regularly into the House; it is not any matter of Advice to
the King, nor of Privilege, nor of Contempt to this Court, because the Matter
complained of was before any Judgment below, or any Jurisdiction could be
attached here, by pretense of the Writ of Error. It Is brought hither by way of
Complaint for a supposed Miscarriage in Westminster Hall, in a private Cause
between Bridgman and Holt, two Commoners: It presumes the Lords to be proper
Judges in the first Instance, for the hearing and punishing of all Offenses
committed by the Judges, and that in a Summary way upon a Petition, and without
that due Process of Law, which is established under our Government.

Either this Refusal is punishable, or not; If not, the Petition ought to be
rejected: If it be, it is either by the Common Law, or by Act of Parliament; but
neither do warrant this Practice of Petitioning; and the old Law is that, which
past Ages have approved, and that by which Justice is to be administered; and
whatsoever is done by way of Judgment in a different manner than the Law
allows, is against that Law.

The proceeding in this manner is against the Consent of the Respondents, for
they have Pleaded to the Jurisdiction of this House as to this matter, etc. and
therefore it differs from all Cases, where the Parties concerned have Answered
the Complaint, and thereby submitted the same to an Examination; and this will
prevent the force of many presidents which may be Cited on this occasion. Some
Persons perhaps have from a confidence of Success, or from a slavish Fear, or
private Policy, forborne to Question the Power of their Superiors; but the
Judges must betray their Reputation and their Knowledge of the Laws, if they
should own a Jurisdiction, which former times and their Predecessors were
unacquainted with.

It Is necessary to answer the pretense of a failure of Justice, in case this
method be Rejected; and therefore it must be observed, That our Law knows
nothing of extraordinary means to redress a Mischief, but that upon a defect of
ordinary ones, recourse is to be had to the Legislature, and to that only,
either to explain and correct in reference to things past, or to provide
remedies for the future. But here is a common easy means of relief, if there
had been occasion.

By the Statute of Westminster, 2 cap. 31. In case the Judge refuses, then a
Writ to Command him, which is to issue out of Chancery, quod apponat sigillum
suum; and then a Writ to own or deny his Seal.

By 2 Inst. 426. the party grieved by the denial, may have a Writ upon the
Statute, Commanding the same to be done, juxta formam Statuti, Reg. 182. Fitch.
Natura brevium, 21. and 11 Hen. 4.51, 62, 63. there is the form of the Writ set
out at large. It recites a surmise of an Exception taken and overruled, and it
follows vobis precipimus, quod si ita est, tunc sigilla vestra apponatis. Si
ita, it is conditional, if the Bill be true and duly tendered, then this Writ,
and if it be returned, quod non ita est, then an Action for a false return, and
thereupon the surmise will be tried, and if found to be so, Damages, and upon
such a Recovery, a peremptory Writ Commanding the same; that the Law is thus,
seems plain; though no precedent can be shown of such a Writ it is only for this
Reason, because no Judge did ever refuse to Seal a Bill of Exceptions, and none
was ever refused, because none was ever tendered like to this, so artificial and
groundless: But that such Actions lie upon this Statute, were Cited Regist.
174. Not. Br. 10. and they are called Attachments, and Damages shall be to the
Party and a Fine to the King; so it is in all Cases of Statute Laws, which do
either prohibit or Command the doing of a thing for the advantage of any
person, such person, if injured by a disobedience to that Law is entitled to an
Action, though the Statute does not in express words give one. 2 Inst.
55.74.118.131. and the same holds in judicial proceedings, the Case of the
Marshalseas, 10 Rep. 75. 4 Edw. 4.37. and the same Reason warrants the Action
for a Scandal' Magnat': But perhaps 'twill be said, that though an Action lies
for a disobedience to this Writ, yet the Writ not being returnable, no Action
lies for a false return, and consequently no peremptory Writ, and by
consequence there is no adequate remedy in case of an unjust Refusal; but to
this it may be answered, That the Writ being Conditional, it is a good Answer to
it, that the Fact was not as is surmised, and that return will justify the
Refusal: And certainly such return may be made; and if not, when the first Writ
is proved to be true in all its Suggestions, by Judgment in an Action for not
obeying it, the same Reason will warrant a peremptory Writ; But whether this be
thus, or not, it only argues an imperfection in the Law, proper for the notice
of the Legislature, and will not justify the method of proceeding, now
attempted here in this place.

It has been Objected, That such Proceedings are not like to be successful,
because Judges still are to try those matters; but these are Reflections not
Arguments, and our Constitution is founded on a Notion, that parity of
Condition is the best Qualification of a trier; and here must be a Jury to try
the Fact, and they are subject to an Attaint, if their Verdict contradict the
Evidence: And no direction of a Judge can excuse them, for if it be a point of
Law, they are not obliged to find a special Verdict, but may find a general one
upon their own peril of an Attaint. Then.

Either this is designed as a Criminal proceeding against the Judges, in order
to Punishment, or as a Civil proceeding, for to gain Damages to the Party, or
else neither one nor the other, but to have an Order Commanding the thing to be
done; which if refused, then to have them compelled by Imprisonment, quousque,
etc. neither of the first are pretended; and the last is not a Warrantble
method, when the Law has prescribed a Writ in Chancery, and that is not
prosecuted.

Here cannot be tried the particular requisites to ground such an Order as they
desire, as whether the Evidence or Exception as stated, was offered at the
Trial, or if offered, whether 'twas overruled, nor whether the matter offered
were believed, for if not believed, it makes no Evidence, and so can raise no
point in Law; There can be no Jury impanelled to try this, nor can an Issue be
directed hence for the trial of it.

By this means, the Judges lose the benefit of that legal Trial, by a Jury of
their Peers, which is their fence and protection against Power, Art, or
Surprise; the best for indifference and discovery of Truth. The Institution of
the Law is cautions and wise in its provision for both. Challenges are admitted
below; it is derogatory to the Honor of this Court, to suppose it necessary
here; but to have it in Westminster Hall, is however reckoned a Commoner's
privilege and Birthright; there the Law is determined by one, and the Fact is
ascertained by another; here both are in the same hands: Not that any Jealousy
can be supposed of mischief by it in this House, but the practice of it now may
give president to future Reigns and Ages, in which there may be danger of a
partiality.

Below, there are by the Law appointed and provided particular Terms and days
for doing Justice, and they are certain, the distances between them are known,
according to the nature of the Suit; which capacitates the parties concerned,
their Agents and Witnesses, to be ready, and there can be no surprise.

It must not be presumed, That this House may err, but if any Error be
possible, it is impossible for the Judges to be relieved, for these Reasons; in
respect of the Court, for no Address can be made in such case, but to the same
persons who did the wrong; which is always with some prejudice or disadvantage,
because the party Erring is to Judge, if he himself has Erred. Then the
Proceedings here being in English and Summary, it cannot well be made appear,
what was the proof in the first instance, no Record being kept thereof. Then
suppose Evidence be allowed, which is none, the person against whom the same is
given, is remediless; these Evils may happen in the repeating of this practice
in the next Reign, though they cannot in the present.

Then this method is not only against the general tenor and frame of the
Common Law, but against diverse Acts of Parliament and Declarations of this
House.

Magna Charta, 9 Hen. 3. cap. 29. is express, per judicium parium vel per legem
terre, now the latter only refers to such cases which are not Triable, per jud'
par': besides, to make it the lex terre, there must be Ancient and continual
usage, 22 Edw. 3. numb. 30. shows that no new practice can make a Law.

By 25 Ed. 3. cap. 4. it is Enacted, That no Man shall be taken by Petition or
Suggestion to the King, or to his Counsel, without Presentment, or by process
or Writ Original at Common Law, and that none shall be put out of his Franchise
or Freehold, but by due course of Law before used; here the one explains the
other; by Writ or due course of Law are taken for the same thing, and both used
in contradistinction to Petition; the 28 Ed. 3. cap. 3. is the same.

Then the 42 Edw. 3. cap. 3. it is by due process and Original Writ according to
the Old Law of the Land; the 1 Rich. 2. numb. 87. Cott. 162. no Suit to be
determined before the Lords or before the Counsel, but before the Justices only.

But the 4 Hen. 4. cap. 23. is fuller, it recites, That in Pleas as well real
as personal in the King's Courts, the parties be made to come upon grievous
pain, sometimes before the King himself, sometimes before the King's Council,
sometimes to the Parliament, to answer thereof anew to the grievance of the
Parties, and in Subversion of the Common Law of the Land, it is Enacted, that
after Judgment, the Parties shall be in Peace until the Judgment be undone by
Attaint or Error; this is agreed and amplified, 3 Bulst. 47.115.

Here is mention even of the Parliaments Summoning persons to Answer, in
Subversion of the Laws.

There are other Statutes not Printed, as 4 Edw. 3. numb. 6. Cotton's Abridg.
7. and the same in 2 Inst. 50.

The Lords gave Judgment of Death without Indictment, upon some who were not
their Peers, and agreed in full Parliament, that they should be discharged of
so doing for the future, and that it should not be drawn in President, that the
like should not be done on any but their Peers; it is a Declaration of the
Lords, nay, it is an Act of Parliament, and penned in the same manner, as 29
Edw. 1. Statute del Estoppel. at a Parliament agreed: 33 Edw. 1. by common
accord, and 9 Edw. 2. the King in Parliament by Advice of his Council, and
these are held to be Statutes.

This was not only an acquittal from the trouble, but a clear denial of the
Power, as appears by the words before, that they had assumed upon themselves,
and the words subsequent, that the like should not be done again. The Complaint
was, because it was intermedling with Commoners after that manner. Suppose this
House should make an Order upon this matter, which is a Law business and not of
Equity, no Execution can be made of it but Commitment.

There is the 15 Edw. 3. now insisted on, Printed in the Old Statute Book, but
omitted in this; it is in Cotton, 28.33. and, it is thus, the Commons complained
of breaches of Magna Charta, etc. and pray remedy, with this Conclusion, That
every Man may stand to the Law according to his Condition, and the Lords pray,
that Magna Charta may be observed, and further, that if any of what Condition
soever, should break it, he should be adjudged by the Peers of the Realm in
Parliament, the next Parliament, and so from Parliament to Parliament, and it
was Enacted accordingly. This was Specious, the same being only for the
breakers of Magna Charta, but in 17 Edw. 3. that whole Parliament, i. e. all
the Acts of it are Repealed; which Repeal, seems designed for the Petitioners,
for it Repeals the supposed Laws which make both their Title and this
Jurisdiction which they would support. It Is observable what is said in the
Repeal, that the Act was contrary to the King's Oath, in prejudice of his Crown
and Royalty, and against the Ancient Law: And such is this, for here is no use
of the King's Writ, no Address to or Command by the King for this Proceeding,
nor any mention of his name in the Petition.

By 1 Hen. 4. cap. 14. Appeals in Parliament for Offenses, are declared
against, as contrary to Reason and the Constitution; this is such. This is not
incident to the Power of Hearing and Determining upon the Writ of Error,
because as was said before, it belongs properly to the Chancery, to Issue a
Writ Commanding it to be done, Si ita est, as is Suggested.

By 12 Rep. 63. the King himself cannot take any Cause out of the Court where
it depends, and give Judgment on it himself.

And this House can make no Order upon this Petition that will be a Record, as
in Hob. 110. The Petition is in the name of a Person, not party to the Record,
which seems very new, for it is by a Stranger in the eye of the Law to the
Cause, and consequently ought not to be joined in any legal proceeding, if this
be such.

This is not incident to the Jurisdiction of the Error; no more than Amendment
of an Error in the Court from whence the Record comes, or the filing of a
Bail, a Declaration, or a Warrant of Attorney, or the Sueing out another
Process in Defect of one lost or the like. These things are never Examinable in
the Superior Court, for in these Collateral things the other are entrusted.

Here Is no Hardship upon the Petitioner for he might have been Non-suite, or
have given this Repealed Act in Evidence at first, and then have demurred on
the Defendant's Evidence, or might have Sued a Writ on the Statute of
Westminster 2.

But suppose this House should Examine this matter, and find the Petition to be
groundless, will such Determination prevent the Judges from being troubled by
Sueing of the Writ afterward. Suppose it E contra; that this House should
punish the Judges and commit them, and award Damages, or make other Order in
favor of the Petitioners, would such Order bar or stop the legal process
afterward; can any Order made here be used below, as a Recovery or Acquittal,
as an Auterfoits Convict, or Auterfoits Acquitte.

If there be any thing in it, it is a breach of a Statute Law; for which they
are punishable at the King's Suit; will the proceeding here save them from the
trouble of answering to an Indictment or Information for the same thing.

Then since a Writ lies to Command them to Seal this Bill, and since an Act of
Parliament directs it, if it were a true one, perhaps it may be Questionable,
if they do not break their Oaths, in case they Sign it in Obedience to any
other direction. If they did it in Obedience to the Royal Word, Signet or Privy
Seal, of the King their Master, 'twould be a breach of their Oath. Then as to
presidents of the Exercise of such a Jurisdiction, none come near this: And
abundance of particular Cases were put and answered; but the considerable one
was Jeffery Stanton's Case, 14 Edw. 3.31. Cot. 30.

The Case is odd, it is in Fits. Abridgment, tit voucher. 119. there is a Writ
directory to the Judges to proceed to Judgment, or to bring the Record before
the Parliament, that they might receive an Averment, etc. To this Case it was
Answered, That the same was long before most of the Statutes aforementioned,
and in full Parliament, and in that Case Stone would not agree to it, but
adhered to the Law according to his Opinion, it is true, Shard in the absence of
Stone, gave Judgment according to that Advice, but a Writ of Error was
afterward brought in the King's- Bench, and the Judgment was Reversed, 15 Edw.
3. B. R. even contrary to the Advice of Parliament, to the other Judges.

As to the other Cases of Property Examined here, either the Parties submitted
to Answer, or they were at the Suit or Complaint of the Commons, or by Consent
of the King and Commons, but none of them carry any resemblance to this, where
the Judges insist upon it, that there is another and a proper Remedy. All the
Cases in Ryley's Placita Parliamentaria, are either Ordinances of Parliament,
or directions to follow before the Justices. But there is no President to
warrant this Petition, and therefore 'twas prayed, that the Petition might be
Dismissed.............................................

And afterward...................................

Dominus Rex Versus Walcott.
WRit of Error to Reverse a Reversal in B. R. of an Attainder for Treason,
before Commissioners, etc. at the Old Bailey, against Walcott; the Record was
thus, Gulielmus Tertius, Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
Rex, fidei Defensor, etc. dilect and fideli nostro Johi Holt, Militi Capitali
justiciario nostro ad placita coram nobis tenend' assign' salutem Quia in
Recordo and Processu ac etiam in redditione Judicii cujusdam Indictamenti
versus Thomam Walcott, nuper de London Generosum modo defunct' pro quibusdam
altis perditionibus personam Domini Caroli Secundi nuper Regis Angliae tangent'
modo indictat fuit and superinde per quand' Jur superinde int' prefat' nuper
Regem and prefat' Thomam Walcott, capt' coram Justic' dict' nuper Regis ad
Goalam Deliberand' assign' convict' exist' and Judicium superinde reddit' fuit
pro prefat' nuper Rege versus prefat' Thomam Walcott, ut dicitur, quae quidem
Recordum and Processum predict' causa erroris intervenient' in Curia nostra
coram nobis venire fecimus and Judicium inde in eadem curia nostra coram nobis
reversatur and quia in reversatione Judicii predict' coram nobis super bre' de
Error' predict' Erro intervenit manifestus ad grave Dampnum cujusdam Isabellae
Dillon Viduae Comitisse Roscomon nuper Uxoris Wentworth Dillon armig' nuper
Comitis Roscomon in Regno nostro Hibernico sicut ex quaerela, sua accepimus.
Nos Errorem siquis fuerit modo debito corrigi, and eidem Isabellae plenam and
celerem Justiciam fieri volentes in hac part.

Vobis mandamus quod si Judicium super Breve de Errore praedict' reversat' sit,
tum Recordum and Processum praedicta cum omnibus ea tangent' nobis in
Parliamentum nostrum ad proximam Sessionem vicessimo octavo die instantis
Mensis Julij tenend' distinct and aperte mittatis and hoc Breve ut inspect'
Record' and Processu praedictis ulterius inde de assensu Dominorum Spritualium
and Temporalium in eodem Parliamento existent' pro Errore illo corrigend' Fieri
Fac' quod de Jure and secundum Legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae
fuerit faciend'. Test Thoma Archiepiscopo Cantuar' and ceteris, Custodibus and
Justiciariis Regni apud Westm' sexto die Julij anno Regni nostri octavo.

Martin.


Respons. Johannis Holt Mil' Capital' Justiciarij infra nominat'.
Record' and Process' unde infra fit mentio cum omnibus ea tangen' Domino Regi
infra nominat' in presens Parliamentum propriis Manubus protuli in quodam
Record' huic Brevi annex' prout interius mihi precipitur.

J. Holt.


Placita coram Domino Rege apud Westm' de Termino Paschae Anno Regni Domini
Willielmi Tertij nunc Regis Angliae etc. septimo. Rot. 3.
London ss. Dominus Rex mandavit Justic' suis per Literas suas Patentes sub
magno Sigillo ad inquirend' per Sacrum proborum and legalium hominum Civitat'
London ac aliis viis modis and mediis quibus melius sciverint aut poterint de
quibuscunque Perdition' Misprision' Prodition' Insurrection' Rebellion' and ab
Malefact is Offensam and Injur' quibuscunque necnon Justic' suis ad Goalam suam
de Newgate per Civitat' London de Prison' in eadem existen' deliberand' assign'
and little cuilibet Breve suum in haec verba.

Gulielmus tertius Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex Fidei
Defensor' etc. Justiciar' suis per Literas suas Patentes sub magno Sigillo
Angliae confect' ad inquirend' per sacrum proborum and legalium hominum
Civitat' London ac aliis viis modis and mediis quibus melius scierint aut
poterint de quibuscunque Prodition' Misprision' Prodition' Insurrection'
Rebellion' and ab Malefactis Offens' and Injur' quibuscunque necnon Justic'
suis ad Goalam suam de Newgate pro Civitat' London de Prisonariis in eadem
existent' deliberand' assign' and little cuilibet salutem Quia in Recordo and
Processu ac etiam in redditioue judicij cujusdam Indictamenti versus Thomam
Walcott nuper de London Gen' defunctum pro quibusdam altis perdition' person'
Domini Caroli Secundi nuper Regis Angliae tangent' unde indictat' est and
superinde per quandam Jur' Patriae inter praefat' Dominum nuper Regem and
praefat' Thomam Walcott Capt. coram Justiciar' dicti Domini Caroli Secundi
nuper Regis Angliae, etc. ad Goalam praedict' deliberand' assign' convict'
exist' and judic' superinde reddit' sit ut dicitur Error intervenit manifestus
ad grave dampnum Johannis Walcott Gen' filij and haered' praed' Thomae sicut ex
quaerela sua accepimus Nos Errorem siquis fuit modo debito corrigi and eidem
Johanni plenam and celerem Justiciam fieri volentes in hac part vobis Mandamus
quod si Judicium reddit' sit tunc Record' and Process' praedict' cum omnibus ea
tangent' nobis sub Sigillis vestris vel un' vestrum distinct and aperte
mittat' and hoc Breve ita quod ea habeamus a die Paschae in tres septiman'
ubicunque tum fuerimus in Anglia ut inspect' Record' and Process' praedict'
ulterius inde pro Errore illo corrigend' fieri faciamus quod de jure and
secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae fuerit faciend' Test
meipso apud Westm' decimo septimo die Martij Anno Regni nostri septimo.

Executio istius Brevis patet in Schedula and Recordo huic Brevi annex'.

Respons. Thomae Lane Mil' Major' Civitat' London ac un' Justic' infrascript'
Record' and Process' unde in Brevi superdict' fuit mentio sequit' in haec verba.

London ss. Memorand' quod per quandam Inquisition' Capt' pro Serenissimo
Domino Rege apud Justice-Hall in the Old Baily, London, in Parochia Sancti
Sepulchri in Warda de Faringdon extra London praedict' die Jovis scilicet
duodecimo die Julij Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae
Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Regis Fidei Defensor' etc. tricesimo-quinto
coram Willielmo Prichard Mil' Majore Civitat' London, Francisco Pemberton Mil'
Capitali Justic' Domini Regis de Banco, etc. ac aliis Sociis suis Justiciariis
dicti Domini Regis per Literas Patent' ipsius Domini Regis eisdem Justiciar'
praenominat' and aliis ac quibuscunque quatuor vel plur' eorum sub magno
Sigillo dict' Domini Regis Angliae confect' ad inquirend' per sacrament'
proborum and legalium hominum de Civ' London ac aliis viis modis and mediis
quibus melius scierint aut poterint tam infra libertat' quam extra per quas rei
veritas melius sciri poterit and inquir' de quibuscunque Prodition' Misprision'
Prodition', etc. infra Civitat' praedict' tam infra libertat' quam extra per
quoscunque and qualitercunque habit' fact' perpetrat' sive commiss' per quos
vel per que cui vel quibus quando qualit' and quomodo and de aliis articulis
and circumstant' praemissa and eorum aliquod vel aliqua qualitercunque
concernen' before veritat' and ad eadem and al' praemissa audiend' and
terminand' secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni dicti Domini Regis Angliae
assignat' per sacrament' Rich' Alie Arm' and aliorum proborum and legalium
hominum Civitat' London praed' qui adtunc and ibidem Jurat' and onerat'
existent' ad inquirend' pro dict' Domino Rege pro Corpore Civitat' predict'
extitit' praesentat' quod Tho. Walcott nuper de London Gen' ut falsus Proditor
contra illustrissimum and excellentissimum Principem Dominum nostrum Carolum
Secund' Dei grat' Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Regem and Naturalem
Dominum suum timorem Dei in Cord suo non habens nec debit' Ligean' suam ponder
an' sed instigatione Diabolica mot' and seduct' dilectsoneret veram debitam and
naturalem obedient' quas verus and fidelis subdit' dict' Domini Regis erga
ipsum Dominum Regem gereret and de Jure gerere tenetur penitus subtrahens and
totis viribus suis intenden' pacem and communem tranquilitat' hujus Regni
Angliae perturbare and guerram and rebellion' contra dictum Dominum Regem
suscitare and movere and gubernat' dicti Domini Regis in hoc Regno Angliae
subvertere and dict' Dominum Regem a titulo Honor and Regali nomine Coron'
Imperial' Regni sui Angliae deponere and deprivare and dictum Dominum Regem ad
mortem and finalem destruction' adducere and ponere secundo die Martij Anno
Regni Domini Caroli secundi nunc Regis Angliae, etc. tricessimo-quinto and
diversis ab diebus and vicibus tam antea quam postea apud Parochiam Sancti
Michaelis Bassieshaw in Warda de Bassieshaw London malitiose and proditorie cum
diversis aliis proditoribus Jur' praed' ignot' conspiravit compassavit
imaginat' fuit' and intendebat dictum Dominum Regem supremum Dominum suum non
solum de Regali statu titulo potestate and Regimine Regni sui Angliae deprivare
and dejicere verum etiam eundem Dominum Regem interficere and ad mortem
adducere and ponere and antiquam gubernat' hujus Regni Angliae mutare alterare
and penitus subvertere ac stragem miserabilem inter subdit' dict' Domini Regis
per totum Regnum suum Angliae causare and procurare ac insurrection' and
rebellion' contradict' Dominum Regem movere and suscitare infra hoc Regnum
Angliae and ad easdem nefandissimas prodition' and proditorias compassation'
imagination' and proposita sua praed' perimplend' and perficiend' idem Thomas
Walcott ut falsus Proditor tunc and ibid' and diversis aliis diebus and vicibus
tam antea quam postea malitiase proditorie and advisate se assemblabat
conveniebat and consultabat cum praed' al' proditoribus Jur' praedict' ignot'
and cum eisdem tractabat de and pro eisdem suis proditionibus and proditoriis
compassation' imagination' and propositis suis prosequend' exequend' and
perimplend' quodque idem Thomas Walcott ut falsus proditor malitiose proditorie
and advisate tunc and ibidem and diversis ab diebus and vicibus tam antea quam
postea super se assumebat and praedict' aliis proditoribus promittebat se fore
anxiliant' and assistent' in execution' prodition' and proditor' compassation'
imagination' and proposit' sua praedict' perimplend' and perficlend' and easdem
nefandissimas prodition' and proditor' compassation' imagination' and proposita
sua praedict' perimplend' and perficiend' idem Thomas Walcott ut falsus
proditor' malitiose proditorie and advisate tunc and ibidem arma videlicet
(...) Anglice Blunderbusses, Bumbard' Anglice Carbines, Sclop' Anglice Pistols,
and procurabat and praeparabat contra Ligeantiae suae debit' contra pacem dicti
Domini nunc Coron' and Dignitat' suas, etc. necnon contra formam statut' in
hujusmodi casu edit' and provis. etc. per quod praecept' fuit vid' Civitat'
praedict' quod non omitt' etc. quin caperent praefat' Thomam Walcott si etc. ad
respond' etc. and modo scilicet ad deliberation' Goalae dicti Domini Regis de
Newgate tent' per Civitat' London apud Justice-Hall praedict' in dicta Parochia
Sancti Sepulchri in Warda de Faringdon extra London praedict' dicto die Jovis
undecimo die Julij anno tricesimo quinto supradict' coram praefat' William
Pritchard' Mil' Majore Civitat' London ac aliis Sociis suis Justiciar' dict'
Domini Regis ad Goalam swam de Newgate de Prison' in ea existen' deliberan'
assign' praefat' Justic' dicti Domini Regis prius nominat' per manus suas
propere deliberaver' Indictament' praedict' hic in Cur' de Recordo in formam
Juris terminand', etc. super quo ad istam eandem deliberation' Goalae dict'
Domini Regis de Newgate tent' per Civitat' praedict' apud Justice-Hall
praedict' dicto die Jovis duodecimo die Julij anno tricesimo quinto supradict'
coram praefat' Justic' ult' nominat' ven' praed' Thomas Walcott sub Custod'
Dudlei North Mil' and Petri Rich Ar' Vicecom' Civitat' praedict' (in quorum
Custod' ex causa and praedicta praeantea Commiss. fuit) ad Barram hic duct' in
propria persona sua qui committitur praefat' Vic' Civitat' London, etc. and
statim de praemissis praedict' in Indictament' praedict' specificat' ei
superius imposit' allocut' qualit' se vellet inde acquietari Idem Thomam
Walcott dicit quod ipse non est inde culpabl' and inde de bono and malo pon' se
super Patriam Ideo immediate ven' inde Jur', etc. Coram praefat' Justic' ult'
nominat' hic etc. and Jur' Jure illius per praefat' Vic' ad hoc impannelat'
scil. etc. exact' vener' qui ad veritat' de praemiss. dicend' elect' triat' and
jurat' dicunt super sacrament' suum quod praedictus Tho. Walcott est culpabil J
de alt' prodition' praedict' in Indictament' praedict' specificat' ei superius
imposit' modo and forma prout per Indictament' praedict' superius versus eam
supponitur and quod idem Thomas Walcott nulla habuit bona seu catalla terras
sive tenementa ad eorum notic' and super hoc statim quaesit' est de praefat'
Tho. Walcott si quod pro se habeat vel dicere sciat quare Cur' dict' Domini
Regis hic ad judicium and execution' de eo super veredict' praedict' procedere
non debeat qui nihil ulterius dicit praeterquam ut prius dixerat super quo
visis and per Cur' hic plene intellectis omnibus and singulis praemissis
considerat' est per Cur' hic quod praed' Tho. Walcott ducatur ad Goalam dicti
Domini Regis de Newgate unde venit and ibidem super Bigam penatur and abinde
usque ad furcas de Tyburn trahatur and ibidem per Collum suspendatur and vivens
ad terram prosternatur and quod secreta membra ejus amputentur and interiora
sua extra ventrem suum capiantur and in ignem ponantur and ibidem comburentur
and quod caput ejus amputetur quodque corpus ejus in quat' parts dividatur
ill' ponantur ubi Dominus Rex ea assignare voluit, etc. per quod praecept' fuit
Vic' quod caperent eum si etc. ad satisfaciend' etc. and modo scil. die Jovis
prox' post mensem Paschae isto eodem Termino coram Domino Rege nunc apud Westm'
ven' quidem Johannes Walcott filius and haeres praedict' Thomae Walcott
defunct' de alta proditione praedict' convict' and attinct' per Benedict'
Brown Attornat' suum and habit' audit' Record' praedict' super quo praed'
Thomas convict' and attinct' existit' dicit quod in Record' and Process.
praedict' ac etiam in redditione Judicij praedict' manifest est Errat' in hoc
vid' quod apparet' per Record' praedict' quod Judicium reddit' est pro dicto
Domino nuper Rege ubi per leges hujus Regni Angliae Judicium praedict' pro
dicto Thoma Walcott reddi debuisset and in eo manifest est errat' erratum est
etiam in hoc, viz. quod Crimina in and per Indictamentum praedict' versus
praedict' Thoma imposit' per Leges hujus Regni Angliae incerte dubie and nimis
generalit' allegat' existunt quodque idem Indictamentum supposuit and eidem
Thomae onerat and imponit crimina diversimoda and toto genere inter se
discrepantia 'Quodque Judicium superinde reddit' sit and existit cantrarium
Legibus Angliae and minime pronunciand' vel imponend' pro vel super hujusmodi
Crimina qual' in Indictamentum praedict' supponuntur and in eo manifest est
Errat' unde Pet' Judicium Cur' hic in praemiss' and quod Judic' and Attinctur'
praedict' ab Error' praedict' and al' in Recordo and Process' praedict'
compert' existent' reversetur adnulletur and penitus pro nullo habeatur and
quod ipse praedict' Johannes Walcott filius and haeres praedict' Thomae ad
omnia quae ipse praed' Johannes occasion Judicij and Attinctur' praedict'
amisit restituatur and quod Cur' hic procedat ad examinationem tam Record' and
Process' praedict' quam materias superius pro Errore assign', etc. and quia
Cur' dicti Domini Regis hic de Judicio suo de and super premissis reddend'
nondum advisatur dies inde dat' est praefat' Johanni Walcott in statuto quo
nunc etc. in Cro' Sanctae Trinitat' coram Domino Rege ubicunque, etc. de
Judicio suo inde audiend' etc. ad quod quidem Crm' Sancte Trinitat' coram
Domino Rege apud Westm' ven' predictus Johannes Walcott per Attornat' suum
predict' and ut prius Petit Judicium and quod Judicium and Attinatur predict'
versus predict' Thomam Walcott reddit' ab Error' predict' and al' in Recordo
and Process' predict' compert' and existen' reversetur adnulletur and penitus
pro nullo habeatur and quod ipse predict' Johannes Walcott filius and haeres
predict' Thomae ad omnia que ipse idem Johannes occasion Judicij and Attinatur
predict' amisit restituatur and quod Cur' hic procedat' ad examination' tam
Record' and Process' predict' quam Materiarum superius pro Errore assign' etc.
And after many Continuances, it is entered thus: Super quo Vis. et per Cur' hic
intellectis omnibus et singulis premissis diligenterque examinat' Record' et
Process' predict' et Err' per predict' Johannem Walcott superius assign' et al'
in Record' et Process' predict' compert' existen' Maturaque deliberatione inde
prius habita considerat' est quod Judicium predict' ab Error' predict' et al'
in Record' et Process' predict' compert' existen' revocetur adnulletur et
penitus pro nullo habeatur et quod predict' Johannes Walcott filius et here is
predicti Thomae Walcott ad omnia que ipse occasion Judicij et Attinctur'
predict' amisit restituatur et quod predict' Johannes Walcott eat inde sine
die, etc. Et super hoc Johannes Trevor Miles Attorn' Domini Regis nunc General'
qui pro eodem Domino Rege in hac part sequitur coram coram Rege ac Proceribus
hujus Regni Angliae hoc predicto Parliamento apud Westm' in Com' Middlesex
assemblat' in propria perfona sua ven' et dicit quod in Record' et Process' ac
etiam in redditione Judicii super predict' priori Brevi dicti Domini Regis de
Errore corrigend' per predict' Johannem Walcott prosecut'pro revocatione et
adnullatione Judicij predict' versus praedict' Thomam Walcott super
Indictamentum predict' pro alta proditione predict' reddit' manifest est
Erratum in hoc, viz. quod ubi per Recordum predict' supponitur quod predict'
Johannes Walcott posuit loco suo quendam Benedict' Brown Attornat' suum ad
prosequend' predict' primum Breve de Errore in et super Indictament' predict'
pro alta proditione predict' quod tamen Benedict' Brown nullum habuit'
Warrant' Attorn' pro eodem Johanne Walcott de Recordo affilat' ideo in eo
manifest est Errat' Errat' est etiam in hoc, viz. quod Record' predict'
apparet quod Judicium predict' pro revocatione et adnullatione Judicij predict'
versus predict' Thomam Walcott in forma predict' reddit' redditum fuit pro
predict' Johanne Walcott versus dict' Dominum Regem ubi per Legem terre hujus
Regni Angliae Judicium ill' reddi debuisset pro dicto Domino Rege versus eundem
Johannem Ideo in eo scil. manifest est Errat' et hoc parat' est verificare
unde pet' Judicium et quod Judic' ill' ab Error predict' et al' in Record' et
Process' predict' existen' revocetur adnulletur et penitus pro nullo habeatur
et quod dictus Dominus Rex ad que omnia ipse occasion revocation' et
adnullation' Judicij predict' amisit restituatur, etc.

It was argued on behalf of the King, That there was no Warrant of Attorney
filed, and consequently the Reversal was not regular; for default of an
Appearance by the Heir, who prosecuted the Writ of Error; and that there was no
Day given to the Attorney General; nor was the Attorney General, or the
Patentee, a Party to the Record, nor any Plea or Answer made by either of them
to the Assignment of the Errors.

To this it was answered, That by the Common Practice in the Crown-Office, no
Warrants of Attorney are filed, neither for Defendants upon Indictments, nor
for Plaintiffs in the Writ of Error; that it had not been known, within the
Memory of any Man living, that such Warrants were ever filed: That there need
no day to be given to the King, or the Attorney General, for that the King's
Attorney was supposed always present in Court, and the King cannot be
Nonsuited, because he cannot be called. That there never was any Answer to the
Assignment of Errors in such Cases; That in Capital Cases there needs no
joining of Issue upon pleading Not Guilty.

Then it was argued, That there was no Error to warrant the Reversal to the
Attainder; that the Exception taken to the Judgment was trivial and frivolous;
that ipso vivente was not of necessity to be inserted; that never any Judge was
known to require that the Man's Bowels should be burnt while he was alive; that
the same was impossible to be executed; that the Law never appointed any
Judgment for Treason, as essential, besides Drawing and Hanging; and that
Quartering has been so long used, as to be accounted part of the Judgment, yet
it is not necessary to make a good Judgment; and if that be so, no more is
needful than Drawing, Hanging, and Quartering; that Ancient Presidents were
thus short; Rot' Parliament' 3 Hen. 5. p. 1. n. 6. Thomas de Gray and al' had
been Attainted of Treason upon a Special Commission at Southampton, and the
Record of the Attainder removed into Parliament, 3 Hen. 5. and the Judgment was
good, Thomas de Gray ut proditor Domini Regis and Regni sui Angliae,
distrahatur suspendatur and decapitetur: And in the Records, Penes These. and
Camar' Scacc' 3 Hen. 7. f. 10. a. it is detrahatur and suspendatur. And many
other there are in that place to the same effect, and in the same manner,
Glanvil. lib. 3. cap. 13. and Fleta cap. 16. And there is the Case of David
Prince of Wales, who was Drawn, Hanged, Beheaded, Dismembered and Burnt, Britton
de Treason, cap. 8. p. 16. Drawing and Death is the Punishment of Treason, and
des Appeles, c. 22. p. 43. to the same effect; and Lib. Assis. 30 Edw. 3. pl.
19. and abundance of Records were cited as found in the Exchequer, and nothing
mentioned in them but detrahatur and suspend'. And then was cited Rot. Parl. 2
Hen. 6. n. 18. and the Book 1 Hen. 6.5. 19 Hen. 6.103. and 1 Hen. 7.24. Bro.
Coron. 129. there is a Judgment against Humfry Stafford per omnes Justiciar'
Angliae, quod iterum ducatur turri and abinde ponatur super herdillum et
trahatur per London ad Tyburn ibidem suspendatur et ante mortem corda
scindantur et caput scindatur et Corpus ejus dividatur in quatuor parts et
mittentur ad voluntatem Domini Regis. Earl of Essex's Case, Moore's Rep. and
Owen's Case in 1 Roll's Rep. have not this inserted. And Stamford, who was a
Judge in 1 et 2 Phil. et Mar. says. c. 19. p. 128. only en son view: And
Alexander Burnett, who was convicted of Treason for taking Romish Orders at the
Old Baily, 26 Car. 2. Rot. 56. had no such Judgment; Corker's Case for the like
Offense, 31 Car. 2. Rot. 239. William Marshall 31 Car. 2. Rot. 240. And Mr.
John Hampden had the like Judgment as Burnett, etc. 1 Jac. 2. upon confessing
an Indictment of the same kind with Walcott's. Whereupon, considering that many
Presidents were without this, and that the Essential Parts of the Punishment
were in this Judgment, 'twas prayed that the Judgment of Reversal might be
Reversed, and the Attainder confirmed.

On the other side it was argued, That the Original Judgment was Erroneous, and
the Reversal just. And first it was observed, That this Writ of Error was new
and particular, ex gravi querela of the Countess of Roscommon, who had nothing
to do with the Record, was a mere stranger to it, and yet it is suggested that
the Reversal was to her Damage.

Then 'twas urged that there was an Error in the first Judgment, for that the
Judgment, in Case of Treason, is by the Common Law, and that it is and must be
certain, and not at the pleasure of the Court which pronounces and gives it:
That it ought to be severe, because it is a Punishment for the greatest Offense
which can be committed, Crimen lose Majestatis, a Sin of the first Magnitude,
an Offense which imports Treachery to the Prince, Enmity to the Country,
Defiance to all Government, a Design to overthrow and confound all Order and
Property, and even the Community it self; and in its Consequence occasions the
Practice of all other Crimes whatsoever, as Murders, Burglaries, Robberies,
etc. and therefore our Constitution has imposed upon it a severe and cruel
Judgment, such as the English do allow or permit in no other Case; the greatest
of other Crimes incur Death only; but for Treason the Judgment is different.
Sir Tho. Smith's Treatise de Republica Anglic. 198. there ought in reason to be
a proportion between the Offense and the Punishment; and as this is the
greatest, so the Penalty is morte multo atrocior; and in Fleta lib. 1. p. 21.
it is cum aggravatione pene corporalis, somewhat more than Death. Then this
being a Common Law Punishment, and not prescribed by any Statute, the knowledge
of it must be fetched from our Law Books, and from Presidents; for the General
Practice of the Realm, is the Common Law; it is described with an ipso vivente,
in Smith's Republica Anglic. p. 28. lat. Edit. page 245. Stamf. 182. en son
view which is tantamount; and Stamford wrote 2 Eliz. In Coke's 3 Inst. 210.
it is ipsoque vivente comburentur, Pulton de Pace Regni 224. and many other
Books were cited to the same effect: And 'twas affirmed that there was no Book,
which recited the Judgment at large, but had this Particular in it. Several
Books do in short put it, That for Treason the Party shall be Drawn and Hanged
and Quartered, but those are only Hints of the Chief Parts, not Recitals of the
Judgment it self. In the English Book of Judgments, printed 1655. page 292.
it is mentioned particularly as the Kings Bench have adjudged it should be. The
Duke of Buckingham's was so, 13 Hen. 8. Stow's Chronicle 513. shows that he was
the Person. Then 'twas said, they have been thus in every Age without
interruption, 'till 26 Car. 2. Humfrey Stafford's Case 1 H. 7.24. which was per
consensum omnium Justiciariorum, though quoted on the other side as shortly
stated in the Year-Book; yet on the Roll, which has been seen and perused,
it is with an ipso vivente: Plowden 387. and Rastal's Entries 645. the same
Case, is thus: Coke's Ent. 699. is so likewise: John Littleton in 43 Eliz.
Coke's Ent. 422, 423, and 366. is so. In the Lord Stafford's Case, 33 Car. 2.
by the Direction of this House, and with the Advice of all the Judges, was the
Judgment so given by the Earl of Nottingham then Lord High Steward. In the Lord
Preston's Case it is so, which was drawn by Advice of the then Attorney and
Solicitor, the present Keeper and Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

As to the Objection, That vivens prosternatur does imply it, and that is
enough. It was answered, That ipso vivente comburentur implies both, but not e
contra; and all the Presidents show the latter to be requisite. And as to the
Case of David Prince of Wales mentioned in Fleta, there is only a Relation of
what was the Execution, not of what was the Judgment. And Coke 2 Inst. 195.
says, That the Judgment was in Parliament, and therefore the same can be no
President to this purpose; and any one that runs over Cotton's Records, will
find the Judgments in Parliament to be different, as the Nature of the Case
required. No Argument can be drawn from the Acts of the Legislature to govern
Judiciary Proceedings; however, John Hall's Case 1 Hen. 4. Cott. 401. is as now
contended for. Before the 1 Hen. 7. there were some Erroneous Attainders; and
the 29 Eliz. takes notice of them as so errneous. The Judgments against Benson
and Sir Andrew Helsey (cited below) are plainly erroneous; they dispose of the
Quarters, which they ought not, but leave the same to the King's pleasure. Sir
Andrew's President is a monstrous arbitrary Command by Writ to Commissioners of
Oyer and Terminer, ordering them to Examine him, and to give Judgment in manner
as in the Writ is directed, that therefore is not to be justified; and 'twas
before 25 Edw. 3. Henry Ropers 21 Rich. 2. does dispose of the Quarters, and
has other Errors in it; and so have William Bathurst's and Henry South's,
which were in 3 Hen. 4. But from that time to 26 Car. 2. there is none which do
omit it. The four Presidents at the Old Baily were against Popish Priests, and
what private politic Reasons or Commands might occasion the omission, is
unknown; and Hampden was not Executed, but his Judgment was upon a Confession,
and his Life saved, the reason of which is also unknown: So that there have
been none Executed upon such Erroneous Judgments: And that there are no more
Presidents, with the Omission, is a good Argument, that those many which have
this Particular in them, are good and legal; the constant Current having been
this way, proves the same to be the Common Law. And this is the most severe
part of the Punishment, to have his Bowels cut out while alive, and therefore
not to be omitted. As to the Earl of Essex's Case in Moore, and Owen's Case in
Roll's Rep. the first is only a Report of the Case, and the last a descant upon
the Judgment, but neither do pretend to recite the whole Judgment.

Then, to pretend that this Judgment cannot be Executed, is to arraign the
Wisdom and Knowledge of all the Judges and Kings Counsel in all Reigns: And
Tradition says that Harrison, one of the Regicides, did mount himself, and
give the Executioner a Box on the Ear after his Body was opened, etc.

Then 'twas argued, That if it be a necessary part of the Judgment, and be
omitted, it is a fatal Error, and does undoubtedly in all Cases give a good
reason for the Reversal of such Judgment, as in the Common Case of Debt, where
dampna are omitted in the Judgment, though for the Advantage of the Defendant, as
is Beecher's Case, and Yelv. 107. Besides, if this be legal, then all those
Attainders, in which this Particular is inserted, must be illegal; for it is
impossible that both the Judgments should be right; for either those are more
severe than they should be, or this is more remiss. To say, that it is
discretionary, is to give the Judges a power, which they themselves have
disclaimed; and to Reverse this Reversal, is to tell the Court of Kings Bench,
that they are not obliged to follow the General Practice of their Predecessors;
that they are obliged to no form in their Judgment for Treason; that nothing
but Death, and being Drawn to it, are essential; and according to that
Doctrine, a Woman might receive the Judgment of Quartering, and a Man might be
Burnt, and both according to Law. But the Constitution of this Kingdom has
prescribed and fixed Rules and Forms, which the Executive Power is obliged and
bound to follow; that as nothing can be made or construed to be an Offense at
the Pleasure of the Court, so no Judgment can be given for any known Offense at
Pleasure. But the Law, either Statute or Common, has established what is an
Offense, and what is its Punishment; and there is nothing of Arbitrary Power
allowed in respect of either. Wherefore upon the whole it was prayed, that the
Reversal might be affirmed, and it was affirmed accordingly.


Sir Evan Lloyd Baronet, and Dame Mary his Wife, and Sidney Godolphin Esquire; and
Susan his Wife, Appellants, Versus Sir Richard Carew Baronet an Infant, the Son
and Heir of Sir John Carew Baronet deceased, Respondent.
APpeal from a Decree of Dismission in Chancery. The Case was thus: Rice
Tannott died seized in Fee of several Lands in the several Counties of Salop,
Denbigh, and Montgomery, leaving three Daughters and Coheirs, Mary, Penelope,
and Susan. Susan married Sidney Godolphin, one of the present Appellants. In
July 1674. Mary and Penelope, in consideration of 4000 l. paid to the said Mary
by Richard Carew Esquire; and in consideration of a Marriage to be had, and which
was afterward had, between Penelope and the said Richard Carew, by Lease and
Release, convey all those their two Parts of the said Lands in Denbigh, Salop,
and Montgomery, to Trustees and their Heirs, to the use of Richard Carew for
Life, then to Penelope for Life for her Jointure, then to the said Trustees and
their Heirs, during the Lives of Richard and Penelope, to preserve contingent
Remainders; then to the first and other Sons of Richard and Penelope in
Tail-Male successively: And in default of Issue-Male, to the Daughters of
Richard and Penelope in Tail: And in default of such Issue, as to one Moiety of
the said two Parts to the first and other Sons of the said Penelope by any
other Husband in Tail, the Remainder of all and singular the Premises to the
said Richard Carew and his Heirs for ever, subject to this Proviso, That if it
should happen that no Issue of the said Richard, upon the Body of the said
Penelope, should be living at the decease of the Survivor of them, and the
Heirs of the said Penelope should within Twelve Months after the decease of the
Survivor of the said Richard and Penelope dying without Issue as aforesaid, pay
to the Heirs or Assigns of the said Richard Carew the Sum of 4000 l. that then
the Remainder in Fee-simple so limited, to the said Richard Carew and his Heirs
should cease; and that then, and from thenceforth, the Premises should remain
to the use of the right Heirs of the said Penelope for ever.

After this Mary intermarried with the Appellant Sir Evan Lloyd, and a
Partition was made of the Premises, and the same had been enjoyed accordingly
ever since, and Mr. Carew and his Lady levied a Fine to Mr. Godolphin and his
Lady of his part; who did thereupon by their Deed dated 23 Sept. 1676. covenant
to levy a Fine of Mr. Carew's two Parts, to such uses as he and his Lady should
limit and appoint, but have not yet levied the said Fine.

Richard Carew and Penelope his Wife, to avoid all Controversies that might
happen, whereby the Estate of the said Richard Carew, or his Heirs, might be
questioned or encumbered by the Heirs of Penelope; and to the End to extinguish
and destroy and bar all such Estate, Right, Title, Equitable or other
Interest, as the said Penelope then had, or her Issue and Heirs might have or
claim to the same, by any Power, Settlement, or Condition, on payment of 4000
l. or otherwise, to the Heirs of Richard Carew, by the Heirs of the said
Penelope; and for the settling of the same on the said Richard Carew and his
Heirs, did in Michaelmas Term 1681. levy a Fine of the Share and Part allotted
to them, and by Deed of 10 December. 1681. declare that the said Fine should be
to the use of the said Richard for Life, Remainder to Penelope for Life, the
Remainder to the said Richard Carew his Heirs and Assigns for ever: And do
further declare, That the Fine agreed to be levied by the Appellants Sidney
Godolphin and Susan his Wife, by their Deed dated the 23 Sept. 1676. should be
to the same uses, and then direct the Trustees by the first Settlement to
convey to those uses.

Penelope died without Issue in 1690. Richard Carew made his Will in Aug. 1691.
and devised the said Lands to Sir John Carew Baronet, his Brother, subject to
pay all his Debts and Legacies, and made Sir John Carew his Executor.

In December. 1691. Richard Carew died without Issue, and Sir John Carew entered,
and was seized and possessed of the Premises, and paid 4855 l. for the Debts
of Richard Carew.

Sir John Carew died, and the Respondent, Sir Richard Carew an Infant, is his
Son, Heir, and Executor.

The Appellants, Mary and Susan, claiming the Lands as Heirs to Penelope, by
virtue of the said Proviso in the first Settlement, upon payment of the 4000 l.
exhibited their Bill in Chancery to compel the Trustees to convey the Estate to
them upon such payment.

Upon hearing of this Cause on Bill and Answer, the Court ordered a State of
the Case to be drawn, which was as above; and afterward the Court, assisted by
the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Mr. Justice Rooksby, seeing no Cause
to relieve the Plaintiffs dismissed their Bill.

And now it was argued on behalf of the Appellants, That such Dismission ought
to be set aside; and amongst other things, it was insisted on in favor of the
Appeal, that this Proviso was not void; that it was within the reason of the
Contingent Limitations allowed by the late Lord Chancellor Nottingham in the
Case of the Duke of Norfolk, and there were quoted several Paragraphs in the
Argument made by the said Lord Chancellor, as that future Interests, springing
Trusts; or Trusts Executory, Remainders that are to emerge or arise upon
Contingency, are quite out of the Rules and Reasons of Perpetuities; nay, out
of the Reason, upon which the Policy of the Law is founded in those Cases,
especially if they be not of remote or long Consideration, but such as by a
natural and easy Interpretation will speedily wear out, and so things come to
the right Channel again: That though there can be no Remainders limited after a
Fee-simple, yet there may be a Contingent Fee-simple arise out of the first
Fee; that the ultimum quod sit, or the utmost Limitation of a Fee upon a Fee is
not yet plainly determined; that though it be impossible to limit a Remainder of
a Fee upon a Fee, yet it is not impossible to limit a Contingent Fee upon a Fee;
that no Conveyance is ever to be set aside in Chancery, where it can be
supported by a reasonable Construction, especially where it is a Family
Settlement. Then these Paragraphs were applied; and further urged, That there
could not in reason be any difference between a Contingency to happen during
Life or Lives, or within one year afterward; that the true reason of such
Opinions which allowed them, if happening within the time of the Parties lives,
or upon their deceases, was because no Inconvenience could be apprehended
thereby; and the same Reason will hold to one year afterward; and the true
Rule is to fix Limits and Boundaries to such Limitations, when so made, as that
they prove Inconvenient, and not otherwise: That this Limitation upon this
Contingency happening, was the considerate Intention of the Family, the
Circumstances whereof required Consideration, and this Settlement was the
Result of it, and made by good Advice: That the Fine could not bar the Benefit
of this Proviso; for that the same never was, nor ever could be in Penelope,
who levied the Fine.

As to the Pretense, That if the Appellants were relieved, Richard Carew who
married Penelope, would have no Portion with her. 'Twas answered, That that
could not alter the Case; the Agreement and Intention of the Parties being the
most considerable Matter; and besides, Richard enjoyed the Estate during his
Life without impeachment of Waste. And as to the Debts, 'twas answered, That
those were no Ingredients in the Question; however there would be 4000 l. paid
toward it, and the Personal Estate was more than enough to pay the residue.
For which, and other Reasons, 'twas prayed that the Dismission might be
Reversed.

On the other side it was insisted on with the Decree, 1. That the Limitation
by the Settlement in July 1674. to the Heirs of Penelope, upon payment of 4000
l. by them to the Heirs of Richard Carew, within Twelve Months after the death
of Richard and Penelope, without Issue, at the time of the decease of the
Survivor of them, is a void Limitation, the Fee-simple being before limited to
Richard and his Heirs, and so not capable of a further Limitation, unless upon
a Contingency to happen in the Life of one or more Persons in being, at the
time of the Settlement; which is the furthest that the Judges have ever yet
gone, in allowing these Contingent Limitations upon a Fee; and which were the
Bounds set to these Limitations by the late Lord Chancellor Nottingham, in the
Case of the Duke of Norfolk; that though there were such Expressions as had been
read on the other side, yet the Bounds set by him to these Limitations, were
only dependent upon Life or Lives in being, and never as yet went any further:
And if they should be Extended, and allowed to be good upon Contingencies to
happen within Twelve Months after the Death of one or more Persons, they may be
as well allowed upon Contingencies to happen within a Thousand years; by which
all the Mischiefs, that are the necessary Consequents of Perpetuities, which
have been so industriously avoided in all Ages, will be let in; and the Owner
of a Fee-simple thus clogged, would be no more capable of providing for the
Necessities and Accidents of his Family, then a bare Tenant for Life.

2. If this Limitation were good, 'twas urged, That the Estate limited to the
Heirs of Penelope was virtually in her, and her Heirs must claim by Descent
from her, and not as Purchasors; and by Consequence this Estate is effectually
barred by the Fine of Penelope: the design of limiting this Power to the Heirs,
not being to exclude the Ancestor; but because the Power could not in its
nature be executed until after the decease of the Ancestor, it being to take
effect upon a Contingency, that could not happen till after that time; and this
Bill and Appeal was not only to have the said Richard Carew, who married
Penelope, to have not one Farthing Portion with his Wife, but to make the now
Respondent Sir Richard Carew, to lose the 4855 l. which his Father Sir John
Carew paid, as charged on the Lands in question. For which Reasons, and many
others well urged about the Mischief and Danger of Perpetuities, and their
Increase of late years, to the intangling and ruin of many Families, it was
prayed that the Decree of Dismission might be affirmed, but the same was
Reversed.

Sir William Morley Knight of the Bath, Plaintiff, Versus Peter Jones Defendant.
WRit of Error to Reverse a Judgment in B.R. in Ejectment upon the Demise of
Bellingham, upon a Special Verdict, which finds, That Anne Bowyer Spinster, was
seized in Fee of the Manor of Frencham; that the said Anne and Edward Morley
Esquire; and Sir William and J. Wells ante tempus quo, etc. viz. 22 July 1664. did
make, and as their Deed, deliver a certain Indenture with their Seals sealed,
whereby the said Anne demises the Manor aforesaid to Sir William and Wells,
and their Executors, for one Month from the Day next before the Day of the
Date; that Sir W. and Wells entered and were possessed; that they the 23d of
July in the said Year sealed, and as their Deed, delivered another Indenture
with their Seals sealed, whereby the said Anne, reciting a Marriage intended
between Anne and Edward; and that Edward had agreed to settle a Jointure out of
his Lands to the value of 300 l. per Annum; and that the said Anne had agreed,
in case the Marriage took effect, and a Jointure were made, as aforesaid, to
settle the said Manor on him and his Heirs, and to particular Trusts
after-mentioned, until the same be performed. She the said Anne, in
consideration of the Marriage, and in performance of the Agreement on her part,
Bargains, Releases, and Confirms to Sir W. and Wells their Heirs, the said
Manor, and all her Right, etc. and the Reversion, etc. in Trust for the said
Anne and her Heirs, until the Marriage take effect, and assurance of a Jointure
be made as aforesaid; and after such Marriage and Assurance of such value as
aforesaid, then to the use of Edward and his Heirs, etc.

Then the 1st of August 1664. a Marriage was had; then the 29th of Jan. 1665. a
Deed is Executed between the said Edward and Anne of the first part, and Young
and Truster as Trustees on the other part, reciting that a Fine is already
acknowledged, and agreed to be levied in due Form of Law next Hillary Term,
between the said Young and Truster Plaintiffs, and the said Edward and Anne his
Wife, of the said Manor of Frencham, and thereby declared that the said Fine
should be to the use of Edward and his Heirs. Two days after the Execution of
that Deed, and before the Fine levied, viz. 31 Jan. 1665. another Writing
indented was made and executed under Seal, between the said Edward of the one
part, and the said Anne of the other part, whereby they both, in Consideration
of the said Marriage, and other good Causes, did Covenant, Consent, and Agree
to revoke all former Grants, Bargains, Contracts, Writings, Covenants, and
Obligations made or done between them, or any other for them, until the said
Edward had performed the Agreements in the said Marriage Settlement on his
part, both in Law and Equity; and that in default thereof, it might be lawful
for the said Anne and her Heirs, to enter into the said Manor and Land,
conveyed by the said Settlement, without the let of the said Edward and his
Heirs.

Afterward the Fine was levied, Octabis Purificationis, which was the 9th of
February in that Term: And afterward by Indenture between the said Edward
Morley of the one part, and one Henry Doble of the other part, dated 9 July
1666. the said Edward in consideration of 600 l. Mortgages the said Manor to
Doble and his Heirs: Then the Money not being paid by Edward Morley to Doble,
Doble did 2 June 1676. in consideration of 600 l. with Interest, paid by Sir
William Morley, conveys the said Manor to one Thomas Young; that Edward Morley
did never convey the Lands agreed to be conveyed for a Jointure to the value of
300 l. per Annum, but did settle and convey only part, which was of the value
of 250 l. per Annum, and no more, and that subject and liable to the payment of
15 l. yearly for ever to a Stranger. The said Anne dies without Issue, and
Henry Bellingham was Cousin and next Heir, Et si, etc. And Judgment was given in
B. R. pro quer'.

It was argued on the behalf of Sir William Morley, That this Judgment was
Erroneous; that the first Deed, and the Matter of the Jointure was nothing in
the Case; that the Question was, to what uses the Fine was levied; that the
Deed executed under Seal between Edward and Anne, and the Trustees, did
effectually declare the uses of this Fine, and that the second Instrument
cannot be made use of, as a Deed, to control the former; that the first was
fairly made, and all Parties requisite concurring to it. And that of the 31
Jan. was not a Deed; for a Man cannot make a Deed to his Wife, or to himself;
this cannot be construed a Deed-Poll, when it is Indented; for that is to
construe a thing different from what it is: Intent may be construed, but one
Thing or sort of Instrument can never be taken for another. Then supposing it a
Deed-Poll, it does not revoke, it takes no notice of the Fine or the Deed; it
has no reference to either of them; it says that all Agreements are to be
void; but how? it is not absolutely; only till a particular Thing be done: So
that it is not a Revocation, so as to annul the Deed of the 29th: and the
Husband by this neither did, nor could direct the use of the Fine to be to the
Wife. Suppose that before the Statute of Uses, a Man had declared an Use to his
Wife, it was no Trust or Use, for that no Subpena lay at the Instance of the
Wife against the Husband. A Man could not be a Trustee for his Wife. Now no Use
can be Executed by the Statute, but where a Subpena did lie before the Statute
to compel the Enjoyment according to it: And therefore it is, that a Corporation
could not be seized to an Use, because no Subpena; and no Subpena, because no
Attachment lay against a Body Corporate. Suppose the last Deed to be any thing,
it is only a Parol Evidence, and that will not Revoke the first Deed.

Then here is no Variance between the Fine and the Deed of the 29th: The Deed
says a Fine is already acknowledged, and to be levied the next Hillary Term,
between the same Parties, and of the same Lands: This is either the next
Hillary Term after the Conusance of the Fine, or after the Deed: Then it is not
usual to acknowledge a Fine, and levy it an Year after; it is not allowable in
Practice, and therefore it is not to be so Expounded; for Men are to be intended
to act reasonably, and according to Common Usage. Now it is true, it does not
appear when the Caption was, whether in or before the Term; yet common
Intendment must carry it, that the Caption was before the Term, and so 'twas to
be a Fine of that Term, or to be in or before the next Hillary; the Parties
designed not, the Fine should lie for one whole Year: If it had been in or
before, it had been well enough; then, though those words are not in, it is plain
that the Intent was so: The Earl of Rutland's Case, was upon Evidence, and not
upon Pleading. If levied before the time, that is well; the next Hillary Term,
is no more, then on or before; or in Hillary next at the furthest, or by
Hillary Term next: These all do sound much to the same purpose in common
Understanding. The End of a good Construction is to supply the Defects of
Expression; Then taking it for the next Hillary Term after that Term. If I do a
thing before the time, it is done in pursuance of the Intent; for the Day given
is for the Advantage of the Party who has Liberty given to forbear the Act
during all that space, till the last Day of the time given; but if he does it
sooner, the End is fulfilled; so Payment before is always reckoned as Payment
at the Day: And it is so in all Cases, where the Time is not in the most
considerable part of the Agreement, as in Harvest, in Winter, or the like; and
the Nature of the Act is such, that it is most convenient for the Obligee or
Covenantee to have it at that Season, and not before: In the Earl of Rutland's
Case, it is agreed if within the time, it is good. Will any Man say that this is
not the Fine which was meant? If a Covenant be to make a Feoffment in Trinity
Term next, such a Feoffment before fulfils the Covenant: This is not a Fine
acknowledged by any other Parties, of any other Lands, or upon any other
Agreement. Suppose a Man had a power of Revocation by Deed under Seal with
Witnesses, and had covenanted in such manner to levy a Fine before this Day
Twelvemonth, and before the Day he had levied a Fine; now the Deed was no
Revocation, because not Express, and of it self made no Alteration in the
Estate; and the Fine of it self was not, because not by Deed attested; but both
together make a Revocation; they are but one Conveyance, as was adjudged in the
two Cases of Wigson and Garret, and Herring and Brown; Should not this have
been a Revocation? Either this first was designed to deceive the Wife, or the
second was designed to deceive Creditors and Mortgagees; the Creditor is to be
preferred. Suppose the first were made, as it is most likely to enable him to
borrow Money. 'twould be hard to construe the second good: Would any Purchasor
have doubted this Title, if he had seen the Fine and this Deed of the 29th? To
allow this second, is to Countenance a Practice which may deceive any Man; for
a Deed precedent leading the Uses of a Fine, is binding, and concludes against
any Thing but an intermediate Deed between that and the Fine; and such private
Agreement between Husband and Wife, may be had and pretended in any Case
whatsoever. Then was cited Havergill and Hare, 2 Rolls 799. And 'twas further
said, that against a Mortgagee the second will be void, according to Proger's
Case, 1 Sid. 133. A Conveyance voluntary, that was good in its first Creation,
may become void by subsequent Accidents; and in truth it was admitted below,
that this second Writing was no Deed, had no more efficacy than a Parol
Averment; and consequently the only Query can be, If this Fine be another, and
different, from that which was meant and intended by the Deed of the 29th: for
if it be not, then Parol Averments or Agreements ought not to be admitted.
Besides, this is but Evidence, nor proper for the Court to consider, and the
Jury should have concluded specially, That if Parol Evidence, or a naked
Averment should be admitted, then they find to such Uses: But here it is like
finding the Badges of Fraud, without finding the Fraud it self, or a Demand and
Denial, without finding a Conversion; upon neither of which can the Court judge
the Thing to be a Fraud or a Conversion. And for these and other like Reasons
it was prayed, that the Judgment might be reversed.

It was argued on the other side with the Judgment, That this Fine thus levied
was not to the use of the Husband, but of the Wife and her Heirs; that the Fine
is not to the Uses in the Deed of the 29th, but controuled by that of the 31st.
'Twas agreed, that if there be a Deed to levy a Fine, and in pursuance thereof
a Fine is levied, to the Person, of the Lands, and at the time, no Proof shall
be allowed, that the Fine was to any other Use, but if it be in case of a
subsequent Deed, then Averment may be against it; but by the making of a
precedent Deed, all Parties are estopped to contradict it, unless there be
another Deed of equal Nature to control that. Where the Deed is punctually
observed, there is no liberty to aver the contrary; but where it is not pursued,
the Averment is consistent. Where it does vary, yet if nothing does appear to
the contrary, there the fine shall be construed to be to the Uses of the Deed
by construction of Law; a Wife is bound by the Husband's Declaration; and if
the Fine be in pursuance of the Husband's Deed, it is as binding to her, as if
she were a Party: An Infant cannot avoid a Fine, where there was a Deed
agreeable, but by reversing it.

Then 'twas argued, That here was such a Variance as did allow of such
Averment; that it is true, the Deed of 29. had been a good Declaration of the
Uses of this Fine, notwithstanding the Variance, if the Writing of 31. had not
been made; but there being a Variance, that is admissible; that this Fine now
found differs as much from that in the Deed, as if it had been levied at a time
after; that levying it before, makes it not the same. The Woman perhaps here
did agree to levy a Fine at this distance of time, that she might in the mean
while have a competent Provision out of her Husband's Estate for her Jointure,
then when she levies this Fine at a different time, she does not do it in
pursuance of the first Deed. Then 1 Rep. 76, 99. 3 Bulstr. 231. 2 Rolls Abridg.
251. 2 Cro. 646. 2 Rolls Abridg. 799. Savil 124. 1 Leon. 210. 3 Cro. 210. 1
And. 240. were quoted, and either answered or applied to this Point of Variance.

Then 'twas said, That there was a difference between a Fine that varies from a
precedent Deed, and a Fine that is followed with a subsequent Deed or
Declaration of Uses. If there be a subsequent Declaration, the Heir at Law
cannot aver that 'twas to the use of the Conusor and his Heirs, or to any other
use then what is in the Deed; the Party himself, or his Heirs cannot aver it,
but they are estopped by this Deed, though subsequent; however, a Stranger is at
liberty to make such Averment: But if a Deed be precedent, and the Fine varies,
and is not the same, there none are estopped, neither the Party himself, his
Heir, nor a Stranger; because the Fine stands alone, without any Deed referring
to it, and declaring the uses of it.

'Then 'twas urged, That this second Deed was sufficient to declare the uses of
this Fine: If the use arise upon, or by transmutation of the Possession, as by
Fine or Feoffment, it is sufficient without any Deed; the use arises only upon
the Parties Declaration or Appointment: If without a transmutation of
Possession, there must be some Agreement binding the Party upon some
Consideration; for the use being founded in Equity, the Chancery would never
relieve, where there was no transmutation of Possession or Agreement upon
Consideration; and if in Consideration of Blood, it must be by Deed, because
the Consideration is not binding without it, Moore's Rep. Callow and Callow. If
this Writing of 31. had expressly declared, that it should enure to the Husband
and his Heirs upon such a Contingency, this had been a good original
Declaration of the use, and would have altered the Estate, because of the
transmutation of the Possession; and as it is now penned, it is a good Writing,
sufficient to declare the uses of the Fine; any sort of Agreement, whereby the
Parties intent appears, is sufficient; an use is an equitable thing; and if it
appears to have been intended, that is enough, 2 Leon. 14. Brent's Case: any
Agreement between the Party that has the Estate, and him who is to have it,
may raise an use in this Case: a Bargain and Sale of the Lands carries the use,
though no mention of it: 8 Rep. Fox's Case, Crossing and Scudamore; In this Case
there was an Agreement betwixt Husband and Wife, that he should have the Lands,
if he made a Jointure. A Bargain and Sale, though not enrolled, a Charter of
Feoffment without Livery, shall raise the use of a Fine levied between the same
Parties; therefore this Writing is a good Appointment. But suppose it were not
so of it self, it is sufficient to control that of the 29th; for it is agreed
thereby, that all Deeds shall be revoked; which shows plainly, that the Fine
was not to be to the uses mentioned in that Deed, especially when it varies
from it. A Parol Declaration of the Mind of the Party will be enough to
control and hinder the raising of an use by the Deed, and Fine where
different; and if so, then the use here is to the Wife and her Heirs. Then
supposing the Variance frivolous and immaterial, this Writing of the Husband
and Wife is a good appointment; the Trustees or Conusees of the Fine need not
to be Parties to the appointing or declaring of the uses: The Indenture
precedent is but directory, and if there be another direction under Seal before
the Fine, it must overruled the first, Writing of it self seems enough, 2 Cro.
29. 3 Cro. 571. But suppose an Indorsment on the Indenture revoking one use,
before the Fine be levied, would not that control it? This is rather like a
last Will, and the last before the Fine must stand. A Covenant to stand seized
must have all the necessary Parts of a Deed, so as to have been obligatory in
Chancery before the Statute; but a mere Declaration of uses need not be so
formal: The use declared by the 29th was always revocable till the Fine was
levied: and this is sufficient both to revoke the last Declaration, and to
declare new uses; this amounts at least to a Deed-Poll, and therefore
sufficient. Then were cited Moore 22, 512. Latch. 139. and many other
Authorities: And upon the whole 'twas prayed, that the Judgment should be
affirmed; and it was affirmed.

Sir Edward Hungerford and John Hill Executors and Devisees of Sir William
Basset deceased, Plaintiffs, versus Edward Nosworthy Defendant.
WRit of Error to Reverse a Judgment in B. R. upon a Special Verdict in
Ejectment by Hitchins the Lessee of Nosworthy, against Sir William Basset
Defendant, for the Manor of Lanrock and other Lands in Cornwall; wherein, upon
Not Guilty pleaded, and a Trial at Bar, the Jury find, That Sir Henry Killegrew
was seized in Fee of the Lands in question; and on the 12th of November 1644.
made his Will in writing, which follows in these words, I Henry Killegrew, etc.
and so they set forth the Will, whereby Sir Henry Killegrew devised the
Premises to Mrs. Jane Berkley (his near Kinswoman) for Life; with Remainder
over to Henry Killegrew, alias Hill (Sir Henry's Natural Son) in Tail, and
makes Mrs. Berkley sole Executrix. They further find, that after the making of
that Testament, and before the time when, etc. viz. about the Feast of St.
Michael, in the Year 1645. Condidit and fecit aliud Testamentum in scriptis,
sed quid fuit content' in eodem ult' mentionat' Testamento, vel quale fuit
purportum sive effectus inde, juratoribus praed' non constat. And that Sir
Henry on the 29th of September 1646. died seized of the said Lands; that Mrs.
Jane Barkley, Devisee of the said Will, in 1644. by Lease and Release conveyed
to Mr. Nosworthy's Father, and that the Father died in 1684. that Mr. Nosworthy
is Son and Heir to him; that Sir William Basset is Cousin and Heir to Sir Henry,
viz. Son and Heir of Elizabeth Basset, Daughter and Heir of Sir Joseph
Killegrew, elder Brother of Sir Henry the Testator; that Nosworthy the Lessor
of the Plaintiff, entered and made the Lease in the Declaration, etc. But upon
the whole Matter, whether the Said Testament made in writing 1645. was a
Revocation in Law of the said Devise of the said Lands to Mrs. Berkley, they
are ignorant, and pray the Judgment of the Court, Et si, And upon this Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff in the Ejectment.

And now it was argued, That the Judgment was Erroneous; that this last Will
could not be taken to be a duplicate of the former, but must be deemed a
Revocation; that no Will is good but the last; that every Will is revokable
till death; that the making of another, does import a Revocation of all former
ones, though it be not so expressly declared in writing; for it must be the last,
or nothing; that this Conveyance by Will was anciently a Privilege by the
Civil Law, for People in Extremis, who had not the time or assistance necessary
to make a formal Alienation, and chiefly intended for Military Men, who were
always supposed to be under those Circumstances, and therefore the Ceremonies
and number of Witnesses required of others, were dispensed with, as to
Soldiers; but now the Rules for Military Testaments, as they are called, are
allowed in most Cases; that as to Lands, by our Law, was a Privilege only
given to some Boroughs and Places within the Kingdom; and particular Custom
gave the liberty of disposing Lands or Houses by Will, and that by nuncupative
Will or Parol without writing; so is Bracton. lib. 4. fol. 272. Fleta lib. 5.
cap. 5. Potest legari and catallum tam hereditas quam perquisitum per Barons
London and Burgenses Oxon, 1 Inst. 111. that then came the Statute of Hen. 8.
and impowers a Devise by a Man's last Will and Testament in writing; but still
it is by his last Will. And so is Littleton sect. 168. If diverse Wills, the
latter shall stand, and the others are void, 1 Inst. 112. In truth it is plain
Law, the first Grant and the last Testament. In Swinb. 1 part, sect. 5. p. 14.
no Man can die with two Wills, but he may with diverse Codicils; and the latter
does not hinder the former, so long as they be not contrary. Another difference
there is between Wills and Codicils: If two Testaments be found, and it cannot
be known, which is first or last, both are void; but the latter countermands
the first, though there be a Clause in the first, that it shall not be revoked,
and though an Oath were taken not to revoke; because the Law is so, that the very
making of a latter does revoke the former: So is Liuwood's Provincial' de
Testamentis; Justice Dodderidge's Office of Executor, published by Wentworth
29. A verbal Will revokes a former written Will, Forse and Hembling, 4 Rep. 60,
61. Plowd. 541. Perkins sect. 178, 179. and sect. 478. The 2 Hen. 5.8. is full
to this purpose. There Is an Action by an Executor against two Executors, and
they plead a Testament whereby they are made Executors; and the Plaintiff
replys, that he afterward made another and himself Executor, and held that by
the second the first became void. Now the meaning of these Books, cannot be,
that a Will expressly revoking, is the only Will that can make a Revocation; nor
is it, that a Contrariety or Repugnance between the one and the other, is
necessary to make a Revocation; for though there be no new Will made, yet a
Revocation may be by word of Mouth, as 2 Cro. 49.115. 1 Cro. 51.3 Cro. 781.
nay, a void Bequest shall revoke a Will, so shall a Deed that has no effect,
as Feoffment without livery, a Devise to J.S. or to a Corporation, when there
is no such, will do it; so that it is not the Contradiction between the disposal
which revokes, for that which is no disposition at all will do it; wherefore
the meaning of the Authors cited is somewhat else; and it can only be this,
That there is somewhat particular in a Will, to that Instrument of Conveyance,
more than to any other, that even the making of a new Will is a sufficient
Revocation; the words are plain, by the making a new Will the former are all
destroyed, for there can be but one last. And when a Man makes and declares a
new Will, that new Will must be presumed to contain his whole Mind concerning
the disposition of his Estate; declaring his Will imports thus much, and
excludes all other. When a Man would alter part of his Will, there is a proper
Instrument for it, called a Codicil, which is known in the Law as well as that
of a Will: here is nothing found of a reference to the former: to judge it
otherwise, would confound the use of Wills and Codicils, and the difference
between them. It Is true, that a Man may make partial Wills of several parts of
his Estate, and all may stand together; but then they must be declared to be
Wills concerning particular things; and they are but several pieces of the same
Will, though written in different Papers: but then in pleading one of them, you
must not generally say he made ult' voluntatem, but ultimam voluntat' of such a
thing: but here it is aliud testamentum, i.e. a general Testament. The 2 Rich.
3. fol. 3. is directly thus, The Defendant pleads one Will, the Plaintiff
replies another, and exception taken, because he did not traverse the former,
but held needless to do so, quia per ult' testamentum ut placitatur
generaliter, primum testamentum revocatur in omnibus: and it cannot be
pretended, that this might be the same Will written over again; for if so, it
could not be aliud, it would be the same; these are not quibbles upon words;
for can it be said, that this is a Devise by the last Will of Sir H. when
there is another: Nor is it an Objection, that the Contents do not appear; for
the Will belongs not to the Heir to keep, and consequently not to show; in
pleading he is not bound to a profert; it is enough that there was a subsequent
Will. And as the latter may confirm or be consistent with the former, so it may
not be so; and the consistency is not to be presumed, especially against an
Heir at Law, and in possession. In the Case of Coward and Marshal, 3 Cro. 721.
the Substance of both are declared, and thereby they appeared to be consistent,
and consequently no Revocation: here Eadem men's sic testandi, the same intent
of disposing his Estate the same way, can never be thought to continue, for
then there had been no occasion of making another Will. If this be not a
Revocation, it is an act void, and to no purpose, which is never to be intended.
Then 'twas insisted on, That the bare act of making and publishing another
Will, is a Revocation, and the finding of the Contents unknown is void: If this
be not a Will, it is a Codicil, and that is contrary to the finding of the Jury;
for the Verdict mentions a second Substantive independent Will, without
reference to the former; which second Will is a Revocation: and therefore 'twas
prayed that the Judgment should be reversed.

It was argued on the other side, in behalf of Mr. Nosworthy, That this was no
Revocation; that here had been a great stir about nothing, for that nothing
appeared against his Title; that a Man may make a Will of several things at
several times, and they both shall stand; that a deliberate Will being made,
the Contents whereof are known, shall never be revoked by that which is not
known: nothing can be judged upon that which does not appear, and consequently
it can never be judged to be a Revocation: Here Is another Will, and nothing is
given by it, nothing is found to be given by this subsequent Will. The form of
entering the ancient Judgments was, Quibus visis lectis and auditis and per
Curiam plene intellectis, now what is here read to make a Revocation. 2 Rich.
3. fol. 3. is with the Judgment, for there it is replied that he made another
Executor; there are the Contents pleaded, sufficient to maintain his Count, and
answer the Defendant's Bar; the Book is, per hoc quod alius Executor nominatur.
Then was cited 1 Cro. 51. the Reason given is, quia in dubiis non presumitur
pro testamento, and here being a good Will, at the most the other is doubtful.
1 Cro. 114, 115. Several Wills of several things may be made. And the same Book
595. 10 Car. 1. which Refolution Sergeant Maynard in arguing this Case below,
said that he heard in that Court of Kings Bench: It Is the Subject Matter of the
Wills and the Repugnancy which makes the Revocation. In this very Case, in the
Exchequer, upon an English Bill, 'twas held by Hale to be no Revocation, it is
in Hardres 375. Coke upon Littleton, which has been quoted, Comments upon
these words several Devises, and if there be no Devise in the second, there can
be no sense or meaning in it, and consequently unless some meaning appear, it
can never be an Evidence of a change of his Mind; as it might be a Revocation,
so it might be otherwise; and he that will have it to be a Revocation, must
prove it to be such: No Man can affirm that every Will must necessarily be a
Revocation of a former, for the second Will might be of another thing, as
Goods, or of another parcel of Land, or in confirmation of the former. If in
these, and many other like Cases, a latter Will is no Revocation of a former,
how can it possibly with justice be concluded, that a latter Will without
Contents, Purport, or Effect, shall be a Revocation of a former. And though the
Jury have in this Case believed the Witnesses, and found that another Will was
made, it may be of dangerous Consequence to encourage and construe this a
Revocation, without knowing the Contents; for no Will can be secure against the
swearing of a new Will, if there be no necessity of showing it, or proving what
it was. For which, and other Reasons, it was prayed that the Judgment might be
affirmed, and it was affirmed.

Sir Simon Leach and al' Plaintiffs, Versus J. Thomson Lessee of Charles Leach
Defendant.
WRit of Error to Reverse a Judgment given in B. R. upon a Special Verdict on a
Trial at Bar in Ejectment brought by Thomson on the Demise of Charles Leach:
the Special Verdict finds, that Nicholas Leach was seized of the Lands in
question in his Demesne as of Fee; and being so seized 9 Nov. 19 Car. 2. he
makes his last Will, and thereby devises the Premises to the Heirs Males of
his Body lawfully to be begotten; and for default of such Issue, to Simon Leach
his Brother for his Life, and after his Decease to the first Son of the Body of
the said Simon lawfully to be begotten, and the Heirs Males of the Body of such
first Son lawfully to be begotten; and for default of such Issue, to the
second, etc. and so on to the eighth Sons, and of all and every other Sons,
etc. and for default of such Issue, to Sir Simon Leach, his Kinsman, Son and
Heir of Simon Leach of Cadley in Com' Devon' Esquire; deceased, and the Heirs Males
of his Body; and for default of such Issue, to the right Heirs of him the said
Nicholas for ever.

Then they find, That the Lands in the Declaration, and those in the Will, are
the same; that afterward, viz. 10 Apr. 20 Car. 2. Nicholas died seized without
Issue of his Body; that after his Death, the said Simon his Brother and Heir
Entered, and was seized in his Demesne ut de libero tenemento for term of his
Life, Remainder to the first Son of the Body of the said Simon the Brother, and
the Heirs of the Body of such first Son lawfully to be begotten; and for
default of such to the second, etc. Remainder to Sir Simon in Tail, Remainder
to the said Simon the Brother, and his Heirs belonging.

That Simon Leach the Brother being so seized, afterward viz. 20 Aug. 20 Car.
2. took to Wife Anne the Daughter of Vnton Crook, that afterward the 20 Aug.
25 Car. 2. he being so seized did Make, Seal, and as his Deed deliver a certain
Writing, purporting a Surrender of the said Lands to the said Sir Simon Leach,
which Writing was prout, etc. Then they find that the said Simon Leach the
Brother, non fuit compes mentis sue tempore confectionis, sigillationis, and
deliberationis scripti illius, etc. That afterward, viz. 10 Nov. 25 Car. 2.
the said Simon the Brother had Issue of his Body, on the Body of the said Anne
his Wife Charles Leach; that the said Simon died, and Charles Leach the Lessor
of the Plaintiff is eldest Son and Heir of the said Simon, etc. Et si videbitur
Cur' quod, etc. Upon this Verdict there was Judgment for the Plaintiff.

And now it was argued, That the said Judgment was Erroneous; and said that in
the Case there were two Queries, 1. If this were a good Surrender, there being
no Acceptance or Agreement by Sir Simon before the Birth of the first Son,
Charles: But this was not insisted on before, and therefore waived here, the
same having been adjudged by the Lords to be a good Surrender, even to an
Infant without Acceptance, in another Action between the same Parties, which
you may see reported in 2 Ventris 198, 208. Then it was argued on the second
Query, That the Lessor of the Plaintiff in the Ejectment, being a Remainder Man
in Tail, cannot take any Advantage of his Father's Lunacy: That in this Case he
could claim no Title, as Heir at Law, to his Father or Uncle, because of the
intermediate Remainder to the Defendant in Tail; so that quoad this Estate, he
is as a mere Stranger, and not as Heir; and though he were able to avoid it by
Writ, or the like, yet it being once good, the particular Estate of Simon the
Father of Charles was determined, before the Contingent Remainder to the first
Son could take place, and consequently it can never after revive. Then the
Question is, Whether this Surrender by a Non compos, being an act done by
himself, and not by Attorney, be void or only voidable: There Is no express Case
that a Surrender, by one who is Non compos to him in Remainder, is void.
Perhaps 'twill be said, as it has been, That the Acts of a Madman are mere
Nullities by all Laws in the World. But to this it is an Answer, That the Laws
of England have made good and honest Provisions for them, so as to avoid their
Acts for the Benefit of the Party, of the King and of the Heir. But it was
repeated, that this was a Contingent Remainder, and if it could not vest when
the particular Estate did determine, whether by Death or Surrender, it never
could vest at all; for a future Right to defeat the Surrender, as Heir, cannot
support such a Contingency; a present right of Entry would; but if no such
present right, the Remainder is gone for ever; and here was no such in Charles.
If Tenant for Life make a Feoffment with condition of Re-entry, the Contingent
Remainder shall never arise again, though the Condition be broken, and a Re-entry
were made. So is the Case of Purefoy versus Rogers, 2 Saund. 380. Wigg versus
Villers, 2 Rolls Abridg. 796. and then Charles cannot avoid this Deed; for the
avoiding of a Deed, is to take somewhat out of the way, in order to the
revesting of somewhat; but here was nothing to work upon; for if the Surrender
were good for a Moment, the particular Estate for Life was once gone, and
consequently for ever; and this must hold, unless the Act were totally void.

Then 'twas argued, That during the Life of the Party, 'twas only voidable for
the King by Office; no Man can Stultifie himself; and so is the great
Resolution in Beverly's Case, 4 Rep. and 1 Inst. 247. and Whittingham's Case, 8
Rep. and if it be not void as to himself, it cannot be void as to others. And
though Fitzh. in his N. B. says that he himself may have a dum non fuit compos,
that is not agreeable to the received Law; for Beverly's Case was never shaken
till now; and Fitzh. supposes it only voidable, by saying that Writ does lie.
There is also a Reason for this Rule of Law, that a Man shall not disable
himself by pretense of Distraction, because if the Pretense were true, he had
no memory, and consequently could not know or remember that he did such an Act,
and therefore it is, as it were, impossible for him to be able to say that he
was so distracted when he did it: it is for him to say what it is not possible
for him to know: But they would compare this to the Case of an Infant, yet even
there all his Acts are not void; his Bond is only avoidable; he cannot plead
that it is not his Deed: It Is true, that Acts apparently to his prejudice cannot
be good, as 1 Cro. 502. Suppose a Non compos Signs, Seals, and Delivers such a
Deed, and after recovers his Senses, and agrees to it, would not this be a good
Surrender from the first, Perkins sect. 23. 1 Inst. 2. and if it can be made
good by a subsequent Agreement, 'twas not totally void, and if not totally
void, it is with the Plaintiff in Error: The Law besides is very tender in case
of Freeholds, to make Conveyances void by bare Averments; and this would be of
dangerous Consequence, if when there was no Inquisition or Commission of Lunacy
during Life, that thirty or forty years after a Conveyance, it should be in the
power of a Stranger to say, that the Vendor was mad; 'twill make Purchasors
unsafe: Acts solemnly done, ought to have a solemn Avoidance. The 1 Hen. 5.
cap. 5. Fine to be void; it is void as a Bar, but yet it makes a Discontinuance,
and must be solemnly avoided. Lincoln College Case, 3 Rep. Stroud and Marshal,
3 Cro. 398. Dett sur Oblig' The Defendant pleads that at the time, he was of
non sane memory, and on demurrer adjudged no Plea; and the Opinion of Fitzh.
held not to be Law. And 3 Cro. 622. 50 Assis. 2. Fitzh. Issue 53. a Release by
a Non compos, which is much the same with a Surrender, only one works upwards,
and the other downwards; and after Recovery the Party agrees to it, the same is
binding, 39 Hen. 6.42. and 49 Edw. 3.13. Then was mentioned the Provision of
the Law in these Cases, besides the Care of the Court of Chancery, which
protects the weak and unwary by Rules of Equity. There Is a Writ de Ideota
Inquirend', and the express direction of the Writ is to enquire quas terras
alienavit, which shows that it is not void. The Statute of Prerogativa Regis, is
express Authority for it; the Reason given is, that such Persons Lands should
not be aliened to their hurt or the King's. It must be agreed, that before
Office found the King cannot avoid the Alienation, even of an Idiot: and then
after Office, the Practice is to Issue a Scire facias to him in possession, or
to the Alienee; and so is Fitzh. tit. Scire facias pl. 2. 106. All these
Methods prescribed by the Law would be useless, if the Acts themselves were
void: Then it is as certain, that the Office must be found during the Parties
Life, and during the insanity, and not afterward. If there had been an Office,
'twould only avoid it with a prospect, as it would be in case of an Heir after
death: Even after an Office, the King cannot have the Profits from the time of
the Alienation, which shows it not it not void from the beginning. If a Suit be
against an Idiot after Inquisition, the Idiot cannot plead it, but the King
shall send a Supersedeas to the Judges, suggesting the Inquisition; so that
even then the Party himself cannot avoid it.

As to the other way of avoiding it by the Heir, it must be by Writ or Entry;
and till Entry or Writ the Act remains good. But here is no Contest with the
Party himself, or with his Heirs, but with a Remainder Man. This Act of
Surrender was no tortious Act, it wrought no discontinuance: there was no Trust
in him to preserve the Contingent Remainder: A Feoffment with livery is allowed
not to be void, and yet that may do a wrong by discontinuance, etc. As to the
pretense that a Warrant of Attorney to make livery is void, that does not reach
this Case; for here is an Act done by himself, which would have passed the
Estate as by and from himself, if he had been of sound Mind.

Then 'twas desired that the other side would show any such Case as this,
whereas multitudes of Gifts, Grants, Releases, Bonds, and other Specialties,
sealed and delivered by the Party himself, are allowed to be good; and the same
reason holds for a Surrender made in Person; and there is no difference between
a livery made in Person and a Surrender; the Act being Personal, and not by
another under his Authority, makes the livery good; and so it ought to be here:
18 Ed. 4.2. Perkins sect. 139. And it is observable in 39 Hen. 6.42. per
Priscott, upon the Inquisition, it is reseized and revested into the Interest of
the Idiot, and consequently of the King: and if revested, 'twas once out of
him. Now here is no prejudice to the Man himself by this Opinion; he is taken
care of, and his Acts avoided by the King on his behalf; and his Heirs may
avoid them: But that Strangers should take notice of them as void, was denied;
and therefore prayed that the Judgment should be reversed.

On the other side it was argued with the Judgment, That this never was a
Surrender; that 'twas against sense and reason, to allow the Acts of a Madman,
a Person distracted, to be valid to any purpose; that in case of livery it had
been allowed to be only voidable, by reason of the solemnity and notoriety of
the thing; but in case of a Deed, or a Thing passing only by Deed, 'twas
otherwise; and Bracton, Britton, Fleta, and the Register were cited, where it is
declared who can take, and who can alien, and that a Madman cannot alien; and
Fitzh. is of Opinion, that the Writ of dum non fuit compos may be brought by
himself; that there was a notion scattered in the Books, that such Acts are
only voidable; but the reason of the Law is otherwise. 39 Hen. 6.42. has the
distinction; that Feoffment with livery is good, but if livery be by Warrant of
Attorney, it is void: If it be a Feoffment with Warranty by Deed, and possession
delivered with his own hands, yet the warranty is void, because the Deed is
void. Perk. 5. The Deed of a Madman is void: if he grants a Rent, it is void. If
an Infant makes a Warrant of Attorney, it is void; so is Whittingham's Case: A
Deed and a Will are not to be distinguished; and by the same reason that the
one is void, the other is so. Finch. 102. is general; All Deeds of a Man of non
sane memory are null: 12 Rep. Shulter's Case, It Is an offense to procure a
Deed from him. The Civil Law makes all his Acts, which he does without consent
of his Curator, to be void: A Madman is taken pro absente: It Is a Rule
unaccountable, That a Man shall not stuitifie himself; that he shall not be
able to excuse himself by the Visitation of Heaven, when he may plead Duress
from Men, to avoid his own Act. It Is absurd to say, That a Deed procured from a
Man in a Fever, or in Bethlehem, shall be valid to any purpose. Fitzherbert,
who was a good Lawyer, ridicules the pretense, and maintains, That he himself
may avoid such Act. Then were cited 2 Inst. 14. Lloyd and Gregory, 1 Cro. 501,
502. Perkins tit. Grant. 13. Then it was said, That in this Case there needs
not much Argument, the Reason of the Thing exposes the pretended Law. And the
Judges have declared that this Surrender is void; the word amens or demens,
imply that the Man has no Mind, and consequently could make no Conveyance.
Wherefore 'twas prayed that the Judgment should be affirmed; and without much
debate it was accordingly affirmed.

Henry Earl of Lincoln by Susanna Countess of Lincoln his Mother, and Procheine
Amye Appellant, Versus Samuel Roll Esquire; Vere Booth, Hugh Fortescue Esquire; and
Bridget his Wife and al' Respondents.
AApeal from a Decree of Dismission in Chancery: The Case was thus; Edward late
Earl of Lincoln, who was Son and Heir of Edward, Lord Clinton, the only Son of
Theophilus Earl of Lincoln deceased, being seized in Fee of the Manors of,
etc. after his Mothers decease (who is yet living) and of other Lands of about
3000 l. per Annum, part of the ancient Estate of the Family. And designing that
in default of Issue-Male by himself, his Estate should go with the Honor, made
his Will 20 Sept. 34 Car. 2. and thereby devised the Premises to Sir Francis
Clinton for Life, Remainder to his first and other Sons in Tail-Male, with many
Remainders over to such Persons in Tail-Male, to whom the Honor might descend;
and directed that his Household Goods at...... should remain there as Heir
Loomes, to be enjoyed by the next Heir-Male, who should be Heir of Lincoln, and
made the said Sir Francis, the Appellants Father, and after his Death, Earl of
Lincoln, Executor. On the sixth of November. 36 Car. 2. Earl Edward made another
Will in writing in like manner, with the alteration of some Personal Legacies;
and afterward in April 1686. and in Dec. 1690. did republish his Will. Then
Earl Edward sold part to Richard Win Esquire; for 24491 l. 3 s. 6 d. and
mortgaged the Premises in question to him for 12200 l. Then Earl Edward by
Deeds of Lease and Release, dated the 27th and 28th of April 1691. conveys his
whole Estate to the Respondents Davenport and Townsend, and their Heirs, to the
use of him and his Heirs, till his then intended Marriage should take effect:
And after such Marriage had, then as to part, in trust for his intended Wife,
and her Heirs and Assigns for ever: And as to the rest, in trust to permit the
said Earl to receive the Profits during his Life; and after his decease, to
sell the same for the best price, and out of the Money raised by Sale, to
defray the Funeral Expenses, and pay his Debts, and deliver the surplus, as he
should (by his last Will and Testament in writing, attested by three Witnesses,
or by another Deed in writing so attested) appoint; and for want thereof to the
Executors and Administrators of the Earl; with a Proviso, That the said Earl,
by his last will and Testament, or any other Deed in writing (to be thereafter
by him made and executed, and attested as aforesaid) might alter, change,
determine, or make void all or any the Trusts aforesaid; and for want of such
after to be made, will or deed, then in trust for the said Earl Edward, his
Heirs and Assigns for ever; Earl Edward died without Issue of his Body, and
without Marriage.

The Appellant exhibited a Bill to have the said Deeds of Lease and Release set
aside, and to have the Will executed. The Respondents, as Heirs, insist upon
the Deeds as a Revocation; and their Heirship was thus: Theophilus Earl had
Issue Edward, Katharine, Arabella, and Margaret; Edward died in the Life time
of Theophilus, leaving Issue Edward late Earl of Lincoln; Katharine by Sir
George Booth had Issue the Respondent Veer Booth; Arabella by Robert Roll had
Issue Samuel Roll; and Margaret married Hugh Buscowen, and had Issue the
Respondent Bridget Fortescue. And the Court, assisted with the two Chief
Justices, and Mr. Justice Powel saw no Cause to relieve the Appellant.

And now it was argued with the Appeal, That the Dismission was Erroneous,
there being Cause for Relief, for that the Marriage never did take effect, nor
any serious Overture or Treaty was made by the said Earl on that behalf; so as
the said Earl did continue, and at the time of his death was seized of the same
Estate in the Premises he had at the time of making and publishing the Will;
that if at Law the Deeds of Lease and Release were in strictness a revocation
of the Will, yet in Equity they ought not to be construed a Revocation of the
said Will, so often and so solemnly and deliberately made and published, and
upon so good a Consideration as the support of the Honor; that the said Will
was the Result of the Earls continued Intentions throughout his Life, and the
Deeds were only the effect of some sudden Fancy or Passion; and even by those
Deeds no benefit was designed to the Respondents; for the disposition of the
Surplus of what should be raised by the Sale, was to be to his Executor Sir F.
C. the Appellants Father; and that did evidence a continued Kindness to him,
who never had offended him, and no regard to the Respondents, who (though they
were his Heirs general) were related only at a distance, and scarcely known by
him; and very well provided for, by great Portions raised out of the Estate for
their Mothers.

Then 'twas argued that this Estate was merely an equitable one, and
consequently Equity only ought to govern the disposition of it: here is no
express Revocation pretended; that a Mortgage in Fee is no Revocation, for in
Equity it does not make the Estate another: Here is a Noble Peer, who is to
sit in the Seat or Place of his Ancestors, and therefore no Presumption,
Intendment or forced Implication ought to be against him or his Interest; that
this was designed to take effect, in case the Marriage was had, and not
otherwise; that here was no intention to revoke, but upon the Contingency of
his Marriage: And there was cited Zouch and Barker's Case 1625. in the Lord
Coventry's time, Chancery Rep. and the Lord Boucher's Case in Edward the
Sixth's time; the Case was said to be in Dyer, left as a Query, and in 1 Rolls
Abridg. And for these, and many other Reasons and Authorities urged, 'twas
prayed that the Dismission should be Reversed, and the Appellant Relieved.

On the other side 'twas insisted, That though this was not an express Revocation
by the use of words declaring it to be such, yet 'twas a true, legal, and
effectual Revocation; that these Deeds of Lease and Release did alter the
Estate; that here 'twas for payment of Debts, as well as in consideration of
the intended Marriage; that here was a manifest change of his Intention; that
both Will and Deed were voluntary and inconsistent, and therefore the latter
must stand; that here were no Children or Creditors claiming under the Will;
that though the Subject Matter were an equitable Interest, yet Equity ought to
follow the Rules of Law; that the Law made this a good Revocation, and Equity
ought to judge it the same way, unless Fraud were proved to be used in the
procuring of the Execution of these Deeds; that the reason why a Mortgage even
in Fee, is not a Revocation, is because a Mortgage does carry upon the face of
it a Defeasance; it is not reckoned an Inheritance to the Heir of the Mortgage,
but shall be Personal Estate, and Assets to pay the Mortgagee's Debts. This
Deed was revocable by an after Will, which shows the Party to have no regard
for any former Will, nor is there any reference to the Will then in being: If a
Marriage had happened, 'twould be agreed to have been a Revocation; and if so,
when was the Will revoked? by what Act? by the Deed, or by the Marriage? That
it was said that it certainly would have been revoked by the Deed, and
consequently ought to be construed a Revocation, though no Marriage did ensue:
Revocations are the same in Equity as at Law; and so was it held in the Case of
the Earls of Bathe and Mountague. The Statute of Frauds never was thought to
extend to such Revocations as these: Though Earl Edward's Intentions were once to
support the Honor with the Estate, yet it was always in his power to alter it:
The Lease and Release passed the Equity of Redemption, and consequently it is
the same now, between the Appellant and Respondents, as if there had been no
Mortgage in the Case.

'Twas further urged, That a Will is but an imperfect Conveyance, inchoate
only, and ambulatory (as the Books term it) till the death of the Party; and
another Will may revoke it, and with greater reason may a Deed, which alters
the Estate, and shows a change of the Intention of the Person who was Owner of
it: There Is no need of a Consideration to warrant the Revocation of a Will;
there needs no reason to be given for it; it is only the Mind of the Party which
both makes and revokes the Will. A Will is only the signification of a Man's
purpose, how his Estate shall go after his death; and though it be solemnly made
in writing, signed, published, and attested, yet if he do any intermediate Act,
whereby it must be necessarily inferred, that such Purpose and Intention of his
did not continue, the Consequent must be, that what was done before, as to such
Will, is totally defeated; and unless it be set up anew by a Republication,
it is as no Will. The Case of Mountague and Jeffryes, 1 Rolls Abridg. 615. and
Moore 429. proves this: If a Conveyance at Law shows an Intent different from
the Will as to Lands, 'twill be a Revocation, though such Conveyance be not
perfect to all purposes. Hodgkinson versus Wood, Cro. Car. 23. It Is a
Revocation, though the Owner should be in again, as of his old Reversion. The
Case of Lestrange and Temple 14 Car. 2. reported in Sid. 90. 1 Keble 357. is
stronger; but this is stronger yet, because it is not to the old use, but
limited in a different manner; it is a qualified Fee, and to be determined upon
the qualifications taking effect, and so cannot be the old Estate; and if it
were, yet it is a Revocation, and there is no Circumstance in the Case, that can
direct a Court of Equity to differ from the Law; and therefore it was prayed,
that the Decree of Dismission might be affirmed; and it was affirmed.

John Fox Gen' Plaintiff, Versus Simon Harcourt Arm' Defendant.
WRit of Error on a Judgment in B. R. The Case was upon a Special Verdict, in
an Action of the Case, upon an Indebitus Assumpsit for Moneys received to the
Plaintiff's use, brought there by Harcourt versus Fox, which Verdict finds, the
37 Hen. 8. cap. 1. entitled, a Bill for Custos Rotulorum and Clerkship of the
Peace. Then they find that 1 Will. and Mar. entitled, An Act for enabling
Lords Commissioners for the Great Seal to execute the Office of Lord Chancellor
or Lord Keeper, and several Clauses therein concerning this Matter. Then they
find that John Earl of Clare was by Letters Patents, dated the 9th day of July,
Anno 1 Will. and Mar. according to the 37 Hen. 8. made Custos Rotulorum for the
County of Middlesex, and set forth the Letters Patents in haec verba. Then they
find that the Office of Clerk of the Peace for this County being void, the Earl
of Clare by writing under his Hand and Seal, dated 19 July Anno primo, did
nominate, appoint, and constitute the Plaintiff, Mr. Harcourt, to be Clerk of
the Peace for Middlesex, for so long time only, as he should well demean
himself therein, and the Instrument was found in haec verba. Then they find him
to be a Person resident in the County, capable and sufficient to have and
execute the Office; that he took upon him the execution of the said Office; and
before he did so, he at the Quarter Sessions for the said County, in open
Sessions, took the Oath required by the late Act of this King, and the Oath of
Clerk of the Peace, and did do and perform all things necessary to make him a
complete Officer; and that during all the time he did execute the sald Office
he demeaned himself well.

Then it is found, That on the fifth of February, Anno tertio, the said Earl of
Clare was in due manner removed from being Custos, and William Earl of Bedford,
by Letters Patents dated the sixth of February, was made Custos according to
the 37 Hen. 8. and those Letters Patents are also found in haec verba. Then
they find an Appointment in Writing, dated the fifteenth of February by the
said Earl, of the said Fox to be Clerk of the Peace for the said County, to
hold the said Office for and during the time the Earl should enjoy and exercise
the said Office of Custos, so as he well demean himself therein. They likewise
find Fox to be a Person capable, etc. and that he took the Oath, and did the
other things requisite to qualify himself for the said Office; that he did
thereupon enter on the Execution of the said Office; and during the time that
he executed it, he well demeaned himself therein, and did take the Fees
belonging to the said Office, which they found to be to the value of five
shillings, Sed utrum, etc. Et si, etc. Et si, etc. Upon this Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff below.

And it was now argued for the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, That this
Judgment ought to be Reversed. And first it was said, that whatsoever the
Common Law was, as to ancient Offices, could be no Rule in this Matter: Many
and most of those were for Life; but my Lord Coke says, That the Office of
Chancellor of England could not be granted to any one for Life, because it was
never so granted; the like of Treasurer: So that Custom, and nothing else, can
govern in those Offices. But here can be no pretense of its being a Common Law
Office; for the Common Law knew no such thing as Justics of the Peace, to whom,
they say, he is a Clerk: That the first Statute which makes Justices, has no
mention of Clerk; but 'twas merely an Incident; some Person of necessity was to
officiate in that kind: And where he is called the Justices Clerk, it can only
be, that he was one appointed by them to make and write their Records for them;
and it is probable, that in ancient time, he that was their Clerk was Custos
Rotulorum, and entrusted with the keeping of the Records; then it coming to be
an honorary thing to be Custos, he that was the most eminent for Quality
amongst them, was appointed to that Trust, and then he appointed his Clerk
under him: For there is no ancient Statute or Law, that empowered the Chancellor
to make a Custos; but he making out the Commission of the Peace, might very
well name one of them to be Keeper of the Records, and to have the first place
amongst them. And such Person might very well appoint his Deputy or Servant,
who in time came to be Clerk of the Peace. We have no certain, but this is the
most probable, Account of the thing.

Then the Statute of 37 Hen. 8. recites, That the Chancellor had much perverted
the Institution, by assuming to make Custos's for Life, and so the Clerks of
the Peace were for Life likewise. The end of that Act was not only to remove
ignorant Persons; for the Common Law it self would turn any such out of Office,
if he be not able to perform the Duty of it; but the Grants for Life, were the
great Grievance; and therefore to remedy that Mischief the Custos must be
appointed by Bill signed with the King's own hand, and at his pleasure
removeable, and the Clerk of the Peace to be appointed by the Custos, and to
continue only during the time of the others continuing to be Custos. This (though
not in the Negative) does amount to it, viz. that he shall continue no longer;
especially when the Act recites the Mischief to be a Continuance during Life:
It implies that the Clerkship of the Peace should be never granted, for a
longer Interest, than the Custos had in his Office. The 3 and 4 Edw. 6. does
indeed repeal part of the 37 Hen. 8. not by express words, but by a very strong
Implication, by giving the Chancellor a power to nominate the Custos: But the
Office of Clerk of the Peace is not touched by that of Edw. 6. and continues as
settled by 37 H. 8. which is during the continuance of the Custos.

Then it is the new Statute, which gives the occasion of the present Dispute;
and there is nothing in this Act, which can make such an Alteration in the Law,
as was below contended for: The words, So long only as he shall well demean
himself, are not enlarging of his Estate, but Restrictive: and whensover it is
considered how to make a Grant for Life to be good, you must consider the power
and capacity of the Grantor, and how the thing is capable of being so granted;
as in Case of Tenant in Tail or Fee, and each make a Lease for Life; in the
latter Case, it is for the Life of the Lessee; and in the former, for the Life
of the Tenant in Tail, because of the different Capacities of the Grantors: and
so the thing it self is considerable; here is an express Statute, that says it
shall be only during the continuance of the Custos; now that Provision is to be
pursued: It Is said, that a Grant quam diu se been gesserit, is for Life; but
the words themselves do not import any such thing; it is indeed a restrictive
Condition which the Law imposes upon all Offices; for Misbehaviour in any
Office, if in Fee, is a Forfeiture; but the chiefest Consideration is, if it be
an Office that is capable of being granted for life; if it be so, these words
may amount to a Grant for Life, as expounded by usage and the nature or
capacity of the Office it self: but otherwise, if the Office be not grantable
for Life, such words will not give an Estate for Life: These words seem only to
be an Expression of what the Law always implies, though not particularly
expressed. If it operate any thing, it seems only to have reference to the
power of the Grantor, as a Restirction on him, and not as an Enlargement of the
Estate of the Grantee, especially where by a Law in being there is an incapacity
upon the very Office not to be granted for life.

Then it was urged that the Statute of 37 H. 8. was not repealed: the 3 and 4
Edw. 6. does not alter this Matter at all; and where it did make any
Alteration, the same is expressly repealed by this last Act in question. It is a
settled Rule, that if there be two Statutes, and both consistent and not
contradictory, the latter can never be said to repeal the former; and so is Dr.
Foster's Case 11 Rep. 5, 6. so it is in Wills, Hodgkinson and Wood, Cro. Car.
23. This last Act of Will. et Mar. is consistent with the 37 H^n. 8. the one
says, He shall continue during the time that the Custos does remain such, so as
he demean himself well: the other says, He shall enjoy his place, so song only
as he demeans himself well in it. Now take the Office to be by the 37 Hen. 8.
only gran^able to hold during the continuance of the Custos, then suppose in
the same Act, it should be said to hold so long only as he demean himself well;
where is the inconsistency or contradiction? And if none, then this last Act
does not Repeal the former as to this Matter. And Mr. Fox's Grant is pursuant
to the Statute of Hen. 8. and Mr. Harcourt's has no relation to it.

Then 'twas argued, That 'twas unreasonable that a Custos should have an
Officer under him of another choice, when himself is responsible for the
Records which such Officer is concerned with. The primary Intent of this last
Act was only to settle the Doubts about the Keepers of the Great Seal, not to
alter the Estate of the Office of Clerk of the Peace. The Offices of the Judges
in Westminsterhall determine with the King's Life who grants them, tho 'they
are granted to hold during good behavior. In this Act, the reason of using
these words, was for Caution, to advertise them that Misbehaviour should
forfeit their Places. If an Alteration of the Law had been intended, they would
have said, for Life, so as he demean himself well, especially when (as was said
before) he was removable for Misbehaviour by the former Laws in being.
Wherefore upon the whole Matter, it was prayed that the Judgment might be
reversed.

On the other side it was argued with the Judgment, That it is clear and
apparent that this Act of W. and M. was made not only to satisfy Doubts, and
prevent Questions about the Office for the Custody of the Great Seal, but to
settle the manner of naming the Custos and Clerk of the Peace; and that it is in
part introductive of a new Law; and in part a reviver of the old: But the
general end was, that that Office of Clerk should be filled and executed by a
learned, able, honest Person, because it concerns the Administration of
Justice. He is the King's Attorney in many respects; he not only writes the
sense of the Justices in their Orders, but draws Indictments, and upon
Traverses, he joins Issue, as one qui pro Domino Rege in ea part sequitur, and
prays Judgment for the King in many Cases; joins in Demurrer, when occasion
requires, and is in the Sessions the same as the Clerk of the Crown is in the
King's Bench. Now to accomplish this end of having a Person well qualified, and
to encourage and oblige him to his good Behavior, it requires a Residence in
the County; it enjoins that the Person named be able; it subjects him to the
Jurisdiction of the Justices, who have a daily observance of his demeanor; it
gives them a power to remove him upon a just Complaint, which they could not
before; it frees him from the usual Temptation to Fraud and Corruption, by
introducing him gratis and sine pretio; and to provoke his Care and Diligence;
it gives him a more durable Estate in his Office, then he had before, when he
bought it, viz. Freehold, an Estate for his Life: That it should be so, is
convenient; because then he will be encouraged to endeavor the increase of his
Knowledge in that Employment, which he may enjoy during Life; whereas
precarious dependent Interests in Places tempt Men to the contrary.

That this is an Estate for Life, appears from the words of the Act; they do
direct how long he shall enjoy his Office; so long only as he shall behave
himself well: If the word only had been omitted, there could be no color for a
Doubt; By 1 Inst. 42. It Is an Estate for Life, determinable upon Misbehaviour;
for during good Behavior is during Life; it is so long as he does behave
himself well; i.e. If he behaves himself well in it, so long as he lives, he is
to have it so long as he lives; during Life, and during good Demeanor, are
therefore synonymous Phrases, the same thing when used with relation to
Offices; the Condition annexed, if observed, continues it during Life, the
contrary determines it: This is the Rule and Law in case of Offices in general,
and must hold in this, for this is an Office, 2 Hen. 7.1. He is called Att'
Domini Regis. It Is capable of being enjoyed for Life, and consequently of being
granted so, especially when an Act of Parliament declares it shall be so:
There Is nothing in the nature of the Employment that hinders it; and there can
be no doubt, but that a Statute may empower a Custos in possession, who has
only an Estate at will, to name a Clerk to hold during Life or good Behavior;
The Justices are at pleasure; Suppose then the Act had said, That they should
name him in this manner, he must have continued, though they had died, or had
been removed; the Case is the same here; he is as much entrusted with the Acts
of the Justices, as with the Records belonging to the keeping of the Custos.
Then there is nothing in the Act that savours of an Intention to make him
dependent on the Custos's Office. The Custos is to name him, but the Justices
have the control over him; he is an Officer to the Sessions, and the Justices
only can remove him. The Limitation of the Interest of the Custos in his
Office, and that of the Clerk, are different; and that shows that the duration
of the one was not to depend on the other. Besides, the Custos is to name, not
when he shall be made Custos (as it would have been worded, if the intention
advanced on the other side had been true) but whenever it shall be void. It
does not say, Every new Custos shall, or that every Custos shall name, but
generally when it is void, he shall, etc.

Then as to the Objection, That this new Act is consistent with the 37 Hen. 8.
and therefore that is still in force? 'Twas answered, That by the former Act,
he was entirely placed under the Custos, who had power to displace him upon
Miscarriage; the Sessions then could not do it, though a Court, and a Court of
Record: they might suspend him, but could not deprive him of his Office, even
for ill Demeanor: This was that Act. Now the present Law abridges the power of
the Custos; he must name a Resident, before he might appoint any able Person;
the Person was then removable by the Custos, now only by the Justices; Care is
taken, that nothing is to be given for the Office; and now he may make a Deputy
without the approbation of the Custos. Here Is plainly a different Jurisdiction
over him, and a different Estate vested in him; this express Limitation of the
Interest to him is an Exclusion of the former Estate, as dependant upon that of
the Custos. And besides, this is a Substantive distinct enacting Clause of it
self, and no ways relating to the Statute of Hen. 8. Why was this Limitation
penned differently from that, unless to give another sort of Interest. As to
the Cases of new Laws which repeal former, 'twas said, That the Rule was
certain, that whatsoever Statute is introductive of a new Law, though penned in
the affirmative, is a Repeal of the former, as implying a negative; i. e. the
latter ought to be observed, if it concerns the same Matter. The Statute of
Edw. 6. controuled the Statute of Hen. 8. One directed the Keeper to name, the
other the King, and both are in the affirmative; yet the latter must be
observed. And if this be a new Estate (as it has been adjudged below) then the
Party ought to enjoy it. And for this was cited 1 Sid. 55. Plowd. 113. and
other Books.

Then 'twas said, That the Clerk of the Peace, named by the Justices, in
default of the Custos, would have an Estate for Life; and by the same reason it
ought to be so here: Though the Custos be to be named, according to the Statute
of Hen. 8. yet he is not to execute his Power of Custos according to that Act,
but is tied to a Resident; has not the Approbation of a Deputy, and cannot
remove. By the Statute of Hen. 8. the Clerk had but an Estate at the will of
the King, the Custos having no other: This is so long as he does well in his
Office; these are different; and when the Custos has named him, he is in by
the Statute. If what they on the other side contend for, had been intended,
there was no need of these words of Limitation at all; and the words, in like
manner as by the former act, had fulfilled the intention, if such had been.

As to the word only, that would make no Alteration in the Case of any other
Office. Suppose an Office granted to a Man quamdiu tantum, or solummodo, se
been gesserit, would that give less then an Estate for Life: The word only was
added, not to abridge the Estate of the Clerk, but rather to restrain the Power
of the Custos, that he should have Authority only to limit it during good
Behavior, and not for a less Interest or Estate: The Custos is confined, that
he shall not grant it for Years, or at Pleasure. Besides, only is but just so
long, and no longer, or so long as; and it is the same thing with the word, as
without it. Dummodo sola vixerit, is during all her Widowhood. Suppose a power
to make Leases to hold only for and during the term of 21 Years, the same would
be good for the whole Term. Then it is no Objection, That the Estate of the
Clerk is greater than his is who names him, for that may be by Custom, as in
the Offices in Westminster Hall, Hobart 153. and the Clerks of Assize, where
usage fixes the Estate. And the like in Case of Power to make Leases upon
Family Settlements to Uses, where Tenant for Life grants larger Interests then
his own: It Is true, the Powers and Estates raised by them, issue out of the
Inheritance, but the Tenant for Life only names them; as the Custos does here,
though the Statute gives the Interest.

As to the Inconvenience, That dependent Offices should continue against the
will of their Superiors, that can be no Objection, since there are few great
Officers in the Realm, but have many Substitutes and Inferiors under them,
which were named by their Predecessors, and are not removable; almost every
Bishop in England is under these Circumstances, with respect to the Register of
his own Court, who notes and records his Acts, etc. This is an Exception to all
Grants for Lives; but Credit ought to be given to the Honor, Wisdom, and
Judgment of former, as well as present Officers, in respect of such
Nominations, 'till some Misbehaviour shows the Choice to have been ill; and
when that appears, the Persons are removable, and then the Inconvenience is
likewise removed, Here the Jury have found the Plaintiff in the Action below,
to be able and sufficient, and well qualified for the Office, and to have done
his Duty in the Office, while he had it. Wherefore it was prayed that the
Judgment might be affirmed; and it was affirmed.

Henry Lord Bishop of London, and Peter Birch D.D. Plaintiffs. versus Attorney
General pro Domino Rege and Regina.
WRit of Error to Reverse a Judgment given in B. R. in a Quare Impedit. The
Case upon Record was thus: The Declaration sets forth the Act of Parliament,
which Erects and Constitutes the Parish of St. James's within the Liberty of
Westminster, out of the Parish of St. Martyns, etc. prout, that by force and
virtue of that Act, the said Parish was made, and the District therein named
became a Parish, and Dr. Tennison Rector of the same; that he was afterward
Rite et Canonice consecratus Episcopus Lincoln', and that thereby the said
Church became void, and thereupon it belonged to the King and Queen to present
a fit Person, ratione Prerogative sue Regie Corone sue Angl' annex', and that
the Defendants hindered, etc,

The Defendants crave Oyer of the Writ, and it is general; Vic' Com' Midd'
salut' precipe Henric' Episcopo Lond' and Petro Birch Sacre Theology
Professor' quod just et sine Dilatione permittant nos prefentare idoueam
personam ad, etc. que vacat et ad nostram spectat d^mationem, Et unde pred'
Episcopus et Petrus nos injuste, etc. And then they pray Judgment of the Writ
and Declaration, because that between the Writ and Declaration, there is a
material variance i^ hoc, viz. quod ubi per Breve pred', pred' Dom' Rex et
Regine ^^^itulant se ad Donationem pred', etc. pleno Jure, tamen per Narr'
pred' iidem Dominus Rex et Domina Regina intitulant se ad, etc. Sec ^^^tione
Prerogative sue Regie Corone sue Anglie annex' unde pro variatione pred' inter
Bre^e et Narr' pred', they pray Judgment of the Writ and Declaration aforesaid,
and that the said Writ may be quashed, etc. The Attorney General Demurs, and
the Defendants Join, and there is Judgment to answer over.

Then the Bishop Demurs generally, and Mr. Attorney Joins, and Dr. Birch pleads
that he is Incumbent, and then sets forth the Statute of Hen. 8. concerning
Dispensations; and that after Dr. Tennison was elected Bishop, the Archbishop
granted to him a Commendam Retinere, with power to take and enjoy the Profits
to his own use, by the space of seven Months.

That this Commendam was confirmed under the Great Seal, according to the
Statute; and the said Dr. Tennison did enjoy the same accordingly, etc. Mr.
Attorney Demurs, and Dr. Birch joins in Demurrer, and Judgment was given for
the King, etc.

And now it was argued in the first place, That the Plea in Abatement was good;
and if so, all that followed was Erroneous. And to make that Plea good, it was
said that there is a variance between the Writ and Declaration; that they are
founded upon several Rights; that upon arguing the Merits of the Cause, it must
be owned to be so, on the other side

That no Argument can be urged to maintain the Declaration in general, but the
Jure Prerogative, and consequently it must be different from the Title or
Interest pleno Jure.

They have said below that though the King's Interest is bound by Statutes, yet
his Prerogative is not. This Distinction of the Rights must be allowed, or else
the main Judgment is not justifiable; and that there is such a Distinction,
appears in Gaudy and the Archbishop of Canterbury's Case in Hob. 302. by the
Presentation there recited, which was drawn by the King's Counsel; it is ad
nostram Presentation' pertinet, sive ex pleno Jure, sive ratione Prerogative.

By Bracton 415. If the Writ be founded on one Right, and the Declaration on
another, the Writ must be abated, as in Case of Executors and Corporations. In
some Cases it must be agreed, That the Writ may be General, and the Count
Special; but none of those Cases will reach to this, where several Rights are
pretended. It Is no Objection to say, That there is no Writ in the Register for
this; for that is rather an Argument against their Prerogative: Besides, this
Prerogative was never allowed till Dyer's time; and in the old Books it is
denied, where the King was not Patron.

In the Register 30. is a Writ Special, quod permittant nos presentare idoneam
personam ad Ecclesiam de, etc. que vacat et ad nostram spectat Donationem
ratione Archiepiscopatus Cant' nuper vacantis in manu existentis. And another
Sine titulo ut de jure, and that is General, ad nostram spectat Donationem.
Another Writ is there Ratione custody terre et heredis upon a Tenure in
capite. And another, Ratione foris facture unius, et ratione custody terre et
heredis alterius per servitium. Another Writ pro Domino Rege et aliis
conjunctim Register 32. is another such by reason of the Vacancy of the
Archbishopric.

It Is not an Answer, That the Writ of Waste is General, and the Count Special,
because that is not en auter droit.

Then it was said that it is true, That where another Writ cannot be had, a
General Writ and Special Count are allowable; but here a Special Writ might
have been sued. And there were cited the 1 Inst. 26, 53, 54, 235, 344, 3 Cro.
185, 829. And as to the Queen and the Archbishop of York's Case 3 Cro. 340.
that does not come up to this Case; for though the Writ were General, and the
Count in Right of the Duchy of Lancaster, yet both were as Patron pleno jure;
and the Count did only show, how the Plaintiff came to be Patron; but here they
were several Rights, as dictinct, as a Claim by a Man singly, and a Claim as
Executor, or in jure Vxoris.

In Answer to this were cited the Presidents in Mich. 31 Hen. 6. Rot. 65.
Pasch. 9 Eliz. Rot. 1408. or 1410. Hill. 13 Car. 1. Rot. 486. Trin. 31 Car. 2.
Dominus Rex versus Episcop' de Worcester, Writ General and Count Special,
Rastal 528, 530.

Then it was argued, upon the Merits of the Cause, as it was, appearing upon
the Declaration and Plea and Demurrer: and therein three Queries were made, as
had been by the King's Counsel below.

1. If the King has any Prerogative to present upon an Avoidance by Promotion,
where neither himself, nor the Bishop, was Patron, but another Subject.

2. If this Commendam Retinere, and to take the Profits to his own use, was not
a Service of this Prerogative turn.

3. Supposing that there be such a Prerogative, and that the Commendam makes no
Alteration in the Case, then if this Vacancy of this Church be subject to this
Prerogative.

As to the first it was argued, That where an Incumbent is promoted to the
Order and Degree of a Bishop, his Living or Benefice becomes void; and that
where a Bishop is Patron, and the Advowson and Bishopric are become void at a
time, there the King shall present; because while the Temporalties are in his
hands, he is lawful Patron for that time, and consequently had a Right to
present, but not by virtue of any Special Prerogative; but only as a Temporary
qualified Patron, like a Dominus pro Tempore of a Manor, may do Acts of
Necessity which regularly belong to the very true Lord himself; and this
perhaps gave the Color for this pretended Prerogative: and in truth it answers
every thing, that can be suggested from any ancient Authority, whether
President, Book Case, or Opinion. It is otherwise where a Subject is Patron,
and the King has no Possession of, or a Right to the Patronage at that time;
In such case he cannot present, and there is no Prerogative given by our Law,
for to warrant such a Right to that Presentation.

All Prerogatives are founded upon some reason of Benefit to the People, either
in respect of the Government in general, or else of some particular Subjects;
but this has neither: And in 3 Cro. 527. it is agreed, that there is no Reason
for such a Prerogative, but it is added, and the Addition is somewhat strange,
that many Prerogatives have no reason in them, or for them: and that it is
unmannerly to Enquire or Doubt, if they are reasonable; whereas it might be
thought that unreasonableness in the Matter contended for, had been an Argument
against any thing but an Act of Parliament.

In Dyer 228. Sir Henry Sidney's Case versus the Bishop of Gloucester, by Dyer
'twas agreed, That the Queen had no such Prerogative; and he adds, quod sic
alij Socii mei sentiebant; so that 'twas not his single Opinion against it, but
the whole Court of C. B.

Then 'twas said that the ancient Law knew nothing of his Prerogative; all the
Records, Law Books, and even Histories have been searched for the Maintenance
of it, and no footsteps can be found for it: No Bracton or Fleta, no Dr. and
Student, or Stamf. that treats of the Prerogative, has any thing of it. Now
all Prerogatives are and must be time out of mind, or not at all: And then, if
this be not so, it must be an Usurpation, and being not time out of mind, it
cannot be a Prerogative, because not part of the Common Law.

In the great Case which they so much insist on, of Woodley in 2 Cro. 691.
Justice Hutton, who was an ingenious Man, a good Lawyer, and a true English
Judge, that argued against Ship Money, he expressly denies, that there was any
such Prerogative; that the King had no Title to present, but where himself is
Patron; and that there was no such Presentment, till of late days; nor any Book
of Law to warrant it; but that Case which is in Bro. Abr. Presentment al'
Esglise 61.

Then 'twas urged, That a few years Practice can no more make a Prerogative,
then it can Repeal an Act of Parliament. It Is true, that in the Report of that
Case, Crook seems to admit, that Winch was of Opinion for the Prerogative, and
only Hutton against it; for he makes Winch to say, That the King has an
Absolute Title by his Prerogative, as well in the Case of Common Persons
Patronage, as where himself is so: But as it is in Winches Reports 96. where the
Case is reported again, there they are both of Opinion against it; and Winch
ridiculed the Opinion of Bro. Presentment 61. as the saying of the Bishop of
Ely, who was then Chancellor, and might have right to present to it by force of
his Place, if the King had such a Prerogative: And indeed Bro. himself makes a
Remark upon it, as a thing never heard of before by a quod nota.

The King has presented to Livings of other Men's Patronages, but that was not
by force of this Prerogative, but on other grounds; as 40 Ed. 3.40. the King
presented to a Prebendary, when the Prebend was made a Bishop: And the reason
of that Case makes for the Plaintiff in Error, i.e. because the Temporalties of
the Bishop, who was Patron of that Prebendary, was then in the King's Hands,
and then the King was Patron so long, and he did present as such: So is the 41
Edw. 3.5. the same as Patron having the Temporalties in his hand: So is 44 Edw.
3.24. upon another reason; a Parson is made a Bishop, and the King presented
not Jure Prerogative, but because that the Patron was the King's Tenant in
Capite, and the Heir was in Ward to the King, and so he had Jus Patronatus in
him: The King has it, where he has the Temporalties; so is Fitzh. Grand
Abridgment Title Quare Impedit pl. 35. the King claimed Title to present to the
Provostry of Wells in the Gift of the Bishop, void upon the Provost, being made
Dean, because the Temporalties of the Bishop were in the King's hands at that
time

The 11 Hen. 4.37, 59, and 76. though cited on the other side below, is a full
Authority; it is a noted Case, the ancientest Case in our Law concerning
Commendams: The Case in short is thus; The King brings a Quare Impedit, and
makes his Title by the Creation of the Incumbent to be a Bishop. There was some
Debate on the Declaration; but the Defendants plead, that the King granted the
Temporalties to the new Bishop, before the Living became vacant. Then the King
waives that Declaration, and betakes himself to another Title, and Declares on
the Statute of Provisors, because the Pope had usurped a Power which that
Statute denied him; and there is no Judgment in the Case upon the first point;
but it is most clear, that the King's Counsel in that Case were of Opinion
against this Prerogative, because they did not stand to that Title, but amended
their Declaration, and took to another.

This Point was directly to have been judged in the Case, if they had thought
fit to abide by it: So that it is plain that they took the Plea to be good, if
the Temporalties were in the King's hands, then the King was to present; if
not, that he had no such Prerogative. And this is a great Authority, that the
King had no such Prerogative, because he waives that Title and goes to another.

5 Edw. 2. Maynard 148. Hugh de Courtney brings a Quare Impedit against Thomas
de Hutwet for the Church of Bingham, and sets forth that Isabel de Force,
Countess of Aumerle, presented such a one, upon the Livings becoming void by
Cession, viz. by the Incumbents being made a Bishop; but never a word of the
King's Title in all the Case, or any such Prerogative as is now contended for.

And in Owen's Rep. 144. Walmesly cites a President which he had seen in Edward
the Second's time, adjudged that the King had no such Prerogative; and all that
was said for it was eight or nine Presidents in Tradition or History of a
Patron, being complemented out of his Right; but not one Law-Book for it.

Coke 4 Inst. 356, 357. who wrote and published much, he never mentions this
Prerogative, but says that the Law is otherwise, for upon his Observation on a
Record of 24 Edw. 3. Rot. 25. coram Rege, Cornub'.

Admittitur Episcopus Exon' pro fine 200 merc' pro contemptu in non admittendo
presentatum Regis ad Ecclesiam de Southwel; pro quo contempt' omnia temporalia
Seisita fuerunt in manus Regis, and tunc temporis ante finem fact' vacavit
Archidiaconat' Cornubiae ratione quod Incumbens Electus fuit in Archiepiscopun^
Dublin' in Hibernia, (Temporalibus Episcopi Exon' ad tunc in manibus Regis
existent) per quod Dominus Rex recuperavit versus Episcopum dict'
Archidiaconat'. Upon this Record he makes two Conclusions;

1. Though Ireland be a distinct Kingdom, yet it is governed by the same Law as
England in these Matters.

2. That when the Archdeacon was by the King preferred to an Archbishopric,
he had the Presentation to the Arch-deaconry in respect of the Temporalties of
the Bishop of Exeter, Patron of the Arch-deaconry, and not by any Prerogative.

Here it is observable, That my Lord Coke took it that the Patronage, by reason
of the Temporalties, gave to the King this Right, and not the Prerogative.

Then his next Paragraph is stronger, If a Bishop in England be made a
Cardinal, the Bishopric becomes void, and the King shall name his Successor,
because the Bishopric is of his Patronage. All which implies, That if 'twere
not of his Patronage, 'twould be otherwise, else why is that reason added.

Obj. But then say they, The Pope's Usurpation prevailed in all those times,
and the Pope had it when Provisions were in use. But that can be no Argument to
give the Crown a Prerogative, for the Pope was a Tyrant over the English
Church, and by the same Reason the King may claim to be above all Laws, because
some Judges said as Hank did in Hen. 4. quod Papa potest omnia; at that rate no
Act of Parliament shall bind the King, because the Pope thought himself bound
by no Law of ours.

Besides, There were several of our English Monarchs and English Parliaments,
that boldly withstood these Usurpations; and there were diverse Intervals of
Liberty and Freedom from that Romish Yoke, and we never read of any Exercise of
this Prerogative in those Intervals.

It Is questioned in 41 Eliz. and in Owen's Rep. it is said that the Pope's
practice was no Authority to warrant a Prerogative, for they used to do strange
things, and the Clergy then made his Will a Law; and our English Lawyers have
always complained of it.

Obj. There Is no ancient Books that mention Title by Lapse. But 'twas answered,
That in Caudries Case, it is fetched from the Reign of Edw. 3. and that is no
very late Reign, and Lapse is so ancient, as it appears by the close, Roll 21
Hen. 3. in n. 12. that the De^ and Chapter pretended to it during a Vacancy of
a See upon an Advowson of the King's own; but it appears there by a Writ to
that purpose, that no Lapse per tempus semestre accrued on the King; which
shows that 'twas old Law for the Subjects, Pryn 2.481.

By a Writ 8 Hen. 3. number. 4. Dorso, Prynne 2 Vol. 389. it appears the
Archbishop of York was to present si ultra tempus sex mensium vasari
contigerint, and 1 Inst. 2 Inst. and all the Booksare full of it, and Doctor
and Student, which is no new Book, treats of it, cap. 31. Besides, that and
this are different Cases; there is a necessity of such a Law for the Service of
the Church; the King is by the Constitution entrusted with the Supreme Care of
his People, both for Religion and Property; and if a Patron will not do it in
reasonable time, it is reasonable he should lose it, and the King present.

But to make that a similar Case, they should show that these Prerogatives were
of equal duration; and that there is as much reason for the one as for the
other; but because the King has preferred the Patron's Friend, therefore the
King shall have it, that cannot hold upon a toties quoties when the Friend is
dead, and three or four more of the King's presenting, for by this means the
Patron may never present to his Church.

2. The next Query was, Whether this Commendam for above the six Months, with
power to take the Profits to his own use, shall be a fulfilling of this turn,
or otherwise prevent the Operation of the Prerogative on it; by this he was a
plenary Incumbent after Consecration, and he had the Profits to his own use: He
was not merely the Ordinary's Deputy to supply the Cure during six Months, but
has it in his own right, and this with the King's concurrence.

The Prerogative could only work upon an Avoidance by Promotion, and that is
upon Consecration; this becomes void at the expiration of therein limited.

It Is to be considered, That this is none of the old Prerogatives of the Crown,
which in a Competition are to be preferred before the Subject's Right, it is a
Prerogative not to be favorably interpreted, but stricto Jure, for 'twas only
taken up as a Papal Right, and so it is plain from 2 Rolls Abridg. 358, 359. As
such a Papal Right, it ought to be interpreted stricto Jure, even by the Pope's
Law, being against the Patron's ordinary Right, and so it is nature odiose;
there might be cited Suares and others to this purpose: Perhaps the Pope's
Right was not so much allowed here, as to make it clear with him in this Point;
for Dr. and Student, cap. 36. and 37. says, that the Pope's Collection of
Benefices vacantium in Curia, was held to be within the Statute concerning
Provisions, viz. 25 Edw. 3.

This Prerogative has been construed stricto Jure here:

1. In the Case which the Lord Chief Justice Vaughan Reports, where the Crown
upon the promotion of an Incumbent to the Bishopric of Oxford (and who by
Dispensation retained his Living till death) would have presented to the Living
when it fell vold, by the Incumbent the Bishop's Death; it was resolved that
the King's Prerogative was not to present to the next Avoidance after the
Promotion, but to the next Avoidance by the promotion which in that Case was
none, for that the Avoidance was by Death.

2. In the Case my Lord Chief Justice Dyer reports 228. the promoted Incumbent
was dispensed with to retain for a term of years; within which term he
resigned; and there, upon the Avoidance, the Prerogative was not admitted to
take place, because the Avoidance was by the Resignation, and not by the
Promotion.

Now if this Prerogative is to be interpreted stricto Jure, it will have no
place in this Case, where the Incumbent promoted is dispensed with to retain
for a term of time which is elapsed: For,

The King's Prerogative will have a very Natural Construction, by admitting his
Title to present to all such Avoidances, as commence immediately from and by
the promotion.

This is the Avoidance which the Law intends, and which the Law would always
cause (if not hindered to operate by Dispensation) and this Avoidance is that
therefore, which the Prerogative must most principally respect, and only that,
if it be to be strictly taken; insomuch that were it in the sole power of the
Archbishop to grant this Dispensation, it seems the King's Title would clearly
be set aside by it: much more therefore should it be so, when what the Law
designs, is prevented by the Act of the King himself: For tho 'the Lord Vaughan
says, That the King's Concurrence to the Dispensation is only for formality;
yet it is plain that the King may force the Archbishop to grant it.

Now this Interpretation of the Prerogative seems to be already made in the
Case cited upon a Resignation of the Incumbent dispensed with, for, (as it is
there intimated) if the King's Title was not supposed to be gone by the
defeating of the immediate Avoidance, which the Law intended, but the King
would not permit. It would be very strange that it should be eluded by the
Resignation of the Incumbent, to which the King was no Party; for if the King
had a Prerogative to present to this new, this deferred, this adjourned
Avoidance, it would be more reasonable to allow it to be hastened, then
defeated by such a Resignation before the time.

This Prerogative ought to admit such a Restriction from the reason of the
thing, and from the consideration of the Inconveniences which may otherwise
follow.

To the Subject. A Patron might be content to let the King exchange a single
Life, and put in a Clerk in the place of one removed, much rather then that the
Living should be held on by one in Commendam, that from thenceforth would be
sure to leave it, and be absent for a better Residence in a Palace; yet they
may, as they have reason, think it too hard, that the King should, as it were,
let a Lease of it first, and afterward put in his Clerk for Life; and though the
King does commend here but for a small time, yet he may for a longer. He may
perhaps, as the Pope did often, dispense with the Bishop to hold durante
beneplacito, and when the Incumbent is in danger of Death, then present
another; so as the Patron may have his own Clerk not removed, as was first
intended, but dispensed with, to wear out his Life in the Benefice, and yet
after all have another put in.

The Crown may have Inconvenience by the straining of it further than this, for
all strains weaken, if not break the thing it self.

This Opinion of theirs arises from the Principle my Lord Vaughan lays down,
That a Commendam neither gives nor takes away Right, but only is a Dispensation
to hold, and he continues Incumbent still, and it prevents an Avoidance; and if
so, why should it not also prevent the operation of the Prerogative too.

As to the Case of Woodley, 2 Cro. 691. they say it is Law, to prove the other
Point for them; If it be Law for them in that Point, it is Law against them in
this.

That a Dispensation ad retinend' prevents the Grantee of the next Avoidance:
The Case was thus; A Man has a Grant of the next Avoidance, the Incumbent is
promoted, but with a Commendam Retinere for six years, and dies, the Grantee
shall not present, because he is to have the next Avoidance only, and no other:
It Is the words of the Book, that when the Incumbent is created a Bishop, and
the King presents, or grants, that he shall hold it in Commendam (which is
quasi a Presentation) and he is thereby full Incumbent, and may plead as an
Incumbent; if the Grantee of the next Avoidance do not then present, he has
lost his Presentation; for he ought to have the next, and he cannot have any
other.

Now if this be so that a Commendam Retinere has so much of a Grant in it, and
is so equivalent to a Commendam ad recipiend', that it will set aside and
frustrate a Grant of the next Avoidance, and be it self taken for a
presentation to the next Avoidance against the Grantee; by the same reason it
must be taken so against the King, as a Presentation to an Avoidance, and
consequently his turn is served by it.

Much might be said against those Commendams, as promotive of Pluralities, and
tending to the ruin of the Church, and this out of our own Law Books; but it
is not material at present; it is however to be observed, that this is not a
Commendatory for six Months, during the time that the Patron may forbear to
present; such Person continued then, is only commendatorius under the Bishop to
provide for the Church, as it is his Duty to take care of it during that time.

3. Admitting that the King has such a Prerogative, and that this Commendam,
though it gives the full perception of the Profits, is not a fulfilling of the
King's turn, nor does any way distinguish the Case, or exempt it from the
Prerogative: yet this is a Case not within it; and this does appear of Mr.
Attorney's own showing in his Declaration upon the King's behalf: He has set
it forth to be a Parish newly created by Act of Parliament, a thing not in esse
before. It appears by the Declaration what that Act is; it must be taken as
it is there set forth. To this Declaration the Bishop has demurred. Now if by
that Declaration it appears that the Bishop, and not the King, is rightfully
entitled to present upon this Avoidance, the Judgment will and must be
accordingly for the Defendants.

Mr. Attorney, by his Count, does agree an Avoidance within this Act of
Parliament, by the Promotion of Dr. Tennison; and Mr. Attorney does likewise
admit and agree, That the King is not Patron of this Benefice called, St.
James's; he does agree too, That the King has no Right given to have any Turn
or Presentment by this Act; for he says, it is to be by the Bishop of London
and the Lord Jermyn; he does also admit by this Declaration, That Dr. Tennison
was never presented to this Living, that he came not into it by Virtue of any
Presentation from any particular Patron; nay, That he did not come into it by
any sort of Presentation whatever; nay, he yet does further agree, That this
Parish Church was never presented to by any Person at all.

But he insists upon it, That now it is void, the King has a Right to present
to it, by force of his Prerogative upon this Avoidance; though the Act says,
That the Bishop shall present after the Decease of Dr. Tennison, or the next
Avoidance.

The Query is, whether the King's Prerogative can operate upon this Vacancy of
this Benefice, thus filled, and thus avoided, against the express Words of an
Act of Parliament. It will be necessary to repeat the Words of the Act; and
they are to this Effect, That all that Precinct or District of Ground, within
the Bounds and Limits there mentioned, from thenceforth, should be a Parish of
it self, by the Name of the Parish of St. James's, within the Liberties of
Westminster; and a Church thereupon built, is dedicated by the Act, to Divine
Service, and that there should be a Rector to have the Care of Souls inhabiting
there; and then after a full Commendation of the Merits and Services of Dr.
Tennison in that Place, the now Reverend the Bishop of Lincoln: It does Enact
and Ordain him to be the first Rector of the same; and that the said Doctor and
his Successors, Rectors of the said Parish, should be incorporated, and have a
perpetual Capacity and Succession by the Name of the Rector of the said Parish
Church; and by Virtue of that Act, should be enabled by the Name aforesaid, to
sue and be sued, to plead and to be impleaded, in all Courts and Places within
this Kingdom, and should have Capacity to hold and enjoy, purchase and acquire
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, to him and them, Rectors thereof, for
ever, over and above what is given and settled by that Act, to any Value not
exceeding 200 l. per Annum.

Then it Enacts, That the Patronage, Advowson, or Presentation after the
Decease of the said first Rector or Avoidance thereof, shall or should belong
and appertain, and by that Act, shall or should be vested in the said Bishop of
London for the time being, and his Successors, and in Thomas Lord Jermyn, and
his Heirs for ever.

Then it Enacts, That the first Rector, after such Decease or Vacancy, shall be
presented or collated by the Bishop of London for the time being; and the next
to succeed him, shall be presented by the Lord Jermyn and his Heirs, and the
two next succeeding turns by the Bishop and his Successors, and the next turn
to the Lord Jermyn and his Heirs, and then the like Succession of two turns for
one to the Bishop and his Succession, and of one turn to the Lord Jermyn and
his Heirs, for ever after. This is the Act.

Now it is to be considered, That this Law does bind the King, and would bind
him in point of Interest, if he had been Patron of St. Martins in Right of his
Crown; and if a Right or Interest of the Crown shall be bound by an Act of
Parliament, a Prerogative shall be in no better plight. It cannot be said, That
he shall not be obliged by it, because not named; for though, and where he is not
named, he is bound by Multitudes of Statutes, according to the 5 Rep. 14 and 11
Rep. 68. He is bound by all Acts generally speaking, which are to prevent a
Decay of Religion; and so he is bound by Acts, which are for further Relief, or
to give a more speedy Remedy against Wrong.

It is no Objection, that this Law is in the Affirmative; for that it is
introductive of a new Law in the very Subject, that is created de novo. Then
before this Act the King had no Right over this; and if he has now any over
it, he can only have it, how, when, and as the Act gives it, not contrary to
it; then the Bishop was Patron of the Place out of which the Parish is created:
And the Bishop can claim no other Right, than what the Act gives him, Bro. tit.
Remitter 49. it is so agreed 1 Rep. 48. and in 2 Rep. 46. if Lands be given in
Fee to one who was Tenant in Tail, his Issue shall not be remitted, because
the latter Act takes away the force of the Statute de donis.

Suppose he had been Enacted to be Patron of a Living, to which he had a former
Right, there could be no Remitter, because as to particulars the Act is like a
Judgment, and estops all Parties to claim any thing otherwise than according to
the Act; and yet Remitter is a Title favored in the Law, then if he have this
only by force of this New Act, and another Person should present in his turn so
given, 'twould be an Injury, if a Subject did it, and consequently the King
cannot do it; for the Prerogative which this Act gives, or which the Common Law
gives, is not yet come to take place.

Though this be an Affirmative Law, yet according to the Rule taken and agreed in
Slade's and Drake's Case, Hob. 298. being introductive or creative of a new
thing, implies a Negative of all that is not in the purview, and many Cases are
there put to this purpose.

Then also it being particular and express, it implies a Negative, because this
and the other are inconsistent;

But First, It Is observable all Prescriptions and Customs are fore-closed by a
New Act of Parliament, unless saved. Suppose there was an Act of Parliament in
Force before this, viz. That the King should present; yet another Statute
Enacting somewhat new and inconsistent, will carry a Negative; and if so, in
Case of a former Act, there is almost as much Reason for a Prerogative: It must
be agreed, That a Man may prescribe or allege a Custom against an Act of
Parliament, when his Prescription or Custom is saved or preserved by that or
another Act; but regularly a Man cannot prescribe or allege a Custom against
any Act of Parliament, because it is matter of Record, and the highest and
greatest Record which we know of in the Law, 1 Inst. 115.

Suppose Money were by the Law payable annually, and an Act comes and says it
shall be paid Quarterly, by even and equal Portions at the four Feasts, for the
first Year, this will certainly alter the Law: It Is true,

That a consistent Devife or Statute, is no Repeal or Revocation; but if a new
Act gives a new Estate different from the former, this amounts to a Repeal, Fox
and Harcourt's Case.

The same Rule holds even in Case of the King as in the Archbishop of
Canterbury's Case, 2 Rep. 46. and agreed to in Hob. 310. the Query was, if the
Lands came to the King by 31 H. 8. cap. 13. or by the Stat. of Edw. 6. and
objected, That the latter was in the Affirmative; yet held, That it came by the
latter, because though they were Affirmative Words, yet they were differently
penned; and the last being of as high an Authority as the first, and providing
by express Words, That by Authority of that Parliament they should be in actual
Possession of the King, held that they should be in him by force of that last
Act; and Reason will warrant these Differences, because if otherwise,
Inconsistencies and Contradictions must be allowed.

Then this is a new Law in the whole; it is a new Parish, it is a new Advowson;
and in truth it is no Advowson till the Avoidance; nay, by the words of the Act
(if any difference can be in an instant, between, at and after, as our Law in
several Cases allows it, as per mortem and post mortem, Devise by Jointenant,
etc.) there is no Patronage fixed, it is no Advowson until after the Avoidance;
for so are the words; after the Avoidance, the Advowson, Patronage, and
Presentation shall be vested, foret vestit' in Episcopo Lond' and Domino
Jermyn, and till then it is vested in no Body; and that which is in no Body, is
not at all; unless it be, as some times for necessity sake we say, in nubibus,
or in abeyance; but to say that an Advowson shall be in abeyance, before it is
created or ordained to exist or be at all, must favor somewhat of Absurdity:
Now the King can have no Prerogative turn upon an Avoidance, by a Promotion,
but when the Patron's Clerk was promoted and preferred; and here is no Patron
till that Avoidance happen. They say it is vested immediately, though to take
possession hereafter, as a Reversion granted cum acciderit, according to 3 Cro.
323. and 1 Saund. 147. But that is not this Case; for there is a present Grant;
here the words are, After the Avoidance shall be vested, and not before; and
being a new thing it may be so; as a Rentcharge de novo may be granted to take
effect de futuro, but cannot be so of an old Rent.

2. Dr. Tennison comes not in by the Patron's Presentation, but by Donation of
the Parliament; and there is not any President for a Prerogative to present to
a Donative upon a Promotion: The King cannot present to that, which the Patron
could not have presented to: and the Patron could not present to a Donative,
quatenus a Donative; and for the King to present to a Donative, is to injure
the Patron; for it is to make that Presentative, which was never intended by the
Patron to be so: And yet in Case of a Donative with Cure of Souls (as it may be
of a Parochial Church, though exempt from Ordinary's Jurisdiction, according to
Yelverton 61. 2 Roll. Abridg. 341.) the Ordinary may compel the Patron to
Collate some body, as was held in Case of the Rectory Parochial Donative of St.
Burian's in Cornwall; and the Tower of London is with Cure of Souls, 1 Cro.
330. 2 Roll. Abridg. 331. 1 Inst. 144. The same will be void by a Promotion of
the Incumbent; for it is not merely the change of Inferior into Superior that
makes the Avoidance; for then an Incumbent, made Bishop of another Diocese, or
in Ireland, would not avoid the Benefice; but it is the Doubleness of the
Charge, contrary to the Council of Lateran, which has been received here. This
is more different from the pretended Notion and Reason of this Prerogative,
then that Case of a Common Donative; for in Case of a Donative, there is an
Incumbent of the Patron's own preferring, who is further promoted by the King,
and still in being, and the same Patron claiming a Right to fill the same: Here
it is an Incumbency by Gift of the King, Lords and Commons. And then, if it be
considered what this new Prerogative is, for so it must be termed, since
there is no footsteps for it in the old times, and the Statute of Prerogativa
Regis (which enumerates most of them, and is rather a Collection of old
Prerogatives then a new Statute) mentions it not; it is a Prerogative to present
upon the Promotion of the Patron's Presentee, or incumbent presented in his
Right; here is no such thing; it is as their Books say, when the Patron's
Presentee is advanced to a greater Dignity in the Church; and the pretended
Reason given for it to avoid the Objection, That no Prerogative is to be
injurious, or to import a Wrong done to the Subject, is this, That here is no
Injury to the Patron, but a Kindness to his Friend, because the Person which he
chose and preferred is bettered, and further preferred to an higher Degree of
Honor and State in the Church; all this fails here; so that there does not
seem to be the same Color, why the King should have it in this Case.

It is a good Argument, according to Mr. Littleton, That because no such ever
was before, that therefore of right it ought not to be: And if no Practice has
been to warrant it, in Case of a Gift by Act of Parliament, there is no reason
it should be allowed in this Case; for a Prerogative never used, can never be
with Propriety called a Prerogative; much less reason have they for it, if they
have no Practice or presidents to warrant their Claim in case of any Donative.

Prima facie the patron has the right; to evade that right of his Mr. Attorney
pretends to a Prerogative; then it being of common right with him, they ought
to demonstrate that there is such a Prerogative to control that right in this
particular Case, and the Arguments brought for it ought to be clear,
convincing, and undoubted: Now because where a Patron's Presentee is preferred
by being consecrated a Bishop, the King shall present, that therefore where the
Parliament's Presentee is preferred, the Patron shall lose the benefit of his
Presentation, is a non sequitur, because the Cases are not the same; for the
supposed Recompense or Consideration in the one, holds not in the other: This
is not the Case of a Prerogative incident to the Crown, from the Necessity of
Government, nor is it a Prerogative which respects the Continuance or
Improvement of the Revenue, so as for the benefit of the Kingdom, an Extent or
Enlargement of it beyond former Practice, may seem absolutely needful; and
therefore the common pretenses of Intendment and Presumption, are no more on
their side then upon this; nay, it is rather otherwise, because that common
right is with the Patron.

It is no Objection to say, That there never was such a Promotion or Avoidance
before; whether there were, or not, is not material; but that rather turns upon
them, for that Evinces beyond dispute, that there never was such a Prerogative
presentation in Fact as they now contend for; Argument' a simili is the
weakest, but they have no Case like this; nay, they have no Opinion in the
Books declaring on their side; nay, the Book Definition of this Prerogative, as
was said before, is only to present to a Benefice, vacant by promotion, that
was antecedently presentable; here the whole Kingdom is Patron, and all that
they can pretend to, is when a Man is dignified by promotion, who came in by
Presentation or Collation, and not otherwise.

It is not at present proper to argue when this Prerogative shall begin or
commence upon this Church, or if ever; 'twill be time enough to dispute that,
when another Occasion offers it self, when the Doctor, or any of his
Successors, happens to be preferred to the same state, as his Predecessor is.
It suffices to maintain that this turn belongs to the Bishop of London.

This is not an Advowson created, as others usually are. First, As was observed
before, no Advowson is fixed, or vested, or created, but in futuro, the same
Person is made a Pluralist by Act of Parliament, though the Act it self says the
Parish was too great for one Cure.

Then 'twas observed, That this is not a Patronage turn; it must be admitted
that this Act vests the Fee-simple of this Advowson in the Lord Jermyn and the
Bishop of London, and in their respective Heirs and Successors by turns, viz.
to the Lord Jermyn one, and to the Bishop two successively; and so the
Succession is enacted to be for ever; now this is not one of those Patronage
successive turns, but it is a particular Presentation which is given to the
Bishop of London by express Limitation, and the penning is different. The
first, about which the present Contest is, is to be by the Bishop of London for
the time being; then the successive Presentations of one and two, are to be,
one by the Lord and his Heirs, and the two by the Bishop and his Successors; so
that there is no words in the first that looks like the Gift of an Estate, but
it is only one first particular Presentation, given to the Bishop more then
ordinary: It is not one of his turns, which he is to have as Patron, by two to
one: But first he is to present one, before ever it comes into the form and
manner of turns prescribed by this Act, in perpetual Succession: For if
otherwise, the Patronage would be to the Bishop three turns in four, to one of
the Lord Jermyns.

As to their Objection, That a Patronage newly created shall be in the same
plight, and under the same Rules and Circumstances and Encumbrances as another;
that Objection can never take place, before it becomes a Patronage, which this
was not: And 2. with a stronger reason, it can never take place, till it has
been presented unto: 3. It can never take place, where a particular
Presentation is at first given by express words.

The words are, The first Rector shall be Collated by the Bishop for the time
being, and then the Succession; and it is always to be remembered that it is an
Act of Parliament. Now suppose the Act had said that the Patronage, after an
Avoidance, should be vested in A. and B. but that the first Rector, upon that
Avoidance, should be presented by J. S. a third Person; this could never be
reckoned a common ordinary turn, subject to the like Prerogative as others: The
Bishop here claims not this particular Presentation in right of his Patronage,
whereby he is to have two turns to one; but by express Gift of the Parliament.

Suppose the King had been Patron of St. Martyns in his own right, no Man would
say, that this Act, thus creating of a new Parish, a new Rectory, and a new
Patron, would not have bound him.

Surely the King's Assent as Supreme or General Patron, is as much implied in
this Act, as it would have been, had he been a particular Patron of the Church
of that Parish, out of which the new one is taken: Here the King himself gives
the first Presentation to the Bishop of London; for the King and People, all
together, the whole Kingdom are Donors or Grantors of this first Presentation
to my Lord of London.

Suppose such a Right as this is, were in a Subject, and he were able to
prescribe for it, he must then have set forth, that time out of mind,
wheresoever any incumbent of another Presentation was preferred by him to
another Living, that he should have the Presentation ea vice; this is the most
that could be made of it. Would any Man say, That this Case would fall under
that Prescription, or the reason of it. Now though a Prerogative be part of the
Common Law, and not like a Prescription; yet every Prerogative has its
Boundaries and its Limits, and a Reason for it too; or else it is no
Prerogative, that our Law allows of.

Besides, there is good Reason in Fact, for this Provision of the first
Presentation, because the Act takes notice of the Parish of St. Martyns; out of
which, this Parish is taken, and the Bishop of London was Patron thereof, and
at first there is the same Incumbent of both, Dr. Tennison: Now the Patronage
being formerly in the Bishop, and in the Successive Patronage, created of this
new Church by this Act, there is one turn in three given away from him to a
third Person, then this Presentation out of turn is at first given to the
Bishop of London, in Consideration of the third turn given to the Lord Jermyn
afterward.

Then there is another thing deserving of notice in this Case, and that is this;
That one and the same Person being incumbent of both Parishes, the King has
had the Effect of his Prerogative upon the promotion of this very Incumbent, by
presenting to that Church, into which he came by Presentation and Induction,
viz. St. Martyns; but here the Prerogative cannot operate, because he came into
this by Donation, not of the Patron, but of the Parliament; and consequently as
was said before, of the King himself.

Besides, here is no Salvoe of the King's Prerogative, or other Right; and to
what end in all private Acts for Sale of Estates, paying of Debts, docking of
Settlements, and the like; do the King's Council take Care, always to insert a
saving, if the same be not necessary.

Here Is a new Estate given, and that to a particular Person, and in a
particular manner; and no Person can claim a Right to, in, or over this, but as
the Parliament has given it; as for instance, in an Act where two Churches are
united, as upon the Rebuilding of the City of London, the first Presentation is
ordered to be by the Patron of the Living, of the greatest Value in the King's
Books. The King is Patron of the Living of the lesser Value, as he is of
several of them in London, he shall not have his Common Prerogative of the
first Presentation, which he has in all other Cases, where his Interest is
intermixed with others, as in Case of Coparceners; and the youngest is in Ward,
he shall present first; though the eldest, by the Common Law, is to have the
first turn, and the King's Right is in the Place of the youngest; but yet in
case where that an Act of Parliament gives a new Estate, and prescribes a
Method, though in the Affirmative, the Method limited shall take place against
the King's Prerogative of being preferred; and the reason is, because it is a
new Right which the Act gave to present to the Church, to which the Union was,
and consequently it must be taken as it is given: And so was it held by the
Civilians at Doctors Commons, before the Chancellor of London, and several
assistant Delegates, upon a Caveat there against Institution, and on Advice of
the Lawyers, the King's Presentee acquiesced, and never brought any Quare
Impedit.

The Argument now is only, as to this one first Presentation, there is no flat
Contradiction between the use of the Prerogative and My being Patron for ever;
but it is a Contradiction, to say, the King and I shall both have the same
Presentation.

To say, That he shall have a Prerogative here, is to say, That he shall do a
wrong to his Subject, for the Bishop can have no other than this one
Presentation; he can have no other in lieu of it, and has no Advantage or
Recompense antecedent or subsequent from this Prerogative.

First Fruits and Tenths are not demandable from this Parish, because no saving
of them in the Act to the King; upon passing the Act, it is known, That in the
Commons House the same was pressed to be inserted, but denied, and the Clause
rejected; the same Attempt was made in this House, but to no purpose.

In other Acts for the Erecting of new Parishes, there is generally such a
saving, as for St. Ann's, and St. John's of Wapping, and the Act for uniting of
Parishes, upon Rebuilding the City, has a Clause of saving to this Effect: All
which shows, That such a saving is necessary, though the First Fruits and Tenths
being formerly enjoyed by the Popes, might have been pretended, by Construction
of Law, to be a Profit annexed to the Crown by Stat. of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1. all
Payments to the Pope having been prohibited by 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21. and all
Profits and Commodities enjoyed by the Popes thereby annexed to the Crown. Yet
neither that Act, nor that other in the same Year (whereby the First Fruits and
Tenths of all Ecclesiastical Livings that then, or thereafter should belong
from any Parsonage or Vicarage were granted to the Crown) were ever intended to
reach this Parish of St. James's, it being a new Creation by Act of Parliament;
and because in the Act no First Fruits or Tenths are given or saved; and
there is as much Reason to argue in that case, for an implied saving, as there
is for this Prerogative.

Suppose it should be admitted, That a presentable Benefice created by Act of
Parliament, should be subject to the same Rules as others are; yet that will
not reach this, because not like other Benefices till once presented to; it is a
peculiar singular Case, by 2 Roll. abr. 342. and 1 Inst. 344. If a Patron
present to a Donative, it becomes presentative ever after; which shows, That
it is the Presentation which makes it presentative in its Nature, now here it is
plainly a Donative till once presented to.

Then it was said, That it is not needful to engage in the Dispute, whether
this Prerogative shall prevail against the Grantee of the next Avoidance,
according to Woodley's Case, 2 Cro. 695. or whether that case be Law, for that
the same is plainly distinguishable from our Case, for there the Grantee comes
in the place of the Grantor, quoad that Avoidance, and he can have no better or
greater Right than his Grantor would have had, if no such Grant had been made.
Here ours is a first Presentation, granted by Act of Parliament.

Suppose the Donors of this Presentation to the Bishop, had named a Person in
Esse, to have succeeded upon the Death or Avoidance of Dr. Tennison; no Man
will pretend that this Prerogative should have prevented him, the reason given
in the Books cited for that Case of the Grantee of the next Avoidance, is, That
the Patron could not grant more or otherwise, than under the Contingency of
this Prerogative. Surely they will not say, That the King, Lords, and Commons,
were such feeble qualified, restrained Donors; then the Parliament being the
Donors, the Prerogative insisted upon, and the express Gift to the Bishop, are
contradictory and repugnant, and cannot both be fulfilled.

It is no Argument to say, That if a Vacancy had been in the Sea, and the
Temporalties in the King's hands, then the King must have presented and not the
Bishop, and that would have contradicted the Act as much as this; for that had
been the same as if the Bishop had presented himself, for the King during that
time, was in loco ordinarij.

To say, That the Bishop of London has no more right by the Act of Parliament,
then a Grantee of the next Avoidance has by the Common Law, this surely is no
very close reasoning, for there is some difference between the one and the
other: Here the Act of Parliament (which has the King's Consent) gives a
particular and express Right, and an Act of Parliament may (as Coke says)
alter, change, annul, abridge, diminish, qualify, enlarge or transferr any
Common Law; nay, it has the Common Law and the Prerogative too, under its
Control.

Upon the whole, it was concluded, That by this Judgment, a new Prerogative is
affirmed to belong to the Crown, and this is extended to a turn after a
Commendam, which may be a prejudice to all the Patrons in England; 2. It
destroys and makes useless the plain and express Words and Meaning of the Act
of Parliament, which gives the first Presentation to the Bishop of London, and
3. It confirms the old Non obstante Doctrine of Commendams, which has always
been acknowledged to be to the prejudice of the Church; wherefore it was
prayed, That the said Judgment might be reversed.

On the other side it was argued, That this Judgment ought to be affirmed; for
that, as to the first pont, though it has been said to be a new thing, and
grounded upon late Presidents, yet it has been so often adjudged, that it does
not now deserve a Debate; 'twas solemnly settled in Wright's Case, and upon
Consideration, 2 Rolls Abridg. 343, 344. 3 Cro. 526. Moore 399. That though many
ancient Authorities have been lost, yet in Brook, Presentment al Esglise 61.
there is the Opinion of the Bishop of Ely for it. And as to the old Presidents,
there is no need of Recourse to them, because continual Usage has been with the
King in this matter; a settled Opinion for an hundred years is surely enough to
declare the Law as to this particular: This is sufficient Evidence to prove
this Right in the Crown, there being no Judicial Opinion against it. The reason
for this Prerogative, is because the King, by the exercise of his prerogative
in the promotion, has made the Avoidance, and it is but changing one Life for
another, and possibly the Patron is as near the having another presentation, as
before.

It was agreed that this is none of the prerogatives mentioned in the Statute
de Prerogativa Regis; but then 'twas said, That the prerogative to present by
Lapse, is not in the Statute, and yet that is admitted; so that the omission of
it there, can be no objection; this is a prerogative that follows a Vacancy
occasioned by the exercise of the prerogative, for such it is to make Bishops.
The King first made them by the donation of a Ring and Staff, then by a Conge
d'Eslier, the King gave license to choose, and approved the person chosen, though
not by absolute donation, as before. By the 25 Hen. 8. the Crown is restored to
its ancient Prerogatives, and there are Letters Missive, directing the choice
of such a person. In Wright's Case in 3 Cro. and Moore, then was the first time
it came in question; and it was debated and considered, and the Judgment upon
deliberation settled it with the King. And as to the Objection, that in Dyer
228. it is said, That he and the rest of his Brethren thought otherwise; that
point was nothing to the Case then in question: But however, it is observable
that the Queen presented Anno 6. and the Patron did not dispute it, as appears
in Woodly's Case. And in Owen's Rep. it is said, that several Presidents in
Henry the Eighth's time were searched. It Is true, that in 11 Hen. 4.67. and 21
Edw. 4.33. the King did not entitle himself by virtue of his Prerogative, but
by reason of the Temporalties being in his hands; those Cases can influence
nothing in this matter, because the King's Prerogative consists not in ousting
of himself, but of a Stranger; it is to present in the turn of another upon
such a Vacancy, but not where he is entitled himself, there he presents by
virtue of his own Interest.

As to the Objection, That the Old Books are silent about this Prerogative;
'twas answered, That before the Statute of Provisors 25 Edw. 3. the King was
defeated of his Prerogative by reason of the Pope's Provisions, and therefore
the King could not have it; whereas it is the Exercise of his Prerogative of
Promotion, that gives him this Prerogative of presenting upon this Vacancy by
such Promotion; and therefore that Statute was made to prevent all
Encroachments; and though it was made to that very purpose, yet the Clergy being
then so strongly united to the Pope's Interest, the Kings of England could not
use that Prerogative, and frequent Usurpations were made upon the Crown, till
the Pope's Supremacy was denied. The 41 Edw. 3.5. shows that there were such
Usurpations. 7 Hen. 4. cap. 8. complaint is made of them: and 5 Hen. 4. number.
95. Cotton. 458. And thus it continued till the Statute about the Supremacy 28
Hen. 8. the Kings are to make the Bishops; and then consequently, in point of
Law, the right of presenting was restored.

Then 'twas urged, That none of the old Books do mention the King's right to
present by Lapse, except in Cawdries Case, where notice is taken of a Case in
the time of Edw. 3. but that is not to be found. Bro. tit. Presentment 61. is
as much Authority for this as that in Cawdries Case is, for the Prerogative to
present upon Lapse. And this right in question, having been enjoyed so long,
should not now have been questioned.

In 5 Edw. 2. Maynard 148, 198. there is one Instance of the Patron's
presenting again; but then Provisions were common and usual, Walsingham 1313.
so that supposing the Patron did in those times present, the King was not
concerned, because 'twas then only the Pope's right, as was thought, and the
Pope might be ignorant of the matter. And from thence 'twas argued, that the
practice of those Times cannot be urged as Arguments in the present Case.

Then 2. it was urged, That the King having this Prerogative, he is not
debarred of it by the Dispensation to hold it, etc. nor by the Act of
Parliament, nor by the King's Confirmation of it. The King by that did transfer
no Right to the Incumbent, but merely did continue him in, and there was no
Avoidance, but the same is suspended; and had the Incumbent died, or resigned,
during this time, the Church had been void by such Death or Resignation, and
had debarred the King of his Prerogative: The Incumbent still remains Incumbent
for the time, by force of his first presentation, and so the Dispensation does
prevent the Avoidance: He is not in by force of any Title which the
Dispensation gives him, but of his old Title, Jones 91. 161. Vaughan 18.

3. Then 'twas argued that the Act of Parliament for making this new Parish did
not alter the Case. 'Twas said, that the making of this a Rectory in this
manner, does make it subject to this prerogative; and that it was by no means
the intent of the Act to debar the prerogative. It is made a Parish and
Rectory, such as others are, subject to the EcclesiasticalLaws, as well as any
other Benefice, under the obligation to Residence, and liable to the Common
Jurisdiction and Censure of the Ordinary; and it is to be made vacant by the
same ways and means, as other livings are; the words Death, or any other
Avoidance, prove it to be so: Lapse will prevail upon this Rectory; and that
cannot be, but because it is made a Rectory, and presentative. It cannot be
doubted, but that the next Avoidance might have been granted over by the Bishop
of London, before any Avoidance was.

Suppose the Bishop of London had died, and this Promotion had happened, should
not the King have presented by reason of the Temporalties; and yet that is as
much out of the Words of the Act, as this is? As to its being a Donative, 'twas
said, That the present Rector does not come in by Donation; and though it is true,
That the King cannot present to a Donative upon such an occasion, the reason
is, because the Promotion does not make a Vacancy of the Donative, it does not
make a Cession, the Parson is not subject to Censures as other Rectors are; he
is still in by reason of the Institution of the Founder, so that nothing can be
inferred from thence: Suppose the Incumbency of a Donative had been immediately
turned into a Rectory, would not that have subjected it to this Prerogative:
It Is admitted, That the promotion of the Rector did make an Avoidance; then was
cited Princes Case, 8 Rep. Then suppose it a Donative as to Dr. Tennison, at
the same time that the Church becomes vacant, the Patronage vests; and then the
King's Prerogative shall take place, either codem Instanti, or before: But here
the Right of Patronage did vest immediately by the Act; he that is to present
when the Rectory becomes void, he is Patron: It Is like a Reversion granted cum
acciderit, there is a present Interest vested; and there is no reason why it
should not be so, in Case of this Act of Parliament.

The Stat. of 12 Car. 2. for confirming of Livings, makes the then Possessors
full and perfect Incumbents, as this does, were not these Benefices void, if
the Parties were advanced to Bishoprics, and upon such promotions, did not the
King present, undoubtedly he did.

Then 'twas argued, That 'twas never the Intent of this Act to oust the King of
this Prerogative; the first Intent was to make a Parish, and establish a
Rectory, that was the true design. Suppose the Act had only vested the Advowson
in my Lord of London, and had not mentioned the Lord Jermyn, would not this
Prerogative have been consistent with the Right of Patronage: As to the
pretense that the Bishop is to present first, that is only to make a Partition;
it is an Explanation, That they should not have it in common, but by turns. The
holding of Dr. Tennison was reckoned as one turn, and the Bishop was to have
the next; besides, every Act of Parliament is to be construed according to the
Subject Matter, and not further than the Act designs and intends; it is plain,
from the Nature of the thing, That nothing was designed but to settle the
Rectory, and establish the manner of Presentation, according to the Agreement
of the parties: General Words shall not oust the King of his Prerogative, since
he is not named, 3 Cor. 542. Moor 540.7 Rep. 32. Plowd. 240. Hob. 146. Here are
no Words which do import any Intention to restrain the King of that Right with
respect to this, as he has with respect to other Rectories. The King's
Prerogative does not interfere with their being two Parishes; this Prerogative
must operate upon all presentative Livings, so soon as they are made so.

This can never be pretended to be partly presentative and partly donative; for
Dr. Tennison was in by Act of Parliament as one presented: Then it being a
Cession of a presentative Rectory, whether old or new, it is the King's Right to
present. Vernon's Case, 4 Rep. 4. Plowd. 127. The Dr. came in not by Donation,
but was rather placed in by Parliament, which implies in it the Consent, and
all the necessary Acts of the Patron and Ordinary: Suppose the King should
grant away his own Advowson during a Plenarty, and afterward such a Cession
should happen by promotion; surely that would not deprive the King of his
prerogative, and by the same Reason it ought not in this Case. Wherefore, upon
the whole Matter, it was prayed, That the Judgment should be affirmed, and it
was affirmed accordingly.

Dominus Rex, Versus Reginald Tucker.
WRit of Error to reverse a Judgment given in B. R. for Reversal of a Judgment
against T. before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, upon an Indictment for
High Treason. The Record is to the Effect following:

Ad Gen' Session' de Oyer et Terminer tent' pro Com' Somerset, apud Civitat'
Wellen' in dict Com' Somerset, little Francisco Wythens mil' un', etc. Richardo
Heath un', etc. Georgio Strode, mil' un' Servient', etc. et aliis Sociis suis
Justiciariis dicti Domini Regis per Liter as Patentes ipsius Dom' Regis sub
magno sigillo Anglie confect eisdem Francisco Wythens, Richardo Heath, Georgio
Strode, et aliis aliquibus tribus vel pluribus eorum direct' quorum alter'
eorum praefat' F. W. vel Richardum Heath Dictus Dominus Rex unum esse voluit ad
inquirend' per Sacramentum proborum et legalium Hominum Com' praed' ac aliis
viis modis et mediis, etc. assignat' per Sacrament' Francisci War, Baronett',
etc. proborum et legalium hominum Com' Somerset praed' adtunc et ibid
impannellat' jurat' et onerat' ad inquirend' pro Domino Rege pro Corpore Com'
praed' presentat' existit quod Reginald Tucker nuper de Long Sutton in Com'
praed' Gen' et Thomas Place nuper de Eddington in Com' praed' Yeoman timorem
Dei in cordibus suis non habentes nec debitum ligeantie sue ponderantes sed
Instigatione diabolica mot' et seduct' dilection' ac veram et debit'
obedientiam quas very et Fideles subditi Domini Jacobi secundi nuper Regis
Anglie, etc. erga ipsum Dominum Regem gererent et de jure gerere tenentur
subtrahent' et machinant' et totis viribus suis intendent' pacem et Communem
tranquilitatem, etc. proditoris compassaverint imaginat' fuer' et intendebant
dictum Dominum Regem supremum et naturalem Dominum suum ad mortem adducere et
contra dictum Dominum Regem supremum verum naturalem et indubitatum Dominum
suum, prodotorie levaverunt guerram, etc. contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc
Coron' et Dignitat' suas ac contra formam Statut' in hujusmodi casu edit' et
provis'.

Et statim de premissis in Indictament' praed' specificat' superius eis
imposit' per cur' hic allocut' qualiter se vellent inde acquietari, iidem
Reginald Tucker et Thomas Place separatim dicunt, etc.

The Judgment is per cur' hic quod praed' Reginald Tucker et Thomas Place
ducantur eteorum uterque ducatur usque ad Gaolam dicti Domini Regis Com' praed'
unde venerunt, et abinde usque ad locum Executionis trahantur et uterque eorum
trahatur et super furcas ibidem per collum suspendantur et viventes ad terram
prosternantur et uterque eorum prosternatur et interiora sua extra ventres
eorum et utriusque eorum capiantur ipsisque viventibus ibidem comburantur, et
quod capita eorum et utriusque eorum amputentur quodque corpora eorum et
utriusque eorum in quatuor parts dividantur et quod capita et quarteria illa
ponantur ubi Dominus Rex ea assignare voluit, etc.

And now it was argued on the behalf of the King, That this Reversal was not
justifiable; that the Exceptions taken below were many, and as to the Pretense
that secreta membra amputentur was omitted; the same was not allowed as Error
below, by reason of the many Precedents which in the Entries did omit it. That
though the Practice be common to pronounce it, yet few or no ancient Records do
mention it; that in 3 Inst. 210. where the Judgment is taken notice of, this is
not part In Plowd. 387. it is omitted, that Interiora includes it, In Bro coron'
128. it is not inserted; That this was never entered as part of the Judgment,
till 12 Car. 2. Then as to the separatim allocut' upon the Arraignment, that
was likewise overruled below; for it must be intended a several Demand or
Question: And the same is implied in this Entry, as much as if it had been
expressed, and the Precedents are both ways. But the main and only Exception,
for which the Court reversed the Judgment, was, That in the Indictment, it is
not said to be a Fact done contra ligeantie sue debitum; and as to this, it was
argued, That it was not necessary to use those very Words, That they are not
Terms of Art, such as are absolutely necessary; they are not like to the Words
Burglariter, Felonice, Murdravit, and the like; That proditorie implies it,
that it is plainly apparent to be contrary to his Allegiance; That all the whole
Indictment shows it to be so, it is not weighing his Allegiance, it is against
his true natural Liege, Lord and Sovereign, That it appears he was a natural
born Subject; That the very Words themselves are only of Aggravation, That they
may as well be laid precedent to the Fact as in the Conclusion; That here is
that which is Tantamount. That Sir Henry Vane's Indictment was thus, Cotton and
Messingers, Sid. 328. The Scotch Officers in Suffolk, Lamberts, Hackshams,
Titchburns, and many more.

That it is true, the Fact in the Indictment ought not to be made good by
Intendment or Inference; but if there be Words which show, that the Party owed
Allegiance, its enough. An alien Enemy is not indictable in this manner; but
here it is shown, That he is a Person capable of committing Treason, and that
the Act done was against his Duty and Obedience which he owed as a Subject;
That many Precedents have been thus, That nimia subtilitas in jure reprobatur;
That a Certainty to a common Intent is sufficient, Longs case; That in 2 Rolls.
abr. 82. contra coron' et dignitat' suas, is held not necessary; wherefore, and
for other Reasons then urged, 'twas prayed, That the Reversal might be
reversed, and the King restored, etc.

On the other side, it was argued, That this Reversal was just; That this
Arraignment being Joint, for want of separatim, makes the Proceeding Erroneous;
That the Precedents do use the Word separatim; and abundance of Entries were
mentioned, as Leach and Ruthford, et al'. 28 Hen. 8. Dudely, Gates, and Palmer,
1 and 2 Phil. and Mar'. Throgmorton and Weddall, 2 and 3 Ph. and M. Peckham and
Daniel, eodem Anno. Blunt and Danverse, 44. Eliz. Earl of Ess. and S. eodem
Anno. Guy Fawks and Sir Everard Digby, 3 Jac. 1. Harrison, Scot, and the other
Regicides, 12 Car. 2. 1660. Green, Berry, and Hill, for the Murder of Sir. E.
Godfrey, 1678. Ireland, Pickering, and Grove, 31 Car. 2. rot'. 242. Whitebread,
Fenwick, et al'. 32 Car. 2. rot'. 224. Johnson et al'. 2 Will. et Mar. num'.
57. and Lord Preston and Ashton, Trin. 3 Will. et Mar. n. 16. separatim
allocut'. and many more. Besides, the Nature of the thing is such, as requires
a several Arraignment, because they may plead several Pleas, and they are
several Offenses; and though they plead in this Case severally, that is not
enough; for they ought to be asked severally:

But this was not so much insisted on, as the next Error, the Omission of
secreta in the Judgment; it is part of the Judgment upon the 25 Edw. 3. for
compassing, etc. though for coining, it is only to be drawn and hanged, according
to Morgan's Case, Cro. Car. 383, Stamp. 182. 3. Inst. 15, 17. Finch's Law, lib.
2. cap. Treason, they are all secreta membra abscindant', as well as interiora;
all common Books have it, as Bolton's Justice of the Peace, tit. Prefidents of
Indictments for High Treason, 38, 42. Dalton's Justice, p. 335. Sheppard's
Epitome, tit. Crown, and all those common Abridgments, etc. Lord Preston and
Ashton's was drawn by good Advice, Harrison and al'. 12 Car. 2. Ireland,
Pickering, and Grove, 1678. Whitehread's, 1679. Walcott's, 1683. Langhorn's,
31. Car. 2. Colonel Sidney's, 1683. The Earl of Stafford's in 1680. was thus,
upon Debate and Consultation with all the Judges, Dominus Rex, versus Owen, 1
Rolls. Rep 185, 186. there it is mentioned.

But then it was chiefly insisted on, That the Reversal was to be maintained
for the Error in the Indictment; that contra ligeantie sue debitum was the
general Form; that all the great Men in all Ages, who had been of Counsel for
the Crown, had inserted it: That all the Indictments, the first Assizes, after
Monmouth's Rebellion, which were drawn or perused by Sir H. Poll' had this
Conclusion: That Ashtons, Crosses, Gaunts, Cornishes, Earl of Staffords,
Batemans, Ayliffs, Goodenoughs, Hone, Blague, Rowse, Armstrong, Sir Robert
Peyton, Langhornes, Lord Bellasis, Venner, Harrisons, Faukes, Sir Everard
Digbyes, Patricius Dolphie, Pasch. 41 Eliz. John Tipping 34 Eliz. are all thus;
and the Prints are so likewise, 3 Inst. 214. Fitzh. Justiee, page 218. Plowd.
387. Coke's Entries 361. Cro. Car. 120, 122, 123. and a great number of
Particulars more, which might be cited.

Then 'twas urged that Reason does require this, for that Treason is punishable
as a Breach of Allegiance; that that is the very Essence of Treason; that if
the Fact be not alleged to be against his Allegiance, it is not Treason; that
it is by reason of his Allegiance that he can commit Treason; and therefore
it is, that an Alien Enemy, who was never protected, cannot commit Treason,
because he owed no Allegiance: and there may be many Acts done, which look like
a levying of War, without any Breach of Allegiance; and for that was quoted
King John's Charter made at Rumney Mead, 18 die Junii Anno Regni 17 Rot. Pat.
17. m. 13. a Transcript whereof is in Matthew Paris 245. Anno 1215. which
Charter was ratified four times within nine years after. The first Confirmation
was granted 1 Hen. 3. and probably at his Coronation; for there was a Charter
dated at Gloucester 6 Febr. Rot. Pat. 1 Hen. 3. m. 13. that they should enjoy
Libertatibus Regno nostro Anglie a Patre nostro et nobis concessis. In the
second year of his Reign, he sends a Mandate to the several Sheriffs to
proclaim this Charter amongst others: Rex, etc. Salutem, Mittimus tibi Chartas
de Libertatibus, etc. Mandantes quatenus eas legi facias in pleno comitatu tuo,
Dat' 22 Febr. Rot. Claus. 2 Hen. 3. Then was cited Fox's Acts and Monuments, ad
Ann. 1218. That after Michaelmas, this King held a Parliament at Westminster,
wherein he confirmed and ratified, by his Charter, all the Franchises and
Liberties which were made and given by King John his Father. In the seventh
year of his Reign, viz. the Sixteenth of his Age, he took the Government into
his own Hands; and then the Archbishop of Canterbury, in open Parliament, does
mind him of the Oath sworn in his Name by the Earl of Pembroke (Rectore Regis
and Regni) and others, at the Pacification between him and the Dauphin, that he
would restore and confirm those Liberties to his Subjects, for which the War
broke out between his Father and the Barons. Then was quoted what Henry the
Third promised, when he invited Henry de Lucy to come in to him, 1 Hen. 3. m.
16. which is in very strange language, if his Allegiance had been broken. Then
was cited Sadler 262. and Spelman verbo ligeantia; and Calvin's Case, 7 Rep.
expounding of that word: and the old Custumer of Normandy, cap. 43. And the
said, and other Authorities, were enforced and amplified in such manner, as is
not fit to be remembered.

Then 'twas urged, That as the Subject Matter of this Indictment did require
these words, so the Reason of the Law in other Cases did warrant them to be
necessary here: that vi and armis was necessary, till the Statute of Hen. 8.
made it needless: and 'twould be strange, that an Indictment for a Trespass,
setting forth an Assault and Battery, with force of Arms, should be ill for
want of contra Pacem, and this should be good, without contra ligeantie sue
debitum: contra formam statut' is necessary, though the Fact be alleged,
sufficiently appearing to be within a Statute Law. Indictments are not to be
made good by Intendment or Implication, Stamford 96. Trin. 18 Edw. 4.10.
Furatus est without felonice, not good; Felonice abduxit without cepit, not
good. So for a Rape, quod ipsam contra voluntatem suam carnaliter cognovit,
without rapuit, is ill, 9 Edw. 4.26. and so is Dyer 304. Murdravit is
necessary: No Words or Terms of Art are to be supplied by any other Phrases
equivalent or tantamount in Sense, for the sake of certainty; because if such
loose Descriptions should be allowed, 'twould subject Men's Actions too much to
the Power of Construction, 2 Cro. 20, 142, 187, 527. And in all Indictments for
Offenses committed, between December. 15. and Febr. 13. 1688. the Conclusion was
contra pacem regni. Then was cited Vaux's Case 4 Rep. 39. 2 Rolls Abridg. 82.

Then 'twas said that there were express Authorities for the Defendant; 3 Inst.
11. that the Indictment of Treason concludes thus, 1 Inst. 129. is the same,
and Dyer 144. to the like effect. And what is said in the Margin of the new
Dyer, is very remarkable as to Mary Queen of Scotland: Calvin's Case 7 Rep. 6.
is full and express, as to the reason of the thing; and it is founded upon the
Difference, between an Alien Enemy and a Subject, Courteen's Case, Hob. 271.
Hobart is of Opinion, according to Calvin's Case, that Indictment against Alien
amie, it must conclude contra debitum ligeantie sue.

Besides, here are no words which carry the same Sense, or are equivalent to
it; Proditorie does imply a Treachery or Falsehood, and that he might be guilty
of, and yet not act contrary to his Allegiance; for at that rate every Breach
of Trust, as to the King, would be Treason: debitum ligeantie sue minime
ponderantes, is not sufficient; for a Man may not weigh his Allegiance, and yet
not act contrary to it: then contra naturalem Dominum suum supremum verum and
indubitat'; those words in themselves are not necessary, and anciently were not
inserted: In old time 'twas only contra Dominum Regem; and 'twill be hard to
say, that the use of words unnecessary should supply what is necessary, and
has anciently been used. Those words do only import, that the late King was
King of the Place where the Defendant was born and lived; and cannot make it
appear, that his Fact was contrary to the Laws of the Land, and the Duty of his
Allegiance, as a Subject to him.

Then supposing it not necessary in the Conclusion; for, as some Presidents are
in West's Symboleography, it is first, as contra ligeantie sue debitum levavit
guerram, yet it ought to be in the Indictment, in one part or another. The
formal Reason of the Facts being Treason, is because it is against his
Allegiance, and that ought to be expressed; all the other Expressions urged on
the other side, are at the most but Argumentative, and do not directly affirm
the thing which is necessary to make the Offense.

As to the Presidents which are the other way, they are but few; those in the
Reign of Hen. 8. and Queen Elizabeth, they are upon particular Statutes; as for
denying the Supremacy; taking Orders under the Pope, and the like; they are not
contra ligeantiam in the nature of the Offense, and there contra formam statut'
is enough: But no Answer can be given to the Case of Lopez in Calvin's Case,
where the Judges met and considered, how the Indictment should be, and agreed
to be contra supremum Dominum suum in Anglia; and the Conclusion to be contra
ligeantie sue debitum. Whereupon, for these and other Reasons, it was prayed,
that the Judgment of Reversal given in the Kings Bench might be affirmed; and
it was affirmed accordingly.

Joseph Eastmond Executor of Henry Eastmond and Samuel Nail Appellants, Versus
Edwyn Sandys Clerk, Respondent.
APpeal from a Decree of the Court of Exchequer: The Case was no more than
this; The Parish of Yeovilton consisting much in Pasture Land, and the
Respondent having been Rector thereof for Twenty years last past and upwards,
and being entitled to the great and small Tithes, and all other Dues within
the said Rectory, he did exhibit his Bill in that Court, against the Appellant,
Joseph in his own right, and as Executor of Henry his Father, and against the
other Appellant Samuel Nail, for Agistment Tithes, for depasturing and fatting
their Oxen, and other unprofitable Cattle, within the said Rectory, from the
Year 1677. to the time of exhibiting his Bill, which was in Michaelmas Term
1692.

The Appellant Joseph Eastmond by his Answer admitted, that he had Assets
sufficient to answer the Plaintiffs Demands; and both of them admitted, that
they and the Testator had fatted and depastured diverse Oxen yearly upon their
Lands in the said Parish, but said, that some of them were first used to the
Plough, and afterward fatted when turned off from the Plough.

The Court of Exchequer did thereupon, viz. May 26. 1696. decree Tithe Herbage
to be paid for the Appellants and the Testators Oxen and unprofitable Cattle,
not used for the Plough; and also for their Oxen and unprofitable Cattle used
for the Plough, for and during the time they were grazed and fatted in the
Parish for Sale, after they were turned off from the Plough. And now it was
insisted on in favor of the Appeal, that the Decree was unjust; and then were
quoted some Texts of Scripture about muzzling the Ox, etc. And also it was
urged, That that part of the Decree concerning Oxen once used to the Plough,
was erroneous; and there were cited all the Cases in the Books for exemption of
Plough-Cattle from Tithe Herbage, and that this was double Tything: And it was
insisted on, that the Reason of the thing was against it in this Case, because
the agistment of these Cattle, was necessary to sustain that labor which
promoted the Grain, of which Tithe was paid; that this Privilege extended to
all such Oxen as ever had been used to the Plough; that the exemption did
continue after they were forborne to be used at the Plough; for there was the
same reason to continue the exemption afterward, as there could be to allow it
during the Interval, when they do not draw the Plough. And for these and other
Reasons urged, 'twas prayed, That the Decree for Tithe quoad such Cattle as
ever had been used with the Plough, should be reversed.

On the other side it was urged, That the said Decree is agreeable to the Law,
and supported by many Resolutions in the Court of Exchequer, that there was a
Reason for Tithe in this Case; because these Cattle, though formerly used to the
Plough, they ceased now to belong to it, and consequently Tithes became due;
that there is a Difference in the nature of the thing; for when they feed in
order to labor, the Parson has a Tenth of the Benefit produced thereby, but
when they are fatted only for Sale, it is otherwise; That this was a settled and
allowed Difference in the Exchequer; That while the Oxen are working, no Tithe
shall be paid for their feeding, because there is Tithes of other things
arising by the Labor of such Cattle; but when they do no Work, and are turned
off to be fatted and are grazed, there Tithes shall be paid for the Herbage
which they eat, they being no way beneficial to the Parson in any other Tithes:
And many Cases in scacc' were cited to warrant this Distinction; and 'twas
said, That none could be alleged to the contrary, wherefore 'twas prayed, That
the Decree might be affirmed, and it was affirmed.

Magdalen Foubert, Widow, Grandmother and Administratrix of Katherine Frances
Lorin de Granmare, Appellant, Versus Charles de Cresseron, Administrator, with
the Will annexed of Katherine Granmare, Respondent.
APpeal from a Decree in Chancery, the Case was thus, Peter Lorin (Son of the
Appellant) and Katherine de Mandoville came to an Agreement to marry, and that
the longest Liver should take all, whether Issue or not: A public Notary took
and entered that Agreement in his Book, and both Peter and Katherine subscribed
the same so entered; and then being written fair, they signed it again, and the
now Appellant and other Relations subscribed it: They Intermarried, Peter was
killed in Flanders, and left Katherine with Child; afterward, she being near
her time, thought fit to make her Will, which she wrote with her own hand in
French, in these Words,

Quoy que je sois presentement en perfaite sante de corpse et d'esprit,
cependant ne scachant de quelle maniere il plaira a Dieu de disposer de moy
dans ma couche, Je trove a propos de marquer jcy mes dernieres volontes: En cas
qu'il luy plaise de me retirer de ce monde, si c'est sa volonte de donner des
jours a mon enfant, Je luy laisse generalement tout ce qui peut m'appartenir,
and supply tres humblement Madame Foubert, ma soeur Lorin et Mr' le Bas d'en
prendre soin; J'espere que Mr. Foubert, and le Major, a la consideration de feu
son paure Pere, luy rendront les services don't il aura besoin, and que Dieu ne
l'abandonnera point: Je l'en supply de toute mon ame, comme aussi de benir
toute la famille fait a Londres ce 16th de Novembre, 1693. par moy, Catherine
de Granmare: After which the said Katherine annexed a Codicil to her Will, in
these words, viz. En cas qu'il plaise a Dieu de retirer mon Enfant aussy bien
que moy, Je done a Mademoiselle le Bas ma bague de Diamans, mon Ecritoire
garnie d'argent, and une boete de rubants neufs; Je done a Madamoselle
Peireaus mon habit brun double couleur de paille, et mon habit Jaune; une demie
douzanie de mes Chemises: Je done au fills a Jacob dix livres sterlings pour le
mettre en Metier, and a son pere ce qui se trovera des habits de mon Mary: Je
done a Catharine Williams, ma filleule, dix livres sterlings pour la mettre en
metier Tout le rest de ce qui m'appartient tant en Meubles, que Linge,
Vaissell d'argent, and Argent Monnoye, qui m'est du, Je le laisse a ma soeur
Lorin, and a mess' de Cresseron, pour etre egallement partage, enter eux;
J'excepte seulement le portrait de mon Cher Mary, ma bague Turquoise, que Je
done a ma soeur Lorin, and la pry de garder l'une and l'autre tant qu'elle
vivra: Je done aussy a Monsieur Cresseron ma montre d'Or que le souhaite qu'il
guard et port pour l'amour de moy; fait a Londres ce 16th Novembre par moy
Catherine Granmare.

Then she was delivered of a Daughter, and a few Hours after died, and the
Daughter did survive her near two Years, and then died: And after her Mother's
Death (there being no Executor named) Administration of the Estate of the
Testatrix was committed during the Minority of the Child with the Will annexed;
but the Appellant possessed her self of the Estate, being about 600 l. Value.
Then after the Child's Death, the Appellant as next of Kin, took Administration
to the Child, and also to Mrs. Granmare.

The Respondent exhibited his Bill, claiming a Moiety of the Residuum by force
of the Codicil, the Appellant by Answer insisted upon the Invalidity of the
Agreement between Peter and Katherine, but that being waived, the Question
arose upon the words of the Will, and particularly these, donner des jours, and
'twas insisted, That nothing was designed to the Respondent, but only in case
the Child were still-born, or should die in her lying in; whereupon the Court
ordered the Cause to be continued in the Paper, and that both sides should take
time to procure the Opinion of French Men born, and acquainted with the Laws of
France, and the Cause coming on again to be heard before the Lord Chancellor;
and upon reading of several Opinions of French Gentlemen bred to the Laws of
that Country, the Court declared, That the Respondent was well entitled to his
Moiety of the Residue, after the particular Legacies, Debts, Funerals, and
other Allowances deducted, and decreed the same accordingly.

It was argued on the behalf of the Appellant, That this Decree was erroneous,
that the proper Signification of those words, was no more than to give Life,
that it was so translated at Doctors Commons, That that Translation does agree
with the Opinion of several of the most learned Divines amongst the French
Refugees here; That it is so interpreted in the Famous Dictionary of the French
Academy, dedicated to that King, where the Words are as follows, viz. les jours
au pluriel, signify la vie, That Days in the plural signify Life, without any
Determination of time; That there are few Frenchmen of any Understanding, but
will acknowledge, That by les jours d'une person, the Days of one (whether
they be many or few in number) must be understood the Life, etc. That the
Testatrix here could mean no other by Days, but Life; when she said, That in
case it pleased God to take her out of this World, if it was his Will to give
Days, to give Life to her Child, she left it all that belonged to her; knowing
well, That if the Child was born alive, it must be maintained from that Moment,
out of what was so left it, that it appeared from the Preamble of the Codicil,
viz. In case it shall please God to take away my Child, as well as my self,
then, etc. That the Testatrix never intended the Estate to go over, unless the
Child died as well as her self in her lying in.

Then it was argued from the Nature of the particular Legacies; they were of
such a sort, as that they must be given without Sense or Reason, had she not
supposed her Child's Death, as well as her own, in her lying in; for otherwise
those new Ribbons must become old, which were intended as a Present to a young
Gentlewoman, Clothes locked up in a Trunk would have been of no use to Persons
then in Distress, and the poor Orphan had gone too far in Years to learn a
Trade. Then other Things are given as Tokens to be kept, and worn by them for
her sake, as long as they lived: Now what Reason can be assigned for this, if
she did not mean and suppose a Death in her lying in: From whence it was
inferred, That the Intention of the Testatrix was to give all she had to her
Child, in case she survived her; and if it did not survive her, but was taken
away as well as her self, in her lying in, then her Intention was to give that
same All (which she had given to her Child) to other People, as specified in
the Will; and unless this were the Intention, the Child must have starved, or
lived upon Charity, not having the Property of what was left it; and the
Condition precedent, according to the Respondents Exposition, excludes the
Child till its Years of Discretion; wherefore 'twas prayed that the Decree
might be reversed.

On the other side it was argued with the Decree, that the same was just; that
no Objection could arise from the Nature of the other Legacies, or of this, as
being reasonable or unreasonable; for that it is the Natural Right and
Privilege of every Person, to dispose of that which they have, at their
pleasure, to do what they will with their own; a Privilege so certain, that
though it is used many times to ill purposes, yet the Law cannot interpose, nor
restrain the Proprietor, no not to preserve him and his Family from ruin, as
daily Experience shows: That it is agreeable to Law and Justice, and to true
Piety, to see that the Will of the Dead be performed; and though the Law have
ascertained how Estates shall go, when there is no Will, yet when there is a
Will that disposes of it otherwise, then the Law would do; the Courts below
will compel a Performance of such a Disposition, as the Will directs.

Then 'twas said, That the Intention of the Testatrix, in favor of the
Respondent, is both Charitable and Prudent; He was her nearest Relation in
England, and considering a great part of what she left was once her Husbands,
she honorably gave as much to his, as to her own Relations, making her
Husband's Sister, and the Respondent Charles, residuary Legatees to share
equally, and so is the Decree: And to Reverse this Decree, and permit the
Appellant to go away with the whole, (as she must, if the Decree be reversed)
does directly destroy all the Prudent and Charitable Intentions of the
Testatrix, and carries the Estate where she never designed it, viz. to the
Appellant.

Then 'twas argued, That the Court of Chancery had done well in taking the
Opinion of Persons skilled and knowing in the Matter in question; that the
Gentlemen of the Long-Robe of that Country, now here in London, did all give
their Opinions; that according to their Construction of these words in a Will,
it was an arrival to Years of Maturity or Age enabling to dispose; that unless
the Child had lived to such an Age, as that she had been capable to give the
same away, her Representative in this Case, could not be entitled to it.

Then 'was said, That words are to be interpreted according to the Sense and
Acceptance of those which use them: That the Testatrix was a Native of France,
and therefore this method of Inquiring into her Meaning was just and
reasonable: That the Courts at Law have frequently consulted Merchants about
the signification of Mercantile Terms, and Trinity House about Marine Phrases;
so in like manner Grammarians, Critics, Chemists, and Artificers have been in
the Court of Kings Bench consulted, according to the Nature of the Thing in
question, upon words belonging to, and used in their respective Professions:
That in case of words disposing of an Estate in a Foreign Language, by the Will
of a Foreigner, the Judgment of Divines or Grammarians could be no proper
Direction to the Court of Chancery; but the Means of Information must be from
those who were acquainted with the Rules of Interpretation in Case of Wills
amongst those People: That the Opinion of those Gentlemen was sufficient to
justify the Decree.

But then it was further argued, That here the Meaning of the Testatrix could
not be such as the Appellant would pretend, i.e. that she meant to give her
Estate to the Respondent and others, only in case the Child she then went with
should be still born, or if born alive, should dye with the Mother in her lying
in, for these Reasons: First, For that she was so far from apprehending that
the Child would either be still born, or if born alive, would dye as soon as
her self, or in her lying in, that she expected 'twould live, and, as she
hoped, to full Age, for she takes particular Care of its Education; and
earnestly recommends the same to the now Appellant, and others; prays God to
bless it, and not forsake it; and hoped that all the Relations on the Father's
side would, for the Father's sake, do it all the Services it should stand in
need of.

Then taking it that the Testatrix did expect the Child to outlive her, (as
unquestionably she did) if her meaning had been such as the Appellant has put
upon her words, the way to have it sure fixed to the Child, and then to the
Appellant, had been to have made no Will at all; because if the Child survived
the Mother but a day, or an hour, or never so little, the Law had vested the
whole, first in the Child in its own Right, and upon the Child's decease, in
the Appellant, as Administratrix to the Child.

Suppose the Child had outlived the Mother for a Month, or the like, what
Interpretation could have been put upon this Will? All their Arguments will
hold as well to a Month, Week, or Days surviving of the Mother, as to this of
two Years; and therefore it must be thus construed to be her Intent, that the
Devises over should take effect, if the Child should not live to an Age of
Maturity, and Power of Disposition.

And as to the pretense of the Child's starving in the mean time, there neither
is, nor can be any weight in that, for the Interest and Produce of the whole,
during all that time, must remain and be to and for the benefit of the Child.
Wherefore, upon the whole Matter, 'twas prayed that the Decree should be
affirmed; and it was affirmed.

Philip Jermin and Sarah Vxor ejus', Plaintiffs, Versus Mary Orchard Widow,
Defendant.
WRit of Error to Reverse a Judgment of Reversal given in the Exchequer
Chamber, upon a Judgment given in the Kings Bench for the Plaintiffs, in an
Action of Trespass for the mean Profits, after a Recovery in Ejectment, and
Possession had thereupon: The Case was this upon Record; The Plaintiffs declare
that the Defendant, 1 Sept. 1672. their Close, etc. vi and armis, etc. did
break, and upon the Possession of the Plaintiff did enter, and the Plaintiffs
from their Possession did expel and remove, and them so being removed and
expelled for a long time, viz. from the said 1 Sept. 1672. to the time of
exhibiting the Bill, viz. 6 May 1685. did hold out from the same, by which they
lost the Prosits thereof, etc. Et al' Enormia, etc. The Defendant by Plea takes
Issue as to the Force, and Issue thereon; and as to part of the Trespass,
pleads the Statute of Limitations; and as to the residue of the Trespass,
pleads that Sir William Portman made a Lease to one Trowbridge for 1000 years,
and by mesne Assignments derives a Title down to Thomas Nicholas; and that he
in his Life time, by Indenture, assigned to the Defendant.

The Plaintiffs Reply, and as to the first part of the Plea, viz. of the
Statute of Limitations, they demur; and as to the other part of the Plea, they
tender a Traverse, and deny that Thomas Nicholas did assign the Premises to
the Defendant.

The Defendant joins in Demurrer, as to the first part of the Plea, viz. the
Statute of Limitations: And as to the other part, she takes Issue upon the
Traverse; which Issue is joined; and a Venire awarded tam ad triand' the two
Issues, quam ad inquirend' de dampnis upon the Demurrer.

The Jury find that Thomas Nicholas was possessed in manner as the Defendant in
her Plea has alleged, and that he did make Seal, and as his Deed, deliver the
Indenture in the Plea mentioned; which said Indenture follows in these words;
and so set forth the whole; in which, after a Recital of the Lease, and a
Deducement of the Title down, are these words, viz. The said Thomas, as well
for and in consideration of the natural Love and Affection which he bears to
the Defendant his Grand child, as for other good Causes and Considerations,
has granted, assigned, and set over, and by these Presents does grant, assign,
and set over unto the said Mary, her Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
all the said Cottage, Barn, and Lands, and all and singular other the Premises
herein before recited or mentioned, with the Appurtenances to the same
belonging or appertaining; together with the said recited Lease, and all
Writings and Evidences touching the Premises, to have and to hold the said
Cottage, Barn, and Premises, and every part thereof, with the Appurtenances,
unto the said Defendant Mary, her Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from
and immediately after the Death and Decease of the said Thomas Nicholas, party
to these presents, and Mary his Wife unto the end of the term; and for and
during all the rest and residne of the said term of 1000 Years, which shall be
therein to come and unexpired, by and under the yearly Rents, Covenants, etc.
expressed in the said Original Indenture of Lease. Then the Jury leave it to
the Court, whether the Deed of Assignment be good in Law or not, and conclude
specially, if the Assignment be not good in Law, then they find for the
Plaintiffs, and Assess, Damages, 50 l. and 40 s. Costs, and thereupon, etc.

And now it was argued for the Plaintiff; and it was said in the first place,
That this Case was extraordinary, that though the Majority of the Judges in
Westminster Hall were of Opinion with the Plaintiffs, yet they were forced to
sue this Writ, they had the four Judges of the King's- Bench, and the then Mr.
Justice Powell, and the then Baron Powell concurring with the King's- Bench;
and the chief Baron Atkins being absent, the other Five in the
Exchequer-Chamber reversed the Judgment, it having been resolved upon the Stat.
of Eliz. which erects that Jurisdiction, That the Concurrence of six are not
necessary to reverse, but only that six must be present to make a Court; so
that here were six to five for the Plaintiff, and yet he has lost it.

Then it was argued, That there had been two Things insisted on below, one was
the finding of Damages generally, and the other was as to the Validity of the
Assignment; and as to the finding, it was said, That the Matter of the Force is
mere Form; and if there had been no non prosequi, the same could not make an
Error; That in C. B. and B. R. the Issue upon the vi and armis, etc. is seldom
or never taken notice of, no Entry is made of it upon the postea at all, unless
a wounding or some such other special Matter were mixed with it, in the same
Issue; That it is held in the Case of Law and King, 1 Saund'. 81. If nothing be
answered to the vi and armis in a special Plea, it is well upon a general
Demurrer, and the 7 Hen. 6. 13. and 1 Hen. 7.19. are plain, That if the Party
have the special Matter which he pleads, found for him, the vi and armis shall
not be inquired of: So if the Defendant have Judgment against him, upon
Demurrer to the special Matter pleaded by him, the vi and armis shall never be
tried, though Issue were joined upon it, but the Party shall be fined upon the
Capiatur, etc. without any Inquiry: So is the King and Hopper, 2 Cro. 599. in a
Scire Facias, on a Recognizance for the good Behavior, special Matter pleaded,
held, That the Jury need not inquire about the vi and armis, if such Special
Matter be found for the Defendant; much more is it so, in case it be found for
the Plaintiff, for there the Act which is found imports it, etc. and it shall
be intended to be vi and armis, etc. and the Book of Hen. 6. is full in it, no
need of any Inquiry in such Case. And in this Point both the Courts having
concurred, the Counsel for the Defendant did not contest it.

Then as to the other Matter of the Damages, which should have been inquired of
upon the Demurrer, 'twas said, That they were released upon Record; and, it is
plain, that the Jury have found nothing upon that, because the Conclusion of
the Verdict does show, that they inquired and found Damages only as to the
concessit or assignavit; they assess Damages for nothing else; for if the Deed
did pass the term, then they find for the Plaintiff, and assess Damages; and if
the term did not pass, they find the Defendant Not guilty, etc. the Damages
cannot therefore be for both; for if they had found any for the Matter demurred
upon, it must have been with a si Contingat; here it is not so. And though the
Special Fact found had been against the Plaintiff, it might have been for him
upon the Demurrer, and consequently the conditional finding of the Damages
here, can never be as to that.

Then it was further said, That this might be supplied by an Inquest of Office,
in case it had not been released; and there was cited Cheyney's Case, Mich. 10
Jac. 1. 10 Rep. 118, 119. Writ de Valor maritagij, Issue on the Tenure, and
Verdict for the Plaintiff, and no Value found of the Marriage; and held ill,
because they say, an Attaint lies upon it, that being the Point of the Writ;
and there the Rule is taken generally, that where an Attaint lies upon the
finding, the omission of finding such Matter cannot be supplied by a new Writ
of Inquiry, because such Writ of Inquiry would prevent the Party of the Benefit
of his Attaint.

Then the Book says further, That the Rule is, that the Court ex Officio, ought
to inquire of such thing upon which no Attaint lies; and there the omission of
its being found in the Verdict, may be supplied by a Writ of Inquiry of
Damages; as in the case of a Quare Impedit, ( Poyner's Case, Dyer 135.) Issue
found for the Plaintiff; but the Jury per negligence were not charged to
inquire of the four Points, Plenarty, ex cujus Presentatione, si Tempus
Semestre, and the yearly Value of the Church; there a Writ of Inquiry lies de
novo, because upon them no Attaint lies; as is the 11 Hen. 4.80. because as to
them it is only an Inquest of Office; and the Book says further, That all the
Cases to the contrary of that Rule have passed, sub silentio, without due
Advisement, and were against the Rule of Law: So in the Case of Detinue, the
omission of the Value in the finding is fatal, because an Attaint lies upon a
false Verdict in that particular: So that by the Case cited, it may be only an
Inquest of Office as to part, which is the present Case. In that Case of a
Quare Impedit in Dyer, is cited a President for it, in the Old Book of Entries,
110. which is a false Folio, for it is in 93. b. and there is the very Entry of
the Writ, setting forth a Recuperavit presentation' virtute Breais de Nisi
prius, Et quia nescitur utrum Ecclesia plena, etc. And as the Case is in Dyer,
the Plaintiff did there (as the Plaintiff does here) release his Damages, and
had a Writ to the Bishop. Now in Heydon's Case, 11 Rep. 6. it is held that no
Attaint lies upon an Inquest of Office; and therefore it is, that if in a
Trespass against diverse Defendants, some plead to Issue, and one suffers
Judgment to go by Default, the Damages found on the Issue shall be chargeable
upon all, and the Inquiry of Damages on the Judgment by Default shall stay,
because no Attaint lies upon that. It Is there also said, that attaint lies only
on a Verdict on the mise of the Parties: In Trespass, three Issues, Non culp'
to one part, Prescription for a Common to another part, and the Cattle raptim
momorderunt in going to take Common to another, etc. The Jury find one for the
Plaintiff, and another for the Defendant, and inquire not of the third Issue at
all; the Plaintiff relinquishing his Damages on the third Issue, prays Judgment
on the Verdict for the first, and held that this prevented all Error, Mich. 13
Car. 1. B. R. Brown and Stephens, adjudged, 1 Rolls Abridg. 786. Then as to the
Case of Vastuman and Row, 11 Car. 1. B. R. in 2 Rolls Abridg. 722. Trespass for
an Assault, Battery, and taking Corn; Special Plea to the Battery, and Demurrer
thereupon, and Non culp' to the taking the Corn; the Jury find no Damages upon
the Demurrer; said there, That when Judgment is for the Plaintiff on the
Demurrer, the Damages for it cannot be assessed on a Writ of Inquiry, but a
Venire Facias de novo for the whole: 'Twas now argued, that that was expressly
against the Rule in Cheyney's Case, and that in the Case in Rolls; it is put
with the addition of a dubitatur.

But if that be Law, there needs no Writ of Inquiry in this Case, because the
Damages, as to that part, are released; and for this, there is the express Case
of Bentham, 11 Rep. 56. In Annuity, the Parties descended to Issue, found for
the Plaintiff as to the Arrearages, but no Damages and Costs; 'twas held an
imperfect Verdict, and that it could not be supplied by Writ of Inquiry of
Damages; yet the Plaintiff releasing the Damages and Costs had Judgment for
him; and a Writ of Error was brought, and the Insufficiency of the Verdict was
assigned for Error; but the Judgment was affirmed, because the Plaintiff had
released it, Dyer 369, 370. Ejection' custod' terre and hered', and ill,
because entire Damages; and for the beres no Ejectment lies; yet the Damages
being released, he had Judgment for the Land. And 'twas said to be there held,
That insufficient finding of Damages, and finding of none, are all one. If a
Release of that which is ill found, will help, where such thing released is
directly in Issue; much more it should do so, where the thing released is but
obliquely inquired of, and was not put in Issue to the Jury; and then 'twas
repeated what was said before, that the Special Conclusion helps and prevents
the General Intendment which otherwise would be had, as to the Damages being
entire, and therefore 'twas insisted that this made no Error, but the Judgment
in the Kings Bench stood good, notwithstanding this Exception. Then the Counfel
for the Defendant did likewise wave this, as not being the Cause of the
Reversal in the Exchequer Chamber.

Wherefore it was argued for the Plaintiff, That this Assignment or Grant found
in the Verdict is void, and passed nothing; for that either it passed the whole
Term, or no part of it, and that immediately; that this must be agreed. Then
'twas said, that it could not pass the whole; for so to do, was contrary to the
Intention of all the Parties, to the good will of the Grantor, and even to the
hopes of the Grantee; for it is plain from the whole Contexture of the Deed,
that the Defendant was to have nothing in the Term till the Death of the old
Man and his Wife: It was undoubtedly the meaning and design of all the Persons
concerned, that the Defendant only should have the Residue after his decease.

Then that the Law will not permit this, is plain from the Books, for that it is
uncertain, how much, or if any of the term will remain, or be in being, at the
death of the Grantor or Assignor; that the Law rejects such a small or remote
Possibility; that Man's Life in the Eye of the Law is of so great a regard,
that it is presumed to be of a longer duration than the longest term of years:
That this is an old Maxim, upon which Thousands of Properties do depend, that
though some Men's reason may not approve it, it is not to be altered but by the
Legislature; that the Law first prefers Inheritances, or Estates descendible;
then Freeholds, or Estates for Life; then Chattels real or Terms for Years: The
Law values and regards, what a Man and his Heirs shall enjoy, before that which
he himself only can enjoy; and what he himself may enjoy during his Life,
before what he may have only for a certain limited time, the which he may by
any supposal survive: These are known Truths. 32 Assis. 6. Plowd, 521. If a Man
be possessed of a Term for 100 years, and grants so many of them as shall
remain at the time of his death, this is void for the uncertainty; otherwise if
it be by Devise, because there nothing takes effect till death, and then it is
certain how many years he is to enjoy it. It Is true, a Lease of Land for Forty
years, to commence after a Man's death, is good, because it is certain that the
Land shall be enjoyed for Forty years, but here non constat in certain, that
this Deed could take effect for a year, an hour, or at all; Bro. tit. Lease 66.
Plowd. 520. A Man possessed of a Term, grants it to another during Life, it is
as much as during the whole Term (though never so long) because Life is presumed
longer; so if he grant all the Term that shall remain after his Death, it is all
void, because he reserves to himself the whole; for a greater includes the
less; and for Life is the longest of the two: These things are not to be
disputed: If both Premises and Habendum had had this Limitation, the other
side must have agreed it to have been void ab origin, and nothing to have
passed by this Deed.

But then the Objection is, That the whole Term passes by the Granting Part,
and then the Habendum is void, because it is repugnant. To this it was answered.
That in a Deed each part has its proper Province: The Office of the Premises
is to express the certainty of the thing granted; the Habendum is to express
the quantity and limitation of the Estate, 1 Inst. 6. Plowd. 196. Lofield's
Case, 10 Rep. 107. And according to Littleton's Text, Sect. 370. all the parts
of the Indenture are but one Deed in Law: from whence it was inferred, That the
Habendum is never to be rejected, but when there is a manifest, express, and
particular Contradiction; never when the Habendum does apparently show the
Parties Intention.

Here the Lessee for years grants totum Cottagium suum, etc. The Grantee or
Assignee (if there be no Habendum) has but an Estate at will; whereas if he
grants all his Estate and Interest in such a Cottage, there the whole Term
passes. This is the express Opinion in Griffin's Case, 2 Leon. 78. Case 102.
and there said to have been lately so adjudged in Wynnibank's Case in B. R. Now
here is nothing in the Premises, but what is general, not the whole Estate
granted; nor is it said for how long time he shall enjoy it; and therefore the
Habendum cannot be said to be repugnant or contradictory, because the first is
not express.

In Stukely's Case, Hob. 170, 171. upon the Case of Grants and Exceptions, is
the learning of Habendums laid down, if it had been a Grant of all his Estate,
Habendum after his Death, there the Habendum shall not frustrate the Grant; but
if the Premises give no certain or express Estate, there you may alter and
abridge, nay, you may utterly frustrate it by the Habendum; these are the words
of the Book: Then was cited 2 Rolls abr. 66. and 1 Inst. 48. b. and the same
Case of Hodge and Cross, in 3 Cro. 254, 255, where 'twas ruled, That the
Habendum, though void, shall control the implied Limitation in the Premises;
'twas a Feoffment of Lands in London, Habend' to the Feoffee and his Heirs
after the Death of the Feoffer: And 'twas argued in that Case, That the Habend'
was void, but resolved, That nothing passes, because it appears to be the
Intent of the Party, that nothing should pass but in futuro; for the Premises
could pass nothing but by Implication, and that was nothing at all, because the
Intent was to pass nothing presently; and though there were Livery made, yet that
Livery could operate only secundum formam Charte, and therefore the whole was
void; the reason was, because the first was General, though the Law would have
given a particular Estate for Life by the Livery; yet because the Party gave
none expressly by particular Words, the Habendum was not to be rejected; many of
the Rules in Buckler and Harvey's Case, 2 Rep. 55. are applicable to this: And
although there be a Difference, where the Deed passes the Estate, and where
Livery or other Ceremony is requisite, as to many purposes; yet still the
Distinction is, where the Premises do not give all the Parties whole Interest,
or some other particular Estate, but is General, there the Habendum shall not
be rejected as repugnant, 2 Rep. 23, 24. Baldwin's Case.

As to the Words, together with the said recited Lease, that can only mean the
Indenture or Writing; for the Adjective recited, implies the Intent to be such:
Recited signifies only a Rehearsal or Repetition of Words, spoken or written
before; and so is Recitare Testamentum, Calvin's Lexicon, and it is joined with
the other Writings and Evidences concerning the Premises, and doubtful Words
are to be construed according to the Nature of the things expressed and
mentioned with them: Lease in it self imports only the Conveyance or Instrument
of Conveyance, not the Interest in the thing conveyed; if by Writing, it is
called a Deed or Lease in Writing, if otherwise, a Lease Parol: Thus is it
explained in Blunt's Law Dictionary, and in Knight's Case, 5 Rep. 55. where all
the Parts of it are described: A Man may give away his Lease, and yet retain
his Estate or Term, he may deposite it as a Pawn or Pledge; and the Party in
whose Custody it is so lodged, may maintain Trover or Trespass, if it be taken
from him, nay, against the Lessee himself, the Owner of the Lands, if he takes
it before the Performance of the Condition; so that these Words cannot alter
the Case; this is not the Case of a Will, but of a Deed Executed in the
Lifetime of the Party; the Rule, and the Reason of the Rule about Exceptions in
Grants, will hold to this; where the Grant is General, the Exception cannot be
rejected as void, on pretense of Repugnancy: The Common Law does not care to
raise, or make Estates by Implication where the same Person has an express
one, so is Vaughan, 261, 262. therefore there is no Reason in this Case, to
construe the whole Term to pass by Implication in the Premises, a particular
Estate being limited in the Habend', and that not being good, all is void:
Here Is no Purchaser, Creditor, or Heir in the Case, but it is a mere voluntary
Act to the Defendant.

Then was cited 1 Cro. 376. 2 Bulstr. 272. of a Copyholders Surrender, Habend'
a tempore mortis, and held void; wherefore upon the whole, it was insisted,
That by the Premises, nothing passed but an Estate at Will, That the Habend'
giving an Estate or Interest, which was not allowable in the Law, the Deed was
void, and passed nothing; and therefore the Verdict was for the Plaintiff, and
the Judgment in B. R. was good, and accordingly it was prayed, That the
Reversal of that Judgment might be reversed.

On the other side, it was argued, That to construe this to be void, was
contrary to the Intention of both the Parties; That now the Grantor and his
Wife were dead, and there was no dispute about their Estates: That the
Premises here passed the whole, it is to her and her Executors and Assigns,
it is all that Cottage; it is together with all his Deeds concerning it, the
Deeds are concomitant with the Estate, and when he grants the Deeds, he
certainly did design to pass his Interest; he could never mean an Estate at
Will, when he names the Executors, etc. Then was cited the Case of Lilley and
Witney, Dyer 272. pl. 30. Grant of all his Interest, Estate, and Term, Habend'
after his Death, the Habend' is void, Plowd. 520. 1 Bulstr. 191. Bro. Grants,
154. Leases 66. The Presumption that a Man can outlive a 1000 Years, is a weak
Pretense, and void of Reason: Equity is a part of the Law of the Land; and here
to judge this void, is unconscionable and unreasonable. Then was cited 1
Anderson, 284, 290. Grant of a Reversion Habend' after his Death, shall vest
immediately; the Lease imports and carries the Estate, Peto and Pemberton, 1
Cro. 101. Plea, That he had surrendered his Lease, which shows, that it carried
the Interest, they are Synonimous, Bro. tit. Grant 155. A Man grants omnia
firma sua, shall pass his Term: There Is no prescribed Form for passing a
Chattel before the Stat. of Frauds. A Man possessed of a Term, grants it to
another and his Heirs, it passes the whole, so to a Man for Life; it shall
pass the whole Interest, and shall go to his Executor, Plowd. 424. 3 Cro. 534.
If the Habend' were out of the Case, this would pass the whole, and if so, the
Habend' is void; it is an old Rule and a good one, Vt res magis valeat quam
pereat: The Lord Chief Baron Hale seemed of that Opinion in the Case of Smith
and Tutchett, in scacc' (but that proved a Mistake, for that Case was
different, and was ended by Consent, as appeared by a Rule, Die Mercurij 13.
Die Maij, Term' Pasch. 26. Car. 2. after Hale was removed into the Kings
Bench.) Then 'twas said, that there could be no ill Consequence in adjudging
this to be a good Assignment; the like case was never probable to happen again,
that here had been a Diversity of Opinions below Stairs, that Equity was with
the Defendant, and therefore 'twas prayed, That the Reversal might be affirmed;
and it was affirmed accordingly.

Bennett Swayne, Esquire; Petitioner, Versus William Fawkener and John Lane,
Executors of Benjamin Middleton, Defendants.
WRit of Error to Reverse a Judgment in the Kings Bench given for Benjamin in
an Action against Swayne for 20 l. received by him of the Profits of a Share in
the New-River, etc. The Case was thus;

Simon Middleton Esquire; being seized in Fee of Seventeen Thirty-six Parts of the
King's Moiety in the New-River Water, and having Issue eight Children, viz.
Hugh, Sarah, Hannah, and Anne, by his first Wife; and Elizabeth, Rebecca,
Benjamin, and Hezekiah by his second Wife, made his last Will; and thereby
amongst other things, to the intent that all his younger Children might be
provided for, he devised Seven Thirty-sixth Parts or Shares of the King's
Moiety aforesaid amongst them, in manner following; viz. to Sarah, Hannah, and
Anne, to each of them and their Heirs, one full Thirty-sixth Part or Share of
the said King's Moiety, free and discharged from the Fee Farm Rent payable to
the King's Majesty, and of 100 l. per Annum payable to Henry Middleton
deceased, and his Heirs, and from all other Payments and Charges whatsoever.
And also to Elizabeth, Rebecca, and Benjamin, and to each of them, her, and his
Heirs, one full Thirty-sixth Part or Share of the said New-River Water of the
King's Moiety; only they, and each of them proportionably to stand charged with
the payment of the Fee-Farm Rent due and payable to the King's Majesty, and
with the 100 l. per Annum to Henry Middleton and his Heirs, and with no other
Payment or Charge whatsoever; and to his Son Hezekiah, and his Heirs, one full
Thirty-sixth Part or Share of the said New-River Water, the said Share being
part of the King's Moiety, to hold to him and his Heirs, with the Rents,
Issues, and Profits thereof, from and immediately after his Decease, only
proportionably to stand charged with the Payments of the Fee-Farm Rent, due and
payable to his Majesty, and with the aforesaid 100 l. per Annum to the said
Henry Middleton, and his Heirs; and also charged with 150 l. more toward
binding out of his Brother Benjamin an Apprentice, when and so soon, as he
shall attain to the Age of Sixteen Years, but with no other Charge or Payment
whatsoever: And further devises, That in case any of his said younger Children,
Sons or Daughters, shall happen to die before he, she, or they should attain
the full Age of Twenty One Years, or be married, then and in either of the said
Cases, he did will and devise that Part or Share, with the Profits thereof, of
him, her, or them, so deceasing as aforesaid, to the Survivor or Survivors of
all his aforesaid younger Children, Share and Share alike, chargable
nevertheless with the several Payments as aforesaid, but liable to no other
Charge or Payment whatsoever: And all the rest of his Shares in the said
New-River Water, he gives to his eldest Son Hugh and his Heirs, so that he
permit the rest of the Shares to be enjoyed according to his Will, and
discharge the Fee-Farm Rent, with which they are charged: And in case he shall
not do so, he gives the said Shares, he should otherwise enjoy by the Will, to
and amongst all other his Children, and their Heirs, equally to be divided
amongst them.

Simon Middl^ton died seized the 20 July, 1679. and after his death, Rebecca
having attained her Age of 21 Years, died. Hezekiah after seisin of his Share,
died under 21 Years, and unmarried. Anne, one of the Five younger Children
(which Five claimed the said Hezekiah's Share) by Lease and Release, settles
the fifth part of the Share, late her Brother Hezekiah's, upon her self and the
Plaintiff Bennet Swayne (whom she afterward married) and after to the Children
that should be between them, Remainder to the right Heirs of the Survivor of
them two. Anne died without Issue; and Bennet Swayne after her death received
the Profits of that fifth part of Hezekiah's Share, to the value of 20 l. That
Benjamin Middleton was the only Brother of the whole Blood, and Heir of
Hezekiah, Et si, etc.

Upon the arguing of this special Verdict, the Court below was of Opinion, That
Benjamin was entitled, to Anne's Share of Hezekiah's Part, as he was Brother
and Heir of Hezekiah, viz. That by the Will, the Fee-simple and Inheritance of
a Thirty-sixth Part or Share of the New-River Water was given to, and vested in
each of the youger Children; and that on the Death of Hezekiah, one of the
younger Children, unmarried, under One and Twenty Years of Age, by the Clause
(whereby the Shares of the youger Children dying before Twenty One, and
unmarried, are given to the surviving Children, Share and Share alike) the five
Survivors became Tenants in Common, and each was seized of a fifth part only
for Life, and not in Fee: That the Reversion of Hezekiah's Share, expectant on
the deaths of the younger Children, descended to the said Benjamin his Brother
and Heir; and that he on the death of Anne, ought to have enjoyed that
Fifth-part in Possession; and therefore the Profits of it received by Swayne,
were due to Benjamin, and Judgment accordingly given there for Benjamin.

And now it was argued, That this Judgment was erroneous, for that by Virtue of
the said Devise, the said Anne had an Inheritance in her part of Hezekiah's
Share, for these Reasons, 1. It is well known and agreed, That a Part or Share
in the New-River is an Inheritance, and therefore the Devise of all that Part
or Share to any Person, is a Devise of that Part and Share to such Person and
his Heirs; and is as much, as if a Person being seized in Fee of Lands, should
say in his Will, he devises all his Estate in those Lands to J. S. it could be
no question, but such a Devise would convey the said Lands to such Devisee and
his Heirs. 2. The Share of Hezekiah was given to him and his Heirs,
proportionably charged with the payment of the Fee-Farm Rent to his Majesty,
and with 100 l. per Annum to Henry M. and his Heirs, and also with 150 l. to
his Brother Benjamin; and being thus charged, upon his dying before Age or
Marriage, his Share, with the Profits thereof thus charged, is given to his
younger Brother and Sisters, the Survivor and Survivors of them, Share and
Share alike. Then it is observable, that the Fee-Farm Rent, payable to the King,
his Heirs and Successors, is 500 l. per Annum; upon which account 'twould be
very difficult to conceive, that the Testator, by this Devise of the deceased's
Part, to the Survivors, Share and Share alike, did intend to such Survivors
only an Estate for Life, when at the same time he subjects and charges it to
and with the proportionable payment of the said yearly Fee-Farm, and the 100 l.
to H. M. and his Heirs, which are Rent-Charges in Fee, and cannot reasonably be
understood to be charged on Estates given barely for Life.

Besides, The Point here is upon the Construction of a Will, and the Testators
true Intent and Meaning, in any part that is obscure, ought to be collected out
of any other part or words of the Will that may explain it: Now, it being
plain, that Hezekiah's Part was a Fee-simple, and thus charged, it seems to be
as plain, that the very Inheritance of that Part, should upon his death go and
remain to the Survivors, Share and Share alike; that is to say, That they
should be Tenants in Common in Fee-simple of that Part, the same being thus
chargable with the two Rents, and with the 150 l. to Benjamin; for otherwise
this Devise over (which was designed in their favor and for their benefit)
might have turned to some of their Losses and Prejudice, for they might have
paid the 150 l. to Benjamin, and have died, before they were re-imbursed out of
Hezekiah's Share, had the same been only an Estate for Life; and it cannot
easily be supposed, that he intended his youngest Children by the second Wife,
should have a better Estate in his Shares of the New-River Water, devised as
aforesaid, then the younger Children by the first Wife had, but that their
Shares in it should be equal; but by this Construction, Benjamin by the second
Venture must carry away Anne's Share from her Sisters and Brother of the first
Venture; here is no need of the common Care in construing Wills, not to
disinherit an Heir by general words; for Hugh is disinherited by this Will,
whether this surviving Interest be a Fee, or for Life: The Intention here was
to make an equal Provision for all the younger Children; the Part and Share of
the Person dying, is the Inheritance in the Part and Share of the Person dying
in the New-River Water. The three Sisters were to have their Shares discharged
of the Fee-Farm Bent; but if this be only an Estate for Life, then those who
were designed to have the least benefit by the Will, are to have the greatest,
for they are Heirs to Hezekiah; whereas the Children by the first Venture seem
to be most favored by the Will, because they are to have their Bequests free
from those Encumbrances. The Testator recites his own Scisin in Fee of so many
Parts and Shares, and then devises those Parts in Fee, how can this Clause of
Limitation to Survivors be construed to mean otherwise, then that the whole Fee
of that proportion should survive. The Cases cited in Rolls, on the other side,
are only Devises of the Land, and not of his Share.

Then 'twas said, That here was no Tenancy in Common; that it is true, equally
divided, and equally to be divided, make a Tenancy in Common; but it is upon the
account of the word divided; that to two equally, will not be so construed, 1
And. 29. and if the words equally will not, why should Share and Share alike;
these words do not show any partition of the Estate in Fact, nor in the
Intention of the Testator; and one of these is necessary to prevent a
Survivorship. Wherefore, upon the whole it was prayed, That the Judgment should
be Reversed.

On the other side it was argued with the Judgment, That the same was Legal,
and ought not to be Reversed; for that as to the last thing stirred, it must be
a Tenancy in Common; the words Share and Share alike imply a Division, or
Partition in esse, or in future, and it has always been so construed. The
distinction between divided, and to be divided, has been long since Exploded,
as importing no difference.

Then it was argued, That here was only an Estate for Life given by this Clause
to the Survivors; that a Devise of the Share is the same with the Devise of the
Land; that the Share does not signify the Estate or Interest, but the Quantity
or Proportion of the Thing; here are no words to vest the Inheritance in the
Survivors; there are proper words to give an Inheritance to the Children; and
there are no such proper words used to divest it out of them, and to give it to
the Survivors upon the decease of any one of them under Age and Unmarried. The
Share or Part can only be the Thing it self, not the Estate in the Thing; and
it is all consistent, if it be adjudged an Estate for Life.

Besides, In the last Clause, when he enjoins the Heir to permit the Devisees
to enjoy their Interests, and in case he do not discharge the Fee-farm Rent, he
gives the rest of his Shares to and amongst all other of his Children and their
Heirs, equally to be divided among them. The adding of the word Heirs in this
Clause, and omitting it in the former, shows the Testator to have a different
meaning in the first, from what he had in the last.

Then were cited several Cases to prove that totam illam partem carried only
the Thing devised, not the Interest which the Devisor had therein, 3 Leon. 180,
181. 3 Cro. 52. 2 Leon. 156, 56. and 1 Rolls Abridg. tit. Estate, 835, 836. 1
Cro. 356. Latch. 40. and as to the 150 l. appointed to be paid for to bind
Benjamin Apprentice, 'twas said, That the same was to Issue out of the Rents
and Profits. And therefore upon the whole, it was prayed, That the Judgment
might be affirmed; and it was affirmed accordingly.

Dominus Rex, Versus Episcop' Cestr', and Richard Pierse Esquire;
WRit of Error upon a Judgment in a Quare Impedit in C. B. given for the King,
and affirmed in B. R. The Case upon the Record was to this effect; Mr. Attorney
General declares, That Queen Elizabeth was seized of the Advowson of the Church
of Bedall, ut de uno grosso per se, ut de feodo and jure, in jure corone sue
Anglie; and being so seized, did such a Day in the Twelfth Year of her Reign,
present to the said Church then vacant, John Tymms, as by the Inrollment of,
etc. appears, that he was instituted and inducted; that Queen Elizabeth died
seized of such her Estate of and in the Advowson aforesaid; that the same
descended to Jac. 1. per quod he was seized of the Advowson of the said Church,
ut de uno grosso, etc. That the Church became void by the death of Tymms, and
that King presented Dr. Wilson; that he was admitted, instituted, and inducted;
that King Jac. 1. died seized of such his Estate in the said Advowson, and the
same descended to Car 1. and he became seized; and the Church was again void by
the death of the then Incumbent, and Car. 1. presented Dr. Wickham; that Dr.
Wickham died; that thereupon one John Pierse, not having any Right to present
to the said Church, sed usurpando super dict' nuper Regem Car. 1. did present
one Metcalfe, who was inducted; that Car. 1. died seized; that the Advowson
descended to Car. 2. that the Church became void by the death of Metcalfe; that
Car. 2. presented Samways, who was inducted; that Car. 2. died seized, and the
same descended to Jac. 2. who became seized ut de uno grosso, etc. who being so
seized, de regimine hujus regni Anglie se dimisit, by which the said Advowson
came to the present King and Queen, and they were, and are now seized of it, ut
de uno grosso, etc. That the Church became void by the death of Samways, and it
belongs to the King and Queen to present a fit Person; but the Defendants
hinder them ad dampnum, etc.

The Bishop pleads that he claims nothing in the Advowson, but as Ordinary, etc.

The other Defendant, Richard Pierse, pleads, That the King occasion
premissor' ipsum pred' Richardum impetere seu occasionare non debet, quia
dicit, quod been and verum est, quod Car. 1. devenit and fuit seisitus of the
Advowson aforesaid, ut de uno grosso per se ut de feodo and jure modo and forma
pred' in narr' pred' specificat', and did present Wickham his Clerk, who was
inducted. But he says further, That the Church being so full of the Incumbent,
and Car. 1. so seized as aforesaid, the said Car. 1. by his Letters Patents,
etc. bearing date at Canbury, 19 Julij, anno regni sui decimo quarto. quas idem
Richardus hic in curia profert, ex speciali gratia, certa scientia, and mero
motu, for himself, his Heirs and Successors, did give and grant cuidam
Willielmo Theckston adtunc armig' and postea milit' the Advowson aforesaid, to
hold to him and his Heirs to the use of him and his Heirs for ever; prout per
easdem Litteras Patentes before apparet; by virtue of which said Grant, the
said Theckston was seized of the Advowson in question, ut de uno grosso, etc.
And he being so seized, the Church became void by the death of Wickham,
posteaque ac eodem tempore quo superius in narr' pred' supponitur pred'
Johannem Pierse usurpasse super pred' nuper Regem Car. 1. He the said John
Pierse usurping upon the said William Theckston (to whom of right it then
belonged) did present the said Metcalfe, who was accordingly instituted and
inducted, by which the said John Pierse was seized of the Advowson aforesaid;
and being so seized, and the Church then full, he the said Theckston did by
Indenture 18 April, 18 Car. 1. release to the said John Pierse and his Heirs,
all his Right, Title, Claim, etc. by which the said John Pierse became seized,
and he dying seized, the same descended to the Defendant Richard, as his Son
and Heir, by which he became seized; and then the Church became void by the
Death of Metcalf, and continued so void for a Year and half, and more, and by
that Reason, Car. 2. to the Church so void, per lapsum temporis in defectu
Patroni Ordinarij et Metropolitani jure Prerogative sue Regie eidem, Car. 2.
devolut' did present Samwayes his Clerk, who was inducted, and afterward died;
and the Church being so void, the Defendant presented one Scroop, his Clerk,
absque hoc quod praed' nuper Rex Car. 1. obiit seisitus of the Advowson
aforesaid, in manner and form as the Attorney has declared, Et hoc paratus
est, etc. unde petit jud' et breve Episcopo, etc.

Scroop pleads the same Plea, mutatis mutandis.
The Attorney General craves Oyer of the Letters, Patents, produced in Court,
and they are read to him, and are to this effect: They recite, That Queen
Elizabeth had by her Letters Patents, Anno 13. Regni sui, granted to then Earl
of Warwick, all those Manors of Bedall and Ascough, etc. and all Advowsons and
Rights of Patronage thereunto belonging, etc. rendering a Rent; and that Jac. 1.
had granted the Rent to Sir Christopher Hatton, et al', and that the said
Manors and Rents by good Conveyances in the Law had come to Sir William
Theckston, Knight, and that he then had and held the same to him and his Heirs;
then it is, Know ye, That we for diverse good Causes and Considerations, and of
special Grace, etc. do ratify and confirm to him the said William Theckston
and his Heirs; etc. all those, etc. then it follows, That whereas the said
William Theckston, by Virtue of the said Letters, Patents, made to the said
Earl of Warwick, and lawful Conveyance of the Premises to himself made, does
claim to have the Advowson of the Church of Bedall aforesaid, according to the
Tenor and Intent of the said Letters, Patents; and whereas he the said King
Car. 1. upon the Death of one John Petty, had by lapse presented Wilson, and
after his Death, the said Theckston claiming the Right of Presentation, the
said King ad dictam Ecclestam sic vacantem (ut ad presentatio^em snam pleno
jure spectant) had presented Dr. Wickham, and that the said Theckston, to
recover his Right, had brought his Writ of Quare Impedit, upon which Issue was
joined; That afterward it was agreed between Theckston and Wickham, that
Wickham should enjoy it during his Life, and that Theckston and his Heirs
should have it quietly for ever after, prout ex informatione dicti Wickham
nostri Capellani in ordinario accepimus; Nos igitur volentes, That the said
Presentations of the said Wilson and Wickham, or either of them, or their or
either of their Institution and Induction should not hurt the said Theckston's
lawful Right of presenting to the said Church for the future; and it is our
further Intention, That the said William Theckston, his Heirs and Assigns,
shall freely and peaceably have and enjoy the said Advowson of the said Church
of Bedall, according to the Tenor and true Intent of the said Letters,
Patents, granted by the said Queen to the said Ambrose Earl of Warwick, any
Defect or Defects in the same Letters, Patents, notwithstanding.

And then follows the Grant it self in these Words, Sciatis igitur quod nos ex
uberiori et speciali gratia nostra, etc. Know ye therefore, That we of our more
abundant and special Grace, and of our certain Knowledge and meet Motion, have
given and granted, and do by these presents, for our selves, our Heirs and
Successors, give and grant to the aforesaid William Theckston the Advowson,
Donation, free Disposition, and Right of Patronage of the aforesaid Church of
Bedall, and all our Right, Estate, Title, Interest, and claim whatsoever of
presenting to the said Church, whenever or howsoever it shall become void:
Quibus lectis and anditis, the Attorney General demurrs, and the Defendant
joins; and Judgment in C. B. pro Domino Rege, upon this Reason only, that this
Grant was void, the Advowson being in gross, and nothing was intended to pass
but an Advowson Appendant, and so the King was deceived; and upon a Writ of
Error in B. R. the Judgment was affirmed upon another point, viz. That the
Grant pleaded was to William Theckston, then Esquire; and afterward Knight, and
the Grant set forth upon Oyer, was to William Theckston, Knight; and there were
Three Judges of Opinion with the Patent, and one only against it; and one Judge
of Opinion with the Plaintiff in the Error, as to both the Validity of the
Patent it self, and the Identity of the Person named in the Plea and Patent.

And now it was argued for the Plaintiffs in the Writ of Error. That this
Judgment was erroneous; and first it was answered to the Objection of the
Variance between Knight and Esquire; and it was said. That in case of a Title of
Worship, the want of it could never viciate a Grant; that even in Indictments,
upon the Statute of Additions, a Gentleman may be called Esquire, and so e'
contra, and thus is 2 Just. that here constat de persono, there is nothing does
appear to show them to be different; that in case of Feoffments, this Pretense
will not hurt, because the Person is ascertained, and here it is likewise the
same, it is William Theckston then Esquire; and afterward Knight, it is but one
Man, they are two different Affirmations concerning the same Person; that in
the Case cited on the other side of the Earl of Pembroke in Jones's Rep. and in
1 Cro. 173. and Littlet. 191.223. Richardson and Hutton are of Opinion, That
such Grant is good; then 'twas said. That 'twould be very hard to intend them
several Persons, in order to avoid a Grant; that Veritas nominis tollit
Errore^^ demonstrationis Person; that he was William Theckston; that if it had
been said concessit Wilielmo Theckston generally, that would have been
sufficient; and his being an Esquire; does not exclude his being a Knight, so that
it is not a false Description, 25 Edw. 3.19. a Writ was abated, because shown,
that they were two Persons, but held that if it had appeared that they had been
but one, 'twould have been well: Then was cited the Major of Lynnes Case, 10
Rep. 126. It Is true, this is a Name or Title of Dignity to some purposes, but
not to all: It must be agreed to be so upon Originals and Indictments, and
there is a very good reason for it; because in that Case a greater Certainty is
required, that one Man may not suffer for or instead of another; but in Case of
Grants, any Description of the Person is sufficient; besides, if a Name be
mistaken in a Writ or Indictment, another may be sued or preferred by the true
Name, but a Man cannot of common Right demand a new Grant; though this be a Grant
from the Crown, it is the same case, for the King's Grant shall be taken most
beneficially for the Support of his Honor, 6 Rep. 6. that here is no Color to
pretend two William Theckstons.

Then it was said, That this at most was only an Addition of Enlargement to his
Name, not parcel of the Name it self, for no more goes to that, than Christian
and Surname; then 'twas said, it is generally known, That the use of Surname was
not settled amongst us, till long after the Conquest; that before then they
were named by their Titles, Offices. Places of Birth or Residence, or
Employments, as does appear plainly by Dugdale 1. Monast. 37. In those Days
Miles was used instead of the Surname, immediately after the Christian Name, as
Ego Wolwardus Miles, and many more such. Selden's Tit. of Hon. 637, 638. thus
in 1 Monast. 166. Domim Algari militis, 2 Monast. 173.853. thus it was in the
time of Hen. 2. then after Sirnames came to be used, this Title of Miles was
also used as an Addition or Enlargement after the Surname; Cambden's Treatise
of Sirnames in his Remains, and Kennell's Parochial Antiquities, lately Printed
at Oxford, in 4to. do show this, That the Title of Knight came after the
Surname as an increase, not in Reu of it, as Merchant, Mercer, etc. Professor
of Divinity, Law, Music, Master of Arts, etc. for further Distinction sake.
Then it was said, That this use of Sirnames holds not in case of Bishops, Dukes
or Earls, for they add only the Place, and therefore the Descent or Accession
of the Honor, comes instead of the Surname, so is 2 Inst. 666. but now William
Theckston, when made a Knight, he remains William Theckston still, he loses no
part of his former Name, though the same be enlarged; if it had been otherwise
'twould have merged the Surname, but his Title makes no Alteration therein at
all: The Law does require a Man to be named only by his Christian and Surname,
unless somewhat comes in lieu of the last, or the first be altered by
Confirmation; a Grant is good, if the Party be so described, as that he may be
known, though there be a Mistake in it, yet it is good, as a Grant to an Earl or
Bishop by a wrong Christian Name, has been held 2 Rolls Abr. Tit. Grants, 44.
Dyer 376. it is the Identity of the Person, which the Law does most regard and
value; and therefore, since there was no presence, but that the same Person who
granted it to Pierse, was intended by and in the King's Patent; it was hoped,
That such a Nicety should not lose the Subjects Inheritance in this Advowson,
which he had bought for a valuable Consideration: Further it was said, this
could not hurt upon the Oyer of this Grant in this Record, as this Case stood,
and should be further shown anon.

Then it was argued, That either take the Case upon the Declaration and Plea
alone; or take it as it stands upon the Letters Patents alone; either of these
two ways, it is with the Subject: If the Patent be considered by it self,
there is nothing appears to make it void, the King had a Power to grant, and
there are Words sufficient to pass it. Then consider the Declaration and Plea,
there is a good bar to the Title laid in the Declaration; so that the only
Objection can be upon the Rules of pleading, as it stands all together; and the
Query is, If P. has owned or confessed any such thing as is pretended of a
Seisin in gross, in Eliz. anno 12. and if it be admitted, whether the King can
take an Advantage of the Variance between the Patent set forth on Oyer, and
that which is pleaded, the same being only pleaded by way of Inducement,
whether the King can waive his own Title, and question the Defendants in this
Case.

As to the first, it was said, That this Grant was not void by reason of any
such Admission, the King declared his full Intention, That Sir William should
fully and freely enjoy this Advowson, any Defects to the contrary
notwithstanding; that it is not admitted in this Case to have been an Advowson
in gross, in the 12th of Q. Eliz. no such thing does appear; and then the Grant
of Car. 1. is good; and if it did so appear, yet the Grant is good. The Plea
does say, that Car. 1. came to it by Descent, but that does not admit her
seized in gross: That Allegation in the Declaration is mear Surplusage and
Immaterial, and cannot hurt the Party which makes it, though contradictory to, or
inconsistent with his Title: Nor can it benefit the other side to deny it; for
if he had denied it, it could have done him no good; and consequently to admit
it, shall not hurt him. Now it is not necessary in a Quare Impedit to allege a
time of Seisin; a Seisin generally in time of Peace is enough; then the not
denying, admits only what is materially alleged. Suppose the Defendant had
pleaded absque hoc, that Queen Elizabeth did present Tymmes modo et forma; and
it had appeared upon the Trial, that he was presented in the 43d Year of her
Reign, it must have been against the Defendant. Even, where time is required to
be alleged, another time may be proved, as in Trespass, Battery, etc. The most
that can be pretended to, is, that here is an Admission of her being seized in
gross after the Grant to the Earl; and it might be appendant then, and
afterward got to the Crown by Presentations; there is no color to suppose an
admission of the time. Hob. 71. The Case of Sherly and Wood, and 2 Leon. 99.
prove that neither alleging or confessing a thing immaterial shall hurt; the
Reason is the same for both.

There was a plain Artifice in this Pleading; the Declaration mentions a
Presentation, prout per Inrolment, which cannot be, unless in the same Court;
otherwise you must plead an Exemplification, Wymock's Case, 5 Rep. If the
Declaration had been in the common usual way, setting out the Queen to have
been seized generally, or to have presented generally, there had nothing
appeared to have hurt this Grant; for it might then have been appendant; and if
it might be so, it shall be intended to be so; for he is not bound to aver it
to be appendant; for upon Oyer every thing shall be intended to make a Grant
good, unless the contrary does appear, 2 Cro. 679. he need not plead, that it
was appendant at the time of the Grant to the Earl; Concessit is enough, and
that though in general words, 35 Hen. 8. Bro. Pleading 143. Kelway 43. 1 Rolls
Abridg. 405.

Then suppose it did appear that this Advowson was not appendant in the 13th
Eliz. yet it does pass: There is but one supposed Falsity, and that is Dr.
Wilson's Presentation by Lapse, which is admitted to be pleno jure; First, The
Grant is full, express, and large enough, Know ye therefore, etc. All our
Right, etc. as full words as can be used, without any restriction whatsoever.
And as to the Suggestions, there is not any Mistake in them: It Is not suggested
that 'twas ever appendant; not suggested that it did pass by those Letters
Patents; nor that it came to Th. but only that he claimed it; and the word
claim does not always import a lawful Claim; for a Man is amerciable pro falso
clamore: Here Is as much Caution and Care in the penning of these Letters
Patents as was possible, nothing but what is exact.

Suppose a Man does claim an Advowson by a void Grant, and he brings a Writ,
after the King has presented; and the King says, Let my Clerk have it quietly
for his Life, and you shall have a Grant from me, and shall be secure of all my
Right for the future: it is not said, that 'twas Sir William's Presentation, but
he sued a Writ so describing it.

It Is admitted by Car. 1. that this Patent might be void, yet it was his
Intention that Th. should have it for the future: This Intent is as plain as
words can make it; that he and his Heirs should for ever enjoy it,
notwithstanding any defect in the Patent of Q. Eliz. It Is not only to restore
an old Title, and make reparation for the wrong done by the King's
Presentation, but in Case the old Title were defective, to make and give to him
a good one: If it appears that the King's Intention were for passing it, it
shall pass, notwithstanding a Mis-recital.

Suppose the Grant had been recited at large, and no more had been said but the
King confirms it, would not that have been good: Then was cited the Earl of
Cumberland's Case, 8 Rep. 166. the word therefore is in that Case too; yet
because full words are superadded, it shall not be qualified by the Deed
recited, and that is a much stronger Case than this: Hill. 22 and 23 Car. 2.
Sir Robert Atkins versus Holton, it is in Ventris. And the pleading in Vidian's
Ent'. agreed that King John's Patent was void, and King Edw. must have been
deceived in his Grant, and his Intention might be there said to be only to make
a Restitution. And a false Inquifition turns a Man as much out of possession of
a Franchise, as the King's Presentation does out of a Patronage; but held
there, that though King John's Grant was void, yet that of Edward was good,
because the words were full and General, and the King showed his intent that
the Party should have the thing. But the other side have objected, That this is
a qualified Intention according to the tenor of the first Patent. To which it
was answered, That the King did suppose that Patent to be defective, and his
true intent was that Th. should have the Advowson. Besides, though it were in
gross, yet it might have the reputation of being appendant, and it was the
King's meaning to pass it, 6 Rep. 63. a small matter will make a reputation of
an Appendancy. If a Man mortgages his Manor, excepting the Advowson thereto
belonging, it is become in gross; but when the Condition is performed, and the
Deed avoided, it is appendant again; therefore it might be thought appendant; it
might be some accident, which did sever it from the Manor; yet if it had the
reputation of being so, it might be within the King's intent to pass it, though
it did not pass by the first; 'twas intended that some Advowson should pass,
and here are express words to pass this: In Coke's Entries... Quare Impedit, it
appears that this Advowson of Bedall was appendant.

It further appears by History, That this Simon Digby had committed Treason,
before the Church was void; and before Attainder the Queen presented, that made
it in gross, then the Attainder makes it appendant again; then though it might be
possible that the Queen was seized in gross, yet if it were so, upon Digby's
Attainder she was seized of it as appendant: now if any thing might make it
appendant, 'twill be hard to construe it void, where, for any thing that does
appear, it might be good. Such Declarations so subtle may ensnare any
Defendant, and take away any Man's Inheritance. The Attorney should have taken
Issue upon the Traverse, and that would have brought the whole Matter in
question.

As to the mistake about Wilson's Presentation, that cannot vitiate against an
express intent; the King's design was to determine the difference between his
Incumbent and another; he would not have his Right in this Benefice to be
questioned or disputed; for otherwise, there was no reason for Th. to take a
Grant to avoid Controversy, and yet that new Grant to leave him in as bad or
worse Condition; here is both Confirmation and Grant; and if so, what matters
it, whether Wilson were presented one way or the other. Th. could not have been
in a worse Condition, if he had miscarried in his Writ, the King designed to
him all the Right which he had, and otherwise he was at the charge of procuring
Letters Patents, to no other purpose then to be deceived. Besides, here was a
good Consideration, though Th. had no right: a Surrender of void Letters Patents
is a good Consideration: 1 Rep. 143. Altonwood's Case, and 5 Rep. 65. Lord
Chandois's Case; the King there thought himself seized by virtue of the
Surrender, which he was not, yet held good; so that it is not every Mistake that
will avoid a Grant, when the Intention appears, 1 Rolls Rep. 23. Therefore if
there may be any thing given in Evidence, which might support these Letters
Patents, they shall not be adjudged void upon Oyer: and to make these void of
Car. 1. they must construe those of the Queen void; and these cannot be
adjudged void, because they are not before the Court; Letters Patents recited
were never adjudged illegal; for notwithstanding this recital, there might be
more words in them, which might make them good: it is inter alia, suppose it had
been spectant' or existent' in Bedall, that would have passed the Advowson in
gross: It Is not inconsistent with any thing said in this Patent of Car. 1. to
say that the other of Queen Elizabeth contained or passed more, Mod. Rep. 194,
195. Hardres 231. the igitur is only nota continuationis, and does not always
suppose all that is precedent to be the Consideration, it cannot well begin a
Deed, and that is all: it is Exuberiori gratia, etc. 3 Leon. 249. It Is
impossible to suppose or use more comprehensive words then in this Case, and
therefore it was inferred that these Letters Patents of Car. 1. were good.

Then it was argued further with the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, that in
this Case Mr. Attorney can take no advantage of either of these Mistakes in the
Defendant's Plea, if they are such; for that it is only Matter of Inducement;
and the Letters Patents needed not have been pleaded with a profert hic in
curia, and therefore cannot hurt; If the Inducement be good to maintain the
Traverse or make it material, that is enough; but still the Inducement is not
traversable: It Is true, that generally speaking, a Deed or Grant after Oyer
becomes part of the Plea, but still it is only Inducement. If a Defendant
confesses and avoids, the Plaintiff shall not depend upon that which he
confesses, but answer that whereby he avoids the Plaintiffs Title or Charge:
This is no more then if they had traversed the Grant, which they could not do.
In the Case of a common Person, suppose the Defendant's Title not full, yet if
he traverses the Plaintiffs, that is enough: Form requires an Inducement to a
Traverse, but the latter is only material for the Plaintiff to answer to; for
nothing can be traversed, but what is material; now why should it not have been
a good answer to their Declaration, to have said that Car. 2. presented by
Lapse, absque hoc that Car. 1. died seized; for by this the Seisin or
Presentation of Car. 2. had been avoided; and there is nothing else material in
the Declaration; for the Seisin of Queen Elizabeth and Jac. 1. are not to the
purpose; and if answered by the Defendant, it must have been against him, there
had been a good Title for the King without it: then supposing it necessary to
show how it came out of Car. 1. the Attorney General can only take Issue on the
Traverse of his dying seized; for that denies the whole Title that is material
to be answered to: Now whatsoever shows that the Plaintiff has no right to the
thing in demand, is a good Plea, let who will have the true right: The true
Title upon this Declaration is that Car. 1. presented, and thereby became
seized, and died seized; and the denying him to dye seized, is a denial of this
Title; for if K. Car. 2. did present by Lapse, and K. Car. 1. did not die
seized, it is with the Defendant; no Man is bound to answer that, which if he
do, 'twill still be against him; but if a Man makes such an answer, as if true,
the present Plaintiff has no Title, it is enough: Then if it be true that no
Right descended from Car. 1. to Car. 2. and that Car. 2. presented only by
Lapse, what Right can his present Majesty have: and all this is confessed by
the Demurrer, if well pleaded; and it is no Objection to say, that the dying
seized ought not to be traversed, but only the Presentation; for that is a
mistake; in case of Land it is good; and an Advowson is an Inheritance
descendible in like manner, and Mr. Attorney thinks it a good Traverse; for he
all along in his Declaration, alleges a dying feized from Queen Elizabeth
downward: and there are several Presidents thus, Winch's Ent. 661, 662. and
Winch. 912, 686, 692. and Buckler and Symonds, Winch. 911, 912. is of an
Advowson in gross; and in the same Book 35, 59, are thus: A man may die seized
of an Advowson, as well as of Land; and if he does not dye seized, it does not
descend; and the Seisin in gross is not to be traversed, as is 1 Anderson 269.
and Hob. 102.

'Then 'twas said that the true Reason and Nature of a material good Traverse
is well explained in Vaughan's first Case of Tufton and Sir Rich. Temple, and 1
Saund. 21, 22. and it is this, especially in a Quare Impedit, If any thing in
the Count be traversed, it must be such Part, as if true, is inconsistent with
the Defendants Title, and if false or found against the Plaintiff, does
absolutely destroy his Title; nay, if the Traverse leaves no Title in the
Plaintiff, then it is good, whatsoever comes of the Defendants. Then the
Difficulty is, If the King by his Prerogative may waive his own Title which is
traversed, and insist upon the Deficiency of that which the Defendant alleges;
and in the Case of the King and the Bishop of Worcester, and Jervis, in Vaughan
53. there it is said, That the King ought to maintain his own, and not to
question the Defendants; he cannot desert that which he has alleged for
himself, and fall upon the Defendants Title; and Reason warrants such Rule for
(though the King has no Damages in a Quare Impedit notwithstanding his laying it
ad dampnum, Hob. 23, yet) the Suit supposes an Hindrance and Damage to the
King, and if the Right be not his, he has no Cause to complain of the
Defendant, though another has: Every Man is to recover by his own Strength, and
not by the Weakness of the Defendants Pretensions; and if the Law be thus, then
how can Mr. Attorney General take Advantage of this upon Demurrer after Oyer,
for now upon Oyer it is, as they say, become Part of the Defendants Plea, and
consequently it must be part of the Inducement; and if so, he ought in that
Case, to have taken Issue upon the Traverse, which denied his Master's Title:
Wherefore, upon the whole Matter, it was prayed, That the Judgment should be
reversed.

On the other side, 'twas argued for the King, That this Judgment ought to
stand, and as to the last point, 'twas said, That taking it for granted, the
King could not traverse any Point of the Defendants Plea; yet certainly he
might demurr upon the whole, in case it were insufficient; That now Oyer was
craved, and had, the Deed did become part of the Defendants Plea, and must be
taken as such; That though there had been no need of a Profert, yet when it is
produced, it is such as he has pleaded, and upon the whole, the Court is to
judge, there being a Demurrer; That as the Case stood, the King might take
advantage of both the Exceptions; That the Declaration of it self was good, and
if the Plea be naught, the King ought to have Judgment for him; That every Plea
is to be taken most strongly against the Party that pleads it; That here the
Defendant had admitted K. Car. 1. well seized, that he ought to show it out of
him, otherwise the Plea was ill, that every Traverse must have an Inducement;
That if upon the whole Plea, it did not appear that King Car. 1. parted with
this Advowson, it is naught; That if by the Parties own showing, it was manifest
to the Court, That the King continued seized, and what he does further show, no
ways contradicts it, he could not traverse the dying seized, and therefore a
Demurrer was most proper; and consequently, upon this Demurrer, they were let
in to affirm, that nothing passed from the King by these Letters Patents of
Car. 1.

Then it was argued, That this Grant was void, because it was to a Person then
Esquire; that Tunc Armigero, can have Reference only to the time of the Letters
Patents, that a Man cannot be a Knight and an Esquire; at the same time, that
Knight is part of his Name, and the Title of Esquire; is drowned in that of Knight,
that the old Books are thus, 7 Hen. 4.7. 14 Hen. 6.15. 21 Edw. 4.72. 2 Inst.
594. 666. Hutt. 41. Bro. Tit. nosme. 33. 1 Cro. 372. That it is true, if a Deed
of Feoffment be made to a Man by a wrong Name, and Livery be thereupon had,
it is good; but all the Books make a difference between that Case, and where it
is by Deed, where the Operation is altogether by Deed: Then was cited the Earl
of Pembroke's Case, in Littleton's Rep. 181. and in Jones, 215, 223. the Court
went upon the Reason, that the Jury found him to be the same Person, Latch.
161. there they would intend him an Esquire; at the time of the Commission, and a
Knight at the time of the Return, and it was for Necessity-sake, for to prevent
the avoiding of so many Trials, as had been upon that Commission.

Lord Ewre's Case, 2 Cro. 240. there 'twas held well enough, because
sufficiently described; so in a Grant, if it cannot be intended otherwise than
to the same Person, there it is well enough; but here they can never be the
same: In Case of an Earl or Bishop, there it is understood, who is meant by the
Description, there can be but one of that Title; but here the Plea says, That
he was not a Knight at the time; and Sir Thomas Ormond was attainted by the
Name of Thomas Ormond, Esquire; and ill for that Reason, 2 Rolls Abr. 43.198. Dyer
150.1 Leon. 159.160. the highest and lowest Dignity are universal, and the same
in every Kingdom, 7 Rep. 16.20. Edw. 4.6. can any body say upon this Grant,
That the King intended to pass this Advowson to a Man, that then was only an
Esquire; Seldom. 682. the Addition of Esquire; is drowned and merged in that of Knight,
and Seldom was a very competent and good Judge of this Matter: Then 'twas said,
that the only way to salve this, which had not been urged for the Plaintiff,
was, that he might be reputed a Knight, and a Name of Reputation will be
sufficient to take by, and to this it was answered, That he who is reputed a
Knight, and is none, cannot take by that Name: And besides, if he could, it
should have been pleaded by a per Nomen; in case of a Bastard, the Reputative
Name must be shown to make the Grant good; the Degree of Knight was formerly of
Esteem in the Law, as upon a Writ of Right, if the Mise be joined; and if a
Peer be Party to any Issue at Law, triable by Jury, etc. As to the Objection,
that a Grant to one by a Name of Dignity, which he really had not, viz. The
Eldest Son of a Duke as a Marquess, and that a Grant to him by that Name is
good, 'twas answered, That there was a real Reputation, he takes place after
all, real Marquesses as a Marquess by the Rules of Heraldry: There Is a ground
for it, from the Precedence given him by the common Use and Custom of the
Realm, and they are named so nowadays in Deeds, but anciently Conveyancers
were more Cautinos, and named them Esquires commonly called Marquesses; and
even now, careful Men call them eldest Sons of such Dukes, etc. If a Reputation
would have done it, the pleading should have been with a Cognit' et Reputat'
per Nomen: It is the name which intitles the Grantees to take, and otherwise
they have no pretense to claim by such Letters Patents, no more than John or
Thomas Theckston; and if the Person has any other Name of Reputation, that
ought to be shown, wherefore it was hoped, That this was cause enough to affirm
the Judgment.

Then it was argued, That this Grant was void as a Grant of an Advowson
appendant, when upon the Record, it appeared to be an Advowson in gross; that
the Defendant had admitted it an Advowson in gross, in Queen Elizabeth that he
has not only admitted, but confessed it in almost direct terms, by saying,
Been and Verum est, that Car. 1. became and was seized in manner as in the
Declaration; this is a full Confession, That the Queen was seized in gross,
'twas said to come to that King by Descent, and so there is no room left for
Presumption or Intendment, that it was by any wrongful or other Seisin. Then
'twas urged, That nothing passed to the Earl of Warwick, because not appendant,
but in gross, and for this was cited Moor 45. Hob. 322, 323. and other Books;
so that it does not appear, that the King did intend to pass this Advowson; for
in the Grant to the Earl of Warwick, there is no Grant of it by any express
Name, which its probable would have been, had the same been intended; now to
suppose it appendant, is to suppose against the Record, against both the
Averment in the Count, and the Confession in the Plea, it is in general Words,
una cum Advocationibus, etc. nor does it pass by the Letters Patents of Car. 1.
because it did not pass to the Earl, by those of Queen Eliz. this Grant is
ushered in after all the Recitals, and those suppose the Advowson to have
passed by the first; Igitur; wherefore, it must be upon Consideration of what
is before alleged, this is at least an illative Word, and cannot begin an
independent Substantive Clause of it self; so is Vlterius, 2 Browt. 132. If
this Granting Part should be taken to be Substantive, and to have no Reference
to what is precedent, all those Recitals would be vain and insignificant, and
the King might as well have begun with the Words of the Grant. The King's
Grants are to be taken according to his Intentions, and those are to be
expounded by the Recitals; then were quoted many Cases, as 5 Rep. 93. Hob.
120.203. Hutt. 7.2 Rolls Abr. 189.11 Rep. 93. and it was said, That here are
many false Recitals, Sir Will, Theckston claims, that must be intended a lawful
Claim, whereas he could not lawfully challenge any Right to this Advowson; That
the King presented Wilson by lapse; The King was deceived in thinking that this
passed to the Earl; The Agreement between Dr. Wickham and Sir William
Theckston, was only to deceive the King: Here Is no notice taken of the
Advowsons being in gross; The Quality and Nature of the Advowson is totally
concealed from the King; the Words notwithstanding any Defect, helps only want
of Form; Here was a plain Artifice in the Matter; in Queen Elizabeth's Grant,
it was Advowsons in General, etc. but when Car. 1. is to confirm that Grant,
it is of that Church by Name; all the intermediate Recitals between that of the
first Grant, and the words of this new Grant, are dependent on that first: The
King's Intention, That Theckston should have it, is not absolutely, but secund'
Thenorem and Intentionem of the former Patent; the King meant only to restore
to him his old Right which he had by that Patent, notwithstanding the
Presentations, 10 Rep. 110. all Facts recited in the King's Grant, shall be
intended to be of the Suggestion of the Patentee. If there be several
Considerations, and one false, and the King deceived thereby, it shall viciate
the Grant, 3 Leon. 249. Voers Case cited in Legates Case; Fits. Tit. Grant, 58.
3 Leon. 119. If the Granting Words had stood alone, the Case had been more
doubtful, but here they are all coupled. In all the King's Grants, there must
be some Considerations for his Favor, and abundance of Cases were quoted
concerning the King's Grants, Misrecitals, false Recitals, and Deceit, etc.
Then it was strenuously insisted upon, That the Recitals and the Granting
Clause, must be considered and judged of together; that the contrary Opinion,
is to make the Granting Part to be without any Consideration; it is to have a
Conclusion without Premises, an igitur without a Cause; That eadem servitia
can never be intended new ones; That secundum tenorem must referr to the
Appendant Advowson, and therefore the Advowson in gross here declared upon and
pleaded to, can never pass by this Grant, and upon the whole it was prayed,
That the Judgment might be affirmed.

It was replied on behalf of the Plaintiff in Error, That as to the Variance in
the Title of Knight, no Answer had been given to the reasonable Distinction
between the Case of Grants, and that of Writs and Indictments, that here was no
Proof or Appearance of a Diversity of Persons; That as to the Grant it self,
secund' tenorem, could mean only a Reference to the Interest or Estate granted
by them, not to the thing or the Nature of it; That such Words signified only,
as fully and largely, they had no express Relation to the Quality of the
Advowson, whether in gross or appendant; That by such Niceties, any or most
Patents might be avoided, That Grants of Honors as well as of Interests, if
questioned, must be under the same Rule; and the Considerations upon which they
are grounded, may be subject to Inquiry, if true or false, etc. That the Patent
of it self, without Reference to the pleading was good, That the Judgment
desired, was to condemn a Patent as void, because another Patent recited in it
was so, which perhaps was not fully recited; and if it were, was not in
Judgment before the Court; and the substance of what was urged before, was in
short repeated, and prayed, That the Judgment might be reversed, and it was
accordingly reversed; and Mr. Pierse ( Scroope being dead) presented Francis
Pemberton his Clerk, who was admitted, instituted and inducted, etc.

FINIS.
THE NAMES OF THE Principal Cases.
1. DOminus Rex and Viscount Purbeck. Page 1 2. Duvall versus Price. Page 12 3.
John Duvall and Elizabeth his Wife, versus William Terry of London, Merchant.
Page 15 4. William Dolphin and Katharine his Wife, versus Francis Haynes. Page
17 5. Dormer Sheppard and al', versus Joseph Wright and al'. Page 18 6.
Whitfield and Ux' and al', versus Paylor and Ux' and al'. Page 20 7. Thomas
Arnold versus Mr. Attorney General, and Matthew Johnson Esquire; Thomas Bedford
Gent. Page 22 8. Sir Richard Dutton versus Richard Howell, Richard Gray, and
Robert Chaplyn Executors of Sir John Witham decased. Page 24 9. Philips versus
Bury. Page 35 10. Dr. William Oldis versus Charles Donmille. Page 58 11. Smith
and Ux', versus Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's, London, and Lewis Ruggle. Page
67 12. The Countess of Radnor versus Vandebendy and al'. Page 69 13. Dominus
Rex versus Baden. Page 72 14. Hall and al' Executors of Thomas Thynne, versus
Jane Potter Administratrix of George Potter. Page 76 15. The Society of the
Governor and Assistants of the New Plantation of Vlster in the Kingdom of
Ireland, versus William Lord Bishop of Derry. Page 78 16. Sir Caesar Wood alias
Cranmer, versus Duke of Southhampton. Page 83 17. Sir Caesar Wood alias
Cranmer, versus Thomas Webb. Page 87 18. Jonathan Lord Bishop of Exeter and
al', versus Sampson Hele. Page 88 19. Robert Davis versus Dr. John Speed. Page
104 20. Wats and al' versus Crook. Page 108 21. Lee Warner versus William
North. Page 110 22. Briggs versus Clark ibid. 23. William Bridgman and al',
versus Rowland Holt and al'. Page 111 24. Dominus Rex versus Walcort. Page 127
25. Sir Evan Lloyd Bar. and Dame Mary his Wife, and Sidney Godolphin and Susan
his Wife, versus Richard Carew Bar. an Infant, the Son and Heir of Sir John
Carew Bar. deceased. Page 137 26. Sir William Morley Knight of the Bathe,
versus Peter Jones. Page 140 27. Sir Edward Hungerford and John Hill Executors
and Devisees of Sir William Basset, versus Edward Nosworthy. Page 146 28. Sir
Simon Leach and al', versus John Thompson Lessee of Charles Leach. Page 150 29.
Henry Earl of Lincoln, versus Samuel Roll and al'. Page 154 30. John Fox Gen',
versus Simon Harcourt Esquire; Page 158 31. Henry Lord Bishop of London and Dr.
Birch, versus Attorney General pro Domino Rege. Page 164 32. Dominus Rex versus
Reginald Tucker. Page 186 33. Joseph Eastmond Executor of Hester Eastmond and
Samuel Neyle, versus Edwyn Sands Clerk. Page 192 34. Magdalen Foubert versus
Charles de Cresseron. Page 194 35. Philip Jermin and Sarah his Wife, versus
Mary Orchard. Page 199 36. Bennet Swayne versus William Fawkner and John Lane
Executors of B. M. Page 207 37. Dominus Rex versus Episcop' Cestr' and Richard
Pierse. Page 212

