A New-Years-Gift: Containing Serious Reflections ON TIME, AND ETERNITY. And
some other SUBJECTS Moral and Divine.

With an Appendix concerning the First Day of the Year, how Observed by the
Jews, and may best be Employed by a Serious Christian.

LONDON, printed for S. and John Sprint at the Bell, and J. Nicholson at the
King's-Arms in Little-Brittain. 1699.

TO THE READER.
WHatever is likely to awaken Men to the Consideration of the great
acknowledged Principles of Religion, cannot be Unseasonable. And when it is
every Man's Concern, the Meanest, and Weakest Endeavors may be of some Use.
The Subjects of the following Reflections are most of them of that kind,
necessary to be attended to, by all sorts of Persons; and so cannot be too
often pressed, though in different Manners.

The usefulness of the subject Matter, and the smallness of the Bulk, are two
Things which are wont to recommend a Book to most Readers: For which Reason, I
may hope, this will be read by several, who suffer much better (because bigger)
Books to lie by them neglected. Some may possibly give it the Reading, as a
New-Years-Gift. And whoever shall be so far persuaded by it, as to set apart
some Time in the Beginning of the Year, for Self-Examination, Confession of
Sin, Repentance, Thanksgiving, and solemn renewal of their Covenant with God,
(which several of these Reflections may not only excite to, but are intended to
direct and assist him in,) I am persuaded he will thank me for putting him in
Mind (at least) of so seasonable an Exercise. The greatest part of these
Meditations were begun on a New Years day, though some others are thought fit to
be inserted, as tending to promote the same design. But knowing how much easier
it is to stir up other Men's Devotion, than to command and keep alive my own;
it is desired, that the most Devout Thoughts contained in these Papers, may be
looked upon as what the Author aims at, and would persuade to, rather than what
he has already attained: As what he knows he ought to be, and do, and does
seriously endeavor, rather than what he is, and has been; heartily lamenting
wherein he has been faulty, or defective in such duties, as these, and the
like Reflections, do oblige to, and enforce upon All, who shall read them, and
therefore much more upon himself.

That they were Penned at several times, and in occasional Retirements for
Spiritual Exercises, will, with the difference of the Subjects, be a sufficient
Excuse, that some are larger and others shorter, and that the Style is in some
places more neglected than in others. If I may hereby render any Service to the
Souls of Men, if any secure Sinner, any Self-deceiving Hypocrite be hereby
awakened, or any serious Christian's Devotion be quickened and advanced, I hope
God will accept it. To his Blessing I humbly Recommend it, for those Ends.

J. S.

Serious Reflections ON TIME AND ETERNITY, This World and the Next.
SECTION I.
Of the Changeable State, and Short Duration of Earthly Things; especially of
Man, how little it is Considered and Believed; how Necessary it should be.

WHen I consider that yesterday was the Conclusion of the Last Year, and that I
now am entered on another; it is seasonable to reflect on the mutable Condition,
and short Duration of all Things in this World, which are measured by Time.
That as they have their Beginning, so they have their End: And that the
Distance, or Space of Time between the one and the other is very little. Let me
not then, O my Soul! Rejoice and please my self too much in New Enjoyments,
remembering a Change may be at hand, and the End is certain.

Many who were Rich and Flourishing the last Year, may be reduced to Poverty
and deep Distress, before the end of this: Who are now in a Capacity to relieve
others, within a few Months, or a shorter Space, may be Objects of other Men's
Charity. The Thing which has been, is that which may be: And that which has
been seen in one Year, may happen in another; so easily, so quickly may a
Charge be made! Riches may unexpectedly change their Owners, and borrow wings
of a thousand Accidents, wherewith to fly to Heaven for a new Disposal. 1 Cor.
7.29.
They therefore who possess, should be as if they possessed not; for the
Fashion of this World passes away. Innumerable Casualties may effect that
Change, which no Humane Art or Skill can possibly foresee, or hinder.
Afflictive unexpected Evils attend us every where: We cannot promise our selves
Tranquillity for a Day, much less one Year to come. They lay in wait for us on
every side, enter at every Crevice, and commonly overtake us, when we are least
apprehensive of their Approach. Job 9.25.
Man that is born of a Woman is of few Days, and full of Trouble: He comes up
as a Flower, and is cut down; flees as a Shadow and continues not. What then
are Riches, Beauty, Strength and Honor, the Accidents of this Substance, which
is it self but a Shadow.

How false is the Hope of Man, and how frail is all his Glory! One Day can make
an End of all his Riches and Honors: And yet what Solicitude, Care and Labor,
to get what we desire of these things, (though often we do not need 'em) and
then to keep what we have gotten, and then to increase it, and then to defend
it, and at last to enjoy it, and in a Moment it is snatched from us, or we from
it. His Life is but a Vapor, on which they all depend; then how much less are
they? To how speedy an Alteration are they subject! What numberless Instances
of this, does one Years Experience furnish! what sadning Disappointments and
unexpected Calamities have befallen many since this Day Twelvemonth! and
Multitudes who are now at Ease, and think their Mountains too strong to be
removed, shall meet with sharper Trials before the End of this Year. Alas! how
few consider or believe it, 'till they find it so? All Men should count upon
Trouble and Disappointment, Suffering and Sorrow in this World; and he that
has the least Share, is reckoned the most prosperous Man; and yet he knows not
how soon his Portion may be doubled. We reckon our Joys by the Absence of some
degrees of Sorrow and Calamity that others meet with; and before the End of
this Year, our Condition may be as disconsolate as theirs.

O my Soul! Though I know this to be true; though I cannot, I dare not deny it;
yet how difficult is it to conquer the Love of this World, and of this Body, to
that degree I ought! to undervalue the interest of a short, a mutable,
uncertain, and troublesome Life, in comparison of the permanent possession of an
everlasting Good! Though I know, that what is earthly and temporal must needs
be thus changeable and fading; and that it is as true of Man himself, as of any
thing under the Sun; yet how do I forget what Man is! not only mutable in his
State, his Body, and his Life, but in his Mind too, so as to love and hate, to
choose and neglect, to delight in, and abhor, such things at one time, as he did
not before. He does not pass the same Judgment, nor retain the same Affections
at one time, as at another. How do I live, as if all this were as certainly
false, as it is unquestionably true? admire, love, fear, trust in Man, as if he
were the direct Contrary to what he is, and seek for Immortality upon Earth,
and act as if I were assured of it, and were not liable to any Change; though I
acknowledge and know the Contrary. Though the last Years Experience, and the
observation of every Day, does convince me of it; though all History, and all
the Records of the Grave attest it; though all Mankind in every Age have found
it so; though it be a manifest notorious Truth, legible in the various Changes
and Calamities, but especially in the Dust and Ashes of all, who have lived
before us, (our Graves being often made of our Predecessors Dust, and the Earth
we bury in having once been living) yet how little is it believed, how seldom
considered! The Confirmation of it which one Year gives us, has little
Influence on our Hearts or Lives, with respect to the next. We ought therefore
to accustom our selves to these Thoughts, before such Changes happen, to which
our Final Change shall e're long succeed. They will be less efficacious, if
never admitted till our Minds are oppressed and feebled by the weight of
Affliction. We shall then want that Vigor of Reason, which should cooperate
with the Remedy; and which if used beforehand, would help to support and stay
our Minds, under all subsequent Revolutions. For those Considerations may be
able to fix and stay our Minds under Changes, that may not be sufficient to
recover, and raise our Spirits, after they are dejected and fallen.

SECTION II.
Of the Change in Men's Inclinations, Opinions, and Actions, which one Year
shows; How observable it is in Others; how much more discernable in our Selves.
Honor and Reputation, etc. how uncertainly preserved, and how easily blasted.

WHat a discovery does one Year make of the Mutability of Man, not only of his
outward Condition, but of the Man himself; his Temper, his Practice, his
Inclinations, his Aversions, etc. He abides not at one stay; every breath of
wind turns him to another shape. We despise to day, that which we admired
yesterday; and to morrow hate the object of our present love. We begin
Friendships, and cancel them on slight occasions; And a mortal Enmity often
succeeds to a tender Affection: The very Persons, who are in one year our
darling Friends, and possibly deserved to be so, may yet be open Enemies the
next, and seek our Ruin. Lord! what is Man? How deceitful and mutable the
Heart of Man! We know not what other Men are, or will prove to be till a trial;
and we are equally ignorant concerning our selves, till an hour of Temptation.
How patiently do we think we could bear Afflictions till we feel them! how
partial and mistaken a Judgment do we make of our Wisdom and Strength, in
reference to the future? we counsel others to Submission and Resignation in the
most difficult trials, and wonder they complain so loud; when we our selves
despond, and sink under half their Burden; and send up our more impatient
murmurs to Heaven, when God thinks fit to prove us by a lighter Stroke. We
censure and condem Others, who are in an higher Station, and are called to more
difficult work than we; when by a little Advancement, and the like Temptation,
we discover that we are as bad as they. They who were reputed Humble,
Temperate, and Religious when they have been Exalted higher, become proud,
sensual, and ungodly. Had some been told a Twelve month since, what now they
are, and speak, and act, they would have made Hazael's Answer, Am I a Dog, that
I should do this? A change in the public Affairs of the State, and by that
means of particular Interests, or some Alteration of our own private
Circumstances, (calling us to new Duties, and exposing us to new Temptations)
discovers us more to our selves and to other Men, than was expected, and proves
us to be very different from what we appeared to be.

Such a change, for Instance, as from Poverty to Riches, from Sickness to
Health, from Obscurity to Honor, from Privacy to a Public charge, etc. or on
the contrary. Men cannot bear the weight of Temporal Happiness, but Riches and
Honors make us to be Other Men, than before we seemed to be. How weak a thing
is Man! that cannot carry his own Wishes, without falling under them: That
cannot prosper in his designs, without being changed in the Temper of his Mind,
upon every success. So true is it, that Man in Honor is like the Beast that
perishes; and changed ordinarily for the worse, as to serious Religion. May we
not fear, that some, who a year since dared not live a day in the neglect of
Closet and Family Devotion, do now omit it, for many Days and Weeks together?
And that some, who once were careful to improve the whole Sabbath to religious
purposes, now place the whole of their Religion in attending the publiek
Worship, and think it enough, not for that Day only, but for the whole Week.
Under the Afflicting Hand of God, or some Apprehensions of an approaching
change, or sense of guilt upon great Transgressions, the Convictions of Sin are
lively, Conscience is sensible and awake, Affections warm, Resolutions strong,
etc. But alas! how soon does the case alter! our Spirits cool, our Zeal abates,
our good Purposes untwist and die, and come to nothing. By degrees we return to
Folly, and boldly venture on that Sin, we lately trembled at. Through the want
of continued smart Afflictions, or of a serious awakning Ministry, and friendly
faithful Admonition; or through the Temptations of vain Company, and the
remaining power of fleshly Lusts. So that we falsify our most sacred Promises
and Resolutions, violate our holy Vows, cancel the Bonds of God upon us, suffer
the Devil to re-enter, and prevail again, to take possession of our Hearts, and
yield our selves an easy prey to his Temptations, till our latter end be worse
than our Beginning.

Oh what a Change does one year let us see in Persons, as well as Things! in
our selves, as well as other Men! And as it is with Man himself, so with every
thing that he values himself upon, or for which he is esteemed by others; and
even his Esteem and Reputation is also changeable and uncertain. Not to
Instance in Riches, but in what is nobler, Learning, and the Improvements of
the Mind by Study; how soon may the violence of a Disease disturb or stupifie
the Brain to that degree, as shall reduce the greatest Scholar to the pitied
Condition of a Fool or Bedlam? And where is his Reputation and Renown, in such
a Case? But much less than that will blast the fairest Reputation, with the far
greatest part of the World: It may be lost by unwary Mistakes, by false
Reports, by Envy and Malice, by the subtle Hatred of Enemies, or by the
Weakness and Credulity of Friends, (who will listen to every Back-biters Story)
or by one or two Indiscretions of the Man himself; and no Man can be certain to
secure his Reputation whilst he lives, much less after he is dead. Who can
content all Men, however he live? And who is well spoken of by all when he is
dead? Who is so esteemed, that some do not despise him? The wisest Conduct
cannot hinder, but some will judge hardly and amiss.

How vain and faulty is an Ambition to be talked of after we are dead, which
will be but by very few, and that very differently, and but for a little while;
There is no Remembrance of former things, neither shall there be of things to
come, with those that shall come after, Eccles. 1.11. For how little a while do
the proudest Monuments last, that are set over the rotten Flesh and Bones of
many, to preserve their Memory? God has promised, it is true, that The
Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance; but it must be understood so
far only, as the frame and state of this World, and the Revolutions and
Vicissitudes of Time will permit. But what Good can it do us, farther than the
Interest of God's Glory, and the Good of others is concerned in it? The Blessed
will not need it, and the Damned have no Advantage by it: And no Endeavors can
be certain of Success: For People will talk of us as they please; and their
Opinions very often change from one Extreme to the other: But he who has the
loudest Fame, shall only be talked of a little longer than his Neighbors; and
that by a few dying Men, that must themselves be e're long forgotten. And how
small a part of the inhabited World, is acquainted so much as with the Name of
the greatest Men in Europe? And how different and contrary are men's Opinions
and Discourses of them, where they are known and talked of? And how many holy,
excellent Persons are buried in Oblivion, or misrepresented as unworthy to
live on Earth, whose Names will be found in the Book of Life? Our Life is yet
as mutable, and uncertain as any of theirs. The Time is hastening, when we shall
be too old to Live, but at any time we are old enough to Die. Our Breath is in
our Nostrils; and though there be room enough for it to go out, we have no
Assurance that we shall have power to draw it in again.

SECT. III.
Of the Uncertainty of living to the Period of another year. The Vanity of this
Life: The Swistness of Time, and how to be improved.

I Now begin another Year: But what Assurance have I to outlive it? I cannot
not say, how soon my Sovereign Judge may call me hence, and summon me to appear
before his Righteous Bar. O let me not defer my necessary Preparation for
Death, which may be nearer than I imagine! Let me mind the Great things first,
which are of absolute necessity to be done, some time or other before I dye.
This perishing Body which I have pampered and indulged, at the expense of so
much Cost and Time, may be putrefying in a silent Grave, before half this Year
be past. Lord! bless this thought, to awaken my diligent endeavors to secure
the Blessedness of Eternity! to mortify the desire of Great Things for my
self, in future Years, by the considered Possibility of dying before the end of
this! Let me look into the Graves of others, and consider that this may quickly
happen to me, and must ere long be my own ease: Let me think what this Body
will shortly be, when it has been six or eight days separated from my Soul;
how vile? how loathsome? that I may despise the Beauty, and be dead to the
Pleasures of the Body, which so easily, so suddenly, so strangely may be
changed. For no Glass is more brittle, no Bubble more vanishing, no Ice more
dissolving, no Flower more fading, no Shadow less substantial, no Sleep or
Dream more deceiving, no Sound more transient, nothing more vain and more
uncertain than Life, on which all other things in this World depend. My days
are as nothing says Job, though they lasted above two Ages.

There is hardly any thing very frail and feeble, mutable and uncertain, but
the Spirit of God in Scripture sets forth the Vanity of Life by; as if he would
teach us by it, from the Light of every perishing Object, which our Eyes
behold, to reflect on our own Mortality. We sleep every Night, in the outer
Chambers of Death: And in some Diseases Sleep, which is the image and Picture
of Death, is taken away, to give place to the Original, and make way for death.
And every year, every week, every day are we hastening to our final Change;
which may overtake us e're we are aware. Every day we lose some part of our
Lives; in our very growth from Infancy to Manhood, our Life decreases, and
grows less. Every Pulse and Breath does tell us, we are hastening to the End of
Time, and calls upon us to dispatch our Work.

If we consider Dr. Donn's Devotions.
Time, to be the measure of Motion, however it may seem to have three Stations;
Past, Present and Future, yet the First and Last of these are not: (one is not
now, and the other is not yet.) That which you call Present, is not now the
same it was, when you began to call it so in this Line? before you sound that
word Present, or the Monasyllable Now, the Present, and the Now is past. If we
consider Eternity, into that Time never entered; Eternity is not an Everlasting
Flux of Time; but Time is a short Parenthesis in a long Period; and Eternity
had been the same, as it is, though Time had never been. If we consider not
Eternity, but Perpetuity, which shall out- live Time, and be when Time shall be
no more. What a Minute is the Life of Man to that? How soon must it end?

Every Word we speak, is formed of that Breath whereby we live; and we may not
live to pronounce another Sentence, but the Lamp of Life may be extinguished and
blown out by a sudden Blast. Every thing we do, carries away some Sands of our
little Glass of Time; and how little may remain? Or how soon may the Glass be
broken? Our Souls are in our Bodies, as a little Air enclosed in a thin Bubble;
how easily is that broken, and where are we? How many who are now alive, in
health and vigor, who deliberate on their Meat and Drink, and are curious of
Air and Exercise, to maintain themselves in Health, and please themselves with
the Dream of Years to come, shall never see another New-years-day? It may be
not another Month, or week, or morrow? Many have promised themselves great
things on the morrow, but dyed before Night: Let me not say, I shall not die
this Day, when I may this Hour; and it is but once for all, there is no amending
an ill Death, by another Trial. When I lie down to sleep, I hope to rise
stronger and fresher, and fitter for work; but I know withal, I may rise no
more. And may not my Name be on the Roll of those who shall next be called, at
least some time this Year? Let me not then neglect or foolishly delay my
Principal Business, to provide against a Change, which is inevitable, but the
time of it altogether doubtful. Ought not my first and chiefest care to be
employed, to make my peace with God, (He alone can be my happiness to his final
Judgment I am hastening; His Favor alone can give me Support and Joy in a
dying Hour: To his Mercy I must trust, when I leave this World, and can have no
advantage more by any thing in it:) that he may mercifully receive my Soul at
Death and be my Everlasting Portion? Do I know my Life is thus vain and
transient, and shall I not seriously improve it to such a Purpose? Shall these
Thoughts leave no Impression upon me? Do I breath continually in this Element
of Vanity, and yet forget where I am, and remain insensible of so near a
Change? Shall these Thoughts pass away as a vanishing Cloud, and distill no
softening drops on my Soul? Shall the Image of Death, which meets me every
where, be only like an appearing Ghost or Phantasm, that startles and scares a
little, but is presently gone, and no more considered? Oh! let me now remember
to make God my Friend, and secure an interest in his Eternal Mercy, while the
Day lasts; yea, while my Reason and Understanding are free, and not disturbed
and clouded by Fear and Pain, and the Disorders of the Body, as commonly they
are in Sickness, if God should vouchsafe me that Warning, which yet I may not
promise my self to have, for I may be cut off by a Sudden Stroke, before the
end of this Year, I now begin.

And how great and necessary a Work have I to do in so short and so uncertain a
Portion of Time? Endless joy or Misery will be the consequence of spending this
present Time. My ignorant Soul must be instructed, my carnal Heart renewed,
many false Opinions must be unlearnt, and sinful Customs changed, and powerful
Lusts mortified, and strong Temptations overcome, and many Graces to be
obtained, exercised, strengthened and preserved, to please and serve, and
glorify an Holy, Omnipresent God, my Sovereign; and express the Thankfulness
of my Heart and Life to Christ my Savior; and is all this nothing? Is not all
my little hasty Time too little for such a Work? to prepare for a safe and
comfortable Death, in order to a blessed Eternity?

SECT. IV.
Of the seeming Difference, between so many Years Past, and the same number of
Years to come.

WHen I look back on the preceding Years of my Life, how easily can I grasp
them all at once? they are even as yesterday when it is past. But so many Years
to come has something great and vast, which fills my Thoughts, and affects my
Mind, after another manner. Such is the difference between past Enjoyments, and
the Expectation of future. Let me suppose the same term and duration of Years,
and yet how different are my Apprehensions of what is past, and of what is yet
to come! Things past by a remembrance of some remarkable Passages, when they
happened, seem to be present with me: But not knowing what may happen in the
same number of Years to come, I have nothing whereon to fix my Thoughts. Or the
Reason of this Difference may rather be, that Men in this degenerate and
necessitous State (with unsatisfied Desires reaching after Happiness, and
sensible nothing present can afford it, and knowing by Experience that nothing
past could have done it) are eagerly desirous of Felicity; and because we know
not but what is to come may procure it, we hope it will; which makes the Time
seem long, by reason of our Expectation and Desire of Good. Whereas the
foresight of Evil, and the Expectation of that, some years hence, makes the
Time rather seem short, and near at hand: So many years to come, in the
expectation and desire of Good, are long and tedious? such Hope deferred makes
the heart sick, even though it is of that sort, as must needs fail our
expectations.

Prepare me, Lord! for what thine unerring Counsel shall please to order, as to
the remainder of my Time on Earth; and suffer me not to count upon a great
number of Years to come, since this, for ought I know, may be my last: Neither
let me expect Rest and Happiness in this World, which nothing Temporal can
afford. This is not the state or season, wherein, by any promise of God, I am
encouraged to hope it. And if fifty or threescore years to come, be thought so
great a matter, and really is so, as to our stay on Earth; Oh! what
apprehensions ought I to admit concerning an endless, everlasting State!
especially being as certain of the latter, after Death, as I am uncertain about
the former; whether so many Years be yet to come before my Death. Let me not
hereafter be so preposterous in my Solicitude, Cares, and Fears, as to be
anxious for to Morrow, and yet be thoughtless of Eternity.

SECT. V.
The little Portion of our Time on Earth considered, by a Computation of the
Life of Man, from the number of Years and Hours.

THink, O my Soul! how short is that Life at longest, made up of Years and
Months, and Days; such little parts and yet in number few. Well therefore may
it be expressed, as I find in Holy Writ, by years of Number, that is, such as may
soon be numbered. When a few Years are come, says Job 16. Job. 22.12. Ezekiel. 16.
Isa. 10.19.
, (or the Years of number, as in the Original) I shall go the way, whence I
shall not return. By the years of an Hireling, which were not above three, Isa.
16.14. We usually compute Threescore and Ten Years, to the life of Man: Let me
suppose fourscore. The Bed with most imploys one half; and hardly one in Thirty
does reach the Age of Seventy Years. And Winter-Evening Conference, Conf. 1.
they who live to such an Age, do yet complain how soon it is done. Ignorant
Childhood and heedless Youth, and infirm old Age, may be supposed to take up a
third part of that Time. In either of them very little of the great Ends of
Life are answered. We ordinarily begin to reckon our lives from our Birth;
whereas for a good while after, we know not whether we are alive or no, but are
beholding to others to make the account for us. When we first come to the
steady use of Reason, or what we call the years of Discretion; how few are
there, but from the Prejudices of Education, from the Corruption of Human
Nature, from the want of Experience, from the Infection of bad Company, how
few, I say, but spend their younger Years in those things, which afterward
they are ashamed of, when experience has taught them the Wisdom of Men? How
great a part of our remaining Time is taken up in the Necessities of Nature,
about Food and Raiment, and in lawful Cares, to support the Body? and how much
more than needs, in pampering, dressing and adorning it? Out of the small
remainder, how much is employed in the concerns of a Family, and near
Relations, in particular Callings, in necessary Civil Business, and in getting,
keeping, or improving an Estate? Besides all the Time that is spent in
Recreations, Visits, unprofitable Discourse, impertinent Thoughts, Journeys,
Sickness, and innumerable other Occasions, some allowable, some unavoidable,
and many needless? After this, how little Time remains wherein to cultivate and
improve our Minds, by Languages, Arts and Sciences, or the knowledge of a
Trade, etc. How little then after all, may we say, is left for the matters of
Religion? for Devotion to God, and serious Preparation for another World?

Alas! how small a number of Years make up the Life of Man! and how small a
Portion of that, is employed about the Principal Business, for which we were
born, and for which we live? We divide Time into Past, Present, and Future: But
the Past is not now ours; the Future is not yet, and the Present now is past,
e're the sound be pronounced. And yet this is all the Time allotted us wherein
to secure the Blessedness of Eternity. How many Hours more of our little Time
might be improved, than commonly are by the Best? In every Year there are 8775
Hours: If we allow the greatest half for sleep, and necessary attendance on the
Body, and take but 4000 Hours for our Work and Business of consequence: How
poor an account can most Men give of all these 4000 Hours in every Year? not
one hour in seven, not one in ten, is ordinarily devoted to God, and the
purposes of Religion. Should it not affect us, seriously to consider this?
especially if we remember, at what an uncertainty we are, how small a number of
Days and Hours do yet remain. This Year, this Month, this Week, this Day or
Hour may be my last. What an unsuspected Accident or a sudden Disease may do, I
know not: But this I know, that there is scarce any thing that has not killed
some Body; an Hair, a Feather, a Vapor, a Breath has done it, and when the
Apostle James ask the Question, What is your Life? He Answers, It is even a
Vapor, that appears a little while, and then vanishes away.

SECT. VI.
Of the Redemption of Time, how precious and valuable a Treasure it is, and
will be thought to be, when it is too late.

IS the life of Man so short and fleeting, our Days on Earth so few, and so
uncertain? How careful should I be to manage every Hour, endeavoring to match
the Swiftness of Time by my celerity, and diligence to improve it? I can have
no Business of greater or of equal Moment to mind, than to secure the Happiness
of my Soul in another World. And shall I lavish my Time, and lose my Pains
about things unnecessary? What will all other Business signify in the end, if
this be neglected? Is there any Interest more weighty, that calls me from
such work? Is there any thing else that so well deserves my Time? That may be
put into the Scales, or weighed in a balance a against this? Shall Eternity,
which comprehends all Time, have the least share of my Time allotted for its
concernments? How little a part of my Time has been hitherto employed in such
work! How reasonable, how necessary is it to redeem the little Inch of Time
that yet remains, but hastens to a Period? For as there is no Covenant to be
made with Death, so no Agreement for the Arrest and Stay of Time; it keeps its
pace whether I redeem, and use it well or not.

The greatest part of our Life is designedly employed to avoid Death; we eat
and drink, and sleep, and labor, and rest, that we may not die; and yet even
by these we hasten to Death. Every Breath, every Pulse, every Word leaves one
less of the number, which God has appointed me, and carries away some Sands of
the Glass of Time; and yet how little care is taken to employ it well? We
seldom value it, till we can no longer use it to any advantage; and though we
know it can neither be retarded in its motion, or recalled when past, yet of
nothing are we more prodigal. Yea, how many complain of it as a Burden, and
know not what to do with their Time, are exceedingly at a loss wherein to
employ it, what to do to be rid of it? But alas! how near is that Change, when
they shall think nothing too dear to purchase some few Grains of that Sand,
which now seem too many, while they are passing through their Hourglass? How
sad will be the review of our lost and ill-spent Time? How different an Opinion
of its Value shall we have on a Sickbed, or when our Time and Hope is gone?
How many Weeks, and Days, and Hours, O my Soul, have I trifled away in Sloth
and Idleness, in foolish Mirth, and hurtful Company, in vain Thoughts and
impertinent Discourse, in excess of Sleep, and needless Pastimes, Feastings,
inordinate Care to adorn the Body, or gratify the sensual Appetite? All that
which is past is irrecoverable; and the little remainder slies apace. How
quickly will it be gone; how soon, how suddenly, may an unexpected Stroke of
Death conclude it? And yet this is all the opportunity I shall ever have, to
make my Peace with God, and prepare for the everlasting World.

Did we consider it as we ought, we should not foolishly throw away so much of
it in Trifles, and things impertinent, or what is worse: How much more might we
redeem than commonly we do? To how much better purpose might we husband it? How
much more work might we do, were we never idle, or did not loyter? We might
walk far, did we not often stand still, or go out of our way. We see it plainly
by the great and excellent Effects of some few Men's Industry in every Age. Art
has found means to set Spies and Watches as it were on the Sun, that he cannot
look out, but they take hold of his Shadow, and force it to tell how far he is
gone that day: And yet while we are curious in making Time give a just Account
of it self to us, how little do we consider the account of our Time, which we
must shortly give to God? Oh! that such a Thought might effectually persuade me
to redeem it! that I may not tarry till the end of Time, to know the worth of
it! Let me not undervalue it, while it is given me to be used, that I may not
eternally regret my Folly, when Time shall be no more.

God calls me to Diligence and Labor; the Work he calls me to is excellent,
and the Reward glorious; to know, and love, and serve, and obey Him, in order
to Eternal Life; and shall I yet be Idle? Is this the Use and End of all my
Time? And do I know it, and believe it? Do I indeed believe it, and yet delay
and loyter, and wast my precious Hours in Vanity? Am I going into Eternity, and
entering into another World, and know that I must be in Heaven or Hell for ever,
and have I Time to throw away? Am I fit to die, and to appear before my Judge,
or am I not? Am I made meet for Heaven, by pardoning Mercy, and sanctifying
Grace? Have I the Earnest of the Spirit to witness and assure me of it? Is my
Interest in the Promise of Eternal Life as firm, and my Evidence of it as
clear, as it may be made? Am I not conscious to my self, that much of this
necessary Work is yet to be done? And shall such an unprepared Soul as mine, be
careless and indifferent how I spend my Time?

SECT. VII.
Of the Ordinances of Heaven, Day and Night, Summer and Winter, Seed-time and
Harvest; their order and succession, established by God, is the effect of
Infinite Wisdom and Goodness. What they may teach us.

WHen I consider the beginning of another Year, I can hardly avoid reflecting
on its several parts, Summer and Winter, Spring and Fall, Day and Night, and
their alternate Turns. This calls me to observe, and admire his Eternal Power
and Godhead, Wisdom and Truth, who is the Great Author of this admirable
variety; Who has fixed the Earth with his Foot, and hanged it on nothing, and
settled the Luminaries of Heaven for Excellent Ends: The Sun to Ruleby Day, and
the Moon by Night, thereby to distinguish Times and Seasons, to separate Day
and Night, Winter and Summer, and consult the convenience of Man and Beast, by
their due Succession. The Day is thine, the Night also is thine, thou make
Summer and Winter: How wonderful is their Order, Beauty, and constant Course;
that when the Sun withdraws, and the shadows of the Evening cover the Earth
with darkness, to conclude the Day; the Moon and Stars supply the place of the
absent Sun, during the Night: And that though they differ in length, yet
gradually lessen, till they are both equal at the years end, and have made the
same Circuit. How excellent a work of God, is that quick succession to one
another? The supposition of a perpetual Night, is a dismal gloomy thought. O
what will the Everlasting Darkness of the Infernal Prison be! The Sun by day
enlightens the Earth, directs our Motion, guides our Way, governs our Travail,
assists Conversation, awakens Industry, warms the Earth, and Air, gives Life,
and Vigor, and fruitfulness to all things under the Sun, and makes the whole
Inferior Creation to rejoice. An Emblem of God's universal Goodness, who is
kind to all his Creatures. How admirable is its Luster! how glorious is its
Light! how loudly does it proclaim his Power and Wisdom! who made this, and the
other Lights of Heaven, by his powerful Word, and preserves them hitherto by
his daily Providence.

If God be now so glorious, contemplated in his Works, considered in the luster
of the created Sun, viewed only through the Windows of Sense; how much more
glorious will he appear hereafter, when we shall see him face to face, and
nothing interpose betwixt us and his incomparable Light! If mine Eyes dazzle to
look upon the meridian Sun, in what inaccessible Light must he dwell, who is
the Father of Lights? If this lower World the common receptacle of his Friends
and Enemies, have so much of his Glory vouchsafed them by the Heavenly Bodies;
O what a place will Heaven be, where shall be no Sun or Moon, nor need of any,
but the glory of God shall lighten it, and the Lamb be the Light thereof?

While I thus consider the Sun, and the Day, I must not think the Night is
useless, which discovers another part of the Heavens, not discernable by the
Day, viz. the Stars and Planets, refreshing the Earth, cooling the Air, giving
necessary Rest to the Creatures, etc. Their order, motions, aspects,
oppositions, influences, are all useful, and instructive. The agreeable
mixtures of Light and Darkness, the regular succession of Day and Night within
a few hours, are exceeding wonderful, and advantageous. In other parts of the
World, where the Sunbeams are more direct, and its heat excessive, God has
made amends by the length of the Night, (under the Equinoctial Line it is
always Twelve hours) and in the more Northen parts, where the Influence of the
Sun is weaker, the days are proportionably longer. So good is God to all his
Creatures, in all parts of the world. As the Morning and Evening answer to the
day of Twenty four hours; so does Spring and Autumn to the Twelve months of the
Year, that we may not pass immediately from one extreme to another, but
gradually be disposed for so great a change, as is between Summer and Winter,
and Winter and Summer. So merciful and gracious, and infinitely wise is God, in
all his Works! so that we cannot say, one part of the Year is more necessary
than another. The Winter is as useful for the good of the Universe, as the
Summer: In this we are supplied with what is necessary to maintain us in that.
And the admirable Situation of the Sun (most probably) in the Center of the
World, seems much to contribute to it. If it had been at a farther distance
from us, our Earth would have been in a manner desolate; because the Influence
of the Sun could not have been considerable: And if it had been nearer: the
Stars above would have wanted Light, and this Earth under been burnt up. The
Excellent Order which it has now obeyed for above six Thousand Years, is also
wonderful. The Sun never stood still but once, and that by a Miracle; though much
inferior to that of it is daily Progress. What a Subject is here to admire the
Power, Goodness, Wisdom, and Faithfulness of God? Lord! what is Man! For whom
thou do all this? And because I find every Year that the Day dies into Night,
the Summer into Winter, and Herbs and Plants lose their Beauty and Verdure, and
shed their Blossoms; may I not hence learn to consider, and prepare for my own
Approaching Change? In Prosperity, Health, and Ease, and Life, to expect, and
make Provision for Trouble, Sickness, Pain and Death? as every Wise Man in
Summer would do for Winter; and work with all my Might, while it is called to
day; while the Light continues, because the Night of Darkness is at hand, when
none can work.

SECT. VIII.
Of Evils to be expected in this Year; the Wisdom and Mercy of God, in
concealing from us the Knowledge of future Events.

NOT only few, and uncertain, but Evil likewise are the Days of the Years of my
Life, may every one say, with the Patriarch Jacob. A sufficient Portion of Evil
for every year may well be expected, when our Lord tells us, there is a certain
Measure allotted for every Day. Sufficient to the Day is the Evil of it. Not
only is our Life short, but troublesome, full of vexations Mixtures. We cannot
sing a Requiem to our Souls, when one great Calamity is past; for we know not
in this Region of Changes, but another, a greater may be be at hand. One
Messenger of ill News may succeed and outdo another, as it was with Job. We
come weeping into the World in a most helpless, forlorn State; and if we escape
the Dangers of Infancy, and the Casualties of Childhood; and after that outlive
the Snares and Follies of Youth, we are tossed upon the Pikes of Time and Chance,
and sadden and disquiet our selves with a thousand Griefs and Sorrows, by
inevitable and unexpected Occasions; though we increase the number of needless
Cares and Fears and Discontents; 'Till at length a sudden stroke arrests us, we
fetch a groan, and dye.

Who can give a Catalogue of the Afflictions and Calamities, Perplexities and
Disappointments, Encumbrances, Crosses, and evil Accidents of Humane Life? By
means whereof Millions are disconsolate and sad, mourn and complain, weep and
sigh, and from day to day are fed with the Bread of Affliction, and the Water
of Adversity. Not to mention Men's fluctuating restless Thoughts of Heart,
importunate Desires, baffled Projects, defeated Purposes, which suppose or
bring Vexaation. A good share of these is not to be avoided; and yet very few
can be Particularly foreseeen. Who could prognosticate a year ago the Mercies,
or the Evils, which have happened since? Public and Private, Personal and
Relative, to the Countries, Cities, Families and Persons we are concerned for?
And who can certainly foretell the Eyents of this ensuing Year? God has
intermixed Good and Evil in the Life of Man: He has set Prosperity against
Adversity, says Solomon, to the End, That Man should find nothing after him,
Eccles. 7.14. that he may not know what shall come next, whether a Prosperous
or a Calamitous Event.

What a Change may be made in a year by the mere Casuality of Humane Events? by
the Treachery of Friends, or the Malice of Enemies, or the more immediate Hand
of God? We know not what shall be on the Morrow, much less what a Twelve Month
may produce. Because whatever may be disposed to happen, from natural Causes or
civil Counsels, may be altered by a particular Decree of Providence. Prepare
me, Lord! and every of those in whose Felicity I more especially take part, for
all the Calamities and Sorrows, thine infinite Wisdom shall think fit to
exercise us with, this following Year; and by thy merciful Providence, and
gracious Conduct, cause them to work for Good: Furnishing us with suitable
Strength and Wisdom, to acquiesce in thy good Pleasure, and obey thy Will. Let
me follow thee, as the Father of the faithful, though I know not whether thou will lead me. Knowing the Wisdom and Faithfulness of my Pilot, let me therein
be satisfied, though I know not particularly what Course he will steer.

I thank thee, O Heavenly Father! that thou have reserved the Knowledge of
future Times and Seasons to thy self, and hid Events from Men; Lest by
considering them Certain, we should presume in case they are Good; or should
despairingly afflict our selves, by foreseeing the Evil we know to be
inevitable. Did we certainly foreknow the Good that would befall us, we should
not Trust in Thee to bring it to pass, or heartily implore thy Care and
Conduct. Did we foresee the Evils we shall suffer, before they overtake us, we
should be overwhelmed with Diffidence and Despair. Many a Mother who rejoices
at the Birth of a Son, would mourn to foresee what a Man, what a Son he will
prove. Such an increase of Knowledge would increase our Sorrow; such a
Prescience would transport and discompose us, by unseasonable Joys and Sorrows,
born out of Time; make us remiss in our Duty to Thee; and weaken our Dependence
on thine own unerring Wisdom, Truth, and Power.

SECT. IX.
The Supposition of dying this Year, should be improved; the Consequence of
Redeeming Time, and Providing for Eternity farther pressed. The Folly of Elder
Persons is condemned and checked from the Example of Children. It Is advisable
to familiarize the Thoughts of Death, and to imagine beforehand, what
Apprehensions of things we shall then have.

THE longest Life is but a day multiplied; and who can certify, or assure me,
which will be my last? He only, who was God as well as Man, could say, Mine
Hour is not yet come. Is all my Life given me to resolve this Question, Whether
I shall be in Heaven or Hell for ever? And have I any time to lose, and
squander away, as superfluous? have I any more than needs? It Is no impossible,
or unreasonable Supposition to make, that I may dye this Year. Let me admit
that Thought, and imagine my self on a Bed of Sickness, wearied with Pain, and
ready to leave this World; the Physicians gone, despairing of my Recovery; my
Friends about me weeping; and all things in a doleful Melancholy Posture,
suited to such a state; feeling within my self the presages of Death, expecting
the final stroke, in an hour or two more, What is then the value of sensual
Pleasures? can I then relish or savor them? what then is Honor to me, who
shall never go abroad more to receive it, 'till carried to my Grave? will it
then comfort me to have lived in Reputation, and Applause, if my Heart was not
humble under it, and the Honor of God promoted by it? Can Riches and a great
Estate support me, when I am just packing up, for a Removal to the other World?
In that Hour will it be any Satisfaction, to have made a stir and noise for a
few years upon Earth, to be talked of for a while longer than other Men? Are
these the things, my dying thoughts will be most concerned to reflection?

These Dignities, Pleasures, and Possessions offered to a dying Man, would
rather upbraid than tempt him; they come too late, as a Prince's Pardon to a
Man whose Head is off. Die I must, and appear before my Judge, to answer for
all that I have received, and done in the Body. Fool that I was, (shall I then
too justly say to my self,) not to have considered this much sooner! not to
have provided for it at a better Rate! my Sins stare me in the Face, my.
Conscience tells me I am not ready for such a Trial: I have lived a stranger to
such Thoughts as now I cannot refuse, and which should have been admitted
sooner. But if to such a state, any hope of Mercy may be granted, (though it be
unspeakable little) yet I cannot promise my self any such Warning by Sickness.
The sleeping Virgins were called at Midnight, and so may I. Where can I pitch
my Tents on Earth, to be secure against a sudden Remove?

Lord! make these Thoughts effectual to prevent my Loss of precious Time, which
at such a season, will be esteemed precious, though now it be not. O how swift,
how short is my Time of Trial, in order to Eternity! how difficult how
important a work is it to prepare for an Everlasting State! What is all this
World, how little, how mere a nothing, to a departing Soul? And shall I after
such Reflections, continue to pursue Shadows, and please my self with empty
Dreams? when being so near my final Judgment, the Common Wisdom of a Man
requires me to mind it in good Earnest; and be more solicitous about it than
for any thing Temporal? O in what manner will Death open my Eyes, by shutting
the Windows of Sense! How shall I then see the Nothingness of what is but
Temporal, and the Reality of what is Eternal!

We sometimes laugh to see the Vanity of little Children, who are greatly
pleased with painted Toys, and busily employed about Trifles. It extorts a
Smile to see them eager, and industrious, and mightily concerned in their
Childish Sports; to see them sigh or weep for little things which we despise;
to observe with what Solicitude and Care they will raise a little Fabric, which
three Moments after they themselves pull down, or would otherwise tumble of its
own Accord. We laugh at these, but should weep over our selves, as the greater
and elder Fools; who are every whit as silly, yea infinitely more; that
considering we know the fraily of our present Life, and can look beyond the
Grave to another World, should yet mispend our precious Time on things which
cannot profit; and please our selves with what is so unsuitable to our Age and
State: and suffer our Passions to work with violence, for a thing of naught?
and our greatest Diligence, Care, and Zeal, to be exercised on things
impertinent and vain; that are perishing in themselves, and can contribute
nothing to our Eternal Welfare. And is it not thus, with reference to all that
Men toil and labor for, with the Neglect of an immortal State?

The Voluptuous Sadducee will not refuse the present Gratification of his
sensual Appetite, because he is uncertain of another day. Let us eat and drink,
for to Morrow we dye. Should not the same Motive quicken my Diligence in a
better work? and because my Lord may come suddenly at a Thief in the Night,
immediately prepare to meet him? Let me now therefore, O my Soul! look forward
to the End of Life and Time! and so let me esteem, and seek, and choose, and do
every thing in the first place, which then I shall wish I had; Let me do
nothing now, which I verily believe I shall then be ashamed, or sorry to
reflect on; that by thinking what a Condition I shall then wish to have my Soul
in, I may now provide my self, much better than I have done hitherto. That
while I am in the greatest probability of living, I may suppose my change to be
near, and so not dare to do any thing, but what I would or might do, if I were
in the present Expectation of Death. To this end, let me go down to the
Potters-House, descend to the Consideration of my Mortality, and dwell among
the Tombs; remembering the Egyptians built themselves better Tombs than Houses,
because they were to dwell longer in them. Let every Nights repose, serve me as
a Memorial of my last sleep! and let my Bed stand for the Model of my Coffin!
This is the only Way, to be dead to this World; to be able to judge of things
now, as we shall do after Death, according to Immutable, Eternal Truth.

SECT, X.
The Brevity of Life considered as the fruit of Sin. There are but three ways
of leaving this World, as Abel, Adam, or Enoch. A diligent Improvement of Time
farther pressed; and the Neglect of it bewailed.

THE shortning of our Days is the fruit of Sin. All the Funerals that have ever
been in the World, have been caused by Sin. We dye because we have sinned, and
yet we should not sin as now, if this were not forgot, that we must dye. From
the first Transgression of Adam we derive our Death; and therefore some of his
Posterity lived longer than he. Which proves that the lengthning of our Days is
the peculiar Gift of God; and yet it is such a Gift, as was more desired
formerly, than since the Appearance of Christ: For we read of none in the New
Testament, since Life and Immortality is brought to Light by the Gospel, who
desired a long Continuance here on Earth.

Were we delivered from Sin, the sting of Death, by having made our Peace with
God in the Blood of Jesus, Death would not be frightful, or put on such a
Ghastly Vizor, as to most it does. But we are uncertain of our Justification,
we waver between Hopes and Fears as to our final Sentence; and are conscious to
our selves, that we are not ready for our great Account. This makes Death so
terrible. Considering withal that it is inevitable; The Way of all the Living.
For though the Curse be removed, and the sting be taken out by our Blessed
Savior; so that the Souls of Believers are safe, and shall not be touched by
the second Death; yet God has not taken away the stroke of it from the Body.
Though a Christian is assured of deliverance from Hell, he is not exempted from
the Grave, as his Passage to Heaven.

Prepare me, Lord, by the free Remission of all my Sins, and make me meet for
the Blessed Inheritance, by sanctifying Grace; and then thy Time is best; Thy
Holy Will be done, No matter then, whether my Death be violent, or what we call
Natural. It will be one of the two, for I cannot expect to be Translated by a
miraculous Change, as Holy Enoch was; and as they shall be, who shall be found
alive in the World, when our Glorious Judge shall come again. There are but
those three ways of leaving Earth; and the Three first Men of whose Departure
we read in Scripture, are Instances of all Three. Abel of a violent Death, Adam
of a natural One, and Enoch of a Translation. The Variety and Order of their
Departure, as one observes, is very admirable, and deserves to be considered.
For all Mankind must follow one or other of those three Examples. Every Man or
Woman, that is born into the World, must leave it by one of those three ways;
either be cut off by a violent Death, as Abel, the first Man who dyed; or dye a
natural Death, as Adam did, who was the second; or be translated, as Enoch, who
was the third we read of.

But though I know, that within a few Years at farthest, I must leave this
World by one or other of these ways; though I have been dying ever since I
began to live; am Dead to the last Year, and to all the preceding Portions of
my Time; and know withal, that what remains will quickly pass and be gone after
the same manner; yet how have I overloved this Body, as if I should never live
out of it! and set my Heart and Affections on this World, as if I should never
remove to another! and trifled away my precious Time and Life, as if a change
would never come!

That Few do seriously admit such Thoughts is too evident, by the general
Course and Practice of their Lives. For to what Hazards do Men expose
themselves? what Pains will they take? what Inconveniences will they bear? with
what unwearied Industry will they toil and labor, to get a little Money, or
Honor in this World, though they know not, but they may be called out of it,
before the End of this Year? And yet the same Persons are remiss and slothful
about a future Life! negligent and unconcerned about an Eternal State; careless
and indifferent, yea, sottishly stupid, about the Welfare of their Immortal
Souls. Henceforward, O my Soul! whatever others do, let me resolve to live in
the Expectation of a Change, which I know is certain, and may be very near.

SECT. XI.
Of the Expectation of Another Life. The Vanity and Misery of Man in his Best
Estate, if there be none. The satisfactory Removal of that Supposition, by the
Thoughts of God, and of Eternal Felicity in his Blessed Presence.

LET me retire a little, O my Soul! and bethink my self, what a World this is;
what Men design and seek, and do and suffer; with what false and feigned Joys
they are pleased, being only happy by Comparison; and with what real Sorrows
they are afflicted; what innumerable Disappointments, Sicknesses, (and as
troublesome Remedies,) Dangers, Labors, Pains, and Calamities of all sorts,
Multitudes groan under, and loudly complain of? And what little unworthy Ends
are pursued, by all that do not seriously seek Eternal Rest? and how often
frustrated? And withal consider the Cares that disquiet us, the Errors that
deceive us, the many Temptations that assault and overcome us; how busy we are
about Vanities; how often dejected, and melancholy for the breaking of a
Bubble; how eager and industrious to pursue a Shadow; active and in earnest to
destroy our selves, and one another; and then reflect on the Malice and
Cruelty, the Filthiness, and Impiety, and great Corruption, which abounds every
where; whereby God is dishonored, and provokt to Anger? after this what a
Theater of Tragedies, must this World appear? what an Hospital of Sick, and
diseased, or rather distracted Persons? How should I be tempted to say, Lord!
why have thou made all Men in vain? In vain indeed, if I could not look from
this Sea of Troubles, to the Haven of Rest, from this dark Prison, to the
Region of Light; from this deceitful, troublesome, and defiling Earth, to a
Blessed, Everlasting Heaven: For verily, if there be no World but this, Every
Man in his Best Estate in this World, is altogether Vanity, Selah. Psalm. 39.5.
It Is a certain undoubted Truth, the prefixed verily tells us so; and that it
deserves to be well considered, we learn from the concluding Selah, Every Man
is Vanity. Not the Inferior Parts of the Creation only; but Man the Lord of
all: And Every Man, every Adam from himself, to the last Man that shall by
ordinary Generation descend from him. Not the Ignorant, Poor, or Wicked only,
but all the Individuals of this Species. Young or Old, Strong or Weak,
Beautiful or Deformed, Rich or Poor, High or Low, Good or Bad, (in respect of
the Body, and this present Life) every one is vanity; and this is true, suppose
him in his Best Estate, not only in helpless Infancy and Childhood, or in
decrepit old Age, not only in Pain and Poverty, and Disgrace; but in his most
settled, most flourishing, most envied, and admired Condition upon Earth; in the
midst of Strength and Wit, and Honor; when at best, as to Body, and Mind, and
outward Circumstances; when he looks fairest; when he shines brightest; in the
height of all his Glory, with the greatest Likelihood of a Continuance; yet
then he is but Vanity, In his Frame, in his Temper, Constitution, Inclinations,
Actions, and Employment; he is a mere Shadow, an empty, mutable, inconsiderable
Thing, and not to be accounted of. His Heart, his Head, his Imaginations,
Reasonings, Desires, Purposes, Projects, Hopes and Fears, are all Vanity; and
altogether Vanity, in all the Parts, and Kinds, and Particulars of it. He not
only may be, but he is so, in his best Estate; if this World be his Best, if
this be our All, and nothing more to be expected after Death.

And how should such a Reflection strike me to the Heart, to suppose that after
a few Years are ended, I must return to my first Nothing, and my very being be
Vid. Mr. How 's Vanity of Man as mortal.
swallowed up of Eternal Death! what Satisfaction can I then take in any
present Enjoyments, if an Eternal Annihilation be at hand, when I must bid
Adieu for ever to all that I now possess? What Delight can I have in the
ordinary Comforts of Life, with this Belief, that within a Year or two, it may
be to Morrow, I shall sink into the Dust, and exist no more? What Pleasure in
any thing with this dismal Expectation? The more flourishing my Condition is in
this World, the more should I dread to lose it, if nothing better, nothing at
all, can be enjoyed after Death. Some Philosphers have ignorantly urged such a
consideration, as an Antidote against the fear of death; but the admission of
it may rather deprive a Man of all the comfort of Life. What then is the
advantage of a Wise Man above a Fool? the exercise and improvement of our
noblest Faculties, would render us more miserable than others, if nothing be
expected, and certain, when this Life is over. Not only sensual, but
intellectual pleasures would be disturbed, and destroyed by such Thoughts; that
very shortly, the next Year, or Day I must disappear; and all my Enjoyments and
Hopes be utterly and for ever lost, with my very Being.

Were the case thus, (which such Consequences evince it is not,) it were better
for most Men they had never been Born; whether their conditition here be
Prosperous, or Afflicted. For what Comfort or quiet can any Man have in Plenty
and Prosperity, when this frightful apprehension of an approaching end is ever
present? and what Consolation can it yield a Man, who is afflicted and
Calamitous, and yet loves his Life above all things; to think that he shall not
cease to be miserable, but by ceasing to be? And what is become of all
Religion, if such a Thought be entertained? All Devotion to God is thereby
extinguished, all the Restraints of Vice removed, the Floodgates of Impiety
opened, the Encouragements of Virtue, the Rewards of Holiness, the Foundation
of Patience in Tribulation, and suffering for Righteousness sake, all at once
taken away. Lord! Confirm my Belief of the invisible future state of Rewards
and Punishments! and let not Sadducism and Infidelity damp my Zeal in thy
Service, or rob me of the Comforts of this Life, which if I have any solid
ones, must suppose the hopes of a Better.

Let others therefore, O my Soul! who expect not an Everlasting Heaven beyond
the Grave, place their Affections on Earthly Things, and mind this World, as if
there were no better, no other. Let them who doubt, or disbelieve the promised
Rewards of Eternity, take up with what they must shortly leave, and labor for
the Bread that perishes. But since I profess to believe and seek the Life
Everlasting; let me daily entertain my self with the Hopes of it. and let all
the flattering Dreams of what is desirable upon Earth, give place to nobler and
better Thoughts. Let me derive my principal Joy, from the Promise and
Expectation of that future Felicity, and endeavor nothing more than a meetness
to partake of it. O my God, my God! thou art my Life, and Joy, and Portion; in
Thee, and in thy Love, all my Desires, and Hopes are answered, and all my Wants
supplied. However Evil this World is made by Sin, yet thou art the infinite and
supreme Good. How mutable, how uncertain, how perishing soever are all
sublunary things; yet thou art the Rock of Ages, the Fountain of Everlasting
Life, and have appointed another World, and another Life, when this is ended,
wherein thou will be better known, and loved, and served, and honored, and
communicate thy self more abundantly than now, to Those, the Desire of whose
Souls is toward thee, that believe and love thee, that partake of thine Image,
and are devoted to thy Fear. The Assurance of this and nothing else, will
answer the Objection, of the present Vanity and Misery we are subject to.

SECT. XII.
The Consideration of the Death of Others, especially of Relations, Friends,
and Acquaintance, how to be improved. What Instructions we may learn by the
sight of a dead Carcass, or a Deaths Head, and the usual Motto on it: and what
by the Death of Holy Persons, to quicken our desires to be as they.

Has divine Patience added one year more to the number of my Days, when so
many others were removed by Death the last Year? Others, whom a few Months
since I knew in vigorous health; wiser, stronger, more likely to live, and to
answer the ends of Life, than me; some of them, my near Relations, and useful
Friends, in whose Converse I took delight, and promised my self advantage by
their Company, and Examples; but they are taken, and I am left. Thy Holy Will,
O Lord! is done: and they, who were prepared, are infinite Gainers by this my
loss. Quicken my Preparations, by following their Piety, to meet them in thy
Heavenly Kingdom. Let thy long-suffering lead me to Repentance; and suffer me
not to slight thy warning, by the Death of others, to expect my own. Lord! cure
my Earthly-mindedness, and practical Unbelief; and by all such admonitions of
thy Providence, teach me to possess, and use this World, as knowing I must
shortly leave it; and let not the thoughts of my Mortality wear off, as soon as
the Funeral of my Friends is over.

Every year some or other of our Acquaintance drop into the Grave, we attend
them thither, and lament, it may be, for a few days, their departure and
removal; but consider not, that others will e're be long do the same for us; it
may be before this year is ended. Oh! how soon do we forget our deceased
Friends, and our selves, who are likewise dying! and count upon a long Life,
which we cannot reasonably expect; and hug the enjoyments of this transitory
World, as if our present State would last for ever! Will nothing but our own
Dissolution, effectually convince us of our mistake, and folly, in this
particular?

Though the Arrows of Death fly continually round about us; sometimes over our
Heads, when Superiors are taken away; sometimes fall at our Feet, when
Children and Servants, and Inferiors die; sometimes on our left Hand, when an
Enemy is cut off; and while I am pleased with that, in that very hour, it may
be, another Arrow on our right hand, strikes the Friend of our Bosom and
Delight. And can we see all this, that great and small, high and low, friends
and foes are all Vanity, and drop down dead round about us; and shall we not
consider, that we are as Vain as they, and must shortly follow? Shall we not by
a Christian Chemistry, extract Spirits out of these dead Bones? and by these
Examples learn the end of all Men, and lay it to Heart?

Whenever I see the Funeral of another, let me think thus with my self; why
might not I have been that Man or Woman, that is now carried to the Grave? If
we had been compared a few days since, it is probable I should have been thought
as likely to have been his Monitor, by dying first, as he mine. By such an
Improvement of these warnings, the request of the rich Man to Abraham were in
great measure granted; for it is a call from the dead that speaks loudly to us,
to consider our selves, and prepare in time for so great a Change: and say, as
the Prophet to Hezekiah, Set thine house in Order, for thou shall die.

Can we look upon a Deaths Head, and not remember what we shall shortly be? may
not much be learnt from its common Motto? Sum quod Eris, Fueramque quod Es. I
am that, which thou shall shortly be, and have been that, which thou art now:
that is, I have been as gay and jocund, as brisk and merry, as proud and vain,
as rich and great, as careless and secure, as honorable and as much esteemed,
as beautiful and as well beloved, as witty and as learned, as Thou art or can
be now. I valued my self as much upon my Estate, and Trade, and Health, and
Beauty; upon my Education, Profession, Employments, Parts, Friends, Family,
etc. as thou have ever done, or can do: I lived in ease and pleasure, in
mirth and jollity; I minded the World as much, and indulged my self as much in
sensuality, and was as careful of my Body, pampered and pleased my Flesh, as
much as thou; and thought as little of a sudden Death, and prepared as little
for such a change, as thou do: But now my dry Bones are looked upon with
contempt and scorn, but thou shall shortly return to dust, and be as vile as I
am.

It cannot but affect us, did we consider it, to see diverse snatched away in
their Youth, and outward Prosperity; and in the midst of their Sin and Folly,
without any visible signs of true Repentance: Or in terrible anguish and horror
for their past crimes: And yet how few do take the warning, carefully to
prevent the like unhappiness? O Lord, preserve those strong Convictions, those
serious Thoughts, those holy Resolutions, those lively Apprehensions of the
Life to come, of the Evil of sin, and the Terrors of thy wrath, which the sight
of dying persons has at any time awakened in my Soul! O the Eloquence of a
dying Sinner, to persuade to Repentance! Even when he has lost his Speech, and
lies gasping, and trembling, on a bed of sickness; breathing out his last faint
breath, and passing into the other world, to answer for the Crimes and Follies
of a wicked Life: Lord! revive these thoughts upon my Soul, and let me feel the
power and influence of them, in the hour of Temptation, and in every time of
need; and let the consideration of the death of Believers, the Blessedness they
are thereby entered into, and the Happiness they are possessed of, quicken my
desires and diligence to prepare to follow. When I think were they are, and
what they are doing, what is their work, and what their state, what their
continual employment, and what their enjoyments, and how different from ours; I
cannot but wish to be with them, to be as they are, and do as they do; to know,
and love, and praise God as they. They are not hindered by such a clog as this
Body is to us; or tempted by their senses, appetite and fancy, to sin against
Him: They complain not of a seducing Flesh, unruly Passions, low and disordered
thoughts; of temporal Afflictions, spiritual Desertions, the snares of the
World, and the malice and subtilty of the Devil: We who are Pilgrims and
Travelers are exposed to these difficulties, and storms which they are freed
from. They are now rejoicing in the light of God's Countenance, and shall never
question his love more, while we are in Tears and Sorrows, groaning to be
delivered.

But think, O my Soul! that They were lately such as We are now. They were
members of the militant Church, before they entered into Joy and Triumph. They
had their conflicts and difficulties, their hour of Temptation, and time of
Trial, as we have ours. They were slandered, and persecuted, and sadned, and
disappointed, as their Followers are: They went to Heaven the same way, and got
the victory after the same manner, by Repentance, and Faith, and humble
persevering Obedience. They were once Imperfect as we are now; and complained
of the Body of Sin and Death, and struglings of unmortified lust, as we do: And
were sometimes in the dark about their interest in the promise, and walked
heavily by the hiding of God's face, and endured Temptation, even as we. And as
we have nothing to do, or suffer, but what they met with, we have the same
Encouragement, that administered to their support; the same God and Savior, the
same way and rule, the same Assistance, by the aids of his Holy Spirit offered
to us; the same promises, and the same rewards proposed, which they enjoyed,
first in faith and hope, and afterward in fruition. Yea they passed through
the dark valley, and so must we: Their Earthly tabernacle was dissolved, and so
must ours be. We must expect to go the same way to Rest and Glory, and wait
God's time for our admission. We must finish first the work, which God has for
us to do and suffer, and then all Tears shall be wiped from our eyes, we shall
grieve no more, we shall sin no more, but be as the Angels in Heaven, or as the
Spirits of the Just made Perfect.

SECT. XIII.
What Influence the Consideration of Eternity would have upon our Hearts and
Lives, if soundly believed and considered; especially, if the supposition of
Dying this year be annexed to it.

WIth what Humility, Mortification, and Self-denial, what Seriousness,
Watchfulness, and resolved Constancy, would every Christian Live on Earth, did
he act always under the influence and power of a confirmed Faith, concerning
the Life to come? We should not then grudge at a little labor, or boggle at a
few difficulties in our Way. What though I meet with injuries and affronts,
hardships and inconveniences, being now in a Foreign Country, and every day I
live, one Days journey nearer my Eternal Home! Shall I not patiently bear
momentany Sorrows, while I believe I am hastening to Eternal Joy? Did I look
more to the Everlasting World, should not I make the pleasing of God, in order
to my Eternal welfare, the great business of my Life? Should I not serve the
Lord with more fervency of Spirit, and be better fortified against the fears of
Man, who can but hurt and kill the Body, nor that neither, without the
permission of God? Should I not order all my affairs, answer all Temptations,
mortify inward Lusts, live in the Exercise of Grace, and in circumspect
persevering Obedience, in order to it? Should I not watch more over my Heart,
and Lips, and Ways, be more diligent to trim my Lamps, more crucified to this
world, more careful to call my self frequently to an account, and renew my
Repentance? Would not my Converse be more useful and edifying, my Discourses
more savory and full of Religion, my Prayers to God more humble and earnest, my
Charity to Men more unfeigned and extensive, and my Preparations every way more
suitable to such a Faith, and to such Apprehensions of an Everlasting State?
Could we carry the thoughts of Eternity about with us every day, and often
admit them in our civil and secular affairs, did we repeat it frequently to our
selves, at least every Morning, as soon as we are awake, that we are near
Eternity; this grain of Incense would perfume the whole Temple, and be an
Antidote against inward Lust, and impure thoughts, against the infection and
defilement of bad Company, and the snares of worldly Business, and do much to
prevent vain and sensual actions, and to cure vain affections.

Did we believe it, and believe it near, should we not take as much pains to
secure Eternal Life, as we see Men do to get riches? Should we not use the same
diligence, care, and circumspection, the same prudent foresight, watchfulness,
and perseverance, to prevent Everlasting Destruction as others do to provide
against Poverty, and to live in Plenty a little while on Earth? Should we not
rejoice as much in the promise and hopes of it, as others do in the prospect
and expectation of some Earthly Advantage? Lord! I confess and bewail the
weakness of my Faith. How often have I concluded, and said, that Heaven alone
is the place of Happiness, and yet my carnal Heart is too much affected with
Earthly Things! How often have I reresolved, (upon the conviction of the
certainty of the Eternal World,) to mind this less, and to affect and seek it
no more, as I have done! and yet my foolish Heart is hankering after it still.
O crucify my Affections to things below! and let the believing Thoughts of the
next Life, render me victorious over all the Temptations of this. Pardon and
cure the staggering trembling Thoughts of an unbelieving Heart, by greater
measures of a lively Faith. That my desires may be strong and urgent, and my
diligence and stedfastness in the way of Truth, be some way correspondent to
this important Article. Let me live only for Eternity, hope for nothing but
Eternity, design and intend nothing as my chief end, but Eternity, and seek and
mind nothing in comparison with Eternity! Did we believe it, how would every
thing in this World be looked upon as eligible, or fit to be refused, as it is
like to be an help, or an hindrance, with reference to Eternity! we should then
endeavor to do nothing unbecoming such an Expectation. Considering this World
as our Passage, and the invisible future World as our abiding Country, where we
are to dwell for ever; whatever we meet with here, whether sweet or bitter,
easy or troublesome, pleasing or ungrateful, we should not much matter, but as
it relates to hereafter.

And were I certain I should have no longer time of Trial in order to this
Eternal State, than this one year, which is now begun: If a Messenger from God
should convincingly assure me of it; what would I not do to prepare for Death,
and secure the interests of Eternity? With what remorse and deep Repentance
should I reflect on the Follies of my past Life? What what importunate cries
should I beg Forgiveness? How patiently should I bear Calamity, for so short a
time? How little should I value the favors or frowns of Men? How circumspect,
to improve every Season of doing and receiving good? How careful to avoid
Temptation, and how resolute in resisting it? Did I verily believe I had no
longer time to live on Earth, than this one Year at most; How insipid would be
the offer of carnal Mirth, vain Pastime, sensual Diversions, idle Company? etc.
How should I value every Hour, every inch of my little Time, under the
Apprehension that Eternity is at hand? O my Soul! Shall I make no provision
against the Possibility of such a case? Is not my change as certain, as if it
were this year, as if it were to Morrow? Though I am not certain it is so near,
nor certain but it may be. Let me then seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness: Let me fix it well, and make it clear, that I have secured my
great Concern, and am ready for a sudden summons.

SECT. XIV.
How a Good Man may improve and encourage himself, under the Supposition of
dying this Year, even in the most uneasy, and undesirable Circumstances.

I May dye this Year; then all my Cares and Fears, if I am Rich, all my Sorrow
and Calamities (as to this World,) if I am Poor, will die too. I may dye this
Year; then I shall have no more Enemies, no more Sickness, and which is
infinitely better, I shall Sin no more. I must shortly die, it may be, this
Year; but there is no other way to come to a blessed Life, but by dying; and my
Savior has died for me, and he that believes in him, shall never see Death.
He lives who was once dead, yea, he lives for evermore; and has promised, that
I shall be with him to behold his Glory. He has the Keys of Death and Hell: He
is the Resurrection and the Life; he has removed the sting of Death; and I
need not fear a conquered Enemy. If I dye this year, I must quit the Company of
all my dearest Friends on Earth, but I shall go to better Company above; and if
they are the Friends of Christ, we shall shortly meet again, and love one
another in a better manner than now, and never more be parted.

I may dye this Year; my Friends and Enemies may dye too. Let me enjoy the one
as mortal dying Persons, that must e're long leave me, or I them; and not fear
the other, who may so soon Perish, and quickly be incapable of doing me or
others Mischief.

I may dye this Year; Let me not then think much of Temporal Sufferings, of any
Evils which may so soon be over. Oh! what would condemned Sinners in the other
World give, to be able to believe, and say so of their Sufferings?

I may dye this Year; and can I wonder that I am sometimes Sick and in Pain,
and that my Body is out of order? Am I not Mortal, and dwell in an house of
Clay, which must shortly moulder into Dust; and is it any thing strange, that
such a crasy Building does sometime shake, and need repair, and threaten a
dissolution? It Is a greater wonder, I am any time well: That such a Body,
compounded of so many little parts; and so easily disordered by innumerable
accidents, should be in Health; is hardly less to be admired, than that an
Instrument of a thousand strings should be kept in Tune.

I thank thee, O heavenly Father, for the many advantages of Sickness, to
weaken the power of Sin, to humble my Pride, and cure my Worldliness and
Sensuality, to reduce me from wandering, to empty me of Self-conceit, to awaken
the consideration of Death and Judgment, to impress the Thoughts of the vanity
of this World, and the Eternity of the next; to assist me to mortify the
Flesh, to rule my Passions, to exercise Patience, and quicken me in Prayer, and
try my Faith and Love, and excite my diligence to redeem time, and convince me
of the Worth and Uncertainty of it; and thereby promote my Preparations for my
final change. The Great Apostle by dying daily, had as many victories over this
World, as he lived Days. Oh! that I might so far walk by the same Rule, as
every day to think of providing for my last; and in Health to do that, which in
Sickness I shall wish I had done!

I may dye this Year; It may be by some tedious painful Sickness, some
troublesome and loathsome Disease. But God has promised his Grace shall be
sufficient; he will make my Bed in my Sickness, and put under his everlasting
Arms for my support, and not suffer me to be tempted above what I am able; he
will increase my Patience, and carry me through the pangs of Death, and the dark
Valley, and when Heart and Flesh fail, be the strength of my Heart, and my
Portion for Ever.

I may dye this Year; What if it should be by an hand of Violence; if for
Righteousness sake, in defense of the Truth, for a good Cause, and a good
Conscience, and my Peace be made with God, and I am accused for doing well, or
innocent of the Evil which is laid to my charge; there is ground enough for
encouragement and support. Thousands of my Betters have met with the like,
whose names are precious and renowned. Innumerable Christians have dyed by the
Sentence of a Judge, with more Cheerfulness and Joy, than others, or it may be,
than they themselves would have done, by the sentence of the Physician. The
Torture of many Diseases is unspeakably more formidable, as to the mere Pain;
and for all else, the Righteous Lord who loves Righteousness, will clear my
Integrity, if it may best subserve his own Great and Holy Ends: At least, he
will stand by and help me, when all forsake me; and if He speak Peace, and give
inward Consolation, who can speak Trouble? And his final Judgment, which is
near at hand, will distribute rewards and punishments to all, according to
their works.

Suppose farther, that I should want a Scpulcher, after Death. There is nothing
I could better be without. If God receive my Soul, and will raise my Body at
the last day, whether it putrify and consume under ground, or above it, is no
great matter. They who are alive will be more concerned in that, than I shall
be; Graves are for the sake of the Living rather than the Dead. The Sun, the
Rain, the Air, Birds, Beasts, Worms, will all contribute to give me Burial, if
Men deny it. The only difference is, that it will be a little longer e're I am
buried. If my Soul rest in the Bosom of my Savior, and by presevering in the
love and practice of the Truth, I have secured my Reputation with wise and good
Men, I need not be sollicitous what become of my Body. My Almighty Judge will
raise me a glorious Body, like his own, and reunite it to my Soul, as easily,
as certainly, as for any of those, whose Bodies were preserved in Caves and
Vaults, in proud Sepulchers, and under stately Monuments.

I may dye this Year; and shall not then have the satisfaction to see my
Children or nearest Kindred Educated and Provided for, settled and disposed of.
But is not the everliving God the same? Cannot he as well take care of them
when I am gone, as now? answer all my Prayers after my decease? and exercise
that Fatherly Care, Wisdom, and Love; which shall dispose of their Conditions,
save them from Temptations, and supply all their Wants, and exceed all my
Desires, in reference to them? and fulfill his Covenant-promise from Generation
to Generation, to the Childrens Children of them that fear him? O how weak is
my Faith, that cannot trust God in so common and plain a case!

Lastly, I may dye this Year; and not live to see the ruin of the Antichristian
Kingdom, and Interest, and the accomplishment of many Excellent Promises, which
concern the Rest, and Peace, and Purity, and Glory of the Churches of Christ on
earth, in the latter days. But have I not deserved by my provoking Unbelief,
Ingratitude, and Disobedience, to dye in the Wilderness, and not behold the
promised Land, or see the Peace of Jerusalem? And will not the struglings of
Satan to support Babylon, infer a dismal night of darkness and distress, before
the expected Morning of Deliverance? So that it may now, if ever, be truly
said, Henceforth, Blessed are the Dead, who dye in the Lord. And if God will
take me to himself in the other World, I cannot possibly be a loser: Though I
should not see the Beginnings of a New Heaven, and a New Earth, in this.
However I rejoice in Hope, and pray incessantly for the Resurrection of the
Witnesses, and the rebuilding of Sion, and the more plentiful effusion of the
Holy Spirit, (the great comprehensive Promise of the latter Times) to effect a
glorious Kingdom for Christ on Earth: And my Faith assures me, I shall
hereafter see the Son of God revealed from Heaven, clothed with Majesty,
sitting on a Cloud, leading the Heavenly Host, raising the Dead by his powerful
Voice, summoning all the World to appear to Judgment, gathering his Elect, and
finally destroying Death, and him that had the Power of it, the Devil,
condemning the wicked to everlasting Destruction, but acquitting, honoring,
and rewarding his poor Members, with infinite and Eternal Blessedness.

SECT. XV.
Of Dying in a Foreign Country, and of Dying Young. Considerations proper to
Reconcile the Mind to both.

I May not live to the end of this Year; God in his Providence having called me
abroad, I may never see my Native Country more. Let me still remember, O my
Soul! that where ever I am, I am traveling toward the Grave, and passing to
another World: That I may live in all places, as a Pilgrim and Stranger here on
Earth; with Affections suited to my condition, becoming one who is traveling
in a Strange Land. Let me bear the Inconveniences I may meet with in this
World, as Strangers in their Travels are wont to do. Let me not repine at the
ill Accommodations of an Inn, where I am to lodge but a night or two; but
encourage my self with the assurance of better Entertainment at home, when my
Pilgrimage is ended, and my Journey over.

One of my dearest Holy Friends, and Fellow Travelers, (whose memory will be
ever precious, Mr. Thomas Bent, who dyed at Geneva, May 10. 1683.
with those who knew him) quickly arrived to his Journeys end, and is entered
into Rest betimes. Which of his Companions shall next follow, we know not, or
how soon. Lord! Make me apprehend the nearness of my change in every place; and
if I am prepared for dying, no matter where it be. There is no one Country
farther from the Presence of God than another. The whole World may be
considered as one Great House, and the several Kingdoms and Countries of it,
but as different Apartments in the same House; and they who tarry at home, are
no more exempt from Death, than they who travel abroad.

The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; I can go no where to be out
of his Territories, I shall still tread upon my Father's Ground. I had rather
be an Israelite in a Wilderness with the Presence of God, than a Courtier in
idolatrous Egypt. Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, and the Friend of God,
was banished from his own Country; and should I never set foot again on my
native Soil, there is no reason of murmuring against my God, who has dealt
thus with many of his Favorites. And while I have been in a strange Land, he
has not suffered me to feel the wants and necessities, and heart of a
Stranger. Among a People of a strange Language he can, and does provide for me
all things richly to enjoy. I may set up my Ebenezer, hitherto has God
supplied all my wants.

The Presence of my Gracious Father is every where the same; in some measure,
Blessed be my God, I have hitherto found it so. And may I not rejoice in God in
a Desert, though all the World should forsake me; though all the World should
be against me? Should I have no other Friend or Helper; is not God, an infinite
God Enough? and without his Favor and Presence, what can all this World do for
me? If I am sick, and in danger of Death, among my Relations and Friends; if
the comforts of the Almighty do not refresh and delight my Soul, they cannot:
And if I want not these in my last Agonies, no matter in what part or corner of
the Earth I breath my last. If the word and promise of God be my Foundation, an
holy Hope my Anchor, Christ my Pilot, and Heaven my Country, I shall not fail
of being landed there at last. Suffer me not to forsake thee, O Heavenly
Father! while I live; and do not thou forsake me in my last Hour; and let it
come when, and where thou will! If my blessed Savior will receive my departing
Soul at Death, I am not sollicitous in what Country or part of the Earth it be.

And that I may not be unwilling in the flower of my Age and Time, in Youth and
Strength, to leave this World; let me think often, that no one age or part of
Life is more privileged against the stroke of Death than another. If I have
done my work betimes, as my deceased Fellow Traveller had, is it not better to
receive the blessed Recompense, than to to tarry longer, in a World of Sin and
Suffering, absent from the Lord? Shall I not thereby escape a multitude of
Temptations, Sins, and Sorrows, which others by living longer are exposed to?
If my Peace be made with God, what should make me willing to live at this
distance from him? What should render this World so desirable, where God is so
dishonored, where I am so often tempted to displease him, and so often yield
to such Temptations? And may I not fear lest I should fall into such scandalous
and grievous sins, that may bring a public reproach on the Gospel of Christ,
and sadden the Hearts of all my Acquaintance, who love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity? By dying early, I shall contract less guilt, and commit less sin,
and see and feel less Sorrow than others who live longer. And though I should
maintain my Integrity, yet in this World my highest love and obedience to God,
and my sweetest Communion with him, is but imperfect. How many Impediments and
Diversions do I daily meet with, that deaden my Heart to Heavenly
Contemplations and Affections? What disappointments, and sorrowful disasters,
to convince me that this is not the place of Rest and Happiness? What smart
afflictions may some of my Relations prove? What dangerous Snares may attend me
in the remaining Portion of my Time? What Opposition and Hatred from Men may
the steadfast professing of the Truth, and Fidelity to God expose me to? what
Public, National Calamities may I have my share in, etc.

But if I consider Old Age it self, which we do desire to reach; what and how
many are the Infirmities and Griefs, and troublesome Circumstances which attend
that State, which dying young will prevent? Are not most Men, who reach a very
great old Age, helpless Objects of Pity? A Burden to themselves, and to all
about them? And (which commonly happens,) may I not then be as unwilling to
dye, as at present? As loath then to leave the World as now, though in a manner it
will have left me? For how many Old Men, past the Relish of Sensual Pleasures,
are yet inordinately fond of a longer Life!

Have I not been told by Heathens, as well as Christians; that it is not the
length of time, but it is improvement, that does really make a Long Life? If I
have answered the Ends for which I were born, it is not too soon to dye. No Man
ever miscarried as to his Everlasting Interest, because his Life was Short, but
Evil. He that is prepared for Death, he that dies in the Lord, has lived long
enough, and should thank God for a speedy Call to the Possession of that
Felicity, which the Holiest Saints on Earth desire and breath after. Gideon
lost nothing by returning from Victory, while the Sun was yet high. He has
fought long enough who has gained the Victory. If I have wrought but a few
Hours in a Vineyard, and done but little Service for my Lord and Master; and
yet am dismissed, and rewarded, before the rest of my Fellow Laborers; shall I
repine, and think my Lord does not befriend me? If he has any farther Service
for me, he will prolong my Days, and make me Diligent, I hope, and contented.
Otherwise I pray he would make me ready to dye, and make me willing, and
desirous to depart this Life. For to be only content to dye, that I may be
perfectly Holy, and fully Blessed, is methinks too low for a Christian, who
acts like himself; believing the Certainty of his avowed Principles and Hopes,
and knowing, that While we are present in the Body, we are absent from the Lord.

SECT. XVI.
The Contemplation of our Approaching Change, may assist us to mortify the
Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life; to cure
Ambition, and promote Contentment.

ALL that is in the World, says the Apostle, is the Lust of the Flesh, the
Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life. The Dust and Ashes of our own
Mortality, duly considered and applied; will help to deaden, and extinguish
each of these. By Pride of Life, we lift up our selves against Heaven, and
despise our Maker; by the Lust of the Flesh, we overlove and indulge the Body,
and study to gratify the sensual Appetite: By the Lust of the Eyes, our
Desires are immoderate after Temporal and External Goods. The thought of our
approaching End has a Tendency to oppose and mortify these Lusts; to humble
us before God; to take us off from the inordinate Love of the Body; and to
moderate our Passions to Earthly Things. It may help us against Pride, by
showing us the infinite distance, between the Eternal Self-sufficient God, and
such poor Dust as we; who are but of Yesterday, and if he uphold us not, and
maintain our Souls in Life shall be laid in the Dust to Morrow: It will mind us
of his Justice against Sin, the Parent of Death, and of all the Miseries of our
mortal State; and convince us of our Weakness to resist his Will, or avoid his
Wrath. As to our fond Affection to the Body, it may instruct us, that it
deserves not to be so much accounted of; it will open our Eyes to discern the
Preference of our immortal Souls; and what Concerns them, to the Interest of a
perishing Body. It may convince us, that we are Cruel and unkind to our very
Bodies, by overloving them, because we thereby contribute to their Eternal
Sufferings; and so teach us to love and use our Bodies, as Servants to our
Souls in this World! and as expecting to share in Glory with them, after the
Resurrection. It may also help to moderate our Desires after Earthly Good, and
so cure the Lust of the Eyes, by letting us see the Vanity, Uncertainty, and
short Duration of these Things, and their Insufficiency to make us Happy, and
give us true Content.

The Thoughts of an Approaching Change may, if any thing will do it, damp the
Mirth of the Luxurious Epicure, and strike him into a fit of Trembling, as did
Belshazzar's Handwriting on the Wall. It may discover the Distraction of
living in Pleasure, and of Care to please the Senses, and the fleshly Appetite,
when the End is so near. It may likewise check the Folly of Ambitious Designs;
that Men should make so much ado to get into slippery Places, from whence they
may so easily fall. Where being puffed up with vain Applause, they forget
themselves, and their latter End, 'till their Life and Glory expire together:
Where are now the Great, and Mighty, and Honorable, who have made such a Noise
in the World? What is now the Difference between the Dust of an Alexander or
Caesar, and that of their meanest Slaves or Captives? Could their Dignities and
Earthly Glory preserve any of them, from the Stroke of Death, or the Judgment
of God, or without Repentance, from his condemning Sentence?

Think, O my Soul! how little it will shortly signify, whether I have been
known and honored among Men or no; any farther than God may be glorified by
it. How should it suppress Vainglory? to think of being one day esteemed, and
worshipped, reverenced, and applauded by dying Men, and laid in the Grave the
next? Let me rather seek that Glory and Honor, to which Immortality is annexed;
and labor to be accepted with God, at whose Bar I must be judged, endeavoring
to keep the Testimony of a good Conscience; and then it is not much whether I
pass through Good Report or Evil Report; no Contempt, or Frowns, or Threatenings
of Men need then discourage me. Though I should be trampled on by the Foot of
Pride, while others are happy in a Dream for a little while; and it may be have
a prosperous Passage to Damnation; I Will rather thank God, for delivering me
from their Temptations, and giving me the Opportunity, and Call, to hasten my
Preparations for a Better World.

Let God dispose of my Condition here, and Reputation too, as best shall please
his Sovereign Will; only be pleased to keep me upright, and to preserve me from
Everlasting Shame and Confusion of Face, after the general Resurrection, and
final Judgment. Vouchsafe me a Portion now in thine approving Love, and own me
for Thine at last, in the great and terrible Day of Reckoning; that then I may
hear the Blessed Euge, and enter into my Lord's Joy?

SECT. XVII.
The same Argument considered farther, as dissuasive from Worldliness, and
Earthly-mindedness; and as proper to confute the Vanity of long Projects, and
great Designs for this World.

ARE the Years of my Life but few, and they hastening to a Period? and may this
be my last? Let me not then greedily covet Riches and Abundance, and waste my
little time to scrape together large Provisions, for many years to come; when I
have no Assurance to see the End of this. Is it becoming such a Belief, to toil
from Day to Day, that I may lay up that which I must so soon leave? As if I
were to spend an Eternity here on Earth, and in the mean while neglect the One
thing necessary. Am I not upon the Shore of Eternity? May not the next Tide
carry me off? And shall I spend my whole Life in Diversions from the main
Business of it? Have I nothing else to do, but to gather Shells, (if they were
Pearls, the absurdity were still the same) and pile them upon Heaps, till I am
snacht away past all Recovery? Shall I be regardless of an Eternal State, and
run the Hazard of being undone for ever, by sollicitous Care about pretended
Necessaries for a long Abode on Earth? [Much less for Superfluities;] when I am
not certain of the Possession, this one Year? Shall I magnify and admire what
is so soon to be parted with? Value my self upon these Things, so as to Despise
those that have less, and-Envy such as have more? and suffer my Mind to be
distempered, and my Passions immoderate on every Change of these things?

Though I know besides my own Mortality, that to enforce the Argument, there is a
Principle of Corruption in all these Things; that our very Manna here, in a
little while will stink; and Bread, which is the Staff of Life, moulder; our
richest Garments wax old, and rot; Silver and Gold rust, and the greatest
Beauty wither, and every thing that is Earthly, decay and perish. And shall not
this teach me to sit loose from all such things? Can I imagine, that in my last
Hour it will be easier to part with much, than little? Or better in the Day of
Judgment, to have a great Estate to answer for, than a lesser One?

We read concerning the Patriarch Abraham, (who rightly understood the
Transitory Nature of Riches, and his own mutable Condition,) that the only
Purchase he made with his Riches, was a Grave; choosing to take Possession of
the Land promised him, rather by a Mark of his parting with it, than of his
possessing it. Did I think oftener and more seriously, O my Soul! of tarrying
here but a little while; I should more easily be persuaded, that a little of
this World were sufficient to carry me through it. I should consider more that
my Heaven-born Soul is made and designed for another, an Endless World: And
therefore, should not so far forget his own People, and Fathers House; as
eagerly to pursue and seek what is suited only to the Body, for a little while;
and whereof a little with Contentment will be sufficient.

The same Reflection may be useful to contract our Thoughts to present Duty;
that we may not perplex our Minds with long Designs and Projects; which if we
dye this Year, will come to nothing. Our great Business in this World is
adapted to the little Portion of Time, which is allowed us. Not that good
Designs for the Public Benefit, may not be begun by one, and finished by
others; or that we are not obliged, prudently to provide for those who shall
come after us, by attempting many Things of probable Advantage to Posterity.
But considering the Shortness, and Uncertainty of Life, not only should the
most Necessary Things be first minded, and not put off by prosecuting such
Designs, as may signify somewhat to Others, when we are Dead: But we should
not now omit that which we may hope to compass our selves; to begin such
Things, whose Accomplishment must depend on the Pleasure of our Successors.
Consideration and faithful Counsel would in this case have prevented the
fruitless Expense of many Men's Time and Money; which if otherwise employed,
might have turned to good Account to Themselves and Others.

And this heightens our Folly, that while we pursue great Projects in reference
to this World, and dye without effecting them, our Preparations for Eternity
are neglected; and so we are suddenly cut off in the midst of our Folly, and
all our Thoughts perish. How easily, how soon may they do so! The Difference
and Distance between Death and Life, being no more than that of a Candle
lighted, from its being blown out; and if it is exposed to all Winds, how
quickly may that happen?

SECT. XVIII.
The Consideration of the Certain near Approach of an Everlasting State
amplified, and pressed, to enforce an Holy Life.

IN this World we begin a Year, and quickly come to the End of it; and e're
long the little Number of our Years, and Days will be expired. But when Death
conveys us into the World of Spirits, the Day of Eternity shall never be closed
with an Evening. Of how fearful Consequence is that Death, by which an Eternity
must be decided! What Attention, what Seriousness, what Diligence, what Care,
does the Decision of so important a Matter call for? ETERNAL! What will be the
next Word, O my Soul! how much am I concerned to know it! Will it be
Blessedness or Misery? Will it be Life or Death? This one Word is the Joy of
Angels, and the Horror of Devils; the Unspeakable Delight of Blessed Saints,
and the Confusion and Despair of Condemned Sinners.

At the Creation of the World, Time got the start of us, and was five days
elder than we; but our Immortal Souls shall endure beyond the utmost Limits of
Time, and last as long as the Everlasting Father of Spirits, of whose Duration
there is no End. Shall I then exist and live, though my Body perish and see
Corruption? Shall my Soul, my Self exist beyond the Grave, in Felicity or
Misery; and that for ever, and according to my present Actions? What am I then
most concerned to mind? What am I to choose? What am I most to fear, to wish, to
do? What is a Shadow of Honor and Reputation among dying Men? What are a few
Drops of fleshly Pleasure, for a Moment, to Eternal Rivers of Pleasure, at
God's right Hand? What are the sufferings of an Hour or two, to the Pains and
Anguish of Eternity? What can the World, Flesh, or Devil give me comparable to
Eternal Life? What can I suffer in the way of Holiness, that may be set in the
Balance against an Everlasting Hell? And yet how often, O my Soul! how boldly,
how unconcernedly, how foolishly do I hazard the One, and forfeit the Other;
for the Sins and Vanities of this World! Whereas one Prospect of Eternity,
should make every thing that is Temporal, appear little in my Eyes; The highest
Elevations of Earthly Greatness, Abundance of Riches, the Great Affairs,
Business, and Employments of the World, Pomp, and Splendour, and Reputation, and
all that now flatters the Senses, and the Vanity of Mankind

Oh! that I could but live, as believing and expecting an Eternal State! as
having it in my Eye, managing all my Affairs with a Visible Reference to it;
discovering to all the World, by my Behavior and Deportment, that I do in
earnest believe it certain; for be it never so Certain, if I do not apprehend,
and consider it as such, it will no more affect me than a Fable. Neither is it
enough to consider it as certain, but as near: For the most weighty, the most
terrible things, apprehended as at a great distance, will little move. Thinking
of the long Interval, between the advantage of being exempted from such Evils
for so long a time; will please me more than such distant Calamities will
affright.

Let me therefore, endeavor to impress the consideration of Eternity, as at
hand, more deeply on my Heart, that I may walk, and live, discourse, and pray,
and demean my self in every thing, as near an unchangeable State. Am I not
convinced that this is certain, from the nature and operations of my Soul, from
the reflections of Conscience, from the Righteousness of God in his Government
of the World, from the present unequal distributions of Good and Evil by his
Providence, and from the plain and frequent assertions of his Revealed Will? I
have nothing to object, nothing to reply; but I find a necessity of inculcating
and urging the consideration of it, in order to its influence. I find it
needful to reflect often, how near I am to such an endless State; that in one
Instant, by Death, I enter upon it: And that this Instant may be as near me, as
my next Thoughts. That the holy Scripture describes, the two contrary
Conditions after Death, (and every Man and Woman in the World shall share in
one of them) as both Everlasting; the one, by Eternal Life, Eternal Glory, an
incorruptible Crown, that fades not away, an incorruptible Inheritance, an
House Eternal in the Heavens, etc. the other, by unquenchable Fire, a Prison
whence no escape, Eternal Damnation, Everlasting Burning, Everlasting
Punishment, Everlasting Destruction, a Worm that never dies, wrath that is ever
to come, blackness of darkness for ever, ever, etc.

Think, O my Soul! that in One of these two contrary States, I must abide for
ever, in endless Joy, or Sorrow: Blessed in the Presence of God, or for ever
banished from it. And whoever thou art that read this, apply it seriously to
thy self, it is thine own case. Yea, I tell thee from God, that Holiness of
Heart and Life is absolutely Necessary to the former, and that without it, thou
shall never see his Face; but be punished with Everlasting Destruction, from
the Presence of his Glory.

Is this an Unquestionable Truth? O let me consider it, till I feel the Power
and Efficacy, of so Important a Principle! let the Impression be Deep and
Lasting! let it pierce and enter into my very Soul! to cool the Heats of Lust,
to quench Sensual and Earthly desires, and to mortify all Inordinate
Affections to this World; and fix my Resolutions to mind, and seek Eternal Life
with all my Heart!

These are not difficult and perplexed Niceties, which wise and holy Men differ
and disagree about. They are not Metaphisical Subtleties, which few can
understand; but the express Word of God, and the daily Dictates of my own
Reason and Conscience, which all Christians, and almost all Men in their Wits
(except in an Hour of great Temptation) confess and own; or whether they will
or no, are forced to expect and fear, if they are not in a Condition, to
consider them with a joyful Hope.

Lord! cure the unbelieving Doubts concerning these Great Things, which
notwithstanding the plainest Evidence, the Devil may at any time suggest! Iet a
confirmed Faith, be the Reality of what is thus future; that my Soul may be,
influenced by them, as it is wont to be by Things present Let it be the
Substance of Things hoped for, and the Evidence of Things unseen, and as yet at
a Distance; as if the Day of Judgment were already come, and there were no
intermediate Time to pass, between this and that.

O Eternity! Eternity! the more I consider it, the more unfathomable still I
find it. Unchangeable Blessedness, or remediless, endless Torments! An Eternal
Blissful Day, or Everlasting Horror, Darkness, and Despair! Life or Death,
Glory or Destruction, to last as long as the Immutable, Living God! None of the
Patriarchs who lived longest, arrived to the period of a Thousand Years, which
in comparison of God's Everlastingness, is set forth but as one day. But
strictly considered, Millions of Years and Ages have no proportion with it;
because no multiplication of them will amount to Eternity. Whereas one Hour
has some proportion to an hundred thousand years, because a certain number of
Hours will amount to so many years. But no number of Years or Ages, never so
often multiplied, will make up Eternity: As no substraction of Millions of
Years will lessen it; an entire Eternity will be still to come, and will ever
be to come. When innumerable myriads of Years are past, Eternity shall then
seem but to begin, because when as many more are over, it shall be as far from
an end.

Oh! that the thoughts of Eternity may be powerful, and prevailing above all
others! that I may Judge of every thing by its relation to it, by its influence
upon it! Choose now, my Soul! whether Everlasting Joys, or Miseries, shall be
thy Portion: But consider well, that thine Eternity is concerned in thy present
choice; and that this choice must be pursued with stedfastness and constancy,
as long as I live: And what are a few Years to prepare for an Eternal State?
Were we obliged to spend several hundred years, in serious, humble preparation
for it, with the greatest strictness and severity of Life, during all that
Time; it were infinitely less, than to spend an hour or two, in preparing for
the greatest Dignity and Employ on Earth, which can be enjoyed but for a few
years at longest. For to these an hour has some proportion; but an hundred or
thousand years have hone; with an Everlasting Duration. Therefore to consider,
how many years of toil, and pains, and diligence, many bestow on the probable
prospect of some Temporal Good, should reprove and shame, my negligence and
remisness, in providing for Eternity.

SECT. XIX.
The Punishments of the Damned considered, as Intolerable and Everlasting, and
as unquestionably certain. What the Reflection upon Hell Torments may, and
ought to teach us.

THE Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom, the entrance into the way of
Life, as it is ordinarily one of the first Means to awaken the Soul to a
serious Concern for Eternity: Let me therefore first consider the Endless
Punishment of the Wicked, in the other World, before I enter upon the ravishing
Prospect of the Blessedness of Heaven, promised to the Righteous. And with what
serious Trembling should I think, of the Terrors of an Everlasting Destruction,
which our Lord shall be revealed from Heaven to render, to All, who know not
God; and obey not the Gospel. When the wicked shall go away into Everlasting
Punishment; as the Righteous into Life Eternal. The Dreadfulness of that
Punishment, the Endless Duration of it, joined to the Consideration of its
Unquestionable Certainty; deserves the most Attentive Thoughts of every Man,
who loves his Soul, and would manifest he does so, by securing his greatest
Interest.

The Description of that Misery, under Insupportable and Eternal Torments,
demands more than a Transient View; because no words can sufficiently express
the Horror of that State. What is it, O my Soul! to be banished from the
Blessed Sight, and Presence of God for ever, and all the Impressions of his
Holy Image and Likeness? and to know that this is the Fruit of my own Choice,
that I lost it by my own Fault and Folly; that I deserved to lose it; that the
Sentence is as Just, as it is Irrecoverable? Who can fully imagine the dismal
Despair of a Condemned Sinner, under the Anguish of a Guilty, Self-accusing
Mind? while under the Stroke of God's Almighty, Revenging Justice, with a
Distincter View and Knowledge, than now, of God and his Excellencies; of
himself, and his own Vileness and Malignity; which must greatly increase his
Rage and Torment. Add to this, his being enraged by the Accusations, and Cries
of wicked Acquaintance, and Relations; and his being mocked, and insulted over,
and tortured, by malicious damned Spirits; with a clear Understanding of that
glorious Felicity he despised, refused, and forfeited; with a deep Sense of his
former Madness, in preferring the Sinful Pleasures and Advantages of this
World; and this after so many Warnings, and Invitations, and Calls from God, to
have prevented it; and never to be diverted one moment from the Consideration,
Sense, and Feeling of his Misery, and the duration of it; to have all his
Passions let loose, with the greatest violence, and nothing to satisfy them;
and continually to preserve, an Hell of wickedness and Horror in himself; and
to endure the reproaches, convictions, regrets, and stinging Reflections of
Conscience, the gnawing Worm, which shall never die: Who can conceive the
unspeakable misery of such an accursed State? So great Calamity, and yet
Everlasting!

How long does one Day or Night now seem, to a Man under some violent racking
Pain, in any one part of his Body, though he be under the means for Cure, and
have his Friends about him to pity, comfort, assist him, with the hopes of Ease
in a little while, and the certain knowledge that it cannot last long? Oh! what
then will be the dismal state of tormented See Mr. Baxter 's Saints Rest, part
2 Chap. 4.
Sinners in Hell! How infinitely must it exceed, the most terrible idea we can
now frame of it! to languish out a long Eternity, in that Gulf of Darkness and
Despair, under unpitied, intolerable Torments, without Intermission, or Hope of
End! Miseries without Measure! Judgment without Mercy! Pains and Sorrows
intense, and yet endless! without the least Succor or Relief, Relaxation or
Remedy, Diminution or Change! without a Drop of Comfort, without a Moments
Rest, without the smallest Beam of Light, or the least Glimmering of Hope!
Perpetually dying, and never dead! under unsufferable Wrath, which yet will be
for ever Wrath to come! seeking Death, and never able to find it, but Eternally
to endure all that Calamity, which the Conjunction of Death and Life together,
can render dreadful!

What Groans and Cries, will these Thoughts and these Sufferings, wring from
their Hearts? But no Refuge will then be found, no Excuses admitted, no
Prayers, no Entreaties will then prevail, no Tears move Pity. He that made
them, will show them no Mercy, and he that formed them, will show them no
Favor. It Is Never, Never, that is the killing Word, that breaks the Heart of
those hopeless Prisoners, in the Place of Torment. When once delivered over to
that Prison of God's Wrath, they shall no longer be Prisoners of Hope. Judgment
shall be brought forth unto final Victory; and the Redemption of the Soul shall
cease for ever.

The vain Hopes of Sinners shall then be ended in Eternal Desperation: Hell
will be full of those, who did once hope they should never come there: And full
of those who despair of Deliverance from thence; but shall suffer exquisitive
Pains that cannot be numbered, or measured, or endured; but that every Minute of
an Hour will seem an whole Year, and yet must eternally be endured by miserable
Sinners, who will not be wise in time, to prevent such an intolerable Portion?
Let me therefore, O my Soul, descend into Hell by Meditation, whilst I live,
that I may not descend thither when I dye; and be shut up for ever in that
Prison, the Place of Endless Torment.

Might we but suppose, that one of those Miserable Souls did let fall but one
Tear, in an Hundred Thousand Years; and if after he had by this means wept so
much, as that his Tears would equal the Drops of Water in the whole Sea; his
Misery should have an End; this were Hope, this were Comfort. But alas! after
that Period, his Misery will be as far from an End, as when he first began to
feel it. It will then be but the Beginning of Sorrows, which will Never, Never,
Never End.

Think, O my Soul! that this is the Portion of the Sinners Cup; this is the
Wages of Sin, and the certain Doom of final Impenitence and Unbelief. It Is no
Politic Cheat, or Melancholy Dream, but the express, repeated Word of God,
and Christ, the Holy Prophets and Apostles, and the Voice of Reason too.
Supposing but the Immortality of the Soul, and the Power of Self-Reflection,
the Punishment of Sinners must needs be Everlasting, as carrying continually an
Hell within them; unless God work a Miracle to prevent it, which there is no
Ground to imagine he will, or Shadow of Reason why he should. God has pawned
his Truth and his Deuteronomy. 32. c. 40, 41.
Eternity, to execute this Sentence of his threatened Wrath. He is a God of
Infinite Mercy, it is true; but he has told us how far his Merey shall extend.
He will not exercise one Attribute to the dishonor and the disparagement of
the rest. That obstinate and impenitent Sinners shall thus perish, is not
because the goodness and mercy of God are not infinite, but because his other
Perfections are so; viz. His Holiness, Justice, Truth, Sovereignty and Wisdom.
Was it Wisdom and Goodness to annex such a Penalty to the violaion of his Law;
and can it be inconsistent with them, to inflict his threatened wrath?

Shall we suppose God, to uphold his Dominion and Government by a Falsehood? to
keep the World in awe, by the menaces of such punishment, as shall no where,
never, be executed? Is it unlikely, that God should exercise so much severity?
and is it not as improbable, that his repeated Word and Oath should prove
false? Is it not a righteous thing with God, as the Governor of the World;
thus to punish the obstinate Despisers of his Grace? who slighted his
Authority, disobeyed his Law, affronted his Sovereignty, derided his Power,
denied his Truth, contradicted his Holiness, and joined Issue with the Devil,
to pull him from his Throne; who abused his Patience and Long-suffering, and
scorned all his threatenings; who thrust away their own happiness, and would not
take warning; who burst all his bands asunder, and broke through all
obstructions; and would not be stopped in their course of Vanity and Folly, or so
much as consider the danger; who rejected his calls to Repentance, and refused
his Mercy, when it was offered; and preferred a Lust before his favor, and the
Pleasures and Profits of this World, before the Heavenly Glory; and
notwithstanding all the methods of his Grace, and the checks of his Providence,
and of their own Conscience; they will go on, they will dye?

Let me, O my Soul! adore the Sovereign Justice of God in all his Judgments;
and tremble at the threatenings of that Eternal Wrath, which so few consider or
believe, till it is too late. Let the foresight, and the fear of such an
intolerable, endless Punishment, be a means to save me from it! Let me herein
read the evil of Sin, and learn to abhor and avoid it. Let me pity, and warn,
and counsel, and pray for those of my Relations and Acquaintance, who live in
Sin, and run the Hazard of this Eternal Ruin. Let me not envy the foolish
Mirth, and momentany Prosperity of the Wicked, whose present Joy must e're long
expire, and an Everlasting Destruction succeed in its room. Job 20. Chap. 4, 5.
How short is the Joy of the Hypocrite! and the Triumph of the Wicked is but
for a Moment. Let me fear and dread every thing, that leads to this dismal
Issue, and improve every thing, that may help me to escape it. And by
Consequence, let me less value all the Good and Evil of this present Life;
judge of all things by this Light; be patient under Temporal Calamities, and
thank God that it is not Hell; and thank him more, that present Sufferings do
help to save me from Eternal Ones.

Whatever I can suffer in this World, let my Condition be never so dark, and
sad, and afflicted, it is not, it cannot be such, but that every one of the
Damned, would think it an infinite Happiness to exchange with me, and be as I
am. Let me think of those Exquisite and Eternal Flames, to cure my Impatience,
under the sharpest Trials and Afflictions I may now suffer.

Did I believingly Consider an Everlasting Hell Qui non expergiscitur ad haec
Tonitrua, jam non dormit, sed mortuus est. S. Augustine.
, I should not think much of any thing, that is required to prevent it. The
severest Exercises of Religion, the strictest Temperance, the nicest Chastity,
the largest Charity, the greatest Self-denial, all the Hardships of Repentance
and Mortification, and Continuance therein to the Death, though for many Years
more than I am like to live, would be reckoned easy, as well as just, if set
in the Balance against the Eternal Mischiefs of the Damned.

What will not Men do and suffer, to prevent a Temporal Death? They will endure
a painful Course of Physic; tear out their very Bowels, by Purges and Vomits;
and are content to be cut and scarrified, and to suffer any thing almost to
save their Lives: But how little will they do, to be saved from the Wrath to
come! One would think, they should have no Rest, or Peace, or be able to live a
quiet Hour, 'till they had made some Provision against the Hazard of this
Eternal Destruction; and look upon all Men as their Friends, or Enemies,
according to the Help or Hindrance, they received from them, in reference to
it. But the direct Contrary is every where apparent. Men are careless and
secure, jovial and merry, in the Way that leads to Hell; and esteem, and love,
and choose that Company, that will help to bring them to this Place of Torment:
Yea, such is their Stupidity, and strange Perverseness, that they will not
suffer to be told of their Danger. If you tell them, that by such a Course, or
such an Action, they will lose so much Money, or their Lives will be in Danger;
they reckon it an Obligation, will take it kindly, and return you Thanks: But
when they are told, by such Courses and Actions they will lose their Souls, and
the Favor of God, and the Hopes of Heaven, and must perish for Ever; this they
will not receive, they despise the Message, and scorn and hate the Messenger;
are displeased and angry at such Faithfulness.

O bless the Lord O my Soul! for any good hope through Grace, of escaping this
Intolerable and Endless Misery. And let all that is within me, bless his Holy
Name. I have deserved the same endless, and unsupportable Wrath, which
Thousands are now under, and shall be under to all Eternity; but he did not
suffer me to fall into it. To be delivered out of those Torments after many
Years Misery, would be thought an admirable, unspeakable Kindness: And is it
not a greater Favor, never to be thrown into Hell, which I have so often
deserved? How grateful would a damned Person be, to be freed from those Flames,
and placed in the same Condition, I now am in? What a Life of serious,
self-denying Obedience would he lead? And has not God done more for me? Am I
not more indebted to his Goodness? He has kept me out of Hell, and offers me
the Heavenly Glory, upon Reasonable, Honorable, and easy Terms. Blessed be
God, I may yet escape the Wrath to come.

Let me heartily compassionate the Delusion, of those Multitudes of deceived,
perishing Souls, whose Eyes are blinded by the God of this World; who will not
believe it, till they are convinced by the Light of that Fire, which shall
never be extinguished. Yea, when I read, or hear of Ten or Twenty Thousand Men
slain in a War, (whether of Infidels or Christians) let me think of it, with
other Apprehensions, than formerly I was wont to do. Considering that many, it
may be, the most of these, shall never have any Comfort or Mercy more; fearing
lest the same Sword or Bullet, that gave them their Mortal Wound, has fixed
them under God's Everlasting Wrath; and that by dying, they are undone for ever.

In very many other Cases, the Faith of this Article would rectify my Opinion,
and direct my Actions, if seriously considered and improved. This would make me
think of Death under another Notion, than it is commonly considered. For without
the Consideration of Hell annexed to it, it is not so very formidable, but that
Heathens have been able to despise it. The most Contrary Sects among them, on
different Grounds have been able to do it; but consider Death as a Passage to
Eternal Misery, as the Gate of Hell, as the End of all Comfort to a Wicked Man,
and the Beginning of an Endless Calamity, and nothing can be imagined more
dreadful to a Guilty, Unholy Soul. Some of my Acquaintance, it may be, who died
this last Year, are now among those Hopeless, Despairing Wretches, who expect
the final Judgment of God, to consummate their insupportable Misery. If they
were permitted to come, and tell us what they suffer, and what they know; what
a Terrible Consuming Fire God is; what Vanity, Lust, and Folly, brought them to
this Place of Torment; what Diligence they would advise us to, while in a State
of Hope, to prevent the like; if we have any Love and Kindness for our selves,
any Bowels of Compassion to our own Souls; What a Change do we think it would
work upon us? But if we will not hear Moses; and the Prophets, Christ, and his
Apostles; neither should we believe, though one came from the Dead.

SECT. XX.
The Eternal Blessedness of HEAVEN, considered, as the Perfection of Holiness,
to quicken our Desires, and Endeavors after greater Meetness to possess it.

Does one Year after another, hasten me to the End of Time? And does the
Blessedness of Eternity depend on the Communications I now receive from God? On
the Preparations I now make, and the Meetness I can now attain for Eternal
Felicity, in the Presence of my God and Savior? O, with what Intenseness of
Mind, should I now prosecute that Glorious Object; with what unwearied
Diligence, should I run the Race that is set before me, lest I fall short of
the Incorruptible Crown of Life? How should every thing be undervalued and
rejected, that would divert, retard, or hinder me from pursuing this End? Lord!
be not a Stranger to my Soul, in this distant Wilderness state! Let me see more
of thy Light! be transformed more into thine Image! experience more of thy
Love! feel more of thy vital Presence, and quickening Spirit; Let the Divine
Life in my Soul be more powerful, and the Characters of thy Likeness be more
legibly stamped upon it! by the daily Exercise of Faith, and Hope, and Holy
Affections, carry me through this World! 'till my Pilgrim state be over, and
thou have brought me to perfect, Everlasting Holiness! And let the believing
Fore-thoughts of it, fill all the Powers of my Soul with Joy, and Wonder,
Desire and Love!

Give me, Lord! to think aright of the Heavenly Glory; as a Confirmed State of
positive, perfect Holiness; of Heavenly Light, Love, Liberty and Joy, with the
satisfying Vision of God, in the Face of Christ, and his impressed Likeness;
dwelling for ever in the direct, and steady View of his Transforming Glory;
with complete Conformity of the Soul to Eternal Goodness, Truth and Love, as
its Perfection; esteeming nothing, desiring nothing, but that God and Christ
may be glorified, with an entire Subjection to his Will, Adherence to him; Rest
and Confidence in him, Swallowed up in the Love, Admiration, and Praise of God,
and our Lord Jesus; living in joyful repeated Acts of Subjection, Adoration,
and Acknowledged Dependence; ravished to behold the Glory of God, in the Face
of Christ, to see his blessed Image perfect in every one of the Saints, etc.
When all the present Blindness of our Minds, the Errors of our Judgment, the
Perverseness of our Will, the Disorder and Rebellion of our Passions, the
remaining Aversation from God, and Disaffection to him, which in this World we
complain of, shall all be done away: The Flesh shall no more lust against the
Spirit; or the Law in our Members against the Law of our Minds; but an
Everlasting Tranquillity and Holy Peace take place; a Peace which passes all
Understanding, without any outward Molestation, or inward Cause of Disquiet.

Our corrupted Nature shall no more cast forth Mire and Dirt as now; we shall
have no more vain, or wicked Thoughts, no more sinful Fears, or foolish Hopes;
unbecoming Heats, unruly Desires, Sensual Inclinations, Earthly Affections,
Feeble, Sloathful, Spiritless Duties, Dead and Heartless Prayers, Cold
Thanksgivings, etc. But as we shall then know God without Errors, and see our
Lord Jesus Face to Face; so we shall love him without reserve, more than now we
can think; and serve him without Dullness and Distraction, and Praise him
without Weariness; the Spiritual Actings of our Souls shall have no Allay of
Dross. And thus shall we be with him, and admire, and enjoy him, without end.

Thus when Death is swallowed up in Victory; and what was imperfect is done
away, and what was Corruptible and Mortal, has put on Immortality; God in
Christ, shall be All in All: And when it is truly and perfectly so, Then it is
Heaven. The Blessedness whereof is Unconceivable. A Blessed Person, is not
expressed in the Singular Number by the Hebrews, but in the Abstract, and in the
Plural. Beatitudes, instead of Blessed, because the Blessings are as many and
great, as they have Powers and Capacities to partake of Blessedness. So will it
be in Heaven. A Word, though commonly used as little understood, as Holiness;
which is one of the greatest Mysteries in the World; but will hereafter be
fully and delightfully understood by the Blessed Saints; as the Malignity and
Intrinsic Evil of Sin shall be, by the damned Spirits.

Oh, that I might now feel more of this Heavenly Life, begun and carried on in
my Soul, by a farther Participation of his Holy Image, and Conformity to his
Will! by more vital Effects of his indwelling Spirit in my Soul, forming it to
be a Temple to himself, for his own Delightful Residence! that forgetting that,
which I have received, I may still be Coveting, and desirous of more;
forgetting what I have attained, I may press on, with an Holy Eagerness and
Fervency, toward the Mark!

When I seriously examine my own Heart, had I nothing else, to prove the
Weakness of my Grace, and the sinful Remainders of Unbelief, but the low
Desires, and few Comfortable Thoughts, the seldom joyful Prospect of this
Blessed State; how sad an Evidence were it of my low Seize, that I breath
with no more Impatience, after that Blessed, Holy Rest, in the Enjoyment of God
and Christ; and labor no more in preparing for it? When we profess to believe,
that all the Desires of our Souls shall be fixed on Him, and filled with Him,
as our Infinite and Supreme Good; and all the Expectations of Faith and Hope,
swallowed up in Endless Admiration, Gratitude and Joy; being fully satisfied,
and at Rest, in the Presence and Vision of God; without the least Inclination,
or Desire of Change. And by Consequence,

There will be no need of Novelty, as now, to a give a Relish to our Happiness.
All Happiness in this World is, by comparing a Man's present Condition, with
his past, or with that of some Inferiors. But the Intrinsic Good, Felicity,
and Joy of Heaven, will need no such Foil to set it off; no such Comparison to
make it prized. The Blessed Spirits will never lose the lively Sense, of that
low and miserable Condition, from which they were raised to so great a Glory;
and so will ever equally rejoice in the Happiness of their Translation and
Wonderful Change. And what was at first delightful, will for Ever be so; and
not disdained, or lessened by a Continuance; as it happens in this World, from
the Emptiness, Shallowness, and Vanity of the Creature. An Affectation of
Variety, and Desire of Change, proceeding always from a Sense of Want. But Holy
Souls shall never be weary of Seeing, Loving, and Enjoying God; his Blessed
Presence will afford us Undecaying and Endless Satisfacton; Pleasure, never to
be interupted, or abated, and never to cease. The Blessed Object is absolutely
Infinite, and so will be always new to a Finite Understanding; and Continual
Fresh Communications from his Infinite Fullness, must needs make our Subjective
Happiness to be always new, and Eternally such.

Let me by such Thoughts, quicken and excite my Diligent Endeavors; after a
greater Meetness to enjoy so great a Bliss. And to that end, Consider, whether
any of those Happy Souls, who have finished their Course, and obtained the
Prize, do now regret their utmost Diligence, Patience, and Perseverance, during
their short Abode here, to secure the Blessedness of an Endless Life: No, no,
they are far from repenting the Time they spent, the Trouble they were at, the
Care they used, the Difficulties they met with, the Sufferings they endured; to
conflct with the World, and the Flesh, to resist Temptation, to watch over
their Hearts, and Words, and Ways, to work out their Salvation, to please God,
and be faithful to him, etc. They find to their Unspeakable Comfort, and
Everlasting Joy, that Heaven makes amends for all; they could do or suffer, in
order to their Coming thither. Yea, they find that they were not Diligent, and
Humble, and Patient, and Circumspect enough. That they did not love God, and
seek his Glory, redeem their Time, and improve all their Talents, and
Opportunities of doing and receiving Good, and give up themselves entirely to
prepare for Heaven, to that degree they should have done. They find, by the
Transcendency of the Blessed Recompense; that it deserved infinitely more than
the most Active, Zealous Christian upon Earth did ever do; in order to it.

Lord! Quicken my Resolutions and Endeavors, by such Thoughts as these.
Inspire my Sluggish, Carnal Heart, with Holy Light, and Life, and Zeal, and
Fervor! that looking to the Things which are not seen, which are Eternal; I
may 1 Timothy 1.19.
lay up a good Foundation against the Time to come, and so lay hold on Eternal
Life!

But Alas! How much have I neglected the great Duty of Holy Meditation? How
little Skill and Experience have I in it? How tastless and inspid oftentimes
are my Thoughts of God! how confused and unsteady! how little Pleasure or
Advantage have I, by Contemplating his Highest Excellencies? Yet, methinks,
could I but retain the same awakened, lively Thoughts of Heaven, and Eternal
Life, which sometimes I have had; might I continually feel the Sweet and Sacred
Influence, as for a little Season I have sometimes felt it; how little, how
very a Nothing, would all this World be to me! How comparatively weak, its
strongest and most alluring Snares, to draw me off from God! with what an
unshaken Mind could I refuse and resist 'em! with what an unconcerned
Indifference, could I look upon all its most charming Glory!

Could I maintain such a Frame of Spirit, as I have sometimes had for a little
while; in the serious Contemplation of Divine Mysteries, in Fervent Prayers,
and other Solemn Duties of Religion; when the Acts of Faith were strong and
lively, my Heart set on fire with Love to God, and Holy Breathings after Him;
admiring his matchless Grace to fallen Sinners, (and to my Soul in particular)
when he brought me to the very Suburbs of Heaven, (though alas! how seldom!) by
the delightful Thought of what the Blessed Spirits above enjoy, in being where
Christ is, and beholding his Glory; when I was ready to say within my self,
It Is good to be here; this is no other than the Gate of Heaven; Oh! when shall
Mortality be swallowed up of Life! But when I thought at any time, to fix and
settle in such sweet Contemplations; how quickly did my lazy, backward Heart
fly off! how soon did the Flame decay and dye away! how soon did I find my self
fallen down to Earth again! sunk down from the Bosom of my Lord, presently
forgot my self and Heaven, to dwell among the Pots, and embrace a Dunghill!
'Twas not on my own Wings, O Lord! that I soared so high; but I hope, by the
Breathings of that Holy Spirit of Light and Love, who blows when, and where,
and how long he lists; who gave me at any time, any such first Fruits of the
Spirit; who convinced me of the Certainty of the Heavenly Inheritance, by a
lively believing Foresight of it; who made me earnestly desire the Wings of a
Dove to be gone, and appear before God in Sion; made me Pant and Groan to be
delivered, and to be with God and Christ, with inexpressible Desire and Joy,
unconceivably mixed with Sighs and Groans. O my God! let not this experience be
only such a Taste of the Powers of the World to come, as is consistent with
final Apostasy! only the seeming Zeal of the stony Ground! the rapturous Joy of
an Hypocite! from the Power of Imagination, and a heated Fancy; from the
workings of mere Natural Self-love; upon Mistaken Apprehensions of God, and a
false Opinion of Heaven; but by the Holy Effects, let me be assured of the
Cause and Principle; that was of God.

Teach me, from the Sweetness of all Spiritual Communion with God now, in any
of his appointed Ordinances; to argue to my self, what the most ravishing
Satisfaction will be; that the Enjoyment of God in Heaven will afford the Soul.
Our Holiness is now imperfect, to what it shall be; and therefore our
Consolation, Peace and Joy, is but in part; and incomparably less than we are
assured it will be, when we shall be admitted to behold the Glory of the Lord.
It Is now at most, but as the Break of Day, to the Luster of the Meridian Sun.
But if in this low imperfect State, we can sometimes obtain so near a View of
his Glory, and feel such sweet Communications of his Grace; how much more of
this Consolation and Joy, is reserved to Heaven? If in this Pilgrim State, the
Gifts and Graces, and Comforts of the Holy Spirit are so refreshing: O! what
has God prepared beyond the Grave, for those who love him? If now he sometimes
shed abroad his Love in our Hearts, after such a Manner; how much better shall
I love him, and feel the Influence, and Evidence of his Love to me; when I
shall be with him, and see him Face to Face? If the Apprehensions of this
Future Blessedness, do now encourage, raise, and animate my drooping Soul: O,
what shall I know and see? And how shall I rejoice, when the Vail is removed?
If a Sacramental Communion with God and Jesus Christ, be sometimes so sweet,
and so affecting; what will the Blessed Communion with God, and all his Saints
above, amount to? when I shall sit down with all the Children of God, in the
Presence of the Bridegroom, at the last Great Supper of the Lamb in Glory! If
the Earnest of our Inheritance be so reviving, what will be the full Possession
of it? If the Hopes of that Glorious Day, by Holy Meditation, be so
transporting; what will be the End of our Faith and Hope? If a Grape or two in
the Wilderness, be such a Cordial; what will be the whole Vintage in the Land
of Promise?

Shall I after all this, forget my own Experience, and run from God and Heaven,
to embrace or seek a perishing Toy? Shall I hide my self with Saul, among the
Stuff and Lumber of this World; when God is calling me to a Glorious Crown? Art
thou, O my Soul! a King's Son, an Heir of Heaven, an Expectant of such great
Felicity, and yet stoop so low? Hope for Heaven, and yet grasp this Earth; and
hug the vain Appearances of Earthly Good? Hope to be like to God, (and Oh how
Glorious an Hope is that!) to partake of his Image, and live Eternally with
him; and yet be solicitous, anxious, and disquieted about Honor, and Money,
and a Temporal Interest? And mightily concerned about the Momentany
Gratifications of the Flesh, and the Enjoyments of this World? Art thou a
Pilgrim and Stranger here, and traveling Home to the Heavenly Country, and yet
eager and passionate about Earthly Things? Should an Heart that is set upon
Heaven, (or may be so, and ought to be so) should it burn with such Kitchen,
such Common-Fire? And neglect the unconceivable Riches and Pleasures, and
immortal Honors of the other Life, and the Dawnings of that Glory upon my
Soul, by the Foretasts of it in this? How great is the Disproportion between
the Heavens and the Earth? How vast the Circumference of the one, and how small
a Point the other? How many thousand Miles, does the Sun travel in the Heavens,
while it passes but one Inch upon a Dial? Oh! that my Affections were carried
to Heavenly Things, with a swiftness somewhat answerable to the Glorious
Object. And let their Motion to Earthly Things, be rather slow and insensible,
like that of the Sun on a Dial. Since I profess to believe, and wait for the
Heavenly Glory; should I not live, as seeking such Things, as expecting such a
Glory? And are careless and indifferent Thoughts, sleepy, heartless Prayers,
faint and weak Endeavors, becoming in such a Case? Shall I not mend my Pace,
and double my Diligence in my preparatory Work? When I can believingly foresee
the Blessed Recompense; waiting for that Everlasting Light of the Sun of
Righteousness, which no Eclipse shall ever darken or obscure; for that Eternal
Glorious Day, which shall never be closed with an Evening. When I shall see the
Face of God in Christ, and be like him; participate more of his Image, rest in
his Love, and dwell for ever in the Light of his Countenance, according to the
Prayer and Promise of my Blessed Savior.

And ought not such a Prospect, to sweeten the Bitterness of all our
intermediate Sufferings? We are now, oftentimes in Heaviness and Sorrow; but
Eternity will be enough for an uninterrupted Joy. When we shall exchange all
our Troubles for Everlasting Rest, our Prisons for Perfect Liberty, our Poverty
for the Riches of God; Darkness for Light; Discord for Love; Deformity for
Beauty; our Weaknesses and present Languishings, for Strength and Vigor; Folly
for Wisdom; Disgrace for Glory; Sickness and Pain for Eternal Ease and Health;
the Animal for the Angelical Life; Imperfection and Pollution for Consummate
Holiness; our Sighs, and Tears, and Sorrows, and Complaints, for Triumphant
Everlasting Praise; our Losses, Affronts, Disappointments, Perplexities, Fears,
Groans, and Death; for Crowns and Scepters, Hymns and Hallelujahs, Light and
Life, and Bliss unutterable; and such great things as are fit for us to hope,
but too great to be now particularly understood, and talked of; while we know
but in part, and see through a Glass darkly. Yea, it seems as if it were not
lawful to utter 'em, 2 Cor. 12.4. and now they cannot be expressed, or fully
known; For Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, or can it enter into the Heart of
man to conceive, that prepared Glory.

SECT. XXI.
A Devout Meditation upon Psalm 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? And
there is none upon Earth, that I desire besides Thee.

WHAT is there in Heaven or Earth, O Lord! but thy Presence to be valued,
loved, desired, chosen, sought, or delighted in? There is nothing in either
World, desirable without Thee, nothing certainly above Thee; nothing in
Comparison with Thee. In Thee alone I trust, on Thee I depend; in Thee I repose
my Confidence and Hope; from Thee I expect all my Felicity and Salvation.
Whatever I can lose, yet with the Continuance of thy Favor, which is my Life;
I have still Enough. With that I am Rieh, without it I am Poor and Miserable.
And if I want the Love of God, all that Heaven and Earth can give besides, will
not make me happy. In Thee, therefore, I would terminate all my Affections, all
my Devotions! There is nothing of Heaven to be had on Earth, but in thy Favor,
Image and Love; and the reviving Sense of it. And all the Heaven I expect
hereafter, it is in the more full and immediate Communications of these, in thy
blessed Presence. I can desire nothing upon Earth; I can enjoy nothing in
Heaven, but Thee! both here and there, thou art, and shall ever be my
All-sufficient, Satisfactory Portion, my Everlasting All! None else can be the
Portion of my Soul. Nothing else can fill up all its Wants, answer all its
Cravings, be suited to all its Capacities, appease and charm all its restless
Motions, and give Complacence to all its Desires, and be the proper Object of
all its Affections.

What is there else can justly claim my Love, or pretend to my Supreme
Affection in comparison with God? Thou art alone the proper Center of it. Thine
Infinite and Incomparable Excellencies, (who art Love it self) deserve my
choicest Love; and thy numberless Mercies and Benefits, challenge it as a just
Debt as a piece of Homage due from all, and of special Gratitude also from me.
Oh, that I could love Thee above all things! who alone art worthy of all my
Love! O that Divine Love might be the ruling Principle within me! to inspire
all my Thoughts, to regulate all my Desires, to set all the Powers of my Soul
on Work! O that it might take the full Possession of my Heart, and so animate
and order all my Actions to please him, whom my Soul loves! If as yet I cannot
say with thine Apostle? Lord! thou that know all things, thou know that I
love thee. Yet I can say, Lord, thou know that I would love thee! Thou have
provided for our Happiness, by that first and great Command of loving thee with
all our Hearts, and Souls and Strength. But alas! how backward is my sluggish,
carnal Heart, to this Delightful Exercise? Though I have so often been told, that
God is Love, and that He that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in
him. O shed abroad thy Love into my Soul! that I may feel the Vital Power and
Influence of it, and live continually in the Love of God, and that nothing may
ever be able to separate me from it.

Whom have I in Heaven or Earth, to Hope in, but Thee? I expect more from
Creatures, than they can, or will perform; but God can do for me more
abundantly than I can ask or think; exceed my largest Thoughts, out strip my
highest Expectations. And no Man was ever disappointed, who made Thee his Hope.
When I meet with Crosses and Wrongs, Unfaithfulness, Contempt, Hatred and
Persecution from Men, I need not wonder; I was never told by God, it would be
otherwise here. Did I look for less from Creatures, and expect more from God;
Did I reckon this World to be a State of Trial, and not a Place of Rest and
Satisfaction; my Faith and my Desires would be stronger, with respect to God
and Heaven; and Temporal Calamities and Disappointment less afflictive and
Vexatious.

And what is there, O Lord! in Heaven, or in Earth, my Soul can desire besides
Thee? Is there any thing desirable, but as it is thine, of thee, and from
thee? And bears some Impression of thine Excellence, or brings some Intimation
of thy Love? And what can I reasonably desire; what that is worth desiring, or
having, but thou art able to be, and do, and give?

In whom, or what, shall I Rejoice, but in Thee, O Lord! shall I solace my self
in Transitory Goods, that slip between my Fingers, and perish in the Using? or
relish Carnal Joys, which pollute and debase the Soul? When I may and ought to
Rejoice in Thee at all Times, as the only Source of Perfect, Everlasting Joy.
Let me then stir up my Drooping, Desponding, Unbelieving Heart, to rejoice in
God; who takes Pleasure in the cheerful Service and Obedience of his Children;
who delights in those, who delight in him. Is not Vid. Mr. How, Of delighting
in God.
Delighting in God a most Essential, Vital Part of Religion? Should it not be
my Constant Frame? Has not God sufficiently provided, that it may be so? Can I
say and believe, that God is the Portion of my Soul; that he is my God. and I
hope to live with him for ever, and not Rejoice? Or can I consider the Grace of
the new Covenant, the matchless Love of Christ, and the precious Promises of
the Gospel; and not see reason to Rejoice? Yea, does my Soul love God, and
endeavor to please him; and is not the very Act and Exercise of holy Love,
mixed with unspeakable sweetness?

Whom is there in Heaven, or in Earth, or Hell, that I ought to Fear, but Thee?
Who have a Negative Voice in all the Designs of Men and Devils; an Hook in
their Nostrils, a Bridle in their Mouths, to make them fulfill thy Pleasure; and
in every thing accomplish thy Sovereign Decree.

Is there any other, in whom I may repose my Trust, but in Thee, O Lord! the
Rock of Ages? The might of thy Power, the Unsearchabless of thy Wisdom, the
Righteousness of thy Nature, the Stability of thy Truth, the Riches of thy
Grace, and the Immutability of thy Promises, are a sure Foundation, for my Soul
to trust to, and rely upon. Thy word stands firm for ever, and the Truth of
thine Ability, and Readiness to help, in every Time of Need, Endures the same
throughout all Generations. At all Times, and in all Places, my Soul may trust
in Thee, and find Relief. And they who know thy Name will do so; for in the
Lord Jehovah, is Everlasting Kindness and Strength. To answer all my Doubts, to
supply all my Wants, and fulfill all my Desires. May not God take it unkindly,
that I trust him no more? And is it not a criminal Unkindness, that I give him
not the Glory of all these excellent Attributes, which are the grounds of
Trust; by a constant, steady, entire Dependence on him for all that I need?

I have none in Heaven but Thee, O Lord! as the Object of my Invocation and
Worship. Let other Christians have Recourse to New Mediators, and call upon
other Gods: I will make mention of thy Name, and of thy Righteousness only. And
ask of Thee whatsoever I need, for the sake of thy Christ, my only Adorable
Mediator. Him thou hear always, with him thou art always well pleased. I
honor the Holy Angels as Glorious Attendants about thy Throne; and bless thee
for them, as Ministering Spirits, for the Good of thy Servants; but I dare not
invoke or worship 'em, because they are Fellow Servants. On the same Account, I
honor the Memory of Departed Saints, but neither invoke them, or pay them
Religious Worship. That Glory, thou will not give unto another. I have no
Precept in Holy Scripture to direct, no Promise to encourage, no Example to
authorize, the Invocation of any other but Thee; In whom I believe and trust,
Romans 10.14.

Having such a God in Heaven, what can I need on Earth? His Eyes behold me, his
Wing is over me, his Hand can supply me, his Grace provide for me. I can want
nothing that is Good; unless I should need somewhat, which God, the infinitely
Blessed and All-sufficient Good, cannot bestow. If thou art the Portion of my
Soul, all my Enemies cannot make me miserable; unless they can void Heaven of
the Presence of God, hinder his Care, bind up his Hand, or obstruct his Love.
But though my Enemies cannot, I fear my Sins may. They alone can separate between
God and my Soul. And considering the multitude and aggravations of them, and
thine unspotted Holiness and Justice; I should have too much reason to fear and
tremble, yea, and utterly despair, If I had none in Heaven but thee. But thy
word assures me, that I have a Mediator there; a faithful and a compassionate
High Priest, Jesus Christ the Righteous; whom thou have exalted to be a Prince,
and a Savior, to give Repentance and Remission of Sins. Who lives for ever in
Heaven, to make Intercession, till he has brought me there, to behold his
Glory, and partake of it.

That Glory, O Lord! thou have reserved for Heaven; in this World we only
desire, believe, and hope to enjoy it. Whom have I in Heaven? That is the Place
of Fruition. What can I desire upon Earth? This World is the Place of Desires,
as the other of full Enjoyment. Most of that which Men call Enjoyment in this
Life, consists but in Desire. Desire or Lust, is all that is in the wicked
World, 1 John 2. c. 13. the Riches of a Covetous Worldling makes him desire
more; and the Great Mystery of Intemperance, is to create and increase Desires;
and Desires of another kind, are the Portion of Good Men in this World.

Oh! that I could breath after a State of perfect Fruition in Heaven, with more
importunate Desires! Who will give me, to be in Heaven with thee? On Earth I
desire nothing. So one Version. Let me, O my Soul! think of Heaven, as such a
Place, or State of Blessed Enjoyment! speak of it, seek it, long for it,
prepare for it, as such. And let Jesus Christ, who is the Desire of all
Nations, (through whom all Divine Communications are made to fallen Sinners) be
the Great Object of my present Desires and Love! Let me desire nothing but as
in Him, and for Him; that believing his Word, obeying his Law, adoring his
Person, imitating his Example, trusting his Promise, constrained by his Love,
partaking of his Image, filled with his Grace, and comforted by his Spirit; my
Meditations of him may be sweeter, and my Love stronger, and I may have nothing
more left to desire for my Self, but that God who has raised and exalted Him,
would keep alive my Faith, and Hope, and Holy Desires, till he has made me
meet to be with Him; and after having guided me by his Grace, and Spirit, and
Counsels, here on Earth, would receive me to his most Blessed and Glorious
Presence in Heaven. Amen, Amen.

XXII.
The Glorious Appearance of Christ to Judgment considered as Certain: The
Terror and Astonishment, Confusion and Despair of Wicked Jews and Christians,
to behold their Judge, and hear his Condemning Sentence to EVERLASTING
Destruction.

WHen our Blessed Savior shall appear to judge the World, I read that it shall
be, In his own Glory, the Glory of his Father, and of the Holy Angels. If by
the Glory of the Father, be meant that of the Divinity, as the Original and
Author of all things in Nature; as the Almighty Creator of the World; and by
the Glory of his Holy Angels, be understood that of the Legal Administration,
the Law being given by the Disposition of Angels; and by his own Glory, that of
the Gospel, as he is the Messiah; that in the Glory of all these, he shall come
to Judgment: We have a summary Account of the three different Revelations,
which God has made of himself to Mankind; by the Light of Nature, that of the
Law, and the more manifest one of the Gospel. According to which every Man is
to be judged at the last Day.

Though we cannot distinctly tell what, or how great our Lord's Glory will then
be; we may be certain, it will be suitable to the Dignity of his Royal Person,
suitable to the Grandeur of his Father's Majesty; with the Splendor of a
Triumphant Prince, who is Heir of all Things; and has all Power in Heaven and
in Earth committed to him; the Great Lord of both Worlds, Head of Angels and
Men; and suitable to his Glorious Office, as Mediator, and the appointed Judge
of Quick and Dead.

If at his Tranfiguration his Face shone, and his Raiment was white and
glittering; How much more Splendid will his last Appearance be? When the Bodies
of his Saints shall be seven times brighter than the luster of the Sun? And if
his Members shall then be so glorious, how transcendently more so will their
Head, their Lord appear? If the Delivery and Promulgation of the Law on Mount
Sinai, was accompanied with such Circumstances of Terrible Majesty, how much
more may we suppose the Great Assize will be attended with; when he comes to
judge for the violation of the Law, and the contempt of the Gospel? And if even
Moses did then exceedingly quake and fear, what will be the Consternation and
trembling of the wicked World at the Coming of Christ? When he shall be
revealed from Heaven in flaming Fire, with a glorious retinue of his mighty
Angels, as so many bright Stars, about the more glorious Sun of Righteousness.
The Lights of Heaven shall be eclipsed; the visible Sun shall vail its blushing
head, as infinitely out-shone; the present Glory of the Creation be all
benighted, by reason of his transcendent Brightness. Yea, the Heavens shall be
wrapped up as a scroll; the Elements melt away with a mighty noise: the Earth and
all its works be burnt up; and the whole Universe as one great Bonfire, to
adorn the Triumph of our Lord's Appearance. And this ushered in by the Voice of
an Archangel, proclaiming his approach; and the Voice of God, supplying the use
of a Trumpet, to raise the Dead, and possess Mankind with an awful Reverence of
their Judge.

Thus in Triumph, as a Conqueror, and a Judge, shall he come again, who once
appeared in the form of a Servant, to be Judged and Condemned by Man. Then he
was called King in scorn: Now he will appear as much above all Earthly and
Humane Greatness, as once he stooped, for our sakes, beneath it. Then the
Contempt of Nations, and no way esteemed Desirable, when he came from the Womb
of his Virgin Mother: Now the Terror of the World, when he comes again from
the Right Hand of his Father. No more to be subject to a state of Meanness, but
to render vengeance to all, who know not God, and obey not the Gospel: and to
be glorified in his Saints, and admired in, and by, all them that believe 2 Thessalonians. chap. 1.
.

He was put to shame in the days of his Flesh, made himself of no Reputation,
and accounted unworthy to live: But when he comes again, he will put on a
Garment of Vengeance, to repay Fury to the Enemies of his Cross, and make his
wicked Despisers rise again to shame, and everlasting contempt. They that once
bowed the knee to him in mockery, and shaked their heads at him in derision,
shall then see every knee how before him, of things in Heaven, things in Earth,
and under the Earth: Angels, Men, and Devils, in subjection to him, as Lord and
King. Pilate, who condemned him as his Prisoner, shall appear before him as his
rightful Judge; and know, that he was anotherguess King and Monarch, than the
Roman Emperor. The false Witnesses, who accused him of Blasphemy, shall be
impeached by one another, and their own guilty Consciences, before his Bar;
with the other Jews, who once dragged him before their Tribunal; and be
confounded, to stand before his Judgment Seat. His Crucifiers shall behold him
on a Throne of Glory, whom they Nailed to an infamous Cross. They shall be
astonished, to behold him sitting at the Right Hand of God, whose Hands they
bound, whose Body they scourged, whose Side they pierced. They who Crowned him
with Thorns, shall (with all the World) behold him with a Crown of Glory. They
that spit on him, and smote him on the face, with the fist of wickedness, shall
have their own faces covered with Confusion. They that approved his
Condemnation to Death, as a Criminal, shall be sentenced from His mouth, as
their Judge, to Everlasting Destruction. They that scourged him, as a
Malefactor, shall be beaten with many stripes. They that made him stagger under
the weight of his Cross, shall sink under the guilt and punishment of despising
it. They that Nailed him to the accursed Tree, between Thieves and Robbers,
shall be sentenced to endless Punishment, in much worse Company. They who gave
him Gall and Vinegar to drink, shall not be able to get a drop of water to cool
their own Tongues. Where then shall the Wicked and Ungodly of the Christian
World appear? who Crucify the Son of God afresh, since he has declared
himself to be so, by his Resurrection, and the Mission of the Holy Ghost, and
fulfilling his threatened Vengeance on the Nation of the Jews, etc.

If the Jews shall have a sorer Condemnation than ignorant Heathens, who never
heard of Christ, never saw his Miracles, or were informed of his Doctrine; How
shall we escape? For he will come again as a Conqueror, and Judge, and not as a
Sufferer and a Surety, as he came at first; and though he was numbered with
Transgressors, and made his Grave with the Wicked, at his first Appearance; he
shall hereafter be attended with the shouts of Angels, who excel in strength,
and the joyful Acclamations of his Saints, glittering as the Light, and paying
Homage to Him as the Judge of Quick and Dead. He, whom we have despised, shall
then be encompassed with a dezling Glory, that will confound us. He, whom we
have affronted, will be clothed with a Majesty that shall astonish us. He,
whom we have offended, shall be armed with Power, and with Wrath to punish us;
and all that continue to lift up the Heel against him, shall then be made his
Footstool: all that refuse to kiss the Scepter of his Grace, shall be broken in
pieces by his Iron Rod.

The Holy Scripture does frequently, and expressly assure us, that he will thus
come again, and for these ends. He is exalted, and gone to Heaven, as the Head
of his Church, and the King of Glory; and when he foretold his Ascension, he
gave a promise of his Return. The Heavens are to contain him, till the
Restitution of all things. By his Providence, and by his holy Spirit, he now
carries on the Designs of his Death: and when these are accomplished, he will
appear, to the Joy of Believers, and the Confusion of the Wicked. He is entered
as our Heb. c. 6.19, 20. etc. 10.20.
Foerunner, within the Veil, to prepare Mansions, and to take possession for
us, and will not always leave us in this dark and defiling World. He knows
our Sorrows, and hears our Prayers, and bottles our Tears, takes notice of
our Groans, and in all our Afflictions he is afflicted. Being reconciled by his
Death, at his first coming, we shall be saved by his Life, since he lives to
make good his word of coming again.

How comfortable is the News of it? how joyful will be the Meeting, to such as
expect and prepare to see him? when the Sea and the Graves shall yield up their
Dead, and all the Prisoners of Hope lift up their heads, arise, go up, and meet
the Lord in the Air, and ascend with him to the Heavenly Glory. But who can
express how dismal a Sight this will be to the Secure, and the Impenitent, to
all who die in their sins? to behold their Judge (who formerly offered to be
their Savior) upon a glorious Throne, and all the Children of Adam summoned
before his Tribunal! to have nothing to answer against his Charge, and no way
to escape his condemning Sentence! They despised him as a Lamb, offered his
Sacrifice to take away the Sins of the World; but shall no longer do so, when
he comes as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, to devour and destroy the Enemies
of his Cross. Now they will not own him for their Lord, but shall then find he
is so, by the Vengeance he will execute.

As a Jesus, as a Savior they rejected him, making light of his Salvation,
despising his Mercy, refusing his Grace: but the neglected Gospel, will then be
a more killing Letter than the Law. He who by his Ambassadors does now entreat
Sinners to be reconciled, will then be as deaf to their Entreaties, as they
have been to His. Because they would not turn at his Reproof, hearken to the
Call of his Word, and obey its Voice, they must hear the Sentence of
Condemnation, and feel the Execution of it, whether they will or no; yea, the
Blood of his Cross will upbraid, accuse, and plead against them. And whatsoever
foolish Evasions they now make, to continue in security, they shall then be
Speechless, and Self-condemned. Nothing will be able to hide them, from the
amazing Presence of their Judge, or from the Wrath of the Lamb. He then will
inflict an intolerable and righteous Vengeance, an Everlasting Destruction,
upon all the ignorant and ungodly World: The Greatest, the Stoutest, the
Boldest of them, shall then be humbled, and stand before Christ's Tribunal,
upon an equal Level with the Meanest; seized with horror, filled with guilt,
anguish, and despair; and find to their eternal Confusion, that the Judge is no
respecter of Persons, but every man shall receive according to his works. The
Mighty shall not be spared for his Greatness, nor the Mean man for his Poverty.

O Fool! O Wretch that I am! shall many then say, who now brave it out in Pride
and Vanity, unconcerned about a future Judgment! not to be persuaded by the
Terrors of the Lord, which I was so often warned and foretold of! What Refuge
of Hope can I now fly to? What can I say for my self? What can I do to escape,
to die, to exist no longer? I would have no compassion on my own Soul; I would
not so much as consider its danger; I shall now find none from Christ, I can
expect none: His Mercy is gone, and gone for ever! I am lost, undone,
tormented, and must eternally be so. O the Amazement, Horror, and Despair of
self-condemned Sinners in that day of Vengeance!

O my Soul! what is there of greater Consequence, or of greater Certainty from
the Word of God, than that I must appear to Judgment, when Christ shall come
again? Lord, teach me to believe it firmly, to consider it often, to lay it
seriously to heart, to act under the Influence and Power of it, as long as I
live; that at the Great Resurrection from the Dead, I may lift up my head with
a joyful Hope, and find the Judge to be my Friend, my Advocate, my Jesus, and
not my Enemy, and Destroyer.

XXIII.
Meditations of the Glory of Christ in his Glorified Saints, and of the
thankful Admiration of Believers, when He shall come again from Heaven, which
shall be continued to all Eternity.

THE Terror of our Lord's Appearance to Judgment, cannot be greater to the
Wicked, than the Comfort and Joy of it will be to the Saints. When they shall
see Him whom their Souls love, ascend with him to Heaven, and be welcomed,
according to his Promise, with those endearing words, Mat. 25.
Come, ye blessed Children of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you,
from before the foundation of the World. 'Twas for your sakes I assumed Flesh,
lived on Earth, and died on the Cross, to purchase this Glorious Kingdom for
you, which I now come to give you the Possession of: 'Twas for this I prayed
and suffered on Earth, for this I interceded ever since in Heaven: I was heard
in that Prayer, accepted in those Sufferings, and my Intercession granted, that
where I am, you may be also, to behold my Glory. Come therefore, good and
faithful Servants, enter into your Lord's joy. O what ravishing words will
these be! What an Ecstasie of Love and Kindness is implied in them! What matter
of rejoicing may it now give me, to admit the Hope, that my Blessed Savior will
say such words as these to me, and bid me stand upon his Right Hand, among his
Sheep. O what an exulting frame of Soul will such Expressions raise! How shall
all my Doubts and Fears and Sorrows be scattered in a moment, and cease for
ever! O Glorious Day! when my blessed Lord shall thus publicly acknowledge me
for his own, and plead my Cause against all the Accusations of Satan, and the
malicious Calumnies of all his Instruments! when I shall be able to say of all
my sins and sufferings, as my Lord upon the Cross, It is finished, it is
finished! My warfare being accomplished, being more than Conqueror over all,
through him who loved me, and died for me, and now is come to wipe away all
tears from mine eyes, as it were with the Napkin that was bound about his Head,
when laid in the Grave; all being the fruit of his meritorious Death. Then
shall I have nothing more to fear, or wish, or beg. I shall offend, provoke,
and dishonor him no more; or by my folly, and scandal, discredit his holy Name
and Gospel: but by consummate Holiness be fitted, to rejoice in his Presence
and Love, and celebrate his Praise for ever. I shall never more lament his
Absence, or complain of his Anger; never see a cloud on his Face, or a frown in
his Look any more. Now I must wait and pray, struggle and strive, labor and
suffer, desire and expect, believe and hope, etc. but then perfect Rest and
Holiness, Love and Joy, Vision and Fruition, Bliss and Glory, unutterable and
everlasting, shall take place.

All the Attributes of God, all the wonderful Perfections of Christ, will then
be glorified in Believers, and admired by them. His invariable Truth will then
be honored, which they trusted to, and waited for; for now they shall know,
and find they did not wait in vain: They hoped in his Word, and ventured their
Salvation upon it; and now they shall receive the end of their Faith and Hope,
infinitely beyond what they ever expected, or believed.

The Glory of Divine Wisdom will then appear, when the Constitution,
Administration, and Design of the Mediator's Kingdom shall be fully known, in
the admirable Order and Beauty of every part of it, with the exact Tendency of
all the particulars to one Glorious End, and the whole Undertaking crowned with
so blessed an Issue. What is now a Mystery even to Believers themselves, and
has a Veil upon it, shall then no longer be so; all the Riddles of God's Grace
and Providence shall be plainly understood. O how transporting a View must it
needs be, when the Glory of all the Divine Attributes which God intended to
accomplish, in and by Christ, shall be manifest to his Redeemed Saints! The
whole method of our Salvation, will then appear to be the fruit of unserchable
Wisdom, when we shall all see the Reality and Substance, and entire Scheme, of
all that God designed, in and by him; all that was typified of him, and
foretold concerning him, in the Old Testament. How will it all appear to be the
manifold Wisdom of God! Ephesians. 3.10.

As in uniting Heaven and Earth together in the Person of our Moderator;
fulfilling the truth of a terrible Threatening in his Death, and by the same way
accomplishing Vid. Mr. Charnock of the Divine Attribute Wisdom.
many gracious Promises; satisfying Justice, and at the same time showing
Mercy; manifesting infinite Grace and Kindness by shedding of Blood; conquering
Death by dying, and disarming the Law by Obedience to it, etc. afterward
subduing the World to the Faith of the Gospel, by the foolishness of Preaching;
making men wise to Salvation, by the Knowledge of the Cross; and spreading that
Faith the more, by all the opposition made against it, etc. How wonderfully
will a clear View of these things discover, and glorify the Wisdom of God!

But the Love and Grace of Christ; the infinite Goodness and Compassion of God,
will then be magnified in an especial manner. What but Sovereign Love in the
whole Contrivance and Council of God about our Redemption? What admirable Love
and Grace in the whole Management of that design? What unparalled kindness in
the Accomplishment of it, by the Sacrifice of the Son of God? And how Glorious
will this Love appear, when he shall come again to give us the full Harvest of
all his Purchase? With what admiring Thankfulness shall Believers then
contemplate the unsearchable Riches of his Grace? In all the Parts and
Instances of his Humiliation, from his Conception to his Crucifixion and
Burial; in all the Evidences and Discoveries made of it, from the first Promise
to its Completion; yea, from before the Foundation of the World, in the
Covenant of Peace between the Father and the Son, until his second Coming, to
Judge the World, and deliver up the Kingdom to his Father.

How shall we then admire, and adore his Powerful Grace, which snatched us as
Firebrands out of everlasting Burnings; that effectually shined into our minds
by heavenly Light; conquered the Opposition of our stubborn Wills; Sanctified
our carnal Hearts, rescued us from the Tyranny of Satan, and the Dominion of
Lust; giving, cherishing, and preserving the holy Seed of Grace, and making it
Spring up to Eternal Life; defeating the malicious and subtle Endeavors of the
Devil to destroy it; inabling us to endure Tribulation, and persevere to the
end; giving us Victory over Death; conducting us through the dark Valley;
raising our Bodies, reviving ard reuniting them to our Souls, and rendering them
glorious like his own Body; and at length rewarding our imperfect Services with
Eternal Life. Yea, though our best Services were mixed with Sin, our holiest
Duties spotted, our most courageous Sufferings mixed with Unbelief, yet rewarded
with a Blessedness, that has no Alloy of Evil, but all the Ingredients of a
Perfect Felicity, and nothing to lessen and interrupt it. How shall we then
admire the Bounty of our Gracious Lord, the Freeness, Tenderness, Riches, and
the exceeding Greatness, and Glory of his Infinite Goodness and Grace to poor
Believers.

With what Ecstasies of Joy and Gratitude, may we imagine, that our Lord will
be then admired by all his Redeemed ones?

Saying, This is He, who made our Peace with God, and reverst the Sentence of
Damnation, which we were under; who bought us with the price of his most
precious Blood, bore the Wrath of his Father, and submitted to an infamous and
cursed Death for us. He assumed our Nature, that we might partake of his;
became the Son of Man, that we might be made the Children of God; for our sakes
he became poor, that we through his Poverty might become Rich: He stoopt to
bear the greatest Ignominy and Reproach, to confer Honor on us: He was for a
time forsaken of his Father, that we might not be so Eternally: He felt the
stroke of his Anger against Sin, that we might not perish under it. He was a
Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Griefs, that we might Rejoice: His Agonies
and bloody Sweat were for our Refreshment, and by his Stripes we are Healed: He
bowed his Head on the Cross, that we might lift up ours in Triumph; and because
we had eaten of the forbidden Fruit, he hung on the Accursed Tree. 'Twas for us
that he suffered the Frowns of Heaven, the Enimity of Hell, the Rage of Devils,
the Hatred and Persecution of the World: He was judged, that we might not come
into Condemnation: He was Crucified, that we might be Glorified; and he is now
Come again, finally and fully to effect it.

O the Height, and Depth, and Length, and Breadth of the Love of Christ, which
passes Knowledge, but calls for Admiration, and everlasting Gratitude! This is
the Blessed Day we longed and waited, and prayed for! This is our Gracious, our
Glorious Lord, whose Love melted our Heart, whose Promise was our Support,
whose Word was our Rule, whose Spirit was our Comforter, whose Cross was our
Crown, and the Hope of his Appearance our chief Consolation!

Lord! What am I, what was I, that the ever Blessed Son of God should do and
suffer and purchase all this for me? I can remember when I was ignorant of God,
a Stranger to him, at Enmity with him, under the Power of Darkness, and the
Devil, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, hastening to Hell, and liable to his
Wrath. But he chose me out of the World, stamped his Image upon me, pardoned my
Sins, and embraced me in the Arms of his unchangeable Love. O happy Change! and
yet how little did I prize his Grace, admire his Love, and express my own, or
promote his Glory, and honor him in the Eyes of others? How did I dishonor my
Profession and holy Calling, as his Disciple, by aggravated Apostasy? But he
recovered me by Repentance, and healed my Backslidings, and received me
graciously, because he loved me freely. O admirable Grace! to pardon, and save,
and bring to Glory such an unthankful Wretch, as I have been! to make such a
Difference between Me and Others, whom I knew on Earth! That the same Power,
which makes them Miserable, now makes me Blessed! That when they are banished
from his Presence into Everlasting Destruction, I am admitted to behold his
Glory, and shall dwell with him for ever!

O, how much more do I now see and find, than ever I believed, of the Love of
Christ, and his promised Salvation! How much more glorious is the Person of my
Redeemer! How much more Excellent is the Heavenly State, than ever I thought or
expected! I could not have imagined the thousandth, thousandth Part of that
which I now see and feel. I cannot but admire, and spend an Eternity in
admiring, and praising the incomparable Grace and Glory of my blessed Redeemer.

Such Holy Admiration will certainly produce the most thankful Adoration of our
Lord Jesus. Saying one to another, O Bless the Lord of Love and Glory! Who
humbled himself so low, as our Mediator, and has exalted us so high, as the
blessed Fruit of it! How can we ever enough adore and praise him, who
condescended so far, and has done and suffered so much for us? See how the
Holy Angels worship this King of Glory! And have not every one of us more
reason to do so? O let all the Quire of Heaven celebrate his glorious Love! And
let us his Redeemed, his Glorified ones say continually, Let the Lord be
magnified; who has loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, and
made us Kings and Priests unto God his Father, and through him ours.

O merciful Savior! O glorious Change! O happy Society! With whom we shall
Eternally adore our Common Lord. We can some of us remember, when we lived
together on Earth, how we wept and prayed, and fasted and mourned together, how
we suffered, and complained, and sinned together. O the mavelous Change our
Redeemer has now wrought for us, and in us! These Bodies, these Souls, this
Life, this Place, this Company, these Enjoyments, are not like those in yonder
World. But alas, who can describe what Believers shall then think, and say to
extol their Savior! How small a Portion is it we understand of that World? How
little can I conceive, and how much less express? Blessed be God we know so
much, as the matter of our joyful Hopes; and for ever Blessed be God, who has
promised and provided such a Glory for us, as cannot now be fully known.

What inexpressible Sweetness might Believers taste, by rejoicing in Hope, did a
more lively Faith realize all this to their Souls? We might listen as it were
to the Shouts and Acclamations of the Saints above, and say Amen to their
Thanksgivings. We might behold them about the Throne of God, and of the Lamb,
with Psalms of Victory in their Hands, a Crown of Glory on their Heads, and
Songs of Triumph in their Mouths, saying, Allelujah; Rev. 4. c. 11. 5. c. 12,
13.
Worthy art thou, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power; for thou
have created all things, and for thy Pleasure they are, and were created. And
worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing. And again, Blessing, Honor,
Glory and Power be unto him who sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, for ever
and ever.

Whence is it, O my Soul! if indeed I believe and expect all this; that I can
Hear, and Read, and Think, and Speak of these great Things, with no more ardent
Affections, suitable Preparations, importunate Prayers, and vigorous Desires?
How should the believing Thoughts of that Day promote my Heavenly-mindedness,
Self-denial, Contempt of the World, Patience and Perseverance? Quicken my Zeal,
secure my Stedfastness, and give Life and Spirit to my Prayers for the
hastening of it? How should my Soul rise toward Heaven, by holy Love and
Desire? Ascend and meet him, get as near him as I can, breathe after more of
his Presence, and beg him to prepossess my Heart, to anticipate his second
Coming by clearer Discoveries of his Love, and fuller Communications of his
Grace? Even so, Come Lord Jesus.

XXIV.
Concerning the Examination of a man's Heart and Life: the Reasonableness,
Advantages, and Necessity of it. Some Direction and Advice concerning the Time
and Manner. That we may know in what Preparedness we are for Eternity.

I Am hastening every Year, every Day, to the period of this Life: I must
shortly appear before my Glorious Judge; and experience these Terrors or
Comforts, this Blessedness or Misery, which I have now read of. Shall I not
therefore inquire, which of the two belongs to me? Is it not worth considering,
whither I must go, and how I shall fare, when I quit this Body? What is like to
be my next Habitation? To which of the two unchangeable States I shall be
adjudg'd? Shall an Inquiry of so much consequence be put off, to an indefinite
hereafter? Do I not desire to know the worst, while a remedy may be found? Or
am I content to dye, through an unwillingness to discover that I am Sick? The
Question to be resolved, is of infinite weight. Shall I not spend a few hours
to know what will become of me for ever? An error is more than possible, it is
easy to mistake; and the hazard of doing so is unspeakeably great. How many
thousands perish eternally, even under the Light of the Gospel, who never
suspected their Danger? How ordinary, how common a thing is it, for Men to be
thus deceived! How successful is the Devil in this Stratagem against the Souls
of Men!

Is it not then a most criminal Stupidity, to be contentedly ignorant, and
unresolved, whether I am reconciled to God or no; whether I am led by the Flesh
or by the Spirit; whether I am in the broad or narrow way, which lead to such
contrary ends; that is, whether, if I die in this condition, I shall be saved
or perish? Can such an enquiry be frivolous or indifferent? Is the subject of
it so contemptible, or my concern in it so small, that it merits not to be
attentively considered? Shall I never ask my Soul, till I am leaving this
World, (the unfittest time of all to begin so important an Affair) what am I?
To whom do I belong? Whose Image do I bear? How have I lived, and what do I do?
What do I love most? What do I most constantly desire, and choose, and seek? How
does the Pulse of my Soul beat? Is it quickest toward God, or toward the
World? Whither am I going? What will be the final upshot and issue of my
present course? Is it Heaven or Hell I must be translated to by dying? What
security have I got for Eternal Life? What provisions have I made? What
Foundation have I laid?

How strangely infatuated are most Men, who talk of an Everlasting Life, as an
Article of their Creed, and say they count upon it, that they must dwell in
Happiness or Misery for ever; and seldom or never bethink themselves in good
earnest, and for any time, with a settled composed exercise of thoughts, which
of these Two is like to be their Lot. Or if they begin to search and try
themselves, they come to no Conclusion, or conclude too hastily; they pluck off
the Plaster, as soon as it begins to smart; they are either frighted with the
horrid prospect of past Crimes, or having escaped the grosser Pollutions of the
World, judge too favorably of their own case. They commonly do the Work but by
halves, and so go from the Glass, and forget what manner of Persons they were.

Let me therefore, O my Soul! Sequester my self from the World, to commune with
my own Heart, to reflect upon my past Life, and look into my present State, to
recollect and review the most considerable Passages of my course, and time
hitherto. O how neglected and disused a Practice is this, which does challenge
and require our principal and most serious Concerns about it! And how many
begin it, and are discouraged, and leave off without reaching the end of such
an Enquiry?

How much wiser in this respect are the Children of this World, in their
Generation, than the Children of Light? Who is so exact in his Accounts between
God and his own Soul, as Tradesmen in their Dealings with one another? Who is
at the pains to write down his Sins and his Mercies? the grounds of his Fear,
and the Encouragements of his Hope; or keeps a Journal and Diary of his
Spiritual State? Who does at set times, once a Month, or once a Quarter, or
even once a Year, take a just view of himself, his Heart, and Life, and State,
as a Christian; that he may see what he has received and done, what he owes,
and what he may expect; that he may know whether he thrive or decay; whether he
increase or decrease; whether he go backward or forward; whether he be Richer
or Poorer this Year than the last? And is it not a Symptom that you are
declining, when you love not to examine your Accounts? Is there not ground of
jealousy and suspicion, that you are behind-hand, because you are loath to
inquire, whether you are or no? And unwilling to know the worst of your
Condition? Nevertheless, without such Enquiries, and bringing the matter to a
Determination, at what uncertainties must we live? And how unconceivable an
hazard do all Hypocrites and unrenewed Sinners run? And how reasonable, how
necessary is it that we should know, and in order to it, prove our selves? We
must therefore bestow Time, and serious Diligence about it, that we may examine
matters to the bottom, and come to some Result; so that we may form a right
Judgment concerning our own Case.

He that would do it to good purpose, must endeavor to understand clearly the
terms of the Covenant, on God's part, and on ours: And take care not to Judge
of himself by mistaken Rules; by a false Standard that God will not justify;
or by any such Characters as will not conclude. But most Men are unwilling to
bring themselves to a Trial, or to let Conscience deal plainly and faithfully
with them. They are stupidly secure, and see not the necessity of this duty: Or
do not suspect themselves. They presume they need not be at that Trouble: Or
are so taken up with the World, that they cannot find time and leisure for it.
And many Men dare not bring their Hearts and Ways to a Trial. There is commonly
some secret Lust indulged, which they are loath to let go. But most go on in
sin, and perish Eternally, because they think there is no danger of perishing:
and never Repent, and make their Peace with God, because they fancy, and
presume it is done already.

Therefore let me beg of thee, whoever thou art, who read this, to put the
Case to thy self, seriously to admit the doubt, whether you are not mistaken;
make the supposition, that you have not hitherto sufficiently considered the
State of your Soul. You are confident that all is well; and thereupon are
unwilling to Examine farther: But for that very reason you ought to question,
whether it be so or not? Do but ask your selves seriously, what is the ground
of your good Opinion concerning your self? For what reason can you thus
conclude?

Did you ever seriously lay to heart the Characters, and Description, which the
Scriptures give, of those whom Christ will own at the last day; and of such
whom he will reject and reprobate? With unfeigned Application to your own case,
have you therewith proved your selves? and come to a settled Judgment, after a
deliberate Enquiry? and was the Conclusion to your Comfort and Joy? If so, what
influence has it since had upon your Heart and Life? Has it promoted Purity,
Thankfulness, Heavenly-mindedness, Contempt of this World, and stronger Desires
after the Image, Love, and Presence of God, and the Glory of Christ? Moreover,
consider,

Is not this a good while a-go? How have you behaved your self ever since? Have
you not reason to look back with shame? If you but slightly examined your self
formerly, resolve to do it more effectually now: Review the sins you have been
since guilty of. And if you have not done any thing considerable of this kind,
you ought now to begin. It is seasonable to begin the year by such an Exercise,
and it will be found of great use, in all the following parts of it: Especially
when you come to examine your self afresh, in order to the Lord's Supper. For
we ought frequently to renew the sad Remembrance of our former Sins; that from
time to time we may renew our Repentance, which is the Work of our Life, and
not of one day. And he that comes to the Sacrament, and will look no farther
back, than to the last Communion, may possibly presume too much, that all was
then, as it should be, and not be humble enough.

If any one therefore resolve in good earnest upon an holy Life, and seriously
design to prepare for Eternity, as it is necessary to make a general Review of
his Life, so I desire to afford him the best Counsel I can, in order to it.

It may be advisable, Vid. Mr. Baxter's Saints Rest. p. 3. Chap. 7, 8, 9.
if you have not formerly begun this Work, to employ one hour at least in a
Day, for several Days following, in writing down the most considerable Passages
of your Life you can remember, desiring God's Assistance therein; and keeping
your Eye upon your End, in the whole; that is, thinking serioussy that it is in
order to Eternity, that you now examine your self. Choose a place of Retirement,
and the most convenient Time, that you may not be interrupted, and when your
Heart is most serious. Every man may divide his Life into several parts, as
from Infancy till he left off going to School, or was bound Apprentice, or
settled in any way of Education. From thence, till fixed in some Employment: If a
Married Person, till entered into that Condition. And from thence to another
remarkable Period, or to the present Time. It may better assist some Persons
memory, to consider the several Places of their abode, and compute according to
them. In each portion of time, recollect what sins you were most addicted to:
in what Instances, with what Frequency, and with what other various
Aggravations, you committed 'em: And what have been the effects and
consequences of those sins, to your selves, and others, in order to Repentance,
and Godly Sorrow. Which must not be judged of by Tears, but Grief, and inward
hatred of Sin. Remembering that no man is the better, merely for being examined,
if there follows nothing after it. It Is in order to a Judgment to be passed
upon our selves. It Is to search out our own Iniquity, our Beloved sin, in order
to the Mortification of it. That Goliath must first be slain, if ever the other
Philistines are conquered. In some it is Pride, in others Worldliness, in some
Uncleanness, in others Drunkenness, Gluttony, etc. That you may discover it,
observe, What sin it is you are most unwilling to part with: Which you could
even wish were not forbidden.

Which you have formerly been most apt to plead for, to extenuate, or excuse,
and hide.

The thoughts whereof do most frequently occur; especially when alone: first in
the morning, and last at night: And are most distracting in Prayer and Worship.

Which an awakened Conscience has most plainly told you of; under a Sermon, or
at a Sacrament, or under some heavy Affliction, or on a sickbed, etc.

Which you can least bear to be reproved for.

Which the Temperament of your body does most incline to.

Which your Calling, Employment, Company, and Converse, administer the greatest
Temptations for.

That especially which has the Throne of the Heart, and sets all the faculties
awork, to contrive fuel and opportunities for its Gratification.

Observe likewise what Passion was most Predominant in each Period of Time, or
is yet so; and what ill effects it has produced. Consider farther what
dangerous Temptations you have met with; how you have fallen by 'em, or been
enabled to resist. Consider withal the Time, and the Means, whereby God has at
any time formerly awakened, convinced, and humbled you; what Purposes of
Amendment, and Promises of Reformation you have ever made; and how far you
have, or have not performed 'em. Recollect likewise all the special Mercies you
have received from God in every State and Period of your Life, in order to
thankfulness. The last Section of these Papers may give you some Assistance
therein, and consider what Returns you have made to God, for all his Kindness.

You may do well to consider your self also, in the Relations you have stood to
others; as Inferior, Equal, or Superior; in Family, Church or State; in your
Calling, Profession, Employment, etc. And examine in what more notorious
Instances, you have been faulty in your Relative Duties. How you did ordinarily
carry it in your Place and Station; for that is the best, the truest Picture of
a Man, which is like him in his ordinary, every days Habit. Particularly
reflect upon the Sins you have committed in Company with others. By whose
Example you have been drawn to Sin; who may probably have been tempted by
yours, and bewail it; and if the Persons are living, admonish them to Repent;
and if you have injured and wronged any, acknowledge your Fault, and to the
utmost of your Power, make speedy Restitution. If any of your Companions in
Sin, are Dead, and you fear died without Repentance; humble your self
particularly before God, for having contributed to their Damnation. I know of
some who have made such a Catalogue of their Sins, with the most observable
Aggravations of them; which they constantly preserved, and frequently reviewed,
to keep them Humble, Penitent, Watchful, and Thankful; and on some occasions of
secret Humiliation, have spread them before the Lord (as Hezekiah did the
Writing of his Enemy) covering themselves with Shame and Confusion of Face, by
considering what they have been, and thence admiring the Riches of free Grace,
in the forgiveness of such Crimes, through the Blood of Christ.

Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my Reins, and my Heart for thy Loving
kindness is before mine Eyes, and I will walk in thy Truth. Thou have searched
me, O Lord, and known me; Thou know my Thoughts a far off; all my secret
Sins are in the Light of thy Countenance; and thou art acquainted with all my
ways; set my Sins in order before me, that I may Repent and forsake them. Show
me mine Infirmities and Wickedness, that I may watch against them. And teach me
to Judge and condemn my self, that I may not be judged of the Lord, or
condemned with the World.

XXV.
How Christians ought to examine their Decays of Grace and Piety. The greatness
of their Sin, and of their Loss under such a Declension: God's Displeasure, and
departure from them, considered, to awaken Endeavors of a Recovery. In what
manner the Faith of Adherence may be acted by one, who has no Assurance.

IT cannot but be of use to Believers also, at stated Times to examine
themselves, concerning their Languishings and Decays in Grace, falling from
their first Love, to a Spirit of Indifferency and Lukewarmness, disorderly
walking or unfruitfulness; whether gray Hairs are not here and there upon them,
and they know it not. For God may withdraw by degrees, so that his Departure
may not presently be perceived. And some kind of Activity in Duty, may be
continued upon false Principles, and from Common Assistance, while a Christian,
as to his spiritual State, may be under a dangerous Consumption. It Is not
difficult for others to observe it some times, and would be visible enough to
themselves, would they spare a few hours to examine the matter. The Punishment
of such Backslidings, the loss of the quickening, and comforting Presence of the
Holy Spirit, deserves likewise to be inquired into, in order to a speedy
Remedy, and should enforce the Counsel.

I mean not barely the Ebbing of Affections in the Duties of Religion, or the
want of Life, and quickening from sensible Consolations, which new Converts,
(especially such as have been reclaimed from a course of notorious Impiety)
have more of at first, than afterward. This doubting Christians should
particularly take notice of, by the Instance of the Prodigal, who was
extraordinarily feasted at his first Return, but was doubtless contented
afterward with the ordinary Provisions of his Fathers house. Neither does God
dispense the same measure to all alike, nor to any alike at all Times: Some,
who are called to greater Services and Sufferings, than others, or had greater
Conflicts before Conversion, may have a greater share than the rest of their
Brethren. Neither will the same degree of Grace imparted to some Persons, so
discernably move and comfort, as it will do some others of a different Temper.
It Is not therefore so much to be the matter of our Enquiry, (if at all it need
to be so) whether we have more or less of sensible Joy, in the performance of
Duty. But

Whether we are not fallen and declined, as to the inward vital Acts of Grace,
and in the outward Fruits of Holiness. Whether we have such clear convincing
Apprehensions of Divine and Spiritual Truths, and the Mysteries of the Gospel,
as formerly; whether our minds are not become more vain and heedless; whether
our Knowledge of God, and of the Revelations of his Will, be as powerful and
efficacious upon our Hearts and Lives, as heretofore; whether there be not less
Frequency, less Consistency, less inward Satisfaction in holy serious Thoughts,
than formerly. You were wont to pray and endeavor, that God might be first and
last in your Thoughts every day, and by frequent Ejaculations in civil affairs,
to maintain a daily converse with God; but now you mind not whether it be so or
not; yea, you cannot but know, that it is not thus with you still. It was once
your Burden to be pestered with foolish, filthy, worldly, vain Thoughts,
especially on the Lord's Day, or in the Worship of God; you rejected and
disowned them, you lamented and prayed against them; do so much as examine,
whether it be thus still.

Consider all your Affections, and their several Objects; and see whether a
Criminal Lukewarmness has not diffused it self into every of them. Examine
every Grace; and see whether your Faith, Hope, Love, holy Desires, and Delight
in God be not miserably abated; as to the strength and vigor, the efficacy, and
frequent exercise of every of them; so that your Thoughts of God are few, cold,
and lifeless, without Desire, Delight and Love.

Consider the Opportunities of Public Worship, and solemn Occasions of
approaching the Divine Presence: Are they as much the desire of your Souls, and
the rejoicing of your Hearts, as once they were? Are you not more easily
diverted from them, less satisfied and refreshed by them? Are not all
Gospel Ordinances less powerful and quickening, and your profit and advantage
thereby unspeakably less than formerly? Do you hunger and thirst, and pant as
the Heart after the Waterbrooks, to draw nigh to God, and come into his Courts?
Do you make conscience of preparing beforehand? Do you come with a real desire,
and design, and expectation of profiting, and bettering your Spirits? Do you
join in every part of Divine Worship with that attention, seriousness, and
composure of mind, and taste the sweetness and benefit of such Solemnities, as
formerly? Are such services performed with that Awe of God, with that Humility,
Fervency, and Intensness of Spirit, as sometimes they were? Are you not more
negligent and unconcerned before and after, whether you find any thing of this,
or no? Though your Desires are weak, your Hearts flat, your Thoughts wandering,
your Spirits trifling, so the work be done, and the duty be over, (in how
formal, customary, and careless a manner, soever it be) you consider it not,
you lay it not to heart, you reflect not upon it, you bewail it not: Or at
least are better contented, and sooner quieted, and take less notice of the
frame of your Heart in such Duties, than formerly.

Examine farther, how it is with you as to the great distinguishing Duties of an
upright Christian, (if performed as they ought to be) I mean Secret Prayer, and
Meditation: Are you as strict and careful, constant and conscientious, frequent
and abundant in these, as formerly? May not our Closets and places of
Retirement witness against us? How seldom are we there? How quickly are we
gone? How easily diverted? How soon tired? How do we trifle in that work, and
shuffle it over and take up with the shadow and image of Prayer? Our former
humble and importunate Prayers, joyful Thanksgivings, and sweet Contemplation
of the Mysteries of Religion, compared with our present daily practice, will
testify that we are declined and fallen.

Moreover consider the Evil of Sin, and how your Heart stands affected to it.
Is not your Hatred of Sin, and Zeal against it much decayed? especially with
respect to inward Spiritual Sins, such as the secret workings of unbelief, and
distrust, pride, envy, uncharitableness, etc. Do you bewail it, strive against
it, and shun the occasions, and fear the temptations that may lead you into
Sin, as once you did? Have you not lost much of that tenderness, and holy
Jealousy over your heart and ways you formerly had? Do you not now make more
bold with Temptation? Are you not oftener conquered? And with less Reluctance?
And by smaller Temptations, etc.

Are you not more Unserviceable? Root and Fruit in a withering condition? God
less honored, and others less profited, and edified by your Example and Life?
Do you not adhere more to the World? conform to it, and comply with it in many
things, which formerly you durst not have done? And are every day waxing worse?
Make a pause a while, and bethink your self, what this will come to at last,
when even the little Good that remains, is ready to die.

May I not ask such Christians, or desire them to ask themselves; What is
already the effect and consequence of this Declension? Is not God's Spirit
removed, and the Light of his Countenance Eclipsed? Yea as to many of them, are
they not under sad apprehensions of God's displeasure? Do they not feel the
terrors of the Lord? Do they not walk heavily from day to day? They, that could
once converse with God on all occasions as a Friend, and a Father, do now think
of God and are troubled: Thick Darkness does incompass them round about: They
have lost the sense of his Love, the comforts of his presence, and their Song
in the night, and see no relief. This is a more hopeful Case however than
theirs, who are under great Backslidings and Desertion, and hardly sensible of
it. To awaken and assist both; Consider I beseech you, whence you are fallen,
and what you have lost, and what will be the Issue of this; if Sickness, or
some smart Affliction overtake you; or if you should die in this condition. And
inquire seriously, and presently, into the Cause of all this Evil: For a few
transient thoughts will not affect the Heart, and persuade to Action. And do it
presently, because by every delay your work will be the harder, your danger the
greater, and your recovery the more difficult. Reflect upon the Sinfulness as
well as Affliction of this case. Know that you have displeased God, and run
from him, neglected his Presence, and grieved his Spirit, and in what Instances
you have done so, that has made him weary of his dwelling; what Ordinances you
have slighted; what Duties you have omitted; what sins you have given way to;
in order to Repentance and deep Humiliation.

Can you contentedly sit still with this dismal State of things? While God has
somewhat (yea a great deal indeed) against you, for having left your first
Love? Will you not endeavor to remove that, which has made such a Separation
between God and you, and brought you thus low? What Communion with God, what
Communications of his Grace, what Influences of his Spirit, and Evidences of
his Favor have you lost? And will you not acknowledge your Iniquity, and abase
your selves in the Dust, and return to the Lord, and do your first Works? That
he may heal your Backslidings, and receive you graciously; that you may again
take hold of his Covenant, and be at Peace with him?

But to be at Peace with God, is not the whole of your Concern; you need not
only a Pardon, but a Physician to heal you; as does a Malefactor, that is not
only liable to the Law, but desperately sick. Your State is sinful, and
dangerous, as well as troublesome. From performing duties in such a manner as
you now do, you may quickly be Tempted to let them altogether alone. God may be
so far provoked, to suffer Satan to make attempts upon you of that kind: (and
he is forward enough to make use of such an opportunity, to try all his Snares
and Stratagems against you:) till he prevail with you, to think hardly of God
himself, Vid. Mr. Gilpin, of Temptation, part 2. chap. 6.
unthankfully to overlook all his former kindnesses, to put the worst
Interpretation that can be upon all his Providence, to distrust and quarrel
with him, as if his Faithfulness had failed, and his Mercy were clean gone for
ever, and there were no hope left for one in your case: and so run into
Desperation, and through the subtilty and violence of Satan's Temptations, try
the most foolish and unlawful means for ease and cure; either open
Licentiousness, or it may be Self-murder.

Therefore speedy, present Repentance is necessary, to find out, and mortify
every Corruption, and that especially, which Conscience tells us, you have most
indulged; from whence your Distress does principally arise: Confessing your Sin
freely, fully, and without reserve, and waiting on God in the diligent use of
all means, for the recovery of that which you have lost: and justifying God in
his Righteousness, Truth, Wisdom, Holiness, in all his Rebukes. That you may
regain a Spirit of Prayer, and taste the sweetness, virtue, and efficacy of
every Duty, and of every Ordinance; and God may give you the Garment of Praise
for the Spirit of Heaviness, and the Joy of the Lord may be your Strength, for
future service and suffering.

In the mean time, do not cast away your Hope, but though you have (too justly)
deprived your self of the Faith of Assurance, yet endeavor to maintain and
exercise the Faith of Adherence Vid. Dr. Owen on Pf. 130.2.
. Say unto God, that because there is forgiveness with him, therefore he is to
be feared. My sin is not too great to be forgiven. It Is not the Unpardonable
Sin: For I desire to repent, and am resolved to return. I will still cleave to
the Lord, and wait upon him, and follow hard after him, and take no other
course for Deliverance and Comfort. Mine is not a single Case: I am not the
only Soul that has been so distressed, and yet found relief by seeking unto
God. It Is therefore good for me to hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of
God Lam. 3.26.
. I will draw near to God; I will lie at his foot; and continue in all ways of
Worship and Duty, wherein I may hope to meet with the quickening, and comfort,
of his Spirit: I will seek relief from no other; I will keep as near him as I
can; whither else shall I go, he alone has the words of Eternal Life; he alone
can create (what is the fruit of his own lips) Peace, Peace.

Vid. Mr. Baxter 's Method for Peace of Conscience.
I will encourage my self in the consideration of his General Grace, and the
probabilities of his special Love: I will recollect my former Experiences, when
I had some good hope, through Grace, concerning my Adoption: I will remember
the years of the right hand of the most High. If God will give me so much Grace
as to continue waiting, I will hope still: And though I walk in darkness, and
see little or no Light, I will stay my self on the Lord. And if by the want of
sensible Consolation, he will make me more humble, and keep me in a greater
Submission to his Will, I will bless his holy Name; and derive more comfortable
hope from thence, than from the most sweet and sensible Consolations I ever
had; and look upon Humility, Self-denial, Dependence on God, Resignation to
him, and Hatred of sin, as a better sign of his Love, than the highest fervors
of Affection in his service can be.

Oh that I had formerly done as much for Holiness, as I have for Comfort! By
the enjoyment of the one, I should have had more of the other: The Exercise of
Grace would have discovered the Truth of it. Let me therefore accuse and
condemn my self; but still trust, and love God, and wait upon him. Let me
resolve never to choose a new Lord or Master. Or take up with any Portion
beneath God himself; or any way of Hope or Salvation but by Jesus Christ, my
only Savior; neither let me forsake the way of Faith and Holiness, for all the
Hopes and Happiness of this World, if put to my choice. But be always able to
say, (blessed be God I now can) that I will return to my former Husband, for
then it was better with me than now. I had peace and refreshment in my former
ways, I will return to them. Lord, forsake me not utterly! Keep not thine Anger
for ever: Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from
me: Restore unto me the Joy of thy Salvation, that my Heart may be enlarged to
praise thy Name, and to run the way of thy Commandments.

XXVI.
Confession of Sin, Humiliation, and Repentance must follow upon
Self-Examination. Advice concerning Repentance of some particular Backsliding.
The great Perplexity and Distress of a Penitent Sinner represented, as a
Caution against returning to Folly.

THat we may turn unto the Lord, is the end of searching and trying our Ways.
Lord! I have been searching my Heart, and considering my Ways, but can find
little or no good; neither can I discover all that is evil in both. But I find
enough to make my own Heart condemn me, and Thou, (who art greater than my
Heart, and know all things,) may much more condemn me. I am altogether
unclean, polluted, and abominable.

If I go about to enumerate the Sins of my Thoughts, Words and Actions, in all
the periods of my Life hitherto; if I consider my Omissions of Duty, and daily
Crimes by actual Commission; If I reflect upon my Sins according to their
respective Objects, as either against Thee, O God, and against my Neighbor,
and against my own Soul or Body; and compare my Heart and Life with thy strict
and holy Law, and think in how many Instances I have transgrest every of thy
Righteous Commandments: I find they are more than the hairs on my Head, they
cannot be numbered. Who can tell how often he has offended? Many of my sins make
little Impression on my Memory, (I observe them not, I remember them not): But
this hinders not, but they may make deep Impression on my Conscience, which
will one day be awake, and set them in order before me; and they are all
written in thy Book of Remembrance, in order to my final Judgment. All my sins
are before thee: But thou requirest my humble Confession of them, in order to
Repentance; and as a part thereof, that I freely acknowledge their heinous
Aggravations to shame, and humble my self the more before thee, whom I have
offended and provoked.

How long did I serve diverse Lusts and Pleasures, with the neglect and
forgetfulness of God? How sad a Prospect may I take of the far greatest part of
my Life past? Especially of my younger years, which have been trifl'd away in
vanity and folly? And since I have known the way of Truth, how shamefully have
I prevaricated with God? I am confounded to consider, how often I have despised
the Commandment, and rebelled against the Light; against the Principles of
Education, and the checks of Conscience, frequent Warnings from God, and
Reproofs from Others; contrary to my Profession, and Experience, contrary to
the Obligation of peculiar Mercies, solemn Promises, Resolutions, and
Engagements, and a nearer Relation to God than many others; Which sins have
more dishonored the Lord, discredited his Holy Gospel, gratified the Devil,
scandalized the World, and strengthened the hands of the ungodly, than the sins
of others. And alas! How much of my precious Time is thus gone, which if duly
improved, would now afford me comfort to review.

How much Guilt have I contracted every Year, particularly in this last? I now
begin another, which will soon be gone, as that which was concluded Yesterday.
And shall I only advance in Age, to increase the number of my sins, and
heighten my Account against the Day of Reckoning? In Temporal and Civil
Affairs, Day unto Day utters knowledge, and Night unto Night teaches Wisdom.
We are taught by Experience many useful Lessons, which we should not else have
learnt; to reform many Errors and mistakes, to correct many rash and foolish
Actions, and Speeches, etc. And shall I not learn Wisdom by the Experience of
another Year, in what concerns my greatest, my Eternal Interest? Shall not the
reflection on my past sins, prevent my Commission of the like? Especially
considering how my sins are aggravated, by every Mercy I have received; by
every Affliction I have undergone; every awakenning Sermon I have heard; every
motion of God's Spirit, and every check of my own Conscience that I have
resisted; every offer of his Grace; every warning of his Providence; every
invitation and call of his Word; every purpose to Repent, and every resolution
I have made to forsake sin: The greater knowledge I have had of my danger, the
longer time I have deliberated about it; the oftener I have confessed my sin,
and been sorry for it; every reproof I have had from others, and every promise
I have made my self, does aggravate, and increase my Guilt.

How many Years has God vouchsafed me to work out my Salvation? But how little
have I done toward it? Had I died this last Year, how unprepared must I have
made my Appearance before his Tribunal? What opportunities of doing, and
receiving good have I let slip? Have I not made it more my business to seem
Religious, than really to be so? How much of the Patience of God have I abused?
Refusing his Calls to Repentance, resisting the strivings of his Spirit,
smothering my Convictions, and turning the Grace of God into wantonness?
Instead of returning Gratitude for all his Love, I have repeated my
Transgressions after Forgiveness; and gone in a circle of Repenting and
Sinning, even to this day. Lord, I am ashamed, and lay my self in the dust
before thee. To me belongs nothing but shame and confusion of Face. If God
should condemn and punish me as a Rebel, and a Traitor, and give me the Portion
of Hypocrites, I cannot but own his Justices; even in Hell I must do it, with
my flaming Tongue and Breath.

O spare me, for thy Mercy's sake! Enter not into Judgment with thy servant,
for in thy sight shall no flesh living be justified; if Thou lay Judgment to
the Line, and Equity to the Plummet. Give me Repentance unto life, never to be
repented of, never to be retracted again. Bring me to the Blood of Jesus, which
cleanses from all sin. Behold the sighings of a contrite Spirit: For I
acknowledge my Transgressions unto thee, against whom I have sinned: O Lord,
forgive the Iniquity of my Sin. I am unworthy to lift up my Hands and Eyes
toward Heaven, unworthy to be called thy Son, or thy Servant: I am vile in
mine own eyes, because I have made my self vile in Thine. For this I am
troubled, and mourn, and my Soul is grieved within me.

O thou Heavenly Physician of Souls! from thy Pity alone I expect my cure. I am
miserable and undone without thy Compassion; and expect no relief but from the
Treasure of thy Grace. I must perish, and sink under the burden of Sin, if thy
merciful hand do not save me, and lift me up. I am intangl'd and ensnared by
the Devil and my Lusts, and without thy Succor can never hope to get free. O
Lord, forgive my Sin, and heal my Soul: Deliver and save me, for thy Mercies
sake.

May I not yet hope in thy Mercy? Thou have mercifully born with me hitherto:
Thou call me to repent; thou command me to return, and promisest to
forgive those Sins, which are confessed and forsaken: O do not cast me out of
thy Sight and Presence, now I desire, from the bottom of my Heart, to return to
thee! I abhor my self, in dust and ashes, for my past Iniquities. But alas!
such is the hardness of my Impenitent Heart, that I am even ashamed of my
humblest Repentance: how much more may God despise and reject it? But have thou
not given thy Blessed Son to die for Sinners? and exalted him to this very end,
to be a Prince, and a Savior, to give Repentance, and Remission of Sins? And
by the word of thy Grace, thou beseechest all (even the greatest Sinners) to
accept of mercy; and art more willing to Pardon, than we can be to Repent. It Is
thy Delight and Glory, agreeable to thy Nature, and declared Name, as a God
gracious, and merciful, slow to Anger; and of great Kindness, forgiving
Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin. O Pardon mine Iniquity, for it is great; and
receive an humble Penitent, who implores thy Grace, according to the Tenor of
thy new Covenant, flying to the Arms of thy Mercy, through the Merits of Jesus
Christ, who is able to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him.

Lord, hear my Prayer, and let not the mixture of my weaknesses and
unworthiness turn it into Sin: but graciously vouchsafe to look upon a
Returning Prodigal; and cause me to hear the voice of Joy and Gladness, that my
sorrowful Heart may be comforted, and my life be directed to thy Praise. Lead
me into the path of life, that I may no longer err from the way of thy
Commandments: Teach me to do thy Will, O God, and write thy Law upon my Heart,
that I may never more return to Folly. I am convinced of the Evil of Sin, of
thy Right to govern me, of the Equity and Justice of thy Law, of the Sweetness
and Rewards of keeping thy Precepts: O sanctify my Heart, and make me Sound in
thy Statutes, that I may hate every false way, and be devoted to thy Fear, the
remainder of my Life.

If there be any particular Lust, or Wickedness, which through the power of
Temptation, and the deceitfulness of Sin, you have fallen into; that has
wasted Conscience, and robbed you of your Peace, and provoked God to write
bitter things against you; be sure to humble your self without delay, in an
especial manner, for that Backsliding: Confess it freely, with its
Aggravations. Consider whether it was not after some special manifestation of
God's Love, after some special Warning, some strong Conviction, under or soon
after some great Affliction from God, or some more than ordinary Kindness of
his Providence, etc. And impress such Thoughts, to humble your self the lower,
search into the grounds and causes of such Apostasy, such as the abatement of
your Watchfulness, the neglect of serious closet-Devotion, making bold with
Temptation, too great compliance with vain Company, venturing too far in lawful
or indifferent Things, too much Confidence in your own Wisdom, Strength, and
Stedfastness, not fearing sufficiently the Approaches and Beginnings of Sin, or
avoiding the fuel, incentives, and occasions of it, etc. Palliate and disguise
nothing, that may make your Sin exceeding sinful, lest by some little Art of
the Devil, you deceive your self, by an half-Repentance; and the Evil Spirit
you think to be cast out, return again with seven worse than himself, and so
your latter end be worse than your Beginning. For if the Sin be not truly
hated, but only covered over with penitential Ashes, it will quickly flame out
again, when it meets with combustible Matter, and a strong blast of Temptation.

But if you are grieved to the very Heart, and abhor the Sin, and resolve to
quit it, you need not doubt of God's readiness to receive you to Mercy. His
Spirit is yet striving with you, if you are willing to Repent, and return to
God. He sought you, and called you to return, when you were wandering as a lost
sheep in the broad way: And can you think he will not be found of you, if you
seek him with your whole Heart? Therefore renew your Repentance, and beg more
earnestly a Spirit of Humility, Holy Fear, and Watchfulness: And every Morning
implore Divine succors against that Sin, and all Temptations to it, ( which,
as much as possible, you must avoid.) Constant and fervent Prayer, after
Repentance, must be your Refuge, and your Remedy. If you let fall your Hands,
this Amaleck will prevail again. As soon and as far as you fail in the
Constancy, and Fervency of that Duty, your Sin will get strength, and
successfully attempt you another time. But by this Practice, God may turn Evil
to work for Good, make you gain by your Loss, stand the faster by your Falls,
and become stronger by the discovery of your Weakness, and so be better
established for the future.

But take heed that you pervert not the Grace of God, and encourage your self
to sin again by the Supposition, that if you should Fall, it is but to Repent,
and renew your Resolutions, and all will be well. This is a subtle Artifice of
Satan, but such, methinks, as should take with none, who have ever known by
Experience, what it is to Repent. Who have felt the burden of Sin to be heavier
than a Millstone; than the weight of a Mountain. Who have tasted, how evil and
bitter a thing it is, to depart from God. Who have loathed and abhorred
themselves, with deep Remorse, and Sorrow, and Anguish of Spirit: wishing with
all their Hearts, that they had not sinned; and if it were in their power,
would give all the World to retrieve it; and would rather die, than commit that
Folly Luke 23.30. and 17.2.
again, they then repented of. Let those who have not their own Experience to
confirm this, read over (and consider the Case of David, when he wrote) the
Penitential Psalms. How many, like him, have roared, and cried out under the
sense of Sin, of stings and furies in their Conscience, of the poisoned Arrows
in their Souls, and his Terrors surrounding them wherever they went; from the
sense of his Sins Malignity, the apprehensions of God's Anger, and the
consequent Fears of his Wrath. Serious Repentance after great Transgressions,
is another Thing than most imagine it. When their aggravated Sins shall beset
them behind, and before, be placed in order before their eyes, and set in array
against them. It Is always a work of Difficulty, as well as Importance, to
crucify corrupt affections, to tear a beloved Lust from the Heart, with
self-indignation to abhor and cast away what before you loved and delighted
in. How did David's Sin stare him in the Face? It is continually with me, it is
ever before me, said He. It haunted him like a Spectre, or like Belshazzar's
Handwriting on the Wall, it still appeared before him in some horrid shape.

However Sin may smile in its first address, and bespeak us in flattering
language, and promise Pleasure, and Profit, and great Advantages and
Satisfaction; these are but fair Appearances; This is but the outside of the
Cup, and the Color of the Liquor: It will prove Gail and Wormwood, and a
mixture of deadly Poison, if ever God set it home upon the Conscience, and
awaken us to a true sense of it. And the Continuance of daily Repentance for
Sin, which all Christians are called to, is no such easy matter neither.
Constant Self-abasement, and Humiliation before God, from a sense of his
Majesty and Holiness, and of our many Sins, and Pollution thereby: The
imperfection of our best Duties continually to be bewailed; inordinate
Affections to be still mortified; always resisting and opposing Sin, in its
Root and Branches; conflicting against the whole Interest of the Flesh, the
World, and the Devil; seeking after more Holiness, to be derived unto us by the
Grace of Christ, to be wrought in us by his Spirit, and maintained by his
Power; and making daily Applications to the Fountain of all Grace, for
spiritual strength, to continue our warfare against Sin, in all Instances of
outward Duty, and inward Actings of Grace, even as long as we live; all this is
included in it. Due Apprehensions concerning Repentance, (as so comprehensive
and difficult a Duty,) would teach us to beware of Sin.

XXVII.
The Necessity of Christian Resolution to Upright, Persevering Obedience; how
full and extensive it ought to be, and yet humble; by what means we may be
assisted to perform that which we resolve.

HAving acknowledged my Transgressions unto God, and begged Forgiveness, and
experimentally learned the Evil of Sin, by the bitterness of Repentance, I
resolve, for the future, to watch against it more narrowly, and against every
thing that leads to it; endeavoring to please and honor my God and Savior,
by an upright, obedient Heart and Life. And for the Remission of my former
contracted Guilt, I trust to Jesus Christ, according to the Revelation made in
the Gospel, of what he is, has done, and suffered, and continues to do in
Heaven, for the Salvation of Repenting Sinners, who desire to come unto God by
Him.

But how often, O my Soul! have I mocked God, and deceived my self, with formal
and faint Purposes of Amendment? My good Resolutions have been all of them as
the morning Cloud, and the early Dew, which quickly passed away. One fresh
assault of Temptation has swept away all my good Purposes as a Spider's Web. I
have falsified so many, and broke my word so often, that I dare not trust to
any thing I now resolve, or rely on any Promise I should farther make. Succor
me therefore, O Lord, by thy powerful Grace, that what was defective in my
former fruitless Resolutions, may be now rectified. Let me be more humble in
the sense of my Weakness, more dependant on thy Grace, and more heartily seek
it from time to time. Strengthen me with Strength in my Soul, with Might and
Power in my inward man, that I may so resolve and purpose, as to perform; that
I may not be one day hot, and the next cold; zealous in the Beginning, but
faint and lukewarm in the Brogress; fervent and serious only in Resolving, but
weak and impotent in the Execution.

Having changed my Master, my End, and my Hopes, by returning unto God, from
whom I had gone astray, I firmly resolve, through the assistance of his Grace,
to change my Course of Life; that Old things being done away, all things may
become New; that Romans 6.22.
being made free from sin, by pardoning Mercy, and become the servant of
Christ, I may have my fruit unto Holiness, that my End may be Eternal Life. In
the interim, whether I live or die, let it be unto the Lord, resolving both in
Life and Death to be absolutely his. And to that purpose, O my Soul! Let me
seek for continual supplies of Grace from Christ my Head, to enable me to yield
ready Obedience, in the most difficult, hazardous, painful, and humbling
Duties. In vain do I resolve it, without the assistance of his mighty Power, to
strengthen my Heart and Hands, whenever I am called to such a trial of my
Sincerity. Without it I shall never recover my Liberty, or break asunder those
Bonds and Cords wherewith I have formerly been held Captive, as the Servant of
Sin and Satan. Such is the Weakness and Treachery of my own Heart, the
influence of ill Examples, and the subtlety and cunning of the Tempter, that
otherwise I shall quickly change my mind, and return to Folly, as the Dog to
his Vomit. The Spirit is so weak, and the Flesh so frail; the Snares of the
World so many, the Power of remaining Corruption so strong; and of my self I am
so unsettled and wavering, sickle and unsteady, and prone to backsliding, that
all my strongest purposes will not be sufficient, without daily strength from
above. My Senses are so deceitful; my Passions so ungovernable? the Rule and
Law I am to walk by, so strict, and spiritual, and extensive: Criminal
Omissions may be so frequent, and so easily overlooked; so many several and
difficult Duties are to be performed; and by every change of my Condition, or
of God's Providence, so many new Dangers and new Duties may arise, that I fear
the issue of my firmest Resolutions. So strict a Watch must always be kept;
such Humility and Caution is everywhere to be practiced; such speedy Repentance
required after every fall; with thankfulness and contentment in every State,
under all Calamities, (be they never so many, or never so pinching;) and
perseverance herein absolutely necessary, though never so many Stratagems be
used to discourage me from proceeding, or to entice me to go back, or turn
aside to some other Path; insomuch that if God had not promised me his
continued Presence, and that his Grace shall be sufficient for me, and that I
shall not be tempted above what I am able to bear; I should utterly despair of
making good what I now resolve.

But besides these Promises to encourage my Resolved Obedience, he has left
upon Record in his Word many glorious Examples, of his assisting and rewarding
the Courage and Resolution of his Servants to continue faithful; as in the case
of Joseph, Daniel, and his Three Friends, etc. If Christ stand by, and
strengthen me, I know I shall be able to do all things; I shall not then be
flattered, or frighted out of the way of my Duty; no Wind that can blow shall
then turn me to another Point; nothing shall then be able to prevail for my
consent to a wilful and deliberate forsaking of God; no Argument, no
Temptation, though Privacy, Opportunity, Impunity from Men, with Rewards of
Wordly Gain and Honor, should all concur to enforce a Temptation. But, by that
Heavenly Assistance, I shall be preserved Humble, Temperate, Chaste, Patient,
Thankful, Self-denying, Crucified to the World, and hold fast my Integrity till
I die; still perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, growing in Grace, and in
the Knowledge of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, waxing stronger from day to
day, be seldomer surpised, offend less, and repent more quickly, and watch
more narrowly afterward, till at last I receive the Crown.

Especially, let me watch against my Constitution Sins, such as I am most
inclined to, and where a Temptation does most easily enter; where the Devil can
take the fastest hold, and be least suspected; where he has formerly sprung a
Mine, and made a Breach: I have known some humble watchful Christians, after
being recovered from their Backslidings, who abhorred every Temptation to that
sin, by which they had been defiled and wounded: They can hardly put up a
Prayer, but they mention it; hardly have their hearts affected in any
Ordinance, but they are inwardly ashamed of it; hardly hear of any one guilty
of the like, but they are ready to burst out into Tears.

Fix therefore, I beseech thee, most Gracious God! My unfeigned Resolutions of
cleaving to thee, with full purpose of Heart: And show thy strength in my
weakness, by inabling me to do what I now resolve. To that end, teach me to
watch over my Heart, to keep it with all diligence, to be more conversant with
my own Thoughts, examining the motions that arise in my Heart, whence they
come, and whither they go, and what they tend to, that I may suppress the
beginnings of Sin. The unsearchable Deceitfulness of the Heart, the rovings,
straglings and wanderings of the Thoughts, the ungovernable motions and
stirrings of the Passions and Affections, with the corrupt Inclinations that
are ready to comply with Temptation, make such a constant Watchfulness
necessary. Let me live no longer as a stranger to my self, but by
Self-Reflection dwell more at home, reckoning my principal Work to be
within-doors, to keep my own Vineyard. Teach me to watch over my Senses, to
guard the door of my Lips, to govern my Passions; to be wary in the Choice of
my Company, and in the Right Use of it; to be Circumspect in every step of my
daily walk, to call my self frequently to a Reckoning, to cast up my Accounts
at the foot of every Page (by every days review of my Actions,) to live always
as in God's Presence, and be awed every where by the thought of his Holy Eye,
to shun the occasions and appearances of Evil, etc.

By the neglect of this, Spiritual Distempers will insensibly creep upon us.
There is such a venom and malignity in Sin, to wound and weaken the Soul, to
put us off the Hinges, to disorder and unfit us for any Spiritual Service, to
make our Hearts vain and frothy, lazy and listless, that we shall easily let
slip our Opportunities, lose our Seasons, and languish and pine away,
notwithstanding all the means of thriving and growth. And hence it is that so
many Professors mourn and complain, lick the dust, and lie among the Clods, are
dead under the most awakening Ministry, and barren under the most fruitful
means. Hence it is they do little Good, as well as taste little Comfort; some
Duties are neglected, and others performed slightly; and in none of them do
they meet with that Sweetness and Satisfaction, that Refreshment, and
Advantage, Fruit and Benefit, as formerly. And all from the neglect of
Watchfulness, making bold with Temptation, and not standing upon their Guard in
the use of their Christian Armor.

And because no Place, no Condition, no Employment is exempted from
Temptatations, let me fortify my self every morning against all Assaults for
that day, by Serious Prayer, as Holy David was wont to do. My voice (says he)
shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I direct my Prayer
unto thee, and will look up, Psalm. 5. v. 3, 4. Let the Law of God be my daily
and delightful study: that I may be able presently to bring my Words and
Actions to the Touchstone; and know how to manage the sword of the Spirit, on
all occasions, against the fiery Darts of the Devil: That knowing the Rule, I
may not be doubtful, or at a loss; whenever I am tempted, I may not make a
stand to parley, but immediately summon all my forces to resist, and reject the
Snare; being assured from God, that the Continuance of this Warfare shall end
in a most Glorious Victory. He will shortly tread down Satan under my feet.
Thanks be to God, through Jesus Christ, my Lord.

XXVIII.
The Import, and Obligation of our Baptismal Covenant. The renewal of it by a
solemn Dedication of our selves to God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
exemplified and recommended.

ALL this, O my Soul, which I have now resolved on, is no more than what I am
obliged to by my Vow in Baptism; to renounce the Devil and his Works, the Flesh
and the Lusts thereof, the World, and Conformity to it, that I may Love and
Serve the Lord: Agreeable to the undoubted Right which God has in me by
Creation, Redemption, and his innumerable other Benefits. But the outward
washing of Baptism, and a visible profession of obedience, will not save me,
without the Answer of a good Conscience toward God; 1 Pet. chap. 3. v. 21. May
I not by the consideration of my Baptismal Covenant suppose God speaking to my
Conscience, to this effect? Will you take me for your whole Portion and
Felicity? And my Law for the constant Rule of your obedience? And fight against
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, to your lives end? Will you believe in
Jesus Christ, and receive him as a Prince and Savior? And adhere to the faith
and obedience of the Gospel, how hazardous and difficult soever the profession
and practice of it may be? Will you receive the Blessed Spirit as your Teacher,
Sanctifier, and Comforter? and cherish all his Motions, to enlighten, purify,
confirm, comfort, and assist you? It Is my hearty consent to these Terms, and
resolved compliance with them, which Baptism obliges to; and this is the
Answer of a good Conscience toward God.

I have often renewed this Covenant on several Occasions; but did I ever duly
consider the tenor and obligation of it? How have I lied unto the God of Truth?
Dealt deceitfully with him? and been False and Fickle, Treacherous and
Unfaithful to what I promised? O let me now again repeat it, and give up my
self once more to be the Lord's, more unfeignedly, more firmly than ever I have
hitherto done! That the Bonds of God upon me may be strengthened, and my Soul
more thoroughly engaged to be the Lord's. O help me to do it with the greatest
seriousness, as the most important Affair of my whole Life! By thine Aid and
Grace alone, shall I be sincere and cordial in this surrender, and Dedication
of my self. O breathe upon my Soul, most Holy Spirit, (the Power of the
highest) that there may be no Hypocrifie, or Reservation, in this so weighty
and solemn Transaction between God and me!

O most Blessed and Glorious TRINITY! Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, thy favor
is my Life, and thy Loving kindness is better than Life: Thy Will should have
been my Rule, thy Word my Law, thy Glory my End, to please thee my principal
Business, and to enjoy thy Love and Presence my ultimate Felicity. But I am one
of thy revolted Creatures, who have lost thine Image, and rebelled against thy
Law, slighted thy Authority, and rejected thy Grace, and deserve to be cast out
of thy sight, and banished from thy Presence for ever. Nevertheless, O most
merciful God, and Father, upon thy gracious Invitation and Call, I now return
to thee my rightful Lord: acknowledging thee, as my Almighty, Wise, and
bountiful Creator, my absolute Owner, my Righteous Governor, my End, my
Happiness, and Chief Good. I now accept thine offered Mercy; I now submit to
the Scepter of thy Grace; and give up my self to Thee, as my King, and my God;
to rule and sanctify me now, and be my Everlasting Portion. I desire to be no
longer my own, but Thine, to whom of right I belong, and ought to be devoted. I
yield my self to Thee, O my Lord! Accept and possess that which is thine own. I
lay my self at thy Foot, at all Times, and in all Conditions, to be at thy
dispose, and in every thing to acquiesce in thy good Pleasure. Deliberately
resolving, with unfeigned and free consent of my Will, to walk before Thee in
Holiness and Righteousness all the days of my Life. Hereby I consecrate and
devote my self to be thy perpetual, Avowed Servant: Lord, I am thy servant, I
am thy servant, the Son of thine Handmaid. Though other Lords have had dominion
over me, I will now make mention of thy Name, and of thy Righteousness only, by
Jesus Christ.

O blessed Jesus, my All-sufficient Savior! Thy dying Love, infinite
Condescension, and matchless Grace has at last overcome me, and constrained me
to resolve to be wholly Thine, who have redeemed and bought me with thy most
precious Blood. I now acknowledge and own Thee, as my Lord, and my Jesus, my
Prophet, Priest, and King; my Sacrifice, Surety, and Ransom, to satisfy for my
Sins, and reconcile me unto God; to instruct me in his Will, and teach me the
Mysteries of his Kingdom, and the way to the Father. How often have thou opened
thine arms, and called me, yea beseech'd me to come unto thee, and accept of
Life? but I refused to come. I adore thy merciful Condescension, that yet thou will receive me on such easy Terms.

O thou Lord of Life and Glory, now accept of an unworthy helpless Sinner, who
flies to Thee as his only Refuge and Hope! who is convinced, that None but
Christ, None but Christ can make his Peace with God, and save from wrath to
come. I acknowledge thy Title to me, and my Obedience, and to all I have by
dying for me. I desire to take thy Yoke upon me, for it is Easy; and thy
Burden, which is Light. I desire to be entirely, and for ever thine, in an
Everlasting Covenant, never to be broken: To take up the Cross, and follow
thee, whithersoever thou shall lead me; through the straight Gate, and the
narrow way. I will reserve no Lust, refuse no Labor, grudge at no Suffering,
stick at no Difficulty, so I may please, and honor thee, and continue in thy
Love. O shed abroad more of thy Love in my Heart, to make all Things easy for
his sake, who has loved me, and washed me from my Sins in his own Blood.

O God the Holy Ghost, I acknowledge Thee, as my Great Teacher and Sanctifier,
and give up my self to Thee, as the Author of all saving Knowledge and
Holiness: By Thee I have been convinced of my Sin, against the Law of God, and
the Gospel of Christ, and of my necessity of his Merit, Satisfaction, and
Righteousness, to justify my guilty Soul, by procuring the Forgiveness of Sin,
and my Acceptance with God; and of the freeness of his Love, the Riches and
All Sufficiency of his Grace, toward all who come unto God by him. I adore
Thee, O most blessed Spirit, as proceeding, and sent from the Father and the
Son, to renew all the Powers of my Soul, and restore the Divine Image there; to
enlighten my mind, to know and receive the Truth, as it is in Jesus, and purify
my Heart: and to sanctify all the Members of my Body, and make them
Instruments of Righteousness unto Holiness, which before were Servants unto
Sin; and gradually to deliver me from the power, the defilement, and abode of
Sin; as from the Guilt and Punishment by the Blood of Jesus. And as the Witness
of God to the Truth of the Holy Scriptures; and as the Great Paraclete, to
comfort and establish the Hearts of Believers, sealing them up to the day of
Redemption, and giving them the Earnest of the Heavenly Inheritance. O blessed
Spirit, be thou my Witness, that though I have violated the Law of God, and
defaced his Image, and formerly undervalu'd the Love of Christ, and the Grace
of the Gospel, yet by thine Aid, I now accept what I have so long neglected:
And thankfully devote my self henceforward to be the Lord's, in a Covenant
Relation.

But fearing and distrusting my self, I give up my self entirely to the conduct
of thy Grace, depending upon it for my establishment and perseverance. O form
my Heart into an obediential Frame! that in every thing I may endeavor to
answer the Ends and Obligations of this Devoted State.

To this One God I have once again dedicated and resigned my self; to serve,
and please and honor Thee, in Thought, Word, and Act, to the last moment of my
Life: In the Performance of all Duties, even those which I have been most
averse from; in the mortification of every Lust, and the forsaking of every
Sin, even those which I was once most addicted to: Resolving deliberately to
allow my self in nothing, great or little, secret or open, which I shall know
or believe to be contrary to thy holy Will; making it my business to be
fruitful in good Works, to the Praise of my Redeemer; waiting in the use of all
his appointed means, for higher measures of Grace and Holiness, to be more
Victorious over inward Lusts, and outward Temptations, still pressing toward
the mark for the prize of my high and holy Calling, even Eternal Life.

I call Heaven and Earth, O Lord, to witness this day, That I own and avow this
to be my Mind, and the settled Prevailing Purpose of my Soul. This I again
ratify and confirm, without any Clauses, or Exceptions. So help me, O my God.
Glory be to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit.

XXIX.
Practical and Consolatory Reflections on the preceding Self-dedication, or
Covenant with God.

I Have this day solemnly Avouched the Lord to be my God, to walk in his ways;
thereby to fortify my Resolutions, that I and my Deuteronomy. 6.17, 18.
House, (and All that I can persuade to be of my mind) will serve the Lord. I
intend, desire, and hope never wilfully to Violate the Faith, which I have now
plighted in the presence of God; but to continue steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, etc.

Should I undertake any new Employment, or enter into any new Condition, or
change the place of my Abode, where I might see more of God's dishonor, and
meet with more and stronger Temptations to Sin, and be called to the
performance of more difficult Duties, greater Watchfulness, and Self-denial,
etc. I would hope hereby to engage the Presence of God with me, and his
Blessing on all my Affairs, (on which depends the success of all that I
undertake:;) and would hope the better to preserve my Integrity, not only This
Year, but in all the remaining portion of my Time, by the abiding sense of my
Covenant with God, thus seriously renewed.

This is the Method I have been often advised to, for Peace of Conscience,
under doubts and scruples concerning my spiritual state; to put the matter out
of doubt, by again accepting the offered Mercy and Grace of the Gospel; and
heartily consenting to the New Covenant: giving up my self to God in Christ, to
be ruled and saved by him. Blessed be God, I have now done so. Lord, say Amen,
to thy part of the Covenant, that Thou art, and wilt be my God; as I desire
unfeignedly to do to mine, that I will be thy Servant.

But because Articles are sooner consented to, than made good; though I seriously
intend never to disown this my solemn Act and Deed, but firmly to adhere to it,
as long as I live; that having sworn, I will endeavor to perform it, that this
shall be my Everlasting Choice, never to be recanted or altered, yet)
considering the sad Instances of my former Weakness, and the vigilance and
subtle malice of my Great Adversary, I again implore the succor of Divine
Grace, to keep it for ever in the purpose of my Heart, that it may be as the
Laws of the Medes and Persians, never to be reversed. I have given up my Name
to be Thine; O put thy fear into my Heart, that I may never depart from Thee!
Imprint thy Laws upon my Heart, that my Obedience may be uniform and universal,
unwavering and perpetual; suitable to so honorable and near a Relation to
Thee! I am sensible I want Wisdom and Strength to that purpose, but thou have
bid me ask it of Thee, who give liberally to All, without desert, and
upbraidest not, with present unworthiness, or former faults. O lead me not into
Temptation, but deliver me from Evil. Stand by and strengthen me in the Hour of
Trial, lest I forget my Vows, and deny thee. O that my Soul may never draw
back, lest Thine have no pleasure in me. I can serve no better Master; O let
mine Ears be bored to the door of thine House, as the Token and Assurance of my
being thy Servant unto Death. I know it is my Duty, I am sensible it is my
Privilege and Honor; I am convinced, that it is my Interest and Felicity; my
Soul, my Life, my present and everlasting Welfare, and All depends upon it,
that thou should be my God for ever: O conduct me by thy Holy Spirit of
Grace, that I may walk, and act, as having heartily consented he should be so;
and direct my Heart into thy Love, and the faithful keeping of thy
Commandments: That when so many Professors make shipwreck of Faith, and a good
Conscience, and discredit the Religion of my Lord, by their shameful Falls,
thou may make me to stand, and improve the warning of their Examples to walk
humbly; and while I stand, to take heed lest I fall.

Having thus surrendered my self to God, what is there, O my Soul! that is ever
like to prevail with me to go back, and revolt from him? Is the gratification
of a Lust, the securing of an Estate, compliance with a Friend, the pleasing of
a Superior, living in Ease, and Honor, and outward Prosperity for a little
while, the saving my Body from Suffering, or my Life from Violence, or whatever
else be the motive of my Unfaithfulness to God, and Apostasy from him? Is Any,
is All of these any way considerable, compared with the Blessedness of having
God to be my God? For thereby I have the Forgiveness of all my Sins; and the
Assurance of his Favor; the certainty of present Protection, and Provision;
all Creatures reconciled to me, and to be employed for my Good, as the Friend
of God; All things to work together for my Advantage; and by the evidence of my
Adoption, a well-grounded Hope of Eternal Life. God, as my Sun and Shield, will
give Grace and Glory, and withold no good Thing. So unspeakably Comprehensive
are the Privileges of so near a Relation to God in Christ. O happy are the
People who are in such a case! Blessed are the Persons whose God is the Lord.

Do I resolve to abide by my Choice, and to trust in Christ for Persevering
Grace? And shall I not, ought I not to take Comfort in it? Shall I not give God
the Glory of his infinite Goodness, by adhering to him, and rejoicing in him,
notwithstanding all Temptations to the contrary? Casting all my Care upon him,
and quieting my self in the All Sufficiency of my Heavenly Father; having a God
in Covenant, who will supply all my wants, and take care of me, as his own?
Shall I not give him the Glory of his Truth and Power, by trusting him in every
Condition? By Confidence in his Promise, Dependence on his Word, Faithfulness
to his Interest, and Constancy in his Service to the end? Is it not a most
encouraging Thought, That God does never abandon any, who do not first forsake
him? And after such strict Engagements, as I have laid upon my self, shall I
ever strike the fatal stroke with my own Hand? Shall I be off and on, say and
unsay, promise and retract? And after I have proceeded thus far, shall I
forsake the Fountain of Living Waters, and turn again to broken Cisterns?

After I have examined my self, considered my ways, confessed my Sins, and upon
serious Deliberation am come to a Resolve, and in pursuance of it, have devoted
my self with such solemnity to be the Lord's, shall I ever, after this, forsake
Him, and my own Mercies, and lightly esteem the Rock of my Salvation? Now I
have learned, in some measure, what Sin is, by the sorrows and anguish of an
Hearty Repentance; now I have discovered so much of the Snares and Devices of
Satan, whereby I have formerly been betrayed; now I am sensible of the
dangerous and powerful influence and infection of bad Company; the Treachery of
fleshly Lusts; the bewitching Temptations of the World; and have tasted a
little, by my own Experience, of the Pleasantness of Wisdom's Paths, the Peace
and Satisfaction of Devotedness to God, by the present Rewards of a calm
Conscience, the communications of Divine Grace, and the Encouragement of an
Holy Hope, etc. and am persuaded of the Stability of his Word, and the
Certainty of Eternal Life to all who continue in Well-doing; shall I, after all
this, ever break with God again? Shall I ever cancel this Engagement? violate
this my vow? and falsify so many repeated Promises and Resolutions?

Oh, that his Power may rest upon me! and his Grace work in me, both to will,
and to do! that this God may be my God for ever, and my Guide unto Death. Let
me never reassume this Gift, and Surrender of my self, or defraud God of his
Right and Propriety. His I am, and him I will serve: living wholly to Him;
using all I have for him: being willing he should do what he list with his own,
and consequently dispose of me, and of all that any way belongs to me, as shall
seem good in his eyes. I am Thine; O Lord, save me. Command me my work, appoint
me my Duty, direct my Station, order my Condition. Let me be Thine, though
employed in the meanest service, and the most laborious self-denying work. Though
I should be but a Doorkeeper in thine House, an Hewer of Wood, or a Drawer of
Water; Though I must pinch the flesh, and swim against the Tide, and renounce
what before I valued: yet This God shall be my God for ever.

By this means, when I come to die, (if God should add more Years to the little
number I have past, besides this I have now begun) I may be able to say, with
Upright Hezekiah, Remember, Lord, how I have walked before Thee in mine
Integrity; that in the face of Death, and the Grave, in the view of another
World, and the near prospect of Eternity, I may be able to Rejoice in Hope, and
say, Lord Jesus, Receive my Spirit. Thou art my Savior, and I have waited for
thy Salvation. I have sought Thee with my whole Heart; I have chosen thy
Favor, rather than Worldly Grandeur and Prosperity; I have prized thy Love,
and endeavored to obey Thee, (as the best Expression of my own) though with many
Imperfections, which I bewail; I have delighted more in thy Service and
Presence, than in the Pleasures of Sin and Vanity; thy Testimonies have been
the Joy of my Heart; I took no delight in the Company of the Ungodly, after I
was devoted to Thee; O let me not have my Portion with them in the other World!
Fortify me now against the King of Terrors, strengthen me in this my last
Conflict, enable me to triumph over Death, by the Cross of Christ (my
victorious Redeemer) and carry me through the dark valley, at the divorce of
Soul and Body; and grant me an abundant entrance into thine Heavenly Kingdom;
Let me be numbered among thy Chosen, and my Body wait in Hope, till the General
Resurrection, that I may then see thy Glory, and dwell with Thee for ever.

I gave up my self to Thee, and do not repent my Choice; acknowledge me now for
Thine, and do not lose that which is thy own. Lord Jesus! Thou have paid my
Ransom, to deliver me from Satan, and from Eternal Wrath; Oh, do not now reject
me, and cast me off. Is it not thine Office and Covenant, to save those that
Trust in Thee? Oh, remember thy Word unto thy Servant, wherein thou have caused
me to Hope, when I ventured my Salvation on thy Promise, and trusted to thy
Gracious Word, for Eternal Life. Thy Love has already overcome the greatest
impediments of my Salvation. It Is as easy now to receive me as to Love me.
Thou have prepared Glory for thy Redeemed ones; and have bid me believingly to
follow thee, and wait for thy Salvation. Thou have begotten me to a lively
hope, by the Incorruptible Seed of the Word; Let me not now be deprived of the
Inheritance. Can that Love, that pitied me in my Blood, and fetched me from the
Gates of Hell, now suffer me to fall into it? Oh, Crown thy Grace, and perfect
thy Preparatory Mercy, with Everlasting Mercy.

By voluntary Consent and Choice, thou art my God; and thy Presence in Heaven,
my ultimate Felicity; I have trusted to thy Gracious Promise, to prepare me for
it, and bring me to it; O fulfill thy Word unto thy Servant, wherein thou have
caused me to hope; and mercifully receive my departing Soul, that seeks Thee,
that loves Thee, that breathes after Thee, and desires nothing but to know Thee
better, and love Thee more, and be more entirely conformed to thine Image, and
live always in thy Blessed Presence. Thou have called me out of the World,
placed thine Image upon me, enabled me to make it my Business, though with many
Imperfections, to serve, and please, and honor Thee; Oh, Receive me to the
fullness of thy Love, and Grace, and present me faultless before the Presence of
thy Glory, with exceeding Joy. Amen, Holy Father, be it unto me according to
thy Word; through the Merits and Intercession of my All-sufficient Savior,
Jesus Christ, the Faithful and True Witness, in whom all thy Promises are Yea,
and Amen.

XXX.
Thanksgiving to God, for his Innumerable Benefits and Mercies, particularly in
the Year past; with some Direction and Advice concerning it.

HOW precious and delightful are the Thoughts of thy Benefits? O Lord, how
great is the sum of them? Should I count them, they are more in number than the
Stars. Shall I not observe and consider them? maintain a grateful sense of
them, and publicly acknowledge them on all occasions? that I may Bless the
Lord at all Times, and his Praise be continually in my mouth. More especially
should I conclude and begin the Year, with solemn Praises to my Great
Benefactor and Preserver. I ought to begin and close every Day with it, thereby
to make the outgoings of the Morning and the Evening to rejoice in God. Every
Year, every Day, every Hour, every Moment, offers me an occasion to Praise him:
because he is every minute gracious, and has been so ever since he gave me my
Being.

Almost one half of my Time has been spent in Sleep, when I remember not God,
nor my self; yet does He, who never slumbers nor sleeps, remember me in Mercy,
and watch over me for good. Yea, though in the other half, by Day, I have
forgotten him in a worse sense, by casting off his Fear, and not remembering
that his Holy Eye is upon me, yet has he not forgotten to be Gracious.
Therefore I will praise the name of God with a Song, and will magnify him with
Thanksgiving, and never forget his benefits. With which Sacrifice he is better
pleased, than with an Ox or Bullock, that has horns and hoofs.

He has prolonged my Life this last Year, when so many others, of his more
useful Servants, have been removed by Death; and given me farther Time and
Space to Repent, when multitudes have been surpised in their Impenitence. Yea,
it was He, who formed me in the Womb, and brought me safely into the World, by
whose Providence I have hitherto been supplied: In Him I live, and move, and
continually exist: To his undeserved Goodness I am beholding, for all the Good,
of any kind, which I ever enjoyed: To his Bounty I am indebted for all that I
now have; and must depend upon it, for whatever I can hereafter expect.

Through Infancy and Childhood he was pleased to preserve me; favoring me with
many Advantages in my Birth and Education; providing for me a competent
Livelihood; Psalm 69.30.
disposing the Circumstances of my Condition, Relations, Places of Abode, etc.
more advantageously than he has done for Thousands: affording me many Helps,
for the Improvement of my Mind, and the increase of Knowledge; and preventing
my Necessities, and even my Desires, with numberless Blessings, which I never
so much as asked for. He has caused several of my Relations to yield me
Comfort, when they might have been sore Afflictions. He has raised up
Strangers to befriend me, and show me Kindness. How many favors have I
received from God, by the Instrumentality of other Men? to whom God gave the
Will, and the Power, the Opportunity, and the Inclination?

How often has he delivered my Soul from Death, mine Eyes from Tears, and my
Feet from falling, by seasonable Preservations? so that I do yet walk before
him in the Land of the Living. He has rescued me from the brink of many a
Precipice, which, through Ignorance or Inadvertency, I did not apprehend or
fear. When I knew not which way to turn, he has made my Path plain. Under
sinking Disappointments, he has commanded Succor; and been a present Help in
the time of Trouble. In Great Perplexities, his Eye has been my Guide, and his
own Arm has brought Salvation: it may be by the Ministry of his Holy Angels,
obeying his Order, and giving unusual Intimations of very great, and otherwise
unsuspected Dangers: or sending Relief and Deliverance, by such small,
unlikely, and unexpected Means, as carried the Name of God visibly engraven on
them. Innumerable Calamities he saves me from, which others groan under; and as
many Blessings am I favored with, whereof they are destitute. He spreads my
Table, and fills my Cup, and gives me All Things richly to enjoy, when many
Excellent Persons, of whom the World is not worthy, are fed with the Bread of
Affliction, and the Water of Affliction. Others have only Necessaries, or but
few Conveniences, in comparison with the Plentiful Provisions God has made,
for my Cheerful Obedience to him. And shall I not Praise him for Deuteronomy. 33. ver.
13, 14.
the precious Things of Heaven, the blessings of the Earth, the Dew, and the
Deep? and more especially for the God-will of Him who dwelt in the Bush, to
sanctify and sweeten all: Whereby Common Mercies become the Pledge and
Forerunner of better Things; as the fruit of his Special Kindness, the witness
of his Truth, and the seed of Peace, and Joy, and Righteousness, and Praise; by
reason of his Blessing on all that I possess, which otherwise would prove a
Snare, and a Temptation, and be intermixed with a Curse.

And besides the ordinary and continued Bounty of every Day, in the midst of
how many Difficulties and Dangers have I felt the dear Obligations of his
Preserving Mercy? abroad, and at home; in Foreign Countries, as well as my own;
in the midst of Enemies, and among Friends; in all Places, and at all Times.

He has prolonged my Health, or made my Bed in Sickness. He has often granted
the Desires of my Heart, whenever it was for his Glory; and contradicted my
Wishes, and disappointed my Endeavors, in other Instances, when it was more to
my Advantage. From how many Mischiefs has he saved me, by such Things as I
deprecated, and would have hindered? How many Evils has he turned for Good? He
has heard my Cry in the day of Adversity, and set my feet in a large Place. He
has Chasten'd me for my Profit: His Rod and his Staff have comforted me: He
has spoken comfortably to me in the Wilderness. Affliction has been useful
and necessary Physic; made an Instrument of Virtue, and so a Token of his
Love. Therefore Psalm. 89. ver. 1.
I will sing of the Mercy of the Lord for ever, and with the voice of
Thanksgiving will I make known his Faithfulness,

He has all along conducted me by his Wisdom, guided me by his Providence, and
the Angel of his Presence has directed my Path, and ordered all my Goings. He
has been a Cloud to me by Day, and a Pillar of a Fire by Night: he has helped
me in my Straits, and supplied my Wants, and comforted me in all my Sadnesses:
His powerful and gracious Presence has been my constant Guard; and his
Sovereign, Never-failing Goodness has compast me about with Mercy on every
side. For which, O most Merciful Father, my Soul, and all that is within me,
desires to speak thy Praise.

The advantageous Circumstances of many divine Favors, do raise their value,
and deserve to be particularly observed and acknowledged. How suitably, how
seasonably, how wisely has he conferred his Benefits? with what Tenderness and
Kindness? with what Freedom and Readiness? of his own Bounty and Good Will,
without any Necessity, or Obligation on his Part; without any Desert, and
sometimes without so much as a Prayer on mine. And what is more,
notwithstanding my Ingratitude and Forgetfulness of Him, and great
Provocations, heightened by the abuse of so much Mercy: demanding nothing, after
all, in requital of so much Kindness, but my Acceptance of his Love, and
grateful sense of his Goodness, and the sweetest and most reasonable
Expressions of it, by Thankful Obedience.

More especially, would I bless the Lord, for enlightening my Mind in the Great
Mysteries of Religion: disposing in wonderful Wisdom the several Means and
Methods, whereby he brought me to the knowledge of the Truth, by Parents,
Ministers, Friends, Acquaintance, Books, Afflictions, etc. Beginning with me in
Childhood, awakening and cultivating the inbred Notions of God, and Natural
Religion, of Good and Evil, Rewards and Punishments; by the careful
Instructions of Parents, or others concerned in my Education: giving me the
advantage of Good Examples, Counsels, and Encouragements, to know and do well;
with more assistance, and less hindrances, and diversions, than to many others.
Particularly, for the Excellent Privilege, and Inestimable Blessing of his Holy
Word and Sacraments; the liberty of the Christian Religion, in the Purity of
it, in most of those Places, where God has been pleased to cast my Lot. Causing
me to lay down in green Pastures, and leading me beside the still Waters:
Instructing me in the Revelation of his Will and Grace by Jesus Christ:
acquainting me with the sublime Principles and Articles, Precepts and Rules,
Promises and Hopes of the Gospel, in order to Eternal Life.

I bless Thee, O Lord, and shall for ever do so, that with any or all these
Advantages and Helps, thy Holy Spirit has taught me to know the Truth as it is
in Jesus, heartily to believe and obey it. That by thy Grace I have been
convinced of Sin, and brought to Repentance; showing me the necessity of a
Savior, to make my peace with Thee, the All Sufficiency of his Grace, the
Fullness of his Merit, the Freeness of his Love, and his readiness to receive me
to Mercy, inviting and calling me to it, and enabling me to accept his gracious
Invitation, and obey his compassionate Call; making me willing, by a Powerful
and Victorious Grace, drawing me with Cords of Love, and so effectually
persuading me to consent to thy Covenant, and comply with thy Message, on the
gracious Terms of the Gospel. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who, through his abundant Mercy, has begotten me again to a lively
Hope; having humbled my proud Heart, and conquered the perverseness of my
stubborn Will, and brought my Soul to an entire subjection to himself: who took
pity on me, when he saw me in my Blood, spread his Skirt over me, cast a Mantle
upon my Nakedness, washed me from my Sins, and put his own Comeliness upon me
by Sanctification: who opened my Eyes, when I was leaping blindfold into the
Pit of Destruction: who healed my Soul, when I was sick unto death: who rescued
and recovered me from the Slavery of the Devil, when I was led Captive by him
at his will. Shall not a ransomed, redeemed Slave, be thankful to his
Deliverer? Shall not a miserable, undone Sinner, who is received to Mercy, be
thankful for a Pardon? Awake, O my Soul! and utter a Song of Praise to him,
Pasal. 103.3.
who forgiveth all thine Iniquities, and heals all thy Diseases; who
redeemeth thy Life (thy Soul) from Destruction, and crowns thee with
Loving Kindness, and tender Mercies.

Has he made thee Partaker of his own renewed Image and Likeness? given thee
his Son? his Grace? his Spirit? and taken such a wretched Creature into so near
a relation to Himself; and promised to be thy God and Guide, thy Portion, and
thine Inheritance, thy Friend and thy Physician, thy Sun and thy Shield, and
thine exceeding great Reward? and shall not my Soul speak aloud his Praise?
Has he been Isa. 43.14.
merciful to my unrighteousness, and blotted out my sins? Has he gathered me
with his Arm, and carried me in his Bosom? Has he been my Savior and
Redeemer, adopted me into his Family, and promised to make me Blessed in his
Glory, with the Holy Angels? the Curse being removed, and the Handwriting
against me cancelled, the Price paid, the Breach made up, the Mouth of Justice
stopped, and the condemning Sentence of the Law exchanged for a gracious Pardon,
through the Sacrifice of my Blessed Lord Jesus? and shall I not praise his
Incomprehensible Love and Grace?

I likewise thank thee, most Holy Father, for saving me from Guilt, and Ruin,
when assaulted by powerful, and dangerous Temptations; that by Preventing
Mercy, or Restraining Grace, thou have kept me from many scandalous and
presumptuous Crimes. I thank Thee, for making the Sins of Others a Warning and
a Caution to Me; an Argument to Humility, and a Motive to Watchfulness; for
preserving my Judgment from many Errors and Delusions, by which others are
seduced; for enabling me to improve any Opportunities of doing Good, and making
me in any thing useful to Others: yea, I thank thee for all thy Mercies to
other Christians; for all the Gifts, and Graces, and usefulness of any of thy
Servants, wherein, as a Member of the same Body, I desire to rejoice; for any
Support and Comfort to me, or any of them, under honorable Sufferings for thy
Name's sake.

I desire unfeignedly to bless Thee, for any Succor, Relief, and Victory, with
respect to the Snares and Buffetings of Satan, and the vilest of his
Temptations. When he has tempted me to Apostasy, and Infidelity, in
Speculation, or Practice; to question the Truth of the Holy Scriptures, and the
Life to come; to doubt of the Foundations of the Christian Faith, or to despair
of the Mercy of God, and give up the Reins to sensual Lusts; or to draw me from
God, by the love of the World, and the praise of Men, by Evil Company,
Intemperance, secret Wickedness, etc.

I bless Thee with my whole Soul, for calling me back from any of my Wanderings,
and by Infinite Goodness recovering me after great Falls, enabling me to return
when I had gone astray, and seek thy forfeited favor, that thou may heal my
Backslidings; giving me, in order to it, a deep sense of my own Sin, and of thy
Sovereign Grace; leading me to a Savior, whose Blood cleanses from all sin,
when my guilty, defiled Soul so much needed its pardoning, and cleansing
Virtue; awakening me to make holy Vows, and calling upon me by thy Word, and
Spirit, and Providence, to perform them.

I bless Thee, who have guided my feet into the way of Peace, when by the
Terrors of an accusing Conscience, and the sense of unpardoned Sin, and the
Apprehensions of thy deserved Wrath, I was ready to Despair: that though thou
did most justly hide thy Face at any time, it was but for a little while; but
did seasonably, and in Mercy return, to wipe off my Tears, restore the Joy of
thy Salvation, and chase away the clouds and darkness on my Spirit, by the
reviving Presence of thy own. Thou, who art the Author, wilt be the Finisher of
my Faith; and therefore, though thou have visited mine Iniquities with a Fatherly
Rod, yet thy loving kindness thou have not taken from me, or suffered thy
faithfulness to fail, or thy Covenant of Peace to be removed; but have
refreshed me with hidden Manna, after great Perplexities, saying unto my Soul,
I am God, even thy God. Thou have made me to hear thy Voice, which was sweet;
and to taste thy Love, which is better than Wine: enabling me to say with thine
Apostle Thomas, My Lord, and my God; and to have had some Communion with Thee
since, in public or private Duties.

For all these Innumerable Mercies I desire to praise Thee, which yet are but
in order to greater; I hope, in order to Everlasting Kindness in Heaven. These
are but the Taste, and Earnest of what thou will bestow hereafter. Oh, how
great is his Goodness, that he has laid up for those that fear him? And now,
Lord, what wait I for? my hope is even in Thee. I thank thee, who have thus put
it into my Heart, to render thee solemn Praise, and once more to renew my
Covenant with Thee.

I will magnify the Lord, and my Spirit shall rejoice in God my Savior.
Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with me.
Psalm. 104.33.
While I live, I will praise thee, and sing Praises unto my God, while I have a
Being. O come, and behold the Works of the Lord, what he has done for my Soul!
The Lord lives; Psalm. 18.46.
Blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my Salvation be exalted. Let my Heart
be glad, and my Glory rejoice, for the Lord is not ashamed to be called my God.
Thanks be to God, who has caused me to triumph in Christ Jesus. Sing unto the
Lord, O ye his Saints, and give thanks at the remembrance of his Holiness!
Psalm. 30.
I cried unto Thee, and thou have healed, and saved me: I will give thanks to
Thee for ever. Psalm. 119.62.
I will show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness
every night. For the Lord is Good, his Mercy is Everlasting, and his Truth
endures throughout all Generations. O enter into his Gates with Thanksgiving,
and his Courts with Praise: be thankful unto him, and bless his Name. Bless the
Lord, all ye his Works, in all-places of his Dominions: Bless the Lord, O my
Soul.

Let me add, for a Conclusion, That the particular Deliverances, Supports, and
Consolations, which at any time God has given in Cases of great Exigence, or
in answer to importunate Prayer, ought never to be forgotten. Many experienced
Christians have been wont to write down such remarkable Appearances of God for
them, with the particular Circumstances, that did recommend, and enhance the
Mercy, (whether Spiritual or Temporal) as an Encouragement to trust in God in
future Difficulties. And have afterward found the Comfort and Advantage, of
being able to have recourse to such Papers. This Practice I recommend, as what
has been useful and consolatory to diverse Christians, for many years
afterward; and to some others, of their more intimate Friends, to whom they
might, without vanity, be imparted. What Experiences might be recorded, of
signal Returns to Prayer, and seasonable Manifestations of the Truth, and
Goodness, and Wisdom of God, if all the Instances thereof were duly recollected
and preserved! And how sweet, and pleasant would the Work of Prayer and Praise
then be! With what rejoicing, and delight should we set about it, and live in
it, if the constraining Goodness and Love of God, and a thankful Sense of his
unspeakable Mercies, did bring us to him, and indict and animate every word!
What Support, and Comfort, and probable Hopes (at least) of the special Love of
God, might we derive, from the various Passages of his Compassion and Kindness!
And hereby we may be able, more heartily to give him Thanks, for Pardon,
Sanctification, and Adoption, which we commonly mention with too much doubt and
fear.

It may likewise be Advisable, To examine, and record the Workings of your own
Spirit, under such Dispensations: What Thoughts you then had of God? What Acts
of Faith, Love, and Thankfulness, you did then manifest? What Evidences of
God's Favor, and what discovery of your own Sincerity, you have had at such
times? When, and how, and by what means you were cured of your uncomfortable
Unbelief, and raised from your Despondency? What Promises you had recourse to,
for relief? What Considerations were most helpful to you? What frame of Spirit
you kept up in Prayer, before and after? What Resolutions and Engagements you
made to God; to love, and trust, and praise, and serve him, and give up All to
his dispose for the future? And what consequent Obligation may be inferred from
thence, to acquiesce in the Will of God, and resign our selves entirely to Him,
saying, This God is our God for ever and ever, and He will be our Guide unto
Death.

THE APPENDIX.
From what Time the Jews reckoned the Beginning of their Year: Of the
Difference between their Sacred and Civil Account. The Feast of Trumpets on the
First Day of the Year: Its Institution, Nature, and Design: the Traditions and
Customs of the Jews respecting that Day.
UPon the Deliverance of the Jews out of Egypt, the first Month which began
with the New Moon, next to the Vernal Equinox, was to be accounted Exodus 12.1.
the beginning of Months; (it answers to the latter end of our March, and the
beginning of April, and is sometimes called Nisan, and sometimes Abib.) It was
ordinarily, after that Deliverance, reckoned the First Month of the Year, in
their Sacred, or Ecclesiastical Account. The Computation of Years till then,
from the Creation of the World, was from Tisri or September, Lightfoot, Vol.
II. p. 1322. Bishop Patrick's Comment. upon Exodus 12.2. and chap. 23.16.
as the Beginning of Years, but now they are commanded, to begin their
Reckoning from March. Therefore the Passover kept in this Month, is said to be
observed in the first Month: and the Feast of Purim, which was kept in our
February, is said to be in the last Month, that is, of the Sacred Year. A
Period so remarkable and extraordinary, as that was to the Jews, deserved very
well to be particularly remembered, and taken notice of: and might justly be
accounted the First, or chiefest of their Months. And by comparing Exodus 12.41.
with Gal. 3.17. it may be concluded, that Abraham received the Promise on the
Fifteenth Day of this Month: and it is computed, that about the same time of the
Year Isaac was born; and the Tabernacle afterward erected in the Wilderness.

As the Redemption of Israel, from their Bondage in Egypt, was but a Type of a
more glorious one by the Messiah, he was pleased to suffer Death in this Month,
John 18.28. According to this Computation, the Month Tisri (which began with
the first New Moon next to the Autumnal Equinox) is often called the Seventh
Month; but was not so accounted before the Deliverance of Israel out of Egypt.
As to Civil and Political Affairs, it was for the most part reckoned the First
Month of the Year; on this Account, in this Month Heidegeri Hist. Patriarch.
Tom. 1. Diss. 12.. 22. de Anno Patriarcharum.
Tisri (which answers to part of our September, and part of October) on the
Fifteenth Day of the Month, was the Feast of Tabernacles, when the Exodus 23.15,
16. See Ger.l. Vossii Isag. Chronol. dissert. 2. Scaliger de Emend. Temp.
Lydiat de variis Annorum formis. Seldom de Anno Civili vet. Jud. Joel 2.23. 1
King. 8.2. Lightfoot Horae in Matthew. 2.1. Fr. Spanhemii F. Introd. ad Chronol.
and Hist. Sacram. 4to. p. 16, 27, etc. J. Mayeri Diatrice de Festis Jud. 8vo.
c. 3.
Fruits of the Earth were gathered in, and is said to be in the End of the
Year. Much has been said by many Learned Men, for the Date of the World's
Creation, and the Beginning of the Year, from the Vernal Equinox, or the
Spring. And the Egyptians are alleged as keeping the great Festival of Aries,
or of the New-Year, when the Sun enters into Aries. But however uncertain that
be, and difficult to determine it; yet the Jews reckon to have been in Autumn,
the Creation of the World, the Birth of the first Patriarchs, the Reparation of
the Tables of the Law, the Dedication of the Temple, the Three Great Solemn
Feasts of the Beginning of the Year, and other Remarkable Passages. As many
Religious Assemblies, and Solemn Feasts, were appointed of God to the Jews, in
this Month Tisri, as in all the Year besides.

That the Birth and Baptism of our Blessed Savior, Jesus Christ, should be at
this time of the Feast of Tabernacles, is as Considerable, as that his Passion
should be about the time of the Jewish Passover. He was Sacrificed for us at
that time, when by God's appointment, the Paschal Lamb was to be offered as his
Type: And at the Feast of Tabernacles he came to pitch his Tent in our Nature,
to John 1.14.
Tabernacle in our Flesh, and dwell among us. The Scepter was so far gone from
Judah, that the Jews were compelled by a Foreign Power, instead of observing
the Feast of Tabernacles at Jerusalem, every one to repair to his own City to
be Taxed, as the Emperor Augustus had Commanded, (and it is not very likely he
would appoint that in the depth of Winter, the time of our Christmas) and now
was the Season for Shilo to appear.

The 81st. Psalm, composed by Asaph, for the First Day of this Month, or the
Feast of Trumpets Dr. Hammond in loc. Godeau Universe. Hist de l'Eglise. tom. 4.
c. 1.. 6. Hospinian. de Fest. Judaic.
, is supposed to have been in Remembrance of that Deliverance out of Egypt: The
Sounding of Trumpets being a token of Liberty. This Feast of Trumpets, on the
First Day of the New Year, according to their Civil Account, is thus commanded,
Levit. 23.24. Numb. 29.2. and cap. 10.10. That it should be, a Sabbath, and a
Memorial of Blowing of Trumpets, an Holy Convocation, etc. Some think it is
called a Memorial of Trumpets, to preserve the Memory of Isaac's Deliverance,
by the substitution of a Ram to be sacrificed in his stead: To this purpose it
may be alleged, that it is sometimes called by the Jews, the Binding of Isaac;
which they suppose to have been in the same Day of the Year. By others termed
Festum Cornu, the Feast of the Horn.

But it is more probable, that this Name was not given, with any respect to
Isaac, but on the account of that kind of Trumpets, which were then sounded,
viz. such as were made of Sheep or Rams Horns Whether the Year of Jubilee was
proclaimed by such Trumpets, see Bp. Patrick's Commentary upon Levit. 25.10.
. Others think it to have been appointed as a grateful Remembrance of former
Victories which God had afforded them; particularly that at Jericho, where was
the first opposition they met with in their passage to Canaan: And the Walls of
the City fell down, at the Sound of such Horn-Trumpets, Josh. 6.13, 20. But the
most likely Account of it is this; That it was intended to solemnize the
Beginning of the New Year, to mind them of the Beginning of the World, and to
excite their Thankfulness for the Fruits, and Blessings, and Benefits of the
Year preceding. The extraordinary Blowing of Trumpets by the Priests, at that
time, (in all their Cities, as well as at Jerusalem, where two Lightfoot's
Temple-Service, chap. 16.. 5.
Silver Trumpets were also used at the Temple, as well as these of Horn, and
the Levites sung the 81st. Psalm) might serve, both to stir up the People, to
bless God for the Favors of the Year past, acknowledging his Goodness in
preserving them to the beginning of Another; and withal excite them to pray,
for his Protection and Blessing, for the New-Year, on which they now entered.

Maimonides, the famous Jewish Rabbin, thinks the Sounding of Trumpets at this
time, was designed to signify some such Exhortation as this; Canones de
Poenitent. cap. 3. can. 6.
Arise, O ye sleepers, out of your sleep; and you that slumber, awake out of
your slumbering. Search your works, and turn by Repentance. Remember your
Creator, you that have forgotten the Truth, and have exchanged it for the
Vanities of the World; and have all your Lives wandered after Vanity, which will
not profit, or deliver you. Consider your Souls, Consider your Ways, and Works;
and let every one of you forsake his evil way, and his thoughts that are not
good.

Some have imagined a Typical Representation of the two Covenants in this
Feast. The Old Covenant figured by the Year passed; and the Covenant of Grace,
or the Gospel state, by the New Year then begun; and that by the Sound of
Trumpets, was prefigured the future Preaching of the Gospel, according to that
of the Apostle, Their sound went forth unto all the Earth, and their words unto
the end of the World. And so the Feast of Trumpets is abrogated by the
Preaching of the Gospel, if that were typically signified by it. The
Publication of the Gospel, is the joyful sound, Psalm. 89.15. And Ministers are
to lift up their Voice like a Trumpet, Isai. 58.1. the discharge of their
Office, as Watchmen, is expressed by setting the Trumpet to their mouth, Hos.
8.1. Ezekiel. 33. When the Jews shall be converted to the Faith of Christ, it is
said, in that day the great Trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come, who
are ready to perish, Isa. 27. ult. 'Twas the Office of the Priests to sound
these Trumpets, Numb. 10.8. The public Dispensation of the Gospel is committed
to Ministers, set apart for that Work, as the Sons of Aaron for theirs. We
read but of two Trumpets at first, for Eleazar and Ithamar, the two Sons of
Aaron, Numb. 3.4. But David added many Musical Instruments: And in Solomon's
time, at the Dedication of the Temple, we read of One hundred and twenty
Priests, who sounded with Trumpets, 2 Chronicles. 5.12. Without supposing any Type
here, in a strict and proper sense; we may yet farther consider the Parallel,
and observe, how the Joy and Gratitude these Trumpets did excite, is exceeded
by that greater Rejoicing, promised and foretold by the Prophets, when the glad
Tidings of the Gospel of Salvation by the Messiah, should be published to the
World, Isa. 54.1. Luke 2.11. Gal. 4.27. Which has been in part accomplished;
and will be more complete, in that Kingdom of Peace and Purity, which Christ
will establish upon Earth, toward the end of the World: And shall be finally
perfected at the end of Time; when Days, and Years, and Time (thus measured)
shall be no more. When the Messiah, our B. Savior, having finished his
Mediatory Undertaking, as to what concerns Earth, shall come again from Heaven,
with the Trump of God, to raise the Dead, and summon all the World to their
final Judgment. Then shall he deliver up the Kingdom to his Father: And the
Faithful shall enter into the Joy of their Lord, and be forever with him.

There is a Tradition among the Jews, mentioned by Maimonides Canones de
Poenit. cap. 3. can. 5.
, That on the First Day of the New Year, God enters into Judgment for the Sins
of the Year, and Life past. That every one's Faults are weighed against his
good Works. He that is found Righteous, is sealed unto Life: And he that is
found Wicked, is sealed unto Death.

And it is a general Custom that has obtained among the Jews, for the ten first
Days of the New Year, to rise out of their Beds in the Night, and to continue
in their Synagogues praying and worshipping until break of Day. The
superstitious and ridiculous Ceremonies of the Vid. Ceremon. and Cout. parmi
les Juifs d'aujourdhay, par. 2. c. 5.
modern Jews on this Day, I shall not repeat. However vain and groundless,
superstitious, and absurd many of their Customs, and Practices are, on this
Day: Yet this blind Devotion of the Jews may justly shame, and condemn the
Christians of our Age: Who commonly spend the Beginnings of every Year, worse
than any other parts of them; and instead of any solemn Retirement, for Prayer
and Meditation, which might assist them to number their Days, and prepare for
Eternity; (instead, I say, of such seasonable Exercises) how do vain and
hurtful Sports and Pastimes, or trifling and unedifying Mirth, and fruitless
Conversations, consume the greatest part of the Days, (and Nights too) of the
Beginning of the Year! And thus when the first fruits of the Year are offered
up to Sin and Vanity: it is no wonder, if the following parts of it are employed
to no better purpose; without any due concern for the Soul, and an Everlasting
State.

To endeavor some Remedy to these Disorders, and give some Assistance to such
as desire seriously to make Religion their Principal Business, is the end of
publishing the foregoing Reflections. I most heartily beseech the God of all
Grace, to influence by his Holy Spirit, the Conscience of every Reader, that
some such good Effect may be attained. Having found the Practice recommended,
to be of some use to my self, and my own Heart warmed, in composing the
Substance of these Papers, (though without any Intention, at that Time, of
exposing them to the World) it is not unreasonable to hope, That what has been
beneficial to one, may be helpful to another. It cannot certainly be improper,
to Begin the Year with God, with whom we should begin every Day. It Is decorous
and becoming, to Dedicate our selves to Him, in a more solemn manner than
ordinary, at such a Time: Thankfully to acknowledge the Favors and Blessings
we have particularly received, the Year Past: And to recollect the Sins we have
been guilty of: to confess and aggravate 'em with Humility, Contrition, and
deep Remorse: to renew our Covenant with God: to repeat and fortify our
Resolutions of living better; imploring his Grace to assist us in it: to
reflect seriously on the Mutability, Frailty, and Brevity of our present Life:
to consider the Swiftness, Uncertainty, Irrecoverableness, and consequent Value
of our Time: to look forward to a Blessed or Miserable Eternity, one of which
we must every one share in: And to confirm our Faith in the Certainty thereof,
considering our near Approach to such an unchangeable State: To think what
Improvement we should make of the Death of others, especially of Relations, and
Friends, who have lately been called home: To make the Supposition in good
earnest, that we may follow them, This Year, and die before another
New-Year's-Day: To impress such a Thought on our Hearts, and the Inferences
that may naturally be deduced from it: To beg of God, to enable us to Redeem
our Time, and discharge the duty of our particular Places; and prepare us for
all the Events of the following Year: And so effectually Teach us to number our
days, that we may apply our Hearts unto true Wisdom. Lest we be surprised by an
Unexpected Death, before the Period of another Year. And, lastly, to pray for
our Relations and Friends, Families and Neighbors, (and our Enemies too;) and
plead with God on the behalf of Sion, and the afflicted and deformed state of
the Protestant Churches. To some of these, and the like Purposes, I hope what
is here offered, may be subservient; if considered with Seriousness and
Application, after humble Invocation of the Blessing of God, and the Aids of
his Spirit; composing our Minds and Thoughts, as in his most Awful, and Holy
Presence.

I have only this to request; That if Any Reader shall find any real Benefit in
this kind, he would so far requite my charitable Assistance of him; that when
his Heart is most serious, his Spirit most composed and devout, and his
Affections most vigorous and lively, he would not forget, to put up one Prayer
to Heaven for me, for Greater Holiness, and Abilities to Honor God, and
persevering Faithfulness to his Truth, and Interest, whatever Temptations to
desert it, may be employed by the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; the three
Great Enemies of thine, and my Salvation.

J. S.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
Sect. I. OF the changeable State, and short Duration of Earthly things;
especially of Man, how little it is considered and believed; how necessary it
should be. p. 1. Sect. II. Of the change in Men's Inclinations, Opinions, and
Actions which one year shows; how observable it is in Others, how much more
discernable in our selves. Honor and Reputation, etc. how uncertainly
preserved, and how easily blasted. p. 7 Sect. III. Of the Uncertainty of living
to the Period of another Year. The Vanity of this Life: The Swiftness of Time,
and how to be Improved. p. 13. Sect. IV. Of the seeming Difference, between so
many Years past, and the same number of Years to come. p. 20 Sect. V. The
little Portion of our Time on Earth considered, by a Computation of the Life of
Man, from the number of Years and Hours. p. 22. Sect. VI. Of the Redemption of
Time, how precious and valuable a Treasure it is, and will be thought to be
when it is too late. p. 26. Sect. VII. Of the Ordinances of Heaven, Day and
Night, Summer and Winter, Seed Time and Harvest; their Order and Succession
established by God, is the effect of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness. What they may
teach us. p. 30. Sect. VIII. Of Evils to be expected in this Year; the Wisdom
and Mercy of God, in concealing from us the Knowledge of future Events. p. 36.
Sect. IX. The Supposition of dying this Year, should be improved; the
consequence of redeeming Time, and providing for Eternity, farther pressed. The
folly of Elder Persons is condemned, and checked from the Example of Children.
It Is advisable to familiarize the Thoughts of our own Death, and to imagine
beforehand, What Apprehensions of things we shall then have. p. 39. Sect. X.
The Brevity of Life considered as the fruit of Sin. There are but three ways of
leaving this World, as Abel, Adam or Enoch. A diligent Improvement of Time
farther pressed, and the neglect of it bewailed. p. 44. Sect. XI. Of the
Expectation of another Life. The Vanity and Misery of Man in his Best Estate,
if there be none. The satisfactory removal of that Supposition by the Thoughts
of God, and of Eternal Felicity in his Blessed Presence. p. 48. Sect. XII. The
consideration of the Death of others; especially of Relations, Friends, and
Acquaintance, how to be improved. What instructions we may learn by the sight
of a dead Carcass, or a Deaths-Head, and the usual Motto on it, and what by the
death of Holy Persons, to quicken our desires to be as they. p. 55. Sect. XIII.
What Influence the Consideration of Eternity would have upon our Hearts and
Lives, if soundly believed, and considered; especially if the Supposition of
dying this Year be annexed to it. p. 62. Sect. XIV. How a good Man may improve
and encourage himself under the Supposition of dying this Year, even in the
most uneasy, and undesirable Circumstances. p. 67. Sect. XV. Of dying in a
Foreign Country, and of dying Young, Considerations proper to Reconcile the
Mind to both. p. 74. Sect. XVI. The Contemplation of our approaching Chance,
may assist us to mortify the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and
Pride of Life; to cure Ambition, and promote Contentment. p. 81. Sect. XVII.
The same Argument considered farther as disswasive from Worldliness, and
Earthly mindedness; and as proper to confute the Vanity of long Projects, and
great Designs for this World. p. 85 Sect. XVIII. The consideration of the
certain, near approach of an Everlasting State amplified, and pressed, to enforce
an Holy Life. p. 89. Sect. XIX. The Punishments of the Damned considered, as
Intolerable, and Everlasting, and as unquestionably certain: What the
Reflection upon Hell Torments, may, and ought to teach us. p. 97. Sect. XX. The
Eternal Blessedness of HEAVEN considered, as the Perfection of Holiness, to
quicken our desires and endeavors after greater Meetness to possess it. p.
112. Sect. XXI. A devout Meditation upon Psalm 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee. p. 127 Sect.
XXII. The glorious Appearance of J. Christ to Judgment considered as certain;
the Terror, Astonishment, Confusion, and Despair of Wicked Jews, and
Christians, to behold their Judge; and bear his condemning Sentence to
EVERLASTING Destruction. p. 141. Sect. XXIII. Meditations of the Glory of
Christ in his Glorified Saints, and of the Thankful Admiration of Believers,
when He shall come again from Heaven, which shall be continued to all Eternity.
p. 151. Sect. XXIV. Concerning the Examination of a Man's Heart and Life: the
Reasonableness, Advantages, and Necessity of it. Some Direction and Advice
concerning the Time and Manner. That we may know, in what Preparedness we are
for ETERNITY. p. 163. Sect. XXV. How Christians ought to Examine their Decays
of Grace, and Piety. The greatness of their Sin, and of their Loss under such
Declensions. Gods Displeasure, and Departure from them, considered, to awaken
Endeavors of Recovery. In what manner the Faith of Adherence may be acted, by
one who has no Assurance. p. 174. Sect. XXVI. Confession of Sin, Humiliation,
and Repentance must follow upon Self-Examination. Advice concerning Repentance
for some particular Backsliding. The great Perplexity, and Distress of a
Penitent Sinner represented, as a Caution against returning to Folly. p. 187.
Sect. XXVII. The necessity of Christian Resolution, unto Upright, Persevering
Obedience; how full and extensive it ought to be, and yet humble; by what means
we may be assisted to perform, that which we Resolve. p. 199. Sect. XXVIII. The
Import, and Obligation of our Baptismal Covenant. The renewal of it by a solemn
Dedication of our selves to God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, Exemplified
and recommonded. p. 207. Sect. XXIX. Practical and consolatory Reflections, on
the preceding Self-dedication, or Covenant with God. p. 214. Sect. XXX.
Thanksgiving to God for his many Benefits and Mercies, particularly in the Year
past; with some Direction and Advice concerning it. p. 224. The Appendix, from
what time the Jews reckoned the Beginning of their Year; of the difference
between their Sacred and Civil Account. The Feast of Trumpets on the first day
of the Year, its Institution, Nature and Design: The Traditions and Customs of
the Jews respecting that Day.

