An Exhortation to Youth to prepare for Judgment. A SERMON Occasioned by the
Late REPENTANCE AND FUNERAL OF A Young Man, Deceased September 29. 1681.

ECCLES. I. 12. Remember now thy Creator, in the days of thy youth, while the
evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.

LONDON: Printed by J. G. for Benjamen Alsop, at the Angel and Bible in the
Poultry. MDCLXXXI.

TO John Bawdon Esquire
SIR,
IF either the Preaching or publishing of the following Sermon; may be any way
useful to promote the great design of doing good; if the seriousness of the
Subject, or the weight of the Instance that gave occasion to it, may awaken any
one Soul to prepare for his final judgment: I know you will heartily rejoice
and bless God with me; and as readily pardon my defects in the management of so
important a Theme: and the rather, since I endeavored only to convince and
persuade an attentive Auditory, (consisting mostly of young persons) without
the least intention of appearing in Print; as knowing very well, that what may
be acceptable to a Christian ear, when pronounced from the Pulpit, does often
fail of being so, when perused afterward by a critical eye. However, the
Impression once consented to, I ought to address it to no other name but yours;
being Conceived and Born in your House, as well as Preached in your hearing;
especially, when 'twas proper for me to prefix an example of the Connection
between seriousness and cheerfulness. For having discoursed somewhat concerning
the Mirth and Joy of a Christian Life, as well as of the unreasonableness and
vanity of sensual pleasures; it seemed necessary to confirm that Truth by a
lively Instance: And were there nothing else to recommend the practice of
Godliness, but that tranquillity and peace of mind, that calmness and serenity
of spirit which follows a good Conscience, and is the only true ground of a
cheerful conversation; the argument were very pressing. But I need not mention
this, save to let you see the excellency of your choice, and thereby encourage
others to make the same. And none, Sir, that understand my obligations to you
and to your excellent Lady, will judge me guilty of the usual flattery incident
to such Dedications; if I take this first opportunity to avow my Debt of
Gratitude and Honor to you both. And such I must profess it, as is exceeded
only by the Duty owing from Children to their natural Parents; my loss of whom,
your respects and kindness have in great measure undeservedly supplied.

I have only to add, that as the mention of your Name will doubtless invite
many to read the Sermon, who would otherwise be apt to throw it by; so, I am
told, I shall lose other Readers, by concealing that of the person, on whose
account it was Preached. To which I have this to say, that his name and quality,
his life and Conversation, the circumstances of his sickness, and his temper
and expressions on his deathbed, are sufficiently known; to obviate the least
insinuation of a Forgery, as to what I have related concerning him. And as to
what I have not recited, the Readers benefit would be as unconcerned in the
publication, as his curiosity is like to be dissatisfied, if he expect any
other Reason of its concealment.

I am,

Honored Sir, Your most Affectionate, Most obliged, Humble Servant, JOHN
SHOWER.

TO THE READER.
WE reckon it a piece of justice to the Author of this Sermon, to believe, and
(according to that belief) to testify, that the occasion it self did against
his own inclination extort from him the publication of it.

For when the conflict was only between the Modesty due (indeed) to his years
on the one hand, and sense of Duty on the other (upon the concurrence of a
general Obligation, and a present discerned opportunity to promote the eternal
good of Souls) the determination of the matter this way could not seem
difficult to an impartial, unbribed Conscience.

Whither the Discourse it self, the occasion, and all circumstances taken
together have any aptness to serve that end, must be left to the Judgment of
such, as shall read, and consider; with whom the Discourse must speak for it
self. And what it had reference to, will, we cannot doubt, appear not very
considerable only, but be highly grateful also to all Pious and Good men. For
though the Sermon import a relation to a Funeral, the Death of the Person had
nothing in it so mournful, as his Repentance to Life will have with it of
Satisfaction, and thanksgiving to God, with all, that are of a Serious, and
Religious inclination.

Nor can it enter into our thoughts, that any, to whom that Character belongs,
will behold the instance of a Soul (as Christian Charity will believe) rescued
out of the Snare of the Devil, and translated to Eternal Bliss with a slight,
or much less with an evil eye; only because it was not by their means, or not
by one, in all things, of their mind and way. Or that what is the Joy of
Angels, can be the Offense, and Grief of good men.

It is surely not possible, they can be so fatally divided between Paul, and
Apollo, and Cephas, as utterly to forget our higher common Relation to Christ!
For do we not all know, we were Baptized into his Name, and not of this or that
(imagined) head, or Master of a Sect?

But though that transcendent Relation be not quite forgotten, there is too
much cause to apprehend, and lament that it is not remembered, and considered
enough. And to reflect on it as one provoking cause of God's withholding his
Spirit, in so great part, from the Ministry of his word; and of the consequent
paucity of Conversions, and abounding wickedness of the time; that there is so
great a proneness, in many, to subject the sacred Ministry to the serving of
some private mean design, more than that of the common Christian Cause, and
Interest; to proselite men to themselves, rather than Christ, and make them
more exact Formalists of their own Mould and Fashion, rather than good
Christians. To teach them rather to deny or embrace this or that frame, and set
of Rites and Ceremonies, than to deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to
live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World. And more earnestly
to inculcate, and press upon them the things wherein we differ, than the
unspeakably greater, and more momentous things, wherein we are agreed; and
whereof the Dead, Carnal, dissaffected heart of man far more needs the most
earnest inculcation.

It may well be apprehended the Holy God will be jealous in this case. And
while we heartily join not, and do not accept and rejoice in each others help
and concurrence (though in somewhat different methods, which for the present we
cannot give remedy to) in the pursuit of his ends, we have no reason to think
it strange, if he leave us to labor in the Fire, and weary our selves, to no
purpose, in the pursuit of our own.

But let us make it our business to recover as many Souls as we can to God; and
when any are regained, and born anew (according to that ancient Idea of having
all Children taken for the Children of the Commonwealth) let us, whoever was
the happy instrument, account they are neither mine, nor yours, but the
Children of the Christian Church, of the Commonwealth of Israel, the Sons of
God, and a part of the Redeemers Seed. How great will the common Joy be upon
all such occasions! And God will rejoice over us all, to do us good with all
his heart, and with all his Soul, and to use us for the doing of much.

His Cooperation and Blessing may then be cheerfully expected, when our united
strength and endeavor is aimed all one way; and directed to ends great and
noble, worthy of God, and which he will not disdain, or count it dishonorable,
and unfit to concur unto.

It will surely one day come to this. Nor is it to be despaired of, but that
the late work of God's Grace upon this young man (though since prematurely
taken away) may be the earnest and pledge of more, of the same blessed kind;
and this Birth, part of the first Fruits of a Pious Generation to succeed;
wherein Religion shall live, and be transmitted in greater rigor, to them that
shall come after.

Our hope lies mostly among such. And we earnestly desire you that are young,
and in the prime of your age and strength, seriously to consider, how much the
stress of a Religious Interest for future time in England depends upon you.
Which that you may to better purpose; consider also, how much you, more
peculiarly, have of present hope in your own case. God has a kindness for your
Age; makes his first applications to you, at your entrance upon the common
affairs, and business of humane Life, that you would then bethink your selves
of him, as your Creator, and consider how you came into the World: whence it
would not be difficult to collect for what. He covets the beginning of
strength, his Soul desires the first ripe fruits. And you have reason to be
consident, that what he seeks, he will accept, if you consecrate them to him
(as the first fruits were the sacred devoted part.)

Some of you may perhaps, already discern in your selves vicious inclinations,
but your vices are not yet so deeply rooted, nor are so fixedly habitual, as
theirs, who are grown old in Sin and estrangement from God. You have not so often
grieved his good Spirit. You have not resisted so many checks of Conscience,
nor stifled so many convictions, as many others have.

You have a merciful God to deal with. Those are his own words, Prove. 1.23.
(and spoken more especially to such as you, as you will see, looking back to v.
4.) Turn ye at my reproof: behold I will pour out my Spirit to you. Unto that
great God, the Maker and Lord of Heaven and Earth, you have been solemnly
devoted. Consider how great and awful names, the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost were in your Baptism, named upon you! You are as
truly obliged hereby, as you are to your natural Prince; though, perhaps you
have not, as yet, taken, in your own Persons, the Oath of Allegiance. You would
think it a reproach, and it would probably prove a ruin to you, to begin your
course of commerce in the world, with Treachery and Falsehood. Is it more Just,
or Prudent, and Safe, to deal deceitfully with your God, than with men?

Do not think he is to be less the object of your Love, Fear and Obedience, for
that you see him not; How many Subjects in England have never seen the face of
their King? and are they the less bound to be Loyal and Obedient? And how are
you bound, but for the sake of this invisible Lord, and in him?

You have, not seen your own Soul, (or whatever you will call the vital
Principle in you) which yet you are sure you have; for can you not distinguish
your living body from a dead? are you not sure you live? and do you not love
your own life, though you have not seen the very Principle it self, which you
live by? the God you have not seen is as near you. In him you live, move, and
have your being. You have great encouragement and obligation to seek the Lord,
that you may even feel, Acts 17.
and find him out, who is so little far from any of you. You are his Offspring,
as the Holy Apostle tells you, in the words of an Heathen, that you might
understand it to be no new, or strange notion; but, even then, ancient and
common. He is the Author and Parent of your Life and Being. It is unnatural to
affect distance and strangeness to your own Father. It is through the high
excellency of his nature, that you see him not. And he is the object therefore
of your more excellent faculties. You have a mind capable of knowing him, and a
will of choosing him for your God, if they were made pure, and holy, and aright
directed toward him, which his Grace, and Spirit can soon effect in you, when
you seriously seek, and rely upon them.

It Is of greatest concernment to you to have his Favor, in whose Power you
are, and in whose Hand your Breath is. And can you be exempt from his Power,
who made you, and all things? if you doubt whether he can dispose of you,
reward or punish you, was not the making of this World a greater thing? you
cannot be so imposed upon, if you use your understandings, as to be made
believe, that it made it self. For could you, if you were not, make your
selves? and were it easier for all things, than for you?

And you may sensibly perceive, if you will but reflect, and use your thoughts,
that you are Subject to a Superior, Overruling Power, that there is a Lord
over you, and that you live not according to your own wills. For are you never
sick against your wills, or in pain against your wills? and do you not know you
must one day dye, though you be never so unwilling? is it not better to have that
mighty Lord your Friend, than your Enemy? in his Favor is life. And he is in a
Redeemer reconcilable to you. Read seriously, 2 Cor. 5.17, 18, 19, 20, 21.

Kingdoms and Nations are thrown into confusion, if he be displeased, and no
course be taken for seasonable reconciliation. Jer. 18.7.8.9, 10.
And can you stand before his anger? he has long been England's God, your God,
and your Forefathers. Do not you, in your own minds, esteem that wise and sage
counsel, thy Friend, and thy Fathers Friend, forsake thou not. Pro. 27.10.
How much more thy God, and thy Fathers God! It lies upon you, whether he shall
continue the God of England! The parental right derived unto young ones,
continues the visible relation, while their nonage lasts, and incapacity to
treat and capitulate for themselves. But can you think, when you are capable,
your interest by your Parents can avail you any thing against your own personal
rejection of God? No, not though Abraham were your Father, if you should finally
show your selves rather a generation of Vipers: Which we have great hope God
will mercifully forbid.

But if Englands Youth should generally (though not all at once, as they come not
to be such all at once) against their Baptismal Vow, cast off God, here is an
intercision of the line, and an end of the relation between God and us. If
therefore you love your Country, you will love God, and study to please and
serve him with your whole heart.

If you love your Prince, you will do so; for would you have him to be (yea
would you make him?) the Head of a destitute People, forsaken of God?

And how would you propose to your selves to live your days, and spend your
time in the World, without God? What, in eating, and drinking, and pleasing
your Flesh till you dye? would you not take it for a scorn, and ignominy to
you, if one should tell you, you were born for no higher purposes? and are
capable of no higher?

But how dare you think, without knowing, and becoming specially related to the
God of your lives, of dying, and passing into an unknown World? Peruse
seriously the ensuing discourse (that we longer detain you from it) (...) if it
signifies any thing to your better preparation for Death and Judgment; and (in
Order thereto) to your holy, and more useful, comfortable life on Earth; It
will answer the Authors Design, and (with his) the desires and prayers of

Your Affectionate Friends and Servants in our Lord. JOHN HOW. V. ALSOP.


ERRATA.
PAge 6. l. 2. r. grateful, p. 11. l. 9. r. have right, p. 12. l. 29. dele did,
l. last. r. of a, p. 17. l. 15. l. differences, p. 19. l. 23. ad ye, p. 21. l.
16. r. younger years, p. 24. l. 29. add to, p. 31. l. 2. dele and, p. 3. l. 7.
r. exquisite p. 32. l. 5. r. montentany.

A Funeral-Sermon.
Ecelesiastes XI. 9. Rejoice, o young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes: but know thou that for all these things God will bring
thee into judgment.


NOtwithstanding our manifold advantages for serious Religion in our younger
years, and the contrary inconvensences of deferring it to old Age or an
indefinite hereafter; our frequent warnings by the death of others, to provide
for our own, and the unspeakable hazard of a sickbed Repentance; yet how apt
are most persons, in their youth and strength, to forget their Creator and
themselves too! to indulge to carnal mirth and sensual delights; as supposing,
by a fatal prejudice and mistake, That obedience to God would introduce
melancholy, destroy the cheerfulness of conversation, and spoil the sweetness
of human life, and thereupon refuse to bestow a serious thought about Religion
and another World, till God by sickness, or an hasty death, summon them to
appear before his Bar: Upon which account it cannot be thought unnecessary or
unseasonable, upon all occasions, to mind young persons of their sin and duty,
their snares and dangers, their latter end and final judgment.

What at this time directed my thoughts to such a subject is not unknown to
diverse present, viz. The deathbed Repentance of a young man lately deceased,
who for some time past attended this Lecture, I hope; at length, with some
seriousness and profit, though at first he came only with a design to carp and
sooff, as with great remorse he told me in his last sickness.

And therefore, if there be any now come hither upon the same errand, and with
the same thoughts; I pray God command their attention; (for otherwise it would
be in vain for me to beg it) and accompany his own Word with a powerful
efficacy to their hearts, to convince their judgments, and persuade their
wills, and awaken their Souls, that they may go away with other apprehensions
and resolutions than they came hither, as this deceased Penitent once did;
whose Repentance and Funeral calls loudly to us all to consider this Apostrophe
of the Wise man in the Text, Rejoice, o young man, in thy youth, and let thy
heant cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart,
and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God
will bring thee to judgment.

For the coherence of these words with the preceding Verses, we need only
observe, that Solomon in the former Chapters, having given many excellent rules
for the quieting of our minds, and the comfort of our lives, under all that
vanity which he pronounced upon this World, he comes in this Chapter to exhort
us to prepare for another. For when all is done that can possibly be effected
in order to a contented and a happy life; yet he tells us, that our life it
self is vain and transient, our death inevitable, and that the days of darkness
will be many, verse. 8. and then confutes that unreasonable inference, which the
young Epicure is too prone to make from such premises; deriding his foolish
pretense and plea, by an Ironie: and yet endeavoring to awaken his Conscience,
by declaring the certainty of an after-reckoning, and by a solemn citation of
him before Gods Tribunal. For to this purpose, we may suppose the young
sensualist to retort the Argument, Are all things vain? Is life uncertain, and
death and darkness near? let me then enjoy the light as long as I can, let me
indulge my appetite and please my senses, and gratify my lusts, and make the
best improvement of this vain, this short, uncertain life. Have I but a a
little time in which to enjoy this world? Let me not make it shorter by a
Stoical reservedness; lot me not lose this day, least I never have another; but
eat and drink for to morrow I may dye.

To which supposed Objection, the Wise man answers, in the Words I have read,
Rejoice, o young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth, q. d. Let it do thee good, and bring thee joy, be as merry as thou
can, and take all the satisfaction thy lusts can procure; if thou think it
best, and most advisable to do so. Walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the
sight of thine eyes. q.d. Being resolved upon a short life and a merry, baulk
nothing which thy lust does flictate; deny thy self no thing thy foolish heart
can wish, or thy senfual appetite may crave. But know for certain, a day of
reckoning is at hand, when God will call thee to an account for thy sensual
lusts and youthful follies: However now thou may stifle the convictions of
thy Conscience by repeated debauches and lewd company; however now thou may
make a shift to drown the sentiments of a reasonable Soul by the noise of riot,
or bring the pleasures of the flesh to banish the presaging fears of thy
immortal spirit: however now thou may flatter, or delude thy self by the
principles of a Sadducee, or please thy senses by the practice of an Epicvre;
yet for all these things God will bring thee to judgment. q. d. Whither thou will or no, a scrutiny shall be made into thy past actions, and an account must
be given of thine ill spent life: and for all the vanities of thy youth, and
the sensual pleasures that now entice thee; God, a terrible and a righteous God
will bring thee to his Judgment Seat.

And it follows, v. 10. Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, (by avoiding
sin, which is the cause of sorrow) and put away evil from thy flesh, for
childhood and youth are vanity.

From the words may be collected these Three General Heads of Discourse, as
comprehensive of the sum of the Text.

1. In that Solomon makes use of an Ironie, and so in mockery and derision bids
the young man rejoice, we may take notice, that sinful mirth, and sensual
pleasure, is no real and substantial joy, fit for a wise man to choose. It has
but the appearance and the name of joy; for what is truly so, is nowhere to be
had, without the fear of God, and the faithful keeping of his Commandments.

2. In that he directs his discourse to the young man in particular, we have a
plain intimation; that young persons of all others, are most apt to lay aside
the fear of God, and forget their Creator, through the temptations of sensual
pleasures and youthful lusts.

3. Because he tells the young man, that even He must come to judgment, as an
argument most proper to damp his carnal mirth and jollity, and put a check to
his pursuit of youthful Lusts. We may hence observe, in what respects the
consideration of a future judgment has any force of Argument to persuade young
persons to stop in their course of sin, and to remember their Creator in the
days of their youth.

As to the first, I shall divide it into Two Branches, and so consider. 1. That
the carnal mirth of sinners has but the appearance and name of joy: being
expressed by an Ironie, while on the contrary, they meet with trouble and sorrow,
and dissatisfaction in pursuit of their lusts.

2. That the life of a serious Christian, in the fear of God and the keeping of
his Commandments, is the only cheerful and merry life.

1st. That sinful mirth and sensual pleasure has but the appearance and name
of joy. Doubtless the thought of Joy carries Argument with it to allure, as
that of sorrow to dissuade; on which account we are commonly averse to serious
practical Religion in our younger years, as supposing it would interfere with
all the pleasures of human life, and doom us to a perpetual mourning
melancholic state; whereas the Irony in the Text may let us know. That while
we walk in the way of our own hearts, and in the sight of our eyes, we deceive
our selves with the shadow of Joy, and the name of Mirth.

It Is true, he bids the young man here rejoice, and let his heart cheer him;
but it is in perfect scorn and derision, as knowing well that all his mirth and
cheerfulness must be false and spurious, vain and causless, less in quantity
and worse in quality, than the rejoicing of an upright Christian. For as to
sensual mirth, so greatful and infecting to the generality of youth, either it
depends upon their Company, Prove. 23.29.
which sometimes begets quarrels and wounds without cause, or proves not
suitable to their humor; or else arises from a particular temper of Body,
heightened by meats and drinks, and more than ordinary Diet; (and so has more
of the Beast than of the Man:) and by consequence, must needs be of a short
continuance: or else is the sole effect of youth, and so will undoubtedly decay
as they advance in Age. However it is in it self contemptible and base, as
feigned and not sincere, as appearing and not real, as vain and without
foundation, as mational and without a cause: and not contemptible only in it
self, but likewise in relation to the Subject, the inferior part of Man: and
much more in reference to the Object of their carnal mirth, when it is not only
senfual, but forbidden too; and as truly so in regard of the Duration also,
since it is easily disturbed, and quickly gone.

How can it be imagined that a course of sin can give a Man any solid mirth!
when the Men themselves are at such a vast expense of care, and pains, and
trouble, of unavoidable fear, and shame, and anxious thoughts; either to
contrive, or to accomplish, or to conceal their wicked purposes and practices?
so that I need not ask that question concerning the joy of the Epicure, which
Job does of the Hope of the Hypocrite, Job 27.8.
what is it when God shall take away his Soul? But in the mean time, what is it
now? what mirth and joy have they for the present? who must rack their brains
and stretch their fancies, and employ their most solicitous and concerned
thoughts, how to make provision for their lusts; Romans 13.14.
and then must baffle their reasons, and debauch their Consciences, actually to
enjoy them. For oftentimes a troublesome Conscience says so many rubs in their
way, which they know not how to remove; starts so many objections, which they
cannot answer; makes so many doubts and Scruples, which they know not how to
resolve and overcome; that if they will venture upon the sin, it must be even
in despite of themselves.

Sometimes the very contrivance of their sins gives them sufficient uneasiness
and trouble to spoil their mirth: such previous thoughtfulness being necessary
to frame the model, to fix the time, to design the manner, and to order the
circumstances of some impieties; and sometimes the wickedness it self is its
own punishment.

Look upon the young sinner swelling in pride, or burning in lust, or drowning
in sensuality; consider him rackt with impatient desires, and burdened with
unavoidable fears, least his attempt be unsuccesful, or least he be
disappointed in the secrecy of the enjoyment, and his shame and folly published
to the world: And yet this is the merry life of the sensual Epicure!

Besides, when, by a custom and continuance in sin, the Devil is in full
possession, and Lust upon the Throne; what Tyranny does it exercise? and what a
blind obedience must the sinner yield? How often are you forced to declare,
that you approve of that, which your mind condemns? how often do you subscribe
to that as true, which you know to be false? and so run headlong against the
light of nature, and the checks of Conscience, and surrender Soul and Body and
all, to the will of Satan, and the command of an imperious, domineering Lust?

Now, what mirth or joy can consist with such a servitude? yea, while you weary
your selves to commit iniquity, Jer. 9.5.
what frequent vexations do you meet with from the disappointment of your
hopes, finding sorrow, where you looked for joy; an offensive stench instead of
a perfume; and a noisome weed in the room of a flower? Still something more, and
further, is thought necessary to your contentment, and satisfaction, and joy,
than what you possess already: either the presence of somewhat which you cannot
obtain, or the absence of somewhat, which you cannot get rid of, or the
continuance of somewhat, which is not in your power to keep, or such a change
and variety, as you cannot accomplish: And must this be concluded the only
merry and joyful life?

Moreover, Let a man but ask you on the morrow, what is become of the pleasure
of the last nights debauch? when there remains nothing but a sting in the
Conscience; Where then, I pray is your mirth and joy? For when once the heat of
your Wine and Lust is over, and you dare take the liberty of sober thoughts, a
guilty Conscience will then tell you your own, and you shall hardly be able to
stop its mouth. And though in part you may have washed away the sense of former
drunkenness by more Wine: or think to drown the voice of your bosom enemy, the
accuser within, by running into jovial Company, and an excess of riot; yet some
smart affliction, or some sharp reproof, or some serious Sermon, may set your
sins in order again, and make your wounds to bleed afresh: And then Conscience
(notwithstanding your endeavors to stop its mouth, and smother its
accusations) will not fail to lash the Drunkard, and stone the Adulterer, and
make the Lips of an Harlot bite like a Cocatrice. You shall hear its voice, and
understand its errand, and feel a mortal qualm upon your spirits, from such
convictions as you cannot easily stifle.

But if this be not the case of all, because some are given up to a Reprobate
sense; yet how often on asick-bed does the agitation of their own disturbed
thoughts set all in a flame within. When the remembrance of their drunken
excesses gives them Vinegar and Gall to drink, and makes them once more sick;
from that terrible thought, that for ought they know the next draught may be of
the Cup of God's Eternal Wrath in the Lake of Hell. When the remembrance of
their lustful heats gives them the sad prospect and preludtum of unquenchable
Fire, into which they are sinking. When the echo of their Oaths and
blasphemies (which stuck through the Name of God) shall pierce their Souls with
an intolerable remorse. When a sad reflection on their past profaneness, in
scoffing at what is Serious and Holy, in ridiculing Religion, and making a mock
of Sin, shall put them into a fit of trembling, from the unavoidable fears of a
Judgment to come. Now if this be the ordinary state of their case, as most
certain it is, well might the wise man expose their mirth to scorn, and by an
Ironie give them leave to rejoice.

2. That the Joy of a Righteous, Holy Person, in the fear of God and the
keeping his Commandments is the only true and proper Joy. And the Life of an
upright Christian, the only cheerful and merry Life.

Whereas some men have inferred, that because there is a Woe pronounced in
Scripture to those that laugh, Luke 6.25. Matt. 4.5.
and a blessedness to those that mourn and weep: that it is therefore
necessary, if we will be serious Christians, that we must be sad and
unsociable, melancholy and dejected, and lead a life of continual complaints
and sorrows. They might as well conclude a necessity of turning Monks or
Beggars, because the Scripture says, that it is easier for a Camel to pass
through the eye of a needle, Matt. 16.24
than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. For as to that part
of a Christians Life, which consists in the contemplation of spiritual things,
the infinite excellency and novelty of the objects must render it pleasant. And
as to that, which consists in practice, it must needs be more so; from the
encouraging Testimony of a good Conscience, and the Joy of the Holy Ghost;
unspeakably more delightful and satisfactory, than the most ravishing pleasures
the Epicure can boast of. The best of his being short and transient, and mixed
with some uneasiness and trouble. But the delights of an Holy Soul, are pure
and substantial, durable and lasting, rising higher and increasing more by the
very enjoyment: not easily interrupted by a change of outward Circumstances and
Conditions in the World, nor broken on a sudden by little accidents that befall
us unawares; which is not to be denied in reference to sensual Joy.

Sirs, who is it, that either is or can be Joyful, that actually is so, or has
reason to be so? If not the upright obedient Christian?

Is not the continual presence of God, the Father Son, and Holy Ghost, and the
constant Ministry and Attendance of his blessed Angels, a ground of Joy? He may
then rejoice. Is not peace with God, and peace with Conscience, and peace with
the whole Creation? Is not Redemption from the bondage of Sin, from the slavery
of the Devil, from the sting of Death, and the curse of the Law, and Gods
Eternal Wrath, enough to make him cheerful? He may then rejoice.

If the favor of God, and the acceptance of their persons and services with
him, be sufficient reason to dissuade from sadness; Ecol. 9.7.
they may then eat their Breadwith Joy, and drink their Wine with a merry
heart, for God accepts both them and their work.

If freedom of access to the Throne of Grace; if a promise of being granted in
what so e're they ask; if the highest assurance from a God, that cannot lie,
that all things shall work for good; If to dwell in his house, and sit at his
Table, and be related to him as a Father; if to hear his Word, and sing his
Praise, and receive the Communications of his Grace, the pledges of his
Covenant Love, and the comfortable foretasts of Everlasting Joy, be enough to
make them Cheerful, They, and they only right have to be so: And that in Every
Condition. Are they reproacht and slandered? they may yet be cheerful, because
God will bring forth their Righteousness as the Light, Psalm. 27.6.
and clear their Integrity as the noonday Are they afflicted, by poverty, or
sickness, or disapointments in their designs and hopes? they may yet be
cheerful, and thank God for all the advantage and benefit of his wise
dispensations of providence. Are they Tempted by the Devil? they may yet be
Cheerful; Romans 16.20 1 Cor. 10.13.
because God will shortly tread Satan under their feet, and not permit them to
be tempted above what their able. Do they suffer for Righteousness sake? they
may yet be Cheerful; yea, rejoice and be exceeding glad, Jam. 1.2.
and count it all Joy to receive such an honor. For there are promises,
perticularly referring to such a state, sufficient to encourage them; yea, to
make them rejoice. Do they sometimes Mourn with a godly sorrow? yet may they
still rejoice, since to consider the end and effect of that sorrow, will give
it a mixture of Joy: And even their penetential tears do but clear their eyes
to look up to Heaven with delight and comfort, and enable them the better to
read a pardon.

And here it were easy to show how their Faith, and hope, and love, how their
humility, meekness, and patience, their contentedness with God's allotment,
their resignation to his Will, their satisfaction in his Choice, their well
pleasedness with his Order, their preparedness for every Condition, their
diligence in their callings, their moderation in the use of lawful things, and
their innocence and harmlesness in their carriage and behavior toward others,
do all contribute to a cheerful and a joyful life. Therefore well might the
Psalmist tell us that the Righteous shall be glad in the Lord, Psalm. 64.10.
and all the upright in Heart shall Glory. And well might our Lord advise his
Disciples not to be lifted up with the gift of Miracles, but rejoice rather
that their names were written in Heaven. Luke. 10.20.
And well might the Apostle command Christians to rejoice (not by an Ironie, as
Solomon here speaks to the Young Man, but) in the most real and proper sense,
Rejoice in the Lord always, yea, and again, I say rejoice.

Thus much for the first General.

2. Let us consider, in that the Wiseman directs his discourse to the Young
Man in particular, we have thence a plain intimation, that of all others, young
persons are most apt to neglect the fear of God, and be unmindful of their
Maker through the temptation of sensual pleasures and youthful lusts.

Though God demand his right as soon as we are capable of understanding it; and
to serve the Lord from our youth is but just and reasonable, considering that
so great a part of our life is already cut off by our Infancy and Childhood;
though the longer we delay, the greater difficulty shall we meet with, when ever
we set about it; though our whole life at longest (as soon as we are capable and
as long as we did live) should be devoted to God, and it is all little enough,
if we consider its relation to our Eternal State; though the sooner we begin, the
more welcome we shall be, and the more acceptable our Obedience; yea, though an
Early piety be the only hopeful method to prevent the hazard of a sudden death,
and the terrible reflections of old age, and the intolerable pangs a death bed
remorse; yet such is the power of Original. Sin in young persons; such, and so
many are the snares of youth; and those so agreeable to their vicious
inclinations; such the force of prejudice; Such the artifices of the Devil; and
so prevalent the persuasions of evil Company; they are usually so proud,
ignorant, and unexperienced, so rash, hasty, and unadvised and so easily
infected with Sadducism and the principles of Infidelity, so loath to assent to
any such premises, whose con^l^sion will infer the nessessity of changing their
present course, that they of all others do most need a serious admonition to
remember their latter end and final Judgment, least through the temptations of
Sensual mirth and pleasure, they put the evil day far from them.

For (alas!) how seldom do we consider in Youth what we are! and why we were
made! or what is our business in the World! and what will be the end of our
present course! Whereas one thought of God and our last Judgment, methinks,
should be enough to drown all other thoughts as the noise of a Canon does that
of a Whisper.

Sense is so prevalent, and Reason so weak, we are so much inclined to the one,
and so unwilling to be led by the other, that roys and trifles, sports and
recreations, and the vanities of fools and Children possess our hearts, and
employ our time, not looking behind us, to what we have either done, or been;
nor before us, whither we are going, and what in all likelihood will be the
period of our present mirth, and the sad Catastrophe of our Youthful lusts.

Young persons will hardly be convinced, but that Now is their season to be
brisk, and Jovial, having time (as they count) to command, and the World before
them; that it is time enough to think of Death when they are arrested by
sickness, or withered by old Age; let them be concerned about another World,
who are leaving this; their bloed now is warm, and their Spirits nimble, their
senses are quick, and their passions strong; they will walk in the way of their
own hearts and in the sight of their eyes; and ordinarily split upon that Rock
of Evil company, where so many thousand Vessels at their first launching out
have dashed in pieces. Besides, their Age is most inviting to the Devil to bend
his chiefest forces against them, rather than against Children, or Aged
persons? the former not being capable of making a choice, and the latter being
fixed and resolved in their way; his principal endeavors therefore are
levelled against Youth, to draw off their hearts from God and Holy things, and
to divert their thoughts from the consideration of Death and Judgment, which
would otherwise restrain and check them in pursuit of their lusts: And this
brings me to the Third General, to consider,

3. That for all these things God will bring us to Judgment. And therein what
Arguments the thoughts of a future Judgment may rationally suggest to damp the
carnal mirth of young persons, and persuade them to remember their Creator in
the days of their youth.

And to enforce this Argument I might here mind you of the mischief you will do
to others by an ill example, and of the aggravation of your sin by employing
the best of your time in the service of the Devil, which must needs make
judgment more terrible, in that your final doom, the consequences of it will be
more severe.

I might tell you the sooner you repent, the more hopeful is your case in
reference to a pardon; I might largely describe the happy influence of an early
Piety with respect to the future part of our lives, to direct our choice, and
govern our actions, and prevent a great deal of Sin, and shame, sorrow, and
repentance; I might mention the comfortable reflections in Old Age upon a
well-spent life; our capacity of greater Service to God now; and our assurance
of a weightier crown of Glory hereafter; with all the other considerable
benefits that have respect either to a safe and happy life, a comfortable Old
Age, and a peacable Death, or a joyful Resurrection, and a blessed Eternity;
all which will come under the Argument in the Text; and what I shall say of it
may be comprised under the following particulars,

1. Let young persons consider, that notwithstanding their present mirth and
jollity, yet the Judgment of God is infallibly certain. It is an
unquestionable, undoubted truth, that for all these things God will bring thee
to Judgment.

2. Consider, that this Judgment is near at hand, and will shortly take place.

3. Consider your summons may be sudden, before you are aware.

4. Consider, that Youth and health is the fittest time to prepare for this
Judgment of God.

5. That if through the temptations of carnal mirth and youthful lusts you
neglect your preparation, it is more then probable your passage by death to
this Judgment of God will be very uncomfortable and full of horror.

6. That this Judgment it self, and its immediate consequences, will be
intollerably dreadful to unprepared Sinners, whether Young or Old.

1. Consider, that notwithstanding your present mirth and jollity, yet this
final judgment is infallibly certain. What is here affirmed concerning persons,
is asserted likewise concerning things in the next Chapter, Eccl. 12.14.
that God will bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing whither
it be good, or whither it be evil. Methinks I need not tell you, that the
Doctrine of this final Judgment is declared in Scripture with the greatest
plainess, confirmed by the strongest Evidence, and pressed upon the Conscience
with the most cogent, and enforcing and Arguments; espicially since the
pretended Objections on the behalf of the Sadducee, and the sensual Epicure are
so weak and trifling, that if their lusts were not stronger than their
arguments, they themselves would be ashamed to offer them.

For whoever disbelieves a future Judgment must either conclude that the
Almighty God cannot, or that the Righteous God will not call us to an account
for what we have received and done, though his absolute Omnipotence does assure
us, that he can, and his invariable truth (having declared his purpose) that
undoubtedly he will,

And do we think that all the assurance of this Judgment of God; which the
Scripture gives us that all those plain assertions concerning the Judge
himself, and the persons to be Judged, and the consequence of the Judgment, and
the certainty of it, that they are only terms of art to affright the world, and
not real intended truths, which will take effect according to their natural
meaning; that the whole account is perfect fiction, and mere Romance, contrived
on purpose to keep the World in due Decorum, and so to prevent some bad effects
only in reference to the present State of things, which would probably follow,
if this belief did not obtain; Whereas is it not necessary, that there should
be a Judgment day, for the conviction and condemnation of great Sinners, that
scorn the Legislative authority of God, and trample on his Government, and are
above the check and conroul of humane laws? (to manifest the Righteousness of
God, as Ruler of the world, in rendering to every man according to his works
and to uphold the honor of his wise Government, whereof Judgment is as
necessary and essential a part as Legislation; the latter without the former
being little else than show and mockery; is it not necessary for the
vindication of Religion from that contempt and scorn, that is powered upon it;
Is it not necessary to unriddle the mysteries of Divine Providence, and
disclose the secret wickedness of Hypocrites, and put a difference between
those that serve him, and those that refuse to do so? As likewise to rectify
the mistakes and false opinions, that are abroad in the world concerning God,
and Christ, and Holiness, and Sin, to put an end to controversies, and
determine the difference concerning what is Truth and what is Error? These and
such like things considered (besides the Authority of Divine writ) do morally
assure us, that there will be an after-reckoning, and a final Judgment. And
methinks one thought of the certainty thereof, should give a check to your
c^rnal mirth, and cast a damp upon your Sensual joy, and abate your heat and
vigor in a course of Sin. For did we but believe that for all these things God
will bring us to Judgment, how could we so readily entertain the temptations of
the Devil, and fall such an Easy prey to his devices? How could so many unhappy
Youths invade their own Damnation, and snatch it as it were out of the hands of
Justice? thrust away their present and future happiness, and fly into the
Devils, arms in the persult of their youthful lusts, though they have been told
so plainly, and warned so frequently of a Future Judgment? How could these
things be? if they did but believe the certainty of this final judgment? and
how dreadful will be their case who are not awakened till they find it to be so
who will not acknowledge this Judgment of God, till they know the dreadfulness
and terror of it, by being brought to their Trial; who will not believe that
God will ever call them to an account, till a final Impenitence, joined with
their Infidelity, bring them under his condemning Sentence.

2. Consider, that this Judgment is near at hand and will shortly take place.
As Death will consign us over to God's Tribunal; so childhood, and youth,
manhood, and old age, are but several stages that hasten us to Death. Yet a
little while and we must go the way of all living: Job. 16.22.
How concerned and thoughtful soever now we are about this World, we must
shortly bid adieu, and take our leave. Even the Man of business must find a
time to dye, and give an account of his Stewardship; though he allow himself
little or none to prepare for Death and Judgment. Our Youth and Strength is
quickly gone, we soon decline and languish into Dust: As Soon as we begin to
live, we are hastening to the end of our Life. As a Candle, as soon as it begins
to burn, or an hour glass as soon as it is turned, does hasten to its end: (our
life withering like a Flower, 1 Pet. 1.24. Psalm. 90.4.
and passing like a watch in the night.) We must dye shortly, and much sooner
than they who lived in the first ages of the World. As Death is the certain
consequence of old age; so those Evil days (as the wise Man calls them) do
still draw near, and will quickly overtake us. Whether we eat, or drink, or
sleep; whether we be sad or merry; whether we talk or are silent; whether we
work or are idle; whether we are studious or careless; whether we prepare for
Death and Judgment, or whether we despise and avoid such Thoughts: And yet how
many spend there youthful days in vanity and sin, with a careless neglect of God
and their Salvation, in gluttony and Drunkenness, in Chambering and wantonness,
Romans 12.13.14.
not putting on the Lord Jesus, nor walking in his Spirit; but making
provisions for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. As if this day of the
Lord were a great way off, at a mighty distance: Whereas our Judge is at the
door, and the end of all things does approach, and it cannot be long ere all the
World must receive their Doom.

A beleiving thought of this, would certainly imbitter the pleasures of sin,
would quench our fond desire, and check our Foolish hopes, and spoil the relish
of our carnal Joy; would blast the Beauty, and darken the luster of worldly
greatness; would sadden the delights, and weaken the Temptations of fleshly
pleasures. For what satisfaction can that man take in Jovial Company, in the
pastimes of Children, and the laughter of Fools, who is verily persuaded, that
ere long he must appear to Judgment? How can he be enamored of this Earth, and
after serious deliberation be fond of outward grandeur; who beleives, and
knows, that shortly the Earth it self shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10.
the Trumpet of the Arch Angel found, and our Glorious Judge summon all
Mankind before his Bar, by that Thundering Voice, Arise dead and come to
Judment? And can we grant this day of the Lord, to be not only certain, but
near at hand; and not think it time to prepare for our solemn appearance? shall
we contradict our principles, and live in a repugnancy to our avowed Creed,
under the plain censure of Notorious Hypocrisy or folly? The First from our
profession, if we do not believe it; the Second from the unsuitableness of our
practice, in case we do.

3. Consider, that your Summons to this Judgment of God may be sudden and
unexpected, and overtake you unawares. When God will require your Souls to
appear before his Tribunal; how soon or suddenly he will do it, you cannot say.
The time and place of our Death, in kindness and wisdom, is concealed from us,
that we may every where stand upon our gaurd, and every moment expect our call
to Judgment: because we know not whether God by sickness will advertise us of
our approaching end, or his stroke be sudden by an unexpected casualty. And
therefore Moses speaking to the Jews, as to one man, ( Deuteronomy. 30.20.) says he
of God, He is thy Life, and the length of thy Days. q d. The shortning or
prolonging of thy days is in the Hand of God. Hence some are taken the first
hour, and some at the third, and some at the sixth, and some at the ninth, and
others let alone till the eleventh; but that is a great uncertainty: for we may
be surprised. Innumerable accidents attend us every where, that may blot our
names out of the Book of Life, and suddenly confine us to the Chambers of
Death. It may be this day we are Jovial, and in health among our friends, and
worldly affairs: and to morrow arrested with a Summons to Judgment. In the
morning in chase of earthly honor, riches, or delights: and in the Evening
laid out for our funeral, by various accidents not now foreseen by us or any of
our friends.

We may be cut off while we presume on hereafter, while we resolve to repent,
in the midst of our holy purposes, before they are performed: For though we read
in Scripture of the Sinner of an Hundred years old, that he shall be accursed;
yet have we no example of one in a thousand, that lives to that age. This young
person, whose funeral occasioned my discourse, not many days since was as
strong and healthful, and as likely to Live as any of us; and It Is a very great
questions, whether you and I may have so much Time and Space to repent upon a
Sickbed as he had, who enjoyed his senses and the use of his reason to the
very last. This day therefore cannot be too soon to prepare, because to morrow
may be too late: Every unprepared Sinner being exposed to as many hazards of
Everlasting destruction, as their may be accidents to surprise 'em with sudden
Death.

4. Consider, that youth and health is the fittest time to prepare for this
final judgment: As to the former, if we but reflect on the manifold infirmities
of old age, that weakness of body, and that decay of parts which does usualy
accompany that state, the hardening of their hearts by a custom and continuance
in Sin; the loss of memory and quick apprehension; the want of those vigorous
Affections, and flexible inclinations which they had in Youth; which makes it
more difficult to convince and persuade them; such considerations as tkese,
methinks should be enough to discourage a delay in our young yerears.

But besides this, how can such persons expect to find' acceptance with God in
the dregs of their time! after the misspending of an whole Life to his
dishonor? for tho I would not discourage their utmost endeavors, and through
the mercy of God in Christ, there is hope enough to prevent a total despair;
yet what can we suppose should be the substance of such a man's prayer, but to
this effect?

Lord, I have wasted my days in sin, and sacrificed the flower of mine age to
sport and folly, to the provocation of thy Justice, and the hazard of my
Salvation; the best of all my Time, I must needs confess, has been devoted to
the will of Satan, and devoured by my Lusts: But I here present thee with the
Lees and refuse of my strength and Age, the little fragments, and poor
remainder which they have left; I beseech thee, for the sake of Christ to
receive me now at last, though I did obstinately deny obedience to thy earliar
calls, and wilfully refused to return sooner: though now my strength, as well as
my body, is bowed down to the Grave, and I am hardly capable of doing thee any
Service: denyme not, O Lord, to live with thee in the other World, though I have
lived so long without thee in this. What prevalency do we imagine there can
possibly be in so weak an address? without a Soverain extraordinary Grace to
relieve the exigence of such sad and discourageing Circumstances?

And then as to health, that for certain is the most proper time to prepare for
Judgment: Let us but suppose the young sinner seized by a fit of Sickness, if
the accuteness of the disease do not influence the brain, and and cause a
dilirium; yet is that a time to repent, and make your peace with God, and
provide for our appearance before his judgment Seat? for usually the
understanding is then clouded, the fancy then disturbed, the passions
disordered, and the thoughts distracted.

Consider seriously, what is wont to be the hurry of a violent distemper;
suppose restlesness, through heat, or pain, or want of sleep: or suppose the
Physician should mistake thy case: or the Devil use his subtelty and malice to
deceive or terrify thy guilty Soul; and then tell me, whether a sickbed be a
fit season to prepare for Judgment? May not thy thoughts have work enough to
struggle with thy pains? or to settle thine estate? or regard thy mourning
friends about thee? When thy pulse is low, and thy breath short, and thy
Spirits almost gone, thy Sins many, and thy fears great, and thou have hardly
Sufficient strength to get rid of a clot of Spittle, is that a time to enter
the lists with Principalities and powers, and all the rulers of outer darkness?
Beside, it is the sat of many, the nearer they approach to Death, that the less
apt they are to believe it: and so perish in their security, and are totally
unconcerned about a future judgment.

But supposing the free use of Reason, and an awakened apprehension likewise of
what refers to their Immortal Souls, and their Eternal abode. I then add:

5. That if, through the inticements of youthful lusts, you now neglect to
prepare, it is very probable, and you may justly fear it, that your passage, by
Death, to this Judgment of God will be very uncomfortable and full of horror:
whether repentance on the brink of the Grave, after a a wicked life, may be
Saving or no, is not the question. Through an extraordinary act of Grace (whereof
the penitent Theif was an instance) it cannot be denied possible: But when it
is sincere and saving, who can tell, any otherwise, than as in charity we must
hope the best? For as to the persons themselves, on a sick and deathbed, how
can they in an Ordinary way be assured of their sincerity? it is therefore
probable, that their last Sickness will be very uncomfortable, though their
Repentance should prove sincere, and their Souls saved in the day of Christ.
For suppose, when their sins stare them in the face, and they did never till
now bethink themselves of the necessity of a pardon; That Satan should now tell
them, that their Repentance does come too late to meet with that mercy they so
long abused. And that it is all owing to their Fears of Death, and the
apprehended dreadful consequences of dying. If he should tell 'em, that the
pleasures of Sin being lost, and so the bait to entice them gone; every thing
about them looks sad and mournful; and such a change of their condition, from
health to sickness, and the Gates of Death, must needs alter their resolutions
and thoughts. If he should tell 'em, that the nearness of Eternity cannot but
make a person, who has space to consider, more apprehensive of another World,
and concerned about it, than at other times; and that if Sickness and Death
were at a greater distance, they wuold still be the same: which is to sadly
probable from the many Examples of those, who have returned to their former
sins, as soon as they returned to their health; and left all their repentance,
their holy thoughts, and good resolutions, in that Sickbed, where at first they
took 'em up. If the Devil suggest such a Temptation as this to the Sick
Penitent, who has hitherto walked in the way of his own heart, and in the
sight of his Eyes, what can he reply, or plead on his own behalf, to make proof
of the Sincerity of his Repentance to himself, or to those about him? However,
it may become us to consider seriously, that God does oftentimes in righteous
Judgment open the Eyes of Great Sinners on a Deathbed; and fill their Souls
with an amazing horror from the fears and foresight of of his approaching
vengeance. When they cannot but apprehend, that their Sinning season is now
expired; their mirth and jollity over; their final Judgment at hand; and their
Bodies and Souls within a few hours to part, and so be divided between the
Grave and Hell; you will then admit other thoughts of God, and his terrible
Judgment, than at present in your careless health: bitterly reflecting on your
past follies, in the days of your Youth; and freely condemning your former
choice: the serious review of your vensual Joys, (which are fled as a shadow,
and vanished like a cloud of smaok) shall give you an unexpressible remorse and
shame; having bartered away your Souls for such a thing of naught, and ventured
your Eternal Salvation for a trisling lust.

Was my God, my Soul, and my Salvation, of no greater value, will you then be
forced say; of no greater value; than so easily to be parted with, for the
short satisfaction of abrutish forbidden pleasure? must I leave this world I
loved so dearly? and bid adieu for ever to all its enjoyments? are all my good
days past? is all my mirth and joy concluded? and nothing but Eternal sorrows
to be expected? must all my mirth and laughter be exchanged for tears and
howling? my ease and pleasure for insuportable and remediless torments? must my
guilty Soul be thus torn from my body? and from all things in which it took
delight? to be dragged and hurried to a dismal place, where it will hate to
live, and yet cannot dye? Must I sport, and sing, and revel it no more? Must I
brave it out in Pride no longer? and relish the delights of sense no more, no
more, for ever?

And which is worse, infinitely worse: must I make my appearance before my
offended Judge, whose threatenings I derided, whose wrath I provoked, whose
commands I contradicted, whose servants I reproch't, etc? must I now appear
before the dreadful tribunal of this Just, this Holy, this Inexorable Judge? Is
there no hope of escapeing in the crowd, and so avoid a trial? or is there no
possibility of an excuse, when arraigned before his bar? or is there no method
to be found to evade the Execution of his Terrible Judgment? must I hear, and
hear to my Confusion, that Epitome of Hell comprised into a Sentence? Depart,
Depart from me ye cursed into Everlasting Fire? Oh! what shall I be able to say
for my self? when my own Conscience brings the charge, and reads the
Indictment, and I cannot disown or deny one Article of what I am accused?

All the mercies you have received from God; all the instructive, afflictions
you have at any time met with; all the awakening, Sermons you have heard, all
the mottions of God's Spirit, and the rebukes of your own, which you have
resisted; all the calls of his Word, the warnings of his Providence, and the
threatenings of his Wrath, which you have slighted; your knowledge of your
danger; your time and space to repent, your former confessions of Sin; your
convictions of guilt; your purposes to reform; the reproofs you have had from
others; and the promises you have made your selves; may all be mustered up to
your awakn'd thoughts, to seize your Souls with horror and confusion, when you
are called by Death to pass to this Judgment of God.

And now, Christians, it is probable you may suppose and hope that this will
never be your case; yet the present instance, of this Unhappy youth may
convince you that it is possible, and more than possible. For though I never saw
him (to my knowledge) Save on his Deathbed, yet having expressed his own desires,
that others might take warning by his Example, I need not scruple to acquaint
you (with what I learned from himself, and is well known to his Surviving
companions.) that during his health, he did put the evil day far from him: and
yet was very apprehensive of a future Judgment, and concerned at his own
unpreparedness, in his last Sickness; most heartily confessing, and that with
Tears, that he had indulged to youthful Lusts, delighted in wicked company,
lived in the profanation of the Sabbath, and made a mock of every thing almost
that was Serious. And this notwithstanding the counsels of his Friends, and
some checks of his own Conscience: sadly bemoaning his forlorn state, as having
little or no hope to find mercy at the hand of God; and penitently confessing
his own willfulness and folly that procured it to himself: and thereupon cried
out in the bitterness of his Soul, Oh! had I believed and known, what now I do;
I would have been more concerned to Secure my Everlasting Intrest; I would have
taken more care to avoid Temptation; I would have employed my Time to better
purposes: and attended the ministry of the Word in another manner, etc. But I
fear it is now too late. And then with the greatest importunity did beg of God
to pardon and forgive him, for the sake of Christ; then tossing from place to
place, wringing his hands, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven, (with the
affecting vehemence of a despairing Soul) did beseech the assistance of those
about him to seek to God on his behalf. Oh pray for me, pray for me, for
Christ's sake pray for me; That if yet Mercy may be had, the Lord would take
pity on a miserable Sinner. O my Sins are a burden too heavy for me to bear; I
have Sinned though God stood by and saw me: I have Sinned though my Conscience did
rebuke me for it; again, I have Sinned, though I resolved to Sin no more; I know
not what to do, or which way to turn, etc. for with such words as these did he
bewail himself, and signify the horrors of an accusing Conscience.
Nevertheless, for the support of his Relations, and the encouragement of all
returning Sinners, I am willing to add, That a little before his change (which
was sudden and unexpected, when his Friends began to entertain some hopes of
his recovery) his Spirit was more composed and calm, his distracting Terrors
much abated; and the overwhelming fears of Death and Judgment very much subdued
and overcome.

In his confessions of sin, he owned and aggravated his crimes with the
greatest freedom, with a deep remorse of Spirit, and an hearty serious sense
and feeling of what he spoke. He did not go about to palliate or excuse his
former wickedness, to lessen or diminish it, by shifting the blame on the
subtilty of the Devil, the bias and inclination of a bodily Temper, the
Corrupution of humane nature, or the persuasions of Evil Company, etc. although
this last he did very much lament, as the greatest snare to his Soul, and a
principal occasion of his youthful sins, and apprehended Ruin.

Among other sins which an accusing Conscience told him of, one that did more
particularly affect his heart, and burden his soul, was the sin of Lying; I
mention this, with an unfeigned desire, that all young Persons (Apprentices
especially) would remember this Example, and resolve against it.

There is one thing more, which I named first, and would here take notice of, I
mean his Scoffing Humor; and this he acknowledged with a great deal of remorse
and shame; that when first he was an hearer in this place, he came with a
design to droll upon the Sermon, and deride the Preacher: But not meeting with
any thing on which to break a Jest, or occasion mirth and laughter, nothing but
what was serious, becoming the reverence and awfulness of holy things, and
suited to the solemn work and service of a Sabbath, he resolved to come again,
and accordingly for some time did so, (I cannot say how long) with other
thoughts of my Brethren and me, and of the serious plainness of this our way of
worship, than his former Ignorance and prejudices would suffer him to admit;
and thanks be to God he is not the only Instance of this kind.

Therefore I cannot but subjoyn, that as Religion is not the less excellent,
because some Fools despise it; nor sin the less destructive, because there be
some Atheistical Scoffers who make a mock of sin; neither is plain and serious
Preaching, (with the purity and simplicity of Gospel-worshiop) any whit the
more Contemptible, because some that sit in the chair of Scorners, deride and
run it down; since these kind of Scoffers are usually such as cast off all
thoughts of God and an after-reckoning, and are no way influenced by the
consideration of a future Life; to whom Heaven and Hell are words of sport, and
the Sacred Scripture matter of derision.

For none, methinks, who are serious in the practice of Religion, and make a
conscience of their words and actions, should dare to make a mock of the
worship of God, or those that join therein, whether Ministers or people: only
upon the account of some little difference, from that method and way of
worship, which they like best, when the substance and design of both is
apparently the same, and believed to be so. Did men but understand what they
profess by owning Christianity; did they but believe what they understand; and
practice what they pretend to believe, a mere Reverence and Just regard to holy
Things, would most certainly give a check to this Scoffing Humor, in reference
to those who cannot in all respects conform to their measures.

6. Lastly, Consider the dreadfulness and the Terror of this final Judgment, in
its self, and its certain and immediate Consequences to every unprepared
sinner, whether young or old.

When the blessed Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels,
to take the Throne by his Father's order, and Judge the World in righteousness;
when he that stooped from Heaven to Earth, to be a sacrifice for sin; that
watched, and prayed, and sweat drops of blood for you and me; that endured the
Contradiction of sinners against himself, in the days of his flesh; suffered
the Cruelty of men, and the Wrath of his Father, and the Cursed Death of the
Cross, upon our account; shall come again as the Judge of quick and dead; we
shall then have other thoughts of him and of our selves, than now we entertain.

Sirs, he now offers you a pardon, as the purchase of his Death, on easy,
honorable, and advantageous terms; But it will be then too late, and in vain
to beg it. He now warns you of your danger, and tells you, that the end of
youthful lusts, is Death, and Judgment, and eternal Wrath. And then you shall
know that he spoke in earnest, and his words were true. Now as a merciful
Redeemer, he entreats you to be reconciled; he shall then be clothed with
vengeance, and appear, to your confusion, as a Terrible Judge.

At first he came in the form of a Servant, to make our Peace with God, and was
thereupon despised and rejected of men. But he shall shortly come again, to
render vengeance to those, that would not know him as a Prince and a Prophet,
receive his message, and yield obedience to his Holy Gospel. Now he offers
life, eternal life, and begs your acceptance of it: but he will then revenge
your ungrateful refusal of his offered mercy. Now he entreats you to be happy,
and have compassion on your selves: But then he will be as deaf to your
entreaties, as you have been to his; and that, though you should urge him with
the greatest importunity possible, though you beseech him by the mercifulness
of his Nature, by the freeness of his Invitation, by the Compassion of his
Death, by the merit of his sufferings, by the kindness of his Sacrifice, by the
Grace of his Gospel, etc. Now you will not believe his promises; but then you
shall experience the execution of his Threatenings. Now you will not hearken to
his advice and warning, but you shall shortly feel the sad effects of your
contempt and obstinacy. Now you will not be constrained by his dying love; but
ere long you shall know the power of his wrath, whether you will or no; for
though at present he offer you life; yet upon your refusal, he will shortly
pronounce the Sentence of Eternal Death; as yet he Invites you to him, but then
he will bid you depart. Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

From that God, after whose Image you were Created, from that Savior, who
redeemed you by his blood, and from that Holy Spirit who would have sanctified
you by his Grace.

Depart from me, and all hopes of Salvation by me. From me, and all the blessed
Company of Saints and Angels, that shall live with me for ever.

Depart from me, abandoned to an everlasting curse, (of which both Souls and
bodies shall be the wretched unhappy Subjects) into Inquisite Torments set
forth by fire, and such as were originally designed for the Apostate Spirits,
of whom the Scripture does suppose one to be the principal Ring leader of all
the rest, and who are therefore termed his Angels.

They who tempted you to Sin, shall deride your folly, and triumph in your
Rain; and be your Constant perpetual Tormentors, since the fire is
unquenchable, and never goes out.

Nevertheless, how dreadful soever this Sentence must needs be, it is not more
intolerable in it self, than unavoidable to the Sinner: For where will you hide
from his Alseeing eye? or how will you resist the force of his Almighty arm? as
it will be in vain to think of supporting his wrath: so every whit as vain to
Imagine a possibility of escaping it. Will the tears of a desparing Sinner
extinguish the fire of Gods wrath, and quench the flames of Hell? will his
wishing he had been wiser, in the least avail, when the Charge is proved, and
the Sentence past? whither would you flee from the justice of the judge?
whither? but to the mercy of a Savior? But this Savior is now the Judge, and
become your Enemy: A sight of whom shall awaken the most slumbering Conscience,
and make the never-dying worm gnaw your very heart: when it shall mind you of
the calls and invitations you refused, and the warnings you slighted, revive
the convictons you stifled, and remember you of the vows you broke, and force
you to reflect on the vanities of your youth, and sadly look back on the time
past of your ignorance and folly.

When for a light temptation, you run the hazard of this heavy punishment; when
for a temporal pleasure you ventured an endless Torment; for a mixed delight, an
unmixed pain; for a momentary satisfaction, an eternal Wrath; for a short Sin,
an everlasting Sorrow. O Eternity! Eternity! is it true, or rather can it
possibly be false, that after millions of ages, under the wrath of God, it will
not then be past the beginning of Sorrows, but an everlasting vengeance will be
yet to come, and will ever be to come. O cursed be my wicked Companions that
enticed me to Sin, and so to ruin; or rather, Cursed be my own stupidity and
folly, that I would not be persuaded to believe what now I know and feel. Oh
that I were now on Earth again, and had the benefit of one months space, in
order to a second trial! Oh that I had never seen the light, or that the Earth
had opened and and swallowed me up in my Cradle! or rather, Oh that in time I
had received instruction, and harkened to reproof; that in time I had believed
what I was told so plainly, and warned of so Faithfully, concerning God and his
Righteous Judgment.

Now that this may never be the case of any one of us, let me conclude with the
advice of the Prophet, Jer. 13.16. Give Glory to the Lord your God, before he
cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while
ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of Death, and make it gross
darkness.

FINIS.

