A REPLICATION TO A Late BOOK Written By Mr. Benjamin Keach AGAINST
Infants Baptism, ENTITLED A Counter-Antidote, etc.

By Gyles Shute of Lime-house.

LONDON, Printed for the Author: Published and Sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall, and Nath. Hiller in Leaden-hall-street, 1694. Price Three
Pence.

A REPLICATION TO A Late BOOK Written By Mr. Benjamin Keach AGAINST
Infants Baptism.
SIR, I have carefully perused your Book, and I find that you have dealt very
disingenuously by me, and have made several unkind Steps upon my Credit and
Reputation, which is not at all becoming a Christian, especially one of your
Figure.

Secondly, Your whole Book is reducible to five General Heads. The First is
against our Mode of Baptism, viz. sprinkling or pouring water in Baptism, and
to prove that Dipping or Immersion is the only Mode in Baptism. Secondly, To
invalid the Notion of Habitual Faith in Elect dying Infants, and to prove they
are saved without it. Thirdly, To prove the Dissolution of the Everlasting
Covenant God made with Abraham and all his Seed, calling it a Covenant of
Circumcision only. Fourthly, To prove that none but Adult Believers are the
Subjects of Baptism. Fifthly and Lastly, To prove that the Church State, before
the coming in of the Gospel, was only a carnal Legal Church State, and
therefore destroyed and dissolved by the coming in of the Gospel.

Now upon these Five Pillars your Opinion is built, and from these five Topics
are all your Arguments raised and deduced against us Paedo-baptists; wherefore
to confute these five Heads is to Answer all your Book.

But before I enter upon the controversy I must acquaint the Reader with some
of Mr. Keach's unkind Steps he has made upon my Credit and Reputation, which I
conceive was to render me as black and odious in the Eye of the World as
possibly he could: So that what I have written in Vindication of
Infant Baptism, and the Everlasting Covenant God made with Abraham, might meet
with the less esteem among People of all Persuasions. But however Truth will be
Truth still, notwithstanding all the opposition that is made against it by Men
of corrupt Principles.

1. Says Mr. B. K. This Man has come too near to the Expressions and bitter
Reflections John Child uttered against us, falsely called Anabaptists, who soon
after fell under fearful horror of Conscience and Desperation, etc.

And pray observe how his Reverend Brother (...). (as he calls him) and he are
agreed; for,

In page 11. of his late Book he says, Is not this the Man David spoke of,
that traveled with Iniquity, conceived Mischief, and brought forth Falsehood?
Remember, remember John Child, whose chief cause of desperation was his
speaking and writing against those very People of God you now do.

Here you see these two Reverend Brethren are both agreed in their Verdict
against me, wherefore in Answer unto it, I will lay down some of the chief
things which were the cause of his Desperation, and it may be we may find one
Mr. H. C. among the Witnesses unto it in Print, and then I will leave it to all
those who have read my Book, to judge whether I am not most horribly abused by
these two Gentlemen: And for the full clearing up of this Matter, I have
procured their own Parties Testimony to witness against them, in that Book
which was written and attested by Mr. Thomas Plant and Mr. Benj. Dennis,
concerning the cause of Mr. John Child's Desperation.

First, Mr. Dennis in page 10. says, He freely discoursed the Grief of his
Mind, expressing and setting forth his Condition to be most deplorable, as
having no hope of Salvation. I laid before him, with the greatest tenderness,
the Freeness and Riches of Gods Grace, choosing to argue from his own former
declared Opinion against Limiting of it, but could fasten no word of
consolation or hope upon him.

Secondly, Here is the Testimony of Mr. H. C. himself, in page 18. Mr. Child, I
am informed your Trouble arises from the Publishing a Book, Entitled, The
Second Argument, etc. What part of that Book troubles you most? Mr. Child
taking up the Book, began to read, where he says, The greatest number of
Dissenters do hold Principles dangerously Heretical, and most abominably
abusing the most Holy and Blessed God, etc. But before he could end that
Paragraph, being under extreme agony of mind, and weeping bitterly, put the
Book from him, and spoke to this effect, viz. I have represented those of
Calvin's Principles beyond what ever they conceived, strained their Opinions
beyond their Intentions, and drawn such Consequences as never were in their
Mind; and striking his Breast with much anguish, said, These words lie close; I
shall never get over this I writ in prejudice against them, calling them a
Villainous Body of People, which was unjust.

Thirdly and Lastly, to name no more, in page 26. said one of the Company that
was with him, It may be your Endeavors heretofore, too much to advance
Free Will and the Power of the Creature, may be one reason why the Lord has
permitted you thus to fall. Mr. Child replied, You have hit it, Sir: I once
thought there was a power in Man, but now I find it otherwise; for I cannot
pray; the Lord has taken away the Gift of Prayer from me; I have no desire
after any thing that is good; I cannot repent.

Mr. Child did not write against the Anabaptists as such; but he writ against
the Calvinists, among all persuasions, that hold Election and Predestination;
therefore how could these Men declare to the World in Print, contrary to their
own Testimony, that Mr. Child's chiefest cause of Desperation was his speaking
and writing against those very People of God I now do? Pray who is the Man
David spoke of, they or I? Did I ever write against the Free Grace of God? Pray
do me the Justice as to read the Vindication of the Antidote, page 167 to 173.
and see whether I am an Arminian, or not, as both these Gentlemen slily
insinuate; for Mr. Child was so, to whom they have compared me.

2. In page 2. says Mr. K. I think few men who have had to do with us in this
Controversy showed a more sour Spirit than Mr. Baxter: And yet, did he ever
deny us to be True Churches, or call our Baptism counterfeit?

To which I Answer, He has called it worse. Let any Man read Mr. Baxter's Book
of Plain Scripture Proof of Infants Church Membership and Baptism, in chap. 13.
page 136 and 137. there Mr. Baxter has charged the Anabaptists with being
guilty of breaking the Seventh Commandment, in their Dipping Women and Maids
(as he Phrases it) either naked, or, as the Modestest of them do, next to
naked; and he calls their Baptism it self Intolerable Wickedness, and not Gods
Ordinance; and if your Baptism be Intolerable Wickedness, then your
Congregations cannot be True Churches: So that in this Mr. Baxter denies your
Churches to be True Churches, and affirms your Baptism to be worse than
counterfeit.

3. In page 23. says Mr. K. One that read Mr. Shute 's Book observed, and told
me, he has writ near 20 Leaves, to no purpose, to prove that which No body
denies, viz. That the Covenant of Grace God promised to Abraham is not
Dissolved, etc.

This looks as if Mr. K. had not read my Book himself, but did answer it by
hearsay, because he says, that one told him so. Indeed Mr. H. C. did say so
in his half-sheet he printed against me, and my Answer to him shall serve for
an Answer to you, which was as follows,

Mr. C. says, That I spent 20 Leaves in proving that which No body denies, etc.

These 20 Leaves they speak of, begin at page 74. which I spent in proving that
all the Infant Seed of Believers, now under the Gospel, are all in the same
Covenant, with their Parents, which God made with Abraham and his Seed, both
spiritual and carnal, in Genesis 17.7. And therefore they have a Right to the
Ordinance of Baptism. Now if No body denies this, How comes it to pass that
there is any such thing as an Anabaptist in England? So that Anabaptism it self
has resigned up the ghost, and this may serve for its Funeral Sermon. As in
page 20. of my Replication to Mr. H. C's half sheet.

4. Says Mr. K. Mr. Shute has lest part of the Words in some Texts, and added
words in other he has quoted. See page 120. where he mentions the words of
that Text, 1 Cor. 15.22. For as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made
alive; he has wrote thus, For as in Adam all the Elect die, so in Christ they
shall all be made alive.

I have not mentioned the Text at all in that place, but I said by way of
deduction thus, For as in Adam all the Elect died, and not die, (as he says)
so in Christ they shall all be made alive. These were my words exactly, no more
nor no less. Now let any Man of Sense judge whether this be any addition to, or
detraction from the Text, when I did not so much as name it, nor intend any
perversion of the Sense of it; for will any Man say, that all the Elect did not
die in the first Adam? And will any one deny that they shall not all be made
alive in Christ Jesus, the second Adam? Did I say that none but the Elect died
in Adam, and that none but such shall be raised up at the Day of Judgment? This
is a most unworthy Prevarication.

5. Says Mr. K. in page 37, So in page 133. mentioning Mark 16.16. viz. He
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not
shall be damned: He has wrote it thus, viz. He that believes shall be saved;
but he that believes not shall be damned.

Pray Reader mark, He said I mentioned Mark 16.16. which is abominable false
also: I refer you to my Book, and page 133. aforesaid, where you will find it
thus written, viz. 15th. That there were two Covenants from Adam to the coming
of Christ, and from thence to the Conversion of the Jews at Christ's Second
Coming, and to the End of the World, I do own; and they are the same from the
making of them as with Adam, only that of Works was then broken, though they
have passed through various Dispensations and Declarations; but the State of
both is the same: He that believes shall be saved; but he that believes not
shall be damned. So it was from Adam to this Day, and ever will be to the End
of the World. These were my very words, without mentioning any Text at all; for
it had been Nonsense for me to mention Baptism in the first Declaration of the
Covenant with Adam, 4000 Years before that Ordinance was Instituted.

6. In page 30. says Mr. K. I promised to forbear hard words, but a man that
argues thus should be severely dealt with, one way or another.

It is well for me that this Man has not an Inquisition at his beck and
command, for if he had I could promise my self but little favor at his hands.
Pray, Sir, give me leave to tell you, you have broken your promise over and
over many times already in these few things, instead of many, that I have here
cited; for if Calumnies are not hard words, I do not know what are.

7. Says Mr. K. quoting part of my words in page 4. viz. I will not render
Railing for Railing, etc. I shall labor to declare in the Spirit of meekness,
etc. Has he been as good as his word? etc.

I have been as good as my word; but it is a very great fault in you that you
quote Authors so as to pervert the sense of their Words: And therefore I will
lay down the words fairly, as they lie in my Book, in their full Latitude and
Extent, which had a Reference to Mr. H. C's. abusive opprobrious Language,
which is in his Book against me:

Page 4, 5. But I bless God, I can bear all your Reproaches and Calumnies
cheerfully, and it shall no ways discourage me, nor hinder me from vindicating
the Truth, and contending earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints;
and I will not render Railing for Railing, but what I have to offer in
Vindication of Infants Baptism, and the Everlasting Covenant God declared and
made with Abraham, I shall labor to declare in the Spirit of Meekness, only
sometimes you must expect a gentle Touch, to put you in mind how grossly you
have abused me, and in some things, where it cannot be avoided but I must grate
a little smartly upon you, there you must bear with me, although I should
accost you in the most sensible parts, because otherwise I cannot Vindicate the
Honor and Glory of the Grace of God, nor my own Credit and Reputation. Now let
any Man read Mr. Collins's Book, and mine also, and see if I have not been as
good as my word.

8. And Lastly, Whereas it is said in the Preface of Mr. H. C's. Book, viz.
Here thou have the Cavils and Objections of the Adversary answered. 2. Infants,
or little children, proved to have no Habitual Faith. 3. The Dissolution of the
Old Covenant-State demonstrated. 4. And the Infants of Believers to have no
right, as the Seed of such, to holy Baptism.

The Cavils and Objections of the Adversary are placed to my Account by Mr. K.
which is very unfair. Thus you see by these Eight unkind Steps, what kind of
Spirit this man is of; and you may measure, not only Hercules, but also
Benjamin by his Foot. Thus having premised and taken a view of these things, I
now proceed to the matter in hand.

And in the first place I shall begin with the Mode of Baptism, Mr. B. K. has
spent his first Chapter wholly in laboring to prove, That Baptism is only by
Dipping or Immersion of the Subject all under Water, and that any other Mode is
no Baptism; and to prove it to be so, he has quoted several Eminent
Paedobaptists, some of which are dead, and some living: But I find he is so
subject to mistake, both in quoting Authors and Scriptures, that I dare not lay
any weight upon what he says of them.

1. In page 4. says Mr. K. I shall begin with Mr. S. page 5. viz. I think
there is more to be said for sprinkling or pouring water on the Face in
Baptism, then there is for dipping or ducking over head and ears in a River or
Pond; for the latter is more like a punishment of Criminals than the
solemnizing of an Ordinance of God, etc.

To which I Answer, I am of the same mind still, and can see no reason at all
to alter it; for you cannot produce any positive Command for it, nor clear
Example of it, in all the Book of God; but the Learned will tell you, that the
word Baptize, is frequently used for pouring and washing with water.

2. What was the signification of all those Sprinklings, and Pourings, and
Washings, with Blood, and also with Water, but to set forth and Typifie the
cleansing Virtue of the Holy Ghost, and the absolute necessity of Regeneration
and Sanctification? Isa. 52.15. So shall he sprinkle many nations, etc. that
is, God will sanctify many Nations, or some of many Nations; and what is
Baptism but a Sign or Token of Sanctification and Regeneration, Exodus 24.8. And
Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood
of the covenant, which the Lord has made with you. And yet that was but the
Sign of the Blood of the Covenant; for the real Blood of the Covenant was the
Blood of Christ, who was given for a Covenant of the People, Isa. 49.6, 8. Heb.
9.13. For if the blood of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh. Mind, it was
but the purifying of the Flesh, not the Spirit; it was but an External
Sanctification, or a Sign thereof; and is Water Baptism any more? But mind the
14th. verse, How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead
works to serve the living God? Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. Then will I sprinkle clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all
your idols will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new
spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your
flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I pray mind all these
following Scriptures of Sprinkling and Pourings, etc. Heb. 12.24. 1 Pet. 1.2.
Isa. 44.3. Exodus 29.16, 20, 21. Levit. 1.5, 11. chap. 9.18. chap. 32.8, 13. chapter
4.6, 17. chapter 5.9. chapter 8.11, 24. chap. 14.7, 8, 9, 16, 51. Numb. 19.18, 19, 20,
21. 2 Chronicles. 29.22. chap. 30. 16. Here you see are sprinklings, etc. both of
blood and water, under the Old Testament, and also the New, which Types out
Regeneration, viz. blood for Justification, and water for Sanctification, which
is very compatible to the signification of Baptism. Now pray find us out so
many Scriptures, if you can, wherein Dipping, or Immersion in blood and water,
do so nearly represent and parallel the Ordinance of Water Baptism, and also
that have the Covenant for their Center, as all these I quoted have, both in
the Old and New Testament.

3. It is a practice among the Heathens (as I have been informed) when they
Dedicate any thing to their Idol-Gods, to take it and dip or plunge it all
under water; and if so, then it is plainly forbidden in Levit. 20.23. And ye
shall not walk in the manners of the nations, which I cast out before you: etc.

4. Suppose, for Arguments sake, that it should be granted, That dipping in
Baptism was the Mode in those Hot Countries, where it could not be so
prejudicial to their Health, yet it does not therefore follow, that Persons
should be dipped all under water in these Northern Countries, where it is so
extreme cold, especially in the Winter, unless there had been a positive
Command given for so doing; for Baptism is a Duty at all times of the Year; for
God never Appointed any Ordinance that would put his People in Jeopardy of
their Lives.

5. The Anabaptists will have Dipping to be the only Mode of Baptism: For, say
they, John baptized in Enon near Salim, because there was much water there: But
the Learned do tell us, that it should be read thus, viz. Because there were
many waters there; And so I have it also in a Spanish Testament, which I may as
well make use of as Mr. B. K. has of the Dutch Tongue, Viz. John 3.23. Y
Baptizava Tambien Juan en Enon junto a Salim, porque Avia muchas Aguas: y
venian y eran Baptizados. If it had been much water then it must have been
mucho agua, in the singular, and not muchas aguas, which is many waters, in the
plural: And Travelers that have been in those Countries do say, that there is
scarcely water enough to cover a Man's Ancles, much less to bury their Bodies.

6. Another Scripture they lay great stress upon for Dipping is, Romans 6.4.
Therefore we are buried with him by baptism, etc. In which Text is Typed out
unto us the new Birth, which consists of two parts, namely, the death of Sin,
and the Resurrection of Spiritual Life, etc. And both these are pointed at in
Baptism, as a Sign thereof; and so it was in Circumcision; both which you have
represented together, to the same purpose, in Col. 2.10, 11, 12. which seems
also to refer to, or point out unto us the change of the Ordinance from
Circumcision to Baptism, viz. And ye are complete in him, which is the head of
all principality and power. In whom also ye are circumcised with the
circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, by the circumcision of Christ: Buried with him in baptism, wherein also
you are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who has
raised him from the dead. Ver. 13, 14. And you being dead in your sins, and the
uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together with him, having
forgiven you all trespasses, Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances, that
was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing
it to his cross.

Here are several things to be observed from these Scriptures:

1. Here is Circumcision and Baptism, both pointing at one and the same thing,
viz. The death of the body of Sin for all the Elect of God, vertually in the
death of Christ, and the Resurrection of their Spiritual Life when Christ arose
from the dead, which is the First Resurrection, on whom the Second Death shall
have no power; for under the Figure of Circumcision it is said, -- putting off
the body of the sins of the flesh. Secondly, Under the Figure of Baptism it is
[buried with him in baptism,] which is the death and burial of Sin.

2. Here was the total Abolition of the Ceremonial Law, but not of the Moral
Law; for the substantial part of the Ten Commandments are as much in force, and
as binding now, as ever; and likewise of Circumcision, the Token of the
Everlasting Covenant which is centered in the Ordinance of Baptism.

3. This destroys their Argument, viz. That Persons do act Grace in their own
Baptism: For what Analogy can there be in Burial, which they make the Pattern
for their Mode of Baptism, wherein the Subject is wholly passive, so as nothing
can be more; and being active in Baptism, here the former part of their
Argument contradicts and destroys the latter part thereof.

4. The substance of these Scriptures do not only make more for us, who do
affirm That all the Subjects of Baptism are wholly passive in the
Administration thereof, but also it points out unto us the very subjects
themselves, namely, Young Infants: For such were the subjects of Circumcision.

5. And Lastly, The Apostle represents the new Birth in these Scriptures, in
which all the Elect, Young and Old, are as passive, as a Child is in its own
natural birth, and this Spiritual birth is frequently set forth by sprinkling,
washing, and pouring water, as I have proved; and let them prove that it is
represented by dipping or plunging, if they can, in all the Book of God.

2. Let us hear something of what Mr. John Ollyffe, Rector of Almer, in the
County of Dorset, says in his Brief Defense of Infant Baptism, concerning the
Mode or Manner of Baptism.

First, Mr. O. says in page 57. It is to be observed, that whenever the Holy
Ghost, in the New Testament, has occasion to mention the Act of Dipping, it is
never expressed by this word that signifies to baptize, but by another which
we have but four times in the New Testament, viz. Luke 16.24. John 13.26.
Matthew. 26.23. Rev. 19.13. But whenever the Act of Baptizing is expressed, it is
always expressed by another word. The word Baptize is often used to signify any
kind of washing or cleansing by water, by the application of water any way to
the thing, Mark 7.4. The Pharisees eat not except they wash. In the Greek it
is, Except they be baptized. Again, Luke 11.38. The Pharisees marvelled that
our Savior had not first washed before dinner. In the Greek likewise it is,
That he was not first baptized.

Secondly, In page 59. In those Examples which seem to be most express for
Dipping, and therefore are most commonly urged for the Proof of it, there is at
most but a bare probability of it, and hardly that in some; but there is no
demonstrative Proof can be made from any of them: The first is Mat. 3.13, 16.
which sets forth the Baptism of our Savior by John Baptist at Jordan, ver. 16.
Jesus when he was baptized, went up straitway out of the water, etc. But indeed
this Text, if rightly interpreted, does not so much as prove that our Savior
went into the water at all; for in the Greek -- he came up from the water, and
not out of it, etc.

And so I have it in my Spanist Testament also, viz. Y Jesus Desque Fue
Baptizado Subio Luego Del Aqua, y heaqui los cielos le Fueron Abiertos: y vido
Al Espiritu de Dios que Decendia, como paloma, y venia Sobre el: And Jesus when
he was baptized, came up straightway from the water; Subio Luego Del Agua, came
up from the water, and not out of the water.

Mr. O. says, Another Text that is urged is John 3.23. That John was baptizing
in Enon near Salim, because there was much water there: And because of the
numbers of those that went to John to be baptized, it was most convenient that
it should be in such places where there was plenty of water; but can any one
prove hence that they were baptized by dipping into it, or under it, etc.? In
that place it is not said, that there was much water together; but in the
Original it is many waters, that is, many Streams or Rivulets, etc. But let
that be how it will, there is no determinate manner expressed, or to be certainly
and evidently concluded, as ought to have been, to build a Consequence of such
a nature upon, as to infer an obligation to such a determinate manner.

Thus you hear what this Learned Author says touching the Mode of Baptism, and
it is to be observed from Mr. B. K's. own words to me, in his Book, that this
Mode of theirs is but a bare Supposition at best, because, says he, Suppose it
be found at the Last Day to be Dipping. This looks little, especially to lay
such a stress upon it, as to Assert all other Modes are no Baptism; for if he
had a clear Command for it, why had he not said, You shall find it to be
Dipping at the Last Day, and not Suppose it be found so? But, say I, Suppose it
be found at the Last Day to be Sprinkling, pouring Water, etc. For there is a
far greater Probability of that, then of Dipping, as I have sufficiently
proved. Wherefore this Great, Pretended, Infallible Mode of Dipping for
Baptism, is but a bare may be at the best.

I shall descant a little upon the unseemliness of Immersion of Women and Maids
in Baptism.

1. If it be a shame for a Woman to be uncovered in the Church and Worship of
God, because of the Angels, how much more abominable in the fight of God,
Angels, and Men, is it for Women and Young Maids to be uncovered, by being
stripped out of their ordinary Dress within a little of naked, and to be handled
about the Back and Breast, and have their Heels tript up, and flounced over
Head and Ears for Baptism? This is against the plain written Word in 1 Cor. 11.
For Baptism is a part of Gospel Church-Worship.

2. Does not Nature it self teach us, that it is a shameful luxurious way thus
to baptize Women and Maids: For though the Man's Hands do not slip, it is a
thousand to one but his Heart and Thoughts may; for I know of no Saint upon
Earth, that is so perfectly holy, as to be out of the reach of Satan's
Temptations; for David, though a Man after Gods own Heart, was ensnared at the
remote sight of a beautiful Bathsheba a washing her self, though he was not so
near as to handle her.

3. All sober modest Women do count it to be a very bold lascivious Action for
any Man, except their own Husband, to attempt to lay his Hands upon her
Breasts, and looks upon it to be but one degree short of most notorious
Impudence: And the Caution concerning Women's behavior and deportment in the
Church, and worship of God, is brought in by the Apostle Argumentativily, viz.
Because of the Angels; for they are strict observators of ALL persons, in the
Church and worship of God.

4. Christ has forbid all wanton Looks, to prevent Luxury and Uncleanness;
therefore he never appointed the Holy Ordinance of Baptism to run parallel in
this muddy Channel with it, viz. For Women and young Maids to be made such a
shameful spectacle to Angels and Men, which is most abominable; for it is
against the Law and Light of nature, as well as against the Express Commands of
God, namely, To abstain from all appearance of evil, and let all things be done
decently, and in order.

5. Were we in a State of Innocence, such a Mode of Baptism might be
Authentic; but it can never be good in our depraved lapsed Estate, especially
if we consider these Things.

(1.) There is no Saint of God, either Man or Woman, but is liable to
Temptations. (2.) Satan's great Work and Business lies chiefly among
Christians, to tempt them to sin. (3.) That there are the Remainders of corrupt
nature in all the Saints of God, whilst they are in this Life. (4.) The
greatest Saint upon Earth has a deceitful Heart within him, and that Soul that
knows nothing of this, has little acquaintance, either with God or his own
heart; The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can
know it? Jer. 17.9.
6. For a Man to go hand in hand with a beautiful brisk young Gentlewoman, or
Maid, into the water, and to handle her back and breasts, and trip up her
heels, and flounce her over head and ears, is a very immodest, tempting thing,
because there are as many Remainders of sin in a Believer as there is in an old
Sinner, only here lies the difference, Sin does not reign in a Believer.

(1.) Though the domineering power of sin in the believer be destroyed, yet the
being of sin is not; for though it be not in him as a King, yet it is in him as
a Tyrant. (2.) But sin reigns over the sinner, as the Heart of a believer is a
Throne for Christ and Grace, so the Heart of a sinner is a Throne for sin and
Satan.
7. These Men that Transact this Mode of Baptism, must put great confidence in
their own Hearts, otherwise they could never dare be so bold thus to dally with
a Temptation: But what says the Scripture, He that trusts his own heart is a
fool; and the reason is plain, because it is so deceitful as nothing can be
more; for it is deceitsul above all things, and desperately wicked; who can
know it? And this many a dear Child of God have found by woeful experience;
therefore it is every Christians Duty to keep a strict watch over his own
heart, and against the Temptations of Satan, to keep them asunder; for our
Hearts are like Tinder, that no sooner the Tempter strikes Fire, but it takes,
unless the Heart be well guarded.

8. By this unseemly Mode of Baptism they go not only into the water, but at
the same time they run into the Fire of Temptation, and dally with the Tempter;
wherefore I will appeal to these Men's own Hearts and Consciences, that engage
in this Mode, whether they can perform this Thing, with those Female Subjects
aforesaid, without being tempted by Satan to vain lascivious Thoughts. Pray
remember to watch and observe your Hearts the next time, if ever you engage in
it again, and if you do, I am sure you will find what I say to be true. But in
the baptizing the Infant Seed of Believers, by sprinkling water upon them,
there is none of all this danger, because there is no Object to draw out the
Hearts Lusts for Satan to fasten his Temptation upon; therefore Dipping or
Immersion for Baptism cannot be good.

9. The Words for Administration of the Ordinance of Baptism ought to be used
at the same Instant when the water is applied to the Person baptized; but if
Dipping or Plunging be the Mode of Baptism, then these things would necessarily
follow:

1. They must go into the water very near as deep as their Waste, before the
words of Administration are spoken, and so they are half baptized before the
words are spoken.

2. If the words are spoken before their heels are tript up, then they are
baptized before they are dipped.

3. And Lastly, If they speak the words while they have them under water, they
cannot be active in their own Baptism, which is to overthrow one of their own
grand Arguments they produce to prove that none but Adult Believers ought to be
baptized, viz. Because that all Persons ought to be Active in their own
Baptism. Pray what Grace can they exercise under Water, when they can scarcely
exercise their Reason, much less their Graces.

10. Says Mr. K. page 6. Sir, you should take more heed to your Words, and to
what you Assert: Is it said they were baptized in the Jaylors house, etc.?

How can you say page 7. that they were all baptized in his own house, when the
Text speaks not any such thing? How can you presume to Assert, that they did
not go out of the House? Reader, observe the Text well.

And so say I too: Pray, Reader, observe the Text well; and therefore I will
fairly repeat it in Acts 16.23.

And when they had laid many stripes upon them, they cast them into prison;
charging the jailer to keep them safely.

Ver. 24. Who having received such a charge, thrust them into the inner prison,
and made their feet fast in the stocks.

Ver. 25. And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto God, and
the prisoners heard them.

Ver. 26. And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of
the prison were shaken: and immediately all the doors were opened, and every
ones bands were loosed.

Ver. 27. And the keeper of the prison awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the
prison doors open, he drew out his sword, and would have killed himself,
supposing that the prisoners had been fled.

Ver. 28. But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thy self no harm; for we
are all here.

From this Passage we may observe, that the Jailors House or Appartment, and
the Place of Paul's close confinement, were both within view, and call one of
another; for Paul perceiving that the Jailer would have murdered himself, cries
out unto him to prevent it.

Ver. 29. Then he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and
fell down before Paul and Silas;

Ver. 30. And brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved?

This seems as if that Inner Prison, where they were thrust, was a dark
Dungeon, because the Jailer called for a Light, and sprang in, and brought them
out of it, and not out of the House; for then they preached the Word of God to
him, and to all that were in his House, as you may see in Verse 32.

And they spoke unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his
house.

Thus you see they were not out of the House, which I look upon to be the
Jail-keepers Appartment; for they preached to all that were in it.

But says Mr. K. Might they not in that hour go a little way out of the House,
and be baptized? This is begging the Question, and yet he thus concludes, viz.
It Is evident he abuses the Sacred Text.

But hitherto you may see it is plain they did not go out of the House.

Ver. 33. And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their
stripes; and was baptized, he and all his, straightway.

Ver. 34. And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before them,
and they rejoiced, believing in God with all his house.

This was to bring them into some more peculiar Place, or Dining Room in his
House; for you see it is clear, they were not out of the Prison before; for so
it appears by the next Verse, viz.

Ver. 35. And when it was day, the magistrates sent the sergeants, saying, Let
those men go. But the Apostles refused to go out of the Prison, And they came
and besought them, and desired them to depart out of the city.

Thus you see here was (1.) The Jaylors bringing the Apostles out of their
close confinement, after his conviction: (2.) There was preaching the Word of
the Lord to all that were in his House, and not out of his House: (3.) Here was
washing their stripes after they were taken out of their close confinement into
his House at large: (4.) And Lastly, Here was their Baptism: And all this was
done in the same hour of the Night, straightway; and then when this was done,
he invites them into his own peculiar Appartment, or Dining Room, and set Meat
before them. And in the last place, it does plainly appear, that they did not
go out of the House, or Prison, all night, because they were there in the
Morning, and refused to go out when the Magistrates sent to the Jailer to
release them; therefore there is no manner of ground to imagine, that they went
out of the Prison, and out of the City, a little way in the Night to be
baptized in a River or a Pond of Water; but besides, the Gates of Cities use to
be shut in the Night, and Guard kept at them, who would have secured them, had
they attempted to go out in the night; Ergo, they were baptized in the House.
So that I have not abused the Sacred Text; but it is evident, that Mr. K. has
abused me in charging me falsely.

12. And Lastly, I shall give some Reasons to Evince that the Face of the
Subject is the properest part to be baptized, Because by the Face both God and
Man are described.

1. God is described by his most glorious face, Psalm. 51.9. Psalm. 44.24. (...)
18.10. Not that we are to conceive of God as of any Form or Shape, who is a
most Glorious, Immense, Spiritual Being in himself; but it is in condescension
to our weak capacities.

2. Man is described and best known by the Face, Gal. 1.22. Psalm. 84.9. And how
common a thing is it among Men to say, I never saw such an Ones Face? That is,
they never saw the Person.

2. The Face is the properest part for the application of water in Baptism,
because the Face represents the whole Man.

3. The Face ought to be baptized as the properest part, because the part
baptized ought to be naked, for these Reasons, viz.

(1.) Because otherwise the Clothes, and not the Person, are baptized.

(2.) Because it makes the truest Figure of Man in his natural lapsed State,
before he is washed in the Water of Regeneration, and renewed by the Holy
Ghost, by which the Soul puts on these two blessed Garments of Salvation,
namely, Christ's Righteousness for Justification, and the Robe of Holiness for
Sanctification. Every Soul in a lapsed State, you have set forth, in these two
Texts, in the old and New Testament; first in the Old Testament, Ezekiel. 16.4, 5,
6. Here you have Man in his natural State, which is, unsavory, loathsome,
polluted and helpless; and in the New Testament, Rev. 3. there he is set forth
to be wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: This is the
State and Condition of all Men by nature, before they are washed in
Regeneration.

4. And Lastly, The Face of the Subject is the properest part for the
application of water in Baptism, because Nature it self teaches us, that the
Face is the most delightful, comely part of Man for Conversation: We do not
care to converse with a Man that turns his back upon us. Thus much for the part
of the Subject that ought to be baptized, and the posture the Subject ought to
be prepared in, and that is the naked Face.

Thus I have confuted Mr. Keach's Arguments, which he has produced to prove
that Dipping is the only Infallible Mode for Baptism, whereas there is neither
Precept nor Example for it; no, not so much as a bare May be for it in all the
Book of God; but you see there is a great Analogy between those many
Sprinklings and Baptism, though the Mode is not absolutely determined
declaratively.

II. I will prove that all Elect dying Infants must have the Grace of Faith, or
they can never be saved.

1. But says Mr. K. in p. 14, 16. How does God sanctify dying Infants? I
speak as to the Mode of it: No mortal Man I am sure can tell; if it is by
infusing Grace, let it be so, though it cannot be proved while the World stands,
yet Gods design therein could not be the same in them as in others, etc. Though
the Grace is given, by which we do believe, yet is not the Act ours? Can God be
said to believe for us, or can there be Faith in any Subject, and yet no
knowledge of the Object?

To which I answer, that the Mode of sanctifying Elect dying Infants must be by
Infusion of Grace by the Holy Spirit into their Souls, is as clear as the Sun,
because there is no other way for Old or Young to be savingly sanctified by. 2.
God has promised it, Isa. 44.3. I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thine offspring, etc. 3. Gods design is the same in the infusing
Grace and Holiness into an Elect Infant, as it is in an Adult Elect Sinner; for
God has no other End, nor higher Design, then the glorifying his own Free
Grace in the salvation of both Old and Young; therefore that part of your
carnal Argument is already destroyed. Pray, Sir, in your next let us know if
God has any other, or differing Design or End, in the saving Adult Elect
Sinners, from that of sanctifying and saving Elect dying Infants; and let us
also know what way that is.

2. Faith is the Gift of God, though the Act of Faith may be said to be the
Believers, yet if God do not Act in the Believers Faith, his Acting will
signify nothing; for God is the author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.
And it is God that works in us, both the will and the deed of his good
pleasure, Phil. 2.

3. Though the Act of Faith may be said to be the Believers, yet the Habit of
Faith is Gods; for the Believer is wholly passive in the reception of Grace,
and there must be Habits before there can be Acts; there must be the Root of
Grace before there can be the Fruit of Grace; and a young Infant is as capable
of receiving the Habits of Grace, wherein the Subjects are wholly passive, as
an Adult Person is.

4. John the Baptist could never have leaped in his Mothers Womb for joy, had
he not known God in Christ, the only true Object of Joy.

Sir, You have measured these Profound Mysteries by the Rule of carnal Reason,
which is a very false Rule to measure it by: The Faith of God does not stand in
the Wisdom of Men.

2. Says Mr. K. in p. 14. We say the same thing with worthy Mr. Marshal, in
page 78. of his Book, which you recited in the 24th. page of yours, viz. That
Union betwixt Christ and the Soul is fully accomplished by Christ, giving the
Spirit of Faith to us, even before we can Act Faith in the reception of Him,
because by this Grace, or Spirit of Faith, the Soul is inclined to an active
receiving of Christ.

Pray Mr. K. did worthy Mr. Marshal say no more? If he did, how dare you be so
unjust, to deal thus unfairly by Mr. Marshal, as to leave out the conclusion of
his Sentence, without an etc. as if he had said no more? Pray Reader, look into
the Pages Mr. K. has quoted, both of Mr. Marshal's Book and mine, and there
you will find the conclusion of his Sentence thus, viz. And no doubt Christ is
thus united to many Infants, which have the Spirit of Faith, because they are
not come to the years of understanding.

Is this to say the same thing with worthy Mr. Marshal? But this is as true, as
that I spent 20 Leaves in my former Book, to prove that which No body denies.
But pray what has Mr. Marshal said in this, to destroy or enervate the Notion
of Habitual Faith, in Elect dying Infants? For though he has not used the very
same Words, yet it is to the same effect, and carries an Equivalent in it,
with that of Habitual Faith. Now if Mr. K. says the same thing with worthy Mr.
Marshal, then Mr. K. and I am agreed.

3. Says Mr. K. Is Regeneration in your Infants, that are Regenerated, the
Fruit or Product of this Spirit of Faith, or Habits which you plead for, to be
infused into them when Infants? Sure if they had any such Habits, when Infants,
they need no other inspired Habits, when they are grown up.

Where the Habits and Principles of Grace are once infused into a Soul, they
can never be lost, neither shall they need any other inspired Habits of Grace,
when they are grown Persons; for where these Habits are once planted, they can
never be destroyed; for once in Christ by Regeneration, and for ever in Christ
by Justification and Sanctification; for that Soul is in a State of Grace, and
has the Life of Christ in him, and that Life can never be lost, because it is
in Christ the Son of God; it is in the keeping of Christ, and therefore, to
speak with Reverence, Christ himself may as soon be lost as that.

2. We may conclude, that many children of Believers, that did not die in their
Infancy, have had the Habits of Grace infused into their Souls in their
Infancy, and that may be the reason, why so many of them, when they are grown
Persons, can tell they have Grace, but know not how, nor when, they came by it.
No doubt Timothy had Grace infused into him in his Infancy, because we read not
any thing of his Conversion, no more than we do of his Baptism, wherefore both
might be effected in his Infancy, being the Son of a godly Mother: But the
Apostle Paul could tell the time of his own Conversion, and also his Baptism,
Acts 9.

3. All Infants are conceived in sin, Psalm. 51.5. There are all the Habits or
Seeds of sin in an Infant, in its first Conception or Formation, even as many
as there are in an Adult Sinner; for all have sinned, and come short of the
glory of God; therefore Elect dying Infants must be regenerated, they must be
begotten and born of God; for God will be a reconciled Father to none but them
which he spiritually begets; for God was in Christ, reconciling the World to
himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them. Thus you see, as young
Infants are brought into the same Balance of Original Guilt and Pollution with
Adult old Sinners, so they must be brought into the same Balance of
Justification, Adoption and Sanctification with Elect Adult Believers, or they
can never be saved.

4. Mr. K. does own, That all Infants are under the guilt and stain of Original
Sin by Nature; And he also says, We do believe, that all those dying Infants
who are saved, God does in some way or another, which is not known to us,
sanctify them; for no unclean thing can enter into the Heavenly Jerusalem.

There is no other way but this, viz. Children must be justified, and acquitted
from the guilt of Original Sin; And, secondly, they must be sanctified and
cleansed from the filth and pollution of sin; they must be regenerated and made
Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. For without Holiness no Man shall
see the Lord: The Fallen Angels may as well expect to be saved as any
unregenerate Soul may, either Old or Young, that dies in that State and
Condition.

2. All Children are elected and chosen of God, that are saved dying in their
Infancy, and therefore they must have the Grace of Faith to unite them to
Christ, which is the Faith that is peculiar to Gods Elect, Titus 1.1. For all
Mankind by Nature are in a state of Unbelief; for it was that Sin that brought
Man into a State of condemnation; for had our first Parents believed God, when
he told them, if they eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil they should
die, Man had never fell into a State of Sin and Condemnation. Now the opposite
Grace to the Sin of Unbelief is Faith, and Habitual Faith by the powerful
Agency of the blessed Spirit of Grace, is sufficient to subdue and conquer
original Unbelief, and to justify and sanctify them by the application of the
Righteousness, Blood, and Merits of Jesus Christ to their Souls. It is not
Man's acting Faith that justifies him, but it is the Habit of Faith in the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ that does that. The Act of Faith in a sense, may
be said to be the Creatures, but the Habit of Faith is Gods own Free Act in the
Creature; wherefore if Man cannot be justified without his acting of Grace,
then Justification depends on the Acting of the Creature: Though a Believer may
be said to have a hand in his own Sanctification, yet he has none at all in
his Justification.

3. The State of a young Child by Nature is as much depraved by the Fall of
Adam, as the oldest Sinner upon Earth; therefore it must be by the very same
Grace for kind, though it may not be for degree, that must justify, sanctify,
and save a young Infant dying in his Infancy, as is to justify, sanctify, and
save an Elect Adult Believer, and that is by Faith; For by grace are ye saved,
through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Now is not a
young Babe in the Womb, or Cradle, as capable of this Salvation as the oldest
Saint upon Earth? And is there any other way for the saving of any, either old
or young, but this, Even the righteousness of God which is by Faith of Jesus
Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe; for there is no difference:
For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God; Being justified freely
by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ: Romans 3.

4. And Lastly, Young Infants that die in their Infancy, must have the Image of
God restored unto them, and enstamped upon them, which was blotted out by the
Fall of Adam, or they can never be saved, and that must be by Infusion of Grace
and Holiness into their Souls, and so make them partakers of the Divine Nature,
which is the new Creation in the Soul; and the new Creature must have all his
Lineaments, or else the new Creature would be imperfect; it must have Eyes, or
else it would be blind, and Faith is the new Creatures Eyes, Heb. 11. To
conclude, The Righteousness of Christ, and Faith in the justifying,
sanctifying, and saving a Sinner, ever goes together; therefore none can be
saved by the Righteousness of Christ, without the Grace or Spirit of Faith; for
they are all brought into the Balance of Redemption together; 1 Cor. 1.30. But
of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. Now where is that differing
way, or many ways for the saving Elect dying Infants, from that of sanctifying
and saving Elect old Sinners? Mr. K. says in his Title Page, that I am an
unskilful Person in Polemical Cures; but I am sure, those that Assert, That
there are more ways than one for the sanctifying and saving young Infants,
differing from that of Adult Believers, are very unskilful Physicians; and I
pity those poor People that have no skilfuller Physicians than these are, to
take care of them.

5. Mr. K. brings in a Caution by way of Argument, viz. Says he, It Is forbid,
and a sinful thing, for any to pry into Gods Secret. All they that pry into the
way how God applies the Merits of Christ to dying Infants, and sanctifies them,
do pry into Gods Secrets, Ergo.

But those things which are revealed belong unto us, and to our Children for
ever. The justifying, sanctifying, and saving all the Elect of God, is a
revealed thing, as I have sufficiently proved, therefore it is not a sinful
thing to pry into the way how God applies the Merits of Christ to dying
Infants, and sanctify them. This is like the P. that forbids the Laics the
use of the Bible, because they should not detect their Errors and false
Doctrines.

1. The Scripture has revealed unto us, that we are all Children of wrath by
nature, Ephesians. 2.3. and conceived in sin, Psalm. 51.5. Here is our Epidemical
Malady revealed.

2. Here is also the Remedy revealed, 1 Timothy 2. For there is one God, and one
mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom
for all; that is, especially for all the Elect, and if so, then Christ died as
much for all Elect dying Infants, as for all Elect old Sinners; Acts 4.12.
Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under
heaven given among men whereby we must be saved. Ephesians. 4. One Lord, one faith,
one baptism, One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and
in you all. And this one Faith is the Faith of Gods Elect, Titus 1.1. And by
this Faith they shall get the Victory, because they are born of God, Children
of the most High, Heirs of Glory, made meet to partake of the Inheritance with
the Saints in Light. Thus you see this Doctrine of Implicit Faith overthrown,
and your Argument against prying into the way of Gods sanctifying and saving
Elect dying Infants destroyed.

O but (says Mr. K. in page 3.) I hope his Reverend Pastor, whom I have more
cause both to love and honor, than Ten Thousand Instructors in Christ, he
being the blessed Instrument in my Conversion almost Forty Years ago, gave no
encouragement to him thus to write and abuse his Brethren.

But my Reverend Pastor, who is worthy of double honor, he never taught you
any such kind of Doctrine; for though he might be an Instrument in Gods Hand of
making you a Christian, yet he never had any hand in making you an Anabaptist,
neither is he a Person of such a weak Capacity, as not to see through, and
beyond your little kind of Insinuations and Flattery, by which you endeavor to
engage him to side with you, and justify your corrupt Doctrines and
Principles, in opposition to his own; but that will not do.

5. Says Mr. K. Little Children may have Faith, if God please to work a
Miracle, and inspire them with his Spirit.

I Answer, All that Faith that is in a Soul, that is not wrought by a
miraculous Power, is no better than the Faith of Fallen Angels, Jam. 2.19. Thou
believe that there is one God; thou do well: the devils also believe, and
tremble.

2. It is no less a Miracle to work Faith in a dead Sinner, in raising him from
the Grave of Unbelief, then it was to raise a dead crucified Savior, Ephesians.
1.19, 20. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us ward who
believe, according to the working of his mighty power; Which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in
the heavenly places. It was always counted a Miracle to raise the Dead: Ephesians.
2.1. And you has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins. What is
become of this carnal unbelieving Proposition?

6. And Lastly, Says Mr. B. K. If Children be part of their Parents, then
certainly if the Parents go to Heaven, all their Children must likewise; for
the whole of Believers shall be saved.

This Argument, like the former, is lighter than Vanity. It does not follow,
that because I am a Believer, and my Children a part of me, they shall
therefore be saved: But yet notwithstanding, the Children of Believers have a
peculiar Privilege above all other Men's Children in the World; and if you ask
me, what Privilege that is, I must refer you to the Apostles for Answer, Acts
2.39. and 1 Cor. 7.14. Here you see all the Children of believing Parents are
holy Children; nay, if there be but one of their Parents that is a Believer, it
intituleth them to this Great Honor and Privilege of being holy Children.

2. All the Children of Israel were called holiness unto the Lord, Jer. 2.3.
And they are called Gods Son, in Exodus 4. And thou shall say unto Pharaoh, Thus
says the Lord, Israel is my son, even my first born. And I say unto thee, Let
my son go, etc.

3. Here you see all Israel, as one Man, are called Gods Son, and Holiness to
the Lord also, and yet it is no breach of Charity to conclude, that all Israel
were not saved, though they were all a part one of another, as Members of one
Body are; so neither will all the Children of Believers be saved, though they
are a part of their believing Parents, as Members of a Body are, and called
holy Children: So that this Argument is clearly plucked up by the Roots.

Thus you see I have clearly proved, that there is no Justification, nor
Sanctification, nor Salvation for dying Infants; without the Grace, Habit, or
Spirit of Faith, and also, that there is but one way of sanctifying and saving
all the Elect of God, both Old and Young; therefore all the Arguments, which
are raised against it, are utterly destroyed.

III. In the third place I will prove, that the Covenant which God made with
Abraham and his Seed, in Genesis 17. was but one Covenant, and that it was the
same God made with Adam after the Fall, Genesis 3.15. and with Noah after the
Flood, Genesis 9. And it is the same now, and all Believers and all their Seed,
both Spiritual and Carnal, are in it, in the full substantial Latitude of it,
notwithstanding all that can be said against it.

But says Mr. K. in page 23. It Is evident there was two Covenants contained in
those Transactings of God with Abraham, one peculiar respecting only his
natural Seed, or Offspring, as such; for the Covenant of Grace promised to
him, did not peculiarly relate to Abraham's Natural Seed that were Elected
Persons, but to all the Gentiles also, who believed in Christ.

1. There is no such declared distinction in the Covenant God made with
Abraham, in Genesis 17.2, 7. For though the Elect Jews and Gentiles are
principally intended, yet all the Seed of Believers, both Spiritual and Carnal,
are included, and ought to partake of the External Benefits and Blessings
thereof. But it may be objected, The Seed of believing Gentiles are not to be
circumcised, neither have they a Right to the Land of Canaan, therefore they
cannot be in Abraham's Covenant. Pray what Part or Lot had the Seed of Adam and
Noah in either of these, and yet they were in the same Covenant which God
confirmed and ratified with Abraham? Nay, Multitudes of the Seed of Abraham
never saw the Land of Canaan; for the Seed of Abraham were not possessed of
that till 430. Years after the Covenant was made with Abraham, Gal. 3.17.

2. The Covenant which God made with Abraham was out one, and that is an
Everlasting Covenant; but if it had been two, it should have been Everlasting
Covenants; therefore I will lay down the Terms of it fairly, and let us see if
any such Deduction can be made, Genesis 17.2, 7, 10, 11. And I will make my
covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly.

And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee,
in their generations, for an everlasting covenant; to be a God unto thee, and
to thy seed after thee.

This is my covenant, which ye shall keep between me, and you, and thy seed
after thee; Every manchild among you shall be cirunmcised.

And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token
of the covenant betwixt me and you.

Here you see it is but one Covenant, and Circumcision is only the Token
thereof, but not the Covenant.

2. Says Mr. K. in page 25. Observe also, that as these things peculiarly
appertained to his Natural Seed as such, so Circumcision is expressly called
Gods Covenant, Genesis 17.

If this be so, then Ishmael was in the Covenant, and yet Mr. K. does own in
his Book, that Ishmael was not in the Covenant, nor his Seed; but if
Circumcision be the Covenant, then he was in it, because he was circumcised,
Genesis 17.20, 21, 23. So that this Text, with his own Argument, do utterly
destroy that Notion of his, That there were Two Covenants made with Abraham,
and that one of them was Circumcision, because then Ishmael must have been in
it. Indeed it is expressly called the Token of the Covenant, but it is no where
expressly called the Covenant in all the Holy Scriptures, as I know of, and if
it be, he should have done well to have cited it, that others might have seen
it, as well as himself.

Thus having premised these things, I shall proceed.

1. In the first place I will begin with that Text in Acts 2.39. For the
promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even
as many as the Lord our God shall call.

Here in the first part of this Verse, the Apostle informs these Jews, that had
a hand in crucifying our Savior, of their Covenant Privilege, and their
Children also; for the Promise which the Apostle here speaks of, that did
belong to them and their Children, is no other then that which God made with
Abraham and his Seed; therefore the Covenant was not repealed at the coming in
of the Gospel, nor dissolved like an old useless Act of Parliament, neither
were it two Covenants.

2. If we mind the latter part of the Verse, we shall find, that whatever the
Extent of that Promise was to the Jews, and all their Children, it is the same
to all believing Gentiles, and all their Children; for it is not said, To you
Jews, and your Children, and to as many Adult Gentiles, which are afar off,
etc. No; but the latter part of the Verse is an exact Counterpane to the former
part thereof; so that whatever the Promise was to the Jews, and all their
Children, is the same to all believing Gentiles, and their Children; for the
latter part of the Verse is to be measured by the former part thereof.

2. This Promise is Christ, who was first declared and promised unto Adam, and
his Seed, in the new Covenant God made with him, when the old one was broken,
Genesis 3.15. Which Promise, or Covenant, has been a Standing-Dish for Believers,
and all their Seed, to feed upon in all Ages, and ever will be while the World
stands.

3. There ever has, and ever will be a gracious Entail in this Covenant, unto
all Believers and their Seed, from Generation to Generation, Psalm. 105.8. He
has remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand
generations.

It runs in a Line from Parents to Children, until any of them sinned
themselves out of it personally, as Cain and Judas, and Multitudes of the Jews
did; for the Covenant of Grace consists of two parts, an Inner Court and an
Outer Court: So it was under the Law, Ezekiel. 8.16. And so it is under the
Gospel, Rev. 11.1, 2. And it has Internal and External Members, or
Worshippers, in it, Romans 11.17. John 15.1, 2. And there are Spiritual and
Temporal Blessings and Privileges belong unto it, Romans 3.1, 2. Mat. 6.33.

2. In the second place, let us take a View of the Lineal Descent of the
Covenant of Grace, viz. After our first Parents fell into a State of Sin and
Misery, by which the first Covenant was broken, namely, that of Works, then God
made a Second or New Covenant with Adam, and his Seed, the Covenant of Grace in
Genesis 3.15. But Cain sinned himself out of it, and God Excommunicated him with a
Curse, Genesis 4.10, 11, 13, 14. And God gave Adam Seth in the room of Abel whom
Cain slew, ver. 25, 26.

2. The Covenant of Grace continued from Adam to Noah, a Preacher of
Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. that is, he was a Gospel Preacher; for he preached
the Righteousness of Christ for Justification and Salvation, and God confirmed
and ratified the Covenant with Noah, and his Seed, before the Flood, Genesis 6.18.
But with thee will I establish my covenant: and thou shall come into the ark;
thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons wives with thee.

Now was not this distinguishing peculiar Love and Grace, that God should spare
and preserve Noah and all his House, when all the rest of the World were
drowned, and utterly destroyed? Therefore they were in the Covenant of Grace.

2. God renewed his Covenant with Noah, and all his Seed, after the Flood, Genesis
9.9. And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after
you.

And we have the Token of the Covenant in the 12 and 13 Verses, And God said,
This is the token of the covenant which I make between me, and you, and every
living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations:

I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant
between me and the earth.

3. This Covenant was principally made with Noah and his Seed, and consisted of
special and common Mercies, both to Man and Beast. 2. The Token of this
Covenant is extended to all, good and bad, Saints and Sinners, but chiefly and
principally it is for God himself to remember his Covenant, Verse 16. And the
bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the
everlasting covenant, etc. The Rainbow is a Token that God will never destroy
the World by Water again, as in ver. 11, 12, 13. and that Token remains as a
Witness unto this Day. In which Token we may see the Goodness, and also
Severity of God; Goodness to Noah and his Family, which is extended unto us;
for had Noah and his Family been drowned also, we had never been; and Severity
against sin, in that he destroyed all the ungodly World.

From hence I shall make some Observations.

1. If the Token of that Covenant had disappeared at the coming in of the
Gospel, in its Splendour and full Latitude, it might have been concluded, that
the Covenant God made with Noah and Abraham had been Repealed and Dissolved,
and so the Infant Seed of Believers cast out, and in no Covenant at all; for
that was the Token of the Covenant in the largest Extent, both with a respect
to God and Man: For if we do but observe the Terms and Tenure of the Covenant
God made with Noah, before the Flood, and after the Flood, it is much the same,
with a respect to Noah and his Family; and so likewise with Abraham's Covenant,
to him and his Seed; wherefore let us compare them together, and also the
Tokens, Genesis 6.18. But with thee will I establish my covenant: and thou shall
come into the ark, etc.

Genesis 9.9. And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed
after you.

2. Abraham's Covenant runs thus, Genesis 17.7. And I will establish my covenant
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, etc.

2. For the Tokens of the Covenant, Genesis 9.12. And God said, This is the token
of the covenant which I make between me, and you, and every living creature
that is with you, for perpetual generations.

Genesis 17. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee, in their generations, etc.

And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token
of the covenant betwixt me and you.

Mark, that of Noah's Covenant is called The Token; but this of Abraham's
Covenant is called A Token. The first might be called The Token, because it was
to have no Successor; and that of Abraham's might be called A Token, because it
was to have a Successor, namely Baptism; for the Token of Noah's Covenant is to
perpetual Generations, but so is not Circumcision it self, though it is said in
Genesis 17. And my covenant shall be in your flesh, for an everlasting covenant.
So that when Circumcision was abolished the Covenant remained in the flesh,
therefore Baptism succeeded Circumcision; for no Ordinances but them two have
to do with the Flesh in the Covenant, in Initiation, as Circumcision had, and
Baptism has. Thus you see the Analogy there was between the Covenant and the
Tokens thereof, God made with Noah and Abraham.

3. Let us bring this Covenant God made with Noah, and Abraham, down into
Gospel Times.

1. Let us observe what that Gospel-Prophet says, in Isa. 54.8. In a little
wrath I hid my face from thee, for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will
I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer.

Ver. 9. For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that
the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn that I
would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.

Ver. 10. For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee.

Ver. 13. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be
the peace of thy children.

This is a Prediction of the conversion of the Jews in Gospel Times. Heb. 8.10.
For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those
days, says the Lord; (that is, after the days of their Captivity) I will put
my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them
a God, and they shall be to me a people. Compare to Jer. 31.8, 9, 27, to 34.
and Ezekiel. 36.22, to 27.

2. Noah's Covenant, or the Dispensations of God toward Noah, is set forth in
the Gospel in a twofold manner: 1. By way of Figurative Allusion. 2. By way of
clear Expression.


1. By Figurative Allusion, Rev. 4.2, 3. And immediately I was in the spirit:
and behold, a throne was set in heaven, and one sat on the throne.

And he that sat, was to look upon like a jasper; and a sardine stone: and
there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald.

This was Christ, whom God gave to be a Light unto the Gentiles, and a Covenant
of the People, Isa. 49.8. And the Rainbow round about the Throne, is an
Allusion unto the Token of Noah's Covenant, which is a Token of Mercy and
Grace, and the various providential Dispensations of God toward his
Vovenant People, and the various Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, for the full
accomplishment of all the Promises of the Covenant, both to Jew and Gentile,
especially about the Latter-day Glory, in calling and converting the Jews, with
the Fullness of the Gentiles, when God will set Christ his King upon his Holy
Hill in Zion, and make all his Enemies his Footstool, Psalm. 2.6. Psalm. 110.1.
Which is Typified in that aforesaid, Rev. 4.2, 3.

2. We have Noah's Covenant recited in the Gospel, by way of clear Expression,
in 1 Pet. 3. -- when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah,
while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is eight souls, were saved by
water. The like figure whereunto, even baptism, does also now save us, etc.

Here are Six things to be observed from these Texts aforesaid.

1. Here is Noah's Covenant, and the Token thereof, brought down and joined to
the Gospel Dispensation, and the Ordinance of Baptism, which is the Initiating
Seal of the Covenant in the room of Circumcision, is also joined to it.

2. As the Waters that drowned the Old World, were Waters of Mercy to Noah and
his Family, because they bore up the Ark and saved them, so Christ who is a
Lion of Judgment to the Ungodly, is a Lamb of Mercy to his People, and is the
Ark of God, wherein all the Elect of God are, which is born up by the Power of
God by the Waters of Regeneration unto Salvation, of which Water Baptism is a
Figure, Titus 3.4, 5.

3. As the Waters that were aspersed upon the Ark, was a Token of Mercy and
Grace to Noah and his Seed, so is Water Baptism to Believers and all their
Seed, which is the Figure thereof. Now how can this be a like Figure to the
Dispensation of God toward Noah, and all his Seed, if our Children are
excluded from Baptism, the Figure thereof?

4. This also points out unto us the subjects of Baptism, as well as the Mode
thereof.

(1.) The Subjects of Baptism: For as Noah and all his Children were in the
Ark, so all Believers and their Seed are in Covenant, and ought to have the
Figure of Noah's Preservation, namely, Baptism administered unto them in their
Infancy: For though all Noah's Seed were not eternally saved, yet they were all
in Covenant until Ham sinned himself out of it, neither do I believe that all
are saved, or shall be saved, that are baptized, for Judas, and Simon Magus,
and many others, were baptized.

(2.) It gives good Authority for sprinkling or pouring Water in Baptism; for
dipping or plunging is more like a punishment of Criminals than the solemnizing
of Gods Holy Ordinance of Baptism: It is a nearer Representation or Figure of
Gods Wrath upon the Old World, than of Grace and Mercy in the Covenant God made
with Abraham and his Seed, the blessing of which is devolved upon us Gentiles,
and our Children, Genesis 12.3. Acts 3. Ye are the children of the prophets, and
of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in
thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. Unto you first, God
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every
one of you from his iniquities.

5. As the Old ungodly World were all immersed and dipped in Wrath and
Judgment, so proud Pharaoh, and all his Host, were plunged and destroyed, when
he pursued Israel into the Red Sea; but Israel passed through safely, and were
but sprinkled, and so were all baptized unto Moses, in the cloud, and in the
sea, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.

6. And Lastly, By all these things God has plainly demonstrated unto us, that
his Covenant, Love, and Grace, is the same now, as it was ever, both to
Believers and their Seed, it is unchangable, even like God himself that made it.

3. Mr. K. says in p. 25. The Covenant of Works was primarily made with Adam;
yet another Addition or Ministration of it, was given on Mount Sinai, and to
that Covenant, I did there prove Circumcision did appertain.

But how Mr. K. can make these things hang together I know not; for
Circumcision was Instituted 430 Years before the Ceremonial Law was given upon
Mount Sinai, and the Moral Law was from Adam's Time; for Cain was
Excommunicated for breaking the Moral Law: But if the Moral Law was abrogated
when the Ceremonial Law was, then has Mr. K. gained a Point; for he says the
Substance of his other Arguments are in this; and to prove it to be a
Additional Ministration to the Covenant of Works, says he, The Man that does
those things shall live in them: Which latter is true in it self; for there is
no Salvation to be had without Moral Righteousness, though not for it, and so
he lives in it, in sincere Obedience, though not in perfect Obedience; for the
latter is in Christ's Obedience; and though a Man in doing these things lives in
them, yet he is not justified by his own Obedience to the Moral Law, but he is
justified by Christ's personal perfect Obedience, both active and passive, to
the Law and Justice of God; but by the Deeds of the Law no Flesh can be
Justified in the sight of God. Pray mind what the Apostle says in Gal. 3.17,
21. And this I say, that the covenant that was confirmed before of God in
Christ, the law which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disanul,
that it should make the promise of none effect.

2. Here is to be observed, that the Everlasting Covenant God confirmed with
Abraham, of which Circumcision was a Token, is called the Promise, and the
Sinai Covenant is called the Law; but says the Apostle, in ver. 21. Is the law
then against the promises of God? God forbid: for if there had been a law given
which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law.

Ver. 11. But that no man is justisted the law in the sight of God, it is
evident: for, The just shall live by faith.

3. The Apostle does clearly prove, that the Sinai Covenant of Obedience to the
Moral Law is still in force, in Romans 7.7, 12. What shall we say then? Is the
law sin? God forbid. Nay, I had not known sin, but by the law: for I had not
known lust, except the law had said, Thou shall not covet.

Wherefore the law is holy; and the commandment holy, and just, and good.

What think ye now Friend, of all your other Arguments, which you say are
contained in this one? Are they not swallowed up by the Gospel, even as Aaron's
Rod swallowed up the Rods of Pharaoh's Magicians.

4. Says Mr. K. in page 24. The Gospel Covenant ran first to all the Elect,
that were the natural Offspring of Abraham, and then to the Gentiles, and from
hence it is said, Romans 11. that when the Jews are called and brought in again,
they shall be graffed into their own Olive Tree.

1. I Answer, that if the Jews are to be graffed into their own Olive Tree
again, as indeed they must, then the Covenant which God made with Abraham, and
his Seed, is not Repealed, nor Dissolved.

2. That the Elect Jews were principally concerned in the Covenant, I do own;
but that none but such were concerned in it, I deny; for had it been so, then
none had ever been cast out of Covenant; for God never broke Covenant with his
Elect, nor never will: I will produce you, not only his Word, but also his Oath
for it, in Psalm. 89. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is
gone out of my lips.

Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David.

3. The Covenant which God made with Abraham and his Seed, was but one, and is
the very same now in substance to the believing Gentiles, and their Children,
though it is under a new Dispensation, and the Middle-wall of partition is
broken down, and taken away, and nailed to Christ's Cross, Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13,
14. And the Gentiles are Fellow-heirs and of the same Body, and Partakers of
his Promise in Christ, by the Gospel; so that the Covenant is enlarged, as to
the Privileges thereof; for whereas, before the coming in of the Gospel, it
was restricted to the Jews, and their Seed, now it is to both Jew and Gentile,
Acts 2.39. Whereas it was clogged before with Material costly Sacrifices, and
burdensome Ceremonies, and smarting Ordinances, now it is Meliorated and made
easier and better, all these Shadows are done away, which was the taking away
the first to establish the second, viz. to take away the Ceremonial Law to
Establish the Gospel.

4. And lastly, If none but Elect Jews were in the Covenant God made with
Abraham, and his Seed, at which time the Gentiles were rejected and cast off;
for in Noah's Time all the New World were in the Covenant of Grace; How came
the Jews to sin themselves out of it again, when the Elect Gentiles and their
Seed were taken in? Romans 11.17. For if those Jews had been Elected of God they
could never have sinned to such a degree, as to provoke God to cast them out of
Covenant, though they might sin so as to provoke God to punish and chastise
them for it, Psalm. 89.

5. And lastly, Says Mr. K. in page 27. And farther to prove the Promise of
the Covenant of Grace did not belong to Abrham 's Natural Seed as such, Paul
shows in Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham and to his seed was the promise made. He
says not to seeds, as of many, but to thy seed, which is Christ.

Friend, though you have charged me falsely with abusing the Sacred Scriptures,
yet give me leave to tell you, you have horribly abused this Text, by adding
unto it, and diminishing from it; for the Words are these, in Gal. 3.16. Now to
Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He says not, And to seeds, as of
many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.

Mr. K. has placed [was the promise made,] which is in the singular, instead
of [were the promises made.]

Friend, Was not Christ (who is styled this One here in this Text) of the Seed
of Abraham? And was not the Covenant made with him before the Foundation of the
World, for all the Elect and their Seed? And are not all the Promises Yea and
Amen in Christ? Which are the Promises in this Text, which you call the
promise? So that this Text intends quite another thing, ^hen what you seem to
infer from it.

2. Let us observe what strange Absurdities to follow.

1. Would it not be a very absurd thing, that God who is a Covenant-keeping
God, should keep his Covenant with Believers, and their Seed, from Adam to the
coming of Christ in the Flesh, which was about 4000 Years, and so often renew
and establish it with Believers and their Seed, by Repeated Promises and Sacred
Oaths, and that then God should cast them all off, and Repeal and Dissolve the
Covenant? Pray hear what the Apostle says to this, in Gal. 3.15. Brethren, I
speak after the manner of men; Though it be but a man's covenant, yet if it be
confirmed, no man disanulleth, or adds thereto. Viz. Is a Covenant which is
made between Man and Man, so sacred a thing, as that nothing ought to disanul
it, or make it void, and that nothing ought to be added unto it; How much more
Sacred is Gods Everlasting Covenant, and not to be disanulled, made void, nor
added unto, by Men?

2. Is it not an absurd thing for any Mortals to imagine that the Son of Gods
Love, ( John 3.16.) and the Gospel of his Grace, should bring more Grace to
Adult Believers then the Law, and at the same time destroy that Grace which
their Children enjoyed under the Law? John 1.17. For the law was given by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

3. If this Doctrine were true, then all the Seed of these believing Jews,
which kept Covenant, were all cast out, and broken off with the unbelieving
Jews, and their Seed, Romans 11: 17.

4. It will follow, that none but Adult believing Gentiles were taken into
Covenant, and all their Children excluded, which is repugnant to Acts 2.39. For
the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off,
even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

This Promise here is the same God made with Adam, Genesis 3.15. and Noah, Genesis
9.9. and Abraham, Genesis 17.2, 7. which was made to Believers and their Children.

5. These Gentlemen that Assert the Dissolution of the Covenant, wherein are
contained Believers and their Seed, never yet undertook to tell us what the
personal actual Sin was, which these poor Babes did commit against God, that
did provoke him to cast them all out of Covenant, who had been in it Four
Thousand Years successively; wherefore when you write next about this Subject,
be so ingenuous as to tell us what the Sin was which these young Infants were
guilty of, which brought them all under this dreadful condemnation, as to be
cast out of Gods Favor: For unless you can do that, all the Arguments you can
raise against our Principles will only serve to prove that you are in a very
great Error; for the Covenant God made with Adam, Noah, Abraham, and their
Seed, is an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure.

IV. I will by Gods Assistance prove that the Infant Seed of Believers are the
proper Subjects of Baptism, not to exclude Adult Proselytes; and in proving
this, I shall Answer all Mr. B. K's. Twenty Seven Arguments, as fully and
effectually as if I had confuted them one by one; for the Ground of all his
Arguments is to prove that all Children are excluded the Ordinance of
Water Baptism in their Infancy: And to effect my Purpose I shall take this
Method, viz.

1. I shall prove from the Sacred Scriptures, that there is a Command from our
Savior Christ for the baptizing young Infants. 2. There are undeniable
Examples for it. 3. I shall prove it from the peculiar Promises that are made
to the Seed of Believers. 4. From the Renowned Titles that are given unto them.
5. From their being under the care, conduct, and Ministry of the blessed
Angels. 6. And Lastly, From the tender care and sweet condescending Carriage
and Behavior of our blessed Redeemer to the Children of Believers, above all
other Men's Children in the World.
1. There is a positive Command for the baptizing of Infants, as well as of
others, in Christ's Commission in Mat. 28.19, 20. Go and disciple all nations;
that is, Baptize them; for if you observe, Teaching comes after, Go and
disciple all nations, make them disciples by baptism. Now, either Children are
no part of a Nation, or else there were no Children in all these Nations, to
whom Christ sent his Apostles and Ministers to preach the Gospel, or else
Children are every whit as much concerned in the Commission, with a respect to
Baptism, as the Adult: But Children are a great part of a Nation, and for any
to imagine, that there were no Children in all these Nations is ridiculous; and
therefore Children are included in this Commission of our Lords, and so they
come under the Power and Authority of Christ's positive Command to be baptized.

2. They Object, Children must be taught before they ought to be baptized, and
Children are not capable of being taught, and therefore not capable of baptism.

Pray hear what God says in Isa. 59.21. As for me, this is my covenant with
them, says the Lord, My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have
put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of
thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth and for ever. Isa. 54.13. And all thy children shall be taught of
the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy children. Heb. 8.11. And they
shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying,
Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest.

This Teaching of God proceeds from his Covenant Love, as appears by the
aforesaid Scriptures.

2. In Mark 16.15. there is Christ's positive Command to preach the Gospel to
every creature, that is, to some of all Ages and Sects, of the Rational Being;
therefore Children are concerned in this Command, as being a very great part of
the Rational Being, and they have a great benefit by the Ministry of the
Gospel, which benefit lies principally in their Parents being so disciplined
and taught, as to be made Believers, at which Instant their Children are also
initiated and planted into the Covenant of Grace, and are holy Children in Gods
account, 1 Cor. 7.14. and so have a Right to the holy Discipline, viz.
Water Baptism, the Initiating Seal of the Covenant.

3. And Lastly, There is a Command for Children to hear the Word of the Lord,
as well as Adult Persons, in Jer. 2.4. Even as Moses summoned all Israel, Man,
Woman, and Child, to appear before God, and renew their Covenant with him, in
Deuteronomy. 29.9, to 13.

Thus I have proved A Command for the baptizing all the Infant Seed of
Believers.

2. I will prove Infant Baptism from clear Examples.

First, From the Example of John the Baptist, Mat. 3. Then went out to him
Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the regions round about Jordan, And were
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins. But when he saw many of the
Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto them, O generation of
vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? etc.

John baptized all the Natural Seed of Abraham, that came to his Baptism; he
refused none, though at the same time he exhorted them to Repentance, and not
to rely upon their Covenant Relation to Abraham.

Ver. 11. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, etc. So that it does
not appear that John baptized none, but them, which were truly penitent.

1. Here you see all the Jews, Men, Women, and Children, that came unto John,
were baptized by him; for all came to his Baptism; for Children were a great
part of Jerusalem, and of all Judea, etc. And therefore Children were not
excluded, but were baptized.

2. The Ordinance of Baptism was first Instituted among the Jews, and their
Seed, before it was among the Gentiles, and theirs, many Years; for the
Gentiles must first be proselyted and taken visibly into Covenant by Discipline.

3. And Lastly, If John had not baptized all Children, how could it be said,
that Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan, went out
to him, and were baptized of him? Therefore it is plain, that all were baptized
by him. Now if I should say, All my Household are baptized, and yet none of my
Children are baptized, who are almost double in number the rest of my Family,
How could that be true?

So that it is very plain, from the Example of John the Baptist, we have
unquestionable Authority to baptize all our Children in their Infancy.

2. There are Examples of Infant Baptism from the Apostles practice; for they
baptized whole Households; wherefore if there had been but one Child in all
these Households that was not baptized, it could not properly have been said,
that the whole Household were baptized; for children are the principal Upholders
of the House; for where there are no children, that House is but of short
duration; and it is plain, that believing Parents, and their children, make a
holy House, a sanctified Husband, or a sanctified Wife, and holy children make
one Body, and therefore they ought to be baptized, 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one
spirit are we all baptized, into one body, etc.

3. Here are whole Households that were baptized by the Apostles, Acts 18.8.
Acts 16.14, 15. and ver. 30, 31, 33. and some others; and also whole Households,
that were Believers, which we read nothing at all of their Baptism.

3. That Children are a great part of the Household is very clear; for by our
Saviors Words, Parents and their children only make the Household, Mat. 10.
For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter
against her mother, etc. And a man's foes shall be they of his own household.
These were Parents and Children, not one Servant mentioned: And the Widow of
Zarephath, 1 King. 17.15. And she went, and did according to the saying of
Elijah: and she, and he, and her house did eat many days. Here was the Woman,
and the Prophet, and her House, (that was her Son,) did eat many days; for she
had no more in her Family, as in the 12th. Verse.

Heb. 11. By faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved
with fear, prepared an Ark, to the saving of his house, etc. That was himself,
Wife and Children, Genesis 6.1, 7.

So that it is impossible Children could be excluded, if they had any, because
the word Household includes them; but it would be very strange, if there were no
children in all those baptized Families, that are mentioned in the Gospel only
occasionally; for no doubt but there were many thousands of Households more,
that were baptized in the Apostles Time, which they had not the same occasion
to mention in particular, which we do not read of.

4. And Lastly, Though all the Infant Seed of Believers are Holy Children in
Scripture account, yet they are not all savingly sanctified, neither is
Water Baptism it self such an Ordinance as to convey or infuse Grace and
Holiness into the Subject baptized, so as to unite them to Christ by
Regeneration; No, that is the Work of the Holy Ghost alone in the Baptism by
Fire.

Indeed this I do believe, that God may, nay many times does, while the
external Sign of Regeneration and Sanctification is applying without, work the
thing signified by his holy Spirit internally within.

Thus you see here are clear Examples of Infant Baptism, and good Authority for
it, unless it can be proved that there were no Children in all these Nations,
that Christ commissioned his Apostles to preach the Gospel unto.

3. It is clear, that all the Infant Seed of Believers have a Right unto the
Ordinance of Baptism, in their Infancy, from the peculiar Promises of God made
unto them above all other Children in the World.

1. God has promised to be their God, Genesis 17.7. Psalm. 112.2. His seed shall
be mighty upon the earth: The generation of the upright shall be blessed.

Psalm. 102.28. The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed
shall be established before thee.

And in Isa. 29.23. Isa. 44.3. Isa. 65.22. Act. 2.29. Here you see are Precious
Promises made to the Children of Believers, to be fulfilled and accomplished in
Gospel Times; and is it rational to conceive, that God would not allow them the
Ordinance of Baptism, that is now the Seal or Token of the Covenant, wherein
all these Promises are contained, which God has made to the Seed of Believers?
Therefore all the Children of Believers ought to be baptized in their Infancy.

4. We may infer, that the Infant Seed of Believers have a Right to Baptism,
from the Renowned Titles that are given them: First, they are called Disciples,
Acts 15.1, 10. And certain men which came down from Judea, taught the brethren,
and said, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be
saved. They did not say, After the manner of Abraham; No, for they were zealous
of the Ceremonial Law. These Men came from Judea, where John had been baptizing
all that came to him: ( ver. 10.) Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke
upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to
bear?

But it may be Objected, Those were Adult believing Gentiles, Which in part is
true; but it was to their Children principally; for they which taught them,
that they themselves must be circumcised, did also teach them, that their
Children must be circumcised, and that the Jews Children must be circumcised
likewise, as does clearly appear from Acts 21. Thou see, brother, how many
thousands of Jews there are which believe, and they are all zealous of the law.
And they are informed of thee, that thou teach all the Jews which are among
the Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying, that they ought not to circumcise their
children, etc.

Pray when was this, that the Apostle did thus teach the People? Why, do but
look back into Acts 15. and you will find it was when the Men came down from
Judea, and preached up Circumcision, and were such Zealots for the Law of
Moses, as that they told the People they could not be saved without keeping of
it.

So that it is clear, that these Children in Acts 11. were of the number of
those Disciples in Acts, 15.10. And therefore the Infant Seed of Believers are
Disciples, and ought to be baptized, as being in Christ's Commission, Matthew.
28.19, 20.

Now a little by way of Query and Expostulation.

1. Is it any ways likely that the believing Jews would have been brought off
from circumcising their Children, without an Ordinance that was equivalent, or
better, in the room of it? Especially if we do but consider, how hard a Task
the Apostles had to bring them off from it; for they thought they should be
damned if they did neglect it, Acts 15.1.

2. If we do but consider what a great Esteem the Jews has for the Ordinance
of Baptism, which may be measured by the Question our Savior put to those
Great Men, when they came to him to question his Authority, in Mark 11. 29, 30.
They did not dare to say that John's Baptism was of Men, for fear that the
People would have stoned them.

3. If it were such a dangerous thing for those Priests, Scribes, and Elders,
to have denied John's Baptism to be of divine Authority, what a dangerous thing
would it have been for any Man to have Asserted, that all their Children had
been cast out of Abraham's Covenant, or to have opened their Mouths against
Infant Baptism, seeing the Apostles had so much ado to bring them off from
Circumcision, which was the Seal or Token of the Covenant, and did Typifie our
Saviors bloody Baptism, namely, his Death and Sufferings?

1. It was a bloody Ordinance, Exodus 4.25, 26. So was Christ's Sufferings, Luke
12.50.

2. It was a painful Ordinance; so was Christ's Sufferings.

3. It was an Ordinance wherein all the Subjects were passive; so was Christ in
his bloody Baptism.

4. It was an Ordinance of Incision, or cutting off the Flesh; so was the
Sufferings of Christ, Dan. 9.26. After threescore and two weeks shall Messiah
be cut off, but not for himself.

5. And Lastly, The Male Children were only to be circumcised, which did
Typifie that Christ our Redeemer must be a Man, and that of sorrow, and the
Pascal Lamb did Type out the same: It must be a male of the flock without
blemish; so must Christ be a Male of the Flock, or Tribe of Judah, without sin:
But the Females must not be circumcised, because they could not make a True
Figure of Christ, our Passover, which was sacrificed for us: But the Females
have the Ordinance of Childbearing, which is the True Figure of Regeneration,
without which there could have been no Circumcision.

2. When Christ the Antitype came in the Flesh, and was offered up a Sacrifice^
for Sin, then both these two Ordinances, viz. Circumcision and the Passover,
were transformed into Baptism and the Lords Supper; and whereas the two former
did show the Lords Death to come, so the two latter do show that the Lord is
come, and has been offered up a Sacrifice for sin, and Baptism is the Sign of
Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, as succeeding Circumcision.

4. I challenge Mr. B. K. to prove that ever the believing Jews children were
denied the Ordinance of Baptism, or that Infant Baptism is any where forbid in
the Gospel.

5. And Lastly, Let him also prove, if he can, that ever any one Child, either
of believing Jew, or Gentile, did stay until he was an Adult Person, and then
made a confession of his Faith, and was baptized; for no doubt but there were
many thousands of Believers children, and Grandchildren, that were Believers,
and grown Persons, in the Apostles Time, whose Parents might be baptized by
John at the first Institution of that Ordinance: And would it not be very
strange, if they had not been baptized in their Infancy, that we should not
read of one that had been baptized when he came to Years of understanding?
Timothy's Mother and Grandmother were both Believers, and he himself an Eminent
Saint, and he made a great Figure in the Church of Christ, and yet we never
read of his Baptism, but we do of his Circumcision; but no doubt but as the
latter was in his Manhood, so the former was in the time of his Childhood.

Thus I have proved the Infant Seed of Believers to be Disciples.

2. All the Infant Seed of Believers are called holy Children, 1 Cor. 7.14.
Even as the Children of Israel were, because they were a Vovenant People, and
yet all Israel were not saved; for with many of them God was not well-pleased,
neither do I believe that all the Seed of Gospel-Believers will be saved,
though they are baptized; but all that are Elected shall be saved. They are
holy by virtue of their being in the Covenant with their Parents; and as Christ
did not come to destroy the Law but to fulfill it, so neither did he come to
Repeal nor Dissolve the Covenant, but to confirm it, Dan. 9. And after
threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself, etc.

And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week, etc.

5. The Infant Seed of Believers are under the Ministry of the Holy Angels,
Mat. 18.10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say
unto you, that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father
which is in heaven. And look back on the 6th. verse, and you will see that they
were Children that believed in Christ: Heb. 1. Are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? The
blessed Angels have the care and conduct of all the Elect of God, both in their
Lives, and at their Deaths, Luke 16. And it came to pass that the beggar died,
and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom: That was, into Eternal
Glory; and the Angels are as capable of doing Service for an Elect Infant, both
living and dying, as they are for the oldest Saint upon Earth, because the
Angels are not Acted by any power of the Creatures; but by the Power of God;
therefore the Infant Seed of Believers have a Right to Baptism, in which
Ordinance all the Subjects are as passive, as all the Subjects of Circumcision
were; and the Children of Believers do make the same passive Figure in the
Church now, as the Children of the Jews did in the Church under the Law; for
our Savior tells us, that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, which is the
Church.

6. And Lastly, To crown all the rest, Was the sweet compassionate behavior of
our blessed Redeemer toward the Infant Seed of Believers, in Mark 10. And they
brought young children unto him, that he should touch them; and his disciples
rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased,
and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them
not: for of such is the kingdom of God. And he took them up in his arms, put
his hands upon them, and blessed them.

1. Here was no bodily Distemper complained of, nor no cure wrought upon their
Bodies. 2. These Children were the Infant Seed of Believers: For if their
Parents had not been reconciled unto Christ, they would never have brought
their children unto him, to be blessed by him. 3. As they were Adult Believers
that brought them to Christ, so were they also which rebuked them that brought
them. 4. And Lastly, Christ did receive them, and laid his Hands on them, and
blessed them, and also prayed.
Thus you see, that the sweet carriage and compassionate behavior of our
blessed Redeemer, toward these little Infants of believing Parents, does
clearly demonstaate unto us, that they were in the Covenant, and were baptized
before they were thus visibly brought unto Christ, seeing that he himself laid
his hands on them, and blessed them; for laying on of Hands in the Primitive
Time was succedaneous to Baptism, Acts 8.12, 15, 16, 17.

Thus you see it clearly made out, That all the Infant Seed of Believers have a
Right to the Ordinance of Baptism; and this brings me to take notice of that
Query of B. K's. viz. What Benefit is it to a Child to be baptized?

To which I reply, So might proud carnal Reason have Queried in the Time of
Circumcision, What benefit have our Young Infants by being circumcised at Eight
Days old? But the Apostles Answer is very compatible to Mr. K. Romans 3.1, 2.
What advantage then has the Jew? or what profit is there of circumcision? Much
every way: chiefly, because that unto them were committed the Oracles of God.

Believing Gentiles and their Children are one Body, and likewise a holy
People, 1 Cor. 7.14. And so they have a Federal Right unto the Oracles of God,
as Israel had of old.

3. Baptism is a solemn Dedication of our Children unto God, from whom we
received them, and it must be done by a solemn Act, by the Parents consent in
an Ordinance of God, or else it is but humane Invention; therefore if it ought
not to be done in that Church Ordinance, namely, Baptism, then I desire to know
of those Gentlemen that oppose it, what Church Ordinance it must be done in,
that is more compatible than that of Baptism.

4. And Lastly, It is the Duty of all Christian Believers to look upon all
their Children in their Infancy, as Elected of God from all Eternity. It is not
for us to reprobate any of them in our Minds, and say, If I knew which of my
Children were chosen of God, I would dedicate them only unto God in Baptism:
For that indeed is a secret we ought not to pry into; it is Gods Prerogative
only to know which of our Childrens Names are written in his Book of Election:
But seeing they are all called holy Children, without exception, our Duty is to
hope well of them all, and dedicate them all unto God, in the Ordinance of
Baptism, and believe and pray for them all, as if they were all Elected; and we
did know it, as long as we do not know any thing to the contrary. But God has
put all the Infant Seed of Believers in their Infancy, now under the Gospel,
into the Balance alike, with a respect to their Parents knowledge, as if they
were Elected in the 1 Cor. 7.14.

Thus I have proved splendently, That the Infant Seed of Believers are in
Covenant, and are the proper Subjects of Baptism, not excluding Adult
Proselytes: By which I have fully Answered all the Arguments that ever were
raised against it, and also Mr. B. K's. Book, in particular, as much as if I
had confuted them Argument by Argument.

V. And Lastly, Mr. B. K. has labored hard to prove, That the Church State
under the Law was only a Carnal Legal Church State, and that it was dissolved
at the Coming of Christ in the Flesh. And one of his Topping Arguments to prove
it to be so, is, That they were a Natural Church, and the Churches under the
Gospel are congregational.

Therefore my business is to prove the contrary, and I shall pursue this
Method, viz. 1. I shall prove, that the Church is of the same Form and Mettle
substantially now, as it was under the Law. 2. That there are the same sort of
Members, both for Age and Sects. 3. And Lastly, The Church lives and feeds upon
the same spiritual Food now, as the Church did under the Law.

1. That the Church is of the same Form and Mettle, I shall prove first out the
Old Testament, Zech. 4. And the angel that talked with me, came again and waked
me; as a man that is wakened out of his sleep, And said unto me, What see
thou? And I said, I have looked, and behold, a candlestick all of gold, etc.
Secondly, the New Testament, Rev. 1.20. The mystery of the seven stars which
thou saw in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks, which thou
saw, are the seven churches. Candlesticks are to set up a Light in, and they
are of the same Mettle, viz. Golden Candlesticks. What though there was but one
under the Law, and that was National, and now several and they congregational,
yet the Form, Use, and Mettle, is the same. Suppose a Man has a Tree in his
Orchard that has but one Branch upon it, and that is decaying, and he cuts
that off, and graffs several Branches upon the same Stock, that does not
destroy the Root, or Stock of the Tree, Romans 11.16. For if the first-frruit be
holy, the lump is also holy: and if the root be holy, so are the branches. The
Church State under the Law was the same as it was in Abraham's Time, which was
430 Years before the Law of Moses, and it is the same as it was in Adam's Time,
Genesis 3.15. On this Promise the Foundation or Church State was laid, and as it
was in the Beginning, so it is now, and ever will be to the Worlds End.

But says Mr. K. in page 9. I also ask you whether the Jewish Church, that was
sounded upon the Old Covenant, is not gone and dissolved? If so, what does your
arguing prove?

I Answer, The Jewish Church State was founded on the Covenant of Grace, call
it what Covenant you please; for Abraham had the Gospel preached unto him when
God established the Covenant with him, Gal. 3.8. And so had Adam, Genesis 3.15.
And Noah was a Gospel Preacher, 2 Pet. 2.5. And the Church State is the same
now as it was before the Dispensation of the Gospel.

1. By the Words of our Savior himself, Mat. 21. Therefore I say unto you, The
kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth
the fruit thereof. Now if this Kingdom of God was not the Church State, in
which all the Jews then were, pray tell us what Kingdom of God this was. 1. It
appears that this Kingdom of God was the Church Militant, and not the Church
Triumphant. 2. That the Church State was mutable, and yet indissolvable. God
might remove it from one Nation to another, as he did from the unbelieving Jews
unto the believing Gentiles, Mat. 21.43. Romans 11.17. But the State of the
Church is the same, and is unalterable. 3. There were the seven Churches of
Asia dissolved; but that did not destroy the Church State no more than the
Excommunicating Members out of a particular Church does.

2. The Apostle makes it appear plainly, that the Church State is the same now,
as ever it was, before the Incarnation of Christ, in Ephesians. 2. Now therefore ye
are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and
of the household of God; And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and
prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; In whom all the
building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord: In
whom you also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit.

Now pray Mr. K. what do you think? Was the State of the Jews Church a carnal
legal Church State? Whereas you hear it was a Habitation for God through the
Spirit, and Jesus Christ the chief corner Stone. Did God dwell in a carnal
Church? Or was Christ ever the Foundation of a carnal Church? Which must
necessarily follow as the consequence of this carnal Position.

3. In page 43. says Mr. K. I ask whether or no Christ did not remove by the
Gospel Dispensation, all the Wheat out of the old Barn, nay, and pull down that
Barn? etc.

Christ did not pull down that Barn, but he purged the Floor of it, neither did
he remove the Wheat out of it, but he did winnow and fan away all the chaffy
Hypocrites, the unbelieving Jews, and gathered his Elect Gentile-wheat into his
Garner, Kingdom, or Church, and John the Baptist's Testimony is sufficient to
prove this; let any Man deny this if they dare, Mat. 3. I indeed baptize you
with water unto repentance; but he that comes after me, is mightier then I,
whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost,
and with fire. Whose san is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor,
and gather his wheat into the garner: but he will burn up the chaff with
unquenchable fire.

Here are Two Things to be observed from this Text; The Firist is, A threatening
the Expulsion of the unbelieving Jews; and the Second, A Prediction of the
calling and conversion of the Elect Gentiles, which was the taking the Kingdom
of God from the Jews, and giving it to the Gentiles.

2. The Church is the same now in a sense, as it was under the Law, with a
respect to the Members of it; for as the Jews and their children, were the
Members of it under the Law, so Believers and their children, are the Members
of it under the Gospel, Mat. 19. But Jesus said, Suffer the little children,
and forbid them not to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven. Ephesians.
3.6. That the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and
partakers of his promise in Christ, by the gospel. Which Promise you have in
Acts 2.39. which is to Believers and their children.

3. And Lastly, The Church under the Law did live and feed upon the same
Spiritual Food as the Church now does, and was a baptized Church, 1 Cor. 10.
And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea; And did all eat
the same spiritual meat; etc.

Mr. K. pray tell me how was it possible that a carnal legal Church could live
upon Spiritual Food? Sir, you should think before you write: I am sorry you can
distinguish no better of those Profound Mysteries of the Gospel. Thus you see
your carnal Conception of the Church State utterly confuted, and the Church
proved to be the same now, as it was from the Beginning, and ever will be while
there is a Saint upon Earth; and if you do write again, bring better Arguments
to Town with you, or else you had as good say nothing, And so Farewell.

POSTSCRIPT.
MR. B. K. in page 35. has made a Collection of my Words in Answer to Mr. H.
C's. late Book, which he calls unseemly, scoffing, opprobrious Language;
therefore I have made a Collection of Mr. H. C's. Language to me, and let any
Man judge whether I have not been moderate; for Evil Communication corrupts
Good Manners.

In page 1. says Mr. H. C. What is this Man resolved to set himself in a
posture of war against God and his Word? An Advocate against the Truth, blinded
with prejudice. These are in the room of an Oculist, to open his eyes to behold
his Error in Judgment. Page 2. He makes a Man of Straw, and fights with it, or
his own Shadow. If it be not from Ignorance, then it is from a worse Root; he
deserves Austin's Title, The hard Father of Infants. Page 3. What would this
Man make a new Bible? Had he the Notion by Inspiration? I do not wonder the Man
is so well pleased with an unscriptural Baptism, when he Asserts an
unscriptural way of saving Infants. He is almost at his wits-end, and famished
for want of Arguments, and so will catch at any thing. Page 4. You are in the
Pound, Sir, get out if you can. His Arguments are so feeble, that it is a
tottering Fence. Would any Man but one void of common sense, urge such
Scriptures for Infants Inherent Faith. Page 6. When will you cease to pervert
the right Word of the Lord. Page 7. Get out of this Prison as well as you can.
Page 8. Pray Sir, go to School again, and learn better Logic. Page 10. Did
ever Man speak more impertinently: These Lines of his must be written through
ignorance, inadvertency, or worse. Page 11. Who labors all he can to blacken
the Ways of God, and render the Professors of it as odious as possible: Does he
not acquire the Name of an exquisite Calumniator? Is not this the Man David
speaks of, that travelleth with iniquity, conceived mischief, and brought forth
falsehood? Remember, remember John Child, whose chief cause of desperation was
his speaking and writing against those very people of God you now do. Page 14.
Here you have brought your self again into a Noose, and I cannot help it. In
his former Book before ever I writ against their Opinion, he said, Infants
Baptism of Earth and Humane Invention, and Rantizing and a Relic of
Antichrist. So much for Mr. B. K's. Reverend Brother Mr. H. C. whom he has so
highly vindicated in his Book; but in point of Justice and common honesty, he
ought to have laid down this opprobrious Language of Mr. H. C. against me.

Now in the second place I shall compare what Mr. B. K. charges me with, in the
5 Chap. of his Book, against Mr. H. C. and let us see which makes the blackest
Figure.

Says Mr. K. I shall begin with Mr. Shutes unbecoming, scoffing Expressions,
as they lie here and there in his Book.

In page 4. he says, He will not render Railing for Railing, yet in page 5.
you will find these Expressions, speaking to Mr. C. You have charged me
falsely; you boggled and juggled with the Scripture; yet he has not made either
of these things appear. In page 5. he says, Here thou have the Cavils of the
Adversary answered.

This Man matters not what he says to promote his Opinion; just like the
Papists who hold that The End sanctifies the Means; for if you look into my
Book, in page aforesaid, you will find it to be only a Repetition of what is
said against me in the Preface of Mr. H. C's. Book; and let any Man read where
I have charged Mr. H. C. with perverting the Scriptures, and look into his Book
and see if it be not true.

Again, Says Mr. K. of me, Mr. C. does as little Boys, that make a thing of
Rags, in imitation of a Cock, and when they have set it up, etc.

This was only to Illustrate an abominable Falsehood Mr. C. has fixed upon me,
and then raised an Argument from it.

In page 46. he says, Mr. C. is troubled with the Grumbling in his Gizzard.
But this is false, I did not say his Gizzard, but the Gizzard: But you are very
subject to mistakes; but I find it is always in favor of your own Opinion,
which looks as if it were wilful.

He says in page 57. that Mr. C. is pleased to mock at Habitual Faith.

This is true, and I wonder how you dare deny it.

Says Mr. K. He renders me worse than the Devil, page 116. The Devil left out
part of a Scripture once, to tempt our Savior with, but in my weak Judgment (
says Mr. Shute) this Author has done it three times, etc.

In page 82. he says, ( speaking of Mr. C.) Was there ever such Legerdemain
played with the Sacred Scriptures?

In page 23. he cries out, O for shame cease from bringing your carnal Reason,
etc.

In page 24. Where are you now with your humane, invented, lame, decrepit
Salvation, etc.

In page 56. he abuses Mr. Danvers who is dead.

Here is all the scoffing Expressions, or opprobrious Language, as Mr. K. calls
it, as he picked together, as they lie up and down in my Book. Now let any Man
of sense, or common honesty, but consider the Provocations that Mr. Collins
gave me, and then judge whether I have not been moderate: but Mr. K. (the wise
Man) tells us, that to acquit the Guilty, and condemn the Innocent, are alike
Abomination.

And as for this Book of Mr. Benjamin Keaches, I will only say this of it, to
wit, Had I written it, People would have been prone to say, that there was much
of the Malice of Satan in it, and but little of the Subtilty of the Serpent,
and nothing of the Innocence of the Dove to be found therein, and that there
was neither Parts, nor Good Manners, but a complication of ignorant Zeal,
Embelished with Errors, and false Doctrines and Positions.

FINIS.
London, Printed for the Author, and Sold by Nathaniel Hiller: Where you may
also have his other Books, Viz. An Antidote to prevent the Prevalency of
Anabaptism, 4to. Price stitcht 6 d. The Vindication of the Antidote, 12mo.
bound One Shilling. An Answer to Mr. Hercules Collins Last Shift, 12mo. Price
stitcht in Blew Paper, One Penny.


