A Short Vindication OF Marine Regiments, In Answer to a Pamphlet, Entitled, A
Letter to a Member of Parliament, concerning the Four Marine Regiments.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms Inn in Warwick Lane. 1699.

A Short Vindication OF Marine Regiments.
SInce Mankind are subjected to the Licentious Aspersions of every Author who
has an opinion of his railing, the only misfortune a man should resent as
particular is when he falls into the worst hands; That such is the fate of the
Mariners is evident from the scurrility, inconsistency, and falsity, so
conspicuous in every page of his Book.

The Gentleman undertakes, with that becoming assurance which shines through the
whole Piece, to prove these Regiments an useless charge to the People, a
nuisance to the Navy, and dangerous to the Kingdoms Liberties.

This Indictment bears indeed a terrible Front, and were it not for this small
advantage on our side, that every sort of proof from Reason and matter of Fact
is wanting, we were in a desperate condition.

Our Author without any hesitation asserts, that the Officers seldom do any
duty; that they and their men are supernumerary, and useless to the Ships
Company, and a very heavy charge: Whereas it is plain, that the Lords of the
Admiralty, upon fitting out a Squadron of Ships, always direct their Orders to
the Colonels of the Marine Regiments for a detachment of their men, with whom
there constantly embarks a proportionable complement of Officers, who are
disposed of in numbers according to the rate of the Ship, and are always
considered as a part of their Ships Complement; and as such they are less
charge than so many Seamen, the able Seaman's monthly Pay being Four, and
twenty shillings, and the Marines but Eighteen. And for being equally useful at
least, I have often heard it owned by the Flag-Officers, as well as private
Captains, they had rather have one fourth of their men Marines, than be wholly
manned with Seamen, for that they always found them more obedient to Command
in time of Action, whether quartered at the Great Guns or Small Shot, or put
Centrys over the Scuttels; whereas the Seamen at such times are not so
Governable, being accustomed to greater Liberties and Disorders, from their
frequent discharges and variety of Service, when the Marines are kept to a
Constant and Severer discipline.

But here, to dash all our hopes at once, he comes with Antipathy and Economy,
and is very merry with the different dispositions of the Seamen and the
Landmen, and asserts, it is impossible to be practiced with safety, if the
Nation should consent to it: One while he makes us Marines, and then again we
are to be Land Soldiers; and indeed such is his ingenuity, we are to be any
thing his different purposes would have us; The only instnnce we are allowed to
know is, of a dissension in Sir Francis Wheeler's Expedition in the West
Indies; but that happened from a Regiment of Foot taken on board in the West
Indies, nor can it, even with the art of our Author's inferences, fall on the
Marines, the Sea Officers having an absolute Command over them, with power to
confine upon refusing to obey.

The Streights Squadron, Commanded by my Lord Orford, and the Land Regiments
upon that expedition, are happy instances of a better agreement; and it is
rather to be hoped our continuing among them may put an entire end to that
unnatural dissension, he draws such dangerous consequences from.

He urges in additional charge against us, we cannot be a Nursery for Seamen;
Nay, that there is no occasion for any Nursery at all in a time of Peace and
Security. But I hope his Opinion wanting every support but his own assurance,
will not prevail against plain Matter of Fact, subject to other than notional
demonstration; For as the Kings Ships in time of War, by indispensible
necessity did often delay and prejudice the Trading part of the Kingdom; in
times of Peace, the necessity will prevail on the other side; and it is plain,
that long and dangerous Voyages, by Distempers incident from several climates,
and the infinite accidents such a course of Life exposes men to, will
continually lessen the number, and soon awaken us with that necessity we look
upon at such a distance: And that the Marines are a proper supply is
undeniable; Had our Author been a little better acquainted with that
Commissioner of the Navy, he makes such familiar mention of, the Navy Books
would have made appear to them both, that even during the oppressions and
disappointments these Regiments labored under, great numbers of Scamen have
been discharged from them as Able for the service of the Navy: And had they
been encouraged and supported in their first Institution, I am assured a
thousand men might have been Annually drawn from them so qualified.

Nay, these very Marines our Author looks upon as such Ciphers, were found very
ready, and very necessary, when the Invasion was threatened from Calais; when
without them, the difficulties had been insuperable upon the Officers employed
in the speedy manning of the Fleet.

He charges us again, with a modesty proper to him, that Seamen are inveigled
by us to become Landmen, rather than our selves made useful at Sea; that we
receive Forty Shillings per man, to Recruit and List pressed men in our Companies.

The truth of this he makes out with his usual plainness, in that one half of
the Marines are constantly at Sea themselves, and the rest always ready to
relieve them, or be put on board at an hours warning on any other expedition,
and always account the Sea Service their proper place of Action and Duty. The
Seamen have Twenty Four Shillings per month, and the Marines Eighteen
Shillings, which must incline them to choose the Marine Service in point of
Interest, and with their natural inclination to Land Men and Land Service,
hinted by our Author, Page the 5th, make the Task very easy for Marine Officers
to recruit their Companies with pressed Seamen; who must be pressed first by the
Sea Officers, and actually in their Custody, and they doubtless will be ready
(by reason of the Antipathy before mentioned) to oblige the Marine Officers
with the men pressed at their own trouble and expense; for no Marine Officer has
more power to press than any Land Officer whatsoever.

I find, as busy as this Gentleman makes himself, with that determining Port,
stating his own Objections, then answering them as roundly; and setting his
reasons beyond the possibility of a reply, he is forced very often to discover
his humanity, I mean his fallibility, and not his good nature, of that we must
acquit him, the distempers of the State will not suffer by the lenity of our
Reformer.

Here, if the subject were not too serious, I should indeed be inclined to be
merry; The Sailors, he says, are always depended upon better at their Small
Arms, to defend the Decks, and annoy the Enemy, because in their Voyages they
are accustomed to shoot Wild Fowl; and would infer, that to defend the Decks,
and make regular Fires, to load and discharge with quickness, and order,
preserving themselves carefully to advance and retire with that regard to
command, as in Companies well disciplined, may be learnt best by shooting of
Larks; This is so very Ridiculous that I am in hopes the Gentleman will honor
us with the first Fruits of his modesty, and blush for it.

In Confidence of which I will venture to tell him, I have known, when the Sea
Commanders have Complained, they could never bring one in Ten of the Sailors so
much as to endeavor at the Exercise of the small Arms, which makes the
Necessity of the Mariners almost irresistible.

I believe it is possible to prove one instance, that these Mariners have been
Instrumental in preventing Mutinies attempted at Sea, and very many reasons why
they may be useful that way, constant discipline leaving deeper impressions of
Duty, and the highest regard to good Officers, and I am told that is the reason
their Arms are always lodged in the aftermost part of the Ship.

As for his Instance upon those Attacks at Cork and Kingsale, these very
useless Mariners (unluckily to this Gentleman's purpose) had the Honor of a very
considerable part in the Success, so that we must conclude he was at too great
a distance to be positive.

There are now more than one Thousand of the Marines abroad, and I believe the
rest may appeal to any of the Admirals with whom they have served, and find a
different Character from our Authors, who is so palpably unacquainted with the
men, tho so very angry with the Core.

That difficulty he raises of interfering with the Navy rules vanishes, when we
shall appear useful for the Service, or else the Commissioner he is acquainted
with, promises but poorly for the Capacities of the Board.

That the Marine Officers, debauch the principles of the Sea Officers,
introducing Arts of false Mustering, unknown to the pristine Innocence of the
Seamen, is a scandal so void of proof, that it is not yet known they were ever
so much as accused; which requires all the Countenance of our Author to defend,
because the Marines on board, are always under the Muster and Check of the Navy.

Where they are said to be useful in the King's Yards, he tells us he will give
no Answer, after he has said all he could against it; which is a condescension
we must always own, and come to our old way of answering with Matter of Fact of
the most evident kind.

In the year 1694, great part of the Marine Regiments were on shore, and were
Quartered according to the Establishment near the Dock Yards, and there
Employed with the Encouragement of Sixpence per day, the common Laborers
receiving constantly One Shilling and Two pence, and the Marines were
acknowledged by the Officers in the Yard, to dispatch more Work for their
number, than a third more of the Common Laborers, being generally young and
able for the Service; and in six months time many of them arrived to perform
the same work the Artificers were allowed two Shillings per day for.

As for the security of the Yards that he dispises, and sets up a Watchman and
a Bell, and the whole's confuted: But the Marines, so quartered as before, may
take off the charge of one Shilling and Sixpence a night per man paid to the
Watch, and do the Purpose better; For the Soldier does it as a piece of his
Duty, and is diligent in hopes of favor and perferment.

Our Author has taken great care to be particular in the Marines Diet and
Lodging, and other accommodations; I hope, having as many Limbs as other men,
the Advantage of that will be found in their labor.

When Ships are laid up, it is undeniable but the Marines must be an easier
charge than Seamen, to do the duty on board, and in case of any attack, be
unquestionably better able to defend, than a Boatswain and a few Seamen
unarmed, and without discipline.

Such a Force, tho below the Ridicule of our Author, might possibly have
prevented the burning of the Ships at Chattam, and better defended the yards;
for I have heard it affirmed upon the place, that at that time, the Seamen and
Laborers, before one of the Enemy Landed, instead of defending their Charge,
plundered and stole what they could, and made the best of their way: To what
purpose the ringing of the Bell might have been I know not, But of this I am
assured, no Soldier dare conceal himself when the Drum beats to Arms.

Where any necessity arises of speedy rigging of Ships ordered out, The Marines
Quartered near the Docks will be Qualified for that Duty, prevent any delay
while the means are used to get the Seamen together, and in the year (1695) for
want of Seamen at hand, many of the great Ships at Chattam were fitted out, and
carried down the River by Marines.

The First Marine Regiments are not dispersed as he falsely affirms, but one of
the present four consists of the old Officers and chosen men, and the rest were
distributed into the other three; so that the dispute is not to make a new
Establishment, but upon these undeniable uses to confirm an old one.

How it may answer this Gentleman's purpose, or his Character to lay the
strictest assurance upon things utterly false, I cannot tell; But this news from
Holland of their laying aside Marine Regiments wants confirmation.

When this Author had ranked us under the Protection of the Admiralty, I was in
hopes to have seen some of that regard due to a superior Board; But he is now
in his Reforming Capacity, and must be allowed any Latitude.

If continuing such a necessary part of our Naval Force be destructive of the
Kingdoms Liberties, our Author has found out a new way of preserving them
unknown to our Ancestors, and I hope he will be convinced we are not to be
deceived by appearances, how secure soever he may be of his own disguise.

His Malice is every where apparent as his Vanity, which makes his Opinion of
less Force against us, if there were any thing in his Arguments, and I believe
if we were acquainted with his honesty we might lay aside all our Fears.

The End.

