THE MAGISTRACY AND GOVERNMENT OF ENGLAND VINDICATED. In Three PARTS.
CONTAINING, I. A Justification of the English Method of Proceedings against
Criminals, etc. II. An Answer to several Replies, etc. III. Several Reasons for
a General Act of INDEMNITY.


Printed in the Year MDCXC.

The Magistracy and Government of England Vindicated; or a Justification of the
English Method of Proceedings against Criminals, by way of Answer to the
Defense of the late Lord Russel 's Innocence, etc.
IN the present Age, when the variety and multiplicity of new Prints is such,
that the money and time required for their purchase and perusal, is more than
an ordinary Gentleman can reasonably allow; it may deservedly be thought a
Nuisance to the public to have their numbers increased, especially since the
Complaint of the ingenious Author of the Trimmers Character, that for this
very cause he could almost have wished himself unable to read; but yet the
Support of Magistracy and Government is a noble Theme, so useful to the
public, and so generally agreeable to the humor of Mankind, that the mere
Subject will (I presume) be an Excuse for this Publication, if any thing can be
so.

At this time of day none would have thought that a necessity should happen of
writing upon such a Topic, when every English Protestant was entertaining
himself with the pleasing Prospect of impartial, due, and indifferent
Administrations, when Authority was becoming amiable and easy to the People,
when the People were inclining to a zeal and affection for the honor of
Magistrates; in short, when the Law was recovering its clouded Credit: in this
Conjuncture none expected to see all the Pillars and Posts in the Town daubed
with plentiful Title Pages (like so many Histriomastrixes of Will. Prinn's)
directing their Spectators to Books of Obloquy and Reproach, not only on the
Persons and Opinions, but the Authority of Judges; when neither of the three
are corrigible, or so much as censurable any otherwise than in and by a
Parliament; much less was it expected, that a Gentleman of the long Robe would
appear in Print to ridicule their own Profession, and expose our Law even to
the Scorn of Foreigners. It would not have been so very strange to have seen a
Doctor of the Commons exercising his Wit and Railery on the Common Law
Proceedings when he saw his dearest Diana, I mean his Excommunication Process,
in danger of becoming useless, and a fair occasion given him for such an Essay
from the Disgust of the People against Westminster Hall.

But none imagined that Satyrs and Invectives upon past Proceedings should be
writ by Lawyers, who expect a farther Benefit from their Profession by the
Grace and Favor of the Government, which if they happen to acquire, according
to their Expectations, I would only remember them, that Mocking is catching in
the Proverb. There was once upon a time a certain Master of Arts, who, whilst
at Cambridge, did ridicule and expose the Clergy of the English Church, by
writing the pretended Causes of their Contempt; but the Templers said, that he,
whilst at London, did give an occasion for a third Part to the same Tune, or at
least a new Edition of the Book, with Additions by the Author himself, even of
his own dull -- as proper for the like use. In petty Corporations they who have
most complained of others hardships have frequently outdone their Predecessors,
when once they have got their places. A whining complaining Servant does often
prove a peevish imperious Master; and I am sure, in the Inns of Court, the most
noisie, troublesome and mutinous Students and Barristers make the stiffest and
most magisterial Benchers. I make no application, but I leave the Reader to do
what he pleases. Better things are to be hoped of all concerned in public
Government.

Since the Press seems open, and Lawyers Books are published without a License,
another may assume the same Liberty with equal Authority, and with more Reason,
when his Province is only to correct the Misrepresentations of Things, Actions,
and Persons, though made by Authors of Age, Experience, Figure, and Learning,
(I will not say Candor or Honesty,) especially since they are private Men, and
having vented their own Thoughts in Print, they remain no longer theirs, but
are equally exposed to the Censure or Applause of every Reader. Besides, it is
generaly presusumed, that an Author expects a public Animadversion, or
otherwise he would never have become such. He presumes his Arguments
irrefragable, and then an Answer does him no mischief; and if they are
otherwise, he deserves it. And surely he stands as liable to be corrected by
others, as others were to be censured by him. And it is more warrantable
certainly to write and print for the Vindication of former Proceedings, than it
can be either candid or gentile to arraign or expose them; especially since to
do so, is and must needs be mischievous to past, present, and future
Governments, as Experience will unquestionably teach us; but the other is and
will be of service to future Administrations, by maintaining the Reputation and
Credit of Judiciary Proceedings.

It is well known, that the Lord Russel being so unfortunate as to fall under
the accusation of Treason, was the most pitied of any under those
Circumstances, by all who knew either his Family or personal Character; great
expectations were then had of the Issue of that Trial, the Event gave great
occasion for Discourse afterward, and almost ever since; the printing of his
last Speech, with the several Answers to it, did much augment the Talk. It
cannot but be remembered how various and different the Sentiments of most were
upon that Subject; the Debates concerning it generally concluded in a pity to
his Person and Relations, as a great Misfortune upon both, and in truth upon
the Nation, that a Gentleman of such Qualifications should be guilty of so much
Inadvertency (to say no worse) as to engage so frequently in such Consults as
he unhappily did. Some blamed the Jury, most censured the Witnesses, but very
few arraigned either Counsel or Court; and in truth the fairness and
indifferency of that Trial was such, that his own Relations were pleased, and
his Enemies angry with those that then sat upon the Bench; and thus it
continued till the present Revolution.

Then the Memory of that unfortunate Gentleman was revived by the publication
of a Defense of his Innocence; the Name subscribed to the Title Page is so
great, that I should be afraid to proceed, but that I am resolved not to be
known; and therefore if any thing falls from my Pen indecent or disrespectfull,
he must excuse it as a privilege claimed by Authors, especially of Books that
have no Name to them.

To begin at the end; for what purpose was that Pamphlet printed?

It could not be for the good of the Nation, as a means for consumption of
Paper; for, as I have been told, that is a French Commodity.

It could not be for the Bookseller's profit only, for a reason to be guessed
at.

It could not be for the sake of that Lord's Memory, or any of his surviving
Relatives; for no Man will think it a service to them, to renew the thoughts of
that unhappy accident in so noble, ancient, and worthy a Family. In truth, the
whole Treatise is nothing but a painting to the life the too deep concern of
that Branch on it in a weak as well as criminal Enterprise; for what else does
signify the Expression, page 4. that being present at a Consult of Traitors a
second time, or oftener, raises a strong suspicion, that the party who does so,
likes it, consents to it, and approves it; or else he would have forborne after
his having been once amongst them. And many other such Expressions there are
with the like Reflections, as page 7. that Rumsey and Sheppard, the two first
Witnesses, etc. raise a strong suspicion upon my Lord, and make it probable
that he was guilty. And in the same Page the Author seems to agree him guilty
of Misprision. And page 17. he re-publishes the Evidence of Rumsey, that there
was a consent, and this the Author agrees to be High Treason; but he then
endeavors to invalidate the Credibility of that Evidence, by showing the
wildness of his own memory. Now how this could serve the Reputation of the
Deceased, or cure the Resentment of his Relations upon that account, I confess
my self utterly unable to imagine. Nor can any Reader suppose the Title
verified by the Book, viz. A Defense of Innocence, when there is not one word to
be read of it but in the Frontispiece. Surely there is no thanks due to the
Author from that Family, no more than was an extraordinary Fee due to that
Lawyer who pleaded for a Defendant to this effect: My Client, I must confess,
is a Wag, but not so great a Wag as the Counsel of the other side would
represent him; their proof is very strong, but not so strong as they would
boast it to be; our Defense is but dark and weak, but not so weak as they would
argue it. So that the Book could not be writ for a Service to that Family,
unless a concession of Guilt can be called a Vindication of Innocence.

It could not be for the sake of the Government; for it can never be deemed a
politic Service to rake into old Sores, when lenifying and moderate methods
are more advisable; and if every thing should be re-published which has given
disgust to the People, few would escape the lash, the righteous themselves
would scarcely be saved, for abundance of them have tript either in their
public or private conversation, and some in both, and that notoriously too: I
name no Body. Besides, the Government must of necessity never allow the
Doctrines divulged in this Pamphlet, unless it is intended that its being and
continuance shall be as precarious as a Beneplacito Judgship, and as dependent
upon the Peoples humor as that is upon the King's: nor can any Government
countenance and encourage the Arraignment of a considerable number of wealthy
worthy Citizens, with the Printed Censure and Insinuation of their being a
parcel of corrupt, ignorant, injudicious, dishonest and partial Fellows, and
this is done to the full, when said, that the contrary would have sworn to a
not guilty, or at least wise they should, if the Author had been there. But
most of his Readers are of another opinion, notwithstanding the second Letter,
page 7.

It could not be for the sake of popular Applause; for it is thought, that the
Treatise will never deserve or procure it, especially if you take it in pieces,
and consider them apart, and with sober Reflections. So that no Man can tell
what it was writ for.

When the Title of the Book, and Name of the Author was first published,
Mankind was full with a pregnant expectation of some rare, abstruse, uncommon
Learning upon the Point of Treasons with which the World was before
unacquainted. No Man looked for a Preachment concerning the Body and Blood of
our Savior, the World to come, and the Guards of Heaven, as Topics proper for
an Animadversion upon that Trial, especially from such an Author. But there is
nothing strange under the Sun

The Preface is an Encomium upon the Author himself, declaratory of his
readiness for public Services, and seems to be calculated for a Cooler, or a
Defense against the Heats and Rigors of an harsh and oppressive Government, for
an help to such as may possibly hereafter fall into the like danger and
trouble: and to teach the People the fear and jealousy of a possibility of
such Occurrences again, can never be thought a public Service. As to part of
the Preface, it is so dark, that a slender understanding can never reach the
sense of it, I mean that long Paragraph, The Copies of, etc.

The first Letter begins with a seeming show of a bold resolution in the Author
to perform the Duty of a Friendly Council, maugre all the inconveniences that
might happen to himself thereby. But it concludes with an extraordinary caution
and care to prevent all danger, even to such a degree as much diminishes the
credit of that invincible and heroic Resolution at first boasted of. And if
his Courage had been so strong, why were not these Letters published formerly,
and in times when in the Author's judgment there was more occasion for their
use, than the present can possibly afford? But rather it may be again asked why
are they Printed at all, the Observations contained in them having been Printed
not above 500 times already, and perhaps with as much advantage? Was it a
Secret to the World, that a variance between the Indictment and the Evidence
might be alleged on the general Issue? Did no Man in Town know that Treason
and the Misprision of it are different Crimes? Is the distinction between them
such a new invention, and so very useful, as to be an equivalent for the want
of Council in capital Trials, as the Preface and Letter do insinuate, if they
do any thing? Who ever doubted, but that proofs of Treason must not be by hear
say or argument only? Was it ever a question for this hundred years, but that
every Indictment of Treason must contain an Overt Act? Or that less than two
Witnesses was allowable for proof of that Crime? Or did any Man ever scruple
but that Keble's Statute-Book contains a true Copy of the 13. Car. 2. cap. 1.
which requires Witnesses credible? Now if these Questions must be answered in
the Negative, how can the advice of these Letters be assistant to a better
Defense, than was known long since?

The Book it self begins with Stories of Transubstantiation of Bodies, and
Transmigration of Souls, as much to the purpose, as the Parson's Text was to
his Doctrine, who preached upon the certainty of a day of Judgment from that
Verse in Genesis, And Adam knew Eve, and she conceived, etc. But perhaps the
Author intended all that first Page for a Flourish, and to entice his Reader
into a patient perusal of what follows, and prejudice him against the Sheet he
pretends to answer. He is very frank in styling it a Libellous Pamphlet, and
the Author some rank bigoted Papist; but to what purpose no Man can divine,
unless it were to expose him to the rage of the Mobile; but his Name was never
posted, and so he is safe from that danger.

The Assertions are two, that there was neither Charge nor Proof, that the
Indictment and Evidence were both insufficient.

I must confess, that it would be a mighty Addition to the Liberty of the
Subject, to have the Law established, and declared to be what the late Judge
does argue it is; for then there would be a freedom for Malcontents to
endeavor their own satisaction by Conspiracies and Consults, and that with
impunity. But as the Law was, and always has been taken to be, an English
Subject has very little color for his pretense to such a privilege as that
Doctrine gives.

The Indictment is, that at such a place and time he did compass and imagine
not only to deprive the King of his Government and Royal State, but to kill and
put him to death, and to procure a miserable Slaughter amongst the King's
Subjects; and to subvert the Government of England, and to raise a Rebellion
against the King. Then follows, That to fulfill and perfect these Treasons and
traitorous Imaginations, he, together with other Traiters, did then and there
with them traitorously consult, conspire, conclude and agree to raise a
Rebellion, and to seize and destroy the Guards of the King's Person, contra,
etc. Now whether these last acts be not a natural and genuine Evidence of the
former, let any rational Man judge. But I will particularly prove, that this
Indictment was sufficient to warrant the Judgment which the Court gave, and
pronounced upon a Verdict, that the accused was guilty of that Fact in the
Indictment, and then answer the Objections started against it.

First, there is a sufficient Treason alleged. And secondly, here is a
sufficient Overtact; both these I Will agree are necessary, and if either were
wanting, the Indictment was naught. Now it must be agreed to me, that the first
is clear and plain, for by the Law to compass or imagine the death of the King,
Queen, or their eldest Son, is High Treason. It is true by the same Law some
open act of which humane Justice can take a conusance is requisite to be
proved; the very words of the Statute do expressly require it; and in truth it
is no more than what must have been, had no such words been used; for thoughts
are secret, and can never be arraigned, proved, or censured, any otherwise than
as they are discovered by some Overt act; so that that Clause requiring an
appearance of the compassing and imagination by some Overt Act or open Deed, is
no more than would have been impliedly requisite, had the Clause been omitted.
It Is the imagination and compassing which is the Treason, that alone is the
Crimen lesae Majestatis, which is prohibited and condemned; the Overt Act is
not the Treason, that is only a necessary Circumstance, without which no Court
can ever take conusance of the other. And it is necessary to allege some such
Deed, a necessitate rei, without respect to the words of that Statute. I insist
the longer upon this, because it is used as an Objection, that the Clause of
proveably attaint by, etc. is restrictive, whereas it is not so: for it is only
to make that first specified Treason of Imagination and Compassing to be a
thing intelligible and triable; and farther to prove this, it is considerable,
that this Requisite of the Overt Act is of use and necessity barely, and only
in the case of that which is first mentioned, viz. Compassing; for the other
sorts of Treason are Acts themselves whereof notice may be had, as levying War,
violating the Queen's Bed, and the like; and in an Indictment you need only
allege the Facts themselves, as that there was a War levied, there was a
carnal knowledge had, and the like. And this farther appears from the very Form
of Indictments used ever since that Statute; for there never was an Indictment
(and if there were, it could never be good) barely averring an Overt Act
without an express allegation of the Compassing.

Then the matter results solely into this Question, Whether the Fact here laid
be naturally and necessarily declaratory of the Parties Imagination to destroy
the King; for if so, the Indictment is undoubtedly good; and it can never be
called a constructive Treason, or a thing devised by the Judge's Iterpretation
of the Statute; for they adjudge no more Treason, than what the Statute
declares, and that is an Imagination of the King's Death; now whatsoever is
significative of a Man's intention or imagination, is a sufficient Overt-deed
to demonstrate that that Man had such intention or imagination; and whatsoever
is expressive or significative of a Man's intending, compassing, or imagining of
the King's Death, is a sufficient Overt act to prove and make such a Man a
Traitor within this Law. Now that a Consult about, and an Agreement and
Conclusion actually to seize the King's Guards, and raise a Rebellion, are a
natural and genuine Declaration, that the Person who did so consult, agree and
conclude, did compass and imagine the Death of the King, is surely plain
enough; for a Rebellion, if succesfull, can determine in nothing else but the
King's Death, either Natural or Civil, which is all one within this Law; now he
that designs and intends the necessary means naturally conducing to a
particular end, that Man may certainly be said to intend and design that end,
Causa Causae est Causa Causati. If the Deed tend and conduce to the Executionof
the Treason, that is a sufficient overt Act says Coke 3. Inst. 12. and in the
same Book, fol. 6. he has these Words, That he who declares by overt Act to
depose the King, is a sufficient overt Act to prove that he compasses and
imagines the Death of the King; and so it is to imprison the King, to get him
into his Power; and to manifest the same by some overt Act, this is also a
sufficient overt Act for the intent aforesaid.

In 3 Inst. p. 12. it is held that a Preparation by some overt Act to depose the
King, or take the King by force and strong hand, or to imprison him till he
has yielded to certain Demands, that is a sufficient overt Act to prove the
compassing and imagination of the King's Death; for that this, upon the matter,
is to make the King a Subject, and to despoil him of his Regal Office; and so
he says it was resolved by all the Judges of England, Hill. 1. Jac. 1. in the
Case of the Lord Cobham, Lord Gray, Watson and Clark, Seminary Priests; and so
he tells us in the same place, that it had been resolved by the Justices in the
Case of the Earls E. and S. Now if we consider the reason why these were overt
Acts of Treason, 'twill appear to be only because of their natural tendency to
the accomplishment of that particular Treason of compassing, which holds the
same in the Author's Case as well as in those there mentioned.

A Conspiracy with a Foreign Prince is agreed by my Lord Coke, ib. 14. to be
Treason, if it be to invade the Realm; and an overt Act of such practice to be
a sufficient overt Act of a compassing the King's Death; and the reason is,
because such Actions cannot be thought to be intended for any other purpose:
and yet that particular Act may be accomplished, and it may so happen, as that
the King's Death may not follow, and yet they are overt Acts of that
treasonable Imagination because of their conduciveness and tendency thereto.
The Case of Cardinal Poole was, writing a Book of the Pope's Supremacy, in
which were contained Incitements of Charles the Emperor to an Invasion of this
Realm; and that was held an overt Act of imagining the King's Death. In the
Lord Cobham's and Sir Walter Rawleigh's Case, a Conspiracy, Consult and
Agreement to promote an Insurrection and procure an Invasion, was held an overt
Act, 1 Jac. 1. and their meeting, consulting and agreeing, was laid as an overt
Act, though discovered before the thing took effect. Dr. Story's Case, which is
mentioned by the Lords Dyer and Coke, was no more than a Practice or Persuasion
to promote an Insurrection and Invasion, and the overt Act that was alleged
was the Writing of Letters for that purpose; which is no more influential
toward it, nor so much, as frequently meeting, consulting and conspiring, and
at last concluding and agreeing to make an Insurrection. The Case of Mr.
Coleman was no other; for whatsoever the Indictment laid, the Evidence was
only of Letters to the like effect (as to this point) with those of Dr. Story;
and the Case of Dr. Story was before the 13 Eliz. which made a new Treason
during her Life; for the Trial was in Hillary Term, and the Parliament did not
begin till April following. A Machination or Agreement to raise a Rebellion
naturally tends to the Destruction both of King and People; and an Advice to it
has been adjudged so: as in the Reign of Hen. 4 one Balshal going from London,
found one Bernard at Plow in the Parish of Ofley in the County of Hertford;
Balshal told him that King Ric. 2. was alive in Scotland, (which was false, for
he was then dead) and advised him to get Men, and go to King Richard: in Mich.
3 Hen. 4. Rot. 4. you will find this adjudged Treason. Throgmorton's Case is as
plain, for his was only a Conspiracy to levy War within this Realm; he did not
join in the Execution, and the Conspiracy alone was declared to be a sufficient
overt Act by the Judges; It Is no Answer to it, to say, that a War was
afterward levied, for quoad him 'twas a bare Consult; his Offense was no more
than that In Sir Henry Vane's Case, meeting and consulting were alleged and
held to be overt Acts. The Case of Constable, mentioned in Calvin's Case, was
only an Act tending to deposing the Queen, as dispersing Bills in the Night,
that Edw. 6. was alive and in France: and held an overt Act declarative of his
compassing her Death, and he was executed for it: and in the Report of Calvin's
Case you have several other Cases mentioned, where endeavors to draw Subjects
from their Allegiance have been adjudged overt Acts of this species of Treason,
The compassing, etc.

The word Compass in the Statute is of a larger extent than only to mean an
actual Assault on the King's Person, and an endeavor to cut his Throat; it
most certainly implies any Consult or Practice of another thing directly which
may produce that effect, as the dissuading People from their Fidelity; such was
Owen's Case in King Jac. 1. his time, in the 13th. year of that Reign: this
Advice was to this effect, That King James being excommunicated by the Pope,
might be killed by any man, and that so to do was no murder; for being
convicted by the Pope's Sentence, he might be slaughtered without a fault, as
an Executioner hangs a Criminal condemned by Law: and for this he was hanged as
a Traitor. He that denies the Title to the Crown, and endeavors to set it upon
another's Head, may do this without a direct and immediate desiring the Death
of him that wears it; (so said Saint-John in his Argument against the Earl of
Strafford;) and yet this is Treason, as was adjudged in the Case of Burton, and
in the Duke of Norfolk's Case, 13 Eliz. This denying of the Title, with
Motives, though but impliedly of Action against it, has been adjudged an overt
Act of Compassing the King's Death, as it was in John Sparhawke's Case, Pasch.
3. Hen. 4. Rot. 12. The like was the Case of John Awater, who was indicted for
a Treason of that nature in Kent, and the Indictment removed into B. R. Trin.
18. Ed. 4. see Rot. 17. and he was thereupon afterward out lawed as a Traitor;
and so was Thomas Heber at the same time; and words significative of an actual
Intention have been held so, as are the Opinions of Yelver. 107.197. Aarthur
Crohagan's Case, Cro. Car. 332. and abundance of others might be named as they
are reported in our Law Books, but I do not particularly mention them, for that
their Authority in some of them is very slender, and may be ill used, to the
straining of rash and unadvised Words into a signification of a man's
compassing, when perhaps the man never thought as he spoke: however all of them
do evince, that advised and deliberate Preparations moving to a danger to the
King's Person, have all along been held overt Acts of a compassing his Death;
and some of them prove, that Preparatives and Motives to the levying of a War
have been held Treason, as was Sir William Ashton of Suffolk, 31 Hen. 6.
mentioned in Cro. Car. 119. for making Ballads reflecting upon the King, and
writing Letters to the men of Kent, exciting them to rise to aid the then Duke
of York, etc. ad guerram levandam; and no mention of any War actually levied.
Germain and Taylor's Indictment has very little more in it mentioned than the
like Preparations and Incitements to a Rebellion; and yet the Treason there
laid was a Compassing of the King's Death, anno 2 Edw. 4. The Case of Thomas
Burdett, in 17 Edw. 4. as at large it appears in the same Report of Cro. Car.
amounts to no more than the Indictment in question, viz. That he compassed the
King's Death; and to accomplish that Intention, he did disperse diverse
Writings, etc. ad intentionem that the People should rise and levy War, etc.
the Judgment in that Case, Drawing, Hanging and Quartering: the like in
Collingbourn's Case, 2 Rich. 3. in the same Rep. 122. where he is indicted in
like manner, for exciting and moving the People to an Insurrection and War, and
he incurred the like Judgment; which Cases are infinitely short of this in
question: and it cannot but be wondered that any man who has read them should
question whether a consulting and conspiring about rising, and an actual
agreement and determination to rise, be an overt Act of compassing the King's
Death. In the very Trial of the Lord Stafford it is affirmed by Sir William
Jones (who was certainly of great Authority with the Author) that the meeting
and consulting together is an overt Act, though the thing agreed on be never
put in Execution; and it is there resolved by the Judges that the same Treason
may be proved by two Witnesses to several overt Acts, though one speak of Words
or Actions that were spoken or done at one time and place, and another speak of
Words or Actions at another time and place; which argues that Words, much more
a Consult and Agreement, may make an overt Act. Even in the Case of Stephen
College, in which though the Trial has been censured, yet the Indictment
never was, and in that Indictment the Treason is laid as in this Case, That he
traitorously imagined and compassed the King to depose, kill and destroy; the
overt Acts are, That he armed himself, and advised others to arm, and spoke
several Words, etc. Here was no War levied, only a Preparation, and yet that
was allowed an overt Act: and as for the Words, if they are allowed to be one,
with much more reason may Meeting, Consulting, Concluding, and Agreeing to do.

As to the Objection, Surely there is no weight in the first, which is Page 10.
that criticizes upon the word fait Act, and that it is only a meeting to agree,
and an agreement to do, but 'twas not done: Suppose they had concluded and
agreed to poison or stab, etc. according to the Opinion in that Page, this was
no Treason; for it is only agreeing and concluding upon a thing to be done, but
it is not done. He does in Page 13. argue that this can never be an overt Act
of compassing the King's Death, because levying War is a distinct species of
Treason, and a conspiring to levy War is not a levying War, and even levying
War it self cannot be assigned as an overt Act of compassing, unless the
Indictment were particularly for that: but surely another sort of Act that
favors of another species of Treason, if it naturally conduce to the
accomplishing of the first species, viz. that of compassing, it may be assigned
as an overt Act of it; and Sir Henry Vane's Case is quite otherwise, and there
a levying War was the overt Act alleged of the compassing, and allowed by all
the Judges; and all the Indictments in the West upon Monmouth's Rebellion were
so, and yet drawn by very good Advice; besides, what Answer can be given to the
Cases which I have cited, where Consults, Conspiracies, Practices, Advices,
Letters, Persuasions, and other Motives and Preparatives to an Insurrection,
have been held overt Acts of an Imagination of the King's Death, though no War
was levied, though no Insurrection was made.

It Is apparent from what was said before, that to take the King Prisoner, or to
seize his Person, is a compassing of his Death; and if so, then to sit in
Council to conspire the effecting of that, is an overt Act of a compassing the
King's Death: and this Case amounts to, that here was a Consultation to seize
upon the King's Guards, which could tend to nothing but the seizing of his
Person; and then the consequence is plain. The Author says, Page 14. If it had
but been alleged in the Indictment, that in pursuance of the Consult and
Agreement, there had been a view of the Guards, and a Report made that the
thing was feasible, this would have been more to the purpose, how much more, no
man can tell; for every Objection in the Book would have been as good against
that as this. The great Objection he seems to rely on, is, That the Law takes
no notice of them: for once I will suppose that it does not, and then let us
observe if any Argument can be drawn from thence: Perhaps the thing was not
used or known when the 25 Edw. 3. was made. Can nothing be Treason if the Plot
laid to accomplish it be concerning a thing not in esse at the time of the
Statute? Certainly it may. If several Malcontents should consult and agree and
prepare (in order to an Insurrection) to seize the Tower, Portsmouth, Hull, and
Plymouth Fort, would not this be an overt Act of Treason? and yet our Law takes
no notice of any Garrisons there or any where else; they have no relation to
the Militia, nor were there any Arms in those places in Edward 3. his time that
we read of in our Law Books: if this be otherwise. Why did not the Author
find fault wit^ Rouse's Indictment, which was tried much at the same time with
this in question. Suppose all the Gentlemen-Pensioners, Grooms of the Stole,
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, and the like, killed in the Night, and the doors
in White Hall broken up, and all the Swords, Muskets and Pistols there taken
away, and yet it happened that the King's Person was left untouched; would this
be an Act of Burglary and Murder only? We have no Law Books that take notice
of Arms at White Hall, or such Names as those Servants go by: and suppose, at
the same time, upon the Consult, that the Conspirators did move, discourse,
debate and conclude of an Insurrection, would it not then be Treason? If not,
nothing can be so, unless the King's Person be murdered or seized, and the
Statute should not have said compass or imagine, but seize or kill, etc. It
suffices then, that the Guards are in common Understanding known to be used and
employed for the Attendence upon and Preservation of his Person. If common
sense and reason be Judge, no man can think but that he who intended to move an
Insurrection and seize the Guards, had a farther design upon the King's Person;
and then it is Treason: if otherwise, a King of England is in a worse condition
than the worst and meanest of his Subjects; for a King must not, cannot in or
by our Law, assault, strike, seize, attach, or imprison in person, and
consequently cannot defend himself; and shall not his Servants, Guards and
Attendents (which are all of the same nature) wear a Sword or carry a Musket
before him? If they do so, is it not then known that they do it? If it be
commonly known to be so, does not he that seizes and destroys those Attendants,
endanger the King's Person? And if that be so, the Inference is easy. It can
never be, it will never be allowed for Law, that a seizing all the King's
Guards is only a breach of the Peace, unless we renounce the Law, and will
judge more by Inclinations and Partiships than by Reason and Precedents. As to
the distinction between an actual seizing them, and a Consult and Agreement to
seize them, what I have urged before overthrows it; and what the Author says
does not maintain it, for both have a tendency to the execution of the Treason
intended.

I will not take the pains to remark upon all the Inconsistencies of the
Concessions and Denials in the Book, they are obvious to the Readers. As to his
Quarrel at the King's Guards as an illegal thing, and terrible to the People,
somewhat of the French growth, I hope the King will always preserve them for
his own personal Preservation, notwithstanding the Author's Opinion. As to his
temporary Laws, which declare Words Treason, most part of them were affirmative
of the old Law, and were made only in complement to a new crowned Head, when
they prohibited nothing but what was before so: and for the rest, no Conclusion
could be made from them for the maintenance of his Assertion if he had repeated
them; which since he does not, nor will I.

As to the Cases cited by the Author of the Antidote (which I have mentioned,)
he agrees to Constable's Case, but does not distinguish it in its reason, from
that in dispute. He denies the Authority and Law of Dr. Story's Case, which no
body ever denied before him. He says that in the Lord Cobham's Case there were
People assembled, but gives not any Answer to what the Antidote affirmed, viz.
that the Overt Act taken notice of in the little Book called The Pleas of the
Crown, was only the conspiring to make an Insurrection. He does confess, that
in the Lord Gray's Case there was only a Conspiracy: He says, that in Sir Henry
Vane's and Plunket's Case there were several other Ingredients to mount them to
Treason, but what they were no body must learn, at least not from the Author,
for he names none of them.

He consumes half a Page in an Encomium upon the Judiciousness of that Court
which made a conscientious legal Scruple, Whether the Murder of a Mistress by
her Servant were Petit-Treason, by reason of the difference of her Gender? But
at last he tells us, That the Judges of the Common Pleas did upon much
deliberation satisfy those of the King's Bench, that Master and Mistress were
in effect but one.

In the conclusion of the first Letter he says, That Conspiring against the
King's Person is most justly taken to be to conspire against the King's Life;
but in the Book he will not allow a conspiring and agreeing to seize ( i. e.
beat and destroy) the Guards, which are ordinarily and commonly known to attend
the King's Person, to be a conspiring against his Person; which whether it be
or not, the next Trial of this Nature will determine. Now after all, what can
be a greater Reflection upon the Learning, Judgment, and Integrity of the
King's Council, Judges, and Recorder, than to declare and publish in Print,
that the first prosecuted, the second tried, and the last condemned a Gentleman
as a Traitor, when the Charge had nothing in it of that nature: If true, the
bare Printing it is unbecoming the -- But as for their Reputations, let them
justify themselves. The reason of my undertaking to explode such a Reflection,
was my own and every Man's Duty to the present Government, (the King and
Queen's Majesty's being both concerned, and eminently too, in the consequence
of such Doctrines) and a love to my Countrymen, that they may not presume upon
the Authority of such a defense; for if they do, they may find their Mistake,
when noozed through the power of Truth, the contrary Opinion.

As to the Proof I will not rake into it, since the Author has represented too
much of its strength, and de mortuis nil nisi bonum, it can never be thought a
grateful Province to debate or convince of Guilt; but yet I may say so much,
that there was Evidence enough to justify All concerned in the Prosecution and
Trial, though for several Reasons the Attainder is fit to be reversed, but
hardly for those which this Author mentions.

Since the writing of this Sheet, there came to my hands a Treatise calling it
self The Lord Russel 's Case, which savours more of Policy than Law, and his
Topics are the Rights of the People and Power of Parliaments; they argue the
Author to be a greater Statesman than Lawyer, and therefore much too great for
me to encounter; and a Debate concerning the Heads he insists on is neither
safe nor allowable without doors. I shall make but three Remarks on what he
says: First, He may assure himself, That that Power from which he argues his
Law, is now apparently lodged in the Commonalty, not in the Nobility. Secondly,
The King's Solicitor (whom he reflects on) twittered more Reason and Law than
yet has been or ever will be answered: And thirdly, The Indictment contained
no new constructive Treason, but only that which was plainly and directly
declared in and by the 25 Edw. 3. if the Letters of it make Words, and the
Words Sense, and one Man may be allowed able to read them as well as another.

Since the writing of the last Paragraph, there came to my hands another
Pamphlet written by a new Observator; but I suppose the Judges that shall be
will correct that sort of Licentiousness which he assumes in his Remarks: which
if they do not, they will have fine easy places on it as well as their
Predecessors; and much good may it do them.

Aetas parentum pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Horat. A Second Vindication of the Magistracy and Government of England, by
way of Answer to the several Replies, etc.
IT is very observable, that since the late Revolution, nothing has more
disturbed our Peace than the Liberty of the Press: and amongst all our new
Prints, the most malignant and mischievous Libels on the present Government,
have been written by those Lawyers who pretend themselves the greatest Zealots
for its Honor and Service, which may besuspected as false, unless it be
withal considered, that some modern Royallists have nothing recommendatory of
themselves, but the Miscarriages of others and others of them have such great
ones of their own, that an Extenuation or Excuse is impossible, and therefore
to cloud their own Deformities they would blacken other Men's Reputations, and
in order to it they have censured Innocence, and arraigned Laws; and where a
slip or fault has been, though so small as scarcely to deserve the name of
one, they have magnified it into an execrable Villainy; and for a color of such
their Calumny and Slander, they have vented new Gospel and Law both: nay, they
have broached such Notions to the World, as are directly fatal to that Crown of
which they boast themselves the Makers and Supporters, and yet in doing so they
pretend to merit --

It is strange but true, for the Fact is plain, and the Consequence too: upon
the present Change, the Republicans of both Gowns did deem it their Policy and
Interest to bespatter and reproach other Men's Actions; and, like base and mean
Spirits, gave ill names and words to every thing in which themselves had not
been concerned, and made Reviling so customary, that it is become the modish
Sin of the Age. It is most certain the old English Honor, Frankness,
Ingenuity, and good Nature, is quite abandoned from some Companies and places
in the Town, and instead of Folly, we have assumed a Vice in our common
Conversation, instead of Drollery and Banter, the new fashioned Wit at -- 's
allows nothing as acceptable but Lying and Slander; nay the very Spark of a
Courtier has changed his Note: Whereas fulsome, gross, and false Flattery was
wont to be his Talent, he is now got to the other Extreme, i. e. revengefull,
weak, and false Characters, both of Persons and Actions: Which is the worst is
difficult to determine, but Falsehood is the most predominant humor in both;
and that Age is surely unhappy which is plagued with a Surfeit of either,
especially when the Excess is so great as now, that no Gentleman can be thought
a good Companion, no Clergyman a true Protestant, no Lawyer an honest
Englishman, no Courtier a faithful Servant, unless he can, and do rail and
snarl, and scold, and that at things that were justly used in former times, and
must necessarily be used in these times, and will be so in all times
whatsoever, even in Secula Secorum: these little stinging Animals do value
themselves upon their Honesty, because they find Faults, but it is in cases
where no Eye can spy them but their own; they value themselves upon their Wit,
because their censures are sharp and biting, but that is so easy, so very
easy a Province, that Nature teaches even the rudest of her Breed to be
satirical, and the Natural oftentimes out-does the pretended Scholar in
Ribaldry, and has perhaps a better faculty that way than Fancy and Picquancy
of reflection.

Now as the Fact is thus criminal and ridiculous both, so must the Consequence
prove fatal to the Government which they would be thought (but intend not) to
support; for when once resolved to arraign all past proceedings, they are
forced for the maintenance of such their reflections to vent those Opinions,
Doctrines and Rules in Divinity and Law, which have in every Age (save one)
been justly exploded as destructive to the honor and being of the then
Possessors of the Crown; and can conduce to no other end than the utter
Subversion of this, and every other Government that does but smell of a
Monarchy.

It cannot be denied but in most Reigns there have been some occasions given
for Disgust to the People, that Kings have born too hard upon their Subjects,
that the Subjects have worthily complained of some Warps from the Law, but no
Man ever with Sense pretended that this is a Reason to induce a Belief, that
every Act of State, and every Judgment of Law in former times was Arbitrary and
Unwarrantable: No surely, the Publishers of such Reflections are of another
thought themselves; and some folks imagine, they who formerly were engaged in
Seditious Practices against the Crown, would now upon the present occasion
explode that Law which does condemn such Practices, that they may with impunity
repeat them whenever the King or his Ministers shall chance to disoblige them,
and that this is the true reason of half the new Libels and Invectives upon
past Proceedings.

It is now apparent to all Mankind, that every Line, or at least Page, of some
Men's Works are designed only as a Courtship to the Mobb, by bridling the
Sovereignty, and clipping the Prerogative, even to such a degree, as does
absolutely deprive it of those Rights, Powers, and Authorities, which the
ancient Law, continued usage, and our present Representatives consent to allow
it.

To check this growing itch of Pamphleting the Nation into another Change, and
to vindicate the Rights of the Crown, and justify the Magistracy of England
from the obloquy which was industriously thrown on it in one Particular: there
was three Months since, a Sheet Printed and Published, at which some Men took
offense, but others were of Opinion, that its Publication was seasonable and
well timed; that its reflection on the trifling defense which it assumed to
answer, were just and smooth, and very soft, considering the occasion given for
a more Satirical Style from the fondness and incoherence of the Defenders
expressions and inferences, and that the mode of managing his Argument, was
modest and tender, with a decent and due regard to the memory of the
unfortunate deceased, which had suffered more than enough of Injury by that
pretended Justification.

A Choleric and Sedulous Enquiry has been made after the Author's Name, but
the inquisitor is still at a loss, notwithstanding his confidence of a certain
knowledge who it was that came behind and struck him, etc. But to give him some
satisfaction, after all his fatigue in searching, I will ascertain who it was
not; he may assure himself that none concerned in that Trial, were concerned or
privy to its Vindication, and when it was Composed and Writ, the Party intended
it chiefly for his own and the World's diversion, from the ungrateful
necessity of Reading always on one side, by the interposal of a few Lines on
the other; that our Humors might not be quite sowred, and our Genius turn too
peevish through the influence of Satyr and Libel, with which the World has too
much abounded of late years; nor had there been one word more published upon
that Subject, but that the Authority of the Defender does challenge a
Vindication, and the word of a Priest says that it needs one; both shall have
an answer presently.

But first it is remarkable, that this new Reply has got a License, when none
of his other elaborate Works could procure one; however, it is possible that
the Licenser may hereafter renounce, or retract his Allowance in this case, as
he has done in several others already, when his Superiors are acquainted with
the Contents and Tendencies of that to which he has given his Imprimatur; for
it is not to be supposed, that Ministers of State will ever be so incurious of
their Master's Honor, and the Rights of his Crown, as to approve their
diminution, when once they perceive it.

The single Point which the Advocate for Magistracy assumed to maintain, was
that the Indictment in question was Legal and Good, sufficient both for matter
and form, and did warrant the Judgment which was pronounced upon the Verdict
that affirmed its truth; this seems the principal Assertion in that Paper,
which whether his Precedents and Authorities, Arguments and Reasons, are
sufficient to prove, the Reader must judge; that the Cases he cites are truly
reported for so much as he uses them, none can deny, and that the Law is with
them upon the whole matter, shall be farther evinced.

But since that Sheet has made some noise amongst angry Men, (which was little
expected by him that wrote it,) it will not, I hope, be thought impertinent to
spend a few Paragraphs upon the boisterous and blustering Invectives and
Remarks made against its Author in a pretended Reply. In his Vindication
therefore I shall observe, the Temper, the Wit, the Guess, the Reason, the
Religion, and lastly, the Law of that Replication.

As to the Temper, it seems to be writ under some disappointment, for the
Author does in every Sentence declare his Passion, and plainly tells us that he
was then discomposed; but whether his displeasure were conceived at a past or
present Chief, is not so easy to determine: To expose his fury, it is enough
to repeat his Epithets of Daring, Bold, Impudent, Presumptuous, Base,
Ingenerous, Insolent, etc. and all this despised by his reputed Author, and
smiled at by the real one. He is pleased to call the Sentence and Execution a
plain Murder, which if so, sure I am that he is bound in Conscience to
Prosecute an Indictment against the Judges, the Recorder, the Grand and the
Petit Jury, the Witnesses, the Clerks, the Sollicitors, the Jailer, the
Sheriffs, and the Executioner, for they were all concerned either as
Accessories, or Principals, and demerit a Halter if the Repliant's Opinion be
Law; but it is observed amongst Honest Men, that none of these Parties show any
fear on it; and the reason they give for it is, because the Indictment was as
good as their Jurisdiction, and the concurrence of those two makes them as safe
as an Act of Indemnity can do: but all this was Passion.

As to the Wit on it, most of his Readers are at a loss where to find it, unless
it be in his English Verses, which do so hit the sense of the Original, and
contain such strong and pregnant flights of English Poetry, that some of his
Readers have compared them even with Sternhold and Hopkins; and others are of
Opinion that they do not come short of the Essays of the two Gray's Inn Poets,
one of which Translated Grotius, de Veritate Christianae Religionis, and the
other Coke upon Littleton into Rhyme, but the generality do declare that for
Height of Fancy, Propriety of English, and Exactness of Rhyme, he has much
outdone all those: but for my part I believe that last Rhapsody was added not
so much for the Ingeny sake, as to menace the Answerer with a design to
Sacrifice him whenever an occasion should offer it self, and consequently to
do what the whole Book complains of; but that Advocate is not so much a Coward
as to be afraid on it.

As for the Guess, it is very cunning, and argues more Figure Knowledge than
true Judgment in Styles, Modes, Dialects, or Peculiarities of Speech, or
Writing, for he will have the Author of that Sheet, to be the Author of the
Antidote, though he never saw it till he had the misfortune to have read the
Defense; and his particular Idioms are as different from those of the Antidote,
as they are from those of the Defense; but this is all guess. He will have it
one of the Council of that Trial, because he has put Council before Court: a
Cunning Man would have guessed the contrary, as supposing it done fallendi
gratia, for the sake of disguise; but he may be assured it was mere accident
that occasioned that fault. He will have it to be the then Solicitor, because
of his Reputation, which is supposed to be touched in that Defense: but his
Readers think that that Gentleman's Figure for Learning, Honor, and Virtue is
so far above the reach of a little Pamphlet, that all the virulent Reproaches
of the Reply cannot Sully it, nor is it in the power of any Tongue or Pen to
prejudice his Character in the World; but however it is prudent to suppose to
my self an eminent Adversary, that if a Foil be my fortune, it may be the
easier.

But since we are guessing, the World guesses that he who wrote the Reply, did
write the half Sheet called the Justification; and it is really sportive to
read the Justifier, commending the Denfender for a learned worthy Person; and
the Repliant doing the same good Office for the Justifier, and almost in the
same words commending him: nay, he spends a whole Page in the fulsome Praises
upon that Small Bulk Author, and rejoices that the Work was done to his Hands,
which is a very pretty jest. It is at most but R. for A. and A. for R. and R.
A. still, which is much better than the contrary practice, of which some
Authors have been guilty.

As to the Reasoning part, the Reader must excuse my brevity, for in truth
there is very little in it of that nature; however a few remarks may quicken
and revive that faculty against the next turn. The Advocate owns it to be writ
in answer to his Defense, ergo it reflects upon the Nation's Wisdom. He
expresses a Resentment at my Lord Russel's engaging in such a weak and criminal
Enterprise, ergo he reflects upon the Nation's Justice. He names the Lord
Russel, (though with the most tender Appellations that could be used,) ergo he
reflects on that Lord's memory. He vindicates the Indictment as good, ergo he
justifies all the Proceedings in that Case. He argues that the Sentence was
legal upon such a Verdict, ergo he is against the Reversal. He puts a Case,
offers a Point, and makes a Proof on it, ergo he is transcendently impudent.
These, and such like, are the inferences, and do demerit a Laugh.

As to Religion, I see none in it, unless it be in the mention of the Devilish
Powder Plot, which is still as much to the purpose of his Reply, as the story
of Transmigration of Souls was to that of his Defense; only Meekness is
transparent in his Style, Humility in the Title Page, and true Christian
Charity in his Menaces of an exception out of the Act of Indemnity, which he
repeats three or four times at least, as if his whole interest were designed to
promote it. The Gentleman's Danger is from public and scandalous Actings in
the Eye of the World; which were (says he) laboring to Support the Government,
every Man knows what sort; lashing the innocent with a bitter and sharp Tongue,
and inveigling of Juries with Rhetorical flourishes. Now to examine a little
these three monstrous Transgressions, let us go backwards. As to the last, a
Duty can never be a Crime; every Servant owes Truth to his Master, while such:
every Advocate is to do his utmost, and a failure in it had deserved both the
worst of Names, and Punishment, which the Repliant could invent, or his
interest procure. For all Mankind must agree, that the now Servants of the
present Crown are obliged to do the like upon the like occasion; if otherwise,
the Jacobites side will be the safest. I will not reflect on the weakness of
the Juries that were thus inveigled, if any such there were, but rather suppose
that the Oaths of Witnesses, not the Pleading of Council, did govern their
Consciences. As to the second, that is false, and needs no other answer. As to
the first, the Gentleman's Honor and Merit afterward, is as remarkable as his
Fault at first, if it were any; but however he is likely to have abundance of
Company, in Desert at least, if not in Censure: for a Duke of York's Creature
is certainly as culpable as a King James's Servant. And Andrew Marvel's
Characters in his growth of Popery, will be as true a Directory to decypher
Criminals as the four Volumes of noted Trials. And perhaps if the Ordinance of
May 10. 1650. should chance to be revived, danger and fear may seize other Men,
as well as those that served past Governments; it is therefore thought
advisable for all to sit down quiet, and forgive and forget what is past, but
serve God and their Majesty's for the future, and not belabour the excepting
one another; for if any should be such Fools, the Knaves will get the better of
it, and the righteous scarcely be saved. So much for Religion.

Now for the Law if we can find it: But because the Defender seems somewhat
displeased at the repetition of that unhappy Lords name, whose Case gives
occasion for the present question. Let us therefore put it like Mooters, John a
Styles was indicted, for that he, at such a time and place, did compass to
deprive his Natural Lord the King, that then was, of his Regal State, and to
destroy his Life, and to subvert the Government, and raise a Rebellion, and to
fulfill that imagination, he, together with others, did then and there consult
and agree to raise a Rebellion against the said King, and to seize and destroy
the Guards of the said King's Person, contrary to, etc. The question was not
whether J. S. was Guilty? nor, If the Witnesses swore false? Whether his
Attainder were fit to be reversed? But the dispute was, Whether that Indictnent
were legal? Whether supposing J. S. to be found Guilty, the Court that
pronounced the Sentence of Treason against him, ought to have arrested such
Judgment on the motion of J. S. that the Indictment was insufficient? The Sheet
argues that the Indictment was good, and consequently the Sentence pursuant
thereto was warrantable by the Laws of this Land. The Argument seems founded
both upon the Reason of Things, and the Authority of Precedents.

First, The Reason alleged was, that the last part, which in Lawyers terms is
called an Overt Act, was a natural and genuine Sense or Declaration, or Overt
signification of the first part, which is an internal secret Thought, i. e. the
Imagination and Compassing, which is the Treason prohibited and condemned. That
the latter directly and consequentially tending and conducing in the common
Sense and Reason of all Mankind, (excepting the Denfender, and two or three
more,) to the accomplishment of the former, makes a good and sufficient charge
within the Stat. Ed. 3. A Repetition is tedious, and an Abbridgment is scarcely
possible, the whole Sheet being but a Breviate, I shall therefore refer you
thereto.

Secondly, The Authorities there urged, are either the Opinions of Judges and
other Lawyers, or Precedents of Indictments of the like, or the same nature,
from which the Legality of this may be justly concluded: The substance of them
on the whole matter is, that Overt Acts to depose the King, or despoil him of
his Regal Office, or take him by Force or strong Hand, or to imprison his
Person till he yields to the demands of those who practice such endeavors, are
sufficient Overt Acts to prove the Compassing and Imagination of his Death.
That levying War, causing an Insurrection, promoting an Invasion; nay, that
Consults, Conspiracies, Practices, Advices, Letters, Persuasions, and other
Motives, and Preparations to an Insurrection, or Invasion, though none succeed,
have been held Overt Acts of Imagining the King's Death. I will not repeat the
Cases, but as occasion offers from the other side.

The Objections there mentioned and answered from the Penning of the Statute,
are too trivial to deserve a remembrance, nor would they have ever been thought
otherwise, but that J. S. was a Noble Person, and the Defender a great Man, and
the Prefacer thought so too, either by himself or others. These and such like
ingredients have made some semblance of difficulty: and in truth, had there
been a real doubt in the Case, the Author of the Remarks on that Trial, who
wanted neither Sense nor Will to censure it, had his Opinion so inclined, I
say, he would certainly have fallen foul on it in those invidious Observations
of his upon the late Times. He quarrels with the Legality of the Jurors, the
Defender with that of the Indictment, and both with the evidence. The Author
of the Sheet differs from them in the two first, but aggrees with them in the
last, that Testimony delivered for fear of Life, or hopes of Pardon or other
Reward, is hardly creditable; but that is not the Point. Let us see if the
Replication does overthrow the Charge as insufficient; and for my part I cannot
find a Line of Argument in it, but only it is naught, because it is naught. The
consulting and concluding to make an Insurrection and Rebellion, and seize the
King's Guards, is not a Declaration of the Party's compassing the King's
Deposal or Death, and why? Because conspiring to levy War is not a levying War,
and levying War is a distinct Treason; this is the substance of the tenth Page,
if I can read: The Sheet said truly, That levying War it self might be alleged
as an Overt Act of Compassing, and has been so frequently, and meeting and
agreeing to rebel and seize the Guards, has a direct tendency to promote a
Demise of the King either natural or civil, and therefore might as well be
alleged an Overt Act as most things whatsoever.

I had almost forgot one Clause, and that is the unnecessariness of making 13
Car. 2. if it should be as the Advocate argues; I suppose he means the first
Paragraph, for the second is agreed to be introductive of a new Law, etc. but
the first is only a Paraphrase upon the 25 Ed. 3. It is thus, That if any
Person or Persons whatsoever, shall within the Realm or without, compass,
imagine, invent, devise, or intend death or destruction, or any bodily harm
tending to death or destruction, maim or wounding, imprisonment, or restraint
of the person of our Sovereign Lord the King, or to deprive or depose him from
the style, honor, or Kingly name of the imperial Crown of this Realm, or of
any other his Majesty's Dominions or Countries, or to levy war against his
Majesty within this Realm or without, or to move or stir any Foreigner or
Serangers with force to invade this Realm, or any other his Majesty's Dominions
and Countries being under his obeisance, and such compassings, imaginations,
inventions, devices, or intentions, or any of them shall express, utter, or
declare, by any printing, writing, preaching, or malicious advised speaking,
being legally convicted thereof, by the Oaths of two lawful and credible
Witnesses upon Trial, or otherwise convicted or attainted by due course of
Law; then every such, etc. shall, etc. Now what is this but a confirmation of
the old Statute in words at length; which was agreed to be so in the House of
Commons, 1 Jac. 2. when a motion was made to renew that Law, the Lawyers Answer
was, that the 25 Ed. 3. did the same thing, and a Man may boldly say it, that
here is nothing declared Treason, but what had been adjudg'd so before, and
Attainders and Executions had pursuant to it: The Sheet mentions Cases enough,
and to the purpose, though some think otherwise; but I Will not repeat them.

In the 11th Page the Reader is referred to the justification in the half
Sheet; and therefore let us examine that a little: a third part of it is spent
upon the Evidence, but that is not within my Province, which is only to
vindicate the Vindication: As to the rest, the force of it, if any, seems only
to be founded on his first Assertion, the conspiring to do a thing is not the
doing a thing, and he quotes two great Men's Names for it, I would have agreed
that, though he had spared the Authority to justify it; but this is
sufficiently answered in the Sheet: He offers an Argument from the late
Statutes declaring Treasons, because they were temporary, but I answer as the
Sheet does, they were in affirmance of the old Law, and I can show him three or
four temporary, and an hundred other Acts of Parliament that are so, and
therefore that is no argument at all; but I am, as the Party I justify was,
confined to a Sheet, and therefore cannot enlarge.

He lays down a Rule for construction of Statutes, that a thing particularized
in one part is not to be construed within the general words of another part,
but that Rule has near fourscore Exceptions in the Books; besides it comes not
to this Case, for here is compassing the King's Death made Treason, and declared
by Overt Act; then levying War is made Treason: Now says the Repliant, nothing
can be an Overt Act of and conduce to promote and accomplish the first, that
does any ways concern the latter, I say it is a non sequitur; for there are
several instances mentioned in the Sheet, which respect the levying War, and
yet are a genuine evidence of the intention and compassing; and if so, the
Judges who have ruled such Indictments to be good, did neither assume an
arbitrary Power, nor transgress any Rule of Law, as the half Sheet insinuates.

Then the Lord Cobham's Case is endeavored to be answered, by a Wonder that
Sir Edward Coke, late Lord Chief Justice, and then Sheriff, should differ from
Mr. Attorney Cook; for we know his thoughts in Sir Walter Rawleigh's time, and
his Speeches in Car. I. his time; they are as different each from other as the
times were, and in this particular that Gentleman has had more followers than
Precedents; but the Query is, What is Law?

Then Sir Henry Vane's Case is endeavored to be answered by this, that
Syderfin mentions not the Overt Act in the Indictment, but he does say the
Treason alleged was a compassing the King's Death, and every Man knows what
Sir Henry Vane did to accomplish that: he neither signed the Warrant to execute
that Murder, nor was he actually concerned in it; the Justifier says he does
not remember it printed any where but in Syderfin's Reports; for the
refreshment of his Memory, I Will tell him of another Book where it is, and
that is Keble's First Volume of Reports, 304. and there the Indictment is said
to be for Compassing the King's Death, and endeavoring to accomplish the
Treason, by changing and Ufurping the Government, and levying War, which Case
does directly overthrow all the Defender's, Justifier's, and Repliant's
Arguments from the distinctness or difference of the sort of Treason.

Then for Dr. Story's Case, he says it is hard to justify it for Law; whereas
there are above forty places in our printed Laws Books, where it is cited and
agreed to be Law: Now it is pretty odd, that a Case so resolved and so ratified,
should one Hundred and eighteen Years after, be arraigned in Print, for 'twas
Hill. 13. Eliz. if any thing be Law, that is so, and not distinguishable from
this Case in question, but that the Evidence was different, which the Justifier
would make a reason to invalidate this Indictment; the Logic of it passes all
understanding: besides, it is observable, that the Benches were filled both with
Learning and Integrity in 1571, and 1662, neither of those times were Tory or
Popish; and in Dyer, 298. the reason given was, That it could not tend but to
the great peril of the King's Person, and therefore an attempt to promote such
Invasion, though none followed, was adjudg'd as aforesaid. In 2. Anderson pl.
2. fo. 5. Grant's Case, 'twas held, That when any Person intends or
contriveth to levy War for a thing which the Queen by her Law or Justice ought
or may do in Government as Queen, it is not material whether they intend any
hurt to her Person; but if they intend to levy War against the Office and
Authority of the Queen, that is enough, and that resolution overthrows the
Justifier's Notion, that J. S. his design was only to defend the Laws, though
the 13 Eliz. also was then in force, it is a good Argument to answer that
pretense.

Now I have repeated and observed all the Replication or Justification offers
in answer to my Friend's Sheet, the Reader may perhaps expect some new Matter,
not so much for confirmation, as to give occasion for a farther defense. In Sir
Fr. Moor's Rep. fol. 621. pl. 849. on the Trials of the Earls of Essex and
Southampton before the then High Steward, the Justices did there resolve, that
when the Queen sent to the Earl of Essex the Keeper of her Great Seal, and
others, with a Command to him to disperse the Persons armed which he had in his
House, and to come to her, and he did refuse to do so, and continued the
Armor and Armed Persons in his House, that this was Treason; and they did also
resolve, that when he went with a Troop of Captains and others from his House
to the City of London, and there prayed Aid of the Citizens to assist him in
defense of his Life, and to go with him to Court that he might get into the
Queen's Presence, that he might be sufficiently powerful to remove from her
his Enemies who were then attendent, that this was High Treason, because it
tended to a force on the Queen, etc. I make no inference, let the Reader do
that; it is plain that an actual mental intention of hurt is not material in the
one Case or other. As the Duke of Norfolk's Case is related by Cambden in his
History of Q. Eliz. 163. the Treason which the Duke confessed, was a Plot to
seize upon the Tower of London, and deliver the Queen of Scots; and that is all.

There Is nothing remains in doubt, but the legality or illegality of the King's
keeping Guards for the preservation of his Person; they say the Law takes Care
of him, and therefore he is to take none of himself, and that the Judges are
his Guards, and therefore he needs no other, that Henry VII. was the first
other. But let us reason a little; can it be King that had any supposed, that
he should be so sacred in his Person, so great in his Power, and of such
Authority as to make War or Peace abroad, and raise Forces and suppress them at
home, as the Danger or Defense of his Realm should require, and not be able to
provide for his own Personal Safety de presenti? Can he only punish by his
Judges afterward, or prohibit by Proclamation before, but not defend himself
for the present? Is it sense to suppose it? The Kings of England might have,
and actually had Soldiers or Guards (call them what you will) even in times of
Peace, and long before Hen. VII. as well as continually since; I may be so bold
as to defy any Man to show me the Year, the Month, the Week, or the Day, since
the Conquest by William I. that England was without armed Men actually upon
Duty in some part or other of the Nation. This Sheet is not intended for a
studied Argument on this Subject; and perhaps it would be difficult to justify
a standing Army as warrantable, when there is no occasion for it; but to say he
cannot by force, even by force, provide for his own personal Safety, when he
apprehends it in danger, as every English King has continual reason to do,
especially if some Men's Doctrine prevail, it may be modestly affirmed
unreasonable: Has not every Subject power to keep Arms as well as Servants in
his House for defense of his Person? Is not his Mansion called his Castle? And
yet the Law protects him too by Prohibitions a part ante, and Punishments ex
part post: There are many Tenures in England which oblige to the annual
payment of certain Sums toward Soldiers Wages for Defense of the King and
Kingdom; there are others oblige to the annual finding certain quantities of
Grain in kind for the supplying the King's Castles and Garrisons, as well as
Household; which being annual, do demonstrate the lawfulness of their
continuance, even in times of Peace, and their being immemorial do conclude a
Common Law right in the Kings of England, to have those Occasions, as they do
conclude him a Right to have them supplied by such like Services: Nay, Grand
Serjeantry is either by Services of Attendence on the King's Person in time of
Peace, or for Military Aids, in time of War. The Crown may raise Forces by
Commission, or of the Militia, to suppress Insurrections, in Case the Civil
Power of the Sheriff is not sufficient or ineffectual. The Kings of England
have the sole Power and Force of the Nation; Complaints have been in Parliament
against Billeting Soldiers contrary to the Will of the Hosts, but never for
maintaining a Guard for their own Person at their own Charge; Complaints have
been of a standing Army, but never of a select Company for his personal
preservation; a Terror to the People may as well be pretended from his
Coachmen, Footmen, or Grooms, if their Numbers be great: Besides, for a
competent Power in Arms he always may have occasion, when his Subjects know
nothing on it; it is his Province to foresee and prevent as well as suppress and
punish domestic Tumults, and the Business of War is separately his Office, and
that exclusive of his Subjects, any otherwise than as they are bound to obey
and fight, or desired to assist with Aids and Subsidies; and for this, to avoid
a numerous Volume of Citations, I Will name one notable Roll or two in
Parliament. 6. Ric. II. Mem. 9. the manner and way of the prosecution of a War
being given in Charge to the Commons to advise upon, they answered, that this
nec doit nec solayt appertain al cux mes al Roy, and so they did, 31 Edward
III. Part. prim. n. 11. and 21 Edward III. n. 5. It Is true in 5 Edward II. n.
4. Ordinances were made, that the King without the assent of his Barons could
not make War; but those were repealed and dampened, 15 Edw. II. Parl. Rot. M.
13. because prejudicial to the Royal Power of a King; and this is sufficiently
affirmed by the Act concerning the Militia in Carol. II. his time. It is well
known in what time Bryan Chief Justice said, that if all the Subjects of
England should war with the Subjects of another Kingdom, that this is no War,
unless the King denounces it: It suffices for my Friend's Point, that the King
may lawfully have armed Men or Guards, when himself judges his Person or People
to be in danger, or stand in need of them: And that he may, when reasons of
State will not admit their publication to the World. But however foam standing
Force the Crown ever had and ever will have, though not always to such a Degree
as shall be burdensome or oppressive; and our old Law Books say that Arms as
well as Laws are necessary for the Prince, not only in but against the times of
necessity, I mean War or Tumult; besides in Bracton lib. 3. cap. 3. de Corona,
it is said, that Crimen lesae Majestatis is the greatest Crime, because of the
greatness of the Person against whom it is committed; his description of it is,
Presumptio contra personam ipsius Regis; then when he particularizes the
several sorts of Treason, the first which he names is, Si quis ausu temerario
machinatus sit in ( i. e. toward) mortem domini Regis, vel aliquid egerit vel
agi procuraverit ad seditionem Domini Regis vel exercitus sui, licet id quod in
voluntate habuerit non perduxerit ad effectum. I Will make no Inserence, there
needs no Paraphrase, the words are plain; an Act tending to the destruction of
the King's Host is High Treason against his Person, agere ad seditionem
exercitus regis est presumptio contra personam Regis, and presumptio contra
personam Regis est crimen lesae Majestatis: Now can Bracton be thought to speak
only of Treasons in time of War? Glanvil. lib. 14. c. 1. Crimen lesae
Majestatis dicitur de seditione Domini Regis, vel regni, vel exercitus; and
Fleta. lib. 1. c. 20. De seductione exercitus sui: and cap. 21. the same words,
seductionem cjus vel exercitus sui; this was the sense of the old Law, and is
very appositely applicable to the Case in question, as I could easily show,
would my Paper bear it. There is one thing which I had quite forgot, and that
is, that the Instrument of Grievances which the Prudence of the present
Parliament has provided, complains of a Standing Army; the Answer is easy,
it is not of Personal Guards, and the wise enquiry of the House of Commons into
the quantum requisite to maintain such and such Forces during the present
occasion, and of the Expenses of the Crown in Household, Courts, Guards, etc.
afterward do plainly show, that that was not the intended Grievance: Now to
sum up what is not answered at all or endeavored to be so by the Defender,
nothing is said to the reason of the thing, or the necessity and nature of an
Over-act, to the opinion of Coke in the places cited, to the Case of Sir Walter
Rawleigh, the Case of the Cardinal, the Case of Mr. Coleman, the Case of
Constable, the Case of Owen, the Case of Burton, the Cases of Sparhauke,
Awater, and Heber, the Indictment against Sir William Ashton, Germain and
Tailor, and Thomas Burdett, Collingbourne, and College, nor to the Opinion of
the Judges in the Lord Stafford's Case, as if 'twere all impertinent, but the
Reader is Judge if it be so.

Now for the Presacer, I Will be as short upon him as he was upon my Friend; he
said that the Sheet needed a vindication, and I have given it one, and if this
needs another, I hope the Crown will find a Friend to write some Third. He
seems so used to the word Libel, that he cannot forbear calling it an infamous
one; he says it has not one true material word in it; I Will remember him of one,
that Mocking is catching in the Proverb, that is A Grumbletonian in the Stirrup
generally proves a Tyrant -- in the Saddle; that is enough for him to remember:
If he wants any more truth, and that he may not say this has none in it,
Treasons are easier committed than distinguished, by some Men especially, and
the reason why I say this, is because of his Octavo Preface when he is
grumbling still, for I always thought that he had smarted too much for
Libelling on Ministers of State and Male-Administrations, to venture again; but
when a Priest meddles with Law, he is like an Apothecary at Politics, he
generally runs himself into a Noose, for he will never leave off till he is
advanced one way or another. To conclude, the design of the Sheet was to
justify the Prerogative of the King and Queen, and the Rights of their Crown;
and the Republican is angry that either should have any, and from thence flames
the Passion; nay, rather than it should be allowed, they will attempt another
change, from which good Lord deliver us. Pro. 28.2.

During the composure of the Premises, News was brought me that another Pen had
been procured to attack the Vindication, viz. The Author that runs a-muck at
all Mankind, except his own Patroons: A deserved and full remark upon so
voluminous a Book, is not here to be expected, however, this Appendix may serve
for an Advertisement to the World, that the new Repliant is in several
particulars obliged to Solicitor Coke, and the other Regicides defense on their
Trials for much of his Materials; time is wanting to show the Parallel; at
present it is fit to be observed, that his blind side also is apparent, and
consequently capable of a sufficient Answer, and to give my Reader a Specimen
thereof, I Will take notice of a few (amongst many) Mistakes, both in Fact and
Law, which he has wilfully committed. In the first Page he says, That to
justify what has been taken ill, accuses the present Government of Injustice;
which is false. In p. 2. he says, that the Vindication ventures on a point of
Law which it pretends is the result of the Evidence given; there is no such
pretense in the whole Paper, the only debate was upon the Indictment. He says
in the same Paper, that it is said his Relations were pleased with the justness
of the Trial; it only says, his Relations were pleased, and his Enemies angry
with those who then sat upon the Bench, and that is true; for some of his
Relations cannot deny it, the Fact is so well known. The last line of P. 3. and
first of the next are also false, for 'twas neither written, perused, nor
approved by any of his pretended Criminals: I believe they thought the Point
too clear to need a Vindication; but this is just like his wonted positiveness
in his Remarks, where for instance he says, that one of the Judgments he cavils
at was the first that was ever given without Argument or Reasons delivered in
Court, which is also false; for in Plowden's Comment. 459. In Sir T. Wroth's
Case, the Author takes express notice, that the reasons of the Judgment were
not disclosed when the same was pronounced; and Fifty other Cases I could name
him of the same, but one Instance is enough to falsify a general indefinite
Position, though there are several more even in that very Book.

But to run over his Volume, Page 2. is only a farther scurrilous Reflection to
vindicate his own Remarks, and an impertinent bombast of words on the Phrase of
English proceedings: The 3 P. assigns four Reasons of Printing, the two last
are applicable to himself only, and he thinks so of the fourth, or else his
Story is foolish like. -- In the 4 P. he boulsters up himself in his Railery,
by resorting to his refuge of the Parliaments Authority that reversed the
Judgment, which all Men agree to be just, but it was not because the Recorder
did not arrest the Judgment on that trivial Exception to the Indictment, but
because the Prosecution was supposed malicious, and the Evidence supposed false
or deficient, or both.

The 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10th. Pages are all impertinent to the Point in question,
and contain nothing but a Vindication of his justly condemned Clamor in his
former Book; concerning which, I Will boldly say it, in seventeen Points of
twenty he is out in his Law; if 'twere convenient to publish the proof on it, I
could make it plain. His design is to show in those Pages his Wit and Fancy,
more than Candor or Law; for my part, I am of his Friends mind that he comes
not short of the old Observator for mannaging a Dialogue: But all this is not
to the purpose, he is not come at it yet, the 12 Page savours of the same
Kidney, and 13. and 14. are no better: there he vents his Gall, and that in
Ribaldry; no softer a name than Tools can be afforded to Men of Worth and
Honor: If himself be one, as some suppose him, I am sure it is not to the
present Government, for he plainly condemns it, and declares the People, i. e.
his sort of them, unsatisfied with it, for its spatingness in vengeance; and it
is because others are not punished for maintaining the Law, and themselves not
preferred for Arraigning it: some Men know my meaning. He says he is only for
mumbling of Judges and Counsel, Causa patet.

But I must tell him two things, 1. The Incinations of Englishmen, and the Laws
of the Land, will never quadrate with a Commonwealth.

2. His supposed Criminals do not depend on their Number, but the Law, which
ought, and will justify them; if it does not pleas^, let it be changed by
Parliament, or if the Author thinks that a tedious way, let us burn all our Law
Books at once, and then perhaps his Remarks and Reply will be thought to be
Reason, and himself the greatest and only Lawyer in the Realm; but till then,
he must give others leave to know, and to say that they know, he is mistaken:
For Resolutions, and Opinions, pursuant and agreeable to the Opinions and Rules
of former Ages, I mean, frequent and repeated Precedents, approved by the
Lawyers of the Age that used them. I say these will be Law to the end of the
World, unless altered by new Statutes.

And now we are come to debate the Question, all that is past is upon the
Times, and not the Point. In p. 18, is his Reasoning part, which is no more
than was said before in, etc. To redargue him I must repeat; if therefore he
will observe what is said by the Sheet p. 22. I will say no more on it, but
submit to the Judgment of the Reader; he says the inferences are Ridiculous, I
say they are Rational and Genuine: The single Issue is, if his, or my Friends
Arguments are the most Logical and Natural, let the Reader judge.

Now for Authorty, let us see if he urges any on his side, or answers that on
the other. He admires (p. 24.) at the assurance of the Sheet Author, and others
admire at his. He says the Parliament had often adjudged it, but none can show
any Judgment in the House of Lords, or Vote of the Common House to that
purpose. I have shown the Sense of the present Parliament in the Point of
Guards, and his temporary Laws are already answered; nor would any Man but he,
and one more, pretend that they are Judgments in the Case. Surely it will not
be pretended that his Case of the Earl of Northumberland in Hen. 4. time, is
any thing to the purpose: Nor is it any Argument to say, no King of England was
ever killed for want of Guards.

Now for Cases p. 26. He says that in the Earl of Essex's Case there was an
actual War Levied, and that, as I said before, destroys the Argument from the
different sorts of Treason. As to Cardinal Pool's Case, he only says there was
another Statute in force then, but no Record or History says that he was
indicted on any other than the 25. Edw. 3. As to Dr. Story's Case, he tells a
long Tale out of Camden about the Fact, but answers not one word to the
Indictment, whatsoever the Evidence was, the Indictment was as the Sheet
alleges, and that is enough.

His answer to Coleman's Case is that, that things happening afterward proved
more, but the Evidence was no more than what my Friend alleges. As to Sir
Henry Vane's Case, his answer is, his own hearsay of what was proved, but the
Judgment he never perused, argued like a Lawyer. As to Constable's Case and the
rest, he gives no answer, but only that a repetition of a number of Cases makes
a mutter and a noise, and so it does when they Govern and Rule the matter in
question, and are not answered. Owen's Case, he says, the Author presses it
strangely and that is all. He says the Cases of Burton, Duke of Norfolk,
Awater, Heber, and Crohagn, are not to the purpose, let the Reader judge if they
are not pertinent: As to the Opinion of the Judges in the Lord Stafford's Case,
he does not mention it, but says the reviving that Case might have been spared,
and that is all, a pretty answer: As to Colledg's Case, he talks of a proof of
a self Defense, but nothing to the Point it was urged for. As to the Cases of
Lord Cobham, Gray, and Rawleigh, in 32, 33, 34, 35. page Setting aside his
scandalous Invectives and Reflections upon those Times, Ministers, and
Governments, he no ways attempts to answer the Argument drawn from them, viz.
that the Charge was the same as in the Case in Dispute.

Now I appeal to any Man of Sense and Reason that will Read and Think closely,
if the Repliant has offered any one Argument more than the Lord Russel's Case,
Defense and Justification had alleged. If he has shown any one Judgment where
such Indictment was resolved naught; if he has given any answer to Dr.
Story's, Collingborn's, Sir William Ashton's, Burdet's, and Sir H. Vane's
Indictment; in short, if he has answered any two of the Cases cited: or if he
has done any thing but reflect on past and late times, and if the Indictment
remain not good, both for matter and form, notwithstanding all these pretended
Replies. Upon the whole matter, I desire the Reader to peruse the Book cited,
and to judge if there be not presidents enough unanswered to justify the
Indictment in question, and that the Recorder gave a good Judgment upon the
Verdict that affirmed its truth; quod fuit Probandum.

To conclude, Since the Repliant is in love with Horace, I would advise him to
consider one hint of his -- Forum, putealque Libonis
Mandabo siccis. --
Hor.

The third and last part of the Magistracy and Government of England vindicated
with Reasons for a General Act of Indemnity, etc.
IT has been the observed misfortune of most mixed Governments, particularly
of our own, never long to enjoy the entire Friendship of all its individual
Subjects; the lowermost Side has too frequently acquired the greatest share of
the Peoples Love, or at least Pity: It Is then no point of Wonder, that the
Servants of former Crowns should incur their proportion of Envy, Hatred, and
Reproach; and amongst all those none more obnoxious to it, than the Ministers,
Officers, and Instruments of Justice; for such are the vitiated Sentiments of
Persons interested in all Suits, that the Vanquished is certainly injured, or
thought, or said to be so, which is all one, by the Persons themselves, their
Friends or Relatives, their Patrons or Creatures. In truth there is scarce a
Trial on the Plea or Crown-Side, but one party, and someties both, do leave the
Court with a swinging Curse or two on Judge, Council, Jury, Witnesses, and
perhaps all concerned; upon which account, it can never be deemed a
justifiable, much less a commendable and meritorious Employment, for Lawyers to
note and report, and afterward publish to the World the Clamors of such
Malcontents, with the addition of Sarcasm instead of Argument, and blushless
Lies instead of Law and Precedents, and all this under the pretense of serving
their Majesty's and the Government, but it is a mere pretense; for first, it is
not their Province; these Publications are made by them, not as Legislators or
Judges, but as private Persons; and one of their Libels seems calculated only
for private Lucre, as either the hopes of a Place, or increase of Practice, by
telling the Town in the first and last Pages where the Author lives, of what
Profession, and how long standing; an Art learned from some of those exquisite
Doctors inhabiting toward the Fields, whose Knowledge and Conversation is
pretended to be in Heaven: Another writes for Bread, and scribbles that he may
eat, etc. A third, or rather the first and prime, is inspired with Venom and
Revenge, even the pure Spirit on it, as one balked he is angry at all, and
because some were not his true Friends, he is resolved to make Enemies of those
who despise him, and of them the number is great. But secondly,

It Is of no use to the present Government, for Truth only can be a sure Basis
of Respect to that; and in case of Slander, the Filth rebounds, and the Dirt
thrown most surely turns on, and dawbs their own Faces, especially when they
arraign those as ignorant, whose Learning, Knowledge, and Judgment, are so
clear and acknowledged, as to render the Censors unworthy even of being their
Bag-bearers; the like when they censure those as corrupt, who have always
boldly done their Duty, even in defiance of a Court Cabal, or a Popular
Faction: who have always adhered to the old English Law and their just Opinions
in it, though Frowns from White Hall, or Clamors from Wapping, though Lampoons
from Grubstreet, or a worse usage from an Observator, though a Supersedeas, or
a Take him, etc. were the only reward they could expect for such their
(formerly called Puritanical now Arbitrary) Justice: Gentlemen who never
polluted the Law (which the great and good Sir Mat. Hale did truly call a
robbing the Poor of Justice) for the acquiring a Farm or an Office, or a
lumping Sum for Sale of it; who never begged an Executorship for to gain a
Fortune; Gentlemen who never gave strained Opinions concerning the Revenue when
made for their Clients the Farmers, but clamored at the same when used by their
King with more Moderation; Gentlemen who parted with their Places, though of
Honor and Profit, rather than comply with a Court-Opinion or a Club-Notion,
when others (I name no body) offered entire and everlasting Service, if they
could have preceded or succeeded them, (Test.... apud St. James's and the City
of Gloucester,) but missing their aim then, as now they do their Gall must have
a Vent, and so it has with a Vengeance, when a true and bold Justice is made
the Subject on it: The Reason is plain, those Men's Repute is too great for
Truth, Probity, and usefulness: An Eclipse is necessary if possible, for if
otherwise, the Defender will never be Keeper, the Remarker Solicitor, nor the
Gray's-Inn Poet wear Scarlet in Wales; their hopes are but small, unless they
can postpone all their B^tters by Death, Commitments, or that which is but
little worse, Reproach and Slander; but some think their Sting grows weak, for
it is apparent that there are a sort of Men, who though they might and did love
his Majesty when as Prince, yet do not, will not, cannot love him, or any Man
else, as King; and this is now pretty plain. But Thirdly,

Their Libels are criminal, and injuricus to common Justice, for they create a
Disrespect and Contempt upon all Judiciary Proceedings; to arraign all past is
to excite a Suspicion of all present and future Administrations; whereas
Plowden says, fol. 38. It Is a good and sure way to believe the last Judgment;
and if so, it is plain what Name the contrary Practice deserves; besides, were
it otherwise, the Institution of Judges and Courts were vain, and our State, as
Englishmen, the most unfortunate; for we have no Rule but ex ore Judicum, or
from particular Statutes, and of them they are the Expositors. Now let us
inquire which is Law, the Defender's Fancy in his Argument inter S. and B. or
the Judgment in the Exchequer Chamber, affirmed by the Lords? If the Judicial
Resolution be so, then the Publication of his Argument was scandalous, and I am
not to follow him as my Guide; but perhaps he will tell me, That manifest Reason
and good Lawyers ought to govern me; if so, then I ask him, Who shall I follow
in the E. of D's Case of a Capias pro fine puis Judgment, etc. whether the
cleven best Lawyers, or the Vote of the House? If the latter, why not so in the
former Case? And if otherwise, then his Judgment was mistaken; so that
quacunque via data, there is no Infallibity in this World, and cons^quently no
excuse for private Censures of public Proceedings in Courts of Justice:
Besides, the Books are pretty clear, that such things are punishable; but I
leave the Reader to peruse them at leisure. Now let us but consider the
Confusion that must ensue upon the public countenancing such a Practice as
these Scriblers have introduced; for if allowable on a disbanded Judge, it is so
on a sitting one, for the Case is the same in respect of private Lawyers who
pretend to think their Judgments erroneous or corrupt; but surely both are
unlawful. Besides all this, in the present Case

They have palpably wrested the Law in diverse Instances: I need name no more
than the Indictment in question, which that it was legal and good, most Men do
now agree, especially since the dint of the Opposal seems current only on the
Evidence, with a Waiver of the other, the Indictment being good since that
Guards are proved lawful, and the Observator concedes it the most legal part
of the Procedure, and the Justice of Parliaments, etc. supposed written by the
Defender, strains all it is Forces on the Evidence and the Times; and their
Follower, the Port, in his new Nonconformist, page 10. runs the same way too:
only

There remains one Objection to the first Vindication, which is, that it
affirms, Words may be Treason within the 25 of Edw. 3. and the Remarker
challenges a proof of it, and asks where it may befound; and the Nonconformist
quarrels at the Lawyer that did assert it, and some others have done the same
ore tenus.

I confess, that the first Sheet did publish the Assertion, but waved it is
Eviction, for sear of a strained use of such Opinion to ill purposes, for the
serving a turn upon particular Occasions; nor had there been any more said on
it, but that their Confidence and Malice seems so exorbitant as to extort a
Check, for the Regulator is grown so confident of his own Knowledge as to
under-value the greatest of Judgments; whereas his Commonplace Book affords us
no Title but Collusion and Malice prepense; and his Practice has been much of
the same stamp, only that sometimes he has added a little of the Lunatic as
appears by his Rhimes, Prophecies, Dreams, Politics, and other Religionary
Works.

To prove the Assertion, I depend not on the Authority of the sense of the
Commons House. 1 Jac. 2. though (let the Crier for Justice, or who else pleases
contradict it) it was in Fact then affirmed and agreed unto, and upon that, the
then King's Council and Courtiers desisted the Motion and Pros^cution of a Bill
to make Words, etc. But that is a supernumerary Argument, there is more than
enough besides.

I am not to maintain that all rank, malicious, gross Words against the King or
Queen's Person are such, nor that whosoever drinks an Health to our Sovereign
Lord the People, or to the late King James, is a Traitor; but that Words
significative and expressive of a present ^^^ention to do an Act to the King's
Destruction, such Words deliberately, maliciously, and advisedly spoken on
purpose to accomplish the Demise of the King, as by promise of Money with
importunity to commit the Fact, may be an Overt-facit to prove the Imagination
within. 25. Edw. 3.

To evince this, let us think a little..... and 'twill be plain

The words of this Statute are clear and of an easy Construction, if we will
allow those dull old Times to speak Sense: They are to this effect, That if it
shall compass or imagine the Death, etc. and de ceo provablement soit attaint
per overt fait: Now the Objection is this, That Words are not Deeds within that
Clause; to this the Answer is very clear; for by all the Grammatical and other
Rules for Interpretation of the Sense of Words, the latter part of a Sentence
is to be construed (if used by way of opposition) as opposite to the thing
mentioned and intended in the foregoing Part, and not as opposed to every thing
which it may ex vi ter mini exclude in other Cases; and this is an agreed
difference, both amongst Divines in Exposition of Sentences in Scripture, and
Grammarians in almost all Cases whatsoever: Now to apply this:

Overt facit is used not in opposition to Words, for there is no such thing
mentioned; but it is added in contradistinction to that which was before
specified, viz. Thoughts, and such are Imagination and Compassing; and
therefore overt facit must mean any open manifest thing as can truly discover
those Thoughts, as may proveably attaint the Traitor of such his Imagination;
and it is a most natural and proper Mode of Speech, if they did intend, as most
undoubtedly they did, that the Thought should be the thing prohibited, then
it is as plain they intended by the Word fait any discovery of such Thought by
Words or Actions; and so said Newton in 19. Hen. 6. That to imagine the Death
of the King is Treason, though he do no act toward it, if such Imagination be
disclosed that it can be tried if he did so think and imagine. If that thoughts
and Words are mentioned both in a Sentence, and afterward Deeds in opposition,
then the last will exclude both the former; but here when used only in
contradistinction with Thoughts, it seems plainly otherwise. That Deed, when
used in Opposition to Thought, does include both Words and Acts, none can deny;
a thousand Instances might be given of it; and in the exactest propriety of
Speech, Words are Deeds when and as contradistinguisht from Thoughts; for the
Soul thinks even as abstractly considered from the Body, but Man never speaks
without Action and Motion: The difference is plain, and needs no Explication.
But further,

I would fain know, What is a Consult or Plot, but the mutual and reciprocal
Declaration of two or more Traitors Minds each to the other? Each declares his
Traitorous Imagination by Words, and so of an Agreement to commit the actual
Murder, it is but a Declaration of their Minds by Words each to the other, only
they do happen to agree. Now suppose one Man thinks and intends to destroy the
King, and by Words does willingly, deliberately, and advisedly declare this to
another that is not of his Mind, though by mistake is thought to be such; is
not this the same thing? If a Man traitorously offers and promises to another a
thousand Pounds to perpetrate the villainous Act; if he accept it, and a parole
Agreement is made between them accordingly, surely the Apologists for Treason
will agree that to be an overt Thing, and both guilty, if it can be proved by
two Witnesses of credit. Suppose then the Party offered and promised does abhor
and refuse, will that make a distinction? If it does, it is without a
difference: Perhaps the Word Consult will be called a new Cant; we know whose
Coin it is, and who gave it the first stamp; 'twas no less a Man than Sir Will.
Jones, who at the time of such his Invention was no Perogative Lawyer, though
considerably so in Times then lately past: Nor is it imaginable what is the
meaning of a Conspiracy or Plot to take away the King's Life, but a
Communication by Words between several Traitors concerning such Act, and the
method of it is Accomplishment, and a Declaration by Words of each Man's being
fixed in that purpose; which if it be proved by sufficient Testimony, will
undoubtedly be an Evidence of a Compassing, etc. which is the Treason
Prohibited and Punishable; nor can the Meeting make it more so, for they could
not discourse unless they met; and therefore it is the Words only that are the
manifest overt fait. Nor does Hugh Pynes's Case, or the Resolution of the
Judges therein, contradict this, notwithstanding the Confidence of the Remarker
that it did; they only say that the Words in that Case were not Treason, that
those Words were not an Evidence of Compassing, that for those Words he could
not be Indicted upon that Statute; but their Opinion does plainly imply, That
had the Words been Evidence of a Compassing, etc. as they were only slanderous
and reflective, it had been otherwise; and the Instances there mentioned are
full to this, as John Quick's Indictment was only for Words to King Henry,
unless standing up and speaking will alter the Case: Thomas Koiver's, John
Clipsham's, and John Mirfield's, are all for Words, and some others there
specified. Besides, it is observable that in most Indictments on this Statute,
some Words have been alleged in them as an overt fait to demonstrate the
Imagination, which would be impertinent if the Law were thought otherwise. I Will
not insist on Colledge's, because the Case has been cavilled at, though with
no color as to the Indictment: Part of Patrick Harding's Indictment was
loquendo publicavit, but I Will not dwell on that, because foolishly drawn; but
Arthur Crohagan's Case in Cro. Car. is pretty full and for Words; and the Words
of the Book are, That the traitorous Intent and Imagination of his Heart was
declared by his Words, and therefore held High Treason within the express
Provision of 25 Edw. 3. and upon his coming into England he was arrested, etc.
Now no Answer can be to this, but that he came into England; but the Words only
showed his Intent, and by that Book the Words are alleged as the overt fait;
besides the Case of Blanchflower and Atwood, Mic. 5 Jac. 1. B. R. in
Yelverton's Reports 107. per curiam, resolved, that Words may be Treason; and
that is an express Resolution; for there was then no temporary Law in being
concerning Parole Treasons that I know of. The Case of Berisford and Press.
Hill. 8 Jac. 1. B. R. Yelvert. 197. adjudged, that Treason may be committed by
Speech as well as by Act, for any thing which discovers the Mind of a Man to be
Traitorous to his Sovereign, is capital to the Party: Hitcham ad Brook Pasch. 1
Car. 1. Hutt. 75. held per cur. that the speaking of Treason was Treason, and
that sermo est index animi as well as Preaching or Writing; and no Man can
doubt but those are Acts; and Speech is as much so.

Besides, if the Consequence of the contrary Doctrine be well considered,
'twill appear to be a plain Evasion of the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. as is manifest
upon the reading it; and the common Books are full of this, for otherwise no
Action could lie for saying a Man has spoke Treason: But here is enough said to
answer the Challenge, where is the Authority for such an Assertion? Though
infinitely more might be said for it, nay it is as easy to dumbfound the
contrary as it is to transcribe Law Cases. If this does not give them
satisfaction, they shall remain unsatisfied for me, I Will plague the World no
more with writing on this dull, flat, unprofitable Subject, Crown-Law, lest I
should provoke our new Scriblers to double the Plague by their Replies: If they
attempt an Answer, I Will leave the Tobacconist and Grocer to confute them, and
unless a Trunk or Band-box chance to bring them to my View, I Will never be
tempted to read them; and of this they may assure themselves. I say it to
complement the Reader with Patience to peruse the rest of the Sheet, being
ascertained never to hear more on it, at least not from this hand.

Some perhaps may wonder at the reason of the Publication of these Sheets, and
conceive them the product of Malice on one side, as those virulent Pamphlets
are on the other: To solve that Scruple, I need only repeat the Reasons
alleged in the first; but a Repitition is damnably dull, as well as tedious
and irksome: I Will therefore add a new one, and that is to show the
Reasonableness as well as the Necessity of a general, indefinite, speedy Act of
Oblivion; for though the Bloud-hounds fret, and huff, and bounce, as if all
their Madness and Rage were founded on a true Basis, yet it is apparent from the
Premises, that their foundation is false, and the Law is direct and plain in
their Teeth, and does and will justify in most of the particulars, at which
they foam their Curses and Execrations: Reason therefore as well as necessity
enjoins a silence as to what is past, for otherwise the Kingdom can never have
it is desired satisfaction, for in points justifiable, or at least doubtful;
the justice of inflicting Punishments can never be vindicated, did I call them
Punishments, I beg the Readers Pardon for the Impropriety; however I Will not
name their proper term, but with calmness, endeavor to Evince three things.

1. That it would be grateful to the Nation in general, and every good Man in
particular. 2. Conducing to the Settlement and Interrest of the present
Government; and lastly, That it is consistent with the promotive of the highest
and truest Justice.

First, The Nation did and does expect it, for Revenge is never natural but
when freshly pursued, and time wears off the sense of Injuries, by the
Intervention of new ones either real or imaginary, which is all one as to this
purpose: The horror of any Crime, or at least the detestation of the Criminal,
grows faint and languid upon the removal of the Object, especially if time
interposes with the accession of present fears, which at present do more affect
us than greater if more distant. It can never therefore be thought the desire
of the People of England to have their Neighbors or Acquaintance harrass'd and
persecuted by Fines, Consiscations, Imprisonments, Marks of Disgrace, or the
like, for Actions done in the last or former Reigns, about which the World has
been so much divided, if lawful or not: Besides, that this was the general
Expectation of the Kingdom on the new Settlement or at least the Coronation, of
which nature there never was an Instance before this without an Act of Grace;
and it is most plain, that none are Adversaries to it, but the Republicanes and
the Jacobites, not for that they need it not, as I shall show anon, but for
different ends, each drives at and wishes a Change, it matters not to what, for
if to the latter the other hopes a Common wealth will be the more desirable: If
the Republican succeeds, then the other believes a Restoration the more easy,
but both dislike the present, and therefore dread a Settlement, and
consequently dread the People's satisfaction, and quiet under Their Majesty's,
and consequently dread an Act of Indemnity: it is true, the cry for Vengeance is
loud, but it is only from these two corners; which leads to the second
particular, that

It will establish and promote the Interest of the present Government, while
the popular Bully is full of his Damme's and Menaces, there is certainly danger,
and where there is danger there is fear; now fear causes an aversion, and
aversion begets hatred: And the Object of it is that from whence the supposed
danger arises, which is from the Government irritated by the Venom and Fury of
those hot headed Animals, whatsoever has power and will to hurt me, must and
will be abhorred; and though none are immediate actual Patients, yet the being
possibly obnoxious to it, and the want of security for the contrary does of
necessity cool their respect to the present Power, under which they were not
safe; and this tempts them and their Friends upon contrivances and attempts of
Danger, both to Themselves and the Public; and danger by the attempt is no
discouragement where the like danger attends their forbearance: And this is of
weight, unless Cromwell's Polliticks be thought Christian, to cherish and
promote a Flot, as of advantage to Settlement, if seasonably discovered and
subtly managed; but however it is as true, that Enemies who are desperate
ought never to be thought inconsiderable; for they may shake and batter what
they cannot destroy, they may do mischief though they cannot work ruin to their
Adversaries, upon which account the temptation of coutinual impending Danger is
fit to be removed: Besides

The want of Security, and the fear of Danger, making Men uneasy in their
thoughts, replenishes them with Complaints and Murmurs at every awkard Action,
or supposed miscarriage of the Government feared; it makes them Mutineers at
public Taxes and Impositions, partly because they think it strengthens and
increases the power of hurting them, and partly because it sponges and bleeds
them of that, which they fear an occasion of themselves to bribe Black-rods,
Sergeants at Arms, and other Goalers with; and in a conjuncture when
extaordinary Aids are indispensibly requisite, no temptation to complaint is
deserving of Countenance; besides, that it cramps Trade and discourages
Projects for Public Good, etc. but farther, it is the living, not the dead, the
happy, contented, and cheerful, and free, not the oppressed, miserable,
forlorn, or imprisoned Subject, that does Service to the Crown and the Public.

It hinders all such as are thought to be so obnoxious from any bold Essays for
the use of the present Government, for that if success be the attendant of such
their attempt, they continue unsafe notwithstanding, for no Man will adventure
an hazard to secure that Authority, which he is not sure will make him safe, if
he does undertake the present Adventure, and escapes that Danger, and performs
the Service; so that Self-preservation renders it their Policy to unhinge
themselves from, or to be shy of the present Power; of which a considerable
number might prove useful Friends, which are now Newters at least, if not
Enemies.

It Is observable in all foreign Policies, either to work a total Extirpation of
the whole Party, or an universal Indemnity, after so grand a Revolution as this
was; the former is not to be practiced here for two Reasons: 1. Because we want
People: 2. Many of our Friends must be banished too, for diverse of the supposed
Criminals were instrumental to the present Change, etc. Ergo the latter only
is, and can be most advisable; for once I Will suppose their numbers but small in
comparison to the Saints and Innocents, (if any such there are in the Nation)
yet under our present Circumstances all are to be obliged as Friends that
possibly may; but if the thirteen Heads, with the Surrenderer's Clause, and all
it is and their Subdivisions had been reduced into a Law in the designed Act of
Attainder, one third at least of the Nation had been involved, who with their
disobliged Relatives and Dependants is not so contemptible a Flock, though but
of Sheep for the slaughter. Besides,

It Is impolitick as well as unjust to deny or delay it to those who have
submitted to the Government, yielded it Obedience, and quietly bore it is
public Charges according to their Proportion, and yet give a free, full, and
general Pardon, both in Scotland and Ireland to all that took up Arms, for all
their Sins then past and present; it provokes the former to repent their
non-concurrence with the latter, for 'twas but resuming their Quiet and
Submission at pleasure, and then they were safe, which now they are not, but
under continued Menaces and Dangers both, as appears in their being baited by
every barking Cur, that can but write with Gall in his Ink, or speak with a
Damme in his Mouth.

Experience farther tells us, that nothing turns or changes the humor of the
English Commoner, like Rage, Insolence, and Cruelty in their fellow Subjects,
when made Superiors, and such is raking into old Sores thought to be; it
matters not whether justly or no as to this purpose, the effect is generally
such: The Star Chamber in Car. I. his time, the Major-General's in Cromwell's:
The Tophamizing of Abhorrers in Car. II. his time: The Western Campaign, and
the other criminal Prosecutions in the beginning of Jac. I. I say all the
Violences used in these several periods (and yet they had their respective
Provococations) did most notoriously alter the kidney of the Commons, and made
even their once beloved, first dreadful and terrible, then odious and
loathsome; they produced considerable Changes in their several Consequences: I
could come nearer home even to the tearing of Moore and North, and other
Citizens of London, which first turned the Stomach of that City, as is now
apparent; but Sat verbum, etc. But farther,

The want of this renders both the Policy and Honor of the great Bellowers for
Vengeance to be justly suspected: 1. Their Honor in taking care of their own
Servants for all their Excesses upon the Revolution, and opposing the Indemnity
of all others, as by the Act appears: 2. Their Policy, for that it is observable
in Story, that the Association in Queen Eliz. time was under a Protestant
Prince for the Protestant Religion, and no ill Success attended it, yet those
wise Ancestors of ours thought fit to secure themselves by turning the
Association into a Law, and a general Act of Indemnity; I do not say they
needed it, but the Associators in that Reign thought it needful; and it is very
considerable, that in no Reign was there more Peace and Quiet than in Hers, and
in none were there ever more free and general Pardons, and in truth the latter
was the occasion of the former; for when Men are once safe and quiet, no small
Temptation will provoke any more adventures though they like another better,
yet Men being easy are generally contented; There was one free and general
Pardon of the Queen's at first confirmed, 5. Eliz. cap. 11. another, 8 Eliz.
cap. 18.13 Eliz. cap. 28.18 Eliz. cap. 24.23 Eliz. cap. 16.27 Eliz. 13.29 Eliz.
cap. 9.31 Eliz. cap. 16.35 Eliz. cap 14.39 Eliz. cap. 28.43 Eliz. cap. 19.
Eleven in number, and never five years without a Parliament-Pardon, and this
made Parliaments and Crowns the darlings and desire of the People. Besides,
It Is the Interest of each party amongst us, though some don't see it; the Whigg
ought to promote it for two Reasons: 1. Lest being the lesser part he chance to
feel the want of it, and for that he has given some Provocation. 2. That if he
be the greater, the Memory of his Vengeance and Fury may be forgotten, and
himself restored to the good Opinion of the rest of Mankind, by one act at
least of good Nature: The Tory ought to pursue the same measures, and much for
the same Reasons, for his Top-gallantry has been, and if repractis'd will be
again as odious and loathsome to the moderate and good, as ever it was, or as
the others could be: Temper therefore is now the Game, and a Veil over all
that is past is certainly the most Politic, especially considering the
multitude of the supposed Criminals, and the justice of their several Excuses,
which comes next: For,

Lastly, It Is consistent with and promotive of the truest and highest Justice,
for in most of the Cases the Law is doubtful, and to punish Opinion in matters
of Law, is as unjust as to persecute mistakes in matters of Religion is
unchristian, and new Laws for Government de futuro are more agreeable to
natural Equity, than a retrospective Fury; that it is so, is plain, the modern
Scribles have sufficiently proved it. In two of the Cases cited they differ
themselves, for Dr. Story's Case, the Defender cries it is not Law, the Remarker
agrees it is, and that he was well hanged; for Plunket's Case, the Defender
cries, he was well hanged, for there was Treason enough in his Charge, the
Remarker insinuates as if he suffered hardly; now what shall a little Lawyer
believe between these two great bodies of learning? the like may be said of
Soames's Case, and the other above mentioned: But what is more? In the
Voluminous Argument against the Dispensing Power owned by Sir R.A. he does
concede that there are some Prerogatives so personally and inseparably inherent
in the Crown, that no Act of Parliament can cramp or diminish, or at least take
away; and that being granted, I Am sure all that the rest of the Book says can
never make that a plain Case, and in truth his own Argument shows and and
leaves it a disputable Point; and if that were doubtful, every particular else
may well be buried in Oblivion: besides in Cases of Construction the nature of
the thing admits of doubt, and then there is no color for Punishment. Besides,

In respect of inferior Persons by our Constitution they are obliged to submit
to and follow Westminster Hall, which is the lex loquens Angliae, and when all
these things are duly considered, there will remain but few grand execrable
Criminals, who are fit to be made Examples of, only to tickle some, aggrieve
others, and terrify none; for that will be the consequence; for that is the
case of all Violence, where the Justice of the thing is not clear and
undoubted. Then for Exceptions:

Let us think a little; Is it reasonable that some should suffer for not being
afraid of Punishments never declared or promulgated, and others should escape,
because their Countenances are more fawning, or that by consent their Relations
have played on the other side, or that their swinging Fortunes enable them to
scatter Mice for their personal Indemnity, or that they have had the lucky
Principle of being faithful to all Changes, and true to nothing else, or that
they have been forward to subvert their old Master, after their fire and folly
had ruined him, and endangered themselves: these and such like are no Pleas for
Justice, and yet this is the Case. Farther,

The drift is to magnify and aggrandize Punishments by Bill, which by the
standing Laws and common Justice of the Realm could not be inflicted, and they
urge two Reasons for it, 1. Their particular Pardons will otherwise excuse
them. To that I answer, Either they are valid in Law or not, if not, there is no
need of Bills; if they are valid in Law, the same Law and Justice of the Land
enjoin their allowance; even the same Law by which the Countryman plows his
Land, the Gentleman receives his Rent, the Trader recovers his Debt, and the
Senator sits in the House; and by the same Reason that these enjoy their
Properties, the Criminal ought to have his Pardon allowed, for one's a right
accrued by the Law as well as the other. 2. The common Chanel is too smooth;
Severity is sometimes necessary, and that now if ever; and therefore the
Legislative Authority ought to exert its power, and punish according to
demerit. To answer that, I say, either they are no offenses by Law, and there
needs a Bill to make them such, and inflict evils upon them as such; or else
they are offenses, but deserve a greater Punishment than a common Court may
pronounce: Now if the first be the Case, then I Am sure it is rank palpable
tyrannical Injustice, and that is the Plague of living under an an Arbitrary
Power, for none can know what is not Criminal: If they mean the latter, as I
suppose they do, then I ask, to what end were Punishments invented in
Societies, but to restrain Men from doing particular actions through the power
and influence of Fear? And how could that Consequence be expected, when the
penalty was never known before it is inflicted? and to inflict an evil
afterward, which was not known before, is to make a man suffer that which he
could not fear, because he could not know it, and this because he did not fear
it: And the Justice of that is plain too.

I agree with the Satyrists, that there are some Precedents of this last method
of proceeding, but most of them are repealed; I Will name two that are so, the
Earl of Strafford's which the very Law it self did enjoin Posterity not to
observe, or follow, or do the like; I cannot forget one expression of his to
this effect upon the Trial, if there be an Error in a Judge, so that he give
a sentence otherwise than a Man of better understanding conceives Reason for,
there is no cause the offense should be hightened, because he was not so wise a
Man as he might have been, nor so understanding as another; which if allowed,
will make it more eligible to follow a Plow than serve a Government, to dig in
a Ditch than bear an Office; for all Men stand obnoxious to the Constructions
and Passions of succeeding Times. There Is one Istance more, and that was Sir
Tho. Haxey's, who was attainted of Treason, for bringing in a Bill into the
Commons House against the Prerogative, though while and as a Member: I suppose
the Sparks will not much applaud the justice of that Procedure for their own
sakes; but as I said before, that, and most others of their Precedents, were
repealed, when a cooler Assembly met upon the next Session, and so was Haxey's,
in 1 Hen. 4. Cott. abr. rec. 362, 363.

But if Vengeance be requisite, it ought to be without respect of Persons, the
Justice of it ought to be impartial, true, and Catholic: and then come in the
Pensioners and Surrenderers, the Regulators and Promisers, the old High
Commissioners, and the new Creed Makers, etc. and, God knows, quis non? etc.
Nay, since the Revolution some must come in for a snack of Censure too, the
buyers and sellers of Places, the Members that took Offices contrary to their
own Motion and Vote in the Westminster Parliament: The Proclamation-men for
prohibiting of importing French Commodities under pain of Confiscation of Ship
and Goods, three Weeks before a War proclaimed, contrary to eleven Acts of
Parliament for Free Trade, even in Parliament-time: the Treasury for farming
Lotteries, which are common nusances, contrary to multitudes of Statutes, and
continuing them still with non obstante's in the Indenture, though illegal, and
void ab initio: the great Seal for passing four Patents at one Seal in this
Lent Vacation, with non obstante's, contrary to the Bill of Rights: the new
Sheriffs for practicing what themselves condemned in a Moore and a North, Cum
multis aliis, quos nunc describere longum, etc. To conclude, our Savior's
Rule, if observed, will be the most infallible Indemnity that can be contrived,
and that is, John 8.7. Let him that is without Sin amongst you, cast the first
stone. And in truth a Censor of the Manners of others ought himself to be pure,
clean, and innocent in omni re quacunque; and if there be no danger but from
such, I Am sure there is no danger at all, and that it should be so, is the
truest Justice in the World, quod fuit probandum.

I Will not mention the Argument from the Vacancy, that the Government was
dissolved, every thing reduced into its primitive state of Nature, all Power
divolved into individuals, and the particulars only to provide for themselves
by a new Contract; for if so, there is yet no new consent for Punishment of acts
done before the Dissolution, and consequently revenge for that is at an end;
Indemnity therefore ought to be promoted by those who made that Vote, for
otherwise their truth may be suspected, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
SOme perhaps will blame the boldness of this Style, as provocative rather than
palliating; to which I say, Truth ought never to be shame-faced, for veritas
praevalebit one time or another; and if it do not, but angers some, 'twill be
only those that were implacable before, who if they hant good nature enough to
pardon a bold stroke or two with a Pen, they will never consent to an Act of
Indemnity, and then their Fury is not to be regarded, for the want of it will
inflame (as it has created) our present Divisons, and consequently run us at
last into a true Confusion, from which, Good Lord deliver us.

THE END.

