The Youngmans Guide in his way to HEAVEN: OR, A CABINET of Rich Jewels, left
and Bequeathed to all Young Persons by the Reverend Mr. John Shrenock. B. D.
Who dyed in the flower of his Age, lying but seven days on his Death bed;
during which space of time, he wrought this Sermon: desiring it might be
Preached at his Funeral, and published for the benefit of all persons both
young and old. With his last Prayers.

woodcut of a skeleton or figure of death preparing to thrust an arrow with his
hand into a well-dressed young man or gentleman; nearby a young woman or lady
holds her hand to the spot where she has been wounded by another arrow

Licensed and Entered according to order.



Printed for J. Conyers at the Black Raven in Hol (...) Church and Th^^^^^ Inn

2. Chron. 34.2. Whilst he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of
David his Father.
THis whole Chaper, with the next, ar^ nothing but a recital of the Acts of
good King Josiah: he was a holy and good King as any we read of in the book of
God, and this is a commendation of him; that he sought the Lord God betimes, he
was good when almost all were bad and were turned into Idolatry: He in the
twelfth year of his Reign began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high
places and the Groves, the Carved Images, and Molten Images, and they brake
down the Altar of Baal in his presence, ver. 3, 4. And when he had destroyed
all the Idol^ Worship, he set up the worship of the true God, and repaired the
house of the Lord Great was his hatred to Idolatry, as you may read at large in
the remaining part of the Chapter.

And as of all examples, the best ought to be followed and imitated, so I here
present you with a most excellent pattern, and that is of good King Josiah:
Whilst he was, yet young, he sought the Lord God.

From which words we shall show you, that it the duty of young men and young
women to seek the Lord in their youth, and to be really good betimes.

Reason, 1. Because youth is the fittest time Remember thy Creator in the days
of thy Youth says Solomon. Eccles. 12.1. Not a few spar^ hours, as one well
notes, but days, every da^ working; it must be in the days of thy yout^ before
the evil day comes, that is, before ag^ and sickness seize on thee, and thou be
mad^ unfit for so great a work.

The 2 Reason is, because youth is a choosing time. Oh when thou art a choosing a
fit objec^ for thy eye, or heart, oh then think upon God and consider if he be
not the best choice. (...) shall show you those excellencies that are in God
and Christ, that thou should choose him above all others.

1. Are you poor, he is rich; art thou naked Christ has white Raiment to
cloth thee, ar^ thou spiritually blind he has an eye salve to enlighten thee;
art thou in great straits, h^ has wisdom, to counsel thee; art thou
unrighteous, unholy, he will give holiness and sanctification to thee; art thou
an hungry, o^ thirsty, he will be the bread of life and fee^ thee, and wine to
satisfy thy thirsty soul; ar^ thou sick, he will be thy Physician; in a word
he will be All, and in all to thee; thou shall want nothing that is good for
thee. Thus having chosen Christ to be thine, thou have go^ the pearl of great
price, the richest Jewel that that cannot be overvalu'd, therefore oh young men
get Christ and make him your choice, and you have all that can be desired.

Secondly, young women let me entreat you to make the same choice that Mary
did, Lu. 10.42. But one thing is needful, Mary has chosen the good part that
shall not be taken from her she had chosen Christ, she had got a saving
interest in Christ which is this one thing necessary.

Plutarch writes of Hannibal, that when he could have taken the great City of
Rome he would not; and when he would, he could not; so many in their young
years, when they might have mercy and grace, would not, and in their old Age,
when they would have Christ, pardon, peace and Heaven, they cannot.

Thirdly, it was the commendation of Josiah, that he served the Lord betimes.
And Timothy, that he know the Scriptures from a Child. And Obediah, that he
feared the Lord from his Youth 1 Kings 8.12.

Again, Remember thy Creator presently, instantly for thou know not whether
thou shall ever attain to age, thou know not what a day may bring forth,
therefore remember to know him to love him, to desire, delight, to depend upon
him, and to get an interest in him, and to live unto him, remembering to walk
with him. First remember the Father, to know him, and to be inwardly acquainted
with him. Secondly remember the Son, to believe and trust in him, to embrace
him, and give up thy self wholly unto him Remember the holy Spirit, so as to
hear and obey his Voice, and feel his Presence, and to experience his
Influence, and thus thou ought to remember thy Creator.

Says Seneca, though Death be before the old Man's face, yet he may be as near
the young Man's back. Man's life is but a shadow that soon passes away: and
St. Austin doubts which to call it. A dying life, or living death: Alas how
many youngmen, when God calls for the Primrose of their youth and vigor, put
him off with the trembling joints of Old age. Never had youth better
opprotunities of being good than now, in these golden Sun-shining days of the
Gospel, wherein God and Christ and the holy Spirit, are offered in the Gospel
to sinners, nay, the greatest of sinners, that will come in and submit to the
Scepter of Christ, and be saved, Oh young man, nay all persons, remember in
this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace before they be hid from thy
eyes, and thou go hence, and be no more seen. Remember that God will not always
strive with thee, Genesis 6. by his holy spirit; God gives every man and woman a
day of grace, and if thou improve not that thou may be undone for ever,
therefore consider Reader seriously on these things, Oh consider young Men,
young Women, all persons in general, that this is the acceptable time, this is
thy day of grace, even this day that is before thee, now or never.

The Ancients (says Erasmus) paint Time with an hairy Forehead, but bald
behind, to signify that whilst a man has opportunity before him he may lay
hold of it, but if he suffer it to slip away, he cannot pull it back again.

4. Consider of this young men and young women, you are equally concerned. Now
in the flower of your days, remember your Creator and having begun well,
continue in well doing, knowing your Labor shall not be vain in the Lord; pray
and pray earnestly to him for grace and his holy spirit to mortify your
corrupt lusts and affections; you have a great many enemies, the Flesh, the
World and the Devil, and against these must thou be always striving and keeping
a strict watch, or thou will be overcome.

I shall endeavor to set before thee some of those sins that daily attend
youth, and the first is Pride, and it is a reigning sin in youngmen and young
women at this day: I think never more than now. First, Pride of heart, Secondly
Pride of Apparel. Oh, it is rare (says one) to see young men humble and
watchful, and to see an old man contented and cheerful. Saint Bernard says;
That Pride is the Rich Man's Cousin, but Experience speaks it to be the young
Men and young Women's Cousin.

God had three Sons, (says one) Lucifer, Adam, and Christ; the first aspired
to be like God in Power, and was thrown from Heaven. The second like him in
knowledge, and was drove out of Eden when young. And the third was like God in
Goodness, Mercy and Humillity, and by so doing, obtained an everlasting
inheritance. Remember this, young men, get to be be humble, and keep humble,
for the humble God will teach: Pride is a great evil, and reigns more in
young men than ever. Consider and leave it, least God leave you, and that for
ever. What evils did Belshazzar, Haman and Herod's Pride bring them to. Young
Women, let me entreat you in the bowels of love, and out of compassion to your
immortal souls, that our Savior so dearly bought with his most precious blood,
to leave off those patchings and paintings, which are the Devils badgges. O how
like Monsters do too many Women in our times make themselves, in their false
Hair, as Towers and Bulls, (as they call them) and other ridiculous Fashions,
and gaudy Lascivious Attire, not becoming Women professing Godliness, 1. Tim.
2.7.8. says St. Paul.

Likewise, also the Women that they adorn themselves in modest Apparel with
shamefacedness and sobriety, not with broidered hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or
costly Array: Oh how contrary to this Rule do the Women of our times walk. Read
the 16. of Ezekiel throughout, and Deuteronomy. 22. ver. 5. to the end of the Chapter.
And Isaiah 3.6. to the end. Tertullians Counsel to young Men and Women, in
this, To cloth your selves with the Silk of Piety and with the Satin of
Sanctity, and with the Purple of Modesty, so shall you have God for your Suitor.

The second sin of youth is, unlawful Pleasures; hear what Solomon the wisest
of Men says, Rejoice, O young Man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy Youth, and walk in the way of thy heart, and in the sight of
thine Eyes, but remember for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment.

Solomon does not comply with Youth, to encourage them to sin; but by this way
confutes them of their folly; as much as to say, Thou may if thou will take
thy pleasure and ease, and satisfy thy vain appetite, with all manner of
pleasures that this world will afford, but remember that bitterness will attend
thy pleasures, God will bring to light thy deeds of Darkness; those sins that
thou have committed in secret, shall be brought to light, and ^ring thee to
Judgment, where thou must give an account of every idle word, and wicked
action, and then what will these pleasures profit thee, by the committing of
which thou have lost Heaven and Happiness, and thy immortal Soul? I have read
of a young Man that was very much given to pleasure, he standing by St.
Ambrose, and seeing his most excellent Death, turned to the other young men by
him, and said Oh that I might live with you and dye with him. Again, there is a
Curse of insatiableness in the Creature, Eccles. 1.8. The Eye is not saiisfied
with seeing, nor the Ear with hearing, Pleasure (says one) is a beautiful
Harlot, sitting in her Chariot, whose Wheels are Pride and Gluttony, Lust and
Idleness: the two Horses are Prosperity and Abundance: the two Drivers,
Idleness and Security: her Attendants are Grief, Guilt and too late Repentance,
Death and Ruin. Many strong men have been destroyed by her, but never any
received full satisfaction and content in her: Therefore, O young Men, avoid
this Harlot, come not near her door. St. Augustine before his Conversion, could
not tell how to live without those Pleasure, which he much delighted in, but
when his nature was changed, and his heart graciously turned to God: Oh how
sweet is it (says he) to be without those former sweet Pleasures. A truly
enlightened soul that has tasted of the pleasures that are in the enjoyment of
Christ, Oh how bitter are all other pleasures to him!

The third sin of Youth is rashness, They (says Aristotle) know little and
fear less. Saint Paul exhorts young men to be sober minded and discreet; how
many young men have had large Estates, and by their Folly, Rashness, and
Extravagancy, have brought themselves; to Poverty. Rashness unmans a man, and
will put him upon things below manhood. Should I discover the many evils that
attend Rashness which usually Reigns in Youth. I should exceed my bounds, but
let this suffice, and let all young men decline, and wholly forsake it.

The fourth sin attending Youth is, mocking and Scoffing at Religion, and those
that are holier than themselves Job. 30 3, 4. But now, says he, they that are
younger than I have me in derision. Does not this age abound with too many
Scoffers at Religion, I leave any indifferent party to judge? The Athenians
scoffing at Silasis Wife, had like to cause the destruction of their City, her
Husband was so incensed against them. I am afraid that our Atheism and scoffing
at Religion and good men, has ruined our City. Felix for one malicious scoff,
did nothing day and night but vomit blood, till his unhappy soul was separated
from his wretched body.

The fifth Sin attending Youth is Lust and Wantonness which caused St. Paul to
admonish Timothy, to flee worldly Lust, notwithstanding Timothy was a chaste
Youth: but St. Paul admonishes him, knowing the temptations that attend Youth:
much more need have we to warn the Youth of our days to flee those youthful
Lust that so unman them, and make them so like to the beasts that perish: Oh
how do too many in this Nation, in this City, in these Subburbs, instead of
going to hear a Sermon on the Lords day walk in the Fields, or lie in an
Alehouse or Tavern: nay I am afraid some, too many, go to the cursed Harlots
houses, and there spend their time, but surely destruction will certainly
attend such practices. The poor youngman that murdered his fellow servant,
Thomas Savage by name, confessed that the sin of Whoredom and Sabbath-breaking
brought him to the Gallows. Young man take heed by this sad example now in
time, lest God make thee the next, for great and grievous is this sin in the
eyes of God, and he will severely punish it upon all such as follow it, as we
see daily he has done on several Persons.

Sixthly, another grievous sin too much practiced by youth, is swearing, how
too common is it, in many places in City and Country, by men, women and
children, notwithstanding the foulness, vileness; and wickedness of this sin,
and so offensive to Almighty God.

Consider of it, before it be too late, for how do thou know; O thou filthy
Swearer and Blasphemer of Gods name, in thy cursed and filthy Oaths, wishing
God to damn thee? but he may take thee at thy word, and send thee to Hell,
there to abide to Eternity, Matthew. 12 34. Out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks. So then if thy words are profane thy heart is polluted: if it
were a pure Fountain, it would not bring forth such bitter streams of
filthiness; if thou did bless God in thy heart thou would not blaspheme with
thy tongue James 3.10. Oaths are nothing but Badges of a vile and wicked
person, even such as are scu^ of Alehouses, Taverns, and filthy Prisons, as
unseemly evil in the most notorious Villains and High-way-men, much more in any
that pretend the least spark of Grace: Remember that God will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain, Ex. 20. He that makes no conscience of
small Oaths, will not stick at great Ones. But some may object and say, I have
been so accustomed to Swear that I cannot leave it; know this, that if thou
can not alter thy custom by Repentance, God can and will alter it by
punishment, and therefore let all Men, Women and Children, leave this sin as
they tender the salvation of their immortal Souls, and rebuke it boldly in all
Persons guilty of it.

Says St. Chrysostom, Youth is hard to be ruled, easy to be drawn away; apt
to be deceived, and and stands in need of very violent Reins. Says Cornelius,
A Lapide, The Ancients did use to paint Youth like a young man naked, with a
veil over his face, his right hand bound behind him, and his left hand loose,
and Time behind him pulling one thread out of his Veil every day intimating
that youngmen are void of Knowledge, and blind, and unfit to do good ready to
do evil, till time by little and little makes them wiser. Consider of this O
young man; that the least Dram of Pleasure brings thee abundance of grief, and
though thy paths seem to be strewed with Rose Buds of Delight and Pleasure, yet
bitterness will be the end. There are many other sins that attend Youth,
Ignorance, Falsehood, Impatiency under reproof, a trifling Spirit, Prodigality,
Drunkenness, and taking Gods name in vain, which sins I would entreat thee, O
young man, to avoid, as thou tendernest the good of thy immor-soul, and as thou
expectest Heaven and Happiness for ever, leave and loath these Sins, as thou
would a Toad or Serpent. I shall refer thee for thy further satisfaction to
an excellent sheet. Entitled, A timely Warning to Drunkards, Swearers and
blasphemers of Gods holy Name, and other lewd Livers.

Again, I shall speak a few words to Young men. 1. As a Child under tuition of
thy parent^ 2. As a Prentice under tuition of a Master. ^ As a child in the
first place, be diligent to serv^ God, hear the word preached, read the
Scriptures diligently and other good Books, be sur^ to pray to God morning and
evening, according to the example of holy David, if thou can not pray, buy a
Book of Godly prayers till God shall enable thee to pray without a Book. Be
sure to reverence, respect and honor thy Parents with all dutifulness and
gentle behavior as a Child of God ought to do.

I shall not be large in this, but refer thee t^ an excellent sheet named, Mr.
Baxters direction for Family Duties, containing the duty of parent^ to
children, children to parents, Masters to Servants, and servants to masters.

Secondly, a word to thee as an Apprentice o^ Servant: First, be faithful and
honest in that calling that God has called thee to, giving respect to thy
master and mistress, obey the^ in all their lawful commands, hear the advice of
S. Paul, Servants be obedient to your masters, in singleness of heart, Ephesians, 6,
avoiding all ^^fering and making away thy masters goods read the pattern of a
good servant in that o^ Joseph, Genesis 30. he was so just, that his master
committed all his goods into his possession, and he missed nothing; afterward
God raised him up to be the second person in the Kingdom.

I have read of an Italian Poet who brings in a proper Young man, Rich and
Potent, thus discoursing with Death in the habit of a Mower, with a Sithe in
his hand cutting down the life of Man, (for all flesh is grass) Isa. 40. and
will thou not spare any Person, says the young man. I spare none, says Death;
Man's life is but a Day, a short day, a Winters day; oftentimes the Sun goes
down upon a Man before it be well up; your day is short, and your work is great
and your Journey is long, and therefore you should rise early, and set forwards
toward Heaven betimes, as that Man does that has a long Journey to go on a
Winters day; every days experience tells us that a young Man's Life is as much a
vapor as the Old, and as much uncertain.

Again, young Men and young Women, if you would be really good, in the next
place make sure of your Conversion, for without Conversion there is no
salvation: Except you be born again, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Joh. 3.3

St. Austins Conversion was on this wise, He heard a voice from Heaven, saying,
take up and Read, and in opening the New Testament he fell upon the place of
Romans 13.13.14. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in Drunkenness, not in
Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envy, but put on the Lord Jesus,
and make no provision for the flesh, to obey it (...) the Lust thereof. The
Scripture so wrough^ upon him, as it was the means of his conversio^ St.
Cyprian was converted by reading the fir^^ Chapter of Jonah. Junius was
converted by reading the first chapt. of John the Evangelist.

I have read of Paphnutius, that he converted two Famous Strumpets. Thais and
Ephron with this Scripture Argument: That God seet^ all things in the dark when
the doors are fast, the windows shut and the Curtains drawn.

I have read of a poor Man that persuaded a young Scholar from reading Poetry,
and to fall upon reading the Scriptures, which he did and before he had read
out Genesis it pleased God to work a change in his heart, and tur^ him to the
Lord, in the 20th year of his Age.

Many more Examples might be produced to exctie young Persons to the Study of
the Scriptures, thou do not know but it may have the same influence on thy
hard heart to softe^ it and thy proud spirits to humble them, an^ your sinful
natures to change them, and yo^ may by the operation of the spirit, be
converted and saved by them.

Again further consider O all young person^ if in the spring and morning of
your days yo^ do not bring forth fruits to God, it is ver^ much if you do ever,
for deathbed Repentance is rarely true; for those that stop th^^ ears to Gods
early calls, he will shut his ears to their late Prayers. It is a great honor
to a man when he is old, that he can date his conversion from the morning of
his youth. It was Abraham's honor that he died in a good old age: so St.
Paul's, that he was aged in years and grace: and St. John had those Divine
revelations when he was aged in years and grace. I say that God does make large
discoveries of himself to aged Christians. Polycarpus could say when he was
old, Many years have I served my Master Christ, and hitherto he has dealt well
by me. By this you may see as in a glass, plainly the honor of being an old
disciple of Christ.

Let me exhort you young Men and young Women in the words of that ancient and
faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, T. Brooks, says he, As you love your
precious souls, and as you would escape Hell and come to Heaven, and as you
would be happy in life, and blessed in death, and glorious after death, don't
spend any more of your precious time in drinking and drabbing, in Carding and
Dicing: do not trifle away your time, don't Swear away your time, don't Whore
away your time, don't Lie away your time, but begin to be good betimes, because
Time is a Talent that God will reckon with you for.

Again, consider in the next place, Oh young men and women, how near you are to
the ocean of Eternity, there is not a step you step, nor a breath you draw, nor
moment of time you live, but has an influence on Eternity. O the gold^^ Sands
will be quickly run out! Oh what a (...) thing is your life, but a span, a
dream, a wi^ a shadow, a post, swifter than a post, Job 7.^ Remember that you
are all going to your long (...) to the house of Eternity; yet man does not
^^^cern how his precious time does fly from h^^ as the shadow on a Dial passes
on, from (...) hour to another, though its speedy motion not discerned, so man
passes from infancy childhood, and from childhood to youth, (...) from youth
to middle age, and so to old a^^ and to the grave; and how few are there t^
take notice of it? yea in a moment we shall (...) down into the grave and come
up no m^^ How these Meditations much trouble a Pers^^ King, that having took a
view of his vast Ar^ wept to think that within an hundred ye^ not one of them
would be left alive.

Oh young men, tremble to consider that y^^ are on the very brink of Death and
Etern^^ upon the borders of Heaven, or the mouth (...) Hell, and as soon as
death has shut your ey^^ you shall see and know what you shall be, (...) ever;
for you are almost within the dread^^ noise of the Millstone of Gods wrath, and
(...) rattling of fiery Chains of the prisoners of He^^ Oh dolorous outcries,
and roaring of the d^^ned in Hell! crying out, One and all. Oh w^ evil, and
grievous evil, and bitter a thing i^ (...) which we would not believe till we
came to this dis^al place of torment! There you may hear those ^ursed tormented
sinners, crying out in the very anguish of their spirits, Oh when the Lord of
^lory was at the door knocking, we would not let (...) in, and now is Hells
Mouth shut upon us for ^ver. There the filthy Swearer, Liar and ^lasphemer of
Gods holy Name, that did tear and rend the Name of their Creator, and ^wear by
the blood of their Redeemer, are ^ere with scorching tongues to bewail, that
^hey should take the Name of God in vain. There the impudent and swinish
Drunkard, that ^ad too often with his pleasant Cups, and spark^ng Wine, and
cursing Companions, here in ^he Agony of his soul does wish that he had been
^ober and temperate; so that he might not have ^asted the bitter wine of Gods
wrath, the dregs of which he is made to drink for ever, Psalm. 75.8. There the
filthy Adulterers and cursed Harlots ^urning in their Hellish lust, crying out,
Oh that we had been chaste, sober and modest, and that our eyes had been blind,
and never had ^nown the face of man or woman, so we had ^scaped the vengeance
of eternal fire. There ^^e shall hear the vile Atheist wishing that he had
believed the Ministers of Christ; but alas, ^ow it is too late. And likewise
the World^ing choked with Silver and Gold: There ^he cowardly back-slider in
heart shall wish that he had never know the way of God, (...) that he had been
faithful unto death.

But you that are the Servants of God, an^ mourners in Sion, Lift up your
heads, for your Redemption draws nigh; and know that you are co^^ within the
hearing of the Heavenly Songs, Etern^^ Triumphs and Hallelujahs of the Saints
and Glorious Angels in your Fathers house, where there (...) fullness of Joy and
Pleasure for evermore, Psal^ 16.11.

St. Jerome used to say, That whether he (...) or drink, I hear the voice sound
in my ear, Arise (...) dead and come to Judgment.

To conclude, Oh let the thoughts of things to come be much upon your spirits:
every nigh^ when thou go to bed, and every morning have some serious
thoughts of Death and Eternity, let it be by the Pen of a Diamond writ^^^ on
your hearts. Death, that grim Porter, wi^^ open the Gates of Glory to every
Believer, an^ let them into their Fathers house. Whosoever th^^ is wise will
observe these things, he shall see the salvation of the Lord.

Stars are poor books, and oftentimes do miss,
This book of Stars lights to eternal bliss.
shall insert some Forms of Prayer for the benefit of such young Persons as
shall stand in need of them.
A Morning Prayer for Youth.
O Eternal, most Great, most Gracious, and ever Blessed Lord God, thou art a
great God, ^^d greatly to be feared and reverenced of all (...) draw nigh unto
thee; thou art a Spirit, and ^ou wilt be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth,
(...) of such worshippers will thou be found, thus ^^king thee: we beseech thee
to pour down upon our ^arts the spirits of Supplication and Prayer, so (...) to
seek thee aright, and offer up an acceptable ^^^vice, in and through the merits
of our Blessed ^^viour and Redeemer Jesus Christ, and through ^^e assistance of
thy holy spirit of truth, and let thy ^^ly word be a Lanthorn to my feet, and a
light ^^to my paths, to lead me in the ways of Truth and Holiness, that I may
obtain everlasting Hap^^ness, through the merits of my Blessed Savior and
Redeemer Christ Jesus. O Lord pardon my manfold sins and transgressions
wherewith I have trans^ressed against thee, in thought, word and deed,
specially the sins and frailty of my youth O, Lord, ^hey have been many and
great, and by reason ^hereof, I have merited thy wrath and Eternal Damnation:
But O Lord in the midst of judgment ^emember mercy; spare me, spare me, O Lord
God, for thy loving kindness sake in Christ Jesus, who has satisfied thy
Justice, and is ever ma^^ intercession for me at the Throne of Grace and mer^^
I desire to bless and praise thy Name, O Lord Go^ for thy mercies and loving
kindness to me and (...) mankind, that thou have preserved and kept me (...) my
sleep from all manner of danger that might h^ befaln me, and that thou have
brought me safe (...) the beginning of this day, and I bless thy holy Na^^ for
all the mercies that I have received from (...) to time from thee, before to
give me gr^^ to walk thankfully beseeching thee, and to live to t^^ praise all
the days of my life, I beseech thee b^^ my young and tender years with the
gifts and gr^ces of thy holy spirit, and to amend my life accor^ing to thy holy
word, and to pass the time of my li^^ here in thy fear that I may die in thy
favor. I ^^seech thee, O my God, to bless my Parents and Kindre^ and all my
Relations, and teach me to walk d^^ fully before them, as becomes a Child of
God, having thy fear before mine eyes and thy spirit directing my heart, that I
may always do those things tha^ are well pleasing in thy sight, O Lord my
strength and Redeemer, and make me thy true and faithful Servant; teach me to
love and serve thee O my Blesse^ Savior and Redeemer, all the days of my life,
tha^ I may live in thy fear, and at last die in thy favor, Grant me these poor
Petitions, O Lord, for the sa^^ of my Blessed Savior and Redeemer, Jesus
Christ to whom be Honor, Praise and Glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

The Maids Prayer.
O Lord, let thy Handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine Audience, and hearken
unto her ^hen she calls upon thee, O despise not her low state, when she
offers up her Supplication unto ^ee, but how down thine Ears to the hearty
de^^res of thy poor Servant, teach me to ask aright ^r such things as are
requisite for me both for Soul and Body; and though thou have ordained Women
(...) be the weaker Vessels, both in labors of the Body and endeavors of the
mind; yet so strengthen me, O my Lord that I may perform that labor whereun^o
I am called, with easiness and comfort; Oh ^nlighten my Soul with thy Divine
inspiration, that (...) may do those things that are well pleasing in thy
^^ght; let me keep my Reputation honest in the eyes ^f the world, knowing that
a good Name is better then precious Ointment; especially in thy sight ^et me be
pure, honest and undefiled in this World, so shall I not be ashamed in the
great day of my account; give me chaste and religious thoughts let not the
wanton pleasures of the flesh drown in me the Heavenly treasures of thy spirit;
Defend me from Sin, Satan, and the Poison of evil Tongues: make ^ne faithful,
wise, wary, trusty and just in those things committed to my charge by my Master
and Mistress, Father and Mother: Grant me health of body, quietness of mind,
gentleness toward every body, put out of my heart all Pride, (...) Hatred, and
all uncharitableness; give me t^^ ^^^rit of contentment in all conditions,
though I ha^^ wealth and dowry as others have in this worl^ I trust thou will
give me the true Riches. Gra^ Grace that I may love, serve honor and obey
(...) in Holiness and Righteousness all my days, (...) may enjoy thee for ever
in the World to come. G^ these my Petitions for the sake of Jesus Christ (...)
Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

The Dying Man's last Prayer.
O Lord God, who art the Health of all Me^ ^^ving, and the everlasting Life of
them (...) die in thy Faith; I poor Creature submit to thy (...) will. I humbly
beseech thee, O Lord, to give grace, that I may now willingly lay down this
(...) Body in hope of the Resurrection which in (...) manner shall be restored
again. O most mer^^ Savior, that when Death has shut up the (...) of my Body,
my Soul may be received up unto the Lord Jesus Receive my Spirit, and take me
to (...) mercy. Amen.

Whereas certain incroaching dishonest p^^sons have counterfeited this Book,
the (...) book is only to be had of J. Conyers at the (...) of the Raven over
against Ely-House in Hol^

FINIS.

