THE HISTORY OF SCARBROUGH-SPAW, OR, A further Discovery of the excellent
Virtues thereof in the Cure of the Scurvy, Hypochond. Melancholy, Stone,
Gonorrhea, Agues, Jaundies, Dropsy, Women's Diseases, etc. By many remarkable
Instances, being a demonstration from the most convincing Arguments, viz.
Matter of Fact.

ALSO A Discourse of an Artificial Sulphur-Rath, and Bath of Seawater, with
the uses thereof, in the cure of many Diseases.

TOGETHER With a short account of other Rarities of Nature observable at
Scarbrough.

By W. Sympson Doct. in Physic.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Simmons at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1679.

To the most Noble and most Honorable CHARLES PAWLET; Marquess of Winchester,
Earl of Wilt-shire, Baron St. John of Basing, etc. one of the Lords of his
Majesty's most Honorable Council.
May it please your Honor, My Lord,
IT is not the least amongst those Oriental Gems, which adorn the Breast of
Nobility, nor ought it to be reputed the meanest ornamental Virtue, that by its
luster renders the minds of Noble Persons truly such, not only to be thought,
but really to be encouragers of every generous and useful undertaking; not
barely in Specie but effectually to become Patrons to every noble Design. And
surely among the great variety of Topics for discourse (the Hystory of things
appertaining to another World, Divinity I mean excepted) none but in one sense
or other yields the Bays to that highly useful one of health (with its
Introductions and Appendices) whether relating to the continuation or
restoration thereof; to which our ensuing History is so nearly concerned as to
merit the repute of being mainly introductory thereto: whose adaptness to
humane necessities will evidently appear if we silently resolve within our own
bosoms the ensuing Queries, viz. What resentment of Grandeur has an aching
head, although encircled within the most glorious Crown? What delight can a
Statesman take in Regulating and setting at Rights the Grand Affairs of his
Country while he labors under the Conspiracy of prevalent, although couchant,
Maladies? What pleasure has a morbid and (therefore) disgustful Palate, the
bane of Epicurism, in the fruition of the greatest Delicacies, even amidst the
great variety which accosts that erring sensual Organ? What profit can a Rich
man take of all his wealth, while he labors under the pains of a Gouty fit?
What quiet have we in the settlement of our Lands and Tenements; while the
morbid Tenant we inwardly foster, turns Lawyer and Bailiff too, sues and turns
us out of possession by an irresistible Lease of Ejectment? And in fine, what
satisfaction have we of any thing we enjoy here below, while we truckle under
any Grief or Malady? Now, my Lord, the generousness of the Subject we treat
upon, viz. The History of these Mineral healing waters, is such as (among other
useful Essays, toward a public good) may from a solution of the aforesaid
Queries, as also from other intimate Arguments, deservedly challenge your
Honors Patro nage, in as much as you have been particularly pleased out of the
sense of that good you have experimentally reaped thereby to do that right to
Scarbrough Waters, as in the presence of several worthy Personages publicly to
own them, by giving this Autoptical testimony thereof (at least what was
equivalent thereto) That of all the Mineral waters you had tasted (few in
England or France having escaped your test) these of Scarbrough surpassed, both
as to a through as well as effectual working: By which your Lordship received
considerable relief the last Summer from the oppressing symptoms of the
Hypochondraical wind, although at the latest season of the year. -- And, my
Lord, notwithstanding the following Tract as most-what grounded upon
experience, (the mother of Knowledge) having its root deeply set in, and firmly
knit upon, matter of Fact, is doubtless the better able to bear up, yea stand
and vindicate it self against the shocks of any Calumniating Quill whatever;
yet upon due and mature consideration, there is much safety for such a shrub
how well rooted soever, to be planted under so tall a Cedar, that so it may not
only in an hot season (when tender Plants are apt to wither,) thence receive
shade, but also in Winter and stormy weather, when there is no shelter. To
conclude, my Lord, what service your Lordship may do to that Country in this
your tutelage to so good a design, that you may live long enough to experience,
and by your (if need be) annual visits to confirm, is the desire of,

My Lord, Your Honors most humble Servant. W. Sympson.

THE PREFACE.
Candid Reader,
IT is the usefulness of things which renders them acceptable, and the benefit
Mankind reaps from things applicable, makes them truly valuable, which as such,
really ought to gain opinion on their side, the common standard of all matters
relating to humane bodies; amongst which, those that from their own nature are
more nearly allied to the use of man, ought of right to purchase the most
acceptance, the greatest value and the best opinion. As to which, how nearly,
deeply, and necessarily the health of man (the Prince of bodies) is concerned
in the continuing or regaining thereof, let the healthful (who have lately
known sickness or the diseased who now languish) speak.

Whatever therefore relates to the real curing or healing of Diseases, and
consequently restoring of health, is truly valuable and ought to purchase
opinion (the common measure of things) on their side, and thence highly worth
inquiring after, of which sort are all Medical waters, and particularly those
of Scarbrough, which how agreeable they are to the general constitution of
humane bodies? How congeneal to their ferments? How great apperients or openers
of obstructions? How generally they pass? How frequently they remove the causes
of Diseases, and consequently concur to the restoration of health, The
instances of of Cures chiefly performed thereby (in the following History set
down) those speaking for others of the like nature, we have not an opportunity
to insert) will (in order to the gaining the ends aforesaid) yea satisfactorily
and demonstrably point out? Upon my late espousing of Scarbrough-waters (the
rational Induction whereto were the following Instances, the main Subject of
this Tract. I found it in the mouths of many persons (with whom I or my friends
conversed) that I was generally impeached of a retraction of what I had already
writ. They apprehending as if my former Books were writ against the Spaw, which
no person (who ever read them) can accuse me of. For the controversy was not
taken up against the waters, as if designed to blemish them, but was grounded
upon showing other manner of Ingredients then were believed, so that what I
said was not levelled against the waters, but urged against the deposited
principles or ingredients thereof. As to the truth of which I have a cloud of
witnesses, even all who have thoroughly read my two books of the Spaw, (the
chief called Hydrologia Chymica. The latter Hydrological Essays) to whom I
appeal, and particularly I advise such as scruple thereat, for their further
satisfaction to consult p. 115, etc. of my Hydrolog. Chym. where they will find
what I ascribe to the cure of the Scurvey, Dropsy, Strangury, Jaundies,
Melancholy, Women's Diseases, etc. If I was drawn a little aside to have a
jealous eye upon the waters (as some may imagine from my Hydrolog. Essays,) It
was from an oblique credulity, biased by a dark Saturnine Influence, whose
Clouds were soon dispersed by the Sunbeams of experimental light, yea many
were for a time (from the same male-influence) afraid of these waters, as if
they had suffered from the mouth of the constellated Dog above (animated by
the rising of a late Saturnal Star) as injurious at some hits of times, and in
some sense as the bitings of mad dogs here below, and were thence brought into
a Hydrophoby, viz. was afraid of their proper remedy, by refusing to approach
the Medical waters; although they have formerly proved a cure to theirs or
other parallel Diseases. And this Maleinfluence (in reference to these waters)
has (as I hinted) lately taken date from the Cosmical rising of one of the
Satilities, a churlish Star of morose Saturn, which appeared in the year 1670,
1672. But if I have any skill in this sort of Astrology, the effects of this
unfortunate constellation, and dark visaged Saturn, will, by calculation, be
quite over in this year 1679. and another more benign will begin to take place.

At this Pool, like that of Bethesdah's (the dark mists and foggs being blown
over) are a multitude of Scorbuticks, Hypochondriacks and other
Valetudinarians, (I mean such as labor of the Scurvy, Melancholy, Stone, and
other Diseases) Male and Female in their several apartments, waiting for the
moving of the waters, that thereby they may be healed of their respective
Maladies, whilst others (who come here chiefly for diversion) only sport in
Neptunes Province, and like the Leviathan, only play with the waters. Were I to
insist upon an Encomium of these healing waters, I might venture, and that
without Vanity) to speak a bold word, viz. that if a Physician, who has these
waters as a substitute, have but likewise a stock of some good specificks,
(without which he will often prove lame) to use upon occasion, as necessity,
through various indications should require, might Essay to grapple almost with
any Disease, (if there be but any tolerable strength in nature) and scarce any
would be able to stand before him; For those waters do not work as vulgar
waters, which as an Exotic ferment penetrates the Excrements, thins them, and
by irritating the Peristaltick of the Intestines, carries them away; But
withal, by the nimbleness and quickness of its Salts, insinuates into the more
inward recesses of the obstructed bowels, unbinding those hidden ligatures,
unhinging those fastened obstacles, unbending those inward strong springs in
their elasticity, whether in the juyces or solid parts of the body, unlocking
those shut-up bolts, and opening all those hidden obstructions which are far
removed from the eye, or even intellectuals of many, and yet intimately, yea
essentially concerned in the Fabric of many Chronical Diseases; which (as I
said) are with great difficulity come at or reached, but with such nimble
agents and deeply piercing Salts, as are the inmates of these waters. Amongst
which, that of Nitre is so exquisitely (by the Chemistry of nature) mixed, and
contempered with the Alluminous Salt, as that water is thereby (among other
excellent waters) rendered the most effectual quencher of thirst of any water
that ever I saw, yea perhaps I might not be much mistaken, if I should say that
the temperature of the Mineral juyces performed by the wonderful subterraneal
industry (I had well nigh said Chemistry) of Nature, are such as if in
reference to quenching (yea and peradventure also as to other virtues) it may
(and that without vanity) be reputed one of the best of the known healing
waters in Europe.

We have studied conciseness, and yet are larger in the main than we expected.
I could not well be more compendious, especially when I considered, how I was
under an obligation to give the Readers (chiefly the more ingenious sort) some
tolerable satisfaction, at least in the solution of some Phenomina necessarily
to be insisted on, in a discourse of this nature. -- This is to be noted, these
waters being carried at a distance, are found to operate nothing nigh so well,
as to the cure of Diseases, as when drunk at the Springhead.

To consider, what faithfulness I have used in putting down the respective
Cases? What care I have taken in methodically ranging them under their
particular heads? And as near as I could in reducing them to their distinct
classes, and in all with what candor to truth I have used either in
transcribing, or originally placing down the various Topics of the following
History, I refer to every unbyassed Reader by his best Inquest to determine and
satisfy himself? where we do not rank Patients in their several classes first
or last, according to the dignity of the persons, so much as according to the
eminency of their respective cases. Amongst whom, those who are so
publick-minded as to permit their names to attest their cures, thereby do (as
of right they ought) Justice to the waters, Service to their Country, and
meanwhile, no injury to themselves. Thus wishing them, who may be concerned,
much good success by the due, proper, and advisable use of the waters,

I remain Thine further to serve Thee, W. Simpson.

THE HISTORY OF Scarbrough-Spaw.
THE Diseases we propose to treat of, and to which the use of the waters are
most proper, are chiefly Chronical, or such whose causes are so rooted as to
continue long unless cured by proper Remedies: amongst which, the most grassant
or most universally afflicting, are, first the Scurvie with its branchings,
complications and inoculations into other diseases: next the Flatus
Hypochondriacus, or diseases springing from Melancholy. 3. the Stone and
Strangury. 4. Agues. 5. The Jaundies. 6. The Dropsice. 7. Worms. 8. Women's
diseases, etc. next to which we but touch upon acute diseases.

We shall begin with the Scurvy, which, with its appendices, is the most
spreading Malady, No Cities, towns, villages, free from it, nay scarce any
family which is not notorious for some one or other persons therein afflicted
more or less with the Symptoms thereof.

It is not now our intended work here to give the definition and various
distinctions or specifications of the Scurvy, only in short shall crave leave
to say that it depends chiefly, if not solely, upon the depraved ferments, and
vitiated digestions of the body, and particularly and primarily of the Stomach:
(that Primum mobile of this and other chronical diseases) where resides the
very seminary of the scorbutic ferment, consisting chiefly in a spurious
Acidity, which vitiating the subsequent digestions (some more then others
spreds it self by degrees into the blood and other juices, until it appear in
all its colors, and branched fort in all its symptoms and products.

The symptoms of the Scurvy are various, sometimes under one disguise sometimes
under another, they are frequently of these sorts (b^^ some of which that
disease discovers it self) viz. an universal lassitude and weakness in the
knees, dullness or heaviness of spirits, erratick pains, shortness of breath,
tumors, ulcers of many sorts, spots and blotches upon the legs, roughness of
the skin, and other impurities of the outward parts, discolourdeness, and
soreness of gums, pain and looseness in the teeth, sour stink of breath, etc.

As to a further disquisition into the nature and causes of the Scurvy, how the
foundation thereof is laid in the depravation of the ferment of the Stomach,
and how the first Error, not being corrected in the subsequent digestions, but
carried into the blood, subverting the crasis thereof, alters the sweet
balsamic soft natural temper thereof into an austere, sour, saltiness,
perverting its natural and genuine fermentation, and how the blood corrupted by
the vitiating ferment of the Scurvy, breaths forth impure streams, which making
their Egress through the pores of the outward parts, are (by obstructions they
find there) coagulated upon the outward parts, and so make spots, blotches,
foulness, scurf, roughness (as if netled) and other impurities of the skin, the
usual effects of that disease: and how the difference in Scurvys, are chiefly
ascribable to variety of Acids or some acrimonious ferments prevailing in the
juices of the body; And how by analogy, the skin is compared to a transparent
glass, upon which the streams arising from that spurious fermentation of the
blood and humors, being too gross to be pervious to the pores thereof, might
well be supposed to condense along the sides, begetting spots, stains, foul
damps, answerable to those impure mists, and dark steams, really arising from
the bastardly fermentation of the blood in Scurvies, and condensed upon the
external parts, etc. To a further disquisition, I say, of all which, we refer
the reader to what we have said thereon in our Hydrolog. Chymic. p. 70. etc.

Now we shall immediately come to the matter we chiefly aim at viz the
Enumeration of particular cure of the Scurvy and its branches of complications
performed by the waters.

Cures of the Scurvy by the Waters.
The First shall be Major Tailors Case.
IN the year 50 or 51 he had a long lingering scorbutic and complicated
Malady, had a dry Cough, short-winded, had no appetite or digestion could
neither Eat, Sleep, nor capable of any Exercise, was brought by impoverishment
of Spirit, very low, and lean, even to a great debilitude; in which languishing
conditition he continued notwithstanding all the help the Physicians could make
him; who by them was adjuged consumptive, and by them and on all hands
concluded a dying-man: was however resolved for Scarbrough, hearing some noise
of its virtues, for he thus thought, that seeing he was a man already under the
sentence of death, he must dye if he stayed at home, it was but dying and it
could be no worse at Scarbrough, or els-where, and as to the place he was not
solicitous; whereupon contrary to advice, undertakes the journey, although with
very great difficulty, because of his great weakness, he was told to his great
discouragement, that he should never return alive: (if so he resolved to be
buried at Scarbrough) he drank the waters three days before it began to work,
there being at that time no Physician by to advise with: Then he filled himself
very full with the waters, taking about five pints thereof: upon which it made
him very sick, gave him only one vomit, and so wrought downward; whereupon in
about a weeks time, he began to find benefit, and in about fourteen days after
(drinking every day the waters) he found himself so much altered for the
better, as all the bad Symptoms gradually went off, the waters passed well,
working thoroughly upon the humors, discharging the peccant matter, correcting
the Scorbutic acid ferment, opening obstructions, dulcified the blood,
strengthened the weakened tone of the Stomach and bowels, proured an appetite,
helped the digestion, brought on rest, as the genuine result of the former,
became cheerful, returned home (contrary to the expectation of all) very well,
not in a litter, but on horseback, gathering strength daily. Then he thought
himself so well as he needed not come next year, nor did he: But finding
himself afterward not well, came the next year after: And so continued till 64
intermitting one in 3 or 4 years, during which time he had his health as well
as he would wish.

Major Taylor's case of the Scurvy cured a second time by the Waters.
2. DUring the time of his being abroad at Tangier, which was about five years,
at his return into England, he found himself in as bad a state of health as he
was at his first coming to the waters aforesaid. The Scorbutic Symptoms
prevailing strongly upon him, his legs, (as an addition and product of this
sort of Scurvy) was covered over with white scales, and he, in the main,
overrun with the Scurvy from the Sea-air, with most of the indications thereof
aforesaid, betakes himself to his former Asylum for releif and help, drank the
waters twice that Summer (in the year 70) found as considerable an Event, yea
as much benefit by the waters as before, taking off the Symptoms of the Scurvy
as complicated with other weakness, purified the blood, and thereby made the
scales fall off: So continued drinking the waters every year since except one,
and injoys his health very well, was at Scarbrouogh twice last Summer, being
the latter time there with my Lord Marquess of Winchester.

My Lady Carey her case.
The Third cure of the Scurvy.
3 JUly 5th 77 she was highly Scorbutic, the first remarkable appearance
whereof was a stitch she had in her right breast, which like a dart struck
through to her back: That a strong Scorbutic Acidum prevailed in her Stomach,
was evident, in that when she took new milk, it presently became curdled into
cheese, which she vomited up (with great difficulty and danger of suffocation,)
in the very form of a cheese curd, as if indeed the Scorbutic Acid was the
runnet which made cheese of milk while in the Stomach: she took some Tobacco
which caused more of the same cheesy congulum come up: after which this
Scorbutic Acidum was in great part carried upon the nerves, whence she fell
into an universal trembling or paralytick fit, so as every part of her
trembled, which continued about half an hour, during which time she could not
speak, and (as an argument of an accompanied convulsive motion) her mouth was
drawn a little aside; but as to lividness of color and other dangerous
Symptoms, she seemed well nigh Expireing: Then was the scene of this Scorbutic
ferment transfered into the blood, where it caused such a spurious
fermentation, as thereupon a violent heat was contracted, which continued (as
if she had been in a fever) for four days, which with sweating Medicines was
partly transpired, and partly carried or translated to the urinary vessels,
where the Scurvy Acid (thus variously disguised) at length chiefly fixed, and
acted another sort of Scene, bringing on the strangury or stoppage of Urine,
which continued day and night (not past two spoonfuls a time) and her water
constantly mixed with blood, and that for 14 weeks together: mean while some of
the Scorbutic Acidum lodged in the Stomach, depraving the ferment thereof,
whence the lost her appetite: and part of it was sent or precipitated from the
blood in its circulation upon the lungs, whence from the obstructing Acidum
they were stuffed and had not (through a lessening their Systole and Diastole)
a due respiration, the cause of her short windedness, and from both was brought
on a decaying of Spirits and strength, and an impoverishment of her body,
together with a great pain in the urinary Vessels.

Thus the Scurvy had appeared under various masks, as if indeed it had been a
complication of many other maladies, viz. a bastard Plurisie, Surfeit, Palsy,
Convulsions, Fever, Strangury, Stone, (with the aggravation of mixed blood)
dolor Nephriticus, Apepsie, Asthma, Marasmus, while really (as may be concluded
from the range of Symptoms emerging from the frequent metastasis of the
Scorbutic Acid) they were but various appearances, and different guises the
scorbutic ferment had put on, as it was lodged in, or transferred from one
part, organ, or juice to another: was all (I say) but the Scurvy under
different masks.

This worthy Lady, under the circumstances of the aforesaid Symptoms, (somewhat
alleviated) by which she had been under confinement to her Chamber for eight
months, by advice, at length betakes her self to Scarbrough-Spaw, May 28, drank
the waters, and found immediate help; For the Scorbutic Symptoms abated, her
appetite was recruited, and strength regained: And although the waters did not
pass by Urine (the obstructions being so obstinate) at the first time of
drinking thereof, which was only for 10 days: yet upon her Ladyships return
again to the waters; they then made their way through those formerly obstructed
passages, took off all bad Symptoms, formerly afflicting those parts, easting
her pain, procured a good digestion, brought on (considering her age) a good
Athletick habit of body; became very active cheerful and healthful, and as if
renewed again in her old age, the good effects thereof continued: for I waited
on her near two months after her return from the water and found her well as
aforesaid.

A Fourth cure.
4 THe Right Honorable James Earl of Suffolk had been for the space of thirteen
years troubled with a most grievous Scorbutic pain (for so it appeared by the
Symptoms) at the Stomach, which usually seized on him at meals, especially if
he did eat flesh, so as was forced to give over, though sometimes at two or
three bits of meat, and thus it would hold him for several hours, causing a
great distention and hardness upon the region of the Stomach, with torsions on
the right side, so as it made his very ribs on that side to bend: whose best
ease was to sit low, and thrust his thumb with all his force upon his Stomach.
His Lordship had sought for cure both in England and France of the most eminent
Physicians he could hear of, but found none, the malady resisting all means
that could be used: His Lordship came to these waters, and drank about three
weeks, after a few days (as Dr. Whittie, who was then at the Spaw and attended
him, observed) the fits lessened by degrees, that he could better Eat, and
concoct his meat with little pain: who gave his Lordship some grounds of hope,
that after he was settled at home from the waters and his Journey, he might
find a perfect recovery, which through the mercy of God did accordingly
succeed, so as he has scarce any footsteps of his former malady, but can eat
any sort of meat without pain.

The Fifth is Sir John Anderson's Case given in a letter under his own hand to
Dr. Whittie.
SIr, upon your request to give you an account of the effects of
Scarbrough-Spaw, I present you with this, as a true narrative of what I have
observed. In Anno 1661 finding my self very much inclining to the Scurvy
(having most of the Symptoms attending that disease) I came to Scarbrough; and
must confess, that after a fortnights drinking of the waters, I found both the
pains of my knees and short windedness wholly gone, and those other impediments
which are concomitants of that distemper: being thus encouraged, at the
convenient time of the next year I repaired thither again, and very
unexpectedly I was there taken with a fit of the Gout, under which malady I had
formerly suffered, but after I had drank the waters about a week I was freed
from all my pain, and I thank God (excepting some small remembrances, as heat
in that joint of my toe) I never had since any thing of pain worth taking
notice of. In 1663. I found my blood extremely hot, and such pricking in my
hands and feet, and continual bleeding at the nose, that I feared an
extraordinary distemper, which after using of the waters I was clearly freed
from. In the year 1664 I was prevented by extraordinary occasions and could not
come to the Spaw, and most part of that Winter and the succeeding Spring I was
much afflicted with an extraordinary heat in my bowels, and short-windedness
and pain in my knees, which by the blessing of God, and the goodness of the
waters, joined with your advice and assistance in using them, I find my self
quitted of. And this observation I have made this year of my own using them,
that after I had drank three days (the waters having fully answered my
expectation in all particulars) I resolved one night to content my self with a
very slender Supper, and the next morning I observed that I made plentiful
store of Urine, as usually before I drank the waters, after which I drank four
quarts of water, and resolved to fast until they had fully completed their
operation which (as I conceive) ended about three in the afternoon; I still
kept fasting to see if they would work longer, which in some small measure they
did till five, but more by Urine then siege, after which, I measured the
quantity that had come from me, in which I was as exact as I was in taking the
water it self, and when I had compared what had passed through, with the
quantity that I drank, I found the 4 quarts increased to five and very near a
pint, which could not be increased by any thing I took, for until five I had
fasted from all things and then took but a gill of Wormwood wine, which was all
that could help to make the addition, excepting the humors of the body which
were plentifully cast out with the waters. This from Sir your very affectionate
Friend John Anderson.

The Sixth cure of the Scurvy.
MR. J. Robinson of Hull had a Fever with an aguish intervall, being a fever
spun out at length by Paroxysms, and thence upon the exit thereof, had
contracted a Scorbutic Apepsie and chachectical habit of body (as the relict
of his late Quartan) having much pains and weakness in his joints all over him,
so as he could scarcely walk, and his appetite to food was taken away: by
advice, he came to the waters of Scarbrough, drank them, and found himself
better in a few days. After eight or ten days drinking, he got an Excellent
good Stomach, and in about fourteen days time, his Scorbutic Symptoms went
off, and he returned as well in health home as he had been of twenty years
before, as I had from his own mouth: upon which account he yearly drinks the
waters with good success ever since, which is now seven or eight years.

A Seventh cure of the Scurvy.
ANne Robinson labored under a Scorbutic ferment vitiating the natural
ferment of the Stomach, which took away her appetite, and procured a great
weakness and languor of body, her disease was chronical, of long continuance,
held her above two years: in order to the cure of which, she had taken vomits
and other medicaments according to the advice of some Physicians but all in
vain, she still becomeing worse and worse, in so much as she was judged
consumptive, she (contrary to the advice of one Physician she had consulted)
applies her self to the waters, drank them for fourteen days, and that without
any success at all, continued as bad as at first: at length when fourteen days
were expired, she began to expectorate, or spit abundance of Phlegm which in
the aforesaid time had been loosned: whereupon she grew better, got a Stomach
to her food, regained strength, so as in a months time (after the first
drinking) she found her self very well: And returned home in good health. But
after a while at home, she began again in the same malady: whereupon she came
again the next Spaw time, and was cured a second time: also she had some
touches of her former Symptoms a third time, but after her third drinking, she
was thoroughly well recovered, and so continued ever since, being now several
years ago: which account I had from her own mouth at the Waters.

The Eighth cure of the Scurvy.
J. C. near York, labored under a Scorbutic disorder of his Stomach, evident
by its great oppression by Phlegm, and water, so as every morning he had great
and troublesome boknings or retchings to vomit, whereby a clear water came off,
and after that, by much strugglings, came up Phlegm, and then he was at some
ease, during which time it took away his appetite: This continued,
notwithstanding the advice of an ingenious Physician, who at length ordered him
to come to these waters, where he found great relief, it thinns his Phlegm and
carries it off by seidge, and disposes so of the clear water, which used to
distill per lingulam from his Stomach, as he is well, and continues so for many
months after drinking the waters, till toward the Spring, and then it begins
again, and continues till he comes to the waters, which takes it away again,
and he returns well home. Upon which action he every year frequents the waters
and that with good success.

The Ninth cure of the Scurvy.
MR. Christopher Adams of Camelsfield Yorkshire, aged seventy three years, had
for six years together been miserably tormented with pain in his legs,
feebleness in his knees, frequent faintings, and a dry Itch over all his skin,
he had advice with several Physicians, who had ordered him Diet-drinks,
Diaphoreticks, Ointments, etc. But without any success at all, he came at
length to Scarbrough, and upon drinking those waters he found perfect ease in
all the aforesaid Symptoms; he had also been sore afflicted with dizziness in
his head and loss of memory, his undestanding also was sometimes so clouded,
that he could not discern the quarters of heaven, or know the East from the
West, and sometimes was wont to fall: by the use of the Spaw, he recovered out
of the said Symptoms, and never had any fits since considerable. For prevention
whereof he continued his annual visits at Scarbrough for seven years, although
he lived at 40 miles distance.

The Tenth case
MAdam Pockley nere Selby in Yorkshire had a bad Stomach, accompanied with an
ill digestion, a great flatulency or windy-riftings: she drank the waters last
year near fourteen days, with some intervall, which procured her a very good
Stomach to her meat, so as she said, she eat near as much meat, and that with
savouriness and good relish, in one day at Scarbrough, as in a week at home:
her meat also digesting well, and the windiness (the fruit of Indigestion) was
gone.

1 Scorbutic Cholera.
The Tenth cure of the Scurvy.
SIr W. Ker, upon the borders of Scotland (a worthy Knight) labored under a
Scorbutic Cholera, with a great oppression of wind upon his Stomach: in so
much as he could scarce get any meat down, but was presently heaved up by the
force and pressure of the wind, and what ever he eat at night, he was sure
after his first sleep to be desperate sick therewith, till it was carried off
both by vomiting and purging: whereby was brought on a great debilitude of
appetite, could scarce digest any meat, and was thence reduced to a very weak
state of body, being brought to a great enfeeblement by the prevalency of the
aforesaid Scorbutic Symptoms: having had much advice before, and had taken
much Physic but to little purpose, was advised by his Physician Dr. Simpson
(an Eminent Physician in Scotland) to apply himself to Scarbrough waters: who
accordingly did, and upon five or six days drinking thereof, according to
advice, found himself much better, and the Symptoms abating, could take food,
and had a pretty good digestion, the flatus ceasing; and in about ten or twelve
days time, he returned home as well in health as ever he had been before, which
happened in the year 74; found so much good by drinking the waters, as he has
come every year since, and so intends to do for the future if he lives: from
whose own mouth I had the aforesaid relation.

2 Scorbutic Cholera.
The Eleventh cure of the Scurvy.
G. -- labored under a Scorbutic Apepsie, and indigestion, throwing up
sometimes a matter of a greasy form, so as might be made into balls, other
while casting up that little food he took, raw and indigested, many hours after
taking thereof, being unaltered in its form, from what it was when taken, being
contracted by a surfeit from cold, by which Symptoms he became weak in body and
unfit for labor: he continued thus for above two years, most what sick after
taking any food, and what he took was so little as by computation was scarce
able to sustain him: he came to the waters, drank them four days, each day
twelve pints, which wrought very plentifully with him: The very first day, he
began to eat with an appetite, what food he took stayed with him, and in the
compass of the foresaid time, he got a very good Stomach to his meat, which
also digested very well, and he thereupon recovered. The waters during their
working (especially the last day) made him very sore behind, which was a
demonstraion a posteriori of the efficacy of the waters.

3 Scorbutic Cholera.
The Twelfth cure of the Scurvy.
A Scotch Gentleman was afflicted with a Scorbutic indigestion and flatus upon
his Stomach, so as what ever he took he threw it up presently after; This
continued for about three quarters of a year, he came (in order to his help) to
drink the Scarbrough waters, the first week he found no benefit at all: But
being put upon a more regular Method of taking them: he then, the first day
after, began to take some broth, which staid with him, next day he could take
and digest a little meat, which stayed, and agreed well with him: and in a few
days after had a very good Stomach, digested his meat very well, and returned
home in health.

4 Scorbutic Cholera.
The Thirteenth cure of the Scurvy.
A Noble Lord contracted a disorde upon his Stomach by eating Fish (and that of
such sort, which would the soonest, for want of digestion grow putrid upon the
stomach) and perhaps by drinking upon it some bad wines: from which indigestion
his Lordship was much put out of order: I advised him to drink the waters,
which while he was doing, sends for me all in have, when I came, he told me he
was ill at his Stomach, had a pain and dizziness in his head, I advised his
Lordship to follow it yet, by taking more water, which he did, and presently
while I stayed by him, he began to vomit abundance of tough Phlegm, and yellow
bitter choler, which cleared his Stomach, and carried the rest downwards; so
he was presently at ease, nature by the help of the waters discharging her self
both ways of what was burdensome; whence, the disorder of his Stomach, pain,
and dizziness of his head, went forthwith away, and by drinking the waters some
few days, he got a good Stomach to his meat, also a fresh lively color.

The Fourteenth cure.
MR. Humfrey Birch of London, had been long troubled with loss of appetite and
debility of concoction, the ferment of his Stomach being so vitiated and the
tone of the membranes thereof so altered as that he did constantly cast up his
meat, (which were undoubted Symptoms of the Scurvy as it had seated it self in
the Stomach) This being the second year of his appearance at Scarbrough, he
acknowledged he had found a perfect cure, being able to eat and concoct any
sort of meat.

The Fitfteenth cure.
MR. Roger Maynat of Dalton-Royal in Yorkshire, labored for above three years
together under the same malady, which had exceedingly abated his strength, and
resisted all endeavors of Physicians: who was perfectly cured after one weeks
drinking of the waters, and for prevention has not failed for several years to
visit them.

The Sixteenth cure.
MR. William Linstead of Hull had got a Scorbutic surfeit, which brought on an
excessive vomiting and purging even to fourscore times: all his body over he
broke out into red pimples, as if it had been the small pox; upon his drinking
of the waters, immediately all the Symptoms abated, and his strength and
stomach increased daily, and in four or five days was restored to perfect
health.

The Seventeenth cure, viz. a Scorbutic Heart-burn.
MAtthew Alured Esquire of Beverly in Yorkshire was many years sore afflicted with
a Scorbutic Heart-burn, which tormented him day and night notwithstanding much
means used for cure, found benefit here, on which account he yearly frequented
them.

I reckon the seven last cases of Scorbutic Cholar's, together with that of
the Scorbutic heart-burn as most properly reducible to the Classis of the
Scurvy, putting them under that head, as (for Method sake) most adapted
thereto, although the concurring circumstances does not only in every respect
quadrate therewith; however I was biassed thereto, not only (as I said) for
Method sake but also as led by this reason, that if the Scorbutic ferment had
settled or fixed it self in some other parts, organs, or juyces of the bodies of
those aforesaid patients, it would then doubtless have put on other Symptoms,
and appeared under such dresses, as it might easily enough have been discovered
(even by a vulgar Eye) to be no other than the Scurvy.

Now come we to another branch or species of the Scurvy, as its ferment fixes
it self in other parts, viz. either the lungs or Intestines or smaller guts;
where it acts another scene of Symptoms. The first of which we call a
Scorbutic Asthma, because the ferment of the Scurvy seems chiefly to fix it
self upon the Lungs, on which parts chiefly the tragedy of Scorbutic Symptoms
are acted, of which take one Case and Cure as follows.

The Eighteenth cure.
MRs. Mary Byron of Koosby in Yorkshire, had been three or four years
exceedingly troubled with a stopping at her breast, in so much as for a month
or five weeks together sometimes she could not lie down in her bed but was
bolstered up with pillows, she was brought also to that excessive weakness,
that she could scarce go over the house when she was at the best, and her flesh
was quite consumed, being almost nothing but skin and bone; she could never eat
any thing, but cast it up again with coughing, nor could she drink at any
time, but presently she was scarce able to speak for want of breath, the came
to these waters and drank about eight or ten days, returning home with perfect
health, and has so continued, since when she has had a child.

The second, we for distinction sake, call Scorbutic Collicks: which, that
they are indeed Collicks, is evident from the Symptoms immediately emerging
therefrom; and next that they are Scorbutic, is as apparent, because they take
as deep rooting, as the very ferment of the Scurvy, are as durable, and
obstinate to vulgar Methods, and cured mostly with such Antiscorbuticks, as
respect the deep roots of such fixed diseases, under which as stems thereof, or
species of Scorbutic Collicks, we comprise also some Diarrhea's or loosnesses,
the Gripes and Dysenteries or Bloody fluxes: all which have not always their
source or first spring from the Intestines, but many times from a Symbolical
Scorbutic Acid, as sometimes transmitted thither from the blood cooperating
in the Stomach: yet for method and distinction sake we reckon them as follows.

Scorbutic Cholick.
The Ninteenth cure of the Scurvy.
A Man (living in the Bishopric of Durham) labored under a grievous
Scorbutic Colic, asslicting his body, especially below his navel, with great
pain, his stomach was gone, had excessive pains all over him, was brought
exceeding weak as he could scarce walk: came to drink the waters, which he did
with so great success as his Scorbutic pains abated and gradually went away,
got a good Stomach and digested his meat well: And in about eight days time,
was so well recovered, as to the astonishment of his wife, and friends he could
run, and leap upon the sands.

Scorbutick-Stone-Collick.
The twentieth cure of the Scurvy.
MR. Hall near Hallifax in Yorkshire, was under Dr. Wharton and Dr. Paget (two
eminent Physicians) hands in London, for a complication of an Ague and
Stone-Collick, which wrought up to his Stomach and made him very sick; I add
Scorbutic, because Agues (not well cured) frequently degenerate into
Scorbutic habits of body, which also fixing upon the urinary passages is the
patron of many tormenting evils: had many medicines especially purges,
prescribed, which never passed with him: At length, after he came into the
Country, he voided several stones: Then came to drink the waters at
Knarsbrough, but finding those not to pass with him, came to Scarbrough, and
tried those waters, which he fonnd to pass exceeding well, above all the
purging medicines he had ever taken, only for the first two or three days made
him very sore in his posteriors, but carried off the Scorbutic Chollick, and
the relicts of his Ague, procuring a very good Stomach, which before was very
bad and weak: he received so much good thereby, as he has now by times
frequented these waters for ten years: he had one fit of his Chollick this last
Summer at the Spaw, but upon drinking of the waters, it presently went off: he
observed, that for some few days it wrought like Epsom or Barnet, mostly by
seidge, but more effectually than either of them: and other days it wrought
like Tunbridge or Knarsbrough, chiefly by Urine.

This last Instance also relates to the Classis of the Stone cures, but that
the Symptoms thereof does chiefly and strongly bear upon the Scorbutic
ferment, which is the cause why we rank it under this head of the Scurvy.

Scorbutic Diarrhea or looseness.
The One and twentieth cure of the Scurvy.
P. B. of Scarbrough, his wife, was troubled with an excessive looseness, drank
the waters, which after purging, presently stayed her looseness, and she was
well: yea as often as she has any trouble that way, applies her self to the
waters, whether in Summer or Winter, by which she always finds good success;
it commonly cures her with one days drinking.

Scorbutic Gripes.
The Two and twentieth cure of the Scurvy.
P. B. a Master of a ship at Scarbrough, (my late patient) was afflicted with
the Gripes, so as he could neither sit, stand, nor go without great torments;
drank the waters, which at first he vomited, but by a peculiar way or method of
taking the waters, giving him somewhat which made them find the way through,
opening the passages, dinted the acrimony or acidity impacted upon the Guts,
quieted the pain, and took away all bad Symptoms, so he recovered.

Scorbutic Dysentery or Bloody Flux.
The Three and twntieth cure of the Scurvy.
THE aforesaid Master of a ships brother in law, was afflicted with a Dysentery
or Bloody Flux, so as he was not in a capacity (being a Seaman) of going
aboard his Vessel, he was weakened thereby and brought very low: after trying in
vain what other advice he could get, drank the waters, and in a few days the
bad Symptoms were off, and he was perfectly cured.

The twenty fourth Cure.
SIlvester Sympson of Driffield in Yorkshire, had a bloody flux eight years so
as he all that space was forced to rise to stool every night three or four
times. It had resisted all other means he had attempted. He went to Scarbrough,
and was cured perfectly in two or three days with the waters alone.

Scorbutic pissing of blood.
The twenty fifth Cure.
MR. Chapman of 80 years of age was much and often troubled with pissing blood,
whereupon he made his recourse to Scarbrough's-Spaw, which took away that
threatening Symptom by giving him present Ease, which was publicly known among
the neighborhood at Hacknes.

Now we come to reckon upon some other specificated Scurveys, in whose causes
and Symptoms the Scurvy is chiefly twisted viz. Scorbutick-Rheumatisme,
Erisipela's, Ulcers, Elephantiasis, and Leprous Scurvy, and shall give a single
instance of cure of each by the waters, at least by their chief help, as
follows.

Scorbutic Rheumatisme.
The twenty sixth Cure.
A. W. of Scarbrough was troubled with a Scorbutic Rheumatisme, which chiefly
afflicted her right arm and shoulder, with grievous and almost insufferable
pain; so as (through great extremity) she cried forth I ordered her (being
somewhat in years) a vesicatory plaster to be applied to her shoulder on the
same side, and a fomentation made Ex fol. Ebuli, Salv. agrest. Et fl. Sambuci a
a boiled in Seawater: then I advised her some pills with the waters, whereby
they wrought well: and the had ease in the worst of her paroxysme by the
following night Julep (viz) Aq. papav. Rhead. iiij vel iiij Sir. Limon. i ss,
cu^ ^ u C li. acidulat. which she took for three or four nights with great
success and advantage, causing her to rest well: So she recovered.

A Scorbutic Cattarrhe.
The Seven and twentieth cure.
MRs. Mary Bateman of York had been much troubled with Rheumes, which had
swelled up her face and eyes, and resisted all remedies, found very much
benefit by the use of this water, more then all other methods that had been
prescribed for her, upon account whereof she has been an annual visiter of it
these twelve years.

Scorbutic Erisipela's.
The Eight and twentieth cure.
THE daughter of the aforesaid woman (of about ten years of age or more, had an
Erisipelas or Inflammation in her leg, called vulgarly the shingles or St.
Anthony's fire, which began the Winter before; It often ran with a lee, so as
the cloth she wrapped it with would cleave and be baked thereto, and was very
painful to her (even to make her cry) at every taking off, she had a poultiss
laid on, which was hard baked thereto, which I ordered them to take off, and
throw away: I advised her to drink the waters with a few pills, and ordered her
a Topic of Venice Treacle, one ounce mixed in a pint of the best White Wind,
bathing it several times a day therewith, leaving a double linen cloth dipped
therein upon her leg: whereby in a few days time her leg grew better, the
Inflammation abated, and the pain was mitigated: So that in less than a months
time the bad Symptoms went quite off, and her leg was perfectly whole.

Scorbutic Ulcer.
The Nine and twentieth cure.
A Gentleman at the University of Cambridge (Mr. K.) now not far off
Scarbrough, had a Scrobutick Ulcer in both feet cross the toes (while in the
College) which brought him much pain, the sore was white and most-what wept
forth a Lee, accompanied with a Scorbutic Acidum, the chief cause of pain: He
labored under the grief hereof for about two years, notwithstanding all the
help a Cantabrigian Physician could make him; he came upon an occasion into the
Country, and drank the waters of Scarbrough for ten days: (being mindful to
try, if he could thence get any help.) The operation of the waters was such, as
brought away a matter as black as pitch: whereupon the former inveterate and
obstinate Symptoms (that would not bend to Physic nor outward Topics before)
now abated: his pain went away, the Scorbutic Lee was dried up, (its Acidum
being corrected in the blood by the waters,) and the Ulcers healed, was
thereupon cured: being encouraged hereby, frequents the waters every year
since, (he was cured in the year 1655.) only missed coming one year, during
which interval or intermission, he had a dangerous Fever, which was about seven
or eight years ago; since which he has had his health well: Which account I had
from his own mouth.

Scorbutic Elephantiasis.
The Thirtieth cure.
MR. Rogers's daughter of Scarbrough had a Scorbutic Elephantiasis almost all
over her: which also, from the Scorbutic Acidum seizing the tendons and
ligaments of her joints, had rendered her well nigh decrepid: she drank the
waters, and in about a fortnights time or more, the blood was so purified, as
it cast off those external feculencies or recrements of the ultimate digestion
in the form of white scales, and so sweetened the blood and latex, and opened
obstructions, as that it removed those bolts and hedges which were fastened upon
the joints and ligaments, and begot a healthful habit of body: So her skin
became clear and smooth, and she well.

Leprous Scurvy.
The One and thirtieth cure.
A Boy had a leprous Scurvy, which brought a white scurf all over him, drank
the waters, and in a few weeks time, the spreading Scorbutic ferment being
dinted, the blood purified, the scales from the roots dried and mortified, and
pilled off, and he was cured.

To which (as at the Heel of these Instances of cures of the Scurvy) we shall
(by way of conclusion) only subjoin somewhat in short concerning Scorbutic
Hemorrhoids: and that not only for the opening those which are inward, swelled,
and obstructed, but also for binding, closing, and healing those which are too
open; in both correcting the Scorbutic Acidum of the blood: In the one
loosning the impacted, and close rivetted Acidum, which binds and swells the
veins: and in the other sweetning or dinting the Acidum (which lacerated and
wounded the veins) gently binding up and healing the Orifices thereof for the
future: of which in order as follows.

Scorbutic Hemorrhoids.
The Two and thirtieth cure.
MR. Ker of Eaton (in the year 1677) labored under grievous pains of the
inward Hemerrhoids, had a constant pain of those parts, but especially when
nature was to discharge its burden by siege, which was very afflictive to him,
causing him great grief for near a quarter of a year; had advice of a
Physician, but found no benefit, till he came to the waters, which he drank
regularly, for ten or twelve days: whereby the Scorbutic Acidum (which was let
down into and had bound and swelled the Hermorrhoidal vessels) was so sweetened
and dinted, as he returned home perfectly well, and continues so ever since.

A Gentleman acquainted me that the waters open the Hemorrhoid veins, which
does him a great kindness in order to his health: upon the account whereof he
drinks them every year.

Scorbutic Hermorrhoids.
The Three and thirtieth cure.
ANd that the waters are proper, not only for the opening the Hemorrhoids,
where obstructed, as aforesaid: but also for the closing and healing them when
too open, was observable from a Doctor of my acquaintance, who laboring with a
more then ordinary effusion of Hemorrhoidal blood, and that for about seven
years, was at first very timorous of drinking the waters, fearing least they
should open the aforenamed veins too much. But being encouraged by the success
he saw others have, ventured, and to his great satisfaction and even admiration
found great help thereby.

That these waters purify the blood and cure the Scurvy, even in such a^ have
been tainted with it in a high degree, is evident from the large experience had
thereof by Dr. Witty in the late wars, when the Garrison which w^^ kept by Sir
Hugh Cholmly in the Castle^ after a few weeks siege, whether from, the air of
the sea, or a bad diet, (...) want of exercise, his men were most (...) them
fallen into the Scurvy, especially the Country-Gentlemen who had fled in
thither, who were miserably troubled with it: as many of them as drank of the
Spaw water, were perfectly and speedily cured, which some of them used without
any other means. And many instances (as Dr. Witty says) of persons of quality
might be brought in, who have been highly tainted with all the Symptoms that
attend the Scurvy and Cachexy, and were upon the very brink of the Dropsy,
having their legs swelled etc. who have found perfect cures, on which account,
they were constant frequenters of it. Only before we conclude this Classis of
Scarbrough's Maladies, it will not be amiss to take notice, that as the Scruvy
does chiefly depend upon the depravation of the ferment of the Stomach, toward
the rectification and restitution of which, the waters notably contribute: so
likewise the other manner of depravations of the Stomach, whence dejections of
appetite, and an ingendring of tough Phlegm, which in some persons these waters
carry off by vomit; of which I shall give this following instance.

J. Bilbrough Jun. of Scarbrough finds, that as often as his Stomach declines
(as it yearly by times does) when he drinks the waters, always the first
morning it makes him vomit much tough Phlegm, then passes downward the rest by
siedge, and in a few days recruits his Stomach again very well.

Where we might also show these waters are so proper to the Stomach, and to the
restoring its ferment, as that they effectually assist in the carrying off such
depraved matter, as through excess by debauchery lies heavy and oppresses the
Stomach, and by a longer stay in the body, might become the Seminary of many
diseases, (viz.) Surfeits, Scurvyes, Dropsies, etc. thereby preventing such
fruits as are the natural product and offspring of such Seminaries: concerning
which (if we might not thereby give encouragement toward the transgressing the
bounds of Temperance and Moderation) we could give considerable instances, save
that we Judge such here not to be Exemplary, and therefore of design forbear.

Melancholy or the Hypochondriacal Flatus.
THe next disease we intend in order to treat of, and to innumerate the cures
thereof performed by the waters, is Melancholy called the Flatus
Hypochondriacus, or Hypochondriacal Melancholy, and the Diseases springing from
Melancholy; which Disease, we suppose is caused from the irregularities of the
ferments of the Stomach and Spleen, whence some impurities (otherwise separable
by the vigor and genuine temperature of the ferments) are heaped up in the
blood, chiefly in reference to its elaboration into Animal Spirits, which being
depraved in their Minera or Shop, are instead of being (if I may so say)
translucid congeneal Spirits (the genuine product of a right and natural
genesis thereof, and thence proper for the obsolving the functions of the body)
soyled with a clodding vapor, and darkened with a misty and foggy steam,
perverts the Fancy, sometimes inverting the regular Idea's thereof.

The degrees of which Disease are varied, yea intended or remitted according as
those Spirits are (in their first hewings or shapings) more or less soyled with
those noxious steams, and clouding vapors, which steams and fogs receive all
their measures from the ferments of the Stomach and Spleen, as they are more or
less vitiated, from the error of which ferment arises Indigestion or
Crudities, the Mother or rather Chaos of the aforesaid clouds or steams; and
from it also is produced Wind or Flatus, the proper fruit or effect of
Indigestion. For wherever the generation of the Spirits are, the first springs
thereof (whether Stomach, Spleen, or arterial vessels) we suppose to be the
chief Minera of this Disease, (whose deep rootedness and inward recess is the
main reason of the difficuly of its cure,) which accompanying the reluctance of
the ferments in the error of Digestion, brings on the incoarcible Flatus,
whereby it displayes it self into all those various symptoms which attend this
Disease.

These Animal Spirits are the most sublime and etherial parts of the body, and
nearest akin to the Soul; are the medium betwixt the Soul and Body, and as
such, are (we suppose) not only the vehicle but also the mirror of the immortal
Soul: and in as much as the Soul acts in the body juxta indolem organorum,
according to the capacity, disposition, texture, temperature or crasis of its
vehicle, which also has its springs from the alimentary and sanguineous juyces
elaborated by their peculiar ferments: wherefore if the constitution of these
Spirits from the vigor of the ferments (sequestring all Heterogenities) prove
genuine, and thence the looking-glass of the Soul becomes pure and polite. In
such constitutions (I say) the soul, through the clarity of the Regimen of the
Spirits, takes pleasure and solace in its vehicle, causing generous
reflections, and shaping perspicatious Idea's, helping (as we say in our
Hydrol. Chym. 122.) accurateness of fancy, solidity of judgment and
tenaciousness of Memory. But if through the deficiency of the ferments, arise
Indigestion and Crudities, thence the untamable Flatus or Wind, and from both
dark steams, whence the aforesaid Spirits are mudded in their first springs,
and their constitution or Regimen soiled through foggy Scorbutic mists. then
and there is laid the foundation of this deeply rooted Malady; whereby the
imaginative part is darkened, (the fancy by a Melancholy vapor being clouded,)
and thence as from its natural source, arises from the irregularities and
disturbed phansies of Hypochondriacal Melancholy: For the Stomach, Spleen,
arterial juyces, with the ferments thereof, as they are (by nature) employed in
order to the production of Animal Spirits, are Vulcan's Shop, where materials
lie for forging all Idea's, and Minerva's Nursery, where are the ground-plots
and seeds of Diseases.

Now if the depravation of the ferments, in order to the hewing forth or
generation of Animal Spirits, meet or interfeer with other manner of errors of
the ferments as appertaining to the alimentary juyces (as they are to circulate
the various stades of the several digestions, in order to the nourishment of
the body or supply of what daily transpires;) then, I say, is produced a
complication of Melancholy with the Scurvy, yea the one graduates or heightens
the other in their respective depravations, whence it is that Melancholy, and
the Scurvy, frequently go hand in hand. It rarely happens that Melancholy is
brought to any considerable height, but is twisted and complicated with the
Scurvy, (although the contrary not often holds good) from which complication is
generally produced a lesa imaginatio, (the usual product of that disease;)
although sometimes the heightnings of the one, singly considered, effects it,
and from this depravedness of the fancy, it is that the Patient is affected now
in one part (ready to dye upon it,) and presently in another remote part (and
must die of that, and forthwith too) etc. So they coin to themselves hundreds
of Miseries, as to this or the other part, and as many deaths ere one of either
sort really siezeth upon them.

We design not here (because we study brevity) to show how and after what
manner the waters operate, and how other additional helps (by way of advice)
contribute to the cure of this so deeply seated Dise^e: how it absterseth the
first vessels strengthens the ferment of the St^nach, procures an appetite,
helps d^estion, promotes the clarity of the ^gimen of the Animal Spirits by
carrying away the cause of impure and Scorbutic steams,) suppresseth the cause
of Wind, (which two last are most-what the scene, where and whence most of the
Tragical Symptoms of this Disease are acted:) fortifies the tone of the
viscera, rectifies their genuine ferments, sweetens the blood, conduces to the
production of laudable nutritive juyces, (which, how far these may go toward
the cure of most Diseases, we refer to better judgments to determine;) and
thence brings on a good habit of body, and health the sequel of all. To insist
largely upon which, is besides our present purpose; we shall therefore (which
we chiefly aim at) only confine our discourse herein, to number a few
remarkable instances of the efficacy of these waters in the cure thereof, which
are as follows.

Mr. Woodyears Case, a Gentleman in York.
The first Cure.
AT Christmas, 1667. began the occasion of Melancholy or Hypocond. Wind, (being
the Passion of Sorrow for the loss of his beloved Son,) which Disease gradually
grew to that height, as in about eighteen Months time after the first
beginning thereof, it brought upon him a Virtigo or Megrim, so as he thought
all went round. At Christmas 72. he had two fits (one soon after the other) as
he sat in his chair, which for the time deprived him of all sense; after
which, he had (as accompanying Symptoms) pains all over him, with great
oppression of Spirits; a general indisposition, shortness of Breath, want of
Appetite, sometimes vomited what he took, had a great weakness and
unsteddiness, yet seeming great weight upon his head, so as he could not stoop,
or scarce move it but gradually; had strange fancies; the least noise had so
deep an impression upon him, as was enough almost (as he thought) to have
struck him dead. Three days after his two fits he was extremely sick with a
faintness of Spirits as if to death, which so much weaked him as he was not
able to walk over his Chamber without leading for four Months: during which
time he had many of those sudden Epileptick fits, constantly at change and full
of the Moon, and fainted all over his Spirits for some hours together, being in
an Agony with weeping, which fainting fits would hold for nine hours at a time,
with great struglings as if convulsed; upon all which, the pathemata animi had
originally the greatest influence.

He had the advice of two eminent Physicians, who ran through several courses
of Physic with him, giving him Vomits, Purges, ordering him blooding by the
Hemorrhoids, Steel Preparations, etc. Who, when none of these would do, they
advised him to go for Scarbrough-Spaw, whither in July, 1673. he went, and
drank the waters according to advice three weeks: For the first ten days
whereof he was very weak, had a faintiness upon his Spirits, found no advantage
or benefit thereby: at length Dr. Witty (then attending the waters) advised
him to ride abroad upon the Hills. As he was riding, a sudden griping took him
round his body for half an hour, and then an extreme purging came on him that
he had four Stools in an hour, with extremity of gripings before each Stool.
This purging began at two in the afternoon, but the gripings began to abate
before morning, insomuch that it became rather a pleasure to have Stools than
otherwise, so continued all next day and night after (without drinking the
waters) in which time he grew so steady, composed and strong in his head as he
could step out of his bed to the stool without any help, although he continued
purging 4 times every hour. The second morning early the Doctor advised him to
put on his clothes (since he was so strong) and walk to the Spaw, where (he
according to advice) drank only two pints of water, and although in going he
had four stools, yet after drinking the waters he had only one or two there,
but none in returning, and (what was remarkable) in going to the Spaw, he
walked faster than the Doctor, to the admiration of all that were by.

After the aforesaid purgings, he drank the waters for eleven mornings, which
then wrought so moderately as it had a most considerable and wonderful effect
upon him, his symptoms all abated and gradually went off, got a good Stomach
and digestion, the flatus (with its causes) was suppressed, which before sat
upon the skirts of the Spirits, Membrane of the Brain and Stomach, whence his
Vertigo went away, the load or heaviness upon his head was taken off, it became
steady, his faintness and sickness ceased, the soyling steams or vapors which
perverted and darkened the Regimen of the Spirits (whence with other concurring
causes happened the lesa imaginatio) were discussed, prevented, and in fine, he
thereby became lively, brisk, and cheerful beyond expectation, even to the
Admiration of all those (whether in City or Country) who knew him in his former
long lingering weakness. -- He has ever since made his Annual visits to these
waters at their season, and has to (his great satisfaction) enjoyed his health
without the least Relapse or Symptom of his former dreadful Malady.

The Symptoms of whose Disease were signal Testimonies that the ferments were
perverted, the nutritive and Sanguineous juyces were become depraved and
Spurious, an incoarcible flatus was powerful, and that the steams and vitiated
juyces had darkened and clouded the Regimen of the Animal Spirits, whence the
lesa maginatio, and that the flatus by occult passages and rubs of the vessels
bore strongly upon the meninges or tender film of the brain, whence came the
seeming weight and yet unsteddiness of his head, as also bore forcibly upon the
original of the Nerves in the brain, whence his Virtiginous and Epiliptick
fits, and smiting or suffocating the Spirits in their proper ducts, as also
being much penned up (excepting as aforesaid) in the Stomach, strengthens the
Tunicles thereof, bearing upon the breathing-holes of the vital ferment (the
parent of Digestion) transmitted from the Arteries into the Stomach, suspended
its function, whence sicknesses and faintings; And how the waters orderly taken
according to advice, answered all these indications, or as many of them as was
needful, we (for brevity-sake) wave farther to enlarge.

From the aforesaid remarkable cause and cure, we might take an occasion to
raise a discourse how the passions of the mind became the efficients and
authors of many Symptoms and Diseases, especially such as attend Hypocondraism
in Men and hysterical fits in Women; how they influence the ferments,
digestions, chyliferous and sanguineous juyces, tone of the viscera, organs of
the Spirits, etc. perverting the first, disturbing and suspending the second,
alienating or vitiating the third, altering the fourth, inverting the order of
the fifth, and all in order to the production of several Diseases, immediately
emerging therefrom, but that I must re-mind my self of my designed brevity.

The second cure.
THe Right Honorable the Lord Roos had been much troubled with Hypochondriack
wind, which stole away both his appetite and digestion, and caused an eminent
decay of his Spirits and strength, and so filled his head with fumes, that he
was often taken with dizziness and Melancholy fancies, after long methods of
Physic prescribed by several learned Physicians (wherein though he ever found
much good, yet his Distemper was frequently returning:) his Lord-ship came to
these waters, wherein he found so much benefit in all the respects aforesaid,
that he now injoyes a constant state of health, this (when first writ) being
the third year wherein his Lord-ship visits Scarbrough, being then become much
more lively and fleshy than formerly, and found good encouragement to continue
his Annual visits.

The Third Cure.
MRS. Robinson of Buckton (betwixt fifty and sixty years of age) labored under
a grievous and inveterate Headache on one side, which was very violent,
proceeding from the Flatus Hypochondraicus, having fixed it self chiefly upon
that part, and was also highly Scorbutic, having the Scurvy in a great
measure: The pain of her head was so strong as put her upon the trial of many
Physicians, and had the best of their advice, but most-what in vain: at length
drank these waters, and in fourteen days time she found her pain abate and
gradually go off, and within a month she was perfectly well both as to her
headache, (which before would not bend to ordinary means) and also was cured of
the Scurvy, returning in very good health.

The Fourth Cure.
MR. Thomas Birbeck of Sheffeild in York shire, was so afflicted with that
Flatus Hypocond. as it affected his head very much with a dizziness or
virtiginous motion that he scarce durst preach in the Pulpit: was in a
languishing condition in this disease, being full of fears and fancies, applied
himself to the waters, and the first year found so much good thereby as
encouraged him to come the next year after, and then he was cured, and for many
years became a healthful and cheerful man.

The Fifth Cure.
MR. G. Smith of Berwick upon Tweed practitioner in Physic, fell into an
extreme heat and sharpness of Urine, with a continual dysury, after which did
immediately succeed most grievous symptoms of Hypochondriach Melancholy, viz.
Dizziness in his head, Dimness of sight, Difficulty of breathing, Oppression at
Stomach, and Indigestion of meat, being voided raw, which himself, with others
sufficiently learned, did in vain labor to remove, so as he was forced to keep
his Chamber almost six months together, even despairing of a recovery; he came
to these waters and drank three weeks, and returned home in good health and
cheerfulness of Spirit; for two years after he came again, and resolved, while
God spared life to continue his Annual visits, notwithstanding the distance,
being above an hundred and twenty miles.

The Sixth Cure.
MRS. Elizabeth Scremerston in the Bishopric of Durham was troubled for a long
time with the same malady, which had changed her complexion and made her
exceeding swarthy, with three weeks drinking she found a perfect recovery.

The Seventh Cure.
MR. Robert Lever Minister of Bolam in Northumberland was exceedingly troubled
with Hipocondriach Melancholy for the space of eight years, joined with
frequent extention and Convulsion of the Nerves, which when the fit was gone
off left him so feeble that he was not able to walk till he had gotten some
rest, he was often dizzy in his his head, which so clouded his understanding
that he became incapable sometimes for a quarter of a year together of
discharging the duties of his Office. He was several times at the other Spaw in
Yorkshire, where though he found some benefit, yet the symptoms returned. In
1663. he came to Scarbrough and drank a whole week, yet without any benefit
till the Physician then at the waters, viz. Doctor Witty was called to see the
fit, wherein he seemed to be almost distracted, who judged it requisite to
prescribe some other helps proper for the case for two or three days, and
furnished him with some Specificks to be used with the waters, and set him on
again, advising him to drink ten days more; after three days he found eminent
degrees of recovery, all the symptoms abating, and went from the waters very
healthful and cheerful, who (praised be Almighty God) continued so.

The Eighth Cure
MR. M. Darrel of Porstow in Lincolnshire is by times much afflicted with the
Hypocond. Flatus, finds much benefit by drinking these waters, wherefore he
frequents them every year, sometimes he is for rear six months excessive
Melancholy, cares for no company, but loves retirement: And by an orderly
taking of these waters finds present relief, when no other Medicine he has
taken at home has succeeded.

The Ninth Cure.
MRS. Elizabeth Newcome of Manchester in Lancashire was eight or nine years
together so afflicted with this Malady, joined with extreme oppression of the
stomach and back, with flitting heats, as if she had been in a violent Fever,
perpetual costiveness and dizziness of the head before the violence of the hot
fit, she found a sharp stinging in the wrist of her right arm as if a Penknife
was thrust into it, and when the fit was upon her, she would fall into
exceeding great frights from any the least noise, as the crowing of a Cock or
the barking of a Dog, and when it was gone off she would be as sore as if she
were beaten: It had resisted all medicines, till coming to these waters, she
found good success.

The Tenth Cure.
A Scotch Gentlewoman, being in years, was much afflicted with Hypochondraism
and the Scurvy, having a great disorder at her Stomach, drank the waters in
great excess, was brought low and very weak, but after a while she recruited to
her former strength, and the bad symptoms went off.

Here I could reckon upon several persons more who have by the orderly use of
these wates found much benefit in this very Malady. But at present let those in
transitu serve.

The Stone.
THe next Disease in order we here propose to treat on, as curable by the
waters, is that formidable, afflicting and excruciating malady the Stone, where
we do not mean to ascribe that efficacy to these mineral waters as to melt or
dissolve any large confirmed stone of what size soever, fixed in the Kidneys or
Bladder; For that we wholly deny, and judge such persons who labor under the
anxiety of such large Stones as cannot without danger be brought away by the
common passages of the ureters, neck of the Bladder, etc. not capable I say of
receiving much benefit hereby. But are rather to be referred to the skill and
cure of the Lithotomist, to Mars rather than Neptune, to the sharpness of the
knife than to the accurateness of the waters.

But that these waters have a remarkable efficacy upon such as labor under
gravel, smaller stones, (such as are passable) and in taking away, or
alleviating their grievous symptoms, the usual attendants and products thereof,
amongst which, that of Strangury is to be reckoned as a frequent symptom and
almost necessary product of the Stone, (although, that sometimes may proceed
from other causes:) what remarkable efficacy (I say) these waters orderly
taken, have upon such, let the few following instances speak, which in the main
may be sufficient to blazon its virtues to the world in this very particular
Malady, that so none through prejudice or ignorance may deny themselves that
benefit which God in nature holds forth to them in this Mineral Spring.

As to the causes of petrefaction whether in the Macro or Microcosme, but
particularly that of the Lithiasis, viz. the causes of ingendring the Stone in
the Reins or Bladder of humane bodies, we insist largely and de industria in
our Lithologia Physica. (not yet extant) And as for the symptoms, they are so
well known by every one who is afflicted with this Disease as we need not by
numbering them tell what they are, wherefore we shall immediately descend to the
intended particulars as follows.

The First Case.
MR. John Beaumont of Franck-foss in Yorkshire, his wife had been for very
many years subject to a grievous fit of the Stone, for which she had taken much
advice, though with little success, she went afterward to Knarsbrough and
drank those waters, but found no benefit: then her husband brought her to
Scarbrough, which water brought away the matter of the Stone in Gravel and Sand
to a great proportion even in one weeks time, and for five years after (being
then so long to the first writing hereof) she had no necessity of returning to
the Spaw, being free of all symptoms. -- To which I may add what I lately by
letter received from a Relation of the aforesaid Gentle-womans, and (my worthy
friend) that she received so much benefit by these waters, and for this
fourteen years has been so well that she never needed to make a second visit.

The Second Case.
AN old man of eighty six years of age, has frequented the Span for twelve or
thirteen years, finding much good thereby every year for the Stone, had extreme
and most violent pains and grievous torments, even so a^ to make him cry forth
aloud, so as he might be heard at a great distance, yea his torment in those
parts were so strong that (to use his own words) he would have forgiven any one
who would have knocked him on the head, he drank plentifully of the waters,
sometimes fifteen pints in a morning, found great relief thereby: the benefit
he reaps incourageth him to come every year, and was here this very last year
78, from whose own mouth I had the aforesaid Relation.

The Third Case.
THE old Lady Rhodes of Balbrough, was grievously afflicted with the symptoms
of the Stone; who found great help and relief by the drinking these waters;
yea, and by what I could learn was cured thereby.

The Fourth Case.
SR. J. H. of York (now a Member of Parliament) drank the waters for several
years, finding thereby he voided much gravel, and was more cheerful afterward:
Then for five years by times was frequently afflicted with the symptoms of the
Stone, having difficulty of Urine (or dysuria) ^^^ming away drop by drop with
pain before the Stone came away, but still every year Gravel came away, and w^^
more at ease.

Then August 1677. he went and drank the waters, before which for Month or
more, had a great dysuria or difficulty of urine, making none b^^ with great
pain: The first day he wa^ worse, the second day also worser, yea^ the third
day was worse and worse the waters meanwhile passing, but not well. And upon
the night after the third day, a stone, to the bigness of a Date-stone came
away, which was a solid confirmed stone; then all the bad^ Symptoms ceased, and
he had perfect ease.

The next year after (which was the last year) he came to the waters, and upon
the third-day morning (after the first drinking) voided another less stone
about the bigness of a vetch, which was angular, but not of so firm a texture
by much as the former, which he showed me, and since which has had passage of
his water very well, having not the least of those troublesome symptoms which
usually attend the Stone, he observed, that upon every years drinking the
waters, his Stomach was much recruited and digestion bettered.

The Fifth Case.
A Lady of Scotland, no less virtuous in Morals than noble in birth, had two
violent fits of the Stone in her own Country, with extreme sharp pain even to
swoonings, so as they almost despaired of her life, after the severe Paroxisme
was over, she came, by her Physicians advice to Scarbrough, drank the waters
regularly, whereby in a few days she voided a stone, which her Ladyship showed
me, it was angular, yet came away with little pain.

The Sixth Case.
A Merchant of York (Mr. A. T.) labored of a fit of the Stone, after some
other Medicaments I advised him, he drank the waters, whereby he passed away a
little stone, and so the Symptoms ceased and he was at ease For which very
purpose he drank (...) waters most-what every year, and the with good success.

The Seventh Case
Which is Mr. G. Waugh of New Castle's Case, sent by way of Letter to Dr.
Witty.
SR. I judge my self obliged (...) give my testimony of the Spa^ and its good
effects in my Case, and first I bless God that he has afforde^ me so great help
by it, and also I let you know that it proved effectual almost beyond my first
belief of the waters even to my admiration. In the year 69. at my first
visiting of the Well the water did not only bring away (...) confirmed Stone as
large as any Date stone, with its bed in which it lay but as I found did also
soften and dissolve what was more in my body, so that at one urine (as I
remember) (...) voided above a dozen stones, most o^ them as large as a white
Pease, which did lie in the basin as stones, but (...) draining the water off,
and thinking to take them up, they would not bear their own weight, but betwixt
my fingers became sand, and these I voided the very day I left the Spaw. At my
return in 1670. I had not drank eight pints of the water the first morning
before a large quantity of the tartarous tough matter that breeds the Stone
came away, which I know was caused by the virtue of the water.

I am your, etc. George Waugh.

The Eighth Case.
MR. Emmerson of New Castle having violent pain from the Stone, whereby he was
exceedingly enfeebled, drank the waters (in the year 1677.) pretty plentifully,
and at one time (as he observed) about a spoonful and a half of gravel passed
from him; drank the waters also the last year with great advantage, had a pain
in his back from the stone or gravel in the Kidneys before he drank them, but
upon drinking, it went away, and he was as well as ever he was (according to
his own words) in his life.

The Ninth Case.
MR. Christopher Keld of Newby near Scarbrough had been many years subject to
violent fits of the Stone, and falling into one of his usual fits, he called to
mind, that he had heard this water commended in the case; so as he sent
immediately for some bottles thereof, and drank betwixt two or three quarts,
which within less than half an hour, caused him to void several stones, besides
much gravel, which gave him perfect ease, so as for seven years after he had
not another fit. But then it seizing on him again, he applied himself to the
same remedy, with like success.

The Tenth Case.
MR. Stow of Newton upon Trent in Nottingham-shire, his Son being cut for the
Stone, in order to the healing of the wound in the neck of the bladder, first
drank Knarsbrough-Spaw-waters, but afterward hearing of the same of
Scarbrough-waters did about eight or nine years (before the first writing
hereof) make a journey thither, by which they found so much and more real
benefit in that disease of the of the Stone than they had before, that they
never after returned to Knarsbrough but have been constant drinkers of
Scarbrough-waters, either going thither, or else sending for the waters to
Newton, though it be near thirty miles further distant than the other.

The Eleventh Case.
THe Apothecary of Scarbrough's Mother has found much good by the waters for
the Stone, who has sometimes voided a spoonful of red sand or gravel, and has
drank them these many years.

To all which we might add the Case of a Merchant in London, of Mr. W. Kitching
who keeps the chief Inn at Grimsby in Lincolnshire by the Sea side) of Mr.
Skehough a Schoolmaster in Scotland, etc. who all received so much good hereby
for the Stone, as encouraged them for some years to frequent the waters.

That these waters sometimes discovers and brings on a fit of the Stone to some
persons, who possibly never had one before, (I think) an evident demonstration
of the excellency of it virtue: For many are inclinable to the Stone, and
perhaps as yet know not, but might (if the taking these waters did not prevent)
go on toward the Fabric of some large cofirmed stone, which then by its bulk
might be incapable of any cure save that of the knife. But these waters by
their powerful efficacy, suspends further growth to the Stone, dislodgeth those
already bred, and either splits them into lesser stone or moulders them into
gravel, and so passes them off in a stream or flood of urine (which otherwise
might if le^^ alone grow two big for the passages) or if they be no bigger,
than may glide through the vessels and orifices, to carn them away in their
entire form, and hence I say it is that sometimes a sharp fit (upon the
drinking thereof) happens, which to judge otherwise doubtless were to do
manifest injustice to them, because hereby Knarsbrough-Spaw might as equally be
impeached, as Scarbrough, in that some have upon drinking those waters been
seized with a violent fit of the Stone; For instance, the Earl of Twadal about
four year ago (as his Lordship acquainted me) even while he was drinking the
waters of Knarbrough, was seized with a violent fit of the Stone. And Mr.
Justice an Attorney, being in health, out of compliasance drank five glasses of
the Sulphur water of Knarsbrough last Summer, which, not passing, gave him a
Surfeit, so as he afterward vomited and purged all that he took, thence fell
into a great languor of Spirits, and thence into violent convulsive fits, which
endangered his life. Must therefore the former, viz. the sweet Spaw-waters be
accused of a petrifying property, or must thence of necessity the other, viz.
the Sulphur-water be accounted dangerous to drink on? which consequences, how
adapted to our present purpose, we leave to the judicious reader to determine.

These waters are also peculiar against the heat, inflammation and ulcer of the
reins, correcting the heat and sharpness of urine, expelling the mucous matter
which sometimes obstructs the passages of the urine, which often times causes
the same symptoms, and is taken to be the Stone in the bladder; when yet there
is none there, washing through and cleansing all the urinous passages

The Relics of a Clap.
THe waters are likewise excellent good against the relics of a Clap, and
cleanses away the dregs of a bad Mercurial method, helps the pissing of blood,
and strengthens the seminal vessels, the malignity of the Disease being first
removed by due Medicines.

The Gonorrhea.
THe waters regularly drank safely stays the Gonorrhea.

The first Instance.
A Gentleman that had got a Clap, having had the usual symptoms upon him many
Months, which had exceedingly impaired his strength: who committing himself
for cure unto two able Physicians, who in a few weeks took off all the pains,
and other symptoms, only a fluid Gonorrhea remained which resisted Medicines,
even the most proper they could prescribe, and that for several weeks after the
virulency of the Disease was gone, was advised to drink of these waters, where
within ten days he was perfectly cured, and since has begotten Children.

The second Instance.
ANother had got a grievous Gonorrhea which through the sharpness of the humor,
made such a corrosion upon the neck of the Bladder, that he pissed blood with
exceeding great pain, to the great abatement of his natural strength. It had
resisted what advice he had met with in the Country, till coming to these
waters, he was perfectly cured in a very few days.

Agues.
THe next disease, according to our proposed method, we are to treat of, as
curable by the waters, are Agues, which are nothing else but broken or
interrupted Fevers, whose different spaces of intervals and accesses made from
the more or less frequent imbibitions of the offending febril Acidum does
mostwhat, if not solely, distinguish them into Quotidian, Tertian, double
Tertian and Quartane, which (I say) in their root are Fevers, being the same
with them in their essential causes, only (as I said) broken, and thence have
the interchanges of cold and heat, and admit of frequent periods: And that what
a Fever (strictly so called) springs out with a long, and mostwhat unbroken
thread, these snap the thread, and begin and weave again, and that sooner or
later, as the offending febrile Acidum, (whether imbred, or ab extra,
communicated from the air,) is partly transpired or precipitated, or in some
adjacent vessels deposited, or by any of them for a time subjugated.

What one has to say concerning Fevers, whether continued or broken, from a
somewhat novel hypothesis, we refer in the main to our Pyretologia, therefore
shall at present apply our selves to the incumbent task, which is, First, to
show that all broken Fevers, viz. Agues, are curable: Next, that they admit of
various, and yet certain methods of cure: And lastly, more directly to the
purpose, are particularly (with some additionals) curable by these waters.

Only here on the by, we would crave leave to say, that among the great
improvements now on the wheel, in order to the better and more certain cure of
Diseases, it would doutless be none of the least for Physicians to busy
themselves in their Studies, and Observations, how to promote this most
laudable and useful essay, (viz.) how to break a Fever, which I look upon as
one of the Masterpieces of a Physician, (how unhappily it has been slipped
hitherto I know not) to make a Fever split into Proxisms, and then to cure
them, which latter is most easily done; The former of which, how frequently
nature (put occasionally upon some exigency or other) does, with, or without
the help of a Physician, for the good of the Patient, many Physicians in their
observations can tell, which if they had but narrowly watched, and traced her
in those obscure paths, might by searching have found out the knack, and so
have helped her with such another job in her pinch.

If the former (I say) by the industry of Physicians, were but more diligently
prosecuted, and some progress made threin, toward the rendering it practical.

It would then certainly be one of the easiest things in the world, for
Physicicians to cure the generality of Fevers, which otherwise cut off many
hundreds (not to say more) of Patients.

As to the first, viz. that all Agues are curable, the truth of which we are
ready by matter of fact to make evident, where we doubt not but by infallible
demonstration to prove the cure of all manner of Agues, and that both certainly
and safely, supposing meanwhile there be strength of nature enough to admit of

As to the second, viz. that Agues admit of various and yet certain methods of
cure, is evident from the various practice of Physicians, some of whom cure
Agues by one method, others by another.

And as to the last (viz.) that Agues (which is more directly to the purpose)
are particularly curable by Scarbrough-waters, leads me in to give an account
of some few instances of cures performed thereby, which are as follows.

The first.
J. B. Jun. of Scarbrough had a Tertian Ague seventeen weeks, which afflicted
him very much, drank the waters by advice, which in three days time brought
him very low, yet continuing on drinking, he began to find his Stomach to
recruit, got a good appetite, and good digestion of what he took, so his Ague
went sensibly off, yea, in not many days it was quite gone, and he perfectly
well.

The second.
MRS. G. C. A Merchants daughter of Hull, labored under^ Tertian Ague, for
about fifteen or (...) teen weeks, which had vitiated the (...)meant of her
Stomach, debilitated (...) appetite, and so weakened her as she could walk but
little, being much troubled with faintness and a general indisposition and
lassitude upon her, lost her color; came to the waters last Summer, took my
advice, had only one easy fit, and no more all the time she staid, which was
about fourteen days, recovered the ferment of her stomach, got a good
appetite, and what she took digested well, gathered strength, so as she could
walk well, her fainting was gone, she was cheerful, got a good color and
returned home in very good health, and continued so, for I saw her Father about
six weeks after, who acquainted me his daughter continued very well.

The third.
MR. G. Blackaller Rector of Etton in Yorkshire, had been troubled with a
double Quartan for the space of nine months together with some symptoms of the
Scurvy, which appeared in ^ed spots in all the musculous parts of the body. He
went to Scarbrough, and at the very beginning his fits lessened, and staying
three weeks he found a perfect cure, and had not the least symptomps of either
for five years after.

I have often known (says Doctor Witty) inveterate Quartans cured by it, and
other sorts of Agues also, which have long resisted Medicines, have been
conquered by the use hereof in a short time.

And for taking away the relics of all inveterate Agues (those oftentimes
tedious chronical diseases) and of the Smallpox and other diseases, preventing
relapses, these waters are of admirable efficacy.

The Jaundies.
THis disease, as to its causes, chiefly depends upon obstructions of the
bilious vessels leading into the Intestines, whereby that noble juice (as an
auxiliary ferment) assists in the performances of the offices in the second
Digestion, by agitating, fermenting, and further preparing the chiliferous
juice (transmitted from the stomach) helping the due separation, and
percolation of the milky juice into the lacteals disseminated along the
Intestines in order to a future Sanguification, gives color to the recrements,
irritating the Peristaltick motion of the spiral guts, in order to cleansing
work, viz. the seclusion of excrements. This I say being obstructed in its
passage, flows by other vessels into the mass of blood, whose crasis it
vitiates by giving it a high Saffron Tincture, which nature partly in capilary
veins throws into the habit of the body, witness the Saffron dye of all
external parts, and partly discharges it, (as dissolved in the serum or latex
of the blood) by the emulgents into the urinary vessels, whence the height of
its Saffron tincture, both which (together) with the unseparable symptoms of an
universal lassitude, indisposition, shortness of breath and faintness) are the
general, as well as certain indexes of the Jaundies.

Wherefore it is found by observation (the nursery of knowledge) that those
Medicines which do open obstructions are most prevalent in the cure hereof,
amongst which, those who abound most with a fixed or volatile alcalie, or
partake of apperial Mineral Salts, are most effectual, especially if a good
round-working-purge precede, or that they be taken along with some proper
purgative. Now that these waters, as fraught Mineral apperient Salts, are (with
some additional helps) adequate remedies for this and other Diseases arising
from obstructions, yea, even sometimes the waters alone orderly taken) let
their efficacy in these few following instances declare to the world.

The First Cure.
SR John Legards Lady of Gauton within a few miles of Scarbrough, had a
Jaundice that long resisted remedies in a rational method, and was perfectly
cured by the Spaw in a few days, being thereto recommended by another Lady,
who had experienced a cure in the same Disease. This was consented to by her
Physician Doctor Arnold.

The Second Cure.
MR. W. Hodgson Mimister of Scarbrough was for the space of six years ever and
anon falling into the Jaundies, especially Spring and Fall: Nay, one time it
continued upon him almost all the year, notwithstanding his endeavors after a
cure, after he was settled at Scarbrough he found a perfect cure by the Spaw.

The Third Cure.
MAdam Elizabeth Strickland of Boynton in Yorkshire, after the Smallpox, fell
into a Fever, after that relapsed into a Tertian Ague, which terminated in the
Jaundies, after which (probably as an inveterate symptom) followed a most
grievous griping pain at the Stomach and Back, which seized on her by fits,
sometimes a month or two betwixt one another, accompanied with a vomiting up of
whatsoever she took, and after every fit her whole body would be as yellow as
Gold. She had also a fullness and tension at Stomach and upon the region of the
Liver, that she could not endure it to be touched, nor could lie upon the right
side. It had resisted all rational means that could be used, till the season of
the year coming on, Dr. Witty (whose account this is) advised her Lady-ship to
drink the waters, and fitted her with Medicines both preparative and
concomitant, which she did for fourteen days with very much benefit, being
then almost half gone with Child, notwithstanding after some months the fits
returned as before, so as the next Summer she drank the waters again (though at
Boynton twelve miles from Scarbrough) she was again somewhat better. But the
Winter following had most violent returns of her fits. The next year the Doctor
advised her to drink them at the Fountain, and to stay longer, which she did
for three weeks, and then after a months intermission to send for fresh water
every day, and drink ten days at home, her Ladyship being then young with
Child, yet without any harm upon that account, since which she had (God be
thanked) no more fits, (it being when this was writ almost two years after) but
was as healthful as in all her life before.

The Fourth Cure.
MR. Palar of Nun-Nountain in Yorkshire, was during his abode in the Southern
parts much afflicted with the Jaundies, having the symptoms which usually
attend that Disease, consulted Doctor Dickenson (who then lived at Oxford but
is now an eminent Physician in London) whose advice was to get him down into
his own country and to drink the waters of Scarbrough, which he judged the best
and most certain cure for him; whither accordingly he applied himself, and in
not many days was perfectly cured.

I shall only add somewhat remarkable concerning a Country man who had the
Jaundies highly complicated with the Scurvy, with a great stiffness in his
joints, so as he could not stoop but with great pain and trouble; one day I
ordered him a few doses of volatile Spirits to be taken in his waters, upon
which he found so great an alteration as that he could that very day (to the
admiration of those who were by) stoop to the ground with much ease, and (if I
mistake not) played at pennystone upon the Sands.

The Dropsy.
THe next Disease in order is the Dropsy, which although at the first prospect
it may seem contradictory to reason, that the drinking of waters should be
effectual for the curing that Disease which chiefly consists in a flood of
watery latex, already heaped up in the mass of blood, which is aforehand
diluted with a waterishness; that which should be carried off most-what
byurine, being by obstructions made to flow back upon the blood and thence
makes it become slow in its circulation, and brings it very nigh the analogy of
a standing Pool, should by the adding more water be cured, is I say no less
than a seeming Paradox, yet if we consider the Primary and Efficient causes
thereof, and the manner of the waters working will easily remove that Jealousy
and confirm us in the belief of the contrary. And First, if we consider the
immediate and efficient causes, viz. First, the vitiated ferment of the Stomach
(that primary wheel of all Chronical maladies) the patron of the febricula and
thirst accompanying Dropsical persons, and next the transmitted Acidum
impressed upon the reins, from whence sometimes alone, and other while with
some additional mucous matter, happen obstructions of those parts, which are
the principal Emunctories of the potables of the nutritive juice and blood
thence made (to which possibly may be added the consideration of some
obstructions in, or errors of the ferment of the liver) whereby the small
vessels become stopped, and the separation of the latex prevented, whence upon
the regurgitation of the superfluous latex (ready to be separated) back into
the blood, and thence into the habit of the body, happens that Species of a
Dropsy called Anasarcosis, which by the anastomosis of the vessels or
concatenation of the limphiducts, lets part thereof fall into the legs,
swelling them, especially toward night, and at other times re-imbibes or
swallows it up again into the former cavities of the larger vessels, and the
legs become unswelled again.

Or Secondly, The liquid potables (or superfluous latex) by the aforesaid or
equivalent obstructions as considered flowing back, and heaped up mostwhat
betwixt the Omentum and Peritoneum, gives that species peculiarly called
Hydrops, (properly a Dropsy) which stretching the aforesaid membrans, bears up
strongly against the Diaphragme, thereby contracting the cavity of the lungs,
hinder the due motion of the muscles thereof, straitens respiration, making the
Patient short winded as usually they are. Or lastly, The same congested potable
latex as considered accompanied with a flatulency, gives being to that third
species of a Dropsy we call a Tympany, which regurgitated latex has for the
most part no urinous Salt in it, whence those who are tapped for dropsies,
commonly weep forth an almost insipid liquor, so also that water which passes
from those who drink plentifully of the Spaw has no urinous Salt, neither
tincture nor sapour.

Now in the next place we consider how these waters (with some other additional
helps) work, and how they may thence answer the general indications of these
several sorts of Dropsies, and the symptoms thence emerging, will doubtless
covince us of the truth of what we are treating, (especially if thereto be
added) as a sealing argument, (matter of fact) viz. first, that they chiefly
rectify and strengthen the ferment of the Stomach and thence take off the two
attending symptoms of heat and thirst, (all Dropsical Persons generally having
a febricula and thirst upon them). And Secondly, That they (by reason of the
Mineral Salts (wherewith they are acuated) may, and do hew forth their own way,
open obstructions, sweeten or alter the transmissed Acidum and set open those
formerly dammed or blocked up water-sluces, whereby the watery latex (lately
through obstructions heaped up the blood, (and carried into other wrong
vessels) almost drowning and suffocating the vital ferment thereof, is now
drawn or filtred off, and percolated through its proper vessels, which being
exhausted, the blood is reduced to its due crasis, and the tone of the
debilitated viscera, are by the gentle astingency of the inate Salts, fortified
and rendered capable of performing their due seclusions and separations, and the
obstructions of the Liver (if any such there happen in the Fabric of this
Disease) or wrong cast in its ferment, are hereby opened and rectified, and all
the symptoms go off if the ferments be not too degenerate, and the latex too
much depraved, and bowels tainted, (whence shortly will happen a total
stagnation of the blood and drowning of the Spirits in the flood) through the
long continuance thereof; for those who die of Dropsies, are (as we could
easily show) really drowned, (viz.) the same which happens by drowing in water
externally happens inwardly in the vessels in dropsical dying persons, by
intercepting the circulation of the blood and drowning the Spirits, what we
further say upon this subject, the reader may consult our subject, the reader
may consult our Hydrolog. Chym. 117.118. etc. to which (for brevity sake) we
refer; and shall content our selves at present, to confirm the truth of what is
already said by matter of fact from some few Instances, which are as follows.

The First Cure.
MR. Th. Wesled of Grimsby in Lincolnshire, was taken with an extreme pain in
his belly, which held him for many months together, so as he could never say he
was an hour free, which took away his sleep, he was also swelled in his belly,
as that he could not walk twenty yards without a rest, and great difficutly of
breathing, and continual sneesing; his appetite to meat was gone, so as he was
despaired of by his Physicians, who suspected a Dropsy, he came to the waters,
though with great difficulty in his Journey, because of the weight of his
belly, and drank near three weeks, and found an abatement in all the aforesaid
symptoms, the second year perfected the cure; the third year he also drank the
waters, which he continued to do, to prevent a relapse, being then as healthful
as in all his life before.

The Second Cure.
TH. Kud's daughter in Scarbrough, of about twelve years of age, had an
inveterate Itch, and by a Surgeon Quack was fluxed for it, but in stead of
curing her left her worse; heightened the Scorbutic taint into a white leprous
Scab all over her body, and her body swelled much, was very stark and hard, her
legs swelled and her face huffed up, was judged by many incurable; I ordered
her a purge, which carried off much watery humors and made way for the waters;
of which I ordered her to drink every morning; in each first pint in a morning
(or sometimes in a little warm Ale) to take one ounce of the Syrup de Spina
Cervina, also ordered her a glister ex recentis urinae, xij cum Sir. de Spina
Cervina, x. and when I saw her four days after, I could scarce know her, in
that her face was so much fallen and come to its right proportion, also her
body was much unswelled, as likewise her legs, yea, was quite recovered, and
continued so, as I had an account thereof from an ingenious friend who had it
from her own Father.

The Third Cure.
MRS. Eliz. Turner of Hutton-pagnel in Yorkshire, through obstructions, fell
into a great swelling, and hardness of her belly, with difficulty of breathing,
which gave too much cause to suspect a Dropsy: It had resisted Medicines, till
coming to the waters, which she drank fourteen days, her belly fell, and and
she shortly after conceived with Child.

Worms.
THE causes of Worms are chiefly ascribable, first to the debilitude of the
ferments, and next to the depravation and putrefaction of the nutritive juyces
chiefly residing in the Stomach and Guts, which two causes jointly considered,
are doubtless the seminaries of worms and wormatick matter: For we see that
Worms happen generally in Children, where the ferments are not strong, and
whose nutritive juyces are hence apt to grow putrid, and prone to a spurious
animation (if I may so say) the generation of worms, being a bastardly product
or off-set springing from depraved vital seeds animating a degenerate putrid
matter. These without peradventure are many times the causes of several
Diseases (attended with bad symptoms) even in adult persons whose original
frequently lies in obscurity, and hence are apt to be mistaken for other
diseases.

That these waters expel worms and wormatick degenerate matter, both as it
strengthens the ferments, (helps digestion) and likewise resists putrefaction,
will partly be evident from the few following instances.

The First Cure.
RIchard Legard Esquire had been many years troubled with small worms which we call
Ascarides, for which he had taken good advice, and used several remedies, yet
never found any so successful as these waters, which brought from him, to his
best judgment above five hundred in a day, and in a few days quit him both of
the Worms and the matter that bred them.

The second cure.
MR. G. Watson of Throshenby near Scarbrough was grievously afflicted with
Melancholic fumes, which exceedingly clouded his understanding, and possessed
him with fears and fancies, taking away his sleep for many weeks together, so
as he was become a mere Skelleton, and so feeble that he was not able to walk,
but was carried about in arms, during which time he had nevertheless an
incredible appetite, accompanied with a gnawing pain at his Stomach, the cause
of which distemper was not easily discerned, till after some time he began to
void a sort of flat worms about an inch long, empty as if they had been nothing
but a skin, applying himself to the waters, he voided sometimes thirty or forty
in a day, and in a little time, found perfect cure, all symptoms abating, and
his appetite returning to its regular course.

Women's Diseases.
Women's Diseases peculiarly so called, are such as properly belong to the womb,
and to its Regimen and irregularities which chiefly either proceed from the
obstructions of the Matrix, whereby the redundant superfluous blood, (to be
separated according to the due course of nature in the forms of the Menses)
flows back, floats in the containing vessels, in this or the other part, whom
with its plenty it stretches (whence as an aliquid amplius) a turgescence, and
plethory, and the symptoms thence following; or proceed from a debilitude of
the womb, whereby the blood becomes drained away in too great quantities,
whence Lypothymia's, Faintings, Swoonings, etc.

As to the former; in order to the better understanding of what the
obstructions of the womb are, and what the effects thence ensuing toward a
right apprehension (I say) whereof we show in our Hydrolog. Chym. what the
Menstrua are, the manner of their Generation, their use in nature, their lunar
and critical seasons of Evacuation, and how from their obstruction arise a
Plethora (besides what happens at every natural and critical Evacuation) and
how the effects of which (if settling in the head) are usually (if internal)
Megrim, Dizziness, or pain in the head, or (if external) are pustles in the
face, redness and soreness of eyes, swelling of the face, etc. if in other
places, thence tumors, erratick pains, and how from the restagnation of the
blood (through the aforesaid obstructions) in the Bronchys of the Lungs, happen
indispositions, dullness and sluggishness of the body, shortness of breath,
oppression of the Precordia, or upper mouth of the Stomach, etc. concerning all
which (I say) we treat in our Hydrolog. Chym. p. 125. 126. etc. to which we
refer.

We shall only here add, that the waters (by their connate Salts) are (by
matter of fact) found, not only proper for opening obstructions, and
consequently adapted for the helping such Diseases and Symptoms as thence
depend viz. the Green Sickness in Maids, the fits of the Mother, and symptoms
thence arising; But also (by observation) are found, as effectual by its gentle
astingency, to repress the overflowings both white and red, whose floods
otherwise bring on Lypothymia's, Faintings, Swoonings, etc. For though it be an
apperient water, yet with other proper advisable helps, it is found by
experience, notably to stay the immoderate Fluxes of Women.

As to the First, the waters (with other additional helps) are powerful in
opening (as I said) obstructions, the Minera or source of women's Maladies,
makes the blood well to circulate, and duly to pay its Lunar or Monthly
tribute, causing right separations to be made, whereby their shortness of
breath leave them, their listlesness and indisposedness goes off, and all other
bad symptoms aforesaid disappear, their appetite and digestion comes on, grow
vigorous, well complexioned, get a good color for what they do: making them
look of a ruddy and fresh complexion, where nature her self thus assisted,
begins to paint, whose colors (being only contempered by an invisible pencil)
are not only most lively, but also durable, and consequently (if other features
conspire) the best and most taking.

And withal to such as are apt to miscarry, they notably strengthen the
retentive faculty of the womb, helping such to go on to their time.

And that it takes away some causes of barrenness, being frequently found to
further conception, both in those who having been long married, never
conceived, and in such as, after many years of intermission, near past all
hopes of more children: In both which cases let the following Instances serve
for the rest.

Prolifickness of the Waters, or Instances of the waters efficacy toward
helping of conception.

The first Case
MR. Th. St. Quintin, of Flambrough in Yorkshire, and his Wife, were seven
years and an half married, during which time she had never conceived, upon the
report of the efficacy and virtue of the waters, he brought her to Scarbrough,
where she drank fourteen days, within a month after she conceived; and brought
forth a Son. Then having an interruption for four years, he brought her to the
waters again: After a fortnight or three weeks that she had left the waters,
she conceived again; and brought forth a Daughter: both which (at the first
writing hereof) were living and healthful Children.

The Second Case.
MRs. Elizabeth Turner of Hutton-Pagnel in Yorkshire, whose cure of the
Dropsy by the waters is formerly mentioned; shortly after which, she conceived
with Child, and brought forth a Son, having had no child before of seven years.

The Third Case.
MRS. Elizabeth Smith of Scremerston in the Bishopric of Durham, whose cure of
Hypochondriack Melancholy is before recited, upon which it happened also that
while she was with her husband at Scarbrough, she conceived with Child, when as
yet to her own expectation, she was past hopes of any more children, having
never conceived for above five years before.

The Fourth Case.
A Scotch Gentlewo-man, being in years, whose cure of Hypocondraick Melancholy
and the Scurvy is beforementioned, upon which, drinking the waters
(notwithstanding the great weakness she was reduced to) she conceived and
brought forth two Children, which was wonderful so weak a woman as she was
should conceive or bring them forth, being judged so weak, as not capable of
bringing forth one.

The Fifth Case.
SR. H. Thompson his Lady had no Child by two former Husbands when Sr. H.
married her, she came to the waters, whereupon conceived

Among the Classis of Diseases belonging to the Womb, may not impertinently be
reckoned such swellings of the belly, as happen sometimes from cold upon or
after Childbearing, concerning which we have one considerable instance of the
efficacy of these waters, as follows.

Doctor G. Tunstal of New Castle his wives belly never fell after a Child she
had born, nor could he by all the means he used, take it down; The Physician
then at the Spaw, viz. Dr. Witty was consulted, who advised her Husband to
give her some preparatives, and something else with the water to further the
intention, after a few days her Boddice did lace close, that could not meet
within three or four inches before, she continued to drink a month, and
returned perfectly well, and so continued free from all swelling, it being (at
the first writing hereof) near three years after.

To which may be added, that these waters are very effectual in the cure of all
such symptomatical Diseases (if I may so call them) which take their first
original from obstructions of the menstrual evacuation, viz. epileptick,
paralytick, apoplectick, hysteric, convulsive asthmatick Affections; That is,
those Diseases in women, which (from the aforesaid causes) most resemble the
Falling Sickness, Palsies, Apoplexies, fits of the Mother, Convulsions, and
difficulty of breathing, or diseases descending from the aforesaid Springhead,
which by their penetrating Salts open obstructions (the Minera of such
Maladies) and remove the first causes thereof, whereby (together with the
addition of other specific helps) all the aforesaid Symptomatick or secondary
Diseases will necessarily and consequently cease, concerning all which we
discourse more largely in our Hydrologia Chym. p. 84. 94. 95. to which we reser.

An Imposthume.
THat these waters are powerful in breaking and carrying away inward
Imposthumations, I shall give one considerable Instance.

In the year 74. or 75. a man who had an Imposthumation in his small guts,
drank the waters, and in a few days after the first drinking thereof, while he
had a stool, he observed something to give a crack, the Imposthume broke and
came all away, the matter was lodged in a skin or film, which he showed a
Merchant (my worthy friend and late patient) here upon the Sands, who gave me
the relation thereof, as an eyewitness.

Having thus run through the History of Chronick Diseases, and showed the great
efficacy of the waters (sometimes accommodated with other appropriate helps) in
order to their respective cures we would conclude with some remarks of their
virtue in the cure of Acute Diseases, viz. contined Fevers, as to which, we
esteem them (duly administered) among the best sort of purges, and greatly
conducible toward the abating of the spurious febrile fermentation or
praeternatural boiling of the blood, and one of the best quenchers of thirst we
know of in the World, sometimes strangely allaying the Luxuriant symptoms of a
Fever, even although, in some cases, extended to a Dilirium or Frenzy, of
which we shall give this following remakable Instance as I had it from the
Gentleman's own mouth (viz.)

An Alderman of York went to drink these waters for a debilitude of the Anus,
whose Muscles (from some Scorbutic Acidum fixed there) was so relaxed, and the
tone of the parts so altered and enfeebled as was a very great affliction to
him, he for a time suspended drinking the waters, and what through the pain of
the grieved parts, and what through an inquietude and restlesness (which yet
was consequential to the former) and perhaps partly through an imbibition of
the Scorbutic Acidum into the blood, begot such an alteration of the Crasis
thereof as he fell into a Fever, whose symptoms prevailed so strongly, and
grew so high, that it brought a Dilirium or Frenzy upon him, he was forbidden
to drink the waters; but notwithstanding which injunction and imposition, he
ventured privately, which none knew, stole a hearty drink, took two lusty pulls
at a whole pitcher of the waters (left by a water-woman) which wrought
excellently well with him, allayed his thirst, took away his Dilirium or
Frenzy; yea, so took off the bad symptoms of his Fever, as that he speedily
recovered, came down out of his Chamber, and was the very next day (if I do not
mis-remember) as well as any of the rest of the company.

A Discourse of an Artificial Sulphur-Bath, and Bath of Seawater, with the
uses thereof in the Cure of several Diseases.
HAving a Discourse of the Sulphur Bath at Knarsbrough, already Extant, at the
heel of our Zymol. Phys. or Phylosophical Discourse of Fermentation, which we
judged as a necessary Appendix to our two former Treatises of the Spaw's viz.
Hydrolog. Chymic. and Hydrolog. Essays; we have therein (which may be somewhat
preluminary or introductory to this) traced this following Method, in the seven
or eight ensuing particular Heads, viz. First. By laying down the constitutive
ingredients and Mineral principles of that water. Secondly. By showing the
Process (as near as we can apprehend) nature uses in the preparing that
excellent water. Thirdly. By showing the difference betwixt it and natural hot
Baths in their original and imbred principles, so also in some sort as to their
virtues. Fourthly. By pointing out how and by what means, the Sulphur (as the
chief Mineral ingredient of that water) is so opened as to become not only so
subtle as thence to be solvable therein odore tenus, but also so volatile as
to pass off in a continual steam and insensible Effluvium. Fifthly. By showing
how this Sulphur water comes not much short as to its original principles, nor
is much (if at all) inferior in efficacy to some other Sulphur waters, which
are hot Baths, in as much as that it is lately found successful for outward
applications, as well as those by late observation are remarked for inward use.
Sixthly. By showing that the artificial heating of the Sulphur. water bears
some Analogy to the inbred heat of other Baths, as they come hot out of the
earth. Seventhly. By pointing out how Art may imitate Nature (yet from the same
principles) in the resemblance of most Baths, viz. how to prepare such Baths
Artificially as are Natural. Lastly. By inquiring how and after what manner
that Sulphur-water performs those expected helps as a Bath, where in short its
various virtues are unfolded in order to the help of several Diseases; for
illustration of which, we refer to that Discourse.


But the Reader may object and say, that all here said relates to the
Sulphur-water, and the virtues ascribable thereto, may only belong to it as
such? The answer to which objection opens a door to let me in to say in this
matter what I chiefly aim at.

And first, That Art working with the same instruments that Nature does, is so
far from perverting the course of nature, as it rather promotes the intention
thereof.

Secondly. That what is done by Art above ground with congeneal principles, in
imitation of what is performed in the bowels of the earth by the Chemistry of
Nature, must needs be congruous and very suitable to nature, so that if nature
be traced in her subterraneal solutions, praecipitations, percolations, and
other manner of depurations, and that by various Salts or other Mineral juyces
in order to the preparing Mineral healing waters; what should hinder (even in a
rational way) but that by skillful Enkeiresy or manual (admitting analogy in
Principles) the same may be done above ground, and that for the supplying other
places by a benign hand where nature is defective, not but that in some cases
we must own the curiosity of Nature to be such as cannot be imitated, and her
paths so obscure as are indiscoverable by our dull senses, so that in such
productions where Nature is imitable, if we arrive at due Mediums and prosecute
them with parallel circumstances, we need not doubt of reaching equivalent
effects.

But in short, we propose to show, First, The possibility of preparing such an
artificial Bath, as may (for ought we know) in every respect (or at least in
such as we have need of) answer the Natural. And next to show its uses; The
first we discover in our aforesaid Treatise, and intend (if God grant life and
health) to have ready for use against the Spaw season, to render it practical
as (among other things) a necessary adjunct for the benefit of Mankind.

And here (for brevity sake) as preliminary to the latter, because the uses of
the Sea-Bath and artificial Sulphur-Bath will be reciprocal according as the
judgment of the Physician guided by indications of Diseases shall advise,
sometimes the one, other-while the other prore nata, as the case shall require,
therefore what relates to the help or cure of such Diseases as are peculiar to
either or both, we shall (to avoid multiplicity of words) reduce under one
name, viz. the Bath.

Wherefore as to the latter (which is what we mainly aim at) viz. the uses of
the Bath, we propose it as effectual (together with other concurring helps)
chiefly in such Diseases as arise; first, from the ill habit of the genus
nervosum (or nervous parts) viz. Appoplexy's, Palsie's, Falling Sickness, and
Convulsions, the particular accounts whereof we (for brevity sake) new omit,
next to which we might reckon upon the Gout, and Sciatica, (which are the same
Disease, only distinguished by difference of parts affected) which in as much
as it chiefly consists in a spurious ferment or (if I may so call it) Stum of
the blood, transmitted upon the Synovia or interior membrane of the joints
(that exquisitly sensible web woven over the whole,) made up of nervous fibers
whence the sensible pains essentially inherent in that Malady, thence these
Sulphurious Baths (with other helps) are found proper in the dinting and
allaying the aforesaid fermental acoras, matter of fact has already evinced.
To which may be added the Rickets and other weaknesses of joints in children,
as also all Scorbutic impurities, Itch or Scabs, or other foulnesses of the
skin, all which by a skillful management it takes off, opening the pores of the
skin, giving liberty for the blood to breath forth what is noxious to it, and
dints all bad ferments lodged in the outward parts, as to which we have not
time now to enlarge.

The Rarities observable at Scarbrough.
TO rank what is here remarkable into their several classes, and to treat
distinctly of them would swell this Piece beyond its intended bounds, therefore
we shall at present only content our selves with this slight method (viz.)
First, To reckon up the several sorts of Diuretics because those are very
useful for the help of Mankind, next to touch upon Stones with some hints of
the variety thereof: Then to speak and that very concisely by way of Epitome,
of Sea-plants, etc.

As to the First, viz. Some excellent Diuretics of which four sorts are here
found.

The First is the Mineral Fountain it self, which by daily experience is found
to be a most admirable Diuretic, generally passing well, and carrying off with
it that mucous or viscous matter which is often the cause of obstructions and
difficulty of Urine; as also Sabulous matter, which concreted, swells into
larger stones, (and which the waters (if not of a very hard or complete
texture) will dissolve, or if confirmed (and not too bigg for the passages)
will bring away.

The Second Diuretic is Daucus Silvestris, which grows within a dozen yards or
thereabouts off the Spaw, seems as if placed there designedly by Providence to
fortify and second the Diuretic quality of the Mineral waters. That what
Nature works under ground by Minerals exquisitely contempering and dissolving
them and their Salts in water, is here also wrought in another Kingdom (even
the vegitable) above ground, evident not only in that of the Daucus, but also
in the production of another most excellent Diuretic plant (to be found upon
Scarbrough-Castle-Banks) called Carduns-Marinus, of great efficacy, as has been
experienced in the cure of the Stone,

And as though these were not enough to afford such admirable Specificks,
wherein, as if not only the Mineral Kingdom in the Subterraneal Solutions
thereof (evident in this apperient Spring) but also the workings of Nature
above ground, apparent in the vegetable Kingdom (as aforesaid) were I say, not
sufficient; Nature to complete her number in the ternary of Kingdoms, adds the
Animal and therein exhibits to our view the largest sort of Milipides that ever
I saw, a kind of Animal or rather Insect, which are bred and live amongst the
Rocks of this place, they consist of a curious texture of parts very bright and
an almost incredible size, of which we have gotten several a complete Inch
long. They seem to be an animation of Marine Salt fostering their oviperous
original, excited by a stony Fracedo incorporated with the Sunbeams, and to be
fed thereby, whence their great plenty of an inbred volatile Alkali, the Marine
Salt in the Fabric of their bodies, by the ferment thereof, (like as if by an
Animal Alkahest,) being transmuted into an Alkali, or from fixed is made
volatile, such energy there is in Animal ferments, whence these Insects become
powerful Abstersives and openers of obstructions both in the case of the
Jaundies, as also against difficulty of Urine.

The next thing we propose in order is concerning Stones, where in, the first
place, amongst those Rocks on the back of the Castle, we take notice of some
strange and mystical inscriptions written in large Characters by another hand
than we are usually acquainted with, where he who is skilful in the language of
Nature in the unfolding the mysteries thereof, has by these dark
Hyeroglyphicks, a lesson hard enough set him.

To see some Pyrites or fire-stones (some call thunderbolts) enclosed in other
textured rocky stones, so shaped and figured as if shot in by some unseen hand,
as well as invisible bow; which (although both are Stone) yet the former as
much differs from the stony soil of the latter they are planted or grow in, as
a vegitable plant differs from the earth it springs from, such an object I say
can beget no less than wonder. To see (by viewing again) Cockle or
Muscle-shells enclosed in great bulky stones (as Hetrogeneous parts which
constitute the whole compage) and some of them to become as stony as the Rock
they are fixed in. To see others, viz. Cockles in their entire form enclosed in
and perfectly walled about which lesser stones like as if involved in stony
baggs or petrifick cases. Also to view other stones (there found) like boulders
to enclose the perfectly wrought bodies of Snakes or Serpents Spirally wrought
up in a small compass, where the Snake stone has lest such an impression upon
its case or print as if it had been the mould, about which clay or some
succulent stone had been so wrought and then hardened or petrified by the
Salt Water and niterous air, and thence had received impression just as boys do
in making their prints of clay upon moulds, and to see the great variety of
curious Stones thrown upon the Sands; some like Diamonds, others like Aggates,
and so of other colors, of which some have been sold at great rates. To
conclude, to see great stones crusted over with fish-shells, as if nature was
clothing them with new coats; all which, besides matter of common wonder, may
also give occasion to the Naturalist in his allotting of the causes of things,
to think again. To go in the next place and view those pretty little guardens
of Natures own sowing planting and walling: To see I say, little Woods and
Trees curiously branched, each small twig and slender fiber born up and
delicately displayed to full view, painted in their natural colors, enclosed
in stone, growing in Neptunes Province and swimming in a flood; I mean and some
other Coraline plants whose roots are fixed upon stones, incircled with walls
made of the same, floating in Seawater, exhibiting various colors, no less
pleasurable to the eye, then satisfactory to a curious searching mind: To say
nothing here of the prospect of that great variety of Sea-plants which
challenge the Rocks and Sea for their soil, here to be seen, of which I have
bestowed pains in making a Collection, as the curious at the season may view.
All which cannot but beget admiration, which if it do not, it is a firm
argument of the hardness and stoniness of that mind as well as of its
petrifique objects.

To say little here of the two Wells or Springs of fresh waters which arise
pretty near day, upon the high Rock on which the Castle stands, one of which is
within two or three yards of the very brink of that steep Rock which bounds the
Sea, which is a vast height above the Surface of Neptunes Element, and these
Springs are rarely (even in the greatest droughts) known to fail. -- And near
to this place viz. at Whitby are the great Allom-works of England, of which we
have given some account in our Hydrolog. Essays.

To see each Proselite to Natures Wonders searching for Rarities upon the
Seashore, and every one like another Archimedes, returning with his (...) in
one thing or other, either some curious stones, or some Marcasite with a Cockle
or Serpent wrapped therein, which when the petrifick shell is broke, appear plain
to view in their entire and curious form, or some pretty Sea-Plant; for after
every flood, a new scene of Rarities in one sort or other appears, where are to
be seen those Ludicra Naturae, in which Nature sports her self in great variety.

To conclude, Methinks the question concerning every Rarity we here meet with,
is not much unlike that of our Lords to them who tempted him about the
Lawfulness of paying Tribute, viz. whose Superscription is upon it, or whose
Image does it bear? And the answer thereto not different from theirs, viz.
Caesar's, that of the great King, of Heaven and Earth; who as he has stamped
the character of his Wisdom and power upon every created visible object, so
more particularly some things seem to bear bolder shadows of the Divine Pencil,
and to retain more vigorous impressions and lively draughts of the Image
thereof. And lastly, The conclusion or genuine consequence of both, runs
parallel with that of our Lords advice, viz. to give to Caesar the things which
belong to Caesar, viz. Admiration, Adoration, Obedience and Praises for ever,
and all the World to come in with full Chorus, saying, Amen, Hallelujah.

FINIS.

