SIMEON and LEVI, BRETHREN in INIQUITY. A COMPARISON BETWEEN A PAPIST AND A
Scotch Presbyter: OR, An Account of the Ancient and Modern Jesuits, in point of
Doctrine and Practice, carefully extracted and paralleled, for the Benefit of
all his Majesty's Loyal Subjects, who are not willing to be Cheated out of
their Loyalty, Religion, and Lives, and at length their Souls; and all under a
specious pretense of Religion, by such men as make Godliness their Gain, and
Religion the Stalking-horse to all their Black Designs.
Papist.
POpe Gregory the Seventh was the first that took upon him to Depose Kings. And
it is the General received Doctrine of the Roman Church, that the Pope has full
power to Depose Kings and Princes, and to give away their Kingdoms to whom he
pleases. Pope Gregory the 13th having two Bastards (or Nephews, as they are
commonly called) to the one he gave the Kingdom of Ireland, to the other the
Kingdom of England.

He that shall look into their History, shall find what a number of Popes have
raised up one Prince against another, and stirred up the Subject against his
lawful Sovereign.

Pope John the 8th raised Berengar and Adalbar against Otho the Emperor.

Pope John the 18th stirred up Crescentius against Otho the third. Pope
Benedict the 9th raised Peter of Hungaria against Henry the Black. No less than
seven Emperors have been Excommunicated by their Holinesses, viz. Frederick
the first, Frederick the second, Philip Conrade, Otho the fourth, Lewis of
Bavaria, Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth; who having their Dominions set on
fire, were at last contented with what Holy Water the Pope was pleased to cast
upon them. Let Us come nearer home, and see how troublesome his Agents have been
to the Kings and Queens of this Nation. Henry the first was plagued with Anselm
A. B. of Canterbury; Henry the second with his Successor Becket. Henry the
third was sufficiently plagued with the Roman Hierarchy; he had his Treasure
exhausted, his Subjects scourged, and all by the Popes intolerable Exactions.
Henry the Eighth though he continued the Pope's Religion entire, yet for
rejecting his Jurisdiction, was Condemned, Excommunicated, pronounced no King,
his Subjects commanded to deny all Subjection, and all men to take up Arms
against him. Pope Pius the fifth Excommunicates Queen Elizabeth, and Deposes
her by his Bull. The Effects; First a Rebellion in the North, stirred up by
Nic. Morton a Priest: the Chief Leaders were the Earls of Westmorland and
Northumberland, intending to join with the Duke of Norfolk, in order to a Match
between him and the Queen of Scots; thereby to make claim to the Crown of
England, Queen Elizabeth being Deposed by the Popes Bull.

Thuanus tells us, that these Doctrines were inculcated every where; (1.)
Princes not professing the Roman Faith, are fallen from their Title and Royal
Authority. (2.) That Princes Excommunicate were not to be obeyed, but thrown
out of their Kingdoms; and that it is a meritorious Work to do it. (3.) That
the Clergy are exempt from the Jurisdiction of Secular Princes, and are not
bound by their Laws. (4.) That the Pope has the chief and full Power and
Authority over all throughout the world, even in Civil matters. (5.) That the
Magistrates of England are not lawful Magistrates, and therefore not to be
accounted so. (6.) Whatever since the Bull of Pope Pius the fifth was published
(which some hold was Dictated by the Holy Ghost) has by the Queens Authority
been acted in England, is by the Law of God and Man reputed altogether void and
null.

The fruit of these Doctrines you may see in the Case of Anthony Babington, a
proper young Gentleman, who was excited by Ballard a Jesuit to kill Queen
Elizabeth, as a Deed not only just and holy in it self, but honorable and
profitable; she being Excommunicated, whoever killed her should be free from
all Sin, either against God or Man; yea, he would merit a Crown of Glory: and
if he survived the Enterprise, should doubtless obtain a great Reward. Under
the notion of reward, not obscurely insinuating his Marriage with the Queen of
Scots.

In the Year (88) it was agreed between the Pope and King Philip, that the said
Philip should hold the Kingdom of England in Fee of the Pope, when once it was
reduced, according to the Articles and Contract of King Ina, Henry the second,
and King John, made and renewed, with the Title of Defendor of the Faith; upon
which King Philip endeavors an Invasion; but Providence frustrated his and his
holy Fathers Expectation.

I should be endless, should I mention all the Plots and Treacheries of the
Whore of Babylon and her Agents; as that of Hugh Oneale Earl of Tyrone, that of
Don John D'Aquila, who was sent by his Master the King of Spain with a great
Army into Ireland; as also that Damnable Plot of the Gunpowder Treason, never
outdone till this now, which by the great Mercy of God was brought to light by
a Miraculous means. The chief Contrivers were; First, The Pope. (2.) Cardinal
Howard. (3.) Johannes Paulus d'Oliva, General of the Jesuits. (4.) Petro
Jeronimo de Corduba, Provincial of the Jesuits at Castile. (5.) Le Cheese a
Jesuit, Confessor to the French King. (6.) The Provincial of the Jesuits in
England. (7.) The Benedictine Monks at the Savoy, and other Seminary Priests
and Jesuits. The apprehension of so glorious a work engaged most of the eminent
Popish Clergy in England, whose Names will stand upon Record to their perpetual
shame. Those designed for the act, some or them have had their reward. But why
should we so much wonder at the Treachery of the Church of Rome, considering
she is always embrewing her hands in Blood by her Inquisition, by private
Plots, or by raising Jealousies amongst Princes; witness that Murder of Henry
the fourth by Raviliac a Jesuit, by the consent of the Jesuits; That of one of
the Princes of Orange by Gerrard a Jesuit, set on by his Brethren of that Order.

The Death of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, by the Jesuits acted and contrived.

The Massacre in Ireland.

The Cruel and Bloody Massacre in France, both carried on by Jesuits.

But above all, their most barbarous Murdering of no less than Twenty Millions
of Souls in the West- Indies; which shows they are no Christians: otherwise
they could not have shed so much Blood for to enrich themselves.

Presbyter.
MR Calvin in his Institutions, Book the 4th, tells us, That the three Estates
in every Kingdom have power to lay retraints on their Princes, and call them to
account, if they any way entrench on the Peoples Liberty; if they connive with
the King, they are guilty of perfidious dissimulation, and treacherously betray
the Subjects Liberty. This Doctrine (no man is so happy as to be ignorant of)
has been practiced by him and his Followers in France, Holland, Scotland and
England, almost to the ruin of the Nation.

Mr. Buchanan, in his Common place, tells us, That though Princes and Subjects
have relation one to another, yet Subjects in the course of Nature were before
their Princes; Therefore Princes are not Superior to the rest by Nature, in
Right of Fatherhood; but are settled by the Suffrages and Consent of the
People. Thereupon, according to Mr. Buchanan's Doctrine, Princes are born for
the Good of the People, and not the People for their Prince. Therefore it is
Lawful to take up Arms for Religion, not only against any Foreign Prince, but
against their own, or any part of the Realm: Yet in a free Commonwealth the
Supreme Magistrate ought rather to be questioned in a course of Law. That it
was well done of the Switzers to free themselves from the House of Austria: And
that David might lawfully have killed Saul, because he gave his Wife to another
Man, expelled him from his Native Country, murdered the Priest for doing some
good Offices to him. This is Buchanan 's Commentary upon Calvin 's Text.

Mr. Beza: If a Prince, or Chief Magistrate, that is lawfully invested with
Power, shall either unjustly spoil and deprive his Subjects of their Rights or
Privileges, or otherwise oppress them, that then the ordinary and inferior
Magistrates are to oppose him, and by Gods appointment they are bound to
protect their Fellow Subjects against him.

I Will come now to the Doctrine of a whole Synod and Assembly of theirs at
Glasgow, which tells us, It is lawful for Subjects to Covenant and combine
without the King, and to enter into Bond of mutual Defense against him. That an
Assembly may abrogate Acts of Parliament, and discharge their Fellow Subjects
from their Obedience to them, if they any way reflect upon the business of the
Church: they also deny the Kings Right of Calling; and they did continue to Sit
and Act, notwithstanding his Majesty's express Order for their Dissolution. See
King Charles the first's Declaration.

Buchanan tells us, Though the King be greater than any one Subject, yet he is
less than the whole for the People are of greater Authority than the King,
having Power to bestow the Crown where they please, and of making Laws; and
that Kings are but Masters of the Rolls. That the People have the same power
over the King as He has over any one Subject.

This Doctrine has been both practiced and preached by Penry, Vidal,
Coppinger, Hacket and Arthington, in Queen Elizabeth's days; also by Mr.
Cartwright in his Admonitions. Mr. Rutherford, who was looked on as the Chariot
and Horsemen of Presbytery, he tells us, That the Power of a King is but
fiduciary; that the Sovereign Power is Originally and Radically in the People,
that the King is in Dignity inferior to the people: There is a Court of
Necessity, as well as a Court of Justice, and the Fundamental Laws must then
speak; it is with People in this extremity, as if they had no Ruler.

Mr. Knox very fairly tells us, That Subjects may not only lawfully oppose
their Kings, when they do any thing contrary to Gods Law; but also that they
may execute Judgment upon them. So that if a King be a Murderer, Adulterer, or
an Idolater, he shall suffer according to Gods Law, not as a King, but as an
Offender: For if a King prove a Tyrant, then all his Subjects are freed from
their Oath of Allegiance and Obedience. Yea, it were good, says he, that there
were Rewards for those that shall kill Tyrants, as well as formerly for those
killed Wolves, or other beasts of prey. Vid. his Church-Hist. And lest you
should say I have none but Scottish Authors for what I have said, be pleased to
take notice that Mr. R. B. in his Holy Commonwealth says, If a People bound by
Oath shall depose their Prince, and choose and covenant with another, they may
be obliged by the latter, notwithstanding their former covenant. The real
Sovereignty among us was in the King, Lords and Commons; and if the King raise
War against such a Parliament, in that case the King may not only be resisted,
but cease to be a King.

That the Presbyters abolished Kingly Government in the State, is most true,
and Episcopacy in the Church; sold Crown and Church Lands: made it Treason to
deny the Supremacy of the Commons, nulled all Honors granted by the King since
1641. made Scotland one Commonwealth with England, and made it Death to
proclaim the Lawful Heir King. Vid. Scobels Collections. Englands Solomon
knowing what Locusts they would prove to this Nation, gave his hopeful Son
Prince Henry this precaution: Take heed to such Puritans, who are the very
Pests in the Church and Commonwealth, whom (says he) no Deserts can oblige,
neither Oaths nor Promises bind. I protest before the great God, and since I
am here upon my Testament, it is no place for me to lie in, you shall never
find with any Highlands or Border-Thieves greater Ingratitude, and more Lies
and vile Perjuries, than with these Phanatick Spirits. I could heartily wish
that his Son and Grandson had not found him so true a Prophet. They not only
Preach this Doctrine, but put it in practice: For who murdered Henry Lord
Darnly, who married the Queen of Scots, whom they hanged on an Apple Tree? The
Scotch Presbyterians.

Who Murdered Archbishop Beaton of St. Andrews, and said they were sent by God
to do such godly Acts, only cause they imagined he was a Persecutor of Gods
people? The Presbyterians. Vid. Knox's Church History.

Who Murdered King Charles of ever-blessed Memory? The Presbyterians in his
Politic Capacity (as they call it) and the Independents in his Natural.

Who Murdered Dr. Sharp Archbishop of St. Andrews, and raised Rebellion
shortly after? The Presbyterians.

Who was it that in our late Wars Plundered and Sequestered all the Kings Loyal
Subjects, and then cried out, They did but as the Israelites, rob the
Egyptians? The Presbyterians.

TO Conclude; from this Parallel it appears, that the Popish Presbyterians, and
Presbyterian Papists are perfectly united, and have set up their Center in one
Principle; and that although they seem different in outward Forms and
Appearances, they differ nothing in Reality and Essence: The one has already
Murdered their Sovereign, a Brave and Generous Prince; the other have designed
it, and would do it as soon as they could: The difference lies in the Time and
Action, not in the Will and Intention; therein they are both united. I advise
therefore all my Countrymen, that as they are careful to avoid the Paw of the
Bear, so that they should as well eschew the Mouth of the Lion. The one is seen
and known a^ a distance, and therefore Dreaded; the other are masked, and
covered with the Lambs Clothing, that they might the more certainly and
Infallibly destroy. Pray pull off the Vizard, and be no longer deceived; for
you will find the Gall of the Dove as bitter as the Poison of the Serpent.

FINIS.

