A CONFESSION OF FAITH OF James Salgado, A SPANIARD, and sometimes a Priest in
the Church of Rome. Dedicated to the University of Oxford.

With an Account of his Life and Sufferings by the Romish Party, since he
forsook the Romish Religion.

LONDON: Printed for William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-street. 1681.

To all and Singular Members of the University of OXFORD. To the Reverend, and
most Excellent, Mr. Vicechancellour. To the Reverend and Eminent Heads of
Colleges. And to the Worthy Fellows of the same.
James Salgado, A Spaniard,
wishes Felicity, both Temporal, and Eternal.
I Should be very Injurious to your bounty Liberally bestowed upon me; O ye
Men, every one famous according to his Title and Degree, unless according to
the Old Custom of the Romans, I should Crown that Fountain with Laurel, from
whence I drew Water: For it is a great Sign of Inhumanity, to receive a benefit,
and not to return it again.

The Heliotrope must conform it self according to the Suns motion; because, as
it cannot avoid it is Light, so it ought not to decline its influence. But this
acts so effectually upon it, that it is forced to turn its Head to the Course
of the Sun.

You have relieved my Misery, O ye Gentlemen of the University, and that so
effectually, that you have invited me to a Public acknowledgement of your
benevolence toward me; which I am now willing to do, lest by any longer delay,
this good purpose of mine should lose its reward.

This little Book therefore I lay before your Feet, expecting what Censure
you will please to bestow upon it.

You Will take my Endeavors I hope in good part, and pardon this my temerity. (If
taking a little pains in this exercse, as Sylla the Roman Dictator was wont to
carry a little Image of Jupiter in his bosom;) So I presume to bear your
Portraicture in my heart; and this I will do beyond the reach of all envy; and
shall account it among the Number of the greatest Virtues to be found guilty of
such a fault; neither because you have done me a kindness therefore shall it be
lawful for me to be ungrateful. With Cyrus therefore, favorably receive me as
a genuin, and true Persian; and do not disdain to enlighten me with the bright
rays of your further Benevolence, who desires to borrow some splendour from
your shadow.

Fare ye well, most worthy Gentlemen, and be entirely favorable, to one that
admires your dignities, and is,

Your Servant, James Salgado, A Converted Spaniard.

A CONFESSION of FAITH.
IN the Name of GOD Amen.
After I had been admitted to the Order of Priesthood, in the Church of Rome;
and now perceived that I was to look after the Cure of other Men's Souls
committed to my Charge, as well as my own; I very often considered with my self
how I might safely enter upon the way of Salvation, and so provide salutary
supplies, both for my self and also for the Flock committed to my Custody.

It Is very true, that the Romanists debar the Common People from reading the
Holy Scriptures, as from the Food of Life; but yet those of the Clergy, (and
that especially in Spain, my Native Country,) as well as other Roman Catholics
are wont more Religiously to exercise themselves in Reading the Sacred
Scriptures. The same thing happened to me also; and while I was Reading Gods
Holy Book, I lighted upon those words of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.16. All
Scripture is given by Divine Inspiration; and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, and for Instruction in Righteousness and That the Man
of GOD may be perfect thoroughly furnished unto all good Works.

In which Words the blessed Apostle seemed to me, to have drawn a Presbyter in
his lively Colors; and not only to have shown and prescribed a Method of
Preaching the Gospel, but also to have discovered the matter and Fountain from
whence it is to be drawn; and which is more, to have opened a way, which might
bring the Man of God, that is, the Mimister of CHRIST to an undoubted
Consummation.

For he mentions the Scriptures, which he acknowledges to contain in them the
whole Treasure of Gods Divine Will; seeing he has both expressed those four
Fountains of Christian Morality, and also denounced him accursed, whosoever
shall offer to Preach any other Gospel, than that which he Preached; and
withal Pronounced, Peace upon every one that walks according to this Rule,
Gal. 1.9. and 6.16.

When I had pondered these things with my self, and perceived such great and
Magnificent things to have been spoken by the Apostle, concerning the
Scriptures; he being such a one, as had affirmed [to the Elders of the Church
of Ephesus] that he had made known unto them, the whole Counsel of GOD, Act.
20.27. and yet withal, that he spoke nothing but what Moses and the Prophets
had said before him. At last I came to this Conclusion: That the Holy
Scriptures are the only Writings wherein we may be instructed, concerning the
Method and means of our Salvation; and that out of them only we are to instruct
the People, and to Convince the Gain sayers.

To this Rule therefore, I applied all those Controversial Questions which
usually past between Divines, as being very desirous to know the Internal parts
of every Profession in Religion; that by this means I might the safer adjoyn my
self either to this or that party, and with a good Conscience worship GOD, and
his Anointed JESUS CHRIST.

And truly, I could not own any other to be the true Religion which might be
weighed in the Balance of Gods Divine Law and the Promises, besides the
Reformed. Wherefore I made a Covenant with my Soul, That I would forthwith
adjoyn my self ^o the Reformed Church, and forsake the Romish Idolatry, which
also I did in France, and that in the Assembly of CHARENTON, and with great joy
of my mind; I did there unite my self to the Mystical Body of my Savior.

But as every Man must live by his own Faith, and none can be judged before
Gods Tribunal, unless it be by his own Conscience, there being no Mediator to
intercede, betwixt that and GOD. So also I might have been one of the Resormed
Religion without making any External Profession of my Faith.

Notwithstanding because of the Commands of my Friends and common Custom so
requiring; therefore I was the more willing to testify unto the World my
intimate, and sincere Confession in these following particulars.

With GODS help therefore,

I.
In the first place, I Confess that the Holy Scriptures are sufficient for
Salvation, and that they are the Supreme Normal Judge of all Controversies.
It Is very true, that as GOD is the Author of the Scriptures, so he is likewise
the Supreme Judge of all Controversies; but none is to be acknowledged for the
subordinate and Normal Judge of them, but the Scripture only.

Neither is the Heresy of the Papists to be admitted, who make the Church to
be the Supreme Judge of Controversies. Which Church (as they call it) whether
it consists in the Pope only by himself, or as he is joined with a Council, or
whether it Consists in a Council alone without him, they have a long time
doubted, and the Reason of that is this; because no Scripture is of any private
Interpretation, but holy men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet.
1.21.

Now he best understands both the Law and the Promises who wrote them both; and
if he so understands, then he best knows the sense and meaning of them, and if
so, then without doubt he is the Supreme Decider of all Controversies, and he
has left unto us his Law to be the Rule both of our Lives, of our Manners, and
of our Actions.

The Romanists prate against us here, and Object these two things.

First, That every one is a Pretender to the Holy Spirit; and,

Secondly, That the Scriptures do Contradict one another.

But for all that, they are forced to confess these two things. First, That
pretense is no Prescription to the Truth; and Secondly, That the Contradictions
which they Object, are not Really so much as Apparent: Which also is evidently
seen in the many Harmonies and Concordances that are made of the Bible.

Howbeit, there is no doubt, but that the Church has her share also in this
Affair; but yet so as that we still hold, that she only by her Testimony stands
us in stead, as the Witness of Truth, not by her Authority as by a Law to bind
our Consciences primarily and by her own self. The Power she has is
Subordinate, not absolute, she is Gods Servant only; and upon that Account, not
to regulate Gods Word, but to be regulated by it.

So that the Pope of Rome proclaims himself Antichrist by this very thing; that
he exalts himself above all that which proceeds from GOD, as if he were not (as
by Right he ought to be) a Minister of the Divine Command, but a Lawgiver
himself.

II.
As to God, and his Attributes or properties, and also as to the Persons of the
Deity, there is but little difference between us; and the Romanists, and that
also Consists rather in the modes of distinction, than in the formality of the
things themselves; although even under this Head that which they build well
about Fundamentals, they destroy again by their Contra-fundamentals, not only
by ascribing Dulia to Saints and Angels, and Hyperdulia to the blessed Virgin
Mary (though that be a frivolous distinction) but also by their own Confession,
they ascribe Latria, which belongs to God only, even to the Wood of the Cross.

Now, that man the Deity of GOD himself, who is jealous over his own Honor,
that ascribes his Glory to any Creature; for God solemnly protests that he is
such a one as holds fast his Magnificence: For he has said, My Name is
J^h^vah, and mine Honor I will not give unto another.

Of this Glory, neither Paul, or Barnabas, intimate Witnesses of our Savior,
would ever partake, nor yet the Angel in the Revelation; the one professing
himself a fellow Servant of S. John, and of the Prophets; the two others
protecting themselves with this Buckler, viz. That they were men subject to
like Passions with others, and saying, Honor God.

Wherefore seeing this Honor which the Romanists bestow upon Saints and
Angels, could not be a Medium of Abnegation, (for it could neither be Civil nor
Religious) nor yet, a Medium of Participation which admits of both extremes,
for then it would have constituted a partial Idolatry; therefore I concluded
with my self, that the Saints are to be Imitated, as St. Austin speaks, but not
adored by Us, as being utterly Ignorant of our Necessities. Abraham knows us
not; and as for Israel, he is ignorant of Us, as it is Esaias -- Where it is to be
noted, that this Expression knows us not, is not to be taken in the same sense,
as it is in S. Matthew chap. 7. verse the 23. And then I will say unto them, I
know you not. [as a late Jesuit foolishly interprets it] For in S. Matthew it is
spoken concerning the knowledge of Approbation, as appears by opposition of the
contrary, Psalm. 2. v. ult. GOD knows the way of the Righteous, says David
there, that is he approves and allows of it, as he disapproves the way of the
Wicked, That shall Perish, as it follows there: But in Isaiah it is spoken
concerning knowledge of simple Intelligence, or of taking notice, barely
considered in it self as appears plainly by the Text. Now there are not any
things in the World hid from the sight of God; before whose eyes even the
darkness it self turns to Light. Those things therefore which GOD is said not
to know, we must understand in this sense, that he does not approve of them;
but those things which men are said not to know, they are principally to be
ascribed unto the defect of the knowledge concerning their Object.

III.
Thirdly, As to the Nature and Office of the Mediator, I believe thus, viz.
That he has two Natures, the Divine, and the Humane, which is taken into the
Personality of the Word, it being such as cannot subsist of it self, for want
of a suppositality, which appertains to the Person, upon the Account of its
assumption to the Quiddity of some other. There are not therefore in CHRIST two
Persons, or but one Nature; but in one Person two Natures, yet without either
Composition or Confusion.

The Church of Rome errs exceedingly in this point, when she affirms, that
CHRIST'S Body can be in many places at one time; for that Man confounds the
Divine Attributes with the Humane, who ascribe multi-presence to a Body made in
all things like unto our Body, and upon that account, Finite also as ours are;
for a Body, whether it be glorified or whether it be as yet Subject to
infirmity, is liable to Circumscription, which also Aquinas himself
acknowledges, that it savours of a Contradiction in Adjunct, that the same
Numerical Body may be in many places at one and the same time.

The Consideration of this prevailed with me so far, that I could not give up
my assent to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. For not to speak any thing
concerning this, that the very word is not fitly squared, and accomodated to
the thing thereby signified; because then it should be called an Annihilation
of the Substance rather than a Transubstantiation of it; (according to the
Nature of their Hypothesis) I say to pass by that, this also is to be
considered; That it is wholly founded upon the Idol of Multipresence; which
being demolisht, Transubstantiation it self presently falls to the ground;
according to that of the Poet.

If you take the Prop away,
The Structure falls to decay.
Moreover the perverse Interpretation of Christ's words as to the Institution of
this blessed Sacrament, and also the Mutilation of the Institution it self
seemed to me to be a great piece of Sacrilege, as well as it did to their own
Pope Gelasius; For they do not only interpret those thing in a Carnal sense,
which Christ spoke to the Capernaits in a Metaphorical; but also they take the
Cup from the Laity, as though they were unworthy to bear in their Memory the
Blood of Christ that which was shed for the Salvation of their precious, and
Immortal Souls.

As concerning the Offices of Christ, I firmly hold, and Believe that he is a
King, Prophet, and Priest: As a King he is Head of the Church, which by his
Prophetic Office, he leads into all Truths by the Operation of his Holy
Spirit, and which by his Priestly Office, he delivers from the Power of Satan,
Sin, Death, and Hell, and that by shedding his own precious Blood. For God
redeemed the World by his own Blood; So the Scripture teaches us, Act. 20.28.

Now as to these Offices of CHRIST, the Church of Rome errs exceedingly, by
adding to this our King a Companion, to wit, a Queen, the Mother of our blessed
Savior who notwithstanding owns him for her Lord, in her Canticle. This Church
also errs as to the Sacerdotal Office of Christ; when even to this very day the
Priests offer him up, in their Idolatrous Mass, a Sacrifice to God, for the
Sins both of the quick and Dead. Seeing it is not only apparent out of Daniel
that Sacrifices, and Oblations were to cease in the Days of the Messiah, and
that Christ by one Oblation of himself perfected for ever them that are
sanctified, [and that which is but one is indivisible] and not only so, that
Christ is the Consummation of all of them, but it points out also the modus or
manner of that Consummation, namely that it was accomplished by that one
Oblation of himself once for all; But also because none can be Priests of the
New Testament according to the order of Melchisedeck but Christ only; because
he alone is Eternal, and by that means is contradistinguished from the
Levitical Priests, which were not suffered to continue, by reason of Death; As
to their distinction of a bloody and unbloudy Sacrifice, as also of Primary,
and Secondary Priests; because not grounded upon the Scriptures, we reject it
with the same Facility as they propound it.

To this Office of Christ it appertains, that by his merits he makes us worthy
of Divine Justification: For all be it God, Justifies the ungodly, as the
Apostles speaks; yet for all that he does not Justify such a one as is simply
unjust, but such a one as is accounted Just in Christ by virtue of that
satisfaction of Infinite value performed by him. Which Justification according
to the tenor of the Scriptures is not imputed unto us for any desert that is in
us, but only upon the Account of Christ's merits, neither is it obtained by such
deserts, but by faith only in him who is the Propitiation for our sins.

Against this Doctrine, the Romanists early contended, saying that we are
justified by works, by which means they confound justification with
sanctification: Whereas the Apostle says, Therefore by the works of the Law,
shall no flesh living be justified, and again: That the Righteousness of GOD is
manifested to all by Faith: Yea, he directly affirms, that we are justified by
Faith only.

True it is, the Romanists themselves grant that we are justified by Faith, but
so as that it is by a work; which yet is false, because the Apostle opposes
works to Faith: For this Cause Faith is to be looked upon, as it is a Relation,
or an Hand to apply a Plaster to the fore of sin, which not by any virtue of
it is own, but by Efficacy of some virtue applied to the thing it self, makes us
heirs of Eternal Life.

St. James indeed says, that Men are justified by Works, and not by Faith
only: But that I may pass by the Interpretation of some that will have this to
be understood of justification in another World; when the works of all men
shall be sifted, and examined: It may be said, that these words, may and ought
to be understood of such a Faith, as is destitue of good Works, and which is
dead without them; which very thing we also assert; when we do by no means
separate Works from Faith, but always profess that Faith, is to be joined with
good Works, or in short, that an Active, and working Faith, renders us just
before Gods Tribunal. Therefore Faith only justifies us; but yet that Faith
must not be alone, or separated from good Works, no otherwise then as the Eye
only sees, but not the Eye that is separated from the Body; and the hand only
weighs any thing, but not unless it be joined with the Body.

Moreover, as justification is to be taken in a forinsecal sense, as we have
shown; so it is certain, that it is wrought in an Infant, and not by parts. And
therefore upon that account, I rejected Purgatory; because the fault being
forgiven, the punishment should be remitted also.

Neither does this make any thing against our Proposition, that GOD sometimes
sends diverse afflictions even upon just Persons, for these are to be referred
to the Category or Predicament of Fatherly Corrections, rather than to that of
Punishments. For there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.1. Neither do those Fears, to which the Faithful are Subject, signify
so much a servile Dread, as a Filial Reverence; because as we ought to work out
our Salvation with sear and trembling; So we are sure that nothing can work
together for ill to them that Love God.

From hence flows the certainty of our Election, which because it has more
Assertions of it in the Church of Rome, then detractors from it, I need not
much dispute about it. Neither does the account of brevity require, that I
should enumerate the several questions of prescience, prevision and
predestination as things formally different among themselves; seeing we have a
brief compendium of them, set down by the blessed Apostle Paul from whom any
one may take it, Romans 8.30.

I grant indeed that Prescience in its formal signification differs from
Predestination, as a selection out of a Number of Multitude, does from the end,
to which the Objects as considered in themselves, are destined, and designed:
But yet in the mean while I do not admit of any foresight of works, which may
in the least belong to those that are foreknown, and the Establishment of their
own Salvation. For God chooses no man upon the account of works foreseen, but
that they may perform these good Works after they are chosen.

All which things being well Considered, I perceive a plain distinction to
arise betwixt the Church Visible, and Invisible; not so much that the Universal
Church is to be called Invisible from its outward nonappearance to Men; but
from the internal qualities of it; because though many belong to the outward
Communion; yet God only knows who are his. And from hence I concluded, that it
was an easy matter for me to give an answer to that famous Objection of the
Papists: Where was the Reformed Church before Luthers and Calvin's time? Namely
that it was dispersed over the whole World, in every Nation, and in every
Profession of Christians: And although it did not appear outwardly in the sight
of men as it did not in Elijahs time, who thought himself the only man alive,
that remained of all the Faithful, yet at the same time it was in the world,
like Wheat in a good quantity of Chaff, or as the Lilly among the Thorns. For
Protestants are not of the same Opinon as Donatists were of old, that the
Church can be confined to any one Corner of the World, as they said it was to
Africa; but that it is diffused every where throughout the whole World; because
GOD in every Nation, has those that are his.

Neither are we so cruel, as to reject even the Papists themselves [though not
as such] from the Communion of the Church; seeing we know very well, that
though their Church is not a Church in moral sense: yet in a Physical, or
Natural one it is, that is to say, though she be not a good, yet she is a true
Church.

Neither do we deny her a pastoral Office which belongs to Ordination of
Ministers, or Administration of the Holy Sacraments: A Wife does not lose the
Title and Denomnation of a true Wise, although she be dishonest. Now the Church
in a Mystical sense is compared to a married Woman. For this cause, seeing I
found the true Church to consist only amongst those of the Reformed Religion;
and that from those very Notes which are commonly attributed unto such a
Church, viz. from the purity of Preaching Gods Word, and a due administration
of the Sacraments, although Bellarmine has fifteen other marks more or less; I
resolved with my self, as I did intend before to join my self to this Body; and
have renounced the Romish Conspiracy; to betake my self to the true Doctrine
of Christ.

Which now I do here sincerely, and Faithfully profess before GOD and Jesus
Christ; and do most earnestly beseech all my Brethren that they would embrace
the same Opinion with me, and believe this my confession and that they would
receive me as a living Member of our Saviors Body; and that they would also
add some comfort, to one that earnestly longs for the Salvation of his Soul;
that they wouldembrace me in their Arms, and receive me into their Bosom, who
have fervently desired with many Prayers, to enter into the same Covenant with
the Faithful.

And now O God who have been pleased to illuminate me by thine Infinite Grace,
be pleased also to continue me in the same; that as I have now made a sincere
Profession of thy Truth so I may remain steadfast therein, and never turn away
mine Eye from thy truth: Grant that with Holy David in thy Light I may see
Light; and at last having finished my Course, (and kept the Faith) I may behold
thee in thy Heavenly Kingdom; Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. To thy
self with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Praise, and Glory, World
without End, Amen.

James Salgado, A Spaniard and sometimes Priest of the Church of Rome.

FINIS.
AN ACCOUNT OF MY LIFE and SUFFERINGS, Since I forsook the ROMISH-RELIGION; IN
A Letter to Dr. H.S.
SIR,
AT your request I shall add to my former Confession an account by what steps I
was induced to forsake Popery, and withal some small Story of my Life, and
Troubles for the Reformed Religion.

The first thing that startled me, and made me withdraw from the Covent, in
which I had lived in Priests Orders three years, was the dissension betwixt the
Popish Doctors themselves, and that in such things as themselves say Salvation
depends upon: for whilst some of them make it necessary to Salvation to belive
that the Church is (infallibly) governed by the Holy Ghost, and therefore the
ultimate Resolution of Faith must be the Determinations of the Church: I found
others did doubt of this and dispute against it.

Whilst I was thus laying things together in my mind, and under great
dissatisfaction, I resolved to leave Spain (my Native Country) and go into
France where I hoped for greater freedom of speech: for at home I found it was
dangerous to move any thing (how modestly soover) against received Points.
Coming then to Paris, I had many hot Disputes with those of my own Order, with
as little satisfaction, as in Spain. But at last I betook my self to some of
the Ministers of the Church at Charentin, by whom I was very Christianly
entertained, and amongst them the Reverend Monsieur Drelincourt, took great
pains to answer my doubts, and I came forward to close with the Truths of the
Reformed Religion, and he was concerned for my safety, and advised me
fourthwith to go into the United-Provinces: But first I had in their Consistory
renounced Popery, viz. anno, 1666.

When I was come to the Hague, I had a most courteous reception by that
Excellent Person Monsieur Samuel Maretz: he used his endeavor to settle me
there, and for my livelihood put me upon the teaching the Spanish Tongue: But
when that could not succeed, because of my ignorance of the Durch Language,
(though I was well enough able to teach those that understood Latin, French, or
Italian) he gave me advice to return to Paris.

There I was forced to lie privately amongst the Members of the Reformed
Church, being afraid to be known to others: But the Queen of France, a Spaniard
by Birth, had brought over with her many of her Countrymen, who too well knew
me, and narrowly enquired after me. By their means I was taken, sent back into
Spain, put into the Inquisition in the Province of Estremadura, and the City of
Clarena: there I lay a year, and was monthly examined, but at last made an
escape.

When I had gone almost a hundred Leagues, as far as Origuela, I was laid hold
on by the Friars of my own Order, and sent by them to Murcia, where I lay five
years in Prison, having neither Books, nor Society, except of tormenting
Priests.

I was at last brought before the Bishop, and other Officers of his Court,
where for the Scandal, as they called it, I had given, I was sentenced to the
Galleys. When they had publicly read my Crime, during which time they made me
hold a Black-Candle in my Hand, the Sentence was executed upon me.

In the Galleys, for a years space, I endured the miseries that attend Slaves
at the Oar, Chains, Nakedness, Stripes, Thirst Hunger, Vermin, and Sickness,
which they termed a Leprosy, till at length the Chyrurgion and other Officers
of the Galley where I was, interceded with the Inquisitor-General for me, as a
person not only useless, but noisome to thom and the other Slaves. He hereupon
sent me into the Hospital at Murcia; after my Cure, I stayed some months, in
the Covent, but never returned to my Habit, because my Impenitence, as they
termed it, hindered my Absolution.

From thence I made a second escape into France, and after I had stayed about a
year at Lion, not finding my self safe, I came into England: what assistance I
have had here both to establish me in the Reformed Religion, and for my
subsistence you well know. Other passages Historical which are in my Confession
I here omit; Likewise what thoughts it pleased God to comfort me with, in my
distresses, what temptations I endured, and how through the Grace of God, I
overcame them, I cannot in the narrow room of this Leaf set down; neither had
thus much of me ever come in Print, but at your request: and if any doubt be
made of these things, you, or any others, that have Correspondent about Murcia,
may please to satisfy your selves as to a considerable part of them: To that
then I refer you, and am, Sir,

Yours James Salgado.

FINIS.

