THE DEAF and DUMB MAN'S DISCOURSE. OR A Treatise concerning those that are
Born DEAF and DUMB, containing a Discovery of their KNOWLEDGE or UNDERSTANDING;
as also the Method they use, to manifest the sentiments of their Mind. Together
with An Additional Tract of the REASON and SPEECH of Inanimate Creatures. By
GEO. SIBSCOTA.

LONDON, Printed by H. Bruges, for William Crook at the green Dragon without
Temple Bar. 1670.

A DISCOVRSE Concerning those that are born DEAF and DUMB, And of their
KNOWLEDGE.
1. SUch is the calamity of Mortals in this state of misery, that they are
invaded on all sides not only when they are born, by a vast army of Diseases,
but are also troubled with many distempers whilst the Womb is their Lodging;
there we often meet with the precursory messengers of Death even in the very
beginning of Life; and whilst the formative faculty is framing this machin of
our immortal Souls, some deformity, some irregularity in the structure, or
other preternatural disposition obstructing the exercise of the parts
immediately intermixeth it self with our birth. Which enormity of the parts, or
constitution repugnant to the Laws of Nature, prejudicing the operations, and
contracted at our Birth, some have been so scrupulous as to think that it ought
not to be called by the name of a Disease, but of a Defect, reserving the name
of Disease for the defects of that which was once perfect.

2. And as this kind of defect is found to be in many members of man's body; so
it most frequently happens to the sense of Hearing: Which was Aristotle's
Observation long ago, who therefore in the first of his Problems, Sect. 11.
moves this very question; Why the Hearing, of all Senses should be most
prejudiced from our Nativity? And submits it to Consideration, whether this may
not be the reason or cause of it, because the Hearing and Voice seem to be
derived from the same principle: For Speech (says he) which is a kind of
Voice, may easily be depraved, and not without great difficulty restored to its
perfection; a sign whereof is, that we continue mute for some time after we are
born (for in our Infancy we cannot speak at all) then at length we begin to
stammer; since therefore Speech may be easily perverted, and that the principle
of Hearing and Speaking is the same (for, says he, it is the Voice that is the
primordium of Hearing) it follows consequently, that, that Hearing, of all the
Senses is soonest corrupted, as it were per accidens, not per se. We may (says
he) lay this down as au Argument taken even from other Creatures, that the
principle of Speech may be easily destroyed; for no other Creature can speak;
but Man solely is endued with this faculty; yet he (as is premention'd) is a
long while, before he begins to speak.

3. We will propose to our selves three things to be thoroughly weighed in
reference to this consideration of Aristotle. First, the reason it self, by
which he maintains, that the Sense of Hearing may be easily injured from the
very Birth above all the rest of the Senses; because, the principle of Speaking
or of articulate speech may be easily prejudiced, the principle of Hearing
being the same; and therefore Hearing may be injured from the Birth not per se,
but as it were per accidens. viz: by reason the common principle of Speech and
Hearing may be hurt. Secondly, we will take into our Consideration, that which
follows by consequence from that very reason; to wit, that the Hearing is never
damnified from the Birth, unless Speaking, or the articulate enunciation of
the Voice be so likewise: because there is a certain common principle belonging
to the Speech, as well as Hearing, which being injured, it necessarily follows
that both of them must be prejudiced. This consequence was so certain in the
opinion of Aristotle, that in his fourth Book of the History of Animals, chap.
9. he ingeniously pronounces, That they who are born Deaf, are also Dumb; and
for that reason they may make use of a Voice, but not of Speech. Thirdly, we
will subjoyn and inquire into their Understanding that are born Deaf, as also
the way and manner of their Knowledge. Fourthly and lastly, we will Contemplate
a little upon the reason, and discourse of brute Animals.

SECTION I. Why is Hearing, of all Senses soonest prejudiced.
4. AS to the first, Aristotle lays down a certain common principle of Hearing
and Speech: But does not sufficiently declare what, or what kind of thing that
is: Indeed he affirms that Voice is the principle of Hearing, as well as of
Speaking, and withal says, that the Hearing and Speaking seem to proceed from
one and the same Principle. And truly the Voice is the material principle of
Speech, as far as the articulate speech is framed by the Voice; as if the same
Voice were the principle by which the Hearing is stirred up to the act, or the
Hearing had an actual being by means of the Voice, as Peter Apponensis explains
the meaning of Aristotle.

5. But this principle will not effect our Design, for this question will
remain unsolv'd, why, where there is a Voice in Deaf men, yet there is no
Hearing? and where those that are mute can frame a Voice? or brute Animals
themselves, yet they cannot speak by virtue of that common Principle? And
wherefore since Infants can hear, should they not also be able to speak by the
assistance of that common Principle? For the particular cause, either of the
obstruction of Hearing, or impediment or depravation of Speaking, is on either
hand to be sought in the organs: the irregularity whereof, the vitiated
conformation, or solution of the continuum, or the convenient influx of the
animal spirits being impeded by any defect of the organ: obstructs the
operation thereof. But we will see in our following Discourse, whether there
may not probably be some other principle found out, that depends upon the
mutual conjunction of the nerves.

6. But the reason why Newborn Babes can hear, but not presently speak, or
pronounce articulate words, is, because there is more required to the framing
of speech, or speaking, than to the reception of a sound, or hearing. For, the
Hearing is merely passive, and the Sound arriving at the organ of Hearing
(which is the very auditory Nerve, expanded to the internal parts of the
windings of the Auditorium; presuppossing a convenient disposition of the
outward, as well as inward parts of the Ear) a Sound is immediately
represented: but it is not the same when a Voice is uttered, the Speech is not
immediately framed, or Discourse raised, nor does it merely consist in passion.

7. Brute Animals that have Lungs and the Aspera Arteria, are able to utter a
Voice, otherwise than those other Creatures, that only make a Sound or noise;
but yet they cannot therefore speak.

The Dolphin, says Aristotle, in the 4 th. Book of the History of Animals c.
9. has Lung and the Artery, and therefore can utter somewhat of a Voice, but
yet has not a free and voluble Tongue, nor Lips by which it might frame any
articulate voice; therefore it only makes a noise and muttering.

8. But those that have Lips and a greater liberty of the Tongue, so as to be
able to frame some one articulate Word (as Sheep do the word (...), Oxen and
Cows (...), etc.) yet they cannot frame their Voice to several articulate
words; for all Brutes want that aptitude of the organs, by which articulate
words are made and formed; though there are some brute Animals that do imitate
the words and voice of Man: Of which hereafter.

9. But Infants and Children, though they have that aptitude of organs
naturally, by which an articulate Voice may be pronounced, yet the use of those
organs is not then made so familiar to them, as truly to frame words: for
there must be exercise, and from thence a habit contracted to speak easily and
readily; just as when a man in time has gained a habit, he sweetly plays upon
a musical Instrument

10. Besides, the organs of Infants are then but infirm, and by degrees arrive
to perfection. when Nature, or the innate heat by little and little consumes
the superfluous moisture. And so Aristotle in his last forequoted place is in
the right, where he says, that as Children cannot rule and govern their Limbs,
so their first impotency and imperfection appears in the Tongue, and it is long
before they are freed from it; which is the reason that for the most part they
stammer, and speak with difficulty. And hence it is that Infants cannot
properly be said to be mute, because there is no privation, but in a subject
that is capable of the habit, yet they may properly be said to be born Dumb,
whose organs are so disposed from their Nativity, as that they have an
ineptitude to speech when grown in years.

11. But this property of the organs, as the Tongue, Palate, Lips, Teeth and
Throat, is only bestowed on Man to the end that he may get a habit of speaking
any thing. Though herein also is great variety by reason of the Countries and
Kingdoms, insomuch that all men have not a ready pronunciation of all Letters
in use with other Nations: Thus the guttural Letters are appropriated to the
Eastern people; and among them another, though no guttural letter called Dad
(which is pronounced like ddsh) is so peculiar to the Arabians, that they can
distinguish any foreign Nation from their own, by the pronunciation thereof;
though they converse with them never so long, and the Arabians are meant by
those that pronounce this Letter exactly, as when they say that Mahumed was the
most Eloquent of all that pronounce the letter Dad, that is, of the Arabians.
The same is every where obvious in the European Tongues: for, it is a matter of
difficulty for the French to pronounce the German G, which is pronounced like
the pointed Kef of the Persians or Turks; hence it is that they cannot without
difficuty pronounce the German monosyllable Tang: and so in the reft.

12. As to the reason or cause why the Hearing of all the Senses is soonest
prejudiced from the Birth, that cannot by any means be referred to any common
principle of Hearing and Speaking; because such a principle cannot be judged a
sufficient principle of Hearing only, or it conferrs no otherwise to the
hearing then objective; in regard that at least it cannot possibly fall under
the notion of the efficient cause, by which there is any perception of the
Voice; therefore there must be some other reason or cause found out of the
thing in question, if we hold it simply true, that the Hearing is soonest
injured from the Nativity.

13. But the genuine reason of the thing must be found in the winding and
truly labyrinthean structure of the inward part of the Ear, which may be soon
perverted or obstructed; into which the more tender Nerve has a maeandrous
passage, which also is soon affected with the smallest thing and from the filth
of those humors which descend thither partly and primarily proceeding from the
moisture of the Brain.

14. Besides the drum of the Ear may it self be more gross from the Birth,
than ordinary, or be overspread with the sinews of the Brain, or some other
gross humor; or there may be some thick membrane that may cover the auditory
maeanders; but they, to whom this happens, are only troubled with thickness of
hearing, and do as it were receive the sound by the Mouth, the reason whereof
shall be given in our following Discourse. And sometimes there may be some
peculiar defect in the structure of the Ear, extending it self to the Jaws and
Palate of the Mouth, which is the reason that those that are Deaf use to speak
thorough the nose, as Aristotle affirms in his second and fourth Problem s. 11.

SECT. II. Whether those that are Born Deaf, are Dumb also?
NOw we come to the examination of the second point, which seems to be the
consequence of the former; and which is confirmed by Aristotle, in the 4. Book
de Hist. Animal. c. 9. viz. That those that are born Deaf are also Dumb. And as
this is diduced and laid down as a Proposition by Aristotle, by reason of the
former Assertion, though against reason: so it is admitted by very many, and
those Physicians too, as an universal truth, without any further search into
the truth of the thing or disquisition of the difference. Hence they
presupposing on all hands, as a thing beyond exception, That all those that are
born Deaf are likewise Dumb. (as Sanctor. comm. in Art. Medic. and Galen Part
2. Question 41. are also of opinion) make an inquisition after the cause only
of the thing supposed, or incontrovertibly true: But we will more narrowly
discuss the Thesis before we pry into the cause, why it often falls out to be
so.

16. Indeed, if by those that are Mute we understand such whose organs have in
themselves an ineptitude to the framing of an articulate Voice, it is an
absolute mistake to maintain that all that are born Deaf, are Dumb also: for
the ineptitude of organs to the framing of Speech does not immediately follow
the want of Hearing. For where deafness depends not so much upon the defect
which is common to the Hearing and Speaking, (which we have allowed may
sometimes happen) as upon the imperfection rather peculiar to the very
adaequate organ of Hearing (of which as there are many parts, so there may be
many obstructions, that may destroy the Hearing) it does not follow therefore
that there is an immediate inability to speak.

But why rather as the Hearing is sometimes destroyed after the birth, the
speech remaining perfect, so also at the very birth, or immediately after, may
not such a constitution of the Organs happen, whereby they may be adapted to
the forming of speech, and yet be incapable of Hearing?

17. Here we must consult with experience, which testifies that those that are
born deaf, may learn to speak. For so Valles. Philoso. Sacr. cap. 3. reports,
that one Peter Pontius a Monk of the Order of St. Benedict, and his Friend,
taught those that were born deaf to speak, by no other way, than instructing
them first to write, pointing at those things with his finger that were
signified by those Characters, and then putting them forward to that motion of
the Tongue, that did correspond to the Characters.

18. But if by those that are dumb we understand, such as have Organs fit for
the forming of words, but yet understand no language, nor ever learned such
words as express the conceived sense of the mind; it is undeniably true, that
many that are born Deaf, are also Dumb, who never were instructed in any
Tongue, or signicative words by the forementioned artifice, or some such kind
of means.

19. Therefore as to the cause, why those that are born Deaf are also Dumb, (at
least for the generality) Albertus Magnus in his 4. Book de Anim. Tract. 2. C.
2. says, that those that are Deaf from their Nativity are also Dumb, because
they could learn no Idiom by the sense of Hearing, And Sanctor in Art Medic.
approves of this opinion. Galen part. the 2. Question 4. as also Bartholinus in
the 3. book of his Anatomy c. 9. referring the cause of deafness to the Drum of
the Ear, who says that those who from their birth are thus affected, are also
for the most part Dumb, because they can neither conceive in their mind, nor
utter with their Tongue those words, which they never heard.

20. But Laurentius contradicts this opinion in the 11th Book of his Anatomy
and the 11th Question where he says, I do not allow of that vulgar conceit,
that the reason why those that are Deaf are mute, because they can learn no
language, and because Hearing is the Sense of Learning; for then says he, if
that be the only cause, why Deaf Men are Dumb;

First, Why do they breath out their sighs and groans, which are natural
passions with so much difficulty?

Sccondly, whether or no, might not those that are Deaf frame words and speches
to express the sense and conceptions of the mind, if they could pronounce them,
as well as those, who were the first Inventors of them.

21. But in truth we may give this answer to Laurentius his first argument,
that it is a fallacy, to say that Deaf Men groan and sigh with difficulty;
because original deafness, has no manner of communication with the parts
subservient to respiration. But Laurentius his mistake seems to be grounded
upon what Aristotle writes in his 4th Problem. Section 11. That deaf Men breath
not without violence; by which Aristotle does not mean a violent or difficult
respiration which belongs to the Lungs and Breast, but a vehement spiration or
breathing through the Nostrils; whereupon he adds, that the Nostrils become
more large by the passage of the Spirits, and that's the reason they cannot
speak but through the Nose. And so also in the second Problem, (says he) Those
that are deaf want but little of being dumb and those that are dumb, speak
through the Nose, for their Spirits are driven that way, because they cannot
speak.

22. Now where there is a kind of ineptitude to speech in deaf Men, occasioned
by some defect appertaining to the Palate, as well as the Organ of Hearing,
they breath not without difficulty; and because their Spirits do bend their
course more toward the Nostrils, by reason of the wideness of their passage,
besides that, they breath out a kind of voice with their mouths, as Aristtole
speaks concerning Elephants in the 4. Book de Hist. Anim. c. 9. yet that sound,
they make with their Nose, resembles the hoarseness of a Trumpet.

23. To Laurentius his second argument it may be replied; although man by
nature, though deaf, is armed with reason to make him fit for invention; yet as
Plato teaches, it is not the property of a vuigar Genius to impose names upon
things, much less is it in the power of every person, to invent an elegant
speech or peculiar Tongue, to make the conceptions of the mind intelligible.

24. He that first gave creatures their names, to wit, Adam, was in his
integrity, and in the supernatural state of innocence instructed with such
wisdom, as transcends the capacity of prevaricated nature: The confusion of
various Tongues was afterward supernaturally sent by God at the building of
the Tower of Babel; and then the variety of Idioms did gradually proceed from
the commixture of Tongues, or had some other rise by the common use and consent
of men.

Yet those that are mute, can find out a way whereby to explain the sense of
their mind to others, as well as if they had the faculty of speaking, which is
analagous to speech, as shall be manifested in i'ts proper place.

25. But possibly some persons believe that if deaf men had in them that
aptitude of Organs whereby they might be capeable of speaking, that they should
use some native Language, or speech, which Nature their School-Mistress should
instruct them: for since Sermocination is essential to man, as subordinate to
reason, so it is not improbable, that where the Organs are so adapted, there
must be granted external speech. To which we answer, that it is true the very
faculty of sermocination, which is subservient to them in the declaring the
sense of their mind, by those significations that are set forth by words,
whatsoever they be, is essential to man; yet the names of things, and so
consequently the Languages themselves, or the Idioms of speech are not to be
learned by nature, but by instruction, exercise and custom.

26. And really if any certain speech did depend upon nature, as every
individual person of mankind has one and the same nature: so all Nations
whatsoever would use one and the same Tongue. But the contrary is known
experimentally. Therefore their opinion is altogether vain and foolish, who,
being ignorant of Philosophy, would needs oblige themselves and others to this
persuasion, that if a Child were taught no Language in his Infancy, but left to
his own conduct, he would speak Hebrew, that is, he would make use of this
Language by the mere instinct of Nature, which is a conceit altogether inept
and foolish.

27. Vallesius in the forequoted place makes a good objection to this
fantastical opinion; saying, If Speech were connatural to men, as many other
things are; it would be so, though they learnt any other Language, and
consequently all men would understand two Tongues. For, if the Speech in which
a man was first instructed does not hinder his learning another; (since many
men can speak two, three, or four Languages) much less can that which is
natural, be impeded by that, which is acquisititious.

28. Nay rather; if one Tongue were natural to man, they could not be docible
of all the rest; because that which is internal obstructs the external.
Therefore as Nature made Man without Knowledge; that he might be capable of all
Arts; it must necessarily follow, that she Created him without any Language,
that he might learn them all. We also find that many men are more apt to learn
other Languages, than the Hebrew; and that many Europaeans attain the true
pronunciation of some Hebrew words with no small difficulty; which could not
be, if the Hebrew were our natural Language; for all things do voluntarily tend
to that which is natural to them.

29. We conclude therefore, that they who are born absolutely Deaf, though
their organs are fit for the prolation of words, which frequently happens, yet
they are for the major part, Dumb; that is, they cannot pronounce significative
words, because they could not learn any Idiom by the Ear: For it is very rarely
known that they are taught to Speak by any such particular art as Peter Pontius
made use of, which out of Vallesius we have before mentioned.

30. But in the mean time we do no way contradict, but agree with Laurentius,
when he ascribes it to another cause, why all those that are Deaf are generally
Dumb, or at least speak with difficulty, taken from the mutual conjunction of
the Nerves. For this we lay down, as another cause why Deaf men born, are Dumb,
and so really dumb that they are altogether incapable of speaking articulate
Words. For that communion of the Nerves consists not in this, that because the
Nerve of the fifth Conjugation which is the auditory Nerve, and the Nerves of
the sixth Conjugation, which are those belonging to the Speech (or rather of
the seventh, for this is the Nerve of the Tongue) are mutually joined together
within themselves, before they are dispersed into their proper parts, as Peter
Apponensis in in his Explanation of the proposed Problem, is of opinion; or
because that the same Nerves are originally invested with the same Tunicle,
which in the judgment of others, is no less repugnant to it self; for the
Nerves of either of the prementioned Conjugations are found by a sufficient and
long interval originally distant; and it cannot be said, that they have any
other common Tunicle, than what all other Nerves are covered with, viz. the Pia
Mennix from which far-fetcht communion of the Nerves we may also infer, that
those that are Deaf, are Blind, and those that are Blind, Dumb.

31. But that Conjugation of the Nerves is well demonstrated by Laurentius
(which is also mentioned by Bauhinus in the third Book of his Anatomy c. 22.
60. and others,) that the Nerve of the fifth Conjugation (commonly called the
auditory Nerve) has several branches issuing from it, the larger whereof is
expanded to the Ear and the membrane of that most exquisite sense, and carries
all sorts of Sounds to the Brain, the lesser extends to the Tongue and Larynx,
and is there embraced by the seventh Conjugation.

32. And from this Communion of the vessels proceeds the sympathy between the
Ear, the Tongue, and Larynx, and the very affection of those parts, are easily
communicated one with the other. Hence it is, that the pulling of the Membrane
of the Ear, causes a dry Cough in the party; which Avicen takes notice of: and
that is the reason, most deaf Men, at at least those, whose deafness arises
from the ill-affection of the Nerves of the fifth pair, are Dumb, or else speak
with great difficulty; that is, are not capable of framing true words, or of
articulate pronunciation, by reason of the want of that convenient influx of
the animal spirits; and for this cause also, it is that those that are thick of
Hearing, have a kind of hoarce speech.

33. In like manner, if there be any evil defect which usually consists in the
inward structure of the Ear and the Palate (which makes them speak through the
Nose, as we have before mentioned out of Aristotle) there follows a deafness
and withal an impediment of Speech, the organ of speech, being vitiated, but
not simply, because a Language cannot then be learned by hearing. But
contraily, if the only structure of the Ear be defective or only that branch of
the fifth pair, which is carried to the Ear be preternaturally affected; the
Hearing may be hindered, or Deafness may arise; but the impediment is but by
Accident; because that when Words cannot be heard or received by the Ear, they
cannot be learnt.

34. But if the Hearing be prejudiced by the defect of the Tympanum, or by any
particular Membrane that is over it, that is a peculiar Accident; for in this
case there happens to be a thickness of Hearing, which is nearest of kin to
Deafness, rather than an absolute Deafness it self. And in such cases, those
that are deafish use to hearken with their Mouth, or to suck in Words and
Sounds with gaping, and so to pronounce without trouble those very words, by
the help of those organs subservient to Speech, which they learnt by Hearing;
and such are by no means to be called Dumb persons.

35. But the Sound flows to the inward part of the Ear, or the very organ of
Hearing, by the help of the little Cartilagineous Pipe, which is conveyed from
the second passage of the Ear to the Mouth and Palate, being appointed to convey
the Excrements of the Ear through the Mouth, like an Aquaeduct.

By the benefit of this Conduit-pipe it is, that we can exactly apprehend our
own Words, when both our Ears are stopped; so also, if we hold a Stick in our
Mouth, and therewith touch any musical instrument, we hear the sound thereof
more exactly; and if you are desirous to know, whether there be any person
approaching near you in the Night time, place one end of the Staff on the
ground, and hold the other with your Teeth, you hear then far better, though at
a great distance.

36. By the same Pipe, when we blow our Nose, or hold our Breath, by stopping
of the Ears and shutting the Mouth, we are sensible that the air finds a
passage into the Ear, by which the Membrane of the tympanum is struck with the
outward sound, and sometimes prejudiced thereby, if it be very violent, and by
this it is that Smoakers puffing up their Cheeks having taken in the fume of
Tobacco, send it out at their Ears, so as that they seem to Breath at the Ears.
Therefore the Opinion of Alcmaeon is not ridiculous who held that she-Goats did
Breath thorough their Ears, as Aristotle has it in his first Book de Hist.
Animal. c. 11. And to Physicians this conveyance does insinuate, that
masticatory Medicines are not to be slighted in the inward pains of the Ears.

SECT. III. Of their way of Understanding that are Born Deaf.
37. BEfore we come to the third point of what is to be dicuss'd concerning the
proposed Problem, we must Contemplate a little further on those that are Born
Deaf, and see with what Knowledge they are endued, since men usually gain the
major part of what they know, by Hearing.

38. First, those persons that are Born Deaf, and have the Visive faculty
entire, they may gain the Knowledge of all Visible things, as visible, and may
frame those universal conceptions of them by the abstraction of the Mind, as
well in this case, as where the Hearing is perfect: Nay farther, and these
persons as well as all other men in general may proceed from things Visible by
the light of the Understanding to the Knowledge of the Invisible mysteries of
the Deity; so that they are left inexcusable, as well as any other persons
whatsoever, if they do not glorify God, and return him thanks for Benefits
received: Of these the Apostle speaks Romans 1. v. 20, 21.

39. Furthermore, if those that are Born Deaf, are also Blind, although they
are deprived of the knowledge of many things, which come within the compass of
the Senses, nor can arive at the knowledge of God by the outward Book of
Nature, as the other, yet they may obtain the knowledge both of God and
themselves, by those notions that are grafted in their minds. And it is very
probable, that those whose Intellects are less disturbed in Contemplation by
the appearance of corporeal things; the implanted Seeds that are in them of the
Knowledge of Divine and immaterial Beings, do easily break forth into action;
as we our selves are more apt for the search and Contemplation of Divine
things, the less we are distracted by outward objects, and the fancies that
result from them.

40. Certainly it is not at all consentaneous to reason, that the rational
Soul, or Mind is altogether unactive in such persons, and lies as it were
lurking in the lethargy of a benumbed security, or that they do not according
to their capacity incline their minds to the Knowledge of the Deity, by virtue
of that innate light that is in them, as well as the Celestial Angels, and
Devils; since the Soul is to be reckoned in the number of Intelligences (though
perhaps placed in the lowest rank of Intelligences) and in reality is not so
deeply plunged in matter or matterial functions, by reason of its defect of
Sight and Hearing.

41. But what is to be thought of those who are born Deaf, as to their
Knowledge in things that concern the Mystery of our Salvation?

These things as they are too sublime, either for Universal, Humane, or
Angelical knowledge, cannot be found out, or understood by those notions
implanted in the mind. And as Faith comes by Hearing, according to the Apostle,
where this is wanting, it may possibly seem very agreeable to truth, that there
can be no Faith, and therefore no saving knowledge; and the consequence is
undeniable, since no man can be saved without Faith.

42. Oh this is indeed a very hard saying, which shipwracks the Soul! Truly
since those that are born Deaf are no more guilty of neglecting the means of
their Salvation, than Infants (concerning whom however the Sacred Pages advise
us to be more charitable) what reason I wonder can there be, why we should
think God less merciful to them, who are also born of faithful Parents, than to
Infants! We will leave the disquisition of their Faith, or the manner thereof
to Divines. Has God therefore, who according to his Will has elected some ont
of all Mankind corrupted by the Fall, to be Vessels of mercy, and others
Vessels of his wrath, strictly registered all those that are born deaf in the
number of those that are Vessels of wrath? Yet God's Promise and Covenant
belongs to these, as much as to the children of the faithful.

43. The Holy Ghost in truth is the chiefest cause of Faith, who begets it in
our hearts by the preaching of the Word, and consequently by Hearing. This is
the ordinary way of God which he commands us to follow; he that neglects this,
is excluded from Faith by his own fault. Yet God is not wholly tied up to this
one way of operation. He has extraordinary ways which we are ignorant of, and
he will not reveal to us. Yet God made use of peculiar means to bring St. Paul
to the christian Faith, and made him of a Persecutor of the Church, become an
Apostle, Acts. the 9. He proceeded after another manner to the conversion (at
least in part) of the Eunuch of Candace the Ethiopian Queen. Acts the 9. viz.
By the reading of the Word of God.

44. And shall we judge that no persons can be saved, that live where there is
no public preaching of Gods Word, and so by consequence where the mind gains
no spiritual knowledge by Hearing? May we not affirm, that by diligent reading,
and cooperation of the Holy Ghost, Faith may be engendered in the Souls of the
Godly? Now therefore if this means be without Hearing, why may not God manifest
other ways, that so at least his operation may not be confined to the hearing
solely?

45. But let us examine whether there are not other means appointed by God, by
which those that are originally deaf, may attain the knowledge of divine
Mysteries sufficient for salvation.

There is no necessity, why speech, which is usually acquired by Hearing,
should precede writing; but speech uses to be in the first place by reason of
it is facility, for those that have all their senses perfect, are more apt to
speak, than write -- But where there is a defect of Hearing, they may begin
with writing, and so by writing come to speaking, as is manifrst by the
forecited example out of Vallesius. Now external speech is a kind Messenger or
rather representation of the internal, or of the intellect it self.

They therefore that are born Deaf may by writing inform their minds with the
knowledge of those things, which must be obtained by hearing in others, whose
senses are all perfect; and so they may make use of writing in leiu of
speaking, which is otherwise attained by Learning; and they as Vallesius
speaks in his third chapter de Phil. Sacr. Do gain the knowledge of Divine
things by the sight, which others do by hearing, which I my self (says he) can
testify, in those Scholars which my friend Peter Pontius undertook, who first
taught them that were born Deaf to write, or to express the conceptions of
their mind by writing, and then to speak.

46. The same reason there is for those that are born Deaf, if Dumb also; they
may by writing understand things, although no external writing is subsequent to
speech; for the speech in Man conduces not to the gaining of knowledge to
themselves; but only to communicate the Conceptions of their own mind to
others. This is clear by an example taken out of Pel. Platerus who in the first
book of his Observations page 118. reports, that a certain person who was born
Deaf and Dumb, could with Chalk draw out his mind in a Table Book, which he
carried continually about him, and understand what others writ therein.

47. But as writing, or the reading thereof, may serve in stead of speech, by
which the Conceptions of the mind are laid open to the sight, as well as they
are by speech to the Ear; so there may be other signs made imitating the
outward speech, and Succedaneous to hearing; as those are which Mutes
themselves always make use one in lieu of speech, and by which they conceive
the Sentiments of other men's minds. For experience teaches us, and there are
also many obvious examples among us, that those that are originally Dumb, and
Deaf do by certain gestures, and various motions of the body as readily and
clearly declare their mind, to those with whom they have been often conversant,
as if they could speak, and likewise by such gestures of other Persons, they do
absolutely understand the intentions of their mind also.

48. The Emperor of the Turk maintains many such Mutes in his Court; who do
express the Conceptions of their minds one to another, and as it were
interchange mutual discourse, by gesticulations, and variety of external
significations, no otherways than we that have the faculty of signifying our
own thoughts, and conceiving those of other Persons by outward Speech. Nay the
Turkish Emperor himself, and his Courtiers, take great delight with this kind
of Speech shadowed out by gestures, and use to employ themselves very much in
the exercise hereof, to make them perfect in it.

49. Cornelius Haga Ambassador to the Emperor of the Turks sent thither by
the States of the United Provinces did once invite all those Mutes to a Banquet
(as I observed from the relation given me by the most Noble and Worthy Dr.
Brinkins Senator of Hardervick) where though there was not a syllable heard yet
they did exchange several discourses, as is usual at other Treats, which the
Ambassador understood by an Interpreter on both sides by whose assistance he
himself did discourse with the Mutes upon all subjects.

50. But those very significations of things, which Mutes make use of, proceed
not from nature, but from their own institution no more, than our speech;
Therefore they attain unto them by Study and exercise.

Although however most of them do shadow out some outward manner, of the things
which they aim at. As when they close one hand, and move it up toward the
Nostrils, thereby they signify a Flower. Now the significations of those Mutes
(which is as it were their Speech) are not like the Languages which vary among
several Nations, nor are so absolutely different.

51. And as the Mutes do by their gestures exactly and distinctly understand
one another, and those Persons also that use such a kind of analogous Speech
among them; so they conceive many things by the gestures, motion of the Lips,
and such like things in those that really do speak, and sometimes understand a
great part of their conceptions by such outward things. So says Platerus in
the place abovementioned: that his Father told him, that that Deaf and Dumb man
(whom we discourst of a little before) when he very devoutly heard
Oecolampadius Preaching, did apprehend many things from the motion of his Lips,
and gestures; and so from others.

52. And there is now at this very time in the City of Gronning, such a one who
being born Deaf and Dumb, constantly frequents public Sermons, and does as it
were contemplate upon the Words of the Preacher with his eyes fixed upon him, so
that he seems to receive them in at his Mouth as others do by the Ear. This
person when he earnestly desires to receive the Holy Sacrament, I do not at all
question, but that he has that knowledge of those Divine things, that concern
his Salvation, insomuch that he cannot be debarred from it without some scruple
of Conscience. Although I am of opinion that he ought to be examined as to this
his knowledge and Confession, which may be done, by means of his Wife, or
Servant, his Interpreters, whom he always has with him, and who discourse
with him very nimbly by signs, of any thing whatsoever.

53. We will subjoyn one example out of Phil. Camerarius, which is in Horae
Subcisivae 1 Gent. 37- We have now among us (says he) a young Youth and a Maid
born of the same Parents, and indeed of a Noble and honest Family, who have an
extraordinary acuteness of Wit: and though Nature brought them forth Deaf and
Dumb, yet they can both of them Read distinctly, Write an excellent hand, and
keep Merchants Accounts. And as he dexterously perceives by a Nod what you would
have him to do, and ifhe wants a Pen, will express himself by gestures; and is
very cunning at all Games that are usually played among us upon the Dice, which
cannot be managed without great subtilty; so she very much exceeds all Maids at
her Needle and curious Weaving. But among other their admirable qualifications,
which Nature has bestowed upon them; this is wonderful, that they seem to
understand what any one speaks by the motion of the Lips; Wherefore they are
often at Church, hearing the Word Preached. So that it will be no absurdity to
say, that it is probable they take the Words in at their Eyes, they are so
intent, which others use to do by the Ear. For they can at pleasure without any
suggestion, or other help write the Lords Prayer, and other pious Oraisons. And
can remember the Gospells appointed to be read on Holy Days as well as others,
and readily Write them. And if the Holy Name of Jesus be mentioned in the
Church, he, above all the rest, will in a posture of Reverence uncover his
head, and bow the knee. Thus Nature like an indulgent Mother was solicitous and
studious to recompense their defects, that she might free her self from the
injurious accusation of a cruel Stepmother.

The Fourth SECTION, Being A DISCOURSE Concerning the REASON, AND SPEECH OF
BEASTS.
54. THese things, concerning those that are born Deaf and Dumb being thus
determined, we will proceed to a further Illustration of the rest which occurr
in the Problem proposed, and the Explication thereof; And the third point which
Aristotle has offered, to our meditation concerns the Speech of Beasts, where
he lays down this, as an Assertion.

That the faculty of Speech (which presupposes reason) is only bestowed upon
Man, and that no other Creature can Speak: Which we will take into our
Consideration.

55. To speak truly, the inward Speech is no more, than the nuncius or a
certain image of internal reason, which goes to the Idea of the reason expressed;
whence the Graecians, and that not without reason, call rationem and sermonem,
Reason and Speech by the same name (...) absolutely, i. e. Speech which the
Philosophers distinguish into (...) into internal and external, and the one
must necessarily accompany the other, unless there be an imperfection, or
defect in the organs. Therefore this is a necessary Consequence, That where
there is no Reason, there can be no external Speech; and so on the contrary.

56. And it is from this strict copulation of Reason and Speech, that (...)
rational is expressed in the Arabic Version, by the word Natthack, which
signifies Speaking, Genesis 2. v. 7. as its opposite (...), irrational, Chares,
which signifies Mute, is so named in 2 Pet. 2. v. 2. to which the Dutch phrase
answers, even stom Be, (and our English exactly, a Dumb Beast) i. e. an
irrational Creature.

Nay, the Holy Scripture calls irrational; dumb Creatures, or Creatures without
Speech, 2 Pet. 2. v. 16. where the Ass of the Prophet Balaam is said to be
(...), subjugale mutum humana voce locutum; which our English Translation
renders, The dumb Ass speaking with Man's Voice.

57. But here our Galen suggests a difficulty, who, whilst he seems to deny
Brutes external Speech, yet he affirms, that they have Reason, from whence
external speech indisputably proceeds; so that if any Brutes have fit organs
for the uttering of articulate words, it seems that they must not be denied
external speech, reason or ratiocination being supposed; For thus Galen
expresses himself in the beginning of his Book entitled Exhort. ad Art. lib.
Stud. It is not yet certain, whether Beasts, which are called Brutes, are
altogether void of Reason. For though peradventure they have not that Reason in
common, with us, which is understood by the Voice, and called denunciative; yet
certainly, they all of them have that which is taken according to the Soul,
which they call Reason, capable of Affections in common, as well as we, though
some more, some less.

58. But here we must make a halt for a while, to the end that we may more
exactly determine what is to be thought of the Reason of brute Beasts commonly
so called, and also of their Speech. Indeed the most profound Philosophers,
PorphIndeed the most profoundyrius, Plutarch, and Galen (says Bodin in Theatr.
Not. lib. p. 476.) have proved by almost an infinite number of Arguments, that
Nature has bestowed Reason upon Beasts. And Huartus in Scrutin. Ingen. ca. 6.
There is no doubt (says he) but that brute Animals have a Memory and Phantasy,
and a certain Power besides, which is correspondent to the Intellect, as an Ape
resembles a Man.

59. How many things do we meet with, concerning the Ingenuity and Reason of
Brutes (of which Plutarch has writ a peculiar Treatise, as also many things
are mentioned in Gryllo) as well by Tradition from Authors, as those which are
obviously known to us, which certainly seem to argue some kind of Reason, or
somewhat analogous to Human Reason.

Prodigious things are related of the Elephant by Pliny, Aelian, Plutarch and
others, which Lipsius has Collected out of several Authors in his first
Century chapter 50. Where among many other observable things this following Story,
which is almost beyond belief, yet faithfully quoted out of Acosta, and Garcias
ab Horto Hist. Arom. lib. 1. c. 14. relates it also.

There was an Elephant in the City of Cochin, who wanting his food at the
precise accustomed hour, complained, and brayed. His Master excused it by
showing him that the Brazen Vessel, which usually contained his food was leaky
and run out, and that the occasion of this delay was, because, that it could no
longer hold his Drench or Wash: And therefore commands him, if he would eat, to
carry it to the Braziers to be mended. He obeys, takes it upon his Trunk and
brings it to the Brazier. Who either through negligence, or to make sport with
the Beast, did not mend it well, and stop up the Chinks. The Elephant brings it
back again, his Master spying the fault, grew angry, and exclaimed both against
him and the Elephant; and in fine, bids him carry the Vessel back again. He
does so, and with a querulous tone throws it at the Brazier. He being a
pleasant fellow, endeavors to put a Cheat upon him the second time, and makes,
as if he did stop the holes, but did not: Yet he mist his aim; for the Elephant
was so cunning, as to carry the Cauldron to the River, and there puts it into
the Water and fills it, to try whether it would hold, but he found that it did
run out. He being hereupon highly incensed, runs back to the Brazier, and
bellowed out with a thundering voice, so that the Neighbors came about them,
and among the rest the King's Viceroy. The Brazier pacifies the Beast with
fair words (and here says Lipsius, I know not whether I dare proceed any
further) and at last he takes the Vessel into his hands and mends it well and
strongly. But the Elephant being mistrustful, carries it again to the River and
fills it with Water; when he saw that it would hold, he turns himself to the
standers by and shows it, calling them as witnesses to the matter of fact; and
so went home.

61. Garcias adds further, who traveled into those parts, that there are some
yet living, who affirm they saw it done. And he testifies, that Elephants do
not only understand the Language of their own, but also those of foreign
Countries, if taught them. And a little after; In sum, there is nothing
wanting in this Creature to make him appear rational, but only Speech: although
this also (as the same Garcias witnesses) is by some attributed to it. Of
which hereafter.

62. And lest that any one should make a doubt of what is reported concerning
Elephants; hear Iac. Bontius an Author of very great credit; who was some few
years past in the East Indies, and chief Physician to the Belgian Society, and
himself an Eyewitness thereof; who, in his Notes upon the forementioned place
in Garcias, declares expressly, That whatsoever is said of the Elephants
docility, is true: The same things in some measure are related by Pliny,
Scaliger, Canerarius, Lipsius and others, concerning the tractablnesse and
ingenuity of Dogs and Horses, and also of their fidelity to their Masters,
which almost exceed all belief; and yet are every where made manifest by daily
experience.

63. There was in Holland not many years ago, a comely Horse carried about by a
fellow to be seen, being by custom brought to that which Scaliger mentions of
another in his 209 Exercitation, who did very strange things, at his masters
command, or single Nod, among other things being commanded to show him the
greatest wencher, or drunkard, etc. in the Company, he was not much out of the
way, being without doubt, directed by some private sign from his Master.

64. Scaliger in his 236 Exercitation, reports, That he saw a Dancing Parret,
who did with the gesture of his head, and by hanging down and fluttering of his
wings imitate a Savoyard (that was a Songster) dancing; which he assures us a
Crane did also very pleasantly.

Ionstonius in Thaumat. Nature. reports of another Parret, that she would say
over the Apostles Creed before the Cardinal, and answer questions. Also of
another that belonged to Henry the Eighth King of England, who being fallen
into the River cried out for help, and promised twenty pounds to those that
would save her, but being taken up, he bid them give the man a Groat.

65. I my self at present, have a little Dog at home, who not long ago seeing
the Cat licking a large Ladle that was hung up by the Chimney; he first leapt
at her, and endeavored to drive her away by barking; but she fell still to her
work not minding him, by accident he finds me out a great way off from that
place, runs to me, and ever and anon fawns upon me with his forefeet, and then
runs toward the Cat, as it were to show me his meaning, that I might see her,
and drive her away; so that the Whelp took notice of this unworthy act of the
Cat, though not used to do it, and would out of envy have her driven away. I
had formerly another small Cur at Hardervick, who would very hardly be kept at
home when I went abroad, insomuch that if he had slept in the Kitchen at any
time longer than ordinary, being uncertain, whether I were gone out in the
interim, or no; starting up of a sudden, he would run into the Parlour, and
look about for my Cloak, which as soon as he spied, he returned into the
Kitchen satisfied, gathering as it were from hence, that I was in my Study, and
so as yet within.

66. We may daily observe, the gestures of Apes, and their imitation of Men's
actions without any fraud or deceit, though not accustomed to it formerly.
Oornithographer affirm that Cranes observe a kind of discidline in their
flight, and keep a Watch or stand Sentinel. Every days experience openly
proclaims the admirable ingenuity and policy of Bees and Ants. The Spinning of
Spiders, and the way they have to ensnare Flies, or trap them sometimes
unawares. I omit a thousand other observations of brute Beasts, that are daily
obvious to our senses, which do seem to declare that there is some Idea of
Reason, or some kind of ratiocination in them.

67. I will only annex one thing which Fort. Licet. lib. 2. de Monst. c. 68.
relates out of the Portugal Annalls of Castanenda; to wit, That a certain Woman
for some Crime was by Sea transported to a Desert Island, when she was set a
shore there, a horrid company of Apes (which that place abounded with) came and
stood round about her; and that there was one among them bigger, than the rest,
to whom all gave place; who taking the Woman very gently by the hand led her
into a vast Cave, and that he and the rest, did set before her store of Apples,
Nuts, and variety of Roots, and with a complemental Nod invited her to Eat; at
length she was Ravished by the Beast; who continued the act a long time,
insomuch that she had two Children by him; and that she lived in this miserable
condition for some years; till (God commiserating her case) a Portugal Vessel
was driven thither, and the Soldiers coming a shore for Water, which they had
out of a Fountain next adjoining to that Cave, and by great chance the Ape
being absent, the woman ran to the men, having seen none of that Sex a long
time, and falling suppliantly at their feet, beseeched them to free her from
that wicked and miserable servitude; they pitying her condition, did
condescend to her entreaties, and she came aboard of them. But behold, says
he, the Ape unexpectedly coming after her, and with strange gestures and noises
calling back his Consort, and yet no Consort: When he saw them hoise up the
Sails, he runs back with great speed, and brings one of the Children and shows
it to the Mother, threatening to throw it into the Sea, unless she would
return; and did so immediately; then he runs back to the Cave, and returning to
the Seashore with the same speed shows the other, threatens, and then drowns
it; and at last he himself swims after her, and was drowned.

68. As to the Speech of Brute Animals; it is confirmed by daily experience,
that some of them may by custom imitate in some measure an articulate Voice, or
Humane Speech. This is a very familiar observation in the Parret, Pie, and
Sterling. Plutarch, Pliny, Ovid, and others, testify the same thing of the
Nightingal. I my self (says the Author) have observed (at Mersa in my native
Country Anno 1646. at the House of the most Noble and Strenuous Gentleman
Wilhelmus Reinerus a Clou, who was a Peer and Governor of that City and
County) in that kind of Finches, which they call a Goldfinch, and Aristotle
(...), that could imitate Man's Speech articulately and distinctly enough: This
little Bird was so accustomed by heartng people speak frequently, that as often
as she did prepare to sing, she would utter these words distinctly, Sing
Manneken, sing man, but in a lower tone, as if she were hoarse; and after she
had often repeated them, then she would proceed with a most sweet harmony.

We have given you an account of the Parret that could rehearse the Apostolic
Creed; and of the other, that falling into the River desired help and promised
a reward, in the foregoing part of our Discourse.

69. We will not here take any notice of the Serpent's discourse with Eve,
immediately after the Creation, Genesis 3. nor of the Speaking of Baladm's Ass,
Numb. 22. and 2 Pet. 2. v. 16. because we are satisfied that the one, was done
by Diabolical, and the other, by Divine operation; we will only briefly insist
upon those things which the Naturalists, as Pliny, Aelian, Plutarch, and
others, report concerning the Speech of Elephants, and of their writing too.
Among which possibly we might reckon the ingeminated Words that were heard to
be spoken by the Statu of Juno Moneta, and Fortuna, as Valerius Maximus
reports, but that the more inward recesses of Nature are first exactly to be
discussed by us, that we may the more clearly discern the illusions of Satan
from the Works of Nature.

70. Concerning the peculiar Speech of Elephants, Oppian delivers himself, as
follows;

(...),
(...).
It Is famed, that Elephants with their own kind
Talk, and in proper terms express their mind.
Acosta affirms (who lived a long time in East India, and did diligently
examine the nature and towardness of Elephants, and received it from those who
made daily observations of their nature) That in the Kingdom of Malabar, it is a
general received opinion, that these Creatures do Talk one with another.

71. Nay, it is believed that they can learn Humane speech, and express their
inward conceptions by familiar Words. There was (says the same Acosta) an
Elephant in the City of Cochin, who did, at his daily work in the Haven about
marine affairs; who though tired, was however urged by the Prefect of that
City, to draw a light Vessel, (or Pinnace) into the Sea, which he had already
begun to do, but the Beast refused it, and he pressed him with many fair words;
and at last (not prevailing) he entreated him to do it for the King of
Portugal's sake. At which (O incredible!) the Elephant being moved (says
Acosta) repeated these two Words Hoo Hoo; which signifies in the Tongue of the
People of Malabar, I will, I will; and drew the Ship into the Sea without any
further delay.

72. Garcias ab Horto in the place above mentioned, says, That there are some
People in Cochin, who affirm they saw a public Register (called an
Attestation) which did mention, That there was an Elephant there that could
Speak, and did ask his Governor for food, but he answered, that the Cauldron
in which he boiled Rice for him was full of holes, etc. which story is related
before by Lipsius out of Acosta,

73. But let us speak something of the Writing of Elephants, which is a
representation of the external speech; Pliny out of Mucianus, reports, that one
of these Creatures learnt the Greek Letters, and Writ in that Language, Ipse
ego haec scripsi and spolia Celtica dicavi.

And Philostratus, They write (says he) and Dance, nay, to the Pipe also. But
Aelian says, I my self have seen an Elephant Writing the Roman Letters in a
Table Book with his Trunk, and that withal, they were writ very even, not
crooked; Nay, whilst he was Writing, his Eyes were earnestly fixed upon the
Table Book, that you might plainly say, they were intent and accustomed to
Writing.

74. Although the major part of Brutes have no articulate Voice, and so do not
make use of Speech properly so called: Yet we see on all sides, that they
express their inward conceptions one with another, and with Men also, by the
Gestures, Sounds, and Noises which they make with their Bodies, and such other
kind of means; even as Dumb Men use gesticulations and various motions, in lieu
of Speech, whereby they discourse very significantly among themselves, as well
as with other persons.

75. Hither is to be referred that of Philostratus in the Life of Apollonius,
in his 4. Book chapter 1. concerning the Sparrow, who, as a messenger, by the
raising of his chirping tone, did signify to the rest, that he had found out
some place, where there was good store of scattered Corn, and so did
communicate the food he had discovered to the rest of the Sparrows, who hearing
that Voice of his, they all making a sudden noise, immediately flew after him.

The like example was related to me by the most Noble and renowned Brinkins, p.
m. Burgomaster of Hardervick when living, concerning a Goose, who when she had
found in any of the Fields a Stock of Corn, took her flight immediately to the
rest of her Consorts, and making a noise among them, the whole Flock followed
her, she flying foremost, and showing the rest where their food was. We may
daily observe in Dogs greater remarques whereby they signify their inward sense
to others.

76. And since it is so, what must we think of the Reason of Brutes, and their
Sermocination whatsoever it be? What is there wanting to make them rational
Creatures, or make them accounted to be of Humane society? Are we not bound to
acknowledge that there is in Brutes a kind of analogical Reason or estimative
faculty that resembles Reason, from whence their Ingenuity is derived, and by
virtue whereof, they seem to be in some respects prudent.

77. And truly since we see that Brute Animals do sometimes Rave, and Dote
(for Apes when Drunk, have a kind of delirium; Dogs are troubled with the
Hydrophobia or Madness, which happens (as is reported) to Horses, Oxen, Asses,
and Camels) it must needs also follow, that they have Wit, and the use of
Reason in some measure; for natural Potency and Impotency are to be referred to
the same subject: Hence we find, that as that analogical Reason is in some,
more exquisite and vigorous, so some Brutes differ from others in Ingenuity.
Prudence, Docility and Stupidity. Of which Subject I have variously Discoursed
in Theatr. Nature. Univers. part. 2. Disputat. 5. s. 29. and the following
Sections.

78. Yet this Reason of Brutes is absolutely different from Humane Reason in
its very essence, for the former is a kind of sensitive or material faculty of
the Soul, to which, that which is vulgarly called Cogitative in man, or the
estimative faculty it self, illustrated with Reason, from the presiding, and
hypostatical union of the rational Soul with the sensitive, Body, does in some
measure agree: and yet this very Cogitative faculty in Man, though it be
material, it is far more noble and excellent, than the Reason in any species of
Brutes can be; and does by many degrees surpass the Reason of Elephants; then
this Reason is apprehended to transcend the Reason of Gallus Africanus,
insomuch that there is herein a kind of irradiation, or a represented Image in
Man, flowing from the Immortal Soul, which also by its Native and Essential
Reason is capacitated to imitate the Celestial Intelligencies; which bright
light of Reason in Man communicates it self to the estimative faculty, by
reason of the intimate connection of the Rational Soul with the Sensitive Body,
by which the whole Suppositum becomes Rational.

79. And therefore it is not without reason that Aristotle says in the First
Book of his Ethics to Nicomachus, the last Chapter; That Man has a twofold
Reason; the one, he has principally in himself, viz. (...) the very Mind or
rational Soul: the other, that he is obedient to Parents, and that he has
Reason by participation, to wit, that which he calls in Man (...) or that part
that is without the Humane Soul, as the Sensitive faculty; this first Reason of
Man is the very Intellect it self, so called by Aristotle, which he says, 3.
De Anim. cap. 5. t. 20. is separable, immortal, and impassible; the latter, the
passive Intellect, which he does not affirm to be immortal and eternal, because
it perishes with the universal sensitive faculty, when the rational Soul is
separated from the Body.

80. The former sort of Reason in Man, which is proper to the rational Soul or
Mind, and is its native faculty, as the Mind of Man is an immaterial substance,
not at all enveloped in matter, so that makes use of no corporeal organ in the
exercise of its functions; but soaring above all the Senses, contemplates upon
Divine, Immortal, and Eternal Beings; and understands those things which no
Sense of the Body can conceive; and still desires that which the sensitive
faculty wholly abhorrs. So that Calvin in the first Book of his Institutes c.
5. S. 5. reprehends those (and that not undeservedly) who being addicted to
preposterous subtilties would fain wrest that saying (which teaches that the
Faculties of the Soul are organical) to a contrary sense (viz. from the
sensitive faculty, to the very rational Soul) as well (says he) to destroy the
immortality of the Soul, as to rob God of his proper right: for (says he)
because the faculties of the Soul are organical: by this pretext they so link
it to the Body, that it cannot subsist without it.

81. The latter Reason of Man, which is communicated to the sensitive or
estimative faculty by participation, as it is not corporeal, nor intermixed
with the Body (as Aristotle shows de Anim. l. 3. c. 4. text 6.) because that it
is a kind of communicated image, and represented as it were in the Mirror of
the Mind; so neither does it use any organ in its operations (according to
Arist. in the forecited place) although it is busied about outward appearances,
as the object of its operations, and can understand nothing without them (as
Aristotle teaches c. 8. text 39. And in truth that which he has in the last
quoted place, belongs to this passive Intellect, or rather to Man, as he is of
a sensitive nature, adorned with an active Intellect; that an Intelligent
person must Contemplate upon outward Phenomenon, according to that common
saying, Nihil est in Intellectu, quod non fuerat prius in sensu. Nothing can be
in the Intellect, that has not been first received by the Senses.

82. For this sensitive faculty in Man, though illustrated with Reason,
understands nothing of it self, but is like a blank Paper, or Book, that is
susceptible of any inscription, 3. lib. de Anim. 4. text 14. for it is capable
of all things that are cognoscible, by virtue of that light which darted from
the rational Soul, whereby it is illustrated, and extends it self to all
material, immaterial, individual, abstracted, Mortal and Eternal objects.

For as it is sensitive, it perceives v. g. the Water, Fire, Flesh, Magnitude
and the like; and forms an imagination of them (which is also common to Brutes,
as well as Men) but since Flesh is one thing, and the Essence of Flesh another;
Magnitude, is one thing, and the Essence of Magnitude, another; and so of the
rest; it does by another part of it self, or by it self in another capacity
(viz. not as it is sensitive, but cogitative, or as it partakes of Reason, and
is enlightened by the rational Soul) distinguish the Essence, from the things
themselves, which fall under our Senses.

83. But the former Reason of Man, or the genuine faculty of the rational Soul,
as it is altogether immaterial, so it challenges a Knowledge proper and
natural to it self, not any way proceeding from Matter, or the Senses of the
Body (For there is not always one and the same, but a different reason of the
supernatural Knowledge of Divine Mysteries, or of those things which exceed our
Human Capacity, and want the support of Faith) whilst in the interim it renders
that very Knowledge which is drawn from the Senses and inferior Reason far
more illustrious, and more clearly discerns the truth it self.

84. For this genuine faculty of the rational Soul, has within it self the
connate principles and seeds of all manner of Knowledge (which do not involve
Divine Mysteries) or else is furnished with such an Understanding, that it can
extract the truth of things out of their Womb by discourse and ratiocination.
So also the knowledge of God is engraven in the minds of men, yet not so, as if
every man did acknowledge a Deity, or that the existence of God is as it were
written in their minds so soon as Born (of which opinion Anselm and Hieronymus
were, according to Suarez Disputation 19. S. 2.. 3.) but that by Nature there
are such principles of a Deity implanted in our minds, and such an intellectual
light connate with them, that we may by the strength of our own Genius, without
any assistance from the Senses attain the knowledge of the Power and Divinity
of the Supreme Deity. Just as we do truly assert, that Geometrical truths are
connate in us, though we do not originally understand the Elements of Euclid.

85. And as the dull and rude Vulgar, who use not to abstract the Mind from the
Body (and therefore have no other knowledge but what is exerted by the Senses,
and the dictates of inferior or cogitative Reason) understand and conceive the
invisible things of God from the Creation of the World by Works, so that the
(...) that which may be known of God (as our Version has it) in the first to
the Romans may be understood by the very Plebeians; so Philosophers and such as
are conversant with more sublime Speculations, or have learnt to free their
minds from this terrene incarceration, attain unto the knowledge of the Deity
by the inward qualifications of their minds, without being obliged to the
testimony of Sense.

And really those very seeds that are naturally planted in the minds of men, do
sometimes so powerfully exert themselves into action, that they bind the very
Consciences of the most obstinate, and such as deny the very dictates of
Senses. And herein we may affirm with Calvin, in the first Book of his
Institutes, c. 3.. 1. That beyond all Controversy there is by a natural
instinct, a kind of sense of the Divinity in the mind of Man, for God hoth
endued all persons with the Intelligence of his Deity, that no man should
shelter himself under the pretext of Ignorance, who by a constant recollection
of his memory, furnishes him with fresh instillations.

87. But as to the Reason of Brute Animals; being it depends upon the sensitive
Soul, it is absolutely material, and drowned in the Body, it is altogether
inseparable from it, and perishes with the Individuum, and therefore is
conversant with nothing but what is Corporeal and Mortal. The same faculty is
in all the species of Brutes employed about some certain and determinate
object, to which all of them are hurried by a natural propensity; and not as it
is in Man, indifferent to any thing. So Nature instructs Swallows to build
their Nests of Clay; Beasts to get Coverts or Dens; Dogs hunt the Hare; and
Cats watch for Mice; which neither the Reason of a Cow, nor an Ass prompts them
to; nor can they by Art be brought to it.

88. And although probably some species of these Brute Animals are more freely
exercised, about various objects by raciocination, than others, as we find in
Elephants, Apes, Monkies, the Cynocephali, and Dogs themselves, and the like;
yet they are apprehensive of the objects themselves no otherwise, than under
the notion of singulars: For they perceive the Water, Fire, Flesh, Magnitude
and the like; and then frame some fantasms of these very things; and these
they, either compound or divide, and so judge or esteem of the species so
received: but Flesh being one thing, and the Essence thereof, another;
Magnitude, one thing, and the Essence thereof, another, etc. as Aristotle
speaks, they cannot discern the Essence of things from the things themselves,
nor can they abstract individuals from universals. So that their universal
Reason consists in particular and material things; and therefore they are
incapable of Learning, which is comprehended under certain Maxims and Rules.

89. Besides if it could possibly be maintained, that some Brute Animals have a
kind of Sense of Divinity (it is reported that that Idolatrous Religion
consisting in the Worship of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, did proceed from
Elephants) or that some faint image or shadow of Piety may be distilled into
them, yet by that they cannot conceive any thing of God, unless it be by
corporeal reason, and so have no Conception of God, nor can they ever be able
to dispute concerning God by the deduction of Causes, or by the successive end,
nor by conclusions drawn from the principles imprinted in their minds; but only
by the singular commodity or use, or the more splendid appearance of the
particular individual body, viz. of the Sun or Moon, and so they cannot
apprehend the invisible things of God, but can only frame a conception or
imagination of the corporeal Idea of those things which proximately move the
Senses.

90. Undoubtedly that which is purely Incorporeal and Divine, or which is the
true Essence of Divinity, which is only Religiously to be Worshipped, cannot
fall under the apprehension of a faculty merely corporeal. But if there do
appear in Elephants, as well the shadow of many Virtues, as a certain kind of
imaginary Idea of Religion (as Lipsius has heaped together many Examples out
of diverse Authors to that purpose) what wonder is it, that the Celestial Bodies
strike the Senses with greatest admiration and yet are not exquisitely
apprehended by the Senses, that that representation of Religion whatsoever it
be, should be directly apprehended? And so they be believed by Plutarch and
Aelian, to Worship the Rising Sun; and by Pliny and Aelian, the New Moon.

91. Finally, the Wisdom of Brutes consists only in that part wherein they also
suffer a delirium; but Man's Wisdom also consists in the mind or active
Intellect, in which they never dote, and herein they evidently differ from
Beasts, who have not this faculty. So that that passage of Hippocrates, Aphor.
6. Sect. 2. belongs only to the passive Intellect, so far as it resides in the
sensitive faculty; where he says, That those who are troubled in any part of
the Body, and are hardly sensible of the pain, their mind ((...) or as Galen
interprets it in his Commentary (...)) is disstempered, for they are deceived
by a defect of the inward Senses, which Brutes have in common with Men, and
stand always in need of their Ministry, whilst tied to the fetters of the Body.

92. Therefore Men are truly said to be distinguished from Beasts by Reason;
because Brute Animals have not any footsteps of that Reason that is natural to
the rational Soul, or the active Intellect; but they only have some kind of
shadow of that Reason which is communicated to the sensitive faculty, or of the
passive Intellect; so that they are said to have Reason Analogically.

93. Now as to the Speech which is apprehended to be in some Brutes, that have
organs fit for the emission of an articulate Voice; what kind of Reason that
may be, and how it differs from Humane Speech, is the thing to be discussed:
And as the speech of Parrets, Crows, and other Birds, woe are taught by Art, is
nothing else, but a certain articulate Voice without any mental understanding,
to which they are trained up by Custom, not knowing for the most part what is
signified by this or that word. So that Parret that rehearsed the Apostles
Creed; did not at all understand the thing signified by those words. And
therefore this sort of speech, is not at all a representation of the intrinsic
reason, and so consequently no true speech.

94. But if sometimes it so fall out that they seem appositely to appropriate
the Names of things to the things themselves, or retain the signification of
them, that is the work of the Memory, by which they do accommodate those things
which they by their docility have gained to particular things, as they have
been accustomed to them, and according to their often repeated appellations:
But their speech extends no farther to other things, than Custom has directed
them. And as that Parret which fell into the River called for help, and
promised a Reward, it must necessarily be, that she had by practice learnt
those words being oftentimes before in the like danger.

95. And since it is undeniable that not only Elephants, but some other
Creatures, as Dogs and Horses (though these are not altogether so capable) do
in some manner conceive the Speech of Man, to which they are accustomed, or
understand what is meant by such and such words, as they are taught (and as
they by the motion or gesture of their Masters, know what they would have)
though some more exactly, than others. Is it a greater wonder for these Brutes,
if they have organs fit for Speech, to be able by outward expressions (as they
have learnt by Custom) to signify the single conceptions of their estimative
faculty to others, which they frame within themselves according to the common
speech they are accustomed to, than that they should by the usual gestures of
the Body, and other various ways (which is also the Speech of Mutes) be able to
adumbrate their inward conceptions to others? Or what wonder is it for a
Parret, Pie, Crow, or Starling, to express what they inwardly conceive or
desire by an articulate Voice, or such as they have learnt by custom?

96. And those Creatures that have been used to Speech can count numbers; and
yet they have no formal conception of those numbers; because that cannot be
done but by abstracting, and so consequently by the immaterial faculty. For in
the numbering of any thing proposed, or the collecting a definite multitude out
of unities, it is requisitely necessary that the mind have an Idea of some
number be known, and that it appear, how the third differs from the fourth, and
the fourth from the tenth, and so on; to the end, that the number may be
rightly appropriated to any multitude proposed, according as the thing
requires. But this does not at all come within the reach of the material
faculty, with which Brutes are only endued.

97. Since therefore number is not properly formed but by the Intellect, which
Aristotle himself confesses, 4. Phys. t. 131. it must necessarily follow, that
the names of Number are only repeated by the Memory in Brutes that name it, but
the Essence of Number, or difference, of the fourth, and fifth, or twentieth,
is not in them.

98. As to the Writing of Inanimate Creatures, since that Elephants use the
Proboscis, as a Hand, and almost as readily as we do (for they will take the
smallest piece of Money off from the ground, and ordinarily manage a Sword like
a Fencer, handle a Gun, level it and discharge, as we our selves, that have
been eyewitnesses, can testify) it need not seem an impossibility for them to
Write some Letters, whose figures they have been taught, either singly, or
jointly, and so reduced them into words, and perhaps by Writing to express
their conception of any particular thing according to custom, as other Brutes
use to notify their conceptions by gestures, or other ways suitable to their
nature.

99. But it is sufficiently apparent by what has been said, how infinitely the
Speech of Inanimate Creatures, and the adumbration thereof by Writing, does
differ from Human Speech; whereas Man does not appropriate this, or that word,
to this, or that particular thing by custom only; but can use his Tongue
volubly, and can exercise it in the expressing of any thing whatsoever, upon
all emergent occasions, in a far different manner from that of Brutes: And as
Man's Reason it self, or the internal Speech, does not only aim at particular
and material, but universal, abstracted, and immaterial things, which Brutes by
their Reason cannot do, so the external Speech, which is the nuncius of the
internal, is assisted thereby, which indeed the Speech of Brutes cannot aspire
unto.

100. So that there is, as vast a distance between the Reason of Inanimate
Creatures and Humane Reason, and their Speech, or the signification of things
which is designed by Speech, and the Speech of Man, as there is between the
Material and Immaterial Faculty. And therefore we may truly conclude, that no
Creature is endued with the faculty of real Speech, or true Reason, but Man
only; but the Speech of Brutes may be said faintly to resemble the true Speech
of Man, as also their Reason, Human Reason, by some kind of Analogy.

FINIS.
Books Printed for William Crook, at the green Dragon without Temple Bar.
Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae, Authore Fransc. Cherk. Printed 1667.
price bound 1 s.

The Complete Measurer, or an exact new way of Mensuration, by which may be
measured both Superficies and Solids in whole Numbers and Fractions, in a more
plain and easy way, than ever yet extant, whereby you may find out the Contents
of all superficies and solids in whole numbers and fractions by the help of
Multiplication, without Division, by Tho. Hammond. in 8 o price bound 1 s..

A Voyage into the Levant, being a brief Journey lately performed from England
by the way of Venice into Dalmatia, Sclavonia, Bosna, Hungary, Macedonia,
Thessaly, Thrace, Rhodes and Egypt, unto Gran Cairo, with particular
observations concerning the modern Condition of the Turks, and other People
under that Empire, by Sr. Henry Blunt Knight; in 12 o Printed 1669. price bound
1 s.

A Tract concerning schism and Schismatics, wherein is briefly discovered the
original Causes of all Schism, written by the late Learned and Judicious Divine
John Hales of Eaton; in 4 to. 6 d.

Hugonis Grotii Baptizatorium; Puerorum Institutio alternis interrogationibus
and responsionibus: Cai adjicitur Graeca ejusdem Metaphrasis a Christo: Wase
Regalis Colleg. Cant. ana cum observatiunculis in Graecam Metaphrasin ad Calcem
appensis: Quibus accessit praxis in Graecam Metaphrasin per B. Beale cum
Graecis Testimoniis ex sacra pagina and Indice locupletissimo, in 8 o Printed
1668. price bound 2 s.

The Court of Curiosity, wherein by the Algebra and Lot the most intricate
questions are resolved, and Nocturnal Dreams and Visions explained, according
to the doctrine of the Ancients; to which is also added a Treatise of
Physiognomy: published in French by Mark de Vulson Knight. of the Order of S.
Michael, and Gentleman in ordinary to the French King, (since translated into
Spanish, Italian, and Dutch, and now) into English, by I. G. Gent. of the Inner
Temple; in 8 o Printed 1670. price bound 2 s.

A description of Candia in its ancient and modern state, with an account of
the Siege thereof begun by the Ottoman Emperor in the year 1666. continued
1667, 1668. and surrendered the latter end of 1669. in 8 o printed 1670. price
bound 1 s.

The Complete Vinyeard, or an excellent way for planting of Vines according to
the German and French manner and long practiced in England, wherein is set
forth the ways and all the circumstances necessary for planting of a Vineyard,
with the election of the soil, the situation thereof, the best way for
planting the young plants, the best time and manner of pruning, the turning and
translation of the ground etc. with other observations, also the fashion of
Wine-presses, the manner of bruising and pressing Grapes, and how to advance
our English Vines enlarged above half by the Author W. Hughs; 8 o printed 1670.
price 1 s. 6 d.

Epigrams of all sorts made at diverse times, and several occasions by R. F. 8 o
printed 1670. price bound 1 s.

Sylva Sylvarum, or a natural History in ten Centuries, whereunto is newly
added the History Natural and Experimental of Life and Death, or the
prolongation of Life, published after the Authors death by W. Rawley D. D. one
of His Majest. Chapl. whereunto is added Articles of Inquiry touching Minerals,
and the new Melantis, as also the Life of the Author, never added to this Book
before, written by the Right honorable Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount St.
Alban, the ninth and last Edition, with an Alphabetical Table of the principal
things contained in the ten Centuries. fol. printed 1670. pr. 8 s.

The Triumph of Gods revenge against the crying and execrable sin of Murder,
etc. in 30 several histories, delivered by I. Reynolds, 5 Edition with
pictures, fol. printed 1670. price 10 s.

The Jesuits Morals collected by a Doctor of the College of Sorbonn in Paris,
who has faithfully extracted them out of the Jesuits own Books which are
printed by the permission and approbation of the Superiors of their Society
translated out of French in folio printed 1670. price bound 10 s.

A Sermon Preached at the funeral of a sober Religious Man found drowned in a
Pit not long ago, enlarged by the Author upon his review, in 8 o printed 1670.
price bound 1 s.

The Deaf and Dumb man's Discourse, or a Treatise concerning those that are born
deaf and dumb, containing a discovery of their Knowledge or Understanding, as
also the Method they use, to manifest the sentiments of of their minds together
with an additional tract of the Reason and Speech of inanimate Creatures, by G.
Sibscota; 8 o printed 1670. price bound 1 s.


