Hydrological Essays: OR, A VINDICATION OF Hydrologia Chymica: Being a further
Discovery of the Scarbrough Spaw, And of the right use thereof.

And of the Sweet Spaw and Sulphur-Well at Knarsbrough.

With a brief Account of the Allom Works at Whitby.

Together with a return to some QUERIES, propounded by the ingenious Dr. Dan.
Foot, concerning Mineral Waters.

To which is annexed, An ANSWER to Dr. Tunstal's Book, concerning the
Scarbrough SPAW.

With an Appendix of the Anatomy of the German-Spaw.

And, lastly, Observations on the Dissection of a Woman who died of the
Jaundice.

All grounded upon Reason and Experiment.

By WILLIAM SIMPSON, Dr. in Physic, and Practitioner at Wakefield in Yorkshire.

London, Printed by J. D. for Richard Chiswel, at the two Angels and Crown in
Little-Britain, 1670.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Impartial candid Reader,
IT is my hap once more to appear in public, being necessitated thereto, in
vindication of the truth I have asserted, touching the Scarbrough-Spaw, etc.
Were I not constrained, and did not the expectation of many oblidge me thereto;
I could, I confess, as willingly have laid my Pen aside, as have taken it up.
At the first glance upon my Antagonist's Book, I thought he had some color of
Authority on his side, but upon second (and therefore more mature) thoughts,
unravelling his Clew, I found his quotations of Authors in general, either
impertinent, nothing to the purpose in the main, or their sense perverted and
wrested, or their words falsely translated out of the Latin. This he, who gives
himself the trouble of reading his Book, will find all along, that where he
falls short in strength of Argument, he makes supplies in an over measure of
Calumnies, Taunts, Scoffs, and groundless Accusations.

Unto all which ungentile and unscholar-like usages, I shall only answer, by
desiring thee, Reader, to consider, That hereby he has given me so much the
advantage over him, that I could not have wished for more or better; for,
first, I will remarke that his Morals and his Naturals are much of a scantling;
and it seems probable, that he that taught him Physics, read Ethics to him
also, and his mind (in which they are implanted) is equally productive of both;
measure one by the other, and they differ not a ^airs breadth, and either
extends not beyond the dimensions of vulgar and weak Souls and Intellectuals.
Next let it be observed, that it is the common guize of persons less fraught
with right conceptions of things, to defend them with disingenuous and
discurteous Apologeticks; as we see some soyls that naturally bear unsavory
Weeds, will amongst them put forth also Nettles and Thistles, which shall prick
and sting the fingers of that Weeder that aims at the improvement of that
ground.

Again consider, that thus he has rendered himself an object of reproof (not to
say contempt) and forgiveness; which last I will only take the advantage of,
and here publicly give it to him; and though it was his business to throw
dirt, mine shall be only to wipe i^ off, and calmly to tell thee ( Reader^ who
threw it, and why. I should entertain thy eye but coursly enough to repeat his
Repartees; suffice i^ therefore, that I think them no^ worthy a Reply, not that
I want sufficient Arguments, or a competent testimony from others to vindicate
my self, and invalidate his unjust reproaches, but judge it my concern to
employ my time at an other guess rate, then to trifle it away with such
impertinencies.

His Epistle goes off at the wrong end; it was aimed at me that stood before
it, but like a foul Gun it strikes the Discharger; Can you (Reader) or I now
help it? However I shall prompt thee to carry it with thee to the Spaw, for
there, both that and the whole Book may be of use to thee.

I confess I could have wished he had used his silence, not for my sake but his
own, for then he might have passed for a wise man, who now has told you
himself what he is; and what he contains, let this dragm of his Ethico-Physical
Spirit inform your taste.

But I injure my assertions, demonstrated by Reason and Experiments, (if I
overween not) truly sufficient. Therefore, Reader, take no notice of
immoralities, which, I am sure, were once no Ingredients amongst the rest of
the Spaw, and their existency therein did appear as little as that of Vitriol;
yet (oh the riddle!) I find by experience, after all, that they are therein,
for my Antagonist first discovered them there, and of this I yield him the
glory and triumph, but whisper to him, it was his own infused addition, and
shall (for the Drinker's sake) desire him to throw no more such stuff and filth
into those Waters, which God and Nature have intended for other purposes.

Therefore, once for all, I shall desire the Impartial Reader to determine by
the eye of his judgment, which Arrow, of the two, stick nearest the mark
levelled at, without taking notice which has the most or greatest
Goose-feathers in their other ends; and let his Opinion prevail (of us two) who
has wrote most truth, and least calumny.

The method that I have observed, is, first, to clear up those difficulties,
and to answer the most material Objections which my Antagonist urges, and that
too as they lay in my way, confirming what I have before said, by undeniable
demonstration, grounded upon Experiments, adding new Observations, pro re nata.

And for a further discovery of the nature of the other Medicinal Waters at
Knarsbrough; I have given a particular Discourse both of the Sweet-Spaw, and
Sulphur-Water found there; where I have propounded some Experiments, which not
only demonstrate the Nature and Essence of their constitutive Ingredients, but
also by the same may any simple Spring Water (plentifully to be found any
where) be made an artificial Mineral Water, of the same taste and operation
with those made by the wonderful Chemistry of Nature in the bowels of the Earth.

The Experiments which concern the Sulphur-Water, (and by an analogy) all other
the like Sulphur-Springs, are such as no Author (which I have yet met with, who
write upon those Waters) have taken notice of; which may probably yield no very
small light for a further advancement of the knowledge of Sulphurous, and other
Mineral Waters.

And because the Essence of the Scarbrough Spaw consists most what of an
Aluminous Salt, therefore I judged it necessary to give an account of the
Alom-Works at Whithy, describing also the difference betwixt the natural and
the factitious Alom, comprizing the sum of the whole matter, upon that Subject,
in a few short Corolaries.

When my Antagonist apprehended that he ran by a wrong byas in his opinion of
the existence of Vitriol in the Scarbrough Spaw, and that he had spent so many
Pages of his Book to so little purpose, endeavoring to prove (right or wrong)
that to be in the Water, which was ocularly demonstrated not to be, even before
his own face, and in the presence of several Physicians, Scholars, and other
ingenious Gentlemen; and after his last refuge to the ipse dixit of Doctor
Tunstal, when he had nothing to say for himself, but that Dr. Tunstal told him
that Vitriol was in it, last year; was it not a poor (not to say childish) way
of Philosophyzing, to ground what a man publishes to the World upon the bare
word (and that but conjectural) of an other man?

Now when my Antagonist was thus touched to the quick, he called my ingenious
Friend (who had made the Experiment before him) aside, and told him, That if I
would then lay down the Cudgels, he would not only look upon me as a Brother,
but also, when occasion offered, would sooner take me into consultation then
any other. By which may be concluded one of these two things, viz. That either
my Antagonist has given a wrong Character of me in his Book, drawing my
portraiture with as rude, as well as unskilfully handled Pensils, or he is
willing to be accounted of as a Bifrons, or else be likened to a Ferry-man, who
looks one way, and rows another; speaks one thing, and thinks another, and
writes another.

But after, and notwithstanding all this, if my Antagonist shall at any time
make any Experiments to the purpose, and shall thence deduce due observations,
whereby the mechanical part of Philosophy may be improved, I should as
willingly receive them from him as from any other; till then I advise him to
lay aside his undue and improper contentions, and let us love like Brethren;
for I do declare to the World, that I have no enmity to his Person, nor has
(what I have done) been, trom any particular prejudice to him, but to contend
for the truth in things that respect my Profession, and the public good.

I must confess, that as he has behaved himself as a Magisterial Browbeater of
ingenuity, and has endeavored to eclipse the Light of Truth made forth by
Experiments, discovering his darkness and ignorance in the things he treated
of; so far, very probably, I have been as a Remora to his proceeds; yea, and
perhaps, by my means, he has reflected upon his high presumption of infallibly
curing Diseases, and knocking them down (to use his own expression) with the
great Hammer; whereas indeed the more a Physician knows, (daily eying the
conjectures whereon depends the practice of Physic) the more cautious he is,
as to his Prognostics, and that in respect of the ignorance of the causes of
things; and whether such presumptuous Prognostics, if I should use them, (as
my life for his, he shall recover, he is safe; I wish I had a lease of his
life, etc.) in the management of the cure of Diseases, (when yet,
notwithstanding all these, the Patient frequently dies) would not be more an
Argument that I am a Quack and Emperick, rather then a sober Physician, let the
Judicious determine.

And now I shall appeal to thee, (Reader) whether what I have most-what urged,
both in my Hydrol. Chym. as also in this, do not tend rather to an illustration
of Truth, in the discoveries of the Nature and Essence of Mineral and Medical
Waters, etc. then to any verbal jangling.

Lastly, Because I find not only my Person, and my Apprehensions, but also my
Practice under his censure and contempt, all styled by him as Chemical: I
cannot decline that none of the smallest measure of generosity I lay claim to,
but will now propose to him, (as a final decision of this matter under debate)
that we may measure abilities by that unerring Rule, Dignoscitur Medicus a
Medendo. Let us now (opportunely at this Spaw-time) choose by lot such a number
(of persons, chronically diseased) not less then twenty, and he of us that
shall Citius, tutius, and jucundius, cure his number, or the greater part
thereof, let him win both Field and Spring, and the other depart thence as
vanquished either only for this year, or for ever. Provided, that if the
agreement happen to be made only for this year, that the vanquished may enter
the next with new recruits, and attempt afresh then, and as often after as he
pleases; but every time the conquered shall depart for that year.

Pardon me (Reader) if herein I seem vainglorious, I can reflect so upon it as
well as another; but I submit to thy judgment, whether a better expedient can
be proposed to confront a man of words, or whether my own just repute (absit
jactanctia verbis) does require less of me. Or, lastly, whether the matter it
self does not naturally lead thereunto. And now to add more words, will ill
suit with this effort: Therefore it only remains that I inform thee, I was
willing to fill up some vacant Pages of this Tract, (not then finished) with
two particular Anatomies freshly made, the first of the German Spaw-Water,
usually to be had in Amsterdam; the other of a Woman, who recently expired at
Leiden of the Yellow-Jaundice; both not so repleat with inconsiderables, as not
to purchase thy favorable acceptance of them, from him, who every way
endeavors to exhibit himself

Thine, W. S.

Hydrological Essays: OR, A VINDICATION OF Hydrologia Chymica: BEING A further
Discovery of the Scarbrough Spaw.

And of the Sweet Spaw and Sulphur-Well at Knarsbrough.

With a brief Account of the Allom Works at Whitby.

Together with a return to some QUERIES, propounded by the ingenious Dr. Dan.
Foot, concerning Mineral Waters.

To which is annexed, An ANSWER to Dr. Tunstal's Book, concerning the
Scarbrough SPAW.

All grounded upon Reason and Experiment.

By WILLIAM SIMPSON, Dr. in Physic, and Practitioner at Wakefield in Yorkshire.

London, Printed by J. D. for Richard Chiswel, at the two Angels and Crown in
Little-Britain, 1670.

Hydrological Essays: OR, A VINDICATION OF Hydrologia Chymica.
THat I may not be too prolix in ushering in this following Discourse, by any
Praeliminaries, nor seem to make flourishes before a pass; I shall therefore
(without making him a Leg) forthwith close with my Antagonist at downright
Club-Arguments, and my Weapons shall be taken up from his own Authors: Yea, I
shall sometimes turn his own Artillery upon him, to the wounding of himself.

The matter therefore that first and mainly offers it self in Controversy, is
this, (viz.)

Whether Vitriol or Iron are two distinct Ingredients, or constitutive
Principles of the Scarbrough-Spaw?

Now my Antagonist asserts, that they are two distinct Principles of this Spaw:
I take it (says he) to be Iron Mineral, with a touch of the Vitriol; or if you
please, ferrum vitriolatum, or, vitriolum ferragineum: this is a natural
Vitriol generated in the Veins of the Earth, through which the Spring runs,
which has by its acidity or esurine Salt actuated the Waters, which thereby is
enabled to corrode a Vein of Iron.

By which, I perceive, he looks upon Vitriol as a simple Salt, without any
dependence upon any Mineral or Metalline Body: And, as such, has no relation
to Iron, being quite another thing, yet calls it ferrum vitriolatum, or
vitriolum ferrugineum, hooking the Iron to partake of the Vitriol, and the
Vitriol of the Iron, and yet are two distinct things. But, I pray you, will not
you allow Vitriol, I mean the natural, to be made of the Principles naturally
requisite for the concretion and constitution of that mineral Compage called
Vitriol?

If you do, (as of necessity you must) then if you can demonstrate, by matter
of experiment, any natural Vitriol from which by Art I cannot separate a
Mineral or Metalline Body; then will I lay down the Cudgels, yea the whole
matter, if you please, shall pass upon it.

Does not Kircher expressly say, Vitriolum vel ex aerata vel ferrata massa suan
originem naucisci: Mund. Subter. p. 320.
And further, Aquam quam cunque acido sulphuris spiritu imbutam aeratam glebam
exedere; sen quod idem est; corpuscula aerata sua edacitate dissolvere and
separare dissoluta vero corpuscula prorsus insensibili^^ aquam in se recipere,
iisque quadantenus misceri^ Yea and annexeth, Magnus aes inter and ferrum
intercedit magnetissimus, insignique sympathia ex similitudinem origines
pollent, etc.

From whose words, as also from an experimental, Suffrage of Truth, it is
clearly evident, That all sorts of Vitriols consist of an acid sulphurous Salt
or Spirit, in whose embraces are always one or other Mineral or Metalline Body
couched, which is the main Pillar in the constitution of the Concrete of
Vitriol, whether of Iron, Copper or Silver.

For amongst all kinds of Vitriols, whether Natural or Artificial, if thereon
(dissolved first in Water) a lixiviate Liquor, or volatile urinous Spirit be
poured, it does certainly (as I have further illustrated in my Hydrol. Chym.)
precipitate the Mineral or Metalline Body therein secretly contained: And
therefore such Vitrioline Waters do always, upon the commixture with their
contrary Liquors, become so much altered by the loss of their Mineral Bodies,
as they are not afterward capable of altering their Colors, or of becoming an
opacous Body of Ink; no nor of ministering their wonted helps for the health of
Man's Body: to confirm which, we have given many experiments in our late
Treatise.

This Vitriol (says my Antagonist) is not so properly said to be made by an
Esurine Salt, as to have an Enfurine Salt or Spirit in it self: If so, then
somewhat else must go to the making up the Compages of Vitriol: and this must
be an embryonative mineral Sulphur, whether of Iron or Copper; if of Iron, then
it makes the fontes acidi, or vitriolin Spaws frequently to be found in
England, Germany, and other Countries: And those differ amongst themselves
according to the disposition of the corroded Vein, or the different
impregnation of the Preterlabent Water, with the esurine sulphurous Salt. If
of Copper, then it makes the Vitriolin Veneres, or Vitriol of Copper; and that
whether it be found dissolved in Water, and so boiled up by Fire into the
consistence of Vitriol, or it be found spontaniously coagulated within its own
Mine, as that called the Cyprian, Hungarian, Goslaricke, etc.

Yet all Artificial Vitriols are made by an imitation of Nature in the
production of the natural, as in those that are made out of Copper, witness
that which is made by burning of Sulphur upon glowing or melted Copper; from
which, with much labor, is prepared a vitriolin aerngo, or that which
Paracelsus commends as the best Artificial Vitriol, being made by a Cementation
of Plates of Copper stratisied with common Salt and Sulphur: and others after
him perform the same by distilling often Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol from
Plates of Copper, until they be black and friable, then dissolved in Water, is
boiled up, and shoots into a blew Vitriol not unlike the Cyprian; So that to
the Fabric of all Vitriols, whether natural or artificial, is required
necessarily not only an acid sulphurous Spirit or Salt, but also a Mineral or
Metalline Body: And therefore we may certainly conclude that natural Vitriol
is, Partus immaturus Sulphuris Embryonati, and has its own mineral and
metallic Body in it self.

My Antagonist should have given us a definition of his Vitriol in the
Searbrough Spaw. That we might have known what he had meant thereby: he says
indeed, that it is an Esurine Salt, which acuates the Waters, ( p. 6.) which is
able to corrode a Vein of Iron; and yet says, ( p. 5.) That the Vitriol in the
Spaw, is not made out of Iron. How to reconcile this contradiction I know not,
unless you mean, by Vitriol, a simple Esurine Salt: And then in my judgment you
fall far shore of expressing the true essence of Vatriol; which is not Vitriol;
but as it has relation to a Mineral or Metalline Body.

For the acute Helmont says, (p. 55.) Seminas^^ lium cuncta in aquis sita
sunt, attamon nondum saperem induerunt nisi corporum principin consentanca
^^resque terrae debites repererunt, etc. (viz.) That all the Seeds of Salts are
placed in Water, yet are not endued with taste, unless they find agreeable
principles of Bodies, and suitable matrices of the Earth; then, and not till
then, they manifest their saltness, and become determined in a saline Body; in
one place into Allom, in another in Salmarine, in a third in Nitre, etc. To
which he adds, Quocirca notandum, Sal quoddam existere hermaphreditieum
metallorum quod defectu nominis esurinum sine acetosum re and nomine vocari
capit, generale equidem and ad emnia metalla accommodabile, (viz.) That there
is a certain Hermaphroditical Salt of Metals, which for want of an other name,
is called an Esurine or Acid Salt, which is a general sort of Salt, and
accommodated to all Metals: So that you see that this Esurine Salt, while such,
is no more than Salt, and not a Vitriol; but if it become a Vitriol, it must
espouse a Mineral or Metalline Body.

In as much as Helmont further says, Vitriolum Prestantissimum naturaliter
crescis, fodiris, quibus naturaistud Sal Esurinum poperit, Venam aeris feracem
corrodens, and fontis labentis liquore dissolutum, (viz.) That the best Vitriol
is most naturally brought forth in those Mines where Nature bath begot that
Esurine Salt, corroding a strong Vein of Copper, becomes dissolved in the
gliding current of a Spring.

But do not you observe (says my Antag.) that there is a palpable Powder,
which when a little Gall is put into the Water, ( p. 8, 9.) by which it turns
black, (which Color it takes from the Vitriol) there will settle, after some
hours, upon agitation of the Vessel, a black Powder near a dragm in a gallon,
which has a stiptick and drying taste like Crocus Martis, and after the same
manner tingeth the Excrements black.

Very true, I grant that the dissolved minera of Iron, or an equivalent minera
of a strong Concretion, is precipitated either by addition of Galls, or by much
agitation, especially in Oaken Vessels, or by long standing, and is that
Ingredient in the Water which tingeth the Excrements black. But now look about
you; you expressly say, That this precipitated black Powder has its color from
the Vitriol, and yet is the Iron Ingredient of the Spaw; therefore, according
to your own words, it should follow that the Vitriol is yet left behind in the
Water: which if so, Why does it not upon a new addition of Galls, give fresh
tincture? Why is it that upon the precipitation of this Crocus, by long
carriage of the Water, it will give no more tincture by Galls, as we find by
experiment.

For I observe that when the minera of Iron is separated by precipitation out
of the Spaw Water, that neither Galls, nor solution of Galls, (either of which
would have done before) will cause any alteration, either of Red, Purple, or
Black Color; which it would certainly do if the Vitriol were there, which
(according to your own words) gives the color. So that of necessity, either
the Vitriol is not in the Water, or what you speak of it, is not true: choose
whether you please (Hydroph.) you are pinch't; and that no Vitriol remains
after the falling down of the minera of Iron, is apparent; because if you then
pour a dissolved lixiviate Salt thereon, instead of precipitating a terra
vitrioli, (which in all solutions of natural Vitriols will happen) you shall
have nothing but a white troubled milkie Liquor: which will in a little time,
let fall the several contained fabulous Concretions, which had been dissolved
before in the Water, and the Esurine together, with the Nitrous Salt, (which
acuated the Water, and made it as a menstruum) will be embraced and complicated
for the most part with the Lixivial Salts, into a kind of Tartarum Vitriolatum:
So that by this it is as plain as the Sun at noon day, that there is an
inconsistency of Vitriol and Iron, as two distinct Ingredients of the Spaw; The
presence of which, as two distinct constitutive principles thereof, was what I
opposed with sufficient grounds, and now farther confirm, which I think may
byas any unprejudiced Reader.

All Authors, (says my Antagonist) whether Chemists or others, account the
Esurine Spirit, or Juice of Vitriol, enough to impregnate a Water with an
acidity, that shall make it corrode other Minerals or Metals by which it
passes; So as we may very well lay aside this Esurine Salt, or primum eus
salium, as wholly precarious.

How now (Hydroph.) do you accuse me of contradictions, (which I hope e're long
I shall take of for the most part) and yet your self guilty of the same, even
within the compass of half a dozen lines? Can the Esurine Spirit, or Juice of
Vitriol, impregnate Water as a menstruum, and yet the same thing, (viz.) the
Esurine Salt (for by Esurine Spirit, Esurine Salt, or primum ens salium, the
same is understood) be wholly precarious? how does this hang together?

I perceive you have imbibed but a very slight touch of Helmont, otherwise you
would have been better impregnated with his Principles, than to have denied the
same thing you had before owned in a very little different expression.

Do not you frequently mention the Esurine Salt, p. 5, 6, 7, 17. (viz.) That by
its Esurine Salt, (speaking of the Spaw) it more freely corrodes the Iron, and
that Vitriol has an Esurine Salt or Spirit in it self? and yet here you say,
It may be laid aside as wholly precarious; this is quidlibet ex quolibet justly
retorted. But why do I trouble my self, these are only sudden flashes of your
gnis fatum, soon in and soon out, apt to lead the timorous and unwary aside.

But pray, if Iron be in this Spaw, as a distinct Ingredient thereof from
Vitriol, What is that which is the menstruum in the Water, to dissolve Iron,
(viz.) to make it appear in the form of a Liquor?

I tell you (says he) what will do it, besides the Alkahest of the Chemist;
Vitriol imbibed at the first, does by its Esurine Salt make the Water
corrosive, and fit to take that or any other Mineral that is in its way: Well,
this is a confirmation of your late Contradiction, yet you hover and endeavor
to gain the Forts you formerly quitted; for first you own an Esurine Salt, p.
5, 6, 7. and then p. 11. you lay it aside as wholly precarious; and here, ( p.
17.) you very fairly take it up again; and p. 96. you say, you have with good
reason exploded Helmonts primumens.

I Will refer you (says my Antagonist) to your grand Master Paraceisus, where
treating of Acid Waters, Harum ortus est (inquit) ex resolutione Metallorum,
antequam ad maturitatem pervenerint: And presently after says, Interdum ex
vitriolo and a lumine hujusmodi aquae promanant.

You are mistaken, (Sir) I pretend not to be a Paracelsian in Physiology, not
much valuing his Theory; your self quote him five times, I may say, I think for
my once; what I esteem him for, was his Medicinal Arcana's; by which he was
enabled to perform great Cures, maugre yours and others malice against him, and
other searchers of Nature. As to that first sentence you urge, if you consult a
little further, you will find he says, Aurum and plumbum dant dulcedinem,
cuprum ferrumque aciditatem: Now as for Gold, that will give no Vitriol; and
for Lead, that requires an Acid Salt, either Vegetable or Mineral to make a
Saccharine Vitriol thereof; and Copper or Iron, with an additional Acreal or
Mineral Acid Salt, gives in a Water Spring an acidity; that is in short, makes
a Vitriol either of Iron or Copper.

But to proceed, There are four ways (says my Antagonist, p. 21.) whereby
Water may imbibe the Nature or Virtue of a Mineral or Metal.

The first is, By receiving its Vapor; thus Water standing some while in a
Brass or Iron Vessel, will taste of the Brass or Iron.

Not to say (Hydroph.) that those four ways of imbibitions you reckon, are
pillaged out of Doctor French his Book of Knarsbrough Spaw, and out of
Falopius, cap. 8. without taking notice of the Authors, is a crime you can
indulge your self and not another.

Falopius tells us in that place, where he speaks of the several commixtures of
Minerals and Metals in Water, Omnes mixtiones pendent a triplici causa,
Scilicet a calors, a mora and ab aptitudine materiae ad Eliquationem. The last
of which insinuates an aptitude of the Solvent, solvable or both. Non solum (he
goes on) telluris species, sed and vapores, and succi, and metalla, in
subterraneis cavernis reperiuntur, etc. Amongst those he calls succi, he
reckons the Mineral Salts; which (as Basilius Valentinus, who was much
conversant amongst Minerals and Metals, says) are the Keys to unlock the
Mineral Kingdom, and that whether naturally in the Bowels of the Earth, or
artificially upon solid Minerals or Metals: and amongst the succs Minerales,
Falopius reckons the succus Calcanthi, which whether ever it fell in his or
some others way that treat cursorily thereof, to anatomize that Mineral, so as
to rightly understand its constitutive Ingredients, may be much scrupled.

But to return to your Vapors, Falopius says, p. 25. That they are all either
maligni or benegni; the malign we will pass, and come to the benign, for those
(if any) I hope, breath upon our Spring; These, he says, are either bituminous
or sulphurous. Ego ( inquit, speaking of the Vapors) non reperi aliud, non
reperiri dico nec scriptum nec experientia, etc. So that although you say he
uses the term above forty times in the sense you speak of, even in one leaf
side, yet do I not find a word in that place, either that Vitriol communicates
it self to Water by a Vapor, or that Iron or Brass will give a Vapor to Water
which stands therein: And yet you say he speaks of Vapors in your sense; if he
do, it is indeed so in your sense, but I know not that it is in any others: And
that I may be very brief, I refer the intelligent Reader to compare what I have
writ hereof in p. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. of my Hydrologia Chymica, with what my
Antagonist afferts in his three Books, for I love not repetitions: I confess he
says, Aqua Calcant hosa cognoscitur gustu and olfactu. But that those
Vitrioline Waters should chiefly (or eminently, as your own words are) partake
of Vitriol by its Vapor; is what I do not find him mention, nor do I
understand. It Is probable indeed that there are Vapors, but those arise from a
fermentation amongst the Mineral Juyces, and are themselves scarce sufficient
to make up any one Mineral Body, so as to become the efficient of any Acid
Water or Spaw.

But to proceed, ( p. 28.) Does not Iron (in effect urges my Antagonist) give
it self by a Vapor to the Water? for the Iron that is imbibed in this Spring,
is not a solid or compact body of Iron, but like an ordinary Earth impregnate
with a concrete Juice of Iron.

To which I answer, That though we suppose Iron in those mineral solutions, to
be in its juice or succulent parts; yet do not you explain an agent capable of
making this Iron spend it self in Vapors? and since these Vapors must either
be corporeal or incorporeal; the last, I hope, you will not grant; if therefore
they be corporeal, then these Vapors must of necessity have the essential
parts of Iron in them, (viz.) the Mercury and the Sulphur proper thereto: If
so, then what difference is there betwixt these Vapors, or minute parts of
Iron congregated, and the body of Iron it self? for seeing it is (as I further
enlarge in my Hydrolog. Chym.) the union of the Mercury and Sulphur in various
degrees, according to the model of the Metalline Seeds, which gives the
essence, yea and distinction of Metals amongst themselves. Therefore that which
must be the agent or efficient to make a Metal ( viz. that has Metalline
Principles, though not thoroughly maturated) to vapor, must be amongst Fire or
Ferments, Salts or Solvents: For in Nature (as far as I can apprehend) there
are found no other material Agents than what are comprised in those four.

Now it would have very much established your Hypothesis of Iron, communicating
it self to the Spaw by a Vapor; if you had assigned the Agent, by which the
Metalline Body should spend it self in a Vapor.

Well, (quoth my Antagonist, p. 29.) consult Kircher, and he will tell you that
Iron yields a Vapor to the purpose, Observantur ( inquit, Lib. 10. Cap. 10. p.
219.) in fornacibus, etc. To wit, In the Iron works, where it is melted,
Vapors arise out of the Iron which turn into a downiness, which cleaves to the
Walls and Roofs of the House: He also says, That of all Metals, Iron sends out
the most foetid smell.

Here is indeed an Agent (Hydroph.) with a witness, (viz.) The fire of a Forge,
which must needs make Iron, as well as all other imperfect Metals, take Wing,
and make the next adjacent places their Receivers; the same does Lead, witness
Potters Houses, where they calcine their Lead to Powder, by frequent agitation
upon the fire, where the flowers of Lead are seen to hang round the Roof; so
Tin, yea Copper will do the same, witness the flos aris in the melting Forges,
etc.

But what Aequipolleut Fire will you suppose to be near the Scarbrough Spaw;
Perhaps you may think Vulcau's Forge is near hand, and that the Vapors of
calcined Iron are driven into this Spring, and so are somewhat akin to the late
Eruptions of Mount Aetna: I confess indeed that Iron and Copper, etc. will not
only contract an Aerugo by an Acid Salt or Spirit, which floats in the Air, and
so waste themselves away in Vitriols, but also are subject to the same fate of
all other mixed Bodies, (viz.) to suffer some parts constantly (though
insensibly) to wind off, and so wear away in a tabidness incident to all
Elementary Bodies; while some parts, by other active Principles, are wheeled
off, and by different Seeds are determined into (and wound on) other bodies;
and so in a round, in the Metastasis of bodies, from one form into another,
through the whole Fabric of the Creation, and that in a perpetual vicissitude;
and unless you will take this constant unhinging the particles of Concretes to
be Vapors, I know not how you can possibly make good your assertion of the
Vapors of Iron communicable to the Spaw.

Do not Metals (says my Antagonist) yield an Apporrhea while they are firm?
Have you never seen a wise man (for you have lost your smell) put a counterfeit
Coin to his nose, and aver that it smelt of Copper? The like may be said of
Iron and Brass, and yet you say the compact body of Iron will not impart a
Vapor to a Liquor; wherein the Apothecaries Boys will laugh at you, when we
prescribe Chalybeate Drinks, which is ordinary to Hypochondriack Maladies; the
Liquors receive a Vapor from the Iron, and yet the compact body of Iron still
remains.

Metals do indeed yield an Apporrhea in that ^ence I have lately discoursed on,
(viz.) by a continual winding of, or wearing away of the parts of the Bodies,
some sooner, some later, and that by the efficiency of active principles
always in motion, and so all bodies are subject thereto, more or less, and so
you may as well say Gold, Marble, etc. have Vapors; seeing these also escape
not in some measure the general mutability of mixed bodies; besides there are
many Concretes which have no smell, and consequently no Vapor, (according to
the acceptance of the word) and yet are subject to the common vicissitude of
Bodies.

As to the discovering of counterfeit Coin by smelling at ones Nose; in the
alleging of which, I perceive you were not very cautious, for Copper is a
Metal that does easily contract an Aerugo, or flos aeris, by the acid menstrual
Salt in the Air, (which whether the Solution thereof be facilitated by the
Conuate Esurine Salt, (peculiarly natural to Copper or Iron, as Dr. French
would affirm, is not much necessary now to determine) and so what taste or
smell it has in coined pieces, or otherwise, is to be ascribed to its Vitriol,
and not to the body of Copper: We see where ever Copper or Brass is, whether
aloyd with other Metals, (so as it out-proportions the united Metal) or alone,
is very apt (unless constantly kept dressed and clean) to gather greenish Rust,
which is nothing else but a Vitriol thereof, and this (and not the Metal
singly) is that which both gives the taste and smell, both to Liquors that
stand long, or are boiled in such Vessels, or to coined pieces: And therefore
Paracelsus, and others, together with your self, not well weighing this
considerable circumstance, might easily be deceived, and suppose the bodies of
those two Metals, (when it was nothing but the Vitriols thereof) to give that
taste and smell which is sometimes found; and therefore the instance (my
Antagonist) then brings to confirm that emission of Vapors from Copper, ( p.
25.) by putting Carps into a Copper Brewing-Vessel, with fresh Water, to be
preserved for one night, were all found dead in the morning, is, I say,
invalid; and that first, because the Copper Vessel (for ought you know) had not
been used lately before, and perhaps was not carefully cleans'd, and thereby
might (as we have showed before) easily gather a greenish rustiness or Vitriol,
which by the pouring Water therein, might easily dissolve, and as readily kill
the Carps, as if so much other natural or artificial Vitriol had been put
therein; next to which, the change of the Water, which might very likely have a
touch of some Salt (that, many times is not easily discoverable) might prove
altogether disagreeable to the Fish. Whether way we take it, you see there is
no need to ascribe it, or justly think it ascribable to the Vapors of the
Copper: Which suppose we should grant, how absurd and incongruous to our health
would it be, to sup our Broth, eat our Meat, and drink our Drink, so constantly
made ready by those vessels, whose steams were able to kill Fish? Would it be
at all safe to prepare our ordinary Food in such Vessels as have such poisonous
Vapors?

Yea, and that I might confirm what I say by matter of fact, I procured seven
or eight small Fish taken in a Net in Colder, which I ordered to be carried to
my House in some of the Water they were taten in, which with more of the same
Water I put into a bright clean scoured brass brewing Pan, which ^ caused to be
set into the open Air, (for probably ^^ant of fresh Air might amongst other
things, not a little contribute to the destruction of the Fish) and found them
not only to be alive the morning following, but to be as lively and brisk in
their motions, as when newly put in; where for trial sake, I kept them another
night, and found them the morning after, in a manner as brisk and active as at
the first.

And whereas, I say, that all compact Metalline Bodies must have proper and
peculiar Menstruums to unlock them, if any Medicinal Arcanum be thence
expected. My Antagonist answers, p. 25. Why! I can assure him upon trial, that
the filings of Steel (suppose a pound) set to infuse in a quart o^ clear Spring
Water for a few days, the Water upon evaporation afforded a clear Salt of
greenish color.

To which I return, That it is my Antagonists hap to be very unfortunate in the
proposal of his Experiments, and therefore should not be one entrusted to make
those Experiments from whence a well-grounded Hypothesis of natural Philosophy
should be deduced; for he is unwary, in the due poysing of those concomitant
circumstances which make Experiments critical, and from whose management
depends the successfulness, or the contrary, of most Experiments. For had he
rightly considered that all or most Spring Waters we meet with, have a slight
touch of some one or other Mineral Salt o^ Earth, which is that which gives the
difference o^ tastes Spring Waters have one from another, (distinguishable by
curious Palates accustomed to drink Water) he would not have made use of that
as h^^ Menstruum, for the trial of extracting a Vitriolic Salt out of Iron.

I did indeed try the like Experiment with Spring Water which we have by us,
poured upon clean filings of Steel, (for that is another circumstance which
unheeded may also make his Experiment, as ^o what is intended, thereby
miscarry) which being decanted (after it had stood some days) and evaporated,
gave (as my Antagonist says) a greenish colored Salt: which had I not been
further inquisitive in weighing the circumstances better, I had concluded, with
my Antagonist, that it had been a salt from the Iron: but I considered whether
or no indeed this Spring Water might not contain in its self this sort of Salt,
which upon trial (by evaporating it away alone in a Jar Glass) I found that it
^est the very same sort of Salt, and as near as could ^e esteemed, the like
quantity with that left after the ^^fusion of the Water upon the Iron.

Therefore, for further satisfaction, I poured some distilled Water upon
filings of Steel; which being bured off, after several days infusion, found no
^^ch Salt at all left behind, nothing being left in ^e bottom that had any
Salt: by which I have early demonstrated how easily (for want of due
circumspection in circumstances essential to things to (...) tried by matter of
fact) my Antagonist can impose upon himself and others by fallacious
Experiments.

And as to what you say, that the Apothecaries ^^yes would laugh at me for
denying Iron (as a impact body) to impart a vapor to a Liquor; I ^^ght tell
you, that if I could spare so much vacant ^^e, I could both laugh at you and
them; at you ^^^t, and chiefly for your ignorance of the very nature of the
Metals you treat of, supposing Chalybeat ^^inks (frequently ordered for
Hypochondriack Maladies) to be made after such a manner as wherein the Iron
gives it self by a Vapor to the Liquor, not Understanding (at least not
recollecting) that to make Chalvbeat Waters, they most frequently (if no^
always) add some Saline or Acid Spirit, to make the Iron capable of being
dissolved in part in the affus'd Liquor, and that either by taking the Crocus,
or other preparation of Iron, wherewith to satiate their Liquors, which become
so much dissoluble as to give them the name of Chalybeat Waters or Liquors.

For in all Chalybeat Extractions, you should not (Hydroph.) be ignorant that
there is require either that the Iron be reduced into a Crocus, which is done
either by Calcination, (and that either p^se, or with Sulphur) or by Acid
Spirits, such a distilled Vinegar, Spirit of Salt, Niter, Sulphur, and or else
that the Menstruum to be affus'd, have son innate acidity.

I would gladly know (Hydroph.) whether yet ever order your merry Apothecaries
Boys to ma^^ you any Chalybeat Liquors, by barely pouring supple distilled
Water upon fresh filings of Steel, a^ whether they or your Patients do ever
discern a^ taste or smell of Iron from such Waters? Does no I pray, the main
reason of Chalybeat Extraction depend upon the reduction of Iron into a Cro^^
or the acuation or Menstruums by Saline Spirits, (...) either of which there
happens a solution of some the body of Iron into the Chalybeat Liquors, which
give them a sapor not a vapor? It Is true, if you ^^ rusty silings of Iron,
Water upon its affusion ^^ thereby have an Iron taste; but this is by reason an
acid Salt in the Air which has fretted the (...) and t^^ned it into a Crocus
of Iron, and the^ makes it yield a solution of some of its parts.

And now (Hydroph.) by this time, I think you and your Apothecaries Boys have
done laughing, and may take time to turn your Vapors into Tears, and spend
them at your leisure.

Does not Falopius, p. 29, 34. (who had great experience in Mineral and
Metalline Waters) say, Arbitror non reperiri aquam ferream; for certainly if
Iron would give it self immediately to Water, then should we find frequently
those aquae ferreae, in places where Waters run through the minera thereof: but
no such by experience are found, therefore our Argument will be strongly
enforced, a majore ad minorem, (viz.) that if in the minera, where the parts
are more loose, it will not yield its Vapor or Tincture to Water, much less
will the compact Body thereof, (which has undergone the violence of the
melting Forge) do any such thing.

And whereas you cavel at my Philosophical Description of Ink made forth by
Colateral Experiments of the Spaw, if you could have carpt at any thing
therein, no question but you would; or if you had given a better, then you had
done like an Artist, and so might have passed it over with a joke: for though
the Subjects sometimes we treat of be but common obvious things, yet they
require a searching diligence and deep diving, Philosophically to solve the
abstrusities of the nice Compositions and Commixtures of Bodies, to make their
Phaenomaena obvious.

I pray, (says my Antagonist, p. 35, 36.) Are Iron and Vitriol all one? I
think they do as really differ as your Knife and your Ink. Do not all Authors,
as well Chemical as others, that treat of them, do it severally? And does not
Paracelsus say, Natura genorat salem vitriolum dictum, etc. Do not Gallen,
Mathiolus, Sennertus, Pliny, Renedeus, speak to the same purpose?

To which I answer, That Iron and Vitriol may indeed be two distinct things,
but then the Vitriol must be such as is made out of some other Metal o^
Mineral: but if you query concerning natural acid Salt and Iron, as coexistent
in the same Concrete, the^ I say they are both one, (viz.) they both together
make up that Concrete we call Vitriol; from which if you separate the Iron,
what remains falls short o^ being a Vitriol, and becomes only a Salt, which i^
more simple than Vitriol, as being indeed but one Ingredient thereof. And out
of such a Vitriol o^ Iron, if you be a good Metallurgist, and skilful
Mechanic, you may make as good a Blade as you have a Haft; for, as to what you
urge, how that those Authors speak in confirmation of your supposition, I am
not much sollicitous, especially if what they write come in competition with
truth, as i^ results from matter of fact; besides some of these Authors, (as
they have occasion) treat severally o^ these Concrets as different Subjects,
and not as they bear any relation to each other in Mineral Solutions and
Concretions, and so indeed they are different, and may be discoursed of as
differently.

And as to what you repeat out of Paracelsus, (...) am not concerned, seeing he
does not confirm it by matter of fact, nor by any evident demonstration I find
Paracelsus very incautious in his assertions and as for true Physiology not
much to be regarded; besides, what he there says does diametrically oppose
what may be made evident by Experiment; for he calls that a Salt, which after
separation of other Ingredients, is yet reducible into a more simple Salt,
witness the Salt of Vitriols which is separable out of any natural Vitriol,
after the separation of the Mineral or Metalline parts.

Yea, I will tell you, (Hydroph.) that if you can produce out of any of the
aforesaid Authors, so much experiment as to make evident, by matter of fact,
what you would prove; yea, if you can show me from any ingenious Chemical
Artist (to whom you must be beholden, if ever it be done) such a Vitriol either
extracted from this Spaw or elsewhere, that is such a simple Salt as from which
I cannot separate a Mineral or Metalline Body; or if you can separate a Vitriol
out of the Spaw, after the precipitation of the minera of Iron, The Game I
assure you shall be upon your side.

For where you instance what I say p. 47. of my Hydrol. Chym. in p. 105. of
your Mamick, (viz.) that I arguing against Vitriol, as being inconsistent with
that of Iron in the Spaw; the reason you blushed not to urge, why though Vitriol
be in the Water, yet it should not vomit, was that we used it (said you) in
Juleps and Cordials, which does not cause Vomiting; which you confirm and say,
That the main part of the Vitriol in this Water is the Spirit; which is as
much, yea far more diluted with the Water wherein it is, than the force of the
Vitriol is corrected by the vehement heat of the fire in the distilling of the
Spirit thereof.

Now to come to the point, (Hydroph.) if it were certainly true what you say,
that the main part of the Vitriol in the Water is the Spirit, then it would
without controversy demonstrate it self by distillation: For seeing, according
to your own supposition, the Vitriol is in Spirits in the Water, and these
Spirits are also very subtle, volatile, and penetrative; therefore of
necessity, upon distillation of these Waters fresh from the Spring, these
Spirits should arise first; but that they do not, I can assure you, by matter
of Experiment; for I distilled some fresh Water from the Fountain in a Glass
Retort, at Scarbrough, whose joints was exactly closed up; I saved the first
half ounce, yea and in another distillation of fresh Water, the first quarter
of an ounce of Water which came over, (supposing that if any volatile,
vitrioline Spirits would come, it would be at the very first) whose taste or
smell did not (I affirm) at all resemble the Spirits of Vitriol, which
according to your Hypothesis they should have done.

But suppose that what had come off at the first, had been of the nature of
vitrioline Spirits, and had, by the sharpness of their taste, and
sulphureousness of their odor, demonstrated themselves to have been such,
(which yet I assure you happened to the contrary) yet would it not thence have
followed that these had been Vitriol, as you assert, for it is (if I mistake
not) beyond the bounds of Art and Nature, to make Vitriol out of these Spirits
alone; these Spirits indeed may (as I have sometimes seen) be coagulated into a
solid dry Salt; but yet is this Salt as far removed from the Essence of
Vitriol, as it was, while liquid, and in the form of Spirits; Now that Vitriol
should yield it self by Spirits, and these Spirits impregnate the Spaw, and yet
upon the test to be found to be no such things, argues a fiction from the
beginning to the end.

But if you further urge and say, (as I find you do, p. 104.) that these
Spirits are so penetrative, as that they can even pass through the Glass and
Lute; then you must erect a new Classis of Spirits, such as never yet have been
found in rerum natura: For we find that the volatile and most subtle Spirits of
Hartshorn, Urine, Blood; yea, and of Sal Armoniack (then which nothing is more
penetrative) may be catched in Receivers; (yea, even in such as I used for the
taking these supposed Spirits of Vitriol) and may be kept a considerable time
in Vials, close stopped, even for a year or more, as I have done, without any
great loss of their volatile parts.

These Spirits, I say, may be received and kept, and yet are the most
penetrative of all sorts of Spirits we meet with in Nature, save the flatus
incoercibilis, or spiritus sylvestris, which is the common sequel of
Fermentations; whether of Minerals, whence proceeds the incoercibleness of the
pulvis pyrius, aurum fulminans, etc. Yea, and whence all sulphurous arsenical
and malignant damps, or whether of Vegetables, witness the flatus from the
fermentation of all potable Liquors, etc. Or lastly, of Animals, from the
spurious fermentation of whose Juyces, proceed a flatus incoercibilis, the very
efficient and agent in Paralytick, Apoplectick, Epileptick, Asthmatick,
Hysteric, and other Diseases, as you may further see in our Hydrologia Chymica.

As to what you say, that Dr. Heers in his Spadacrene says, That the German
Spaws consist of Iron, Vitriol, and Ochre, thereby making Iron and Vitriol
distinct: if you consult what I say thereof in p. 138, 139. of my Hydrol. Chym.
you may find a sufficient resolve thereof, which I shall not now repeat.

Fallopius (says my Antagunist) treating of the Spaw in Germany, and that at
Rome, says, Arbitror eas (...) quia habeant calcanthum purissimum.

I grant indeed that all Acid Waters are chiefly from Vitriol; but then that
Vitriol must have annexed to it the mineral compage of Iron or Copper, or what
third you please, yea, and is not factitious neither, but natural; for
Scroderus (which Author you also quote) faith plainly, Varia sunt genera
Vitrioli, pro natura minerae quam in se continent differentia, (as you may see,
p. 4. 14. of his Pharmach.) But that Scarbrough Spaw Water is as a Vitrioline
Acidity, is petitio principii, as I shall afterward make more evident.

Another token of Vitriol, (says he) is that Apporrhea Mineralis, or
Vitrioline Vapor, which any of an indifferent smell may observe, which is
somewhat like that of Ink, though more pure.

Indeed (Hydroph.) when I was last at the Spaw, I tried several times if I
could any way be sensible of that Vapor; but neither I, nor two Physicians
more that were by, could at all perceive it: but perhaps we had by consent got
cold, and were obstructed in our Nostrils, so as we could not as well perceive
that apporrhea as Hydroph. Nor do I discover any thing of Vitriol, either as to
the Juice thereof, or apporrhea; which afterward I shall make good by ocular
demonstration.

But looking back (Hydroph.) to p. 13. of your Mimick, I epsy you impeaching
me of a contradiction, in that I asserted, that an aluminous Salt, from a
mineral acidity, had dissolved a slight touch of the mineral of Iron, etc. Are
not here (says Hydroph.) two Minerals made, (viz.) Iron and Alom by his own
confession? To which, I answer, that it is granted. Nay further (says
Hydroph.) I Will see if I cannot find two more, look ( p. 359.) and there he
says, upon a further trial of the Spaw Water, he found a body of Vitriol,
which he calls Terra Vitrioli; then turn over leaf to ( p. 360.) and he tells
you he found Nitre.

To which I return, That as to that which I call terra vitrioli, I understand
no other then that Crocus Martis, or ramenta ferrea, or terra rubrica, or
minera ferri; all which are synonymous, signifying the same thing, (viz.) the
mineral or metalline Ingredient dissolved by the Esurine sulphurous Spirit in
Vitrioline Spaws, or by the nitro aluminous Salt, in nitro aluminous Spaws,
such as Scarbrough Spaw. So as you are mistaken (Hydroph.) to think that I
intend by terra vitrioli, any other Ingredient then the minera ferri; wherefore
all rightly weighed, you find me but to number up (besides the several fabulous
Concretions) three mineral Ingredients of that Spaw (viz.) Alom, Nitre, and the
ramenta ferrea; and those are demonstrably apparent, as elsewhere I may take
time further to enlarge upon.

But now (Hydroph.) that I may not be long in your debt, but may retaliate in
specie, I find, as I pass along, that you say, ( p. 7.) The Iron is not here
(speaking of the Spaw) a perfect solid Metal, but in solutis principiis. And (
p. 44.) you say, That Iron is here in its body, which being calcined, yields a
scoria like Iron: And yet you say, ( p. 80.) That the Salt got out of Iron by
burning it with a Candle, infusing it in Water or Wine, this is the Ingredient
in our Water.

How will these hang together (Hydroph.) that Iron in the Spaw should not be a
solid Metal, and yet should be here in its body, yea and not in his body? for
you say, The Salt got out of the Iron, (while the Astringent Crocus remains) is
that which opens Obstructions, page 7. page 44. page 80.
and is the Ingredient of our Water; so that it is this Salt, (it seems,
according to those last words) and not the body of the Iron, which is the
Ingredient of the Spaw; which how contradictory they be, let the impartial
Reader judge.

Also, you say, in the calcination of the Minerals of the Spaw, page 67.
That though they calcine whitish, yet there are (here and there) Laminae
ferreae, or flakes of Iron interspersed, broad and thin like those that fly off
from Iron while under the Smith's Hammer; and yet you query, ( p. 65.) Why we
should expect that the Minerals should calcine in Scorias and Crocos, since we
had not here to do with perfect Metals or Minerals dissolved in Water? for you
acknowledge that there are Laminae ferreae, which you expressly ( p. 67.) call
the scoria of Iron; and yet you ask, why we should expect these Metals or
Minerals should calcine in Scorias and Crocos?

Again ( p. 65.) you instance Snelfer, (viz.) That the firm Metals being
calcined with violent fire, (among which he reckons Iron) will not calcine into
a Powder, out of which Salt may be extracted. But in scorias and Crocos
convertuntur neutiquam in cineres quibus verum Sal eliciend. Thus far you have
from Snelfer; here you stay not, but you borrow another Weapons, and forthwith
become liable to have them turned upon your self; for presently you pass into
terms expressly contradictory to what you bring him in to vindicate. Your words
run thus, Now if so (quoth Hydroph.) why then should these men expect that
these Minerals should calcine in scorias and Crocos. And ( p. 67.) speaking of
Iron precipitated, This (say you) I calcined in a Crucible, in a very strong
sire, and it became of a dark brown color, and turns to a gross Powder hard as
a Cinder, and is no other than the Scoria of Iron: After calcination, I
dissolved and evaporated it, it afforded a brownish floscule, very sharp and
biting upon the tongue.

Now (Hydroph.) pray you observe the plainness of the contradiction; for first
you produce Snelfer, urging that Iron will not calcine into a Powder, out of
which Salt may be extracted; and yet you say, you calcined the precipitated
Iron of the Spaw with a strong fire, and it turned to a gross Powder as hard as
a Cinder; out of which, by solution and evaporation, you can get a brownish
floscule, very sharp and biting; which you confess to be a Salt, first by
saying, p. 67. that the Water where the solution is made, is brackish; next to
which you expressly call it a Salt, saying, The Liquor will have a strong taste
from the Salt, which opens Obstructions, and is the Ingredient in our Water: So
that being incautious of what you lately urged out of this Author, and being
byas'd by colateral experiments, you presently even unwarily fall foul upon the
very Author you even now quoted, by contradicting those very words you exposed
for the vindicating your own assertions. And whereas you urge the same Authors
words, (viz.) Sed in Scorias and Crocos convertuntur; if you proceed you will
find him to continue on with these words, Qui Croci tamen nil nisi Scoriae
sunt, in minutissimas atomos conversae, and veluti in terram mortuam insipidam,
e quibus Sal aqua affusa elici nequeat: For the scope of this Author in that
place is to answer these three considerable Queries.

The first, Whether any Metal may be truly calcined and brought into real
Ashes, from which a Salt map be extracted? which in his Discourse he determines
in the Negative.

Secondly, Whether an extraction of the same Sugar or Salt of Lead, ( and
consequently of Vitriol, etc.) be a true extraction, or only a solution? the
latter of which he affirms demonstrably.

The third and last, Whether this or any other Salt or solution may be
edulcorated by solution, filtration, and evaporation? which he denies evidently.

Now as to the first, He denies that any Metal may by force of fire be reduced
in Scorias and Crocos, vel Cineres, from whence any Salt may be extracted; and
yet you say, ( Hydroph. p. 79.) That the deopilative property of Iron lies in a
Volatile Salt, with which it abounds; which you say you can extract, and is the
Ingredient in the Water; so that it seems it is the Volatile Salt of Iron, and
not the body of Iron is the Ingredient of the Spaw. Surely (Hydroph.) if there
were a Salt in Iron, yea, and that Salt volatile too, (as your own words
express) why should not it have taken wing by force of fire at the melting
Forge, where the Iron is melted and separated from its drossie earth; by which
I conclude you were more taken with the nearness and novelty of the word
Volatile Salt, then with the truth of what should be intimated thereby; but
your Tyrociny in these abstruse studies plead your excuse; yea, the rawness, or
rather lightness of your experiment, ( p. 80.) does upon that account call for
some more grains of allowance, where you say, That if filings of Iron and Steel
be cast into a flame of a Candle, that they burn like Saltpeter or Rosin,
which you suppose to happen from thevolatile Salt, as if that gave the
flamability; whereas amongst the whole Classis of simple volatile Salts, there
are none found to be flamable; simple, I said, because in the complication of
these, with other volatile Spirits, somewhat sulphurous may arise, as that of
the Offa made with other volatile Spirits of Urine, etc. with Spirit of Wine;
for it is the essential property of sulphurous Spirits or Bodies to take flame
and burn, but not of volatile Salts; and that it is so, appears further, in
that we have sometime extracted out of Iron, Aqua Fortis, or Spirit of Vitriol,
a combustable Sulphur.

But to pass to your third Argument, Why Vitriol (as you say) must be in the
Spaw, and that is by reason of the deep tincture that the Water takes from the
Gall, more then any other you have seen or read of, which cannot (you say) come
from the Alom.

To which I answer, That if we can demonstrate by matter of fact that Alom will
give this tincture, and that whether calcined or crude, then must this your
great Argument fall; but both my self, and my ingenious Friend, have
demonstrated before you and the Gentlemen at the Spaw, at several times, that
both will readily give a Purple tincture (being dissolved in fresh Water) with
the addition of Gall; yea, and will both undergo the same mutations of color
with that of the Spaw, by the addition of the like Spirits and Liquors; as I
have in my Book already, and I may afterward take occasion further to
illustrate.

Your last Argument is assumed from a vitrioline Salt which (you say) sweats
out of the Cliff, of a dark yellow color, very sharp to the taste, even far
beyond Nitre or Alom. My answer is, That you have no ground to suspect that
dark yellow colored Salt to be Vitriol, seeing there are no vitrioline
Marcasities to be found all along that Cliff, where that Earth or Salt is
found; for I have with much diligence searched the Bank, but could find no
vitrioline Stones at all: And seeing (as you may further see in our Hydrol.
Chym.) that all Salts reside in their own proper and peculiar mineral Beds,
Urpote in toris suis mineralibus; Therefore where Vitriol Stones are found,
Vitriol is made: And where the Alom Glebe is found, Alom is made. Now where
both Minerals are found, there is both Vitriol and Alom; as I have sometimes
seen in a parcel of common Vitriol, where the natural Alom has also been
intermixed, being shot forth in white Chrystals amongst the green Cubick
Chrystals of the Vitriol. So that Vitriol is never made out of the Alom Stone,
nor Alom out of the Vitriol Marcasite, but each are got distinctly out of their
own Mineral Glebes; otherwise the Vitriol and Alom workers would be grossly
mistaken, (viz.) if the Alom-worker should out of Alom Stones make Vitriol, and
the Vitriol-worker out of Vitriol Stones should make Alom. Besides, a solution
of this yellow Earth or Salt will by Filtration and Evaporation, perfectly
become a mineral aluminous Salt, as you may see in my Hydrol. Chym. which
yellow Salt will also undergo all the mutations of colors equally with the
Spaw.

As to what you say, ( Hydroph. p. 45.) That the Cliff out of which this Spring
flow, 's plainly Iron, is surely a very gross mistake; for all along that
Bank, yea even over the head of the Spring it self, is most-what Alom Stone, as
is obvious to all that see it; and as to what you say, that though at first
when it falls, it be like ordinary Earth, yet at length by the weather it
becomes hard as Iron, and heavy, and is fusible in the fire: I must tell you,
that what is fallen down, and you denote to be Iron Stone, is not one of the
hundredth, nay (I may say) scarce one of the five hundredth part, either Iron or
Iron Stone, for we had much ado amongst it all to procure a few pieces even of
that Stone which may (at the best) be suspected to be Iron Stone; for indeed
those heaps are most what nothing else but a farraginous mixture of many sorts
of Stones, Sand, Earth, etc. fallen off from the Bank, and crusted together
with the beating of the Sea, and so hardened by the Salt of the Sea and Weather,
into confused heaps. Thus far reaches your first way or manner of Waters being
impregnated with Minerals (viz.) by taking in their Vapors.

The second is, when some of their Juice is dissolved in the Water, and that
whilst the Minerals are in solutis principiis; to which as before, so now we
assent.

But as to the third way, Corrosion of the substance of Minerals, page 46.
(viz.) By corrosion of the substances of the Minerals, and that by the help of
the Concrete Juyces, which extract and corrode Mineral Substances; to confirm
which (Hydroph.) you tell us that the Concrete Juice of Vitriol, which is of a
corrosive property, being imbibed in a Spring Water, will corrode other
Minerals or Metals, (so says Helmont in the place before cited) that it
passes through as Iron and Alom.

In answer to which, I shall refer the judicious Reader, to what I object
against this (in p. 12, 13. of my Hydrol. Chym.) where supposing (in favor to
his Doctrine) a Juice of Vitriol to be in the Water; yet how improper a
Menstruum would it be for extracting or corroding Mineral Substances, seeing
that the Esurine or Sulphurous Salt or Spirit had already coagulated it self
upon a mineral or metalline body, thereby to make up a Vitriol, which we have
showed before, must necessarily have those essential principles to concur to
this constitution: So that if the Esurine Spirit in Vitriol must become a
menstruum to extract or corrode any other Minerals, it must first deposite that
body it has already dissolved: And therefore we see that if a strong solution
of Vitriol be boiled a long time in an Iron Pot, (which according to your
opinion, (Hydroph.) must needs make a considerable corrosion thereof) that no
more of the Iron Vessel is dissolved, then is precipitated of the innate
cuprous body inherent in the Vitriol, which we find tingeth the superficies
thereof. Nay, if I affirm to you, (I shall not say more then I can prove) That
Vitriol, whether in fieri, or in facto esse, cannot become a menstruum for
mineral bodies, nor menstrual apperients for the humane body, till it lay aside
its first dissoluable, whether it be Copper, Iron, etc. As to mineral bodies,
it is evident, that after the esurine or sulphurous acid Spirit has once
preyed upon, and coagulated it self upon any mineral or metalline body, it
cease to act upon any other, till it be loosened from the first, and then
it is at liberty to be married to another, otherwise bodies would be solvents
for bodies; whereas it is that Salts are the proper menstruums and apperients
for bodies; and as to humane bodies, we see that if those usually prepared
Salts of Vitriol, or vitriolum album, be taken inwardly, act not suddenly as
apperients; because having in them a colcotarine body, makes them hostile to
the ferment of the stomach, which presently throws them up again by Vomis,
which indeed is the main reason why Vitrioline Vomits are the most sudden in
their operation; for if they should stay so long (as sometimes they do) in the
stomach and intestines, till the metalline or mineral body be by the diluting
moisture precipitated, then they cease to act as Emeticks, and only in part
pass away by Stool; while the Salt which was the menstruum in those sorts of
Salts called Gilla Theophrasti, or Vitriolum Album, becomes set at liberty, and
proves an apperient of (otherwise) obstinate Obstructions; and that these Salts
of Vitriol so called, as also the white Vitriol, have in them a metalline body,
is apparent, by calcining even these Salts: yea, the Vitriolum Album, though
exquisitely depurated by frequent Solution, Filtration and Distillation, or
Evaporation, (as I have often done) will with no very strong fire calcine red;
from whence by solution, etc. more of a mineral body may by art be separated.

Thus far you see (Hydroph.) that though we should grant a Vitrioline Juice to
be an Ingredient of the Spaw, yet can it not be a competent menstruum to
corrode or extract other mineral bodies, and that for Reasons before alleged;
yea, and that notwithstanding what you quote out of Helmont's fourth Paradox,
where he says, That that which is volatile (viz.) a Spirit, whether it be
concrete or liquid, may corrode other mineral bodies. Pray take in the whole
Sentence, and it runs thus, Corpora non corrodunt corpora; quatenus talia neque
fixa in invicem agunt: sed duntaxat quatenus alterum little velatile est, id est
spiritus, sive is concret^^ est sive liquidus: Here you must know that he is
treating of the Esurine Salt; where indeed if you had duly weighed what he
says a few lines before, you might have had light enough to have led you out of
your former Errors; which an ingenuous Spirit would own, though it was to the
casting down his former wrong apprehension of things; for it is the truth of the
matter (we contend about) that we should aim at, and not our prejudicated
Opinions.

He tells you that the natural Vitriol of Iron, is made by an Esurine Salt of
an embryonative Sulphur corroding a Vein of Iron; in which act of Corrosion
there happens a kind of solution of the Vein, and a coagulation or fixation of
the Volatile Salt: Which Salt, says he, as long as it is Volatile, may be
reckoned amongst Spirits: This Spirit (and not bodies one upon another) is this
agent (and that whether it be concrete or liquid) that may dissolve bodies.
Here (Hydroph.) take notice, that he does not mean, nor say, that either
Vitriol or the Juice of Vitriol is this Spirit which corrodes bodies, but it is
the Esurine Salt, whether concrete or liquid, (viz.) whether in the form of a
Salt or Liquor, which proves the menstruum in mineral solutions. So that it is
plain that either you understand not this Author, (quoting him, because a
Chemist, right or wrong) or else you designedly wrest his words from his own,
to speak your sense. And now how truly you say, that you have with good reason
exploded, and sufficiently confuted, what I say concerning this Esurine Salt,
page 48.
(viz.) that it cannot imbibe, or work upon any other Mineral then one, let the
judicious Reader (upon scanning both) determine.

As to the fourth and last way, how the nature and virtue of Minerals and
Metals do impregnate Waters, which is by confusion; I might justly reject it as
not worthy further scanning, but that I find you bringing in an instance, how
you understand your mixture by confusion, (a term I confess big enough to
cause a jangle) and that is, that a Mineral that is dissoluable in Water, as
Vitriol, Nitre, or Salt, may be so fully taken into the Water, as that the
Water and Mineral are confusedly joined together; every drop of the Water
having something of Mineral Particles, and every particle of them mixed with
the Water.

To which I answer, (Hydroph.) that if so you expound your mixture by
confusion, as when Vitriol and Salts, as Nitre, Sal marine, etc. are dissolved
in Water, I pray you then what mean you by regular or uniform mixtures of
bodies? how differs this from the mixture of Juyces of Minerals, and amongst
them, of the Juice of Vitriol (according to your own judgment) in Water? either
this confused mixture is the same with that of the Juice (as you speak) of
Minerals, or not? if the same, then it is confusion without jesting, a
multiplication of Entities (at least the Entia rationis) without cause: if it
be not the same, then you should have done well to have shown us the
difference, and so put the matter beyond dispute; as you lay it down, I see no
ground of distinction at all: for you say, Every drop of the Water, has
something of the Mineral Particles, and every Particle of them is mixed with
the Water; that is in short, they are mixed per minima: How these should be
confused, and yet different from the mixture of the succulent parts of Minerals
in Water, is (I confess) beyond my understanding in Philosophy. If you had
(Hydroph.) brought the matter to a compute, and given the proportions between
bodies and their menstruums in other kinds of your supposed mixtures, then your
notions had not been so confused but we might have distinguished them. But by
the by, I would a little take notice of that instance you bring out o^ Galen,
treating of the four Elements meeting i^ every mixed body, Ea tota per se
confundi, and su^ eorum substantiis misceri docet; by which it should seem as
if the four Elements, in their combination to make up the composition of
bodies, were only confounded, and hand over head jumbled together^ me thinks
no regular or uniform mixtures should hence arise in the beauteous and
wonderful compag^ of the World; but all would yet remain unhatch^ out of the
first confused Chaos or primitive Hyle^ and instead of an uniform mixture of
the constiuent part in the Genesis of mixed bodies, guided by Spermatick
Principles, according to the Mandate o^ the Primitive Fiat; all mixed bodies
would either appear so confused in their constitutive parts, as w^ could not
difference them one from another, or else they would be no otherwise
intelligible to us, tha^ so many blanks upon which confusion was writ. By this
time, without doubt, the Reader may discover the dimness (not to say
confusedness) o^ Galen, page 53.
and this his Sectators Intellectua^ in this point of Philosophy.

Now come we at length to view you Artilery, My main Fort yet standing.
and your Cannons, whereby you intend to batter down my main For (yet standing)
to the ground. My ch^^ Argument therefore, which I urge against the en^ stency
of Vitriol in the Spaw, and at which you level your battering force, is no less
then what is confirmed by Autopsy; and that is, that my ingenious Friend, the
Chemical Apothecary at York, took some of the mineral Ingredients of the Spaw,
which remained after the evaporation of the Water, which he had from your self;
those he calcined in a Crucible for the space of three hours; and all this
while, without the least appearance of any red color, or the least footsteps
of either Colcothar of Vitriol, or Crocus of Iron. Now for certain, if there
had been any thing of Vitriol or Iron in it, the discovery would have been
made, and it forced to confess its nature, in its yellow, red, or purple
color, by so great a stress of fire.

Now (says Hydroph.) if I prove that Vitriol will calcine white, then his
Argument is invalid; and this I shall do both by the heat of the fire, as also
of the Sun. First, By the heat of the fire, witness that of Swelfer, Vitrioli
veneris pulverisati, and ad albedinem parumper calcinati. Secondly, It will
calcine white by the heat of the Sun, witness the making of the Sympathetical
Powder out of Roman Vitriol calcined white by the Sun.

To which (Hydroph.) I answer, That had you been so thoroughly verst in the
Chemical Art as you pretend, you had not set your Guns so furiously to work to
so little purpose: That Vitriol should by a gentle heat of fire be so altered,
as to be dried to a white color, is a thing I deny not; but that this
alteration to a white color, should be the effect of calcination, is a thing I
cannot admit: For if after your supposed Calcination, you suffer your white
Powder to be dissolved, filtred and evaporated, you will find it appear Vitriol
again as green as at the first, which it would not do, if it had undergone a
thorough calcination; so that your great mistake depends upon your supposing
that whiteness to proceed from a calcination, when indeed it is only an
exiccation, and no more but a degree to calcination, parumper calcinati, as you
instance out of Swelfer: For the same degree of heat which will blanch Vitriol,
is even requisite for the exiccation of Plants, to make them quickly
pulverisable.

And as to your second Argument from the calcining Vitriol white by the heat of
the Sun, drawn from the calcining Roman Vitriol white by the Sun for the
Sympathetick Powder. The return is the same as before, being only an
exiccation of the superfluous moisture of the Vitriol, and that done by a
degree of heat from the Sun equivalent to that exiccation performed by the fire
upon the same subject matter.

Now me thinks (Hydroph.) you have not laid your Argument diametrically against
our Autoptical Experiment; for in ours the calcination was truly performed,
being urged by force of fire in a Crucible; yours is but a slight exiccation:
Now if you had proved that Vitriol by a strong calcination in the fire would
have become white and have continued so, you had followed your Argument
closely. But this contradicts matter of fact, easily experimented by any person
who was willing to be satisfied in the truth thereof, in as much as Vitriol in
a gentle degree of heat, whether of fire or the Sun, by an exiccation of the
redundant moisture, becomes white; after which if the fire be increased, it
turns yellow, then calcines red, and lastly purple, driving away thereby the
menstrual Salt, which had incorporated it self with the metallic body.

Now to prove, that these Minerals, upon their dissolution in this
Water-Spring, must necessarily deposite what other color they had, you quote
Paracelsus in these words, Videtis metalla and mineralia similitudinem nulla^
habere cum corporibus illis, ex quibus generata sunt: In the englishing of
which, I perceive you soyst in two or three words of your own: to make him the
better to speak your sense, you translate the words thus, (to wit) you see that
Metals and Minerals (dissolved in Water) have no resemblance with those bodies
out of which they are generated: those words (dissolved in Water) I find not in
the Author. But Paracelsus explains more fully what he means, even in his very
following words, which you leave out, (viz.) Haec enim aqua sunt, cujus
similitudinem metalla non exhibent, sicut autem metallum aqua fuit, sic
visissim aqua fit lignum, fit gramen, etc. Here Paracelsus is (as by the scope
of his words may be discerned) discoursing of the dissimilitude of bodies
amongst themselves, though from the same subject matter, and therefore urges
that Metals and Minerals, though originally from Water; yet (while such) bear a
dissimilitude to their first subject matter, Water, for that Water which was
the material principle of those bodies, by the superinduction of metalline and
mineral Seeds, was before the determination thereof by such a Seed, as equally
alterable into another body, as (for instance) of Trees, or Grass, etc. as into
that of metalline or mineral bodies: And this is the genuine sense of
Paracelsus in that place, which yet he further illustrates by that next
instance you quote, Videtis vitriolum aliud viride, etc. id si in aquam
resolvatur, colorem omnem deponit: where again, in your translation thereof,
you miss his sense, and wrest it to your own, and that either designedly or
ignorantly, for you translate i^ thus, (viz.) You see one sort of Vitriol is
green, another blew, but if it be resolved in Spring Water, it lays down all
its color; how (id (...) in aquam resolvatur) will bear that translation, I do
not understand; and here, would I appear Pedantick, I might severely chastise
you, as you have endeavored to lash me for smaller matters; for it is not in
aqua, but in aquam; and how it should bear the interpretation of Spring Water I
know not, but let that pass.

Now as in the former instance Paracelsus urged, That Metals and Minerals have
their original from Water, to which (whilst such bodies) they carry no
resemblance. So in this latter Example he affirms that Minerals (for instance
Vitriol) may be resolved again into Water, and then they loose their color;
yea, other properties which (otherwise whilst mineral bodies) are essential to
them; and that it was so, I may (Hydroph.) take leave to tell you, that both
Paracelsus and Helmont could by their Liquor Alkahest reduce mineral and
metalline bodies into simple Water; to confirm which, you have instances enough
in my Hydrolog. Chym. In the third instance out of Paracelsus, you are as much
(if not more) besides the cushion, as in the two former, it runs thus,
Similiter and auri colur flavus est, qui tamen in transmutatione fit purpureus,
si per transmutationem hanc resolvatur, tunc aquam nullam tingit amplius nec
colorem in se continet. You may remember (Hydroph.) that at our last Discourse
before the Gentlemen at the Spaw, I pressed you to signify what you meant by
that instance, and why you brought it in: you replied very gravely, after a
little pause, let Paracelsus speak for himself. A fair return, Paracelsus must
speak for himself, truly so he does, and properly enough, for ought I know, as
to what he is there treating of. But indeed (Hydroph.) either he or some else
ought to have spoken for you, seeing you had so little to say for your self why
you forced an Author to speak in your sense, when you your self did not know,
nor could give any account of your reason of transcribing that Sentence out of
Paracelsus. For first, you make your additions in the translation thereof, the
better to color your pretense, though without reason; you translate it thus,
(viz.) In like manner, though the color of Gold be yellow, and in
transmutation it become purple, yet if it be resolved by this transmutation,
that is, in Spring Water, it tinges the Water no more, nor does it keep its own
color. Your addition, (to wit) that is, in Spring Watet, is a seeming
interpretation; whereas indeed Paracelsus speaks nothing at all in that place
of Spring Water, I say, besides your own figmental additions to, and half
constructions of this quotation out of Paracelsus, you do not (notwithstanding)
make it fadge to your purpose: For what Paracelsus meant by transmutation, (by
querying with you) I found you knew not; and what his resolution of Gold by
this transmution was, you did as little understand. But that I may give you a
little help to what you might possibly mean (even at the best) for your
purpose: We will suppose that you imagined Gold dissolved in Aqua Regia, of
what sort soever; and that after precipitation with Sal Tartari, or any Alkali,
it should come to be purple; which yet it does not, witness the Aurum
Fulminans, which is yellow; or that by edulcoration, let us suppose (at the
best) that it may become purple. Now (Hydroph.) if you could produce any such
purple colored Gold, made by what skill or art you can, that would thereby be
resolved in Spring Water, and yet would not tinge that Water, nor keep its own
color, Eris mibi magnut Apollo. Here perhaps (Hydroph.) may return, as a
French Man once did to the learned Kircher, who having sent him a Scrowl of a
Character (which he had writ at random) to explain; which when Kircher had
undertaken, and with a great deal of pains and dexterity of Art (as he thought)
had interpreted it, according to the sense and meaning of the Author, returned
him an answer to this purpose. page 60.61.
Sir, You have explained my Character singularly well, for you have interpreted
that of which I knew not the meaning my self, having scribled it carelesls and
at random.

Had these (says Hydroph.) been perfect Minerals in their kind, ( viz. Vitriol
and Iron) they might with good reason have expected they should have calcined
of a red or purple color, etc. but if the Mineral (viz.) Vitriol, or the Iron
be imperfect, and only in succo primitivo, no such thing can be expected.

To which I answer, That if one of these two, which you call imperfect
Minerals, (viz.) Iron, may by force of fire be actually brought into the Scoria
of Iron, which indeed is Iron it self: Then by a parity of reason, may we
conclude that the other imperfect Minerals, Vitriol (if such there be in the
Spaw) may by force of fire be brought to undergo the like mutations of colors
competible to it as a perfect mineral body: The assumption I shall prove from
your own words, ( p. 67.) where you say, You calcined the black Sediment
precipitated by the stipticity of the Gall, which you call Iron: This you
calcined in a Crucible in very strong fire, and it became of a dark brown
color, and turned to a gross Powder hard as a Cinder, and was no other (says
Hydroph.) then the Scoria of Iron; and in the same page you call them laminae
ferreae, or flakes of Iron. The consequence is so evident, as needs no further
demonstration; for if the Juice of one imperfect Mineral, (viz.) Iron, becomes
by force of fire perfect Iron, (viz.) the Scoria of Iron. Then why may not the
other imperfect Juice, viz. Vitriol (if such (as I said) there be in this
Spring) by the like stress of fire, be also brought to undergo those changes of
color belonging to the actual or perfect (if I may so call it) body of Vitriol.

And as to what you seem to solve in saying, Vitriol is not imbibed in
Scarbrough Water corporally but precolated; we deny it to be there any manner
of way, either in Juice or by precolation, perfect or imperfect, in fieri, or
in facto esse, or what other way you can name; from all which it appears, that
if there be Iron in the Spaw, there is no Vitriol, because Iron is apparent,
but Vitriol not.

As to what you report out of Falopius concerning a Mineral Spring near Rome,
page 64.
In Agro voleterano, in illa aqua est suctus and albus, and est succus
Calcanthi, non Aluminis. Now (quoth Hydroph.) it is very probable that this
white Juice would make a white Salt by calcination, after its separation from
the menstruum; and truly it is as probable Hydroph. never tried a calcination of
a white vitrioline Juice, or of a white Vitriol; if he had, he would certainly
have been of another mind, in as much as any white Vitriol being calcined,
passes through all the colors ascribable to other kinds of Vitriol; besides
which, what is this white Juice to the Scarbrough Spaw, seeing no vitrioline
Juice, of what color soever, is apparent therein? and therefore what ever you
quote out of other Authors, may indeed prove Vitriol to be existent in those
Springs they treat of; but it is nothing, ad Rhombum, as to prove the existency
of such a Mineral in this Spaw, unless it could be made demonstrable by matter
of Fact, which you neither do nor can; not to say how prettily you confirm what
you would aim at by a palpable contradition in p. 65. of your Mimick, which I
have gently touched upon p. 22. As for your inference which you draw from your
Argumentum ad hominem, (as you call it) where you say, That seeing I grant that
this (viz.) the Swear Spaw at Knarsbrough has Vitriol and Iron, and yet
calcines white, etc. I answer, You take that for granted, against which I
demonstratively argue in the Negative, as the Reader may see, p. 3, 9, 10, 136.
of my Hydrol. Chym. where I assirm and demonstrate that a Vitriol which
contains Iron, is not Vitriol and Iron distinctly, but jointly make up a
Vitriol of Iron; and that the Esurine Acidity preying upon the Minera of Iron
in the Knarsbrough Spaw, had got a slight touch therefrom, and is as a Vitriol
of the Minera of Iron; and has not both Vitriol and Iron, as I have
sufficiently hinted before? And from thence to p 76. is an impertinent
Discourse of the properties of Vitriol and Iron, after such a manner indeed as
is not worth the time t^ bestow a reflection thereon, where the Reader may
please to take notice that some Galenical Physician do ordinarily, and perhaps
no less learnedly discourse of Simples, whether Vegetables, Minerals, or
Animals, according to the four first qualities of heat, cold, dryness and
moisture; to each of which they cunningly ascribe four degrees, whereby they
strictly judge of the temperature of the simple. Thus they say Vitriol is hot,
that is, it is heating; Iron is dry, that is, it is drying.

Now if the temperature of Simples, and their Operation upon the body of man,
may be judged according to those four qualities with their degrees: Then might
I justly query first, Why two Plants of the same supposed degree of any the
four first qualities, are not of the same signature, taste, smell and operation?
Why (for instance) the four greater hot Seeds, Cardamoms, etc. which are
reputed hot and dry in the third degree, should not have the same figure, taste
and smell? Why these should not be Emetick or Purgative, as well as Asarum or
Hellebor, which are reputed hot and dry in the same degree, seeing the
temperature of them, according to the doctrine of qualities, are the same? Why
Mandrakes, Hemlock, Henbane, Opium, Solanum, Lethale, should be deadly by being
cold in the fourth degree, seeing (for instance) Opium is bitter, sharp,
ulcerating and inflammable? the signs of heat, according to the same Doctrine;
yea, and is also eminently Diaphoretick in its Operation, which is irrational
to conceive, can proceed from a told quality. Why Tobacco, which is the Henbane
of Peru, should, according to Monardus, be accounted hot and dry in the second
degree, and yet has a benumming and stupifying quality, which in it (as well
as in the Juice of Poppy called Meconium, or the Stillitidium of the same
wounded heads called Opium) proceed from extreme cold, as Gallen and his
followers do opine? Why one and the same Plant should in its temperature or
Crases, harbor two such inimical guests, as heat and cold, without struggling
in the Womb. As to that distinction the Galenists make betwixt the temperature
of a Concrete, and the property of its whole substance, seems to me too slight
to solve the difficulty arising from this Doctrine: For what is the temperature
of any Plant, but a specifical modification of its substance? and what is its
substance, as to particularities, but a different modification of its part,
according to the variety of Seminal Principles?

Again, Why is Aconitum and Napellus (two mortal poisons accounted) hot and dry
in the fourth degree? and yet white Briony is placed above the third degree of
that rank; Why not in the fourth being above the third? and then, why not
immortal as the two former? Surely the Galenists forgot to add minutes to their
degrees, and to rank every thing in its right Clasis. That the Aconite (...) a
deadly Poison, is evident, by the remarkable and no less lamentable example at
Antwerp, recorded by Gerrard, where those who eat of the Leaves thereof served
up in Sallads, were forthwith taken with cruel Symptoms, and dyed. But white
Briony i^ so far removed from that dangerous toxical property, as that it is
sometimes taken inwardly to a in quantity, as a Hydragogon.

That Hemlock, Henbane, etc. should, (as ^ said) being taken inwardly, perform
those strange effects in the humane (or other Animal) body, by being in their
temperature cold in the fourth degree, is no less difficult, then irrational to
conceit that Hemlock should have such an influence upon the animal powers of
the sensitive soul, so much to eclipse them, as to cause an alienation of mind,
witness the notable Story Kircher relates of two Seminary Priests of Germany,
who eat of Hemlock Roots, (being mistaken by the Cook for Parsley) forthwith,
even ere the Roots were well swallowed, they fell into a rage, tore off their
Clothes, and leaped into an adjacent Pond; out of which being taken, and by
Antidotes restored, (save that the toxicum had seized upon the genus nervosum,
whereby for three years they remained Paralytick) were asked the reason why in
their madness, they had thrown themselves headlong into the Water? answered,
That they fancied themselves Geese, and so after the manner of those Creatures,
betook themselves to the Water to swim. That Henbane should be so toxical, as
that two dragms of the Seed thereof (as Helmont reports) being given to a
Lawyer, by a mistake, instead of as much Dil-Seed, (prescribed for the Cholick)
made him become so mad, as that he could not utter one intelligible word, and
spoiled his pleading, Ita insanus (says he) quod nil stolidius, magisque
fatuum viderim.

But say the Galenists, page 78.
and with them my Antagonist, There are, besides these four first, other
secondary qualities, as molifying, condensing, rarifying, etc. As also some
which they call third qualities, such as are vomiting, purging, expelling the
Stone, etc. Yea, and that there are a fourth sort (now to the Point) called,
Occult Qualities. These are indeed their Asvlum ignorantiae, to which in all
Phenomenon of difficult solution they have their refuge; for where their
manifest qualities fall short in explicating the powers, and unfolding the
secrets of Nature, there must the Occult Qualities bring up the Rear, to the
rendering of things rather more unintelligible, after the manner of an ignotum
per ignotius.

Well, but to return to Vitriol, which our Philosopher says is hot, that is,
it is heating, yet he tells us not what sort of Vitriol that is, whether of
Iron, of Copper, Silver, etc. For we have demonstratively made evident, that
there is no Vitriol existent in nature, but has a mineral or metalline body,
as the main Ingredient of its Compages: Yea, if we should know which sort of
Vitriol he intended, yet should we be at a loss to find whether it must be the
whole compound body of Vitriol, or any of its constitutive Ingredients, or any
parts separable therefrom by the fire; whether the Colcothar, Esurine Salt,
Spirit, Phlegm, Oil, which is hot, that is, its heating?

That Iron should be dry, that is, drying; and Vitriol hot, that is, heating,
we have no other Argument, then what is purely effeminate (viz.) it is so,
because it is so; And what if Jacobus de Partibut, Kircher, Gallen,
Conciliator, Paracelsus, and a hundred more should say so? It Is but yet an
(...) at the best; and that will not half go down with the Explorators of the
new Philosophy: But it seems my Antagonist knows nothing, or very little of
useful Experiments, the very Basis and main Pillars of the true Physiology; but
consults rather those Authors, who themselves have frequently taken what they
have from others upon trust, subscribing rather to dogmatical Placets, then
willing to unravel Natures Clew of Genuine Experiments.

But that my Antagonist may not appear altogether barren of Experiments, he end
eavours to illustrate the opening and drying, the deopilative and astringent
qualities of Iron; the former to lie in a Volatile Salt, the latter in the
Crocus or terrestrial part; by this Experiment, of casting filings of Steel or
Iron into the flame of a Candle, and it will burn like Saltpeter or Rosin.
These filings, when infused three or four times in Water or Wine, (as in making
Chalybeat Wines) till the Liquor has dissolved all the Salt; then dry it, and
cast it into the flame, and it shall not burn, but the Liquor shall have a
strong taste from the Salt.

As to the verity in matter of fact of the flagration of filings of Steel cast
upon the flame of a Candle, Experto Creed Roberto. But his Philosophic remarks
thereon are indeed remarkable, (viz.) That that which gives the flame should be
the Volatile Salt of Steel, is no less then a mistake of a Salt for a Sulphur,
an incombustible for a combustible; for no Volatile Salt whatever as such, is
inflamable, being indeed the essential properties of Sulphurs, whether
Vegetable, Animal or Mineral, to take flame and burn; which that it is so, is
evident both by a flagrable Sulphur, which we have separated from Steel, as
also by this Experiment, (viz.) That if in the making the Saccharum Martis, you
hold a Candle at the top of the Glass, while the Oil of Vitriol is working upon
it, you will find that as soon as it touches the steam, which ascends from the
intestine contest of the two Combatants, it will immediately take flame, and
burn like as if so much Oil or Spirit of Wine had been fired. Now that Iron
should (according to the testimony of those Authors my Antag. Two Contradictio^s
quotes) be cold and dry, and yet according to his own Experiment should take
flame, is surely no less than a palpable contradiction: for sulphurous parts
are always reputed hot, so that an inch breaks no squares betwixt his
Arguments and Experiments; Yea, that Vitriol which he judges hot, that is,
heating, should be so, and yet the Spirit of Vitriol, (as well as the Spirits
thereof in the Spaw) which in plain words, ( p. 97.) he says, are both Vitriol
(how true we may elsewhere examine) are used frequently in most cooling Juleps,
both to cool and quench thirst in Fevers; that the same numerical body of
Vitriol should, as such, be both hot and cold, is not a slight, but a gross
contradiction, and argues great inconsistency and unfaithfulness to himself.

From hence to page 90. is nothing but what already has been said, and already
may (without further repetition) be reputed sufficiently answered. Here he
quotes what I said, p. 38, 39. of my Hydrol. Chym. (viz.) page 90.
That I demonstrated to him what he would not otherwise believe, That the bare
solution of the Calx of Alom Stone, does give exactly the same alteration of
color, as the Spaw it self, yea and as the solution of Vitriol too.

My Antagonist returns thus, I said indeed (quoth he) and so I do confidently
say still, That it is the Vitriol alone, that being dissolved by its Mineral
Juice in this Water, takes the tincture from the Gall.

Now, I pray, (goes he on) With what Logic can he argue from calcined
Alom-Stone, to this aluminous Juice that is here in the Water? page 91.
Had he tried whether the crude Stone of Alom would qualify simple Spring
Water to take a tincture from Gall, or impart any Sapor to Water, he had acted
according to reason.

To which I answer, That to gainsay confidently, yea to persist in the deny al
of what is plainly, even ocularly demonstrated, becomes not, yea, is below a
Philosopher or lover of Truth. Did not my ingenuous Friend, both before your
face, and in the presence of many Gentlemen at the Spaw, show you to your
astonishment, that the crude Alom Stone (even taken out of that place of the
Bank which your self pointed to) dissolved in fresh Spring Water, would with
Gall, give as deep a tincture as the Spaw Water it self? Can you deny this? The
same have I also showed before other Gentlemen at the Spaw, yea, and sent up
some of it to be tried before the Virtuosi.

The circumstances of that transaction about that Experiment, is now too
tedious to relate, only in short thus, (viz.) After this Mimick was brought
upon the Stage to public view, I made a Journey on purpose to Scarbrough Spaw,
to make some further Experiments of that Water, where, with much ado, engaging
my Antagonist in a Discourse about what he had asserted in his Book, querying
with him about the solution of many contradictions therein inserted; which
whether he was not almost driven as far as Hercules his Pillars, with the
Inscription of a ne plus ultra, I shall appeal to the ingenuous Physicians,
Scholars, and other learned Gentlemen who were by; and was so far gravel'd, as
being pincht about a Sentence he had transcribed out of Paracelsus, which I
pressed to know why he made use of, he was glad to refer me to Paracelsus, and
bid Paracelsus speak for himself; together with many other circumstances too
prolix now to in^st upon, concerning which we have (as occasion has offered)
now and then glanced upon them.

The next morning we did, descend^re in arenam, without either our Swords or
our Seconds, where controverting the matter privately, I asked him, Why he
dealt so unworthily with me in his Book? why so many scurrilous invectives, and
unhandsome reflections? and why he had endeavored to cast such an odium upon
me as to my Practice, when I was able to make evident, by substantial witness,
the falseness and the injustice of the aspersions cast upon me, that an
unprejudiced eye might easily discover a vein of fire to run through all his
lines, no way grateful to any judicious person? He answered, That I had made
him my Enemy, and that he had softened something therein, and had intended to
have done more, but that he came more suddenly from the Press then he expected,
and that I had dealt severely with him in my reflections. To whom I returned,
that mine touched not his personal Practice or Concerns, but his Philosophy;
and that if when he had by clearness of Experiment or strength of Argument (as
he thought) found me tripping, then to have paid me, in specie, in my own Coin,
would have been acceptable to most ingenuous Persons. For saving a few lines
(which I confess might have been put into a better dress, and which I told him
he might have looked upon as slips of my Pen, or little flourishes of youth)
his gravity might have given a better president: I cared not if all the World
saw the Book; and in short I told him, That though I looked upon my self bound
to give a return to his Book; yet I did so much abominate that unchristian-like
way of proceeding against each other by calumination, and casting odiums upon
each others Practice, as I promised him (though I might possibly have been
furnished with a competent stock of matter) never to retaliate upon him in the
like kind.

After a little bickerings, and some experiments I made of the Spaw Water, my
ingenuous Friend, the Chemical Apothecary, for a through-experiment whether of
us was in the right, desired my Antagonist to show in what part of the Cliff
his supposed Vitriol lay; who pointing to the place, thrust in his Knife, and
took out some of the crude Alom Stone which lay under the Floscule. That it was
Alom Stone my Antagonist could not deny; but that it should in fresh Water,
with the addition of Gall, give a purple tincture, he utterly denied; wherefore
that they might not be long in suspense whether it was so or no, it was
concluded that an Experiment thereof should be forthwith made, and that the
whole matter should hang thereon, (viz.) Whether Vitriol or Alom was the
Ingredient in the Water; for it might be easily granted, that if Alom did not
give the tincture, then it must be somewhat else, and that could be no other
than Vitriol; but if that did give the tincture, then it was not from Vitriol,
because Alom has been separated, but never any Vitriol from the Water.

Therefore taking a Porringer of fresh Water, in which some of this crude
succulent Alom Stone was shaved, with addition of Galls (wherewith my Antag.
was well stockt) and in the presence of several Physicians, Scholars, and other
ingenuous Gentlemen, it presently struck as deep a tincture as if it had been
the Spaw Water it self: at which my Antagonist trembled and grew pale, and in a
sudden passion told them, That he would take his Oath, that Dr. Tunstal told
him that it was Vitriol the last year; which with reiteration he averred: The
Physicians being by, asked, Where was his witness? So with an Aposiopesis, they
broke up abruptly. Thus my Antagonist was cast upon the Sands with a Hurricane
or sudden storm of an unavoidable Experiment; Yea, and not only the succulent
Alom Stone, but even any of the hard Alom Stones (of which that Bank is full)
we found would give a tincture in fresh Water, acidulated with Spirit or Oil of
Sulphur, if thereto Galls were added; for to make a hard compact mineral Stone
to give its tincture in fresh Water, cannot easily be expected, according to
the uniform Laws of Nature, unless that Water be first made a proper Menstruum,
by acidulating it with a singular and mineral Spirit proper for that purpose.

So that my Antagonist may as equally conclude, that Sulphur has neither
tincture nor acidity in it, because being boiled in Spring Water alone, it
gives neither, nor does it yield any acidity to the taste being chewed; and yet
let the same Water but be acuated with an Alkalie, or let the same fixed Salt
be melted with the Sulphur, and the body of Sulphur will thereby be so opened,
as to yield both its tincture as red as blood, and odor also, which last will
be made to appear by the addition of any acid Juice; yea, its acidity will
plainly be evident by burning it under a Glass Bell, witness the Oil of Sulphur
made after that manner: so that where mineral bodies are to be dislolv'd or
unlocked, their Menstruums are to be acuated and duly prepared.

Wherefore in confirmation of what I elsewhere assert in my Hydrol. Chym.
concerning an Acid Sulphurous Spirit or Salt, which being dissolved in a Water
Spring, becomes a suitable Menstruum to make Solutions, or to take in the
tinctures of Mineral or Metalline Bodies which lie in their way; I say, in
confirmation hereof, I find the ingenuous Swelfer in his Appendix, ( p. 97.)
says to the very same purpose, thus, Etenim vitriolum caerulcum (quod me
judice nihil aliud est quam cuprum, quandoque etiam ex vena argentea ortum
ducens in visceribus terrae a spiritu sulphuris solutum, quemadmodum viride
vitriolum a venis ferri est; eodem spiritu sulphuris in terrae autris
dissolutum) e cupreis venis exortum, etc. And that this is a sulphurous Salt
or Spirit which acuates the Water of this Spaw compatible, as well to Alom as
Vitriol, is evident, both by the profound Helmont's definition of this Esutine
Salt, (viz.) Est partus immaturus sulphuris embryonati. As also by this
experimental Observation which confirms both, (viz.) That in the burning or
calcining the Alom Stone, to make it capable to yield its imbred Salt, a
Sulphur is found thrust forth to the surface of the Stone, by the force of
fire, which will take flame at a Candle, and burn with a blew flame, with the
same sulphurous smell as common Sulphur, which lies in a crust driven from the
body of the Alom Stone, and adheres to it; of which I have some by me, and have
tried the Experiment therewith; by which it appears that that Salt, connatural
with the Alom Stone, has also espoused to it self an embryonate Sulphur, which
lies dormant in all mineral acid Spirits, whether of Vitriol or Alom, this not
being able to abide the force of fire in the calcination of the Alom Stone, is
pressed forth to the superficies thereof, chiefly at the outside of the heap,
and there appears in the real form of Sulphur, as combustible as any common one.

Thus the Legich, by which I argue from calciu'd Alom Stone, to the crude
aluminous Juice in the Water, is no less then by an autoptical induction, as
apparent as the Sun at noon day, and no less demonstrable, but indeed more
obvious, then that three Angles of a Triangle should always be equal to two
right Angles; or then that the Angles of incidence and reflection should always
be the same.

But that we may be the more certain, whether if there were any such thing as
Vitriol in this Spaw Water, it might not by trial be discovered; I therefore,
for better satisfaction, made a solution, first of Vitriol and Nitre in
distilled Water, mixed and evaporated them in an easy heat of a Sand Furnace,
until they did shoot in Chrystals, which were plainly distinct each from other,
so as one might see them severally in the bottom of the Glass.

Then I took Vitriol and Alom Salt, ( viz. the true Alom) of each an anatical
proportion, whole Solutions in distilled Water were filtred, mixed and
evaporated to Chrystals, which also were distinct, (viz.) the Chrystals of
Vitriol from those of Alom; Then I took the Solutions of Vitriol, Alom and
Nitre, of each alike in distilled Water, which being filtred, mixed and
evaporated, ad cuticulam, gave three distinct sorts of Chrystals, (viz.) long
styriate, which were of Nitre; white Chrystals, which were from Alom; and
green, which were from Vitriol, every one, in their several form,
distinguishable enough to the bare eye.

But that I might leave no stone unmoved that might lie in my way, or upon
which my Antagonist might have the least foundation for his fictious Hypothesis
of the existency of Vitriol in this Spaw, that I might (I say) unravel to the
very bottom of his Clew, whose deepest reserve (and by which he thinks he hits
the nail o'th head) is fetch from a supposition of the presence of Vitriol in
this Water by its Juice, or in succo primitivo; I therefore took some of the
Marcasite Stones of Vitriol, which I got out of the black Bog, near the
Sulphur-Well at Knarsbrough, which is the minera of Vitriol, in which (if any
where) the Vitriol is in succo: upon this pulverised, I poured a Solution of
Sal marine, and let them stand together in a Mattress for several days; which
by standing in stigido, extracted a green tincture from the Marcasites: This I
decanted and filtred, which with the addition of Galls, would strike a tincture
not inferior to the Solution of the body of Vitriol. This yellow green salty
Liquor I caused to be evaporated, in a gentle heat, in a Jar Glace placed in
Sand, which shot into curious yellow tinged Chrystals, which left in the bottom
an Oaker, or Terra Vitriolica; after the manner as is found upon the like
process with other factitious Vitriols.

That which was very remarkable was, That the yellowish Liquor wherein these
Chrystals did shoot, would not with Galls strike any color, but remained clear
as before the addition thereof: but when I added some more clear Water, and
thereby diluted it, I found that then it gave a purple color. The very like to
which, I observed to happen to a strong Solution of Dantz-Vitriol, brought to
an oily consistence immediately before shooting, which with the addition of
Galls I found would give no alteration of color; but when I diluted it with
more Water, it then gave its purple tincture, and that the deeper by how much
(to a certain proportion) the more Water I added; just as some menstruums may
be graduated too highly, and made too strong to corrode or dissolve their
proper bodies; the Solutions of which they cannot perform till they be made
weaker. Here if I should tell my Antagonist, That I know by a menstruum, (not
rare amongst Chemists) with the addition of mine or his breath, how to calcine
a Metal, ( via humida, as the Chemists speak) without which (or somewhat
equivalent thereto) the humid calcination of that Metal cannot be performed,
also how to melt another Metal (prepared after a certain manner) with the help
of one single Lamp, unassisted by any blast, he would, without doubt, look upon
them as Paradoxes.

But to confirm yet further the existency and precedence of Alom in the
Scarbrough Water; I observe that in the very minera of that Stone and Earth,
found upon the Bank, a thin Scale of a bright Chrystalline Marcasite, of the
very color and brightness, like another which I do, by an artifice upon that
Water, separate therefrom, which is indeed a bright clear Talk; yea, I find
other gritty parcels of a sabulous Earth, much-what like the others, separated
from the Spaw Water by the foresaid Artifice.

Now from a collation of Experiments, these following Corrolaries will
naturally result.

First, That a Mineral, in its crude succulent parts, may easily be dissolved
in Spring Water alone, when its more compact body, whose parts are locked up
more strictly, require a sulphurous Menstruum to dissolve it, or take it in
pieces; witness the crude succulent Alom Stone, readily giving its tincture
with Gall in fresh Water, when the hard slate thereof requires Water acidulated
with is sulphurous Spirit, to open the body thereof, to make it give its
virtue.

Secondly, That the Marcasites of Vitriol and Alom, have an embryonative
Sulphur connatural with them, produced out of the same Mineral Seed; for
instance, the Sulphur crust, separated by Calcination of the Alom Stone; and in
the Vitriol Marcasites, I find, that putting them into the fire, they burn of a
blew flame, and have a sulphurous smell; in both these the Sulphur is really
answerable to the common Sulphur or Brimstone.

Thirdly, That several Mineral Salts, and other connatural bodies may consist
disguised under one liquid Mask; which when taken off by a gentle distillation
or evaporation, each shows it self in its own likeness. Thus Alom, Vitriol, and
Nitre, being dissolved in Water, and so mixed together, appear in a liquid
form, with very little discrimination; but when this Water is taken away by
easy distillation or evaporation; then they appear, statu quo prius, (viz.)
Alom, Vitriol and Nitre, again, each in their several shapes. Thus the several
constitutive Ingredients of the Scarbrough Spaw Water, whilst under that liquid
Mask, show as one simple limpid transparent body, but take off the Mask, (as
aforesaid) and then they appear, each in their own form, such as they were
before their Solution in that Spring.

Fourthly, That the minera or Marcasites of Alom or Vitriol, do as really give
their tinctures, or yield their Solutions in Water; yea, do every way answer
the operations agreeable to what is expected, or may be performed by their
factitious bodies: Thus the solution of the succulent Alom Stone, gives the
same mutation of colors, as the Liquor drawn from the body of the calcined
Stone; so in like manner does the solution of the Vitriol marcasite in Water,
give the same tincture by Galls, as the factitious body of Vitriol does, yea,
and precipitates the same Vitriolick Oaker, or yellow Sediment, as the other
does.

Fifthly, That a mineral or metallic solution, may have its parts so
concentred, as it may not admit of that alteration of colors, compatible to
the same solution diluted or thin'd. Thus the strong yellowish Liquor made from
a solution of Salt, extracting the tincture from the Marcasites of Vitriol,
would not with Galls give any alteration of color, which yet it would do, when
diluted, by adding more Water thereto; and thus a strong solution of Vitriol
would strike no purple, nor other color with Gall, when yet the same diluted
did so.

But the truth is, (says my Antagonist) I have tried it of that sort of
Alom-Mine which is in the Cliff near the Well, page 91.
having broken it to Powder, and infused it in Spring Water some hours, and it
received no tincture from Gall: Nay, I calcined that very Stone, and then
dissolved it in Spring Water; and yet it received no tincture from Galls.

Which how true, I shall appeal to those many Gentlemen at the Spaw, who saw
the Experiment ocularly demonstrated, yea, the Royal Society, to whom I sent up
so much as was sufficient to pass the test before them; yea, to those who have
seen the Experiment tried at public places and elsewhere in York.

To confirm his Opinion, That Alom Stone gives no tincture, nor yields any
virtues to Water, my Antagonist brings in this instance, p. 29. (viz.) That at
the Alom Mine at Whithy, in the middle thereof a Spring of fresh Water breaks
forth, having twelve fathom of Mine about it; which yet gives no tincture with
Galls, having taken no vapot, odor, or sapor from the Mine.

To which I answer, First by observing how inconsistent my Antagonist is to
what he declares, p. 16. of his Mimick, accounting with Kircher, That Spring
Water is a proper menstruum to take in the virtues of Minerals and Metals;
witness that at St. Lucas in Italy, which has imbibed Iron and Alom; another
in Germany impregnated with Alom and Nitre; and yet here denies it either to
take vapor, odor, or sapor from the Mine it passes through: Next to which I
endeavored, by climing that steep Bank at Whithy, to have examined the source
of that Spring; but having not time, I procured this account thereof from an
ingenuous Friend, (viz.) That it runs not through the Alom Work, but under the
bottom of the stony Quarry, full of Cleffs, (about which there are diverse
Earths about the height of eight or ten yards to the surface of the ground)
underneath which Quarry is a Mine, in color much resembling that of Alom; but
is not the same in nature with it, nor accounted so by the Workmen, but is
usually called by them Doggers, or Cats-heads; betwixt which, and the abovesaid
Quarry, issues forth that Spring, and therefore no wonder it partakes of no
virtues therefrom; in some of these Cats-heads, being broken, are found in the
middle thereof, a kind of transparent Talk.

Thus as he concludes, page 93.
Alom Stone to give neither vapor, odor, or sapor to spring Water, (which how
true let the World judge.) So he further proceeds to tell us, That neither does
Iron give any tincture in Spring Water with Gall, nor yield any Sediment upon
evaporation; witness the Spring of fresh Water which runs out of an Iron Mine
near Barnsley, upon the edge of Derbyshire; the which my Antagonist
contradicts, by closing with what he relates out of Paracelsus, by which he
hints (in his own words) as if simple Water alone were sufficient to imbibe a
Metal, (as Iron) while it has not attained its perfection; which in truth is
the case of the Iron Mine at Scarbrough, and yet here (according to him) it
neither gives tincture with Gall, nor yields any Sediment; but this also
contradicts his Experiment of a Vitrioline Salt made out of Iron by an infusion
in Water.

A brief Account of the Anom-Works At WHITBY.
NOW, because I find that Alom is the chief and essential Ingredient of the
Scarbrough Spaw Water, I shall (for further illustration) give my Observations
concerning the Alom-Works at Whitby, to which place I purposely made a journey,
for my own and others satisfaction; where first I observed, that it is not
every Alom Mine that the Workmen will employ their labor and time about, as
finding some that are unripe, and therefore unfit to extract the Salt
therefrom; amongst which that blew Slate or Earth (which they often find near
the true ripe Stone) which they call Doggers or Cats-heads; and other slaty
Stone mixed therewith, they reject: which I cannot better parallel, then with
those unripe Mines which the Cole-miners often upon digging find, and call
Smitts, as being an imperfect Cole, whose Sulphur is not brought to maturity,
wherefore they reject it as an unprofitable and useless Fuel; and yet these may
no less be reputed Coals, then the other unripe Alom Stone may be accounted
Alom Minera: so that to expect that these crude Stones or Earth (which are akin
to true Alom Stone) should give a tincture with Galls in fresh Water (as some,
not very cautiously, have attempted) is no less irrational, then to expect from
these Smitts, all the essential qualifications belonging to the true ripe Cole,
though both are Cole.

Next I observe, that when they have pitched upon the right Minera of Alom,
they calcine it thus; first, digging great quantities thereof; then heaping it
Stratum super Stratum, (viz.) a layer of Coals, and a layer of Stones; piling
them up a great height in a vast bulk, like a little Mountain, they fire it
below, and so let it burn day and night, till the fire of its own accord
cease, or rather till all that is combustible be spent; when the Stone has
thoroughly taken fire, the whole Mass burns much more intensely then at the
first, and that because of a plenteous Sulphur connate with the Stone, which
then becomes fired, and is thrust forth to the superficies of the Alom Stone,
being a real combustible Sulphur, which as a Crust cleaves to the Minera, of
which I have some by me, sent by an ingenious Friend.

Thirdly, We observe that this Calcination is therefore made of the Minera,
that it may the better and more plentifully yield its innate Salt, partly by
opening the body thereof by this previous Calcination, and partly by preparing
it for a Magnet for the nitrous Particles flowing from the Air to settle
thereon; with which, by being the longer exposed to the Air, it becomes the
more saturated; plentifully, I said, because the natural Stone, unprepared or
calcined, will sometimes separate its connate Salt to the superficies thereof,
by the bare solitary heat of the Sun: as I am by an Autopsie confirmed, in that
I have sometime seen an Alom Slate spontaneously sweat forth its own Salt;
which being dissolved in fresh Spring Water with the addition of Galls, I found
would immediately strike a deep purple, and with Oil of Sulphur and Vitriol
become clear; and then opace again with the addition of Tartar, etc.

Fourthly, The Minera being thus opened by the Calcination, they make a Lee
thereof, in Pirs made within the ground, which run one into another by Pipes or
Channels; this Lee or Solution, they pump into Troughs which conveigh it into
leaden Cisterns, which will, with Galls, strike a deep purple color, whereof
they have whole Tuns, which will give that tincture, (as any who pleases may
try.) This Liquor consists both of a Sulphur, Alom, Salt, and an Oaker, which
as it runs along the Troughs, drills in some places through the crevices
thereof, and by the heat of the Sun is congealed into Salt, of which I procured
a quantity to make Experiments with: This Salt will also (being dissolved in
fresh Spring Water, and filtred) give the purple color with the addition of
Galls.

Fifthly. This Lee boiled up to such a height in leaden Cisterns, is pumped
into other Cisterns, and there it precipitates a great quantity of a yellow
sulphurous earthy Sediment, and so becomes purged of its dross; then is it
conveyed into other Cisterns, where it meets with a decocted Lee of Kelp and
Urine, and thence (if I mistake not) is pumped up into the first Cistern and
boiled again; then lets fall another Sediment, and then is sent into low
Cisterns within the ground, where it in part shoots; what does not shoot, is
pumped up into a boiling Cistern, and therein is brought to its due height;
then is it pumped into great Tun Caskes, where it shoots into that form we find
the factitious Alom of. To the last decoction, in the boiling Cisterns, is
always added its Mother, which is a Liquor which always remains after
shooting, and contributes much toward the chrystallizing of fresh Alom Liquor.

But in their last decoction, which is performed in their roaching Pan, they
boil up that part which before was shot into grains in the lower Cisterns,
together with that which did not shoot, (and all after the mixture with the
additional Salts) into a due consistence, and so they let it run into the
foresaid Tun-Casks to shoot.

That this aluminous Salt is esurine and sharp, (as we have said in our Hydrol.
Chym.) as well as that of Vitriol, is evident by the Experiment of putting a
plate of Iron, suppose of about a quarter of a pound weight, into the last
boiling Liquor, (which I caused to be tried) which in a few hours was totally
corroded and dissolved, which in longer time would scarcely be touched, when
covered with a broad cloth, shred or list; and what is remarkable in this (but
common to other mineral menstruum fretting their proper bodies) was, that while
the Iron was dissolving, the Liquor did ferment, boil and rage more than
ordinarily; which when the Solution was over, ceased, although I must confess
that it is probable, that the addition of the Salts of Kelp and Urine, may
promote the corrosiveness of this Liquor, and may make it the more readily
dissolve Iron, and perhaps other Metals, if they were tried in it.

And were these Salts of Kelp totally alkalizate, (after the manner of the
fixed Salts of common Vegetables, made by the calcination of Plants, by naked
force of fire) would certainly prove destructive to the Alom Work, and that
because the last are endued with a saltiness, contrary and quite destructive to
all acid Salts, which after a sharp contest would terminate not in Alom, but in
a neutrum quid, (viz.) Tartarum Aluminosum. But the Lee made out of the burnt
Sea-wrack or Kelp, is over halanc'd with a Marine Salt, which (by a continual
pressure or agitation of parts) works it self into the texture of those
Seafaring Plants, by unhinging some parts of their first composition, whence
the brackishness and sulphurous twang of the Lee of Kelp is produced.

The addition of those Salts, (viz.) of Kelp and Urine, perform two things,
(viz.) first, cause a further separation of a Sediment by the precipitation of
a kind of Oaker from the Alom Liquor; and next to that they add weight; and a
third is not wanting, (viz.) to help the chrystallizing or shooting of Alom:
the first of which is evident, because the artificial Alom will not with Galls
strike a purple color, but the natural Alom with its imbred Oaker will: the
last is as apparent, because I have observed the natural to shoot in a
different form from the Artificial, as I can show. After the shooting of the
Alom, those yellow and green sordes, which are rejected, are used as a manure
to some grounds; and that because the Alom Earth, together with the Sediment of
the Kelp, become as a Magnet, which attracts (if it be proper so to speak) the
fertilizing Nitre in the Air, the main efficient of improvements of all Soyls;
the which, doubtless, might be much promoted to a further improvement of
grounds, if they were but calcined again, and then exposed to the Air, by being
thrown upon ground; for hereby they would become more hungry (if I may so say)
of the volatile aereal Nitre, and make it fall the more plentifully by Rain and
Dews, or Snow, and other manner of circulations of that vivifying Ether, which
impregnates Grounds for all sorts of vegetation; wherefore I have advised some
that live upon Blacomore, (not far from Whitby, being a barren Soil) to burn
their Alom Slate Stone, (of which there is store in that Country) after the
manner as is done with Limestone in other parts of the Country; and when it
is sufficiently burnt, to throw it upon their Fallow Grounds; from whence
probably an improvement worth their charge and labor may be made of that Soil.

Thus there are few sorts of Soyls in England, or elsewhere, which are so
barren as may not be improved, by being artificially cultivated with what they
bring forth, whether Alom-stone, Limestone, Marle, Cole, etc. Nay, there are
few barren Soyles in the Indies or elsewhere, but have that in their Bowels,
whose worth, one way or other, does compensate their thread bare Coats; the
barrenness of their outsides, being well amended by the riches of their
inwards. From what is premised, will necessarily result these following
conclusions, (viz.)

First, That to extract or separate Salts or Sulphurs out of Mineral
Marcasites, respect must be had to the crudity and maturity of the Mintra,
(viz.) That such a Bed is to be chosen, where the Mineral Principles are not
too crude, but are brought on to a certain degree of maturity; as for instance,
If a Coal-Mine be to be chosen, for burning well, it must be such a one whose
Sulphur is plentiful and flagrable, and not a Smitt, which is but an imperfect
Cole-Mine: So if plenty of Alom-Salt be intended to be separated from the
Marcasite thereof; then must a ripe Stone be chosen, and not that blew Slate or
Earth called Doggers.

Secondly, That to unlock some Mineral Beds to come at their hidden Treasure,
is required a foregoing Calcination by the force of fire; witness the burning
of Alom-stone, before its Salt can be plentifully separated, and the burning of
Vitriol in close or open Vessels before its Spirit, or Salt can be procured.

Thirdly, That the treasures these unlocked Mineral Bodies afford, consist in a
Salt, and an Embryonative Sulphur; for instance, the Salt separable both from
Alom and Vitriol, first opened by force of fire, and in both is an apparent
Sulphur, viz. In Alom it appears in an inflamable sulphurous Crust, thrust
forth to the surface of the Stone; and the same is apparent in Vitriol, both
from what Paracelsus and Helmont have wrote thereof; As also by the Experiment
of pouring Aqua Regis upon Vitriol, brought by gentle exiccation to a
whiteness, by whose humid calcination of that Mineral, an impetuous cloud of
sulphurous Vapors arise, which if pent up in a close Vessel, would break it in
pieces, though the strongest imaginable, whose plenty of fumes are not inferior
to those which arise from the like menstruum poured upon crude Antimony, or the
Spirit of Nitre upon the Butter of Antimony, or the like Aqua Regis upon the
Caput Mortuum of Viride Aeris; which three metalline and mineral Bodies, viz.
Copper, Antimony, and Vitriol, I find by this Experiment to have the greatest
plenty of a combustible Sulphur; and it is by the influence of these two,
(viz.) Salt and Sulphur, by which mineral and metalline bodies perform their
most considerable cures upon the humane body.

Fourthly, That these acid Salts, thus opened, having their native Sulphurs
dissolved with them in a Lee of fresh Water, do by decoctions, and the addition
of other Salts, as of Kelp and Urine, suffer the Sulphurs, and other
heterogeneous mixtures to separate by precipitation; witness the plenteous
separation of the recremental faeces by the foresaid operation from the
Alom-Liquor.

Fifthly, That the Alom-Salt, whether natural or calcined, is esurine and acid
equally with the same in Vitriol, and capable of making solutions of other
mineral bodies which lie in its way; for instance, the natural succulent Alom
Salt dissolves a slight touch of the Minera of Iron in the Scarbrough Spaw
Water; and that either as it lies in the same Alom Bed, or at least in a Vein
of Iron, through which the acid aluminous Salt dissolved in a Water Spring
glides: The same does the corrosion of the Iron in the Alom Liquor evince,
according to our former Experiment.

Sixthly, That some menstruums may dissolve, or break in pieces the close
rivetted parts of some (but proper compact) bodies, when they yet leave other
bodies of a softer and sleighter texture untouched; witness the Alom Liquor
corroding the Iron, when the Cloth Lists, which had covered it, was not
dissolved, though it had been longer in that Liquor than the naked Iron; which
gives light to possibility of finding out by Art and Industry, such menstruums
as may dissolve and reduce in minima, the compact Duelech, or hard stone of the
Bladder, and yet leave untouched the tender soft membrane which makes the
concave of the Bladder, and other hollow bowels.

Seventhly, That to make acid menstruums more powerful and more universal
(especially as to solid metalline or mineral bodies) is required an addition of
other Salts, of such a fabric of parts, as may not by any intestine commotion
destroy each other: but may acuate each other with a mutual invigorating
ferment. Thus the Salts of Kelp and Urine do that to Alom Liquor, which the
addition of Sal Gem, or Sal Armoniack does to an Aqua Fortis, (viz.) makes them
dissolve those bodies, which before they could not; the one forcibly to take in
pieces the body of Iron, the other the body of Gold.

Eighthly, That the Alkalizate Salts of most Vegetables, made by naked force of
fire, do differ from the Kali of Kelp, almost toto Coelo, although both be done
by the like calcination; the one being acido saline, (viz.) that of the Kelp;
the other, (viz.) the fixed Salts of Vegetables are lixiviate; by the difference
of whose constituent parts, arises the known ebullition made from the mixture
of both.

Lastly, That the faeces remaining after the depuration of the Alom Salt, and
incremental addition of other Salts, do still retain a kind of Magnetism of the
Ethereal Nitre, or at least become a proper subject for that fructifying Nitre
to settle upon; whereby some Grounds may be improved, yea, and gives more then
probable hopes that the same recalcin'd, or the crude Stone once calcined, may
well become a medium for the better improvement of some barren Soyls, as well
as Limestone, Marl, faeces of Soap-ashes, etc. are by the like method made
capable of enriching other Soyls.

Now to confirm (besides what is said) the existency of Alom, as the chief (if
not sole) ingredient of some Spaws, I think it not amiss to acquaint the Reader
with my Observations on a Spaw of the same nature, which I found out the last
Summer in Barnsdale upon Blacomore, about ten or twelve miles from Whitby; in
the bottom of which Dale runs a Rivlet fed with several Springs, and walled in,
(in some places) as it were, with Alom-Rocks on both sides, but more on one
side then on the other, out of the Clefts of one large Alom-Bed, (whose length
may by conjectural compute be 50 or 60 paces, and the depth 4, 6, 8, or 10
yards.) I observed several Springs to issue forth, with a yellow Sediment,
along the Chincks and Crevices; one of which that had the best current, broke
forth two or three yards from the foot of the Alom-Rock, having more above it.
This, when I tasted, I found very much in taste to resemble the Scarbrough
Spaw, and would with the addition of Galls, readily strike a purple tincture:
being not a little glad hereat, I ordered a Bottle thereof to be brought along
with me to York; which (there) bringing to the test, I found it to contain
much-what the same Mineral Ingredients with that of the Scarbrough Spaw, but
was nothing near so plentifully fraught therewith as the other. But however by
this it was clearly apparent, that a Water-Spring running through an Alom-Bed,
might (and did) imbibe the immature Juice thereof, in so much as to give it a
taste resembling that of the Scarbrough Spaw, and to render it as capable of
readily striking a tincture with Galls, as the other, which was no small
confirmation of our Hypothesis, asserted in our Hydrol. Chym. concerning the
Scarbrough Spaw.

Had I been at my Antagonists back, when he was vindicating the existency of
Vitriol in our Spaw, I might have cherished him, by whispering (yet I would
first have been sure to have had an answer in promptu) this Objection, to wit,
That Dyers in the making of their Blacks, use not Alom but Vitriol, yea find
Alom a great enemy thereto, always mortifying the stiptick parts of those
Ingredients, which are necessarily required for that color, and therefore
might seem to argue against Alom, and for Vitriol as the cause thereof, made by
Galls in the Spaw Water.

To which Objection I thus return, (viz.) That this is done, first, because
Vitriol contains a greater quantity, by much of a precipitable Ocre, then Alom,
which should close with the flats of astringent bodies, for the better
intercepting of the Luminous Rays, whereby that color becomes made; next,
because factitious Alom having great plenty of Urine, the Spirits or Salts
thereof does precipitate the Ocre of Vitriol, and also destroys the acidity
thereof, which should otherwise bind in its Ocre, and confirm the stiptick or
astringent parts of Galls, Sumach, Logwood, Elder Bark, etc. frequently used
for Blacks.

A Supplement to the Sweet-Spaw At KNARSBROUGH.
WHat I have said in my Hydrol. Chym. concerning the Sweet-Spaw at Knarsbrough,
I find no reason to reclaim, notwithstanding the carping of some, by the
instigation of others; for that it has imbibed but a small quantity from a
Minera or Marcasite of Iron, is apparent; first, because upon its evaporation
it leaves an insipid dark colored Powder, arguing that the Vitrioline
Marcasite, over which this Spring Water glides, is very thin and lean, of a
Vitrioline Acidity, and that is the reason it coagulates not Milk, as do the
German Vitrioline Spaws, and some of our own: which happens not as Dr. French
imagines, from a volatility of its acidity, which evaporates before the Milk
boyls, but rather from the inconsiderableness of the acidity, and the easy
precipitation of its Ocre.

Secondly, By the great quantity of that Water which is to be drunk, before any
sensible Operation can be made, either by Stool or Urine; insomuch as it gives
just cause of suspicion that it is most-what from the weight of that Water
pressing upon those Emunctories, which chiefly gives energy to its Operation.

Thirdly, The same is evident from the Mineral Waters, which are Springs,
passing through some Vitrioline Marcasites, which are found in Coleground, of
which I have some by me; with these are those Springs, drilling through
Cole-Mines, often impregnated, many of which have a Vitrioline taste, and will
strike a purple tincture with Galls, of which sort is Old Town Spaw, and some
near Leids and Hawton, etc. some of which have a slight Iron-like, or
vitrioline taste, and yet are so thin and poor, as not to be able to give any
tincture with Galls, while others of them that are strong, give both tincture
and taste.

Fourthly, The same is apparent by observing, that all these languid vitrioline
Waters, if they either restagnate, being exposed to the Air, or by motion be
carried to a great distance, and if by either way, a little yellow Sediment be
precipitated, then forthwith they become effete in their virtues, and have
neither any distinguishable taste, nor will give any color with Galls, but
degenerate again into simple Spring Water. So that the supposed Spirits of
these Waters are only imaginary and mere Chimera's, no where existent, but in
the brains of those who conceive them.

For further confirmation of what I have already said, and shall now further
add concerning this and other the like mineral vitrioline Spaws, I will
elucidate it by this following Experiment, (viz.) I took a bright Cuprous, or
Vitrioline Marcasite, found about the surface of Cole-Mines, and afterward
exposed to the Air, upon which (without any other preparation) I poured simple
distilled Water in a Jar Glass, which, in frigido, did immediately receive a
vitrioline taste; and being forthwith filtred from the Marcasite, struck a deep
purple tincture with Galls, as deep as any vitrioline Spaw I have yet met with;
its taste was exactly like that of the Sweet-Spaw, we are now treating of, and
would, as other the like Vitrioline Spaws, be reducible to its pristine
clarity, by the pouring a few drops of Oil of Vitriol; and became opace, by the
adding of Oil of Tartar, and so passed those colors found in the Vitrioline
Spaws, as we have hinted more at large in our Hydrol. Chym. concerning those
Mineral Waters; from which Experiment may follow these direct and collateral
conclusions, viz.

First, That Vitrioline Marcasites are allied unto, and generally found in
those Mines where Sulphur is much predominant, viz. in the Cole-Mines, etc. yea
themselves are impregnated with an immature Sulphur, witness their
combustibleness, if put upon hot Coals, burning with a blew flame, and yielding
a sulphurous fume.

Secondly, That these being exposed to the Air, become the more readily
ingravidated with a Vitrioline Salt, by determining the nitrous Particles,
floating in the Air upon its Body, by a peculiar Magnetism (if I may so say)
proper to such bodies; and this is evident, because the longer these Marcasites
are exposed to the open Air, the more they become fraught with a vitrioline
body, contracting a Crust, which by solution, filtration, etc. will easily
resolve into a body of Vitriol.

Thirdly, That these, and their connatural and analogous Juyces do increase,
and (suo more) vegetate in the Earth as other Minerals do, is apparent in that
I have observed a piece of Wood invelloped with a vitrioline Crust found in the
Earth, where other Marcasites of the like nature have been dug, which I keep
by me.

Fourthly, That these Marcasites, the nearer they lie to the surface of the
Earth, and the more patent the Channels are, by which currents of Spring Water
glide by them; the more readily they give their tincture, or yield a solution
of their substance, whence some vitrioline Springs or Spaws become stronger,
both in taste and operation, then others; and this is evident, because of the
facile ingress the Air has to these places.

Nor may this contradict what we elsewhere say, viz. That an Esurine Acidity,
preying upon the Minera of Iron, gets a slight touch therefrom, and so becomes
as Vitriol of the Minera of Iron, which gives essence to the Vitrioline or
Sweet-Spaw at Knarsbrough; for both may be true, though in various respects,
from different Soyls; in as much as there are even in these Marcasites a
connatural acid Juice, reasolvable by the confluence of Air, which seizes on
an embryonative Sulphur of Iron, essential to those Concretes, which are
carried together in their mutual embraces, by a preterlabent Spring of Water,
unto the place where they break forth, called a Springhead, which gives
Original to all or most of the Spaws called Fontes acidi.

So that all Vitrioline Spaws are reducible to one of these two Causes, viz.
Either to a sulphurous acid Spirit, dissolved in a Water-Spring, passing
through the Minera of Iron, the acidity dissolving the looser parts thereof,
and coagulating it self thereon; or to the foresaid Vitrioline Marcasites,
whose acidity being resolved by the Air in the bowels of Earth, takes along
with it the connate immature Sulphur, or loose vitrioline Ocre; and both in one
gives essence to these Mineral Waters, and from the^ two causes singly and
jointly, do the Spaws of Knarsbrough, Rotheram, Oulton, Turnbridg, Astrap, etc.
take their Original; amongst which those that have but sleighter touches of the
Minerals, and consequently do the more readily suffer a precipitation of their
Earth or Ocre, fetch their Mineral in a longer line from the place of their
Eruption, and that too perhaps from Marcasites more penurious, and less opened
then others which keep their Minerals unprecipitated, and consequently their
Virtues the longer.

These Marcasites, calcined in a Crucible with a blast, will melt and flow,
especially helped with Nitre; which melted Mass being poured forth, gives no
Regulus or metalline body, nor is so pondrous as it was before, but has some
bright yellow, or cuprous sparkles interspersed. This in two days time, does
almost all fall to a black Powder, much like what I remember happened to a Scoria
of Iron in the making Regulus Martis; which being laid open to the Air, did in
a few days fall into a black Powder.

Wherefore these Stones are without doubt a Metalline Embryo, consisting of a
Salt and inflammable Sulphur, which has scarce begun the matrimonial embraces
of its Mercury, and therefore at the best is but a Mineral in the road to
metallization; and being plentifully impregnated with an acid sulphurous Salt,
whose other Ingredients hanging but loosly on, makes it the more readily
soluble in a preterlabent Spring of Water; for I have, for experiment sake,
only suffered simple distilled Water to slide over one of them, and have found
thereby that the Water would by so slight a gliding over, strike a purple
tincture with Galls, which it will do again and again to fresh Water, yielding
thereby an inexhaustible treasure to the transient Springs of Water.

Amongst these Marcasites, I have one by me bright and sparkling, cut into
curious angular forms, like so many Diamonds of several sizes set in a Ground,
as if Nature in this neat piece of work, did vie with Art. And yet in the very
Interstices of these Diamond-like cuts, (betwixt each other) is conspicuous the
Mineral Salt which gives Essence and Operation to most of the Vitrioline Spaws.

Some Mineral Waters may (I confess) be such as are only acid, being only
impregnated with the Esurine Salt of the Earth, and have no addition in them of
Mineral Sulphurs, neither of Iron nor Copper; of which sort I have tasted one
near Chesterfield in Derbyshire, which has a very strong sowrishness, but yet,
with Galls, gives no tincture, although I found a reddish Ocre to lie along the
sides of the Current.

The like (I doubt not) may be found in other places; all which may
notwithstanding prove very good Waters to open Obstructions in the body of man,
by their penetrative Virtues.

Lastly, A solution of Salt of Iron in Water, with Galls, gives a deep purple
tincture, and passes all other mutations of colors answerable to all natural
Mineral Waters. But the solution of Roman Vitriol, (with Galls added) gives no
purple color, but becomes a muddied Liquor, which, with Oil of Tartar assused,
becomes greenish, but with Oil of Sulphur wholly green. The same alterations
does Viride Aeris suffer with the same additions. But Roman Vitriol infused in
a weak Spirit of Urine, gives a blew tincture, which will not be altered by the
addition of Alome. The same does Viride Aeris dissolved in Water.

Whence (by the by) I conclude, Roman Vitriol to be factitious, made up
(sometimes) of Alom, with a tincture of Copper, taken in a weak Spirit of Wine,
or the Phlegm thereof, and so caused to shoot into Chrystals.

A further Account of the Sulphur-Well At KNARSBROUGH.
As also concerning The Original of Hot Baths and Sulphurous Waters.
WHat I have said in my Hydrolog. Chym. concerning the essential cause of this
Mineral-Water, (viz.) That it consists (as a Spaw) of a Sal-marine or fossile
Salt (which differ not either materially or formally) impregnated with an
embryonative faetid Sulphur, or rather sulphurous odor, is (I say) true, and
may be illustrated after a double manner; And that first, by the collateral
Experiments I have there inserted, concerning an embryonative Sulphur, as
faetid as this Spaw Water it self, close locked up in the body of Sal-marine;
as at large is made evident by that Experiment, which I shall not now insist
upon.

But secondly, (and now more to the purpose) the same will better be discovered
by a fresh light; let in by some new Experiments: only before I proceed to
produce what I have to urge herein, I shall first (taking things as they lie in
my way) make an inquiery what Ingredients are not (though by some supposed to
be) in this Spring, (viz.) That neither Vitriol, Nitre, nor Sulphur, (as to the
body thereof) are the constitutive Principles hereof.

First, That Vitriol is not here, is apparent; first, because it will strike no
tincture with Galls, which any Mineral Water, that has but the least
participation of Vitriol will readily do; but this Spring, with the addition of
Galls, gives no purple at all; next, because upon evaporation or distillation
of this Water, no Vitrioline Ocre is found, with which such Waters (whilst in
the vigor of their Operation) are constantly impregnated, and as certainly let
fall to the bottom, when effaete in their Virtues.

Nay further, the same is apparent by this following Experiment, (viz.) I took
some of the Vitriol Marcasites (of which more anon) found in the Bog, about 240
paces North-west from the Well, upon which, grossly bruised, I poured a strong
solution of Sal marinum Hispanicum, made in distilled Water, and set them in
frigido in a long glass body; from the commixture of which, I found no
sulphurous apporrhea to arise, but the solution became green; which being
decanted, and evapored, or distilled, (which last, as I remember, I did to try
if it would yield any effluvia of Sulphur, but found none) I obtained a yellow
Salt in Chrystals, with a Vatrioline Ocre or Sulphur at the bottom; which Salt
was the Sal-marine, tinged with the vitrioline body, (of which I have some by
me): for being dissolved again in fresh distilled Water, it will, with the
addition of Galls, strike a deep tincture; yea, the liquamen ( viz. the Mother,
as the Vitriol or Alom-workmen call it) which shoots not, will (if diluted with
Water) give the same color.

By which it is plain, that as Vitriol gives no odor or effluvia of its
Sulphur, to a solution of Salt; so neither consequently does it yield the same
to this Salt Water, considered simply as such: we will suppose that the Salt
Spring in the Earth (I mean the Spring impregnated with Salt) may in its
passage run through these Marcasites of Vitriol, which are found not far from
thence, (as I shall afterward prove it does) it would of necessity (if simple
Salt) make some slight solution thereof, and give its Indications answerable
to our Experiment, by receiving a tincture from Galls, etc. But by matter of
fact, I find it not so to do; Ergo, Vitriol, as such, is no Ingredient of this
Sulphur-Well.

Secondly, That there is no Nitre, is as evident, in as much as, in the
Analysis of this Water, no such Ingredient is to be found; for neither does
there appear any Salt which shoots into such Styria's, nor that has any
inflammable property; both which are essential to Nitre, as such.

Thirdly, Nor is Sulphur (as to the body thereof) an Ingredient of this Spring,
notwithstanding that it has its denomination therefrom, being called the
Sulphur-Well; and this is evidently apparent, because in the genuine resolution
of this Spaw Water into its Principles, not one grain of a combustible Sulphur
is to be found; for upon a gentle distillation thereof, in Glass Vessels
closely stopped, the sulphurous odor goes off in much less then the third part
of the Water, which is first distilled. The rest which distills, is simple Water
without any odor or taste; and what remains in the bottom, (which I filtred,
though it stood not in much need thereof) was a liquamen of Salt, which being
evaporated a little more, shot into a Salt of cubical Figures; exactly in
taste, color, figure, etc. resembling, yea, the very same with a Fossil, or
Marine Salt, having an inconsiderable addition of Alom Salt lest after
precipitation of the Sulphur; so that nothing of Sulphur, or any the least
inflammable matter can be separated from the Spaw.

Against what I say hereof, I have met with an Objection, urged by a Physician
of note, who grounds it upon this Experiment, (viz.) That upon this Sulphur
Water, or others of the like nature, which break forth higher upon the Bank,
above the usual Spring: I say, that upon these Waters restagnating, is found a
kind of white Cremor, (which sometimes is of various colors) this being skim'd
off, and dried, will take flame and burn; which by matter of fact I have my
self upon trial found true.

To which I answer, That this Sulphur which thus separates from this
restagnating Water, is the same with that which swims upon other sorts of
Mineral Waters upon long standing, being a bluish cream or skin, which swims
as well upon the Sweet-Spaw, and any Vitrioline, or other Mineral Waters; and
(as Dr. Here Is says) being put upon the fire, is inflamed, and yields a
sulphurous odor: The same is also found in an Azure colored skin, swimming
upon the restagating Scarbrough Spaw Water: Yea, the like is frequently to be
seen upon Water that stands long upon any Bog.

This Sulphurous skin which swims upon most Mineral Waters, is referrable to a
double Original, (viz.) Either they are such as have a bituminous matter
swimming upon them; which with the Water Spring, issues forth jointly out of
the bowels of the Earth, from some sulphurous or bituminous source; witness
the Spring at Pitchford in Shropshire, and in Averna in France: The Mare
Asphaliticum, called Mare Mortuum, which has plenty of Naptha and Bitumen
issuing from the Shores, which have store of bituminous Pits.

As also that Water, in agro Parmensi, Falop. 24.6.
according to Falopius, of which Water he says, Est usque aduo bituminosis
vaporibus referta; ut ex flamma vix sibi admaea accendatur: And that likewise,
in agro Patavino; and all other Waters, upon which swim Camphire, Amber, in
succo suo soluto, (both which by Falopius Cardanus, Agricola and Casius, are
accounted, e genere bituminis) Pisasphaltum, Petroleum, Balsamus Indicus, etc.
all which are reckoned as various species de genere bituminis; in all which the
bituminous skin will take fire and burn with a sulphurous flame; for as no
Oil, so neither Sulphur, nor the Bitumina, will mingle, per minima, with Water,
Oils, and Sulphurs, consisting of similar parts, which bear no proportion with
watery Particles, unless the watery be subjugated by an oily Ferment. Or,

Secondly, They are such as (whilst in the bowels of the Earth) are impregnated
with Minerals, (although perhaps not sulphurous) but when they come into the
open Air, presently (especially by restagnation) let fall their imbibed
Ingredients, and by continuance of time suffer a sulphurous matter to be
generated de novo; or rather indeed, as I apprehend, by long standing, suffer
the Air, by a kind of putrefactive ferment, to cause a slow resolution of the
very compage of Water; and in this gentle Analysis, makes the restagnating
Water cast its Sulphur, which was not preexistent in the Water, as a Mineral
Sulphur; but is (as I said) either a bituminous Cremor, or a Sulphur of Water
engendered by a putrefactive resolution thereof; which will, being dried, take
flame and burn.

That I might make a sesemblance of this Water, the better to inquire into the
nature thereof, I took one ounce of Hepar Antimonii, upon which, pulverized, I
poured some warm Water; into which, filtred, we dropped some little solution of
Alom Salt, (for I knew Vinegar would do it, as is usual in the making of
Sulphur Auratum Antimonii) and it forthwith separated the Sulphur of Antimony
with a strong sulphurous odor, not unlike that of the Sulphur-Well; and being
filtred, was the same in taste and smell: by which I learned what that was
which precipitated the body of Sulphur after its first solution in the Water
from its native Minera, viz. That it was an Alom Juice, in which I am
confirmed, in as much as I find a Bed of Alom, within the space of ten yards
from the breaking forth of that Well; from the surface of whose Stones, I have
taken a Salt, which (dissolved in fresh Water) I found would strike a deep
tincture with Galls; yea, the very Stone it self, being put into fresh Water,
will, with Galls, give the very same color; of which very thing I have not met
with any that have taken notice, either those who have wrote of, or others who
have frequented the Spaws; and though I found hereby, what was the second Juice
which precipitated the body of Sulphur, and had made its Apporrhea or volatile
odor to appear, yet was I still at a loss what this Sulphur was, or from what
body, and by what solvent it first became loosened or prepared; for all
Sulphurs, whether in their own Earth, or wrapped up in mineral or metallic
Veins, till they be opened by some particular and proper Solvents, are not fit
to give forth their volatile parts, nor to strike the nostrils with their odor.

And that Water impregnated with Sal marine, is not sufficient to open the body
of a mineral Sulphur, and consequently not adapted for a Menstruum, is apparent
by this following Experiment, (viz.) I took a pint of Spring Water, and
dissolved two or three dragms of Sal marine therein, (which is the quantity, at
the most, which the Sulphur-Well contains of the body of Salt) into which I
poured three ounces of the Marcasites of Vitriol aforesaid; then stirred the
mixture very well; after that I poured off some of the Liquor, and filtred it,
which would neither tinge Silver, nor yield a sulphurous odor; but to try
whether Sal marine would at all open the body of Sulphur in the Marcasites, as
some supposed, I added to the filtred Liquor, a solution of Alom Salt, as I had
done for the precipitation of the Sulphur of Antimony, out of the solution of
Hepar, but found no precipitation, coagulation, nor alteration of that Sulphur,
either in color or smell, nor would it at all tinge Silver; all which it would
have done to an opened and prepared Mineral Sulphur.

This Menstruum of the Sal marine, had indeed made such a solution of the
Vitrioline parts of the Marcasites, as rendered it capable of receiving a
tincture from Galls, but had not at all touched the sulphurous parts thereof.

But before I deposite my own Thesis of the true native Ingredients of this
Spaw, which shall be clearly demonstrated by Experiment. I would first take off
what Dr. French opinionates thereon, who says thus, As for the stinking odor
thereof, (speaking of the Sulphur-Well) that I suppose is caused from the
vapors of the burning Bitumen, and adust terreness therewith; and therefore he
judges it to be hot in its original source, in the manner of Hot Baths, who
supposes subterrestrial fires, sed with a bituminous or sulphurous matter,
not only to cause hot Springs or Baths, but also to give being to the
faetidness of such sulphur. ous Waters.

Now this is (I confess) an Opinion that not only he, but Falopius, Empedocles,
Agricola, Casius, Kircher and others hold; for by two ways they did suppose
all Waters to be heated, Nam aquarum (according to Empedocles) aliae calefiunt
quia transeant per saxosa loca, quibus subjectus fit ignis ardens in metallo
sulphureo vel bituminoso; aliae incaloseunt quia transeant per ipsum metallum
ignitum and ardens, as thought Agricola. Nor was Falopius much otherwise
minded, who treating de aquis Patavinis, whose sulphurous odor is not much
unlike that of our Sulphur-Well, says, Ques halitus sulphuris Patavinis, iste
aqua habent non ideo quia bullient in metallo ipso sulphureo; sed quoniam
transeant supra loca, sub quibus ebullit sulphuri, ex quo efferuntur vapores ad
cuniculos, and cum aqua miscentur; from whence he grounds his Opinion, that the
difference of Hot Baths, (viz.) That some are intensly hot, others moderately;
some tepid and subtepid, others cold; proceed from these two, (viz.) Paucitas
and distantia ignis, The scarcity and distance of the fire.

In answer to which Opinions, I thus return, viz, That although I cannot deny
but that there are Subterraneal Fires, which being once inkindled, feed upon
sulphurous Minerals, witness the Eruptions of Aetna, Vesuvius, Strongilo, and
other Vulcanian Mountains; yet do not I see causes sufficient to convince me,
that these give being to all our Hot Baths, or that their Vapors gives
faetidness to sulphurous Waters. That there may be some hot Baths adjacent to
those sulphurous burnings, which probably may be heated by passing over those
places in cuniculis, under which a bituminous matter burns, I shall not deny;
witness that in Apulia, called Tribulus, where is plenty of Ashes and calcined
Stones; and those about the Lake Lucrinus and Avernus; and that in Agro
Valaterano, according to Falopius; Yet we scarce read of any in in Campania,
where is the Hill Vesuvius; nor in Sicily, where Mont Gibello belcheth forth
flames; nor in other places where these Eruptions are, do Hot Baths more
frequently appear, then in those places where there is found not the least
suspicion of any Forge of Vulcan.

That these Subterranean Fires are not the causes of our hot Mineral Waters, or
sulphurous Springs in general, will be evident; if we consider, first, that
it is more then probable, that a subterraneal fire is no more naturally
implanted in the bowels of the Earth, then the imaginary elementary fire is to
be found sub concavo Lunae; which, though it may seem as a Paradox to some, yet
duly considered, it will not appear irrational; for the materia substrata of
all inflammable concretions, whether in the Cavities of the Earth, or upon the
supersicies thereof, or in the common expausum of the Air, must be a
combustible matter common to them all, and that must be bituminous, unctuous,
or sulphurous; al^ which, whether in Subterraneal Caverns, or upon the Surface
of the Earth, or in the Aereal Region, may (I say) take flame, and burn from
some one of these three Causes, (viz.) either from Motion, Corruscation, or
Lightning; or flamma de flamma, one fire inkindling another; to which we may
add a fourth, (which yet may be included in one of the three) (viz.) from some
Mineral Marcasites acuated by air and moisture, instance Alom and Coperous
Mines, being in parcels broken, exposed and moistened, will gather an actual
heat, and produce much more of those Minerals, then else the Mine would yield;
as the learned Dr. Jorden, in his Discourse of Natural Baths; and the ingenious
Dr. Power, in his Micros. obs. Confirms; yea, and that Brass lumps (which are
a sort of Marcafite) being laid in heaps, and exposed to the moist Air, or
sprinkled with Water, will smoke and grow exceeding hot, and sometimes take
fire, and burn all that is about it, as the foresaid Dr. Power proves: So the
Mines of Tin-Glass, exposed after the same manner, to the moist Air, will
become very hot; and Quicklime will do the same.

The like Dr. Jorden observes in those Stone Coals called Metal Coals, which
are mixed with a Marcasite, containing some Mineral Juice, which receiving
moisture, does dilate it self, and grow so hot, as oftentimes great heaps of
those Coals are kindled thereby, and burnt before their time, as has been seen
at Puddle-Wharf in London, and at Newcastle: although these last I account do
not much differ from the aforesaid Coperas Marcasite.

Now seeing that all combustible Concretes may contract a heat, yea, may
actually take flame, and burn from some of the foresaid causes; witness the
heating and firing of a Coach-Wheel, by too rapid a motion; the burning of
Houses, Trees, Men, etc. by Lightning and Thunder; the taking flame of one
combustible matter by another; and lastly, the self-inkindling of a Ryck of Hay
or Corn, which has been laid up too moist; and the taking fire of several
Marcasites, by being exposed to the moist Air, as aforesaid: Therefore I see no
reason why a Meteor or Comet, which suppose brought to that body of sulphurous
Exhalations, and taking flame from its own motion, or from Lightning, or from
what other cause, should less be reputed an Elementary Fire, sub Concavo Lunae;
then those subterraneal fires kindled (according to all probability)
occasionally (not to say accidentally, quoad nos) from some of the foresaid
causes, should be accounted native to the Earth, or naturally implanted
therein, for the production of all Mineral and Metalline bodies: so that as the
one is irrational, and is exploded by our modern Philosophers; so consequently
the other may seem as irrational, if we do but further consider,

First, How impossible it is for actual fire to become the cause of generation
of Minerals or Metals, as some suppose, who imagine the Fire as a Native born
in the Earth; seeing fire, I mean, flaming or glowing fire, is by the gravest
of Philosophers so far rejected from amongst the causes of Generation, as it is
rather justly to be reputed mors rerum artificiosa, the death or destroyer of
all things, committing actual rapine upon all the Seminary Principles of
bodies, which fall under its tyranny, dispersing and dissipating those
Concretions suddenly, which Nature (helped by a generative heat working upon
imbred Seminals) had taken a long time to compile together, making havoc of
the neat Structures of Bodies.

Secondly, How unlikely it is for Water to be so disposed in the Earth; in what
Vessels can it be imagined to lodge? Yea, how these fancied Hydrophylacia can be
so well placed, as they may best be capable to receive the fires, from the as
much fancied Pyrophylacia, without danger of the Waters falling upon the fires
and quenching them, so as to make the heated Hydrophylacia the cause of Hot
Baths; for cannot Water as easily descend or slip down those small Chinks and
Cranies, and smother that Demigorgon, as the fire could ascend to heat these
Cisterns of Water? unless we imagine the Water included in some vast Kettles,
(and so was heated by the playing of the flames about) and then we must be
forced to think of a Vulcan to be before his Fires; who must first hammer out
these large Caldrons, preparing empty Vessels for us to fill with our watery
conceits.

Thirdly, If we should grant the possibility of these actual Subterraneal
Fires, as connatural to the Earth, why should we not find Minerals and Metals
melted instead of being generated? and why we should not, where these fires
meet with Vitriol and Nitre, or Vitriol and Salt, find store of Aqua Fortis?
and meeting with Sulphur, should not give us plenty of Oil of Sulphur, tanquam
per campanam, being the winding Crevices of the Earth would do the like as
Glass Bells for conden^ing the Vapors of fired Sulphur into a Liquor, and
meeting with Vitriol or Alom-stone, should not calcine them to our hand; so as
instead of Vitriol, we should find Colcothar; and instead of Antimony, we
should find either stibium or regulus, or the sublimed flowers; and so I could
hold on to number up many more absurdities that would necessarily follow.

Fourthly, If we consider how easily combustible Concrets in the bowels of the
Earth, where plenty of bituminous and sulphurous matter is found, may, and
probably has been kindled, either by Lightning, or by catching flame from some
burning body; or lastly, by some of their Marcasites, exposed to the moist Air,
or to whom a moist Air has had access; for being once fired, vires acquirit
eundo, it burns on as long as it finds Fuel; and where store of combustible
matter is, (as without doubt there is in all the Vulcano's) there cannot but be
plenty of Heterogeneous mixtures, as of Stone, Gravel, Earth, etc. which
together with the combustible matter, is thrown up at the mouths of those
subterraneous Furnaces; which if they (as by continuance of time) may by
constant burning so undermine the ground, as at some times a vast quantity of
Earth and other Rubbish fall upon it; then being forced to seek another passage
forth, and cannot suddenly, or at least, not so much as the force of the fire
requires, it being obstructed in its passage, causes Earthquakes; but at last
finding vent, makes new Eruptions, thrown forth in such abundance of Stones and
Earth, as sometimes is sufficient (if it happen under the Sea) to make a new
Island; witness what Kircher reports happened, Kirch. Mund. Subter. page 77.
Anno. 1638. ad insulam Sti. Michaelis in Mari Athlantico, Stimulantibus
ignibus subterraneis tantum lapidum in medio Maris egestum fuit, ut inde insula
lapidibus in montes custervatis nata, sese ad quinque milliarium latitudinem
extenderit: As also in Agro Puteolano, Novus mons ex Mari, unius noctis
saevientis naturae subterraneae violentia protuberans; also, Vulcanus
Liparitanus (he further adds) Tantum cinerum saxorum. que ante annos circiter
sexaginta (speaking from the time his Book was writ) ejecisse fertur; ut juxta
sese in medio Mari, quem and ideo vulcanellum, veluti filium a patre genitum
vocant, produxerit; which he confirms by his own Observation.

And to confirm further what we say concerning the occasional or accidental
inkindling of combustible matter, in the intrals of the Earth, I shall call in
a Testimonial Instance, out of Mr. Burton's History of Leicestershire, who
says, That at Coal-Eaton in that County, in the beginning of the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth, the Coal-Mines there did burn for many years together, and
could not be quenched, until the sulphurous and brimstony matter (whereupon it
wrought) was utterly exhausted and consumed. The like fire in Coal-Mines, was
in the year 1622. burning near Willingsworth and Weddesbury, in the County of
Stafford; not unlike which was a sudden eruption of fire in the Coal-Mines at
Sunderland, in the County of Durham, (as I was informed by my learned Friend
Mr. J. H. who had it confirmed by a Gentleman of that County, who had been Page
to King James) where by a sudden eruption of fire, to the number of about five
persons working in the bottom of the Pit, were consumed and destroyed; several
of their Members, as Arms, Legs, etc. were found torn from their bodies.

The last instance might be a sulphurous Damp; or arsenical malignant Steam,
arising from the commixture of heterogeneal mineral Juyces or Spirits, which by
the flame of a Candle (which the Miners frequently have to work by day and
night) might very probably take fire, and so by its unimaginable force, might
easily act that Tragical Scene.

The other Instances evidence the possibility of Subterraneal Fires from
occasional and accidental Causes, which may, not unlikely, be transferred (I
mean from the like causes) to those Ignivomous Mountains, Aetna, Vesuvius,
Strongilo, etc. So that as a Subterraneal Fire was inkindled in Coal-Mines,
which continued for many years; during which time it was as real subterraneal
Fire (and as probable from the same causes) as those fired Mountains aforesaid.

Only the main Objection I meet with, is the perpetuation of those bituminous
and sulphurous Fires of the flaming Furnaces of Aetna, Vesuvius, etc. which
those other fires in coal-mines do not; therefore, as some suppose, are sed by
a large-Central or Abyssal Fire; witness Kircher, Abyssorum omnium
pyrophylacticarum maximam sancti patres in centro terrae non incongrue
statuerint, eternum improbis ad penam destinatum carcerem: which (as he
supposes) is no less then Hell Fire, and the Confines thereof to be his other
Pyrophylacia, which heat the Hydrophylacia, and gives Original to all Hot
Baths: which being a figment from the Center to the Circumference, from the
beginning to the end, I shall not take so much liberty now as to insist upon it.

The Reason, I would say, why the Vulcano's are kept burning with a perpetual
Fire, is the vast quantities of bituminous and sulphurous matter lodged in
those great Hills; which having once taken fire, burn on, and then comes about
in a great round; and as it has consumed the combustible matter on one side,
it goes further on to consume the other; which whilst it is doing, that vacant
part retaining yet (especially in the Earth thereabouts) the Seeds of those
sulphurous mineral Concretes, produces the like de novo, which becomes fresh
Fuel when the Fire wheels about again, still the Mineral Seeds being at work,
produces fresh Minerals in the deserted spaces, where the Earth yet retains
the seminal Juyces of those combustible Bodies; and thus may the Circle of
those Subterraneal Fires be perpetuated, and not fed from any Central or Hell
Fire implanted in the Earth; which may well be confirmed, in as much as it is
observed, that Minerals and Metals are generated anew in the same places out of
which they have been formerly dug; witness the profit ( Falopius says) the
Duke of Florence has by it; and what Sandiv. says, That there have been
Metals found in Mountains, where formerly there have been none left.

Thus not only Nitre is afresh to be got out of the same Earth it was formerly
extracted from; but the like is observed in the Minerals of Vitriol and Alom;
yea, the Generation of Metals, are not terminated with one production, it
cease not there, but the Mineral Seed gathers strength by enlarging it
self, continually proceeds to subjugate more matter under its Government; so as
where once a Generation is begun, it continues many Ages, and seldom gives
over: Thus Dr. Jordan has observed from the Tinners in Cornwall, That they
have, after thirty years, found Tin generated de novo, where it has been
formerly all dug up and filled with Earth. The like has been observed of
Iron, in the Mines of Ilva, an Island in the Adriatic Sea, under the
Venetians, where the Iron breeds continually as fast as they can work it, which
is confirmed by Agricola and Baccius. The like at Saga in Ligiis, where they
(as the same Dr. Jordan observes) dig again their Iron-Mines every tenth year.
Mothesius gives examples of almost all sorts of Minerals and Metals, which he
has observed to grow and regenerate. Erastus (as Dr. J. notes) affirms that he
saw in S. Joachims Dale, Silver grown upon a Beam of Wood, which was placed in
the Pit to support the works. The like of reproductions of Metals, is also
observed in the Lead-Mines at Mendip and the Peak, which do not only stretch
further in extent of ground, then has been observed heretofore, but also are
renewed in the same ground which has been formerly wrought. But to return.

Now as these Subterraneal Fires are not (for reasons aforesaid) native to the
Earth, nor are Elementary in Centro Terrae, more then sub Concavo Lunae; so
consequently, neither are they causes in general of our Hot Baths, or
sulphurous Springs; for as there are no Subterraneal Fires found either near
our Hot Baths, or our Sulphur Waters; witness the digging to the Source of a
hot Water, by the charge and industry of M. de Rochas, (which in our Hydrol.
Chym. we further insist upon) where the Earth was dug beyond the original of
the Waters heating, and yet not the least specimen of any actual or Elementary
Fire, being only produced from a vivid nitrous or hermetick Salt, (as he calls
it) frequently engendered de novo, touching upon a Mineral Bed of Sulphur Vive,
from whose mutual contact that Hot Bath proceeded: Nay, besides this, suppose
we should (for indulgence sake) admit of a Central or Elementary Subterraneal
Fire, keept burning by a sulphurous Matter, yet would it not even hence follow
that our hot Baths or sulphurous Matters, should frequently have their
original thence; and that, first, because suppose Sulphur burning actually, and
that whether set on fire by any of the aforesaid causes, or by Central Fire, or
as you will, yet shall this Sulphur heat no further then the inkindled flames
reach, no more then Sulphur burning under a Glass Campane, (for the making its
Oil) does heat further then the Glass it touches, so that the actual flame
heats, but so does not the fume thereof; for, suppose that the actual flames of
Sulphur should touch upon, and heat the Water; why might we not as easily
imagine the Water to quench the Fire, as the Fire to heat the Water? Nay
further, Suppose we should grant that the flame should not heat Water
immediately, but mediately by heating other bodies, as Stones, etc. over which
the Water in cuniculis propriis passes, according to Falopius, yet not a few
absurdities would hence follow; as how these flames should burn under a Quarry
of Stones, when thereby intercepted from Air (the life of Fire) without which
it exists not? Next, how these hot Baths should then become impregnated with
the medicinal virtues of Sulphur, seeing, by this Supposition, the Water would
want both the flame and fume of Sulphur?

My second Reason (why upon admission, that though a flagrable sulphurous
matter should be burning in the bowels of the Earth, yet should it not be the
cause of hot Baths) is, because then generally all hot Waters would have a
strong Brimstone-like smell, like the odor of Wine or Ale matched or fumed with
Brimstone in Bottles, or like the fumes of Sulphur which arise in the
distillation of its Oil per campanam, of which smell, amongst all hot Baths, I
read of none which yield it.

My third Argument is grounded upon matter of fact in this following
Experiment, (viz.) Take a mineral Sulphur, whether Vive, or in a Marcasite, (as
of Vitriol etc.) put it (in pieces) in an Earthen Retort, and give degrees of
fire under it, in a Furnace; where, because the fire comes not actually to it,
it flames not; urge this so, as all the Fumes (which are dry ones, called
Flowers) shall pass through the Neck into a Receiver, filled most-what with
Water, and so placed, as that these fumes all fall and condense upon the
surface of the Water; which they will do in an unctuous substance like Oil of
Wax or Amber, congealing by degrees, and becoming harder, they fall down to the
bottom in bright flakes of Brimstone; by which way I have got a Sulphur out of
the Marcasites of Vitriol found in the Bog near the Sulphur-Well. Now the Fire
(as I said) drives forth the dry fumes or flowers; these coming in a vapor,
condense upon the surface of the Water in the Receiver; and yet (which is what
I aim at) this Water has neither taste nor smell like that of our Sulphur Well
at Knarsbrough. So that neither an actual or immediate firing of Sulphur, as is
done in the making its Oil, nor a distilling or subliming of it by a Fire ab
extra, whereby Sulphur becomes separated from a Vitrioline Marcasite, will give
to Water either the like taste or odor with the Sulphur-Well; and therefore we
must conclude, that its faetid odor, is not caused from any Vapors of burning
Bitumen or Sulphur, whether imagined to be done in open passages, or close
Caverns of the Earth.

Having thus far refuted (and that I hope demonstratively) the Opinions of Hot
Baths and Sulphur Waters, taking their Original from imbred subterraneal Fires;
I shall now propound my own Observation, in the fabric of the like Waters,
artificially performed in imitation of the natural. I tried therefore whether
Sal Armoniack, mixed with a Mineral Sulphur, and so dissolved together in a
distilled Water, would at all open the body of Sulphur; into which, when
filtred, I poured some Solution of Alom-stone; but it caused no precipitation,
nor made any discovery of any dissolved Sulphur; also into a little of the
clear Solution, I poured some Oil of Tartar per deliquium, and thereby found it
raised a volatile Spirit out of the Armoniack, which would smite the Nose, but
perceived not the least odor of Sulphur. So that I observed that neither Sal
marine alone, or joined with Nitre, nor Sal Armoniack (compounded of a Sal
marine and Volatile Salts) would any of them be sufficient to open the body of
Sulphur in its Mineral Marcasites.

At length, after various Experiments, I hit upon that which answered my
expectation, and satisfied my curiosity; and for the further improvement of
ingenuity, and as a Spur to the greater advancement of Mechanical Experiments,
shall communicate that to the World, which all the Writers of those Sulphurous
Waters (which I have yet met with) have been deficient in.

I took therefore a pint of Spring Water, in which I dissolved betwixt one and
two dragms of Sal marine in frigido; for about that quantity the Sulphur Water
contains of common Salt; into which Solution of Salt, in Water, I added of Calx
Vive, and the Marcasites of Vitriol, (found near the Sulphur-Well) grossly
pulverised, about two or three ounces, which presently contracted a
considerable heat; I poured off some of the Water, into which, filtred, I
poured a little Solution of the simple Alom-Salt, and it immediately caused a
precipitation of a Sulphur, and sent forth the very smell; yea, had the exact
taste of the Sulphur-Well.

This Experiment, thus succeeding, gratified me for my pains in others less
successful; for that which I longed to know, was, What that Menstruum should
be, which might so open the body of Sulphur in the Marcasites, as might render
it capable of a precipitation or coagulation by another second Menstruum or
Acid Liquor; seeing we could imagine no lixivial Salts could be found in the
bowels of the Earth, (which commonly is used for the opening the body of
Sulphur); Therefore I thought it might possibly be from some natural Calx Vive,
seeing there are plenty of Lime-stones upon that Forest, which at Knarsbrough
are burnt in Pits; and so it proved, for the Salt Water passing through some
natural Stone, or soft Marcasite of Calx Vive, becomes acuated thereby; and
then running over the Vitrioline Marcasites, or passing through a Sulphurous
Earth, congeneal to those Marcasites, opens the body of their Embryonative
Sulphur, which it carries along with it, till it come on further to an Alom-Bed
(which I observed to be within ten yards of the breaking forth of that Spaw)
where the acid Juice precipitates the Sulphur, and sends forth the odor; which
being percolated through a streiner of Sand, comes forth pretty clear.

That this Artificial Water is an exact resemblance and imitation of the
natural, is evident, because it answers the natural in every circumstance; for
it has the very smell and taste, undergoes the very same precipitations by
lixivial Liquors; yea, and lastly, tingeth Silver yellow, as readily as the
Sulphur-Well; and therefore, without doubt, the Operation of the Artificial
would be found (upon trial) equivalent to the Natural in other properties also.

The main Objection that offers it self against the identity or similarness of
this Artificial, with the Natural Sulphur Water, is by querying how Calx Vive,
which is an artificial product of the Fire, actually calcining those
Lime-stones, should be imagined to be naturally in the Earth, or how Nature
should find such a Stone calcined to its hand, in the Entrals of the Earth, as
may be sufficient to open the body of these sulphurous Marcasites.

To which I Answer, That it is more then probable there is a natural soft Stone
of Calx Vive, where this Marcasite is in succo primitivo, retaining the same
Seminals and essential Properties, in a remiss degree, with that Stone brought
on to maturity by Air and Fire; for the Air first hardens that Stone, (and
makes it unfit to give any Solution in Water) and then the actual Fire loosneth
it, and makes it yield it self more readily to a Solution by moisture.

To illustrate which, we can as easily apprehend that the Air does harden these
natural Lime-stones (which, while succulent, are soft, and in the form of a
white Earth or Marl) by its continual access in a long tract of time; as we can
imagine the same Air to harden a blew Clay, found upon the Banks in
Lincolnshire; which being exposed to the Air, does, in continuance of time,
harden into a sort of Stone like a blew Marble. For Workmen generally observe,
that all manner of Stone (yea even Marble it self) which they dig out of the
Ground, becomes more and more hard, by being long exposed to the Air; which, to
me, seems to give no small grounds of reason for the possibility of the Liquor
Alkahest, or Universal Solvent; for seeing all bodies are but concretions, and
(as I may say) hardnings of their primitive Juyces, under various disguises,
generally performed by the efficiency of Air: Therefore to prepare a Menstruum
by Art, which may work wonders in this kind, is no more (as I apprehend) then
to make such a one as may soften these Concretions, (made by Air) and by taking
away their hardness, may reduce bodies into their first jucy Liquors; for what
is the shell of an Egg, but a soft film or membrane, hardened and petrified by
the influence of the Air, and as easily reduceable into its first membranous
softness, by being boiled a while in Vinegar? What are the Bones of Animals,
but Spermatick Juyces hardened and consolidated? And were it not for the
perpetual circulation of the Juyces of the body, constantly transpiring through
the pores thereof, we should either become petrified, and walk about like so
many movable, but senseless Statues; or we should be incircled with a Bark, and
appear like so many Plant-Animals, or sensitive Plants. What are all Vegetables
from the Hysop or Rosemary of the Wall, to the tallest Cedar, but seminal
Juyces congealed into those bulky substances which are presented to our eye?
Lastly, What are all Mineral and Mecalline Marcasites, Stones, etc. but the
primitive liquid succulencies concreted into more solid bodies by a hardening
ferment (or what other name we may call it by) aequipollent to the Air?

And amongst all these, what are the Marcasites of Limestone, but a hardened
concretion of its first imbred Juice, or soft marly Earth? whose Minera, whilst
thus in solutis principiis, is one of the chiefest Juyces in the Fabric, both
of hot Baths and sulphurous Waters.

That this is the chief cause of hot Baths, is confirmed by that Experiment
made by that Noble Person, the Lord Fairfax, of a piece of a white Marcasite
found about the place of those hot Springs in Sommersetshire, which put into
Water, gives a heat; not but that there may be other causes of hot Waters, as
from the coincidence of two Springs impregnated with different Mineral Salts
and Juyces, which before union are probably both actually cold, and yet by a
fermentation caused by their mutual contact, may cause a considerable heat;
which can no better be resembled, then by supposing a current of Water, endued
with a lix vial or volatile Salt, to meet another saturated with an esurine
acid Spirit or Salt; though these before union are both actually cold, yet
forthwith, upon their mutual contact, they make a strong ebullition and
fermentation, which produces a heat sufficient to warm those Liquors, which
are, or pass through where the contest is made; not to say that an other cause
of some hot Baths, may be from some Marcasites contracting a heat by moisture,
let into their Minera by some crevices of the Earth, which may give heat to
some Springs that pass over them, nor to insist upon any other cause (viz.) of
some Salts, which in the Minera of Sulphur, may cause such a fermentation, as
may cause hot Springs; witness Dr. Rech. his Experiment.

Yea, that this natural Limestone may be reckoned amongst the chief causes of
hot Baths, is further confirmed by a lixivial Salt, (though small in quantity)
which I have, by evaporation of Buxton hot Water, found left behind: that it is
an alkalizate or lixivial Salt, appears both by its salty taste, its easy
solution per deliquium; and lastly, The Ebullition it makes with an acid
Spirit; all which are demonstrative Arguments of its alkalizate nature: for
Buxton Bath consists of Water, which by distillation arises insipid over the
Helm, and therefore contains no volatile Minerals, and of an inconsiderable
quantity of a solution of the Alkali of the natural Limestone, (where plenty
of the Limestone hardened by the Air, is found in the Country thereabouts).

And that this Minera of Calx Vive, is the chief (if not the sole) apperient,
that opens the body of Sulphur in its Minera, for the making sulphurous Waters,
is evident from our lately proposed Experiment; for all sulphurous Waters (as
I hinted before) are either such as have a sulphurous or bituminous matter
swimming upon them, (witness the instance aforesaid) or they are such whose
bodies being opened by proper Solvents, do then easily give forth their
volatile odors and sapors to Water, which may be made evident by the addition
of acid Salt or Liquor.

And now that we have found out what the first Menstruum is, which opens the
body of Sulphur in the Marcasites found near the Sulphur Well; Let us now
consider what these Marcasites are, I find them to be a spongy or porous Stone,
hard, and wrought with a kind of Network, which in it self contains both
Vitriol and Sulphur, besides a body of Colcothar; and that it does so, appears
by exposing some of these Marcasites to the Air, till they be covered with a
hoary sweet vitrioline Floscule, which then being washed, gives a vitrioline
Solution, that being filtred and evaporated to a cuticle, shoots into a green
Vitriol.

These Marcasites, thus washed, we set before the fire to dry so long, till
they began to send forth a sulphurous fume; then being pounded grossly, we
distilled, or rather sublimed them in an Earthen Retort; what would arise by
degrees of fire, we so placed a Receiver, with Water in it, as that the fumes
were thrown upon the surface thereof, which first swam like Oil upon the Water,
then by degrees hardening, fell down to the bottom; which when the sublimation
was over, we washed, dried, and then melted it, and in small lead Pipes cast it
into Magdaleons; in color and inflammabity, exactly resembling the common
Sulphur, of which at one distillation I got near half a pound.

That they contain a Colcothar or Metalline Crocus, is evident, by burning the
Sulphur of one of these Stones in the fire; and when cold, it will be red just
like the Colcothar of the Vitriol of Iron.

The Caput Mortuum, left after the sublimation of the Sulphur from the
Marcasites, is very like those Cinders, or Scoria of Iron, which is melted from
the Iron-Mass in the Forge, where Iron is made out of its Minera.

From what has been already said, there seems to be no small encouragement
toward prosecuting a further discovery of the nature of this Water, by digging
the Spring, and following it to the fource, or original, where it receives the
first impregnation with Sulphur; for I see nothing yet to the contrary, that
may persuade, why it should not be found to be a hot Spring at that place where
the first imbibition of Sulphur is, especially if the succus La^^is calcari, or
Minera of Calx Vive be found with it, which (for ought I know) might be found
quivalent in virtue to the Aqua Aponensis, that ^^m^d hot Bath near Padua, so
much discoursed by ^^lopius, whom I find to enumerate the very same mineral
Ingredients, in that which I find by Experiment aforesaid to be in ours, before
its precipitation by an aluminous acid Juice; for he says, Certo tellegi illa
tantum tria (i. e) Sal copiosum, succum lapidis calcarii, and vaporem
sulphureum in illa Apounsi aqua conteneri; and says further, Est aqua
ferventissima, and dum calida est, sapit sulphur and ^itumen, refrigerata
neutrum per se fert; and speaking on of hot Waters, says, Aquae Thermales quae
actu frigidae scatent, in sua origin esse ferventes; and that only happens
from the distance of space betwixt the impregnation of Waters first with their
Minerals, and their place of breaking forth.

And as Dr. Jordan says, That all hot Waters are not Sulphurous, witness the
Baths of Caldenella and Avenian, etc. which are all hot, and yet give no sign
of Sulphur, proceeding rather from the Minera of Calx Vive, or from other the
like causes of hot Waters, as aforesaid; nor are all sulphurous Waters hot, and
that because of the distance of the Minera, where the Water first receives heat
from the eruption of the Springhead.

Amongst these sulphurous Springs, as some are replenished with a common Fossil
Salt; witness the Sulphur-Well we discourse of: So there are found others no
less sulphurous in taste and smell, which yet have not the least specimen of
any such Salt; for instance, One of the Springs which is in the black Bog,
where the Marcasites are got; and one at Braughton, not far from Skipton in
Craven; as also one I found in Ferndale upon Blacomore; all which are caused by
a combination of a mineral Sulphur and a natural Limestone, the one opening
the body of the other, without the addition of any common Salt; only these
Springs having imbibed these Minerals, meeting afterward with an acid Juice of
the Alom-Salt, make a precipitation of the body of Sulphur, and only leaves
the Water perfumed with the odor thereof.

That this Sulphur Water should coagulate Milk, if boiled therewith, proceeds
from a slight touch of the acid Juice of Alom; which although in the
coagulation of the Sulphur, it also precipitates a great part of its own body,
yet so much thereof remains, as does make it capable of curdling Milk; for the
Sulphur does not, in as much as it retains that coagulating property, after the
sulphurous odor being evaporated; yea, the very Salt left after distillation
or evaporation will do the same; nor may the common Salt, (the chief Ingredient
of that Water) do it, because we see the contrary in putting Salt to Water and
Milk, which does not curdle it; therefore it must be from some small imbibition
of the Alom-Salt, which yet is so little in quantity, as does not alter the
cubical figure of the common Salt.

And to try whether we could separate the common Salt, from the body of the
Sulphur Water, and the Water only to retain the odor thereof; I took of the
sandy Earth, which lies upon the Bank opposite to the Well; wherewith I caused
a tap'd Vessel to be filled, upon which I ordered the Sulphur Water to be
poured; and about two hours and a half after, (during which time I was digging
in the Bog above) I caused some of it to be let forth at the Tap into a Glass,
and found its brackishness not only much diminished, but that also it lost its
sulphurous odor quite, having not the least smell or taste thereof.

From which experiment may probably be confirmed these two Suppositions; first,
That the breaking forth of this Spring, is not far from the place of its
imbibed Minerals; for although it be so far, as the first contracted heat is
lost in its passage, yet it is not so far, but that it retains its odor after
the precipitation of the most part of the Sulphur, by the acid aluminous Juice.
Next, That if this Sulphur Water had been carried through a longer tract of a
supposed Strainer, before its eruption, it would not only have been diminished
in its Salt, but also its sulphurous odor would have been very weak, if not
wholly spent.

That the Earth, about the Sulphur Well, is replenished with variety of Mineral
Glebes, is evident from the diversity of Waters found thereabouts; for near the
Sulphur-Well, there is not more then ten or twelve yeards distant, (upon the
Banck on the other side of the current of Water) a Spring which drills out of a
small Alom Rock, which leaves a red Sediment behind it, and runs forth with so
great a disadvantage, as to the saving any of it clear, that I could not (that
little time I had to stay) procure any clear Water to make trial thereof, but
it promises much for an Alom Spaw.

And in the black Bog, about two hundred and forty yards above the head of this
Well, where the Marcasites are chiefly found, are several slow Springs, all
which I have caused to be dug further; that which lies on the North side of
the Bog, is that which the Water-women call (improperly) an Alom-Water; this,
with a little Gall, strikes a deep purple, and in taste is very strong of the
Vitrioline Marcasites; yea, the most of the Earth dug up, is Vitrioline.

That Spring toward the West, has a both sulphurous odor and taste also, but
not very brackish; this I caused to be dug a little depth, to find out the
Marcasites; where we found many little metalline Stones, perforated and
corroded into Shells or Scales, and worn (as I may say) into Sceletons: I found
in the Earth, lying along the current of the Spring, a bright Floscule, which
runs in streaks very thin, and almost impalpable; which lay much in Veins; I
look upon it as a crude mercurial Juice, which with its connate embryonative
Sulphur, was as a Seed, laying a foundation for a mineral or metalline
production; the Spring, by digging, proved more large and fluent; the Earth
about it, was a black soft marly Ground, very unctuous, and appeared as if it
were much impregnated with Mineral Juyces; the Earth grained, dried, and burnt,
gives a Brimstone-like smell. Those Marcasites we found, were below the current
of the Spring; and therefore it is likely that Water had not penetrated them,
for it gave no tincture with Galls.

The Spring toward the South, had plenty of a black spongy Marcasite, out of
which we took several pieces; yea, all about that place is full thereof round
about the sides, and in one place, where the Air had wrought upon the
Marcasite, it did shoot, by the heat of the Sun, into green Chrystals like
Vitriol; as indeed being nothing but Vitriol it self, of which I have some by
me: The Water that stagnates there (for it has no current) will with Galls
give a deep purple tincture, being very acid in taste, and so undergoes the
other mutation of colors like other Vitrioline Waters.

And now I have shown, how Mineral Juyces, by their coincidence and mutual
contact, with their various fermentations, become the original efficients of
Hot Baths and Sulphurous Waters, in the secret Meanders of the Earth, where
Metals and Minerals are in solutis principiis, in their primitive spermatick
Juyces, from whence proceeds the great variety of tastes, smells, alterations
of colors, fermentations, and different operations of all Mineral Waters; and
as these are the true causes, from whence the most natural Phenomenon of
Concrets, peculiarly belonging to the Mineral Kingdom, are deducible; so in
like manner, the various fermental Juyces, which circulate in the Channels of
the bodies of Animals and Vegetables, are the causes of those manifold
Phenomenon, proper and incident to all Concrets belonging thereto.

For what is Heat, Fermentation, Motion, Nutrition, etc. with all the
concomitants thereof, but products from the coincidence and combination of
Seminal, with adventitious Juyces of the bodies of Animals? What are the Juyces
of the Body, undergoing various fermentations, but such as thereby are made
capable (by a natural symetry) of performing the functions of Life? And what
are the acid Juyces, situate in their proper places, but actual Ferments,
which macerate, prepare, dissolve, and digest the food we take in; which being
altered by its passage through other subsequent ferments, undergoes various
transmutations and diversifications, which succeeding in a constant
circulation, upholds the fabric of the body? Does not the natural heat of the
body, proceed from a due fermentation of the Juyces? as when the nutritive
Juice undergoes such alterations, by praevious preparations; as when in the
form of a milky Liquor, it coincides with the blood in the subclavial Vessels;
and both carried by the Vaena Cava into the Heart, does there strike up a vital
heat in the taper of life, (the vital Spirits) but if it come raw, for want of
a due preparation, by a defect of previous ferments, then it produces a
spurious febrile heat, which rather dissipates the natural heat, and destroys
(then binds up) the right tone and texture of the parts. And lastly, Does not
the acid Juice of the first digession of the Stomach, dissolve (loosening the
Vinculum of) our nutritive Juice, and so open the body thereof, as to make it
become one similar milky Cremer? and does not this dissolved and opened Chyle,
receive a second Menstruum coming from the Gaul (that Balsam of the Body) by
the ductus communis, inserted into the duodenum, and there (besides the
peristaltick motion it gives to the intestines) in part precipitates the opened
body of the Sulphur of the nutritive Juice, and causes a volatile faetid
flatus peculiar to those parts, which not finding vent per inferiora, sometimes
works into the Stomach, and (by the mediation of the Nerves of the sixth
conjugation) into the Head, and other parts; is not this faetid flatus (native
to the intestines) caused by a commixture of a saline Ferment dismis'd (I say)
from the Gaul, which precipitates the opened body of the Sulphur in our
nutritive Juice, which before such precipitation, is a similar Cremor?

And to conclude; is not the growth, budding, hearing, and specifical
endowments of Vegetables, the product of fermenting Juyces? And is not the
changing of Fruits by grafting and inoculating one sort into another (as that a
pleasant Apple should grow from a Crab-stock, and a Pear from a Thorn) caused
otherwise then by different fermentations, and specifications of the nutritive
Juice, which no sooner undergoes any different ferments, or passes various
Strainers, but forthwith becomes metamorphosed thereby; so that the metastasis
of all bodies in the whole triplicity of nature, depends upon the variety of
fermenting Juyces, and their mutual complications, implanted in the Seminal
Principles of all Concretes.

But to return, to treat a little of another Ingredient of this Well, and that
is Sal marine, or Fossil Salt, both are one, that of the Sea having its
original (according to all probability) from Fossil Salt; concerning which, I
find my Antagonist, p. 119.122. of his Mimick, about to impeach me of two
Contradictions; the first is, in that I say, The saltness of the Sea proceeds
from Fossil Salt, which being dissolved in Water, is carried into the Ocean,
and yet maintains a circulation of the Seawater, from the Sea, to the heads of
Springs by Subterraneal Channels: Now the force of the Contradiction, as he
supposes, lies in this; that he imagines, that I would assert that the same
Channels should convey a Salt into the Sea, and also convey the Seawater to
the Springs, two contrary Currents in the same Channels.

To which I answer, That there is no need (in that Hypothesis of the Springs,
having their original from the Sea, and the Sea's having its saltness from the
Earth) to assert two contrary Currents in the same Channels; and that, first,
because of some Rocks and Bodies of Salt which are often found in the Sea; and
next, because of the saltness, dispersed throughout the whole body of the
Earth, easily imbibed by Waters, (as the Learned Dr. Highmore notes upon the
Controversy, Philosophical Transactions, Numb. 56. P. 1129, etc.) and may as
easily be conveyed into the Sea by Subterraneal Channels, passing through
Salt Beds, in their passage from one Sea to another; which Subterraneal
Channels (by which Seas communicate) we have demonstratively illustrated in the
Appendix to our Hydrol. Chym. p. 307, etc.

But I find my Antagonist taking sanctuary at his wonted Asylum of Putationary
Philosophy, coming in with his, I do verily think that all the Fossil Salt in
the body of the Earth, (which we see is very rarely found) if it were
dissolved, would not serve to supply a twentieth part of the Salt that is in
the Sea; whom I answer, That surely he is either ignorant, or at least
oblivious of what is writ concerning Rocks of Salt in Bohemia, in Monte
Carpato, in Polonia, within two miles of Cracovia, in Helvetia and Rhetia,
where they have no other Salt but from the Rock; as also by the Caspian
Straights are great Rocks of Salt; there are also many Rivers of Salt Water by
the Caspian Straights, and in Spain, and Caria, and in Bactria, Ochus and
Oxius; also there are Salt Lakes, as the Tarentine Lakes in Italy, the Lake
between Strapela and Seburg; in Germany three Lakes; in Sicily, (and besides an
infinite number in other Countries) the Lake of Lakes, the Sea, all which (as
Dr. Jorden says) receive their saltness from Mines of Salt in the Earth, which
are very frequent and huge in bigness, as may appear by the foresaid Rocks of
Salt; Yea, Marcus Paulus Venetus tells of a Rock or Mountain of Salt in
Thaican, able to furnish all the World with Salt: So that it is no marvel
(says the ingenious Dr. Jorden) that the Sea is salt seeing it pierces into
the bowels of the Earth, and discovers many great Rocks of Salt which
dissolve in it; and this is the true cause (says he) of the saltness of the
Sea. What is premised, will be sufficient (without any more ado) to take off
his accusation of a second Contradiction, ( p. 122.) in that I say, in one
place the Sulphur-Well at Knarsbrough is saturated from Fossil Salt; and in
another place, that Sal marine is the cause of that Sulphurous Spring, seeing
it is evident (as also witnesses the learned Dr. Highmore) that the Salt of
Seawater and Salt-Springs are the same with Fossil Salt; his objection against
the Seas having its saltness from Fossil Salt, is frivolous, (viz.) That it
should (if made by Fossil Salt) kill all Fish, as well Seafish as Fresh-Fish;
for so (says he) Salt put to fresh Water does; which is even as true, as that
Fish should, being kept overnight in a clean Copper Vessel with the Water they
swim in, be found dead the next morning, by the mortal Steam or Vapor of the
Copper; both which are found false by matter of fact, the one by that
Experiment I made of Fish, which not only outlived one, but two nights in a
Brass Pan; the other by that Experiment of Oysters made by Dr. Highmore.

I shall now conclude with the addition of a few Mechanical Experiments made
upon this Sulphur-Water, thus:

First, It takes no purple or red tincture from infused Galls, as having
nothing of the praecipitable parts of Vitriol or Alom; Oil of Tartar being
added, it becomes muddied into a white curdled Liquor; and with Oil of Vitriol,
or Oil of Sulphur, it becomes clear again; but with fresh Oil of Tartar, it is
presently turned to a color inclining to a red; and with the addition of more
Oil of Vitriol, or such like, it becomes transparent, and of the color of
Sack, or English Beer.

If upon fresh Sulphur-Water, Oil of Vitriol be poured, it makes neither a
precipitation, nor any other alteration, and that because of a praevious
saturation with an aluminous acidity; but by adding Oil of Tartar thereunto,
and after that Galls, then follows an effervescence, and it becomes of a
reddish color.

Lastly, By the addition of Oil of Tartar, this Sulphur-Water turns white, and
that because it is impregnated with a small quantity of the simple natural
Alom-Salt.

A return to some Reflections and Queries, made on the enlarged account of my
Antagonists Answer to Hydrologia Chymica, in the Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society, Numb. 51. chiefly concerning the cause of the sudden loss of
the Virtues of Mineral-Waters; by the Learned Dr. Daniel Foot.
Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 52. p. 1050.
THE Ingenious Publisher of the Philosophical Transactions, in his enlarged
account of my Antagonists Answer, has these words, viz. That these (meaning
Scarbrough) Waters lose all their Virtues, yea, their quantity and bulk also,
though in Glasses, and under the Hermetick Seal, if removed from the Fountain
Head; and then they become suddenly putrid, ill-coloured, losing their rest
and scent, etc. doubtless through the loss of the Volatile Spirits: What ever
(says he further) these Sprits be, that will neither endure to travel from the
place, nor will be confined in any Bottle, nor under any Seal, etc.

So that the sum of his conjucture (as the Doctor concludes, p. 1051.) is, That
this loss consists in the avolation of some most subtle and p^^^trating
spirituous parts, not to be imprisoned by any enclosure imaginable, but will
find their way out, and leave the Waters bereast of virtue, and decreased in
quantity too; and (what is more) perhaps of their weight also, especially if
they lose of their quantity.

Now to evince whether this be a conjecture, or no, and to clear up this point
of Philosophy, in the Mineral Hydrologia, which has gravelled many Writers,
yea, made them run ashore, or to cast Anchor in shallow Fords, for want of a
depth in Mechanical Experiments. This ingenious Doctor has proposed these
following Queries.

First, Whether by Chemical Researchers, it was ever yet, or can be found, that
such Waters, as the abovesaid, ever yielded a vinous or an acid, or any other
sort of Spirits, that was either inflammable or uninflammable, or flying over
the Helm from the fire?

Secondly, Whether all those sorts of Water, when they are most closely stopped
up, and so let stand, or conveyed to some distance, do not let fall a Sediment
(most commonly) yellowish, or of some such color, when they are become effaete
in their Virtues?

Thirdly, Whether when they are let stand only, and not moved by carriage,
they do not sooner becomes castrated, and sooner precipitate an Ocre to the
bottom?

Fourthly, Whether such an Ocre is not found in all their Spring-heads and
Strenms also, but more in the Head than in the Streams, especially if issued
therefrom to a good distance?

Fifthly, Whether it may not be found upon due observation, that two Bottles of
the said Waters, whereof the one being industriously stopped, the other left
unstopt, and both equally permitted to stand still, or equaly moved, will not
easily ^ose their (...) Medical, in the same space of time, and have the same
precipitated Sediment, and be of the same taste, color, and a like diminished
in quantity, with diverse such like Circumstances?

Sixthly, Whether two Vessels diversified in their matter, etc. filled with
such Waters, will not yield the like Phenomenon in all circumstances, as in the
fifth Query are mentioned?

Seventhly, Whether it may be devised, how to prevent all precipitation of a
Sediment in the Waters vessell'd up? and then to observe thereupon whether
their Virtues would not be kept entire during such a prevention?

Eighthly, Whether any Observer ever found the Waters enervated, but found
withal an Ocre let fall to the bottom, or sides of the containing Vessel?

Ninthly, Whether the Phenomenon of loss of virtues in such Waters may by an
Hypothesis of an intestine precipitation of their parts, wherein those Virtues,
consisted, be as well (if not better) explicated, than by the Hypothesis of an
avolation of spirituous parts through all Vessels and Closures whatsoever?

These Queries I shall (by the help of a few Experiments) endeavor to resolve.
As to the first therefore I conclude in the Negative, for I have distilled the
Spaw-Waters of Scarbrough and Malton; the Sweet as well as the Sulphur-Water at
Knarsbrough, etc. none of which ever did yield either a vinous or acid, or any
other sort of Spirits that are either inflammable or uninflammable.

To the second I answer in the Assirmative, as to the first part thereof; to
confirm which, and to illustrate the rest of the Queries with the light of
truth, I shall propound two or three considerable Experiments.

First, Therefore I advised my ingenious Friend to set by a certain quantity of
Scarbrough-Spaw-Water, in an open Vessel, and found thereby that it did
precipitate its Earth or Sediment in about forty eight hours, so that it would
not give a tincture with Galls.

Secondly, Another quantity of Spaw-Water being set by at the same time with
the former, but in a Glass Bottle so close stopped, that neitheir Air could come
in, nor ought evaporate; and being opened, when the other ceased to give a
tincture, this did yet strike a tincture, but within less then twelve hours
after, it also would give none.

Thirdly, A Glass Bottle, and an Egg-Glass, being filled with the Spaw-Water,
the first exactly stopped, the other hermetically sealed, being both exactly
weighed and set by, with an other Glass filled and weighed, but unstopt, at the
end of six weeks, the stopped Bottle could not be discerned to be heavier or
lighter, being weighed again after the foresaid time; nor could it be perceived
that any Sediment was fallen, because it gave as perfect a tincture with Galls,
as Water fresh from the Spaw.

By which it appears, that the second Query is thus far true, viz. That these
Mineral Waters, when most closely stopped, and so let stand, do not let fall a
Sediment; but if they do let fall their Ocre to the bottom, (as in open Glasses
we find they do) then is this Sediment most-what of a yellow color, and the
Waters become effaete, as to their solutive Operations.

The third is answered in the Negative; for being let stand, and not moved by
carriage, they do not (supposing they be stopped) sooner precipitate an Ocre to
the bottom, nor sooner become castrated thereby; witness the third Experiment,
where, in a stopped Glass, after six weeks time, no Sediment was fallen.

The fourth Query is found true in the Affirmative, by the common Observations
of those who view varieties of Spaws, for they precipitate their Ocre both at
the Springhead, as also in their Current (for some distance) sub dio, but
chiefly at the Springhead; for whilst they are kept from the open Air, though
their Channels underground should be stretched out much longer, yet would they
not let fall their Sediment; by which it appears how great an influence the
open Air has upon the texture of Mineral-Waters, as well as upon other Bodies.

The fifth Query is solved by our Experiments thus, viz. That two Bottles of
the said Water, whereof the one being industriously stopped, the other left
unstopt, and both equally permitted to stand still, do not equally lose their
virtues medical, in the same space of time, nor have the same precipitated
Sediment, and consequently are not of the same taste, color, nor alike
diminisht in quantity.

The sixth Query is involved in the fifth, only presupposing that the stopped
Vessel be of such a figuration or texture of parts, as may exclude the ambient
Air, and then all succeeds as in the fifth.

The seventh is solved thus, viz. That these Waters being closed up either in
Glasses exactly stopped, or hermetically sealed, and kept from motion, do prevent
all precipitation of a Sediment in the Water; and this is confirmed by the
third Experiment, where the Water was kept, hermetically sealed, for six weeks,
without any precipitation; yea, the same is confirmed not only in these
Mineral Medicinal Waters, but even in more ordinary Spring-Waters, whose
Sediments, or what else they have imbibed of Mineral Earth, will easily
precipitate, by being exposed in open Vessels to the Air, or by being
distilled, will leave behind their Sediments; whereas I found the very same,
taken fresh from the Fountain, which I have kept hermetically sealed for above
three months, not to give any the least precipitation or alteration of color,
which (for ought I know) may not only keep so unaltered for months, but also
for years; which very experiment is not inconsiderable toward a further
improvement of Philosophy, and amongst other Phenomenon, which I shall not now
take time to insist upon; that of blood extravasated by Phlebotomy, and a while
exposed in open Vessels to the Air, does receive no small alteration therefrom,
making it separate into such heterogenious parts, as are not pre-existent in
it, whilst running in the Vessels, and therefore does not a little deceive
those Physicians who judge of the temperature of the Blood, and of the
predominancy of this or the other Humor, from a prospect of the extravasated
Blood, separated by an exotic ferment of the Air, into Water, Phlegm, or white
Gelly, or black congealed Blood; when (perhaps) that Blood, whilst in the Body,
and (as I may say) hermetically sealed up in the natural Vessels, was similar
in its parts; which (if enlivened with due fermentations and separations in the
Organical Parts) would throw off all Scorbutic, Venereal, or other Miasms and
Impurities, and circulate in the form of a pure homogenial rubicund Juice: to
confirm which, I would propound one or two Queries, the resolution of which
will infallibly put the matter beyond dispute, viz. Whether suppose some few
ounces of blood should be taken from a found (or if you will, from an
unhealthful) Person, and by a Silver Siphon be conveyed part into a clean
Glass, first warmed, and whilst warm, be sealed up hermetically, and so set in
a continued gentle heat; whilst presently an other part of the same is
conveyed, in like manner, into a cold Glass, and so presently sealed up as
aforesaid, but set by in a cold place; whether, I say, hereby it will be found,
that the blood (in one, or both, or neither) will keep its pristine form it
had, whilst circulating in the Vessels, or whilst transmitted from one Vessel
to the other? and whether hereby it may not be preserved in its entire form,
not only for one, or two, but for many months, yea perhaps year; and whether
it will keep its form better in that Glass exposed to the cold, or set in a
gentle (as it were an) animal warmth? and lastly, whether that set in heat may
not, by continuance of time, be graduated to so high an elixerated Liquor, as
that hereby it may be made capable, not only of preserving it self afterward
from the injury of a separating ferment in the Air, but also may become as a
fermental Balsam, able, if given inwardly (or at least outwardly applied) to
preserve the similar Blood it meets with, from all inse^tious Diseases? yea, it
would be worth inquiry, (...) ^ether it may not make the blood, by his imbred
exalted ferment, reject all those impurities contracted by the Scorbute, Lues
Venerea, Fevers, and other Diseases, even to the performing those cures in the
Blood as may probably tender it worthy (if any be) of the name of a Panacea?
which Experiments I think to prosecute e're long, and shall then (Deo juvante)
give a further account thereof.

The eighth Query I thus solve, (viz.) That in my Trials and Observations of
Mineral Waters, I always found that no sooner was the Ocre or Sediment
precipitated, but they both lose their tinging property with Galls, as also
their purging faculty; and that though the Salts which had dissolved these
ramenta ferrea, were left yet dissolved in the Water, (after the separation of
the Ocre by motion, heat, or air) notwithstanding which, the Waters are found
to have no force in their purging Operation; and by how much the more this is
precipitated, (even till it be all fallen) by so much the Waters are weaker and
weaker in their Operation.

To the ninth, or last Query, I thus answer, (viz.) That by what is premised,
it must necessarily follow, that the Phenomenon of loss of Virtues in such
Waters, may by an Hypothesis of an intestine precipitation of their parts
wherein those virtues consisted, be much better, and more truly explicated,
then by the Hypothesis of an avolation of spirituous parts, through all Vessels
and Closures whatsoever.

By this time, these things duly weighed, in the opinion of all judicious
Persons, (who ground Science upon the infallible Criterion of Luciferous
Experiments) I may well suppose the Spirits in the Scarbrough and Kuar ^ugh
Spaw-Waters, have no existence; and that notwithstanding what ever Falopius,
Dr. Heers, Dr. French, or my Antagonist have said to the contrary.

And hence it is evident why Dr. French came to be mistaken, who supposing
Volatile Mineral Spirits to be in the Knarsbrough Spaw-Water, and endeavoring
by distiliation (in a Glass-Still, whose Joints were luted and closed up
carefully) to get their Spirits, failed not only in his expectation of
catching them, but also found that the first two spoonfuls which were
distilled; yea, and the rest undistilled that remained, utterly lost both the
taste and odor which they had before; neither would they become any otherwise
tinged with Galls, then common Spring Water: who not easily conscious of his
Error, imputes the loss of those Spirits to their subtilty, imagining them so
volatile, as to penetrate even the Glass it self, or the Lute, neither of which
(he judges) could hold them; not recollecting, that no sooner does heat work
upon Mineral Waters, but presently it causes such an alteration in the texture
of their parts, as that forthwith the Mineral Ocre precipitates to the bottom,
leaving both what is distilled, and what is undistilled void of tincture, and
most-what effaete in virtues, and that not from the avolation of Spirits, but
from an intestine precipitation of parts, as is evinced beyond dispute by our
former Experiments.

Lastly, These Waters do not only (being hermetically sealed) keep their
virtues and tinging qualities, but also are not impaired in their quantity and
weight, being found (after six weeks enclosure under the hermetick Seal)
neither heavier nor lighter; and now I give room for the World to judge,
Whether the authority of my Antagonist be Authentic, and whether or no he has
done well to impose both upon himself and others in the delivery of these
words, (viz.) That the Searbrough Waters lose all their virtue, yea, their
quantity and bulk also, though in Glasses, and under the hermetick Seal, if
removed from the Fountainhead, and then they become suddenly putrid, etc.
doubtless through the loss of Volatile Spirits: he speaks this so confidently,
as if he had had it from the Oracle of Experience, whereas he never took the
pains to make any satisfactory Essays therein.

From what is premised, may naturally arise these following short Corolaries.

First, That Mineral. Waters operate and give their usual Phenomenon, by a due
contemperature of their Mineral Ingredients.

Secondly, That amongst these, (if especially the Mineral Ocre becomes once
precipitated) the Waters lose their purging Virtues and tinging Properties.

Thirdly, So long as these can (either by Nature or Art) be kept from
precipitation, so long these Waters retain their proper Virtues.

Fourthly, That to facilitate (or indeed cause) that these Waters should
precipitate their Mineral Ocre, is required one of these three, (viz.) Motion,
Heat, or Air; by Motion, I mean that ab extra, for otherwise what Heat and Air
perform, is by the medium of Motion; for Heat, or an exposing to the open Air,
or a quassation of parts by motion, does make such an alteration in the texture
of these Mineral Waters, as they presently thereby let fall their contained
Mineral Earth.

Fifthly, These three being secluded from having any power over them, they (
viz. the Waters) may continue their Virtues, Weight, tinging Qualities,
Colors, and other consequent Phenomenon, for some months (yea probably for
years) unalterd.

Sixthly, That to have recourse to a sort of Spirits (which are not inrerum
natura) for solving those Phenomenon, better (and perhaps only) solvable by an
intestine alteration and precipitation of Mineral Ingredients, will argue no
less then an imposing upon our imaginations, by a kind of customary fascination.

But here I am to advertise my Reader, That since I committed these Papers to
the Press, I opportunely had some discourse with the aforesaid Dr. Foot,
concerning his Queries aforementioned. Whereupon we mutually agreed, That my
Return to the Queries, together with the Experiments, confirming as well as
elucidating the same, do chiefly relate to the Mineral Medical Waters, which
are of that Class or sort, which do purge by Stool mostly, and also by Urine;
such are the Scarbrough-Spaw, Barnet and Epsham-Waters, and diverse others the
like, which are Aluminous, and work by Siedge. But that the Tunbridge-Waters,
(concerning which he principally proposed his Queries) and also (perhaps) the
Astrap, and Stallbridge-Waters, together with all such as work mostwhat by
Urine, ought to have a somewhat different consideration; especially in the
point of losing their Medical Virtues, though they be vessell'd up with all due
and needful circumstances, and closed and sealed up with all imaginable Art,
care, and industry; yea, although they are not in the least afterward moved,
heated, or exposed to the Air; and consequently, that these close
Circumstances, in vesselling up, and stopping in the Tunbridg-Waters, and such
like, will not prevent this depauperation or amission of their Medical Virtues;
as otherwise may be done with the Scarbrough, and all such like Spaws: but as
to all the other matters almost, both in the Queries, and this Answer to them,
they seem to be applicable indifferently enough to both the sorts of the
forecited Medicinal Waters. Finally, Reader, The Doctor did thank me for my
Return to his Queries, though he (frankly) acknowledged to me, he supposed my
Answer to be inapposite only to that point afore-noted, by reason of my being
(at the writing my Return) a perfect stranger to the Tunbridge, or any other
Waters of the like properties: but further added, That he hoped my Example
would be a motive to others, (whose abilities and opportunities amply
capacitate them thereunto) both from Reason and Experiment conjoyntly, to
acquaint the World with the knowledge and usefulness of all sorts of Medical
Waters, which Nature has prepared by her Chemistry, or rather the God of
Nature has bountifully bestowed on Mankind for its relief and comfort.

THE Epilogue, or Conclusion, BEING Some Reflections upon the most material
Passages, and considerable Experiments, in a late Treatise writ by Dr. Tunstal,
concerning the Scarbrough-Spaw, being an Extract thereof, with a return
thereto: where a way is propounded for preventing all inconveniences which may
happen to those who drink of the Scarbrough-Spaw.
BY that time I had finished the foregoing Sheets of this second Piece, I met
with a Book written upon the same Subject, by an other Chemical Physician;
which coming so opportunely to my hand, before the conclusion of the whole, I
could not let slip some reflections upon the most remarkable passages thereof;
and that, first, because I find him in his Chemical Analysis of this Water, to
join issue with me in the main, by finding out and asserting the same true
essential constitutive Principles thereof; next, because I perceive him
impeaching this Spaw-Water of the grand crime of Petrifaction, and thereby of
being guilty of causing the Stone, Gout, and Jaundice, to persons inclinable
thereto; and for want of due ordering at the Spaw, in danger thereof.

As to the first, (he says) it consists of three Ingredients, (viz.) the
Nitroaluminous Salt; secondly, the Raments of Stone; and lastly, the Glebe of
Alom; all which coincide with what we assert as the Principles thereof, as may
be further seen, both in our Hydrol. Chym. and in this its Vindication; save
that what he calls the Glebe, or blew Clay of Alom, I have described as the
Particles of the Minera of Iron.

Which difficulty will be easily taken away by solving this Query, (viz.)
Whether indeed those Particles enclosed in that Alom Glebe, be not Iron, in
succo soluto, or in minimis particulis, Atoms, or at least somewhat equivalent
thereto, bearing an analogical proportion of texture of parts to each other;
which will not be a little facilitated, if we consider, that as in the
Vegetable Family, not only Galls will strike a purple tincture with the Alom
Salt (got before the addition Kelp and Urine) dissolved in distilled, or fresh
Spring Water, but also the same may be done by other bodies, whose texture of
parts are congeneal; as for example, the inner Bark of the Oak, the Roots of
Tormentile, Avens, Bistort, Clove-gilly flowers, and the Flowers called
Balaustia; all which, like Galls, will strike a purple with Water wherein the
Alom Salt is dissolved; yea, and will also become clear again by the instilling
a few drops of Oil of Vitriol, and with the Oil of Tartar, will become turbid
and muddied, etc.

So in like manner, in the Mineral Family, are found several Stones, even in
that heap which is fallen off the Scarbrough Bank; which would, with Water
acidulated with Oil of Sulphur, (as upon ^^al I found) strike a tincture with
Galls, and yet all those stony Concretions, which gave the Ph^^^menon, could
not precisely be determined to be either Alom Glebe, or Iron Stone, (though
both would do it) but were such as consisted of similar parts with both.

The tincture from the Galls in Scarbrough Water, he says, is from unburnt
Alom-stone: which suppose we grant, yet I see no reason why my ingenious Friend
should conclude, that what is precipitated without the addition of Galls,
should not be any thing of Chalybs, or the Minera of Iron; notwithstanding his
two Reasons, the first of which is, because the Vitrioline Spirit and Iron are
too great Friends (being once met together) to be so easily separated; any that
has (says he) prepared the Vitriolum Martis has learned.

Why? what difficulty is there in their separation? seeing the Ocre, as well in
Acid as Nitro-aluminous Spaws, does so easily precipitate, either by being
exposed to the Air, (witness the yellow Sediment at the Fountainhead of all
such Spaws) or by heat, (as for instance) any of these Mineral Waters being
heated, boiled, or distilled, will precipirate their hidden Ocre; yea, the
Solution of a Vitriol of Iron, or of any common Vitriol will in heat (as I have
found by trial) do the same; or lastly, by motion, ab extra, whereby also a
precipition of the same mineral body happens.

His second reason is, When the Vitrioline Water, by passing in the open Air,
does settle its Colcothar at the bottom, without any mixture of Galls, it is
always of a yellow color; which is also answered in my Return to the first
Reason: for the Sediment of all Spaws, whether Vitrioline from Sowes, or
aluminous, are always yellow; witness both that at Scarbrough, and that in
Bransdals, Knarsbrough, and the Spring that runs through an Alom-Work near the
Sulphur-Well at Knarsbrough, etc.

His last Argument against any thing of the Minora of Iron in the Spaw, is,
That whereas in the taking all Chalybeat Medicines, the Excrements are tinged
black; but by drinking this Water, he says, they become blew; to which I
answer, That blew, or purple, is black in a remiss degree; toward which
difference, the crudity of the Minera may probably not a little contribute. But
had I now the opportunity of prosecuting one Experiment, I question not but to
put the matter beyond dispute; I will now only propound it, and (as I have
leisure) shall afterward try it, and that is this, (viz.) To take a good
quantity of the succulent Alomstone, etc. dissolve as much thereof, as will, in
a competent quantity of fresh Spring Water, when (for trial sake) it will tinge
with Galls readily; pour it off clear, or filter it, let it stand in open
Glasses, or glased earthen Basins, when it has precipitated what it will of a
Sediment, which will be done in two or three days time; then pour off the
Water gently, and dry it up slowly by the heat of the Sun, and compare that and
the yellow Ocre precipitated from Vitrioline Waters together, and that either
with a Microscope, or melt them down severally with a blast, to try if the
result of both will not be the same.

His proportions of the Ingredients are thus, viz. Stone-pouder one ounce three
dragms, of Nitroaluminous Salt one ounce six dragms, of the blew Clay, which is
(as he supposes) the Glebe of Alom three dragms; the active Principles, and
the Caput Mortuum, are equal.

He Queries hence, from what cause it is, that after you have drunk a month of
the Water, then, if not before, it takes a resty fit, will neither go forward
or backward; upon which my Antagonist advises, p. 211. that if the Appetite or
Concoction decay, and the Water pass not so well as formerly, but cause
distention either in the Belly or Veins, and so bring on a difficulty of
breathing, or pain in the Head, or the like, it is then time (he advises) to
desist and proceed no further.

Is there not therefore, says Dr. T. a sting in the tail of Scarbrough Water?
Is not the Stone Feces plaistered upon the inner coat of the Bowels, disturbing
their peristaltick motion, and obstructing the attraction of the lacteal Veins.

His conclusion therefore is, That Scarbrough-Water is petrifying; which he
endeavors to confirm with four Reasons?

First, By Authority, as that of Kircher, Queritur quid proprie sit succus
lapidificus dico, esse saxum introrsum aqua eliquatum.

Secondly, By Experiment, in that the Spaw is mostly a nitrous Stone, melted in
Water, besides the Alom stone imbibed in it.

Thirdly, By the Apporrhea Spiritus Lapidisici; there are found on the Cl^ff
near the Spaw, Muscle-shels, and such like things, petrified.

Fourthly, By the effects the Spaw produces primarily on those inclinable to
the Stone; he instanceth himself, and my Antagonist acknowledges it, p. 150.
concerning which the Reader may please to consult what I have said in the
Epilogue of my Hydrol. Chym. p. 360, 361, etc. which in effect amounts to
little less then a concurrence with this ingenious Physicians Observations.

As to the difference betwixt Scarbrough and Knarsbrough Spaws in this
particular of the petrifying property, he urges the instance of Mr. Hen.
Proctor of Fernly, who was brought very low with a Hectic Fever, and Asthma,
who by drinking of Knarsbrough Water, (after a due preparation of his body by
Dr. N.) coughed up several Stones daily, till he was perfectly cured: the
account of which he had from Dr. N. By what is premised it appears, that as the
one Water lays a stony Foundation for a Fabric of Sabulous Diseases, to such
as take the Water incautiously, and without circumspection of the Nature and
Symptoms of their Diseases, by the advice of a judicious Physician: So the
other Water of Knarsbrough, being devoyd of all those stony Concretions, and
endued with a deopilative, and (if I may so say) antipetrifick property, is
more proper for such persons inclinable to such Diseases, unless diligent care
be taken, by the advice of the Physician, to remove, and at due seasons, carry
off those sabulous products.

And as the Stone, so the Jaundice, and the Gout (says he) has their (...)
from a petrifying Spirit; he instanceth the Lord Erwin's case, who dyed of the
Jaundice, whereby (as he supposes) the Scarbrough Water did petrifie the
Sulphur-Saline humor in the Vesica Biliaria into Stones, too great to pass
through the common ductus.

That this Lord did die of the Jaundice, together probably with a complication
of some other Diseases, might be true; but that the liquid Balsamic Juice of
the Gaul was petrified, was but only conjectural, although (I confess) the
conjecture is not irrational, but may give some ground of probability, and that
because (as he further says) that Stones are as usually concreted in the Gaul,
as in the Kidneys, in Men as well as in Beasts; whereupon he cites the
Professor at a Physic Lecture, in a discovery of the Jaundice, who brought
forth three or four little Stones of the Gaul, separated from a Gentlewoman
(afflicted with that Disease) by a Dose of sharp working Physic, by which she
was cured: Which he further confirms by the opinion of Helmont and Silvius,
(viz.) That the second fermentation made by the Succus Pancreaticus, and the
Gaul, is as necessary for the preservation of life, as the first fermentation
in the Stomach; for according to the eucrasy and fluidness, or the contrary (I
mean obstructions in the Vessels) of this balsamic ferment of the Gaul,
depends not only the Regiment of the second digestion, and the fluidness and
obdurateness of the Excrements, within the peculiar peristaltick conatus of the
Intestines, but also of all the Diseases thence resulting, (viz.) the Jaundice,
Diarrhaeas, Dysenteries, Cholick, Iliack Passions, Tenasmus, etc. in as much
as, by its Sulphuro-saline Balsam, it does not only (in a regular course of
Nature) become as a ferment to prepare the saline milky Juice, before it be
conveyed away by the lacteal Vessels; but also it promotes a separation by a
kind of precipitation of the faeculencies of the nutritive Juice; in which
precipitation, the most exuberant and untamed sulphurous parts of the
alimentary Juice, first opened and prepared by the stomachial ferment, go off
in a saetid Flatus, peculiar to the Intestines, (which is that which Helmont
otherwise calls a Stercorary Ferment) and that it is so, appears hence, because
the posterior flatus or crepitus, will take flame of a Candle, and blaze like
an Occidental Meteor; the obstruction, and consequently the regurgitation of
which flatus upon the stomach, and other parts, causes many disturbances of
Nature, which now I shall not take time to discourse upon.

So that indeed, amongst the efficient causes of the Jaundice, a petrification
of part of that Juice, or a plaistering the intestines over with a tartarous or
sandy matter, where the ductus communis is inserted, may most frequently
happen; whereby this Sulphuro-saline Juice, destined for uses aforesaid, may
preposterously be carried (extra lares proprios) into the Mass of Blood, or
rather indeed the blood, not undergoing that due separation by the ferment of
the Gaul, from causes aforesaid, retains yet in its bosom that which should be
separated; which circulating along with it in the habit of the body, vitiates
the last ferment, or assimulative digestion, whereby the skin becomes tinged
yellow, and shines forth in a Saffron color.

That the Water may sometimes happen (through the incautiousness of the
Patient) to cause this Disease; my ingenious Friend instanceth in the case of
an Alderman of Newcastle, and a Merchants Wife, who after their return from the
Scarbrough Spaw, were both afflicted with the Jaundice; as also Sir. John
Anderson and his Lady, who both drinking the Water at home, were afterward
troubled with the Jaundice; all which might indeed very probably happen to
these, who without due caution had drank liberally of the Scarbrough Water,
and that either at two great a distance from the Fountain, or did not at least
use such skilful means, as at due seasons might carry off the gritty sabulous
residence of the Water; concerning which ere long we shall prescribe a Remedy.

That the Gout also may be promoted by the Scarbrough Water, (arising from a
petrifying property of its acid Spirit) he instanceth in himself, who never had
the least touch thereof, before he drank that Water; the which also my
Antagonist acknowledges, p. 149. Others (says he) drinking without due
preparation, as was necessary, have fallen into the Gout, the Water contracting
heat for want of speedy passage, being thrown by nature upon the weak Joints,
and have hence inferred, that these Waters cause the Gout.

That the drinking of this Water may to some Patients, at some times,
occasionally cause the Gout, through the debilitude of the separating
Emunctories, carrying the sabulous matter along with the nutritive Juice,
through the Lacteal, into the Venal and Atterial Vessels, in the liquamen of
the Latex, where, in the habit of the body, this sabulous matter may be
precipitated into a tophus-like, or nodus-kind of petrifaction, in the Synovia
of the Joints, transmitting along with it a spurious acid Ferment, hostile to
those tender parts: I shall not (I say) deny, if we together take into our
consideration other concomitant, and perhaps no less essential circumstances,
of irregularity in Diet, sharpness and hardness of Drink, in Exercise and
perturbations of the Mind, etc. which we find often sufficient alone to bring
on that Disease, yea, and to exasperate it in a high measure to those who never
drank of this or any other Spaw Water; yea, and that to many too, upon whose
seminal Principles the morbid Character of the Gout was never impressed.

Now I shall proceed first, to examine the reason he gives why the Scarbrough
Water is not of so petrifying a nature as the Knarsbrough dropping Well, (which
he supposes to come from a nitrous Rock) and next I shall prescribe a Remedy
how to prevent petrifaction, and also how to carry off what is already
contracted; where I shall answer (I hope to the Patients satisfaction) his
three Ingredients.

As to the first, the Reason he gives is this, (viz.) That the Alkali of the
Alom in Scarbrough Water, has in part imbibed the acidity of the Nitre, and
therefore it cannot so penetrate the Wood put in it, as to leave a Crust of
Stone upon it, which the other Water having (as he says) Nitre alone, will do;
And here I must crave pardon, if for truths sake I dissent from my ingenious
Friend; for the groundwork of his reason is laid upon a wrong supposition,
(viz.) That the Salt of Alom is an Alkali, whereas in the current of my whole
discourse upon this Spaw, I have laid it down as an acid Salt, which are so
contrary, as they are never reconciled (upon their mutual contact) till each
destroy other, and a third neutral result therefrom. The ground of his Reason,
why he reputes Alom to contain an Alkali, is from its saponary property. That
Alom (says he) is an Alkali, is plain from its saponary property, for the
Dyers scour their Cloth from all filth, by boiling it in Alom Water; which is
no less then a palpable mistake, for the Dyers use it not for scouring their
Cloth, but for laying a ground for other Colors; as for instance, If three
pieces of Cloth be put into the Dyers Woad or Glastum, one White, another
Yellow, the third Red; the White, without any previous preparation by Alom,
shall be Blew; the Yellow, by being first a few hours in Alom-Water, shall be
Green; and the Red, by being also boiled in Alom-Water, shall be Tauny. So that
if they should generally use Alom Water for scouring their Cloth, they would
thereby be prevented either of making Yellows or Blacks; to both which, Alom
makes Cloth incapable, and therefore they only use it in order to a Ground,
fitting it to take other colors afterward; it wholly destroys all Blacks,
yea, it is so far from being lixivial, as it leaves a harshness upon Cloth,
whereby it is made capable of striking other Colors.

Now that Alom consists chiefly of an acid Salt, is further evident by mixing a
lixivium of Salt of Tartar, or of any Vegetable fixed Salt, which the Solution
of simple Alom Salt, the mixture presently coagulates or curdles into a white
Gelly; whereas if it was of the same nature, they would mix, as Spirit of
Vitriol with Spirit of Vitriol, Lixivium with Lixivium, Water with Water, like
with like.

Besides, he is incautious of what he elsewhere asserts, viz. where he says,
That the Scarbrough-Water curdles Milk, not by any Vitriol, but by Alom; Who
Questions (says he) that Alom will curdle Milk as well as Vitriol? the more
subtle any acid Liquor, put to the Milk is, the more perfectly does it separate
the thick parts from the thin; here he acknowledges the Alom to consist of an
acid Juice, which is quite contrary to a Lixivial, for what the one makes, the
other destroys.

Now that the Alkali of the Alom should imbibe the acidity of Nitre; this
latter assertion is no more true then the former: for as the Alom contains no
Alkali, so neither the Nitre, as Nitre, any acidity; for if you put a little
Nitre into boiled Milk, it will coagulate it no more, then if so much Fossil
Salt was put in, neither of which two Salts are acid, until by force of fire in
close Vessels; they are brought over in a fluid form, in statu Fluoris; in
close Vessels, (I said) because in open Vessels, Nitre will by force of fire,
with a little addition of Sulphur, or Charcoal, become an Alkali or fixed Salt;
which is quite contrary to its acid Spirit, got by distillation; yea, that it
is not acid, is further evident, in that it will cause no ebullition with a
Lixivium, which all acids certainly do: So that hence we may certainly
conclude, first, That the acidity of Nitre is not a cause of petrifaction; and
that is evident, because it has no acidity, till it be raised by the fire;
next, That the cause of petrifaction in the Scarbrough Spaw, (compared with
Knarsbrough dropping Well) is not to be computed from an imbibition of the
acidity of Nitre, by the Alkali of Alom, neither of which, as such, are in
rerum natura: So that (notwithstanding all this) we are yet to cast about for
the finding out a more probable cause of petrifaction. In order to which, I
would first inquire, How many sorts of Mineral Waters will coagulate Milk? and
amongst them, which are the most likely to contribute to petrifaction?

All Waters therefore which coagulate Milk, are either such as are strongly
Vitrioline; witness the German Spaws, or such as are aluminous; as for
instance, Scarbrough, Epsham, the Sulphur-Well at Knarsbrough, (which has an
occult aluminous acidity therein contained) etc. Or lastly, Such as contain a
Saxum Nitrosum, or Raments of Stone with a nitrous Juice, which becomes as a
Cement, and knits the sabulous matter (where the place and other circumstances
concur) into stony Concretions; of this sort is the dropping or petrifying Well
at Knarsbrough, also at Bruncton near Northallerton, and in many places more,
which will coagulate Milk, and in evaporation leave Raments of a bright nitrous
Stone.

Now the subject matter of all stony Concretions, are either a sabulous Earth,
glewed together by the efficiency of a salty Liquor, either of Alom, Nitre,
Salt Fossil, etc. easily coagulable by a spontaneous exiccation of the
succulent parts, by being long exposed to the Air, or else it consists in a
peculiar petrifying seminal Juice, implanted in stony Concretions, whereby they
have their growth, and increase.

Thus all the Rocks in the Sea, have had their beginning and growth, from a
petrifying Seed, which has transmuted the Lympha, or common subject matter of
all concrete bodies, into such stony Concretions, Calx in Mediis Aquis sensim
petrescit: Thus Coral, White and Red, by an innate petrifying Seed, springs out
of Rocks, and other Stones in the Sea, which grow from the very same Juice, the
Stone (it vegetates from) had its nourishment; only it is determined into that
form, by the imbred plastic power of that stony Plant, and becomes like (if I
may so say) a Misletoe of the Rock; Yea, and from one or both causes aforesaid,
has (for ought we know) all the rocky and stony productions in the bowels of
the Earth, had their original.

But to be short, Petrifaction, as to the Duelech, or Calculus humanus, (the
subject we chiefly now have in hand) I see no reason to the contrary, but look
upon it as chiefly seminaly; else how comes it, that little Children are
sometimes grievously tormented with fits, and die of the Stone; As I have seen
a young Child, after death, opened, whose Reins contained one large Stones,
besides diverse other lesser ones; by which it should appear, that the
inclinatio petrifica, which is the same with a petrifying Seed, was at first
impressed upon the Seminals of its constitution; and in such, where the
petrifying Seed is at work, the nutritive Juice can never be so pure, nor the
Steinors or Colanders of the Vessels be so accurate in their functions, but the
Stone and Gravel will be increased, the Spirit of Urine will coagulate it self
upon its innate Earth, and so cause a concretion of a sabulous matter; although
much more from some sorts of Meats and Drinks, then from others; amongst
ordinary Drinks, Ale that is hard, blenk'd, or new, thick and unwrought, or
Wine which is not depurated from its Tartar by due fermentation, are very
prejudicial somenters of the Stone; so is Bread not well baked, Meat not well
cooked and prepared; and in fine, what ever contributes to the Fabric of the
nutritive Juice, when through the weakness or error of the ferments, reluctance
of that which is taken, or injustice of the distributive powers, a feculent
tartarous or sabulous matter is sequestered, and either thrown upon the Vessels,
or transmitted by the current of the Latex, into other more fine Collanders and
Streinors of the Body.

Then the Stone, Gout, Jaundice, Diarrhaeas, Dysenteries, Fevers; etc. are in
time brought forth, especially to such persons whose constitutions, or peculiar
fabric of their constituent parts (whether Liquid in Vessels, or Solids) are
most inclinable, and consequently most susceptable of such Diseases.

Therefore respect must primarily be had to the inclinatio petrifica and
podagrica, or natural inclination to the Stone or Gout; for to such, not only
the Waters which contain a sabulous matter, but also the common nutritive Juice
made from our ordinary food, may singly or conjoyntly bring forth, or else
exasperate the fits of the Stone, Gout, etc. for the sabulous matter of the
Waters, as well as the tartarous recrements of our food, being imbibed by the
Latex of the Blood, does (the one as well as the other) by its various
filtratures and percolations, leave its precipitate upon the Streinors, Bowels,
and Membranous Parts, causing the foresaid Diseases in Bodies inclinable
thereunto.

Now in what my Antagonist glories, this our Author and Friend accounts no
less then the shame of the Scarbrough Water, (viz.) That it contains such a
large quantity of the Minerals (as he calls them) including together with the
noble Salt, also the dirty faeces and stony matter, which without doubt (if any
thing) is its greatest disparagement: But here, as we shall accuse the one of
vanity, and to have done it, not for want of ignorance in the critical Analysis
of that Water; So the other we shall no less impeach of too tart a reflection
upon the same, and of raising a theoretick Fabric from too sandy a foundation.

But before we prescribe our Remedy to prevent petrifaction, etc. I shall first
bring the matter in controversy to the test, by propounding only this
following Experiment, which I have not yet, but may (God willing) take the
opportunity of trying at this Spaw-time, which will certaiuly answer this
querie, viz. whether the Scarborew water does leave any considerable quantity
of its sabulous matter in the body, whereby it may give just cause of suspicion
of furthering or increasing the Stone, Gout, Jaundice, etc. the Experiment is
this, viz. To save the Urin of a calculous, gouty, or other such like Patient,
after he has drank plentifully of the Spaw, which is only to be saved after
the Urin comes untinged from him, to the quantity of two or three quarts, and
to distill that in a Glass Body or Retort, or barely to evaporate it in a Jar
Glass, and so to try whether indeed it has or no, left any considerable
quantity of its sabulous matter in the body; which may truly be computed from
the more or less quantity of the stony matter left behind after evaporation or
distillation, compared with the residence of the same quantity of the Spaw
Water, distilled or evaporated fresh from the Fountain.

A Method Prescribed For the right use of the Scarbiough-Water.
NOW come I to give my Receipt how to prevent petrifaction, by propounding a
Method for the right use and improvement of the Water; where, first, I advise
all Patients, who would take this Water for their best advantage and help, for
the prevention or cure of the Stone, Gout, Scurvy, Jaundice, Palsies,
Epilepsies, Asthma, or other chronical Diseases; to begin with a gentle
Vitrioline Vomit, the Dose to be ordered according to the discretion of the
advising Physician, which may be done, although the Patient has for some time
drunk of the Water; for this sort of Vonrit (which is surely the safest in the
World) does not only carry off plenty of a depraved matter, involved in the
Tunicles of the Stomach, the fomenter of most Diseases, whether Acute or
Chronical, but also strengthens the Fibers of the Stomach, and other Membranes,
through the whole body, reducing them to their proper Tone; which the
generality of Solutions, yea, the too frequent use of this Spaw Water, is apt
to relax, and to make them flag and hang; the depravation of whose economy,
makes them forgetful of their offices, and renders them susceptible of a stony
incrustation, from the sabulum of the Water; and hereby they become the cause
of all those Diseases, which happen upon those who incautiously drink, and that
long and plentifully of this Spaw Water: and hence it is, that after a months
drinking of the Water, it sometimes happens that the Appetite or Concoction
decays, (which my Antagonist acknow ledgeth) or the Waters pass not so well,
but cause distention in the Belly or Veins, and so brings on a difficulty of
breathing, pain in the head, etc.

All which may be now remedyed, by the method we are now propounding; for this
kind of Vomit (which may, as occasion shall require, be safely repeated) does
fortify the membranous parts notably, and makes them mindful of their duties;
after which the Patient may, for two or three mornings, drink pretty freely of
the Waters, using moderate exercise after, as walking upon the Sands, or in
their Chamber; and about two hours after the last Glass of Water, let them
drink a Glass or two of the best White Wine, (well refined from its Tartar) and
about one hour after that, take some warm Broth; then to eat of a few Dishes of
Meat, and those to be as well ordered as may be: nor is it a little respect
that is to be had to the Drink at Meats, viz. that it neither be new, thick, or
unwrought, nor that it be hard or tart.

So that four things are to be regarded in the drinking of the Waters.

First, Moderate exercise after drinking the Water.

Secondly, To drink a Glass or two of Wine, two hours after the Water, to help
the passage thereof.

Thirdly, Not to eat too soon after the Waters; for either by too immoderat
exercise, that which should pass away by Urine, (by the short way) is
preposterously carried into the habit of the body, or by eating too suddenly
before the Waters have passed; the like disorder may happen, (viz.) That the
Latax wherein the sabulous matter is dissolved, is thereby in danger to be
carried by the Thoracical Vessels, into the fourth digestion of the heart, and
thence into the habit of the body, where it may lay a foundation for the Gout,
Stone, Scurvy, Fevers, etc.

Fourthly, A moderation in Diet, having good Meat well ordered, and to keep a
restraint upon the Stomach, not overcharging it with too much, nor with too
great variety of food, for sometimes what the Water builds, in order to health,
the irregularity of diet in some persons pulls down.

Fifthly, Good wholesome Drink is to be chosen at Meats, which should neither be
very small, nor hard or tart, nor, lastly, new, thick, or unwrought, but should
be soft, clear, and healing Ale; or a middle sort of Beer, fresh and lively;
all botled Ale (especially that which flies) is to be avoided; in short, it
should be kindly Ale, such as may well dilute our other solid Food, and be a
suitable Vehicle of our nutritive Juice; for from a due contemperature of our
Drink and Meat (by the efficiency of the ferments) arises the wholsomness of
our nourishment.

When the Patient has drank for two or three days of the Spaw Water, after
the former directions, then is he to take a Dose of Solutive Pills, viz. one
overnight, and two the next morning; observing much what the former
instructions, and to omit taking any Water for that day.

These Pills ought to be so contrived by the Physician, as to contain in them
such Ingredients as may chiefly respect the Scurvy, and that because the Scurvy
is most-what the ground to other Diseases; and next, that they may be such as
may give the Patient four or five stools, (without griping) as his strength,
and the indications of his Disease may require; not neglecting, in the interim,
other specificks seasonably to be exhibited, as the Physician shall think meet,
from the indications of the Disease.

Then (if the Physician think fit) is the Patient to rest a day or two from
taking the Spaw-Water, and that to prevent a sudden precipitation of the stony
matter upon the Tunicles of the Intestines, after their abstersion or cleansing
by the former Solutive; and after that to begin again, observing the former
instructions, and so on in a round, with such diversifications as the
Physician, from a critical observation of the Symptoms and Indications, shall
judge requisite, until the Patient be cured, at least in so hopeful a way
toward it, as that Nature may, without much stress, tug through the rest.

And by this means, will all the inconveniences which happen, as aforesaid,
to incautious Spaw-Drinkers, be prevented; hereby Patients will not miss of
their aim, viz. their desired health, etc. This course being taken, I see no
cause of suspicion of any harm from the Waters; for supposing (at the worst) a
precipitation should happen, which cannot be much; the next Dose of
Antiscorbutick Pills, together with a good Diuretic, and a glass or two of
Wine, will absterge it off, and carry it c^^ verly away.

Nor need we be altogether so fearful of harm from the stony Concretions in the
Water, if we confider, That Physicians often prescribe Coral, Crabseyes, Pearl,
Crabs-claws, Hyacinth, Smaragde, Sapphire, Bezoar, etc. which are the
Ingredients of several compound Species, as of Pulv. e chel. cancrorum, species
Cordiales, etc. frequently ordered by them for the cure of Diseases; which
sometimes dulcifie the Blood, and other essential Juyces of the body, by
coagulating their acidities, which otherwise cause obstructions in the bowels,
and give beginning to Apostemations, etc. being frequently carried off by
Siedge.

Yea, I know a Gentlewoman, who being troubled with a spurious (and therefore
superfluous) acidity upon her Stomach, amongst the hundred of Remedies she has
used, finds nothing comparable to the eating plenty of Chalk, which is a stony
Concretion: This more powerfully, then any other thing she has yet met with,
dints the overflowing acidity, sweetens it, which otherwise, with an acid
flatus, afflicts her Intestines, causing unufual tormina, or griping of the
Guts; Of this she has eaten (as I remember she told me) some pecks in some late
years, and yet is no more afflicted with the Stone or Gout, then she was before
the taking thereof.

So that all those who are not originally inclined to the Stone or Gout, may
very safely drink of the Waters, and that with very good success, for the cure
of most other inflrmities, by the due management of the Spaw, according to our
prescribed Method, where we are not so magisterial in our advices, but do leave
the judicious Physician to vary, as he sees cause, I giving only hints, and
opening a Casement for more light, for the better discovery of the improvement
of this Noble Spaw, in order to the cure of many Diseases; for Art is not only
to imitate Nature, but also help and supply its deficiencies, separating what
is superfluous, and adding what is necessary.

But if any, who are inclined originally to the Stone or Gout, shall upon the
consideration that the Scarbrough-Water is so esurine or acid, by its imbibed
Nitro-aluminous, or duplicate Salt, as to dissolve and carry along in its
bowels the several Raiments of Stone, shall, I say, thereupon become jealous of
drinking the Water:

To those I shall first advise, the drinking the Water according to our
prescribed Method; which if it do not answer their expectation upon trial, at
least does not satisfy, then would I thus farther add, viz. That doubtless
when these stony Concretions are separated by Art or Nature, the foresaid Salt
being dissolved in fresh Water, (which upon evaporation yields no sabulous
Sediment) must needs, I say, become very powerful against all those Diseases,
whose seminaries consist in a sabulous petrifying property, as the Stone, Gout,
Jaundice, etc. especially if dissolved with the addition of Salt of Steel, and
drunk with great plenty of Spring Water so acuated.

And therefore, lastly, would I propound to all those who are afflicted with
these Diseases, upon not being satsfied with the former Method, or being at too
great a distance, to take it accordingly, either (by procuring this duplicate
Salt of the Spaw) to dissolve it in some pure Spring Water, as aforesaid, with
the addition of Salt of Steel, and so to drink it (according to the advice of
their Physicians) at home; or else, to dissolve the same Salt in some
Vitrioline Water, as that of Kuarsbrough, Rotheram, Olton, etc. and to drink as
large quantities thereof, as their Physician, by the indications of their
Diseases, shall advise.

Thus, from what is premised, the three Indications (propounded by my candid
Friend) for the right improvement of the Water, are readily, and without much
ado, answered: for, first, by a right management of the Waters, according to
our Method, the suspicious petrifying property of the Scarbrough Waters may
very probably be prevented, yea and though already begun, may as likely be
carried off; And, secondly, by the same process, the Stone-pouder, and faeces
of the Alom, may be hindered from fixing upon the Bowels; and, lastly, to
prevent (in tender constitutions) that the duplicated Salt corrode not the
Entrals, may easily be done, either by our former Method, or by diluting the
essential Salt thereof in great plenty of fresh Spring Water, or by dissolving
it in Vitrioline Spaws, as aforesaid.

An APPENDIX Concerning the Anatomy of the GERMAN Spaw-Water.
I Took about a quart of the Spaw-Water, (which is brought out of Germany, and
exposed to sale in Leiden, Amsterdam, and other Cities of the Low Countries, in
Bottles sealed up) into a little of which I put some Powder of Galls, with
which it struck a pale Clarret color; the rest I ordered to be put into a
Glass Retort, with a clean Receiver close luted to it, and gave an easy heat,
distilling off first about one ounce of Water, then poured it sorth, and found
that it had neither taste, smell, nor any other properties that might
distinguish it from ordinary Spring Water distilled, for with Galls it would
make no more alteration then common distilled Water: Then we distilled off
about two or three ounces more of insipid Water; after which, I ordered the
fire to be permitted to extinguish, to try what kind of precipitate it would
let fall; because, after the first ounce was come over, slacking the fire, we
found that a little Sediment was fallen, which was of a pale reddish color;
and upon the second cooling, more of the same fell down: Then I caused that
which remained in the Retort to be filtred, and saved the Sediment in the
Filter Paper; which being dried up, was an insipid pale red Calx.

Then I tried if the filtred Water, after this precipitation, would give any
tincture with Galls, as it did before separation, but found it would not; after
which I poured it into the clean washed Retort, and distilled again, as before,
until all was come off, except about one half ounce: This I brought to London,
and evaporated in a clean Jar Glass, in a gentle heat, till it came to a
dryness. The color of this Powder was somewhat white, and its taste was
pleasantly sharp or piercing, with a heat and warmth diffused upon the Tongue,
but had no Vitrioline taste: to this, pouring Oil of Sulphur per campanam, it
did make a manifest ebullition, as if it had been poured upon so much Salt of
Tartar; but Oil of Tartar per deliquium, did cause no effervescence at all; by
which it was evident, that the Salt contained in this residence, was rather
lixivial then acid, although in taste it scem'd to be neutral, but to partake
of both; so that probably this Spring in its Original (I mean where it is first
impregnated with Mineral Juyces) is hot, but running further through a Colander
of Earth or Sand, loses its heat, and becomes at its eruption a cold Spring.

Observations on the dissection of a Woman who dyed of the Jaundice.
AND here, that I may entertain the Reader with some little variety, I shall
end all with some Observations on the dissection of an ancient Woman, who dyed
at the Hospital in Leyden, of the Yellow Jaundice; Her Skin (before death, as
well as after) was dyed the most deep Yellow that ever I saw in my life; she
consumed away in a Marasmus, not withstanding all the means that could be used,
and it will be judged impossible that it should otherwise be, after I have
related what we observed in the dissection of her body: Upon the opening of the
Abdomen of this Cadaver, (performed by the Professor in the Theater) was first
observed (omitting the less considerable enormities) a connexure or knitting
together of the Pylorus, and the under part of the left Lobe of the Liver,
close by the Vesica Bilaris, by a hard schirrhous tumor; for besides that, the
Stomach was somewhat larger then ordinary, and the Spleen lay length ways, in
a parallel line with the direct Muscles of the Abdomen, being somewhat less
then usual; and although being cut, its Patenchyma was found of a due
consistence, and not vitiated in substance; I say, besides these, the Liver was
found very stiff and hard, with several schirrous tumors, some lesser, some
bigger, whose consistence was mostwhat glandulous, one or two being as big as
Wallnuts, and some less, but one near as large as a Man's Fist.

The Cystis Fellea was large and very (...) which was found (together with
those in the (...) Ductus) near a hundred and twenty Stones, so^^^ like little
Peace, some larger, but all of them mostwhat angular; in color some near
bright, and not much unlike the ordinary sort of Mother of Pearl; others had
dark spots intermingled, and, as it were, marbled: The Professor distributed to
each of the Students, who were present, one of these Stones as a rarity. The
liquid part of the Gaul, which was not yet petrified, most of which was lodged
in the Ductus Hepaticus, was tenacious, and mostwhat of the consistence of a
Syrup.

The common Ductus, which reaches from the Cystis to the Duodenum, was so much
obstructed, as the Professor could not (without cutting the Vessel which leads
from the Cystis further open) make the Style pass from that part into the
Intestine; and that because the situation of the parts was altered, and become
different from the natural, by reason of that strict connection of the Pylorus
with the Liver.

Then opening the Thorax, the Lungs were found scarce vitiated at all, but the
Heart was less by much then usual; yea, and that which was the wonder of the
whole, (and which no Author (that we know of) has yet ever observed) was, to
see a Schirrus upon the right Ventricle of the Heart. True, the Polypus Cordis
has been frequently found in the dissection of Dutch Bodies, by the sam'd
Sylvius.

And I saw another Woman dissected there, who dyed (as was supposed) of a
Syncope; in the right Ventricle of whose heart was found a Polypus, several
inches long, from the Basis to the Cone thereof; although it is more probable
she dyed of a complication of other Diseases; for in the Abdomen was found a
great quantity of a Serum, together with plenty of a Pituita floating together
in that cavity. But that there should be a schirrous tumor upon the Heart, is
what we never heard of, or at least never observed before.

As to the cause of the Jaundice in this Woman, it was variously disputed; some
supposed that it proceeded only from an obstruction of the Bile, which thereby
being mixed with the Blood, was dispersed into the whole habit of the Body:
Others supposed that the Disease proceeded srom a volatility of the Bile, which
passing up by the Ductus Hepaticus, was thence, by the Vena Porta, sent into
the Mass of Blood, and so vitiated the whole habit of the Body with that
Saffron Dye: But upon the dissection, it should seem to be evident that the
natural Crasis of the Bile was wholly perverted, and that that which should
have been useful in its due consistence, not only as a Balsam to the Blood, but
also by its volatile Alkali, to perform the gentle and natural fermentation in
the Intestines, together with the subacid ferment of the Pancreatical Juice,
was in great part (being vitiated in its constituent parts) petrified; which
petrifaction, as well in that as in other parts of the body, do all, most
probably, proceed from the same efficient causes; and that (not unlikely) from
a too great exaltation of the saline and sulphurous parts of the Bile,
coagulating themselves upon some terrestrial or tartarous matter, which, by
continuance of time, has been precipitated to the bottom or sides of the
Vesica Bilis.

From what is premised, I would excite the Ingenious to further improvements,
that we may the better be capacitated to do good by a right understanding of
the causes of things; and that by propounding, first, that several Experiments
may be essayed, in order to the immitation of these Anomolous Products in
Animals, which do so often afflict the humane Body, in several parts thereof;
for from a true apprehension of the essential Causes which concur in the
Fabric of these Animal Stony Concretions, we may the better be informed, how
to prepare such Menstruums, as may genuinely (and without corrosion of other
tender adjacent parts) resolve such petrified Bodies.

FINIS.

