Zenexton Ante-Pestilentiale. OR, A short Discourse OF THE PLAGUE: Its
Antidotes and Cure, According to the PLACETS of the best of Physicians,
HIPPOCRATES, PARACELSUS, and HELMONT.

By W. Simpson, Philo-Medico-Chymic.

Opera danda est Chirurgo, ut vires gemmarum, herbarum, radicum, ac seminum
coelitus infusas ad pestem, accurate cognoscat.

Paracels. Chirur. Magn. p. 22. LONDON, Printed for George Sawbridge, at the
Sign of the Bible upon Ludgate Hill, 1665.

TO THE READER.
Candid Friend,
I Have ventured here into a Bottom, which, whether it sink or swim in the
Vulgar Opinion, I matter not; I have exposed my self to Public View in the
penning of these few Lines; a Hazard I confess sufficient to have discouraged a
Tyro, to lie open to the Carpings of some, and to the Criticalness of others
biased and prepossessed persons; had not my Genius been born up by the
satisfaction of the Truth of what I write, and that from a good end, and
therefore have heartily imparted those grand Secrets of Hippocrates and Helmont
against a Disease, that at the writing hereof was on the increasing hand. And
therefore I shall say to the unbyassed Reader, that I thought in my own breast
I should do no small piece of Service to my own Country (especially in such a
Juncture as this) in describing the Nature and Essence of this so direful a
Disease as the Plague: and also that we might not only know where the Malady
lay, but also be instructed where to find a Remedy; Therefore I have set open
one Gate into the Magazine or Treasury of Chemical Medicines, whereby we may be
furnished with at least some Spagyrical Antidotes, which may, by the blessing
of God, be useful in their places: I shall, I confess, much wonder if many
Errata's be not committed both by Me and the Printer, seeing I have endeavored
to huddle it up in haste, having not had past eight days time since I begun,
and that too snatched from my other Affairs of my Elaboratory, repairing of
Housen, and other domestic and abroad-Business. Some perhaps will be ready to
impeach me with Tautology in repeating the words Idea, Ferment, Archeus, etc.
so often over, to which I shall truly say, That I was ready to accuse my self
thereof, but could not without impairing the sense leave them forth: for,
though as to my self I could well have often forborne them, yet I espied a flaw
often if they were omitted, which might easily invert the sense of the
sentence; therefore I rather let them pass. If this be favorably received, its
probable it may give encouragement to the divulging of somewhat else in
Chemical Physic, viz. the fruits of my daily Labors in the Spagyrick Science.
In the interim peruse this with an unbyassed judgment, and pass not sentence
till thou know thou art a competent Judge.

Farewell. Thine, W. Simpson.

Zenexton Ante-Pestilentiale, etc.
TO give an account to the World why I attempt so difficult a Task as to treat
of the Pest or Plague, that greatest of Contagions that ever was in the World,
whereby God is pleased to permit multitudes of people to be swept away, and
thereby, as it were, to thin the Earth: And not rather leave it to riper
judgments and more mature understandings, whose grey-hair'd Experience, if
nothing else, might be deemed to set off these Arcana Naturae abstrusiora or
more hidden secrets of Nature, with a better and more resplendent luster. I
say, the reasons why I set upon this Work, which some may (and that perhaps not
enviously) think unproportionable to my shoulders, is;

First, Because I have not seen, as yet, another step forth with his Bow and
his Sling against this great Goliath, which may probably (if not prevented by
Divine Providence either raising up Instruments who may show forth his Wonders
that he has planted in Nature, or by a more immediate hand stay the Fury
thereof:) may, I say, knock down thousands of people ere the sting thereof be
dinted; and therefore calls for some to stand up whose Names are written in the
Volume of Nature as well as of Grace, to show forth the Wonders of the Most
High.

2. Because God has not left us destitute of means even in the most deplorable
cases (unless he has determined the ruin of a Family, a Town, a City, Country,
or People through the crying sins thereof) and for that purpose has planted in
his wonder-works of Nature such a Treasury as therein to be found a Remedy for
every Malady, which are not often handed forth to the unworthy, though
otherwise never so industrious, upon selfish interest; who are like those that
grope for light at noonday, who in the midst of light are yet in darkness: but
it pleases God the Primitive Author and Fountain of Nature to enlighten those
in Him accepted persons with his gift of light and knowledge in the things of
the outward Nature, so as they may be enabled through his inspiring light, from
whom every good and perfect gift proceeds, to single forth those Specific
Remedies as they lie in the bosom of Nature against every Malady and Infirmity
(to which Humane Nature in its outward being is most prone) who likewise are
taught to exalt those Medicinal properties according to the intention of Nature
to their highest energy and efficacy. We therefore who are Sons of Pyrotechny,
and wait for our Diploma from the Most High, are, by the blessing of God
succeeding our endeavors, in a better capacity of making our grand inquests
into the secrets of Nature, the Handmaid of God, than those loiterers in the
Vineyard; I mean the Galenists, who like the angry Wasps neither work
themselves nor yet would willingly suffer others, lest by the fruits of their
Labors, (which at length will overcome) the dronish Galenists in time be
degraded, who now according to all probability (seeing a better light to
Physic springs up from the anatomizing Art of Chemistry) are at the declining
hand.

3. The third reason may be from the imminent danger and extraordinary urgency
and necessity of the present time, whereby this Nation is threatened with one,
if not more, of that trine of those epidemical sweeping Judgments, which God
permits to come upon the face of the Earth, when his wrath is stirred up by the
exorbitant vanities and crying wickednesses of a People; so that many Moses's
had need to stand in the Gap and cry, lest the Vials of wrath be poured forth
after an extraordinary manner upon a gainsaying People: And seeing, as the Wise
man says, that, of the Most High comes healing, and that the Lord has
created Medicines out of the earth, and he that is wise Will not abhor them.
And that God has created the Physician: And therefore the Wonders of God in
his creation of Medicines out of the earth, ought not to become as Ciphers
through ignorance and unworthiness, but, by the strength and enabling power of
God, to improve our Abilities and Talents which he has bestowed upon us that we
may not hide them in a Napkin, but improve them to the utmost every one in his
capacity and order, in his generation, to do what good he can; for we are here
as Stewards every one entrusted with a Talent to improve, which who lays out to
the best advantage and does the most good in his place, receives the greatest
Reward of the Heavenly Donor.

4. The last reason, and that which as to my own particular was instar omnium,
was, the bent of my own Genius, which I confess has been captivated amongst the
rest of my Spagrrick Inquiries after a peculiar manner to search for an
Antidote and Cure of some highly malignant Fever, which I was apt to think
might ere long appear upon the Stage of the World as an epidemical Disease, and
certainly the Plague is the highest and most malignant of Fevers. It was the
current, I say, of my own inclination, prompted by an inward hand, that led me
that way, that I could not but take notice of: It was that amongst the rest of
my Fireworks that put an edg upon my desire of doing good in my generation,
that I might not be found in idleness, drolling away my precious time either in
vanities or in empty speculations, but in experimental essays of those
Medicinal Virtues which otherwise lie dormant under their shells and husks;
seeing God keeps his Jewels of hidden Energetical Virtues, such as are Healing
Endowments of things, under Lock and Key, as I may say, and will not let them
go unless the Artist have the Key from him, who thereby is let into the secret
Meanders of beautiful Nature, and sees the many, and yet orderly windings and
turnings in that great Labyrinth, where indeed Healing is seen to be the gift
of God.

Now that I may buckle to the Point, and in short but compendious discourse
(waving prolixity) may signify the essential nature of the Plague, its manner
of surprising and destroying the body: also the probable way of Antidote and
Cure, if curable, that so we may not appear altogether barren in the Theory.

The Plague therefore is a certain virulent and contagious Ferment conceived
from without or within the body, seizing upon the vital Archeus, or spirit of
life, with a kind of fear and terror, and boyls in the blood; and in its
fermenting, impresseth its malignity upon all the principal parts and humors of
the body, whereby the blood presently putrefies, and sends forth bubo's, sores,
stigmata, etc. the immediate badges of its mortification, and so works in the
blood and spirits til such time (which is speedy) as the vital Lamp burns dim
and shortly becomes extinct, much like a malignant combustible halituous
Mineral Sulphur which is sometimes found in Mines under the earth, which blows
forth a Candle, and sometimes stifles the vital fire of the Laborators.

First, I say, it is a virulent and contagious Ferment, viz. A poisonous and
infective operating power: now Ferments are certain powers in Nature whereby
all things are put into a way of change either for good or bad; for, Ferments
are the Parents of transmutation out of one form into another, or from one
degree to another, whereby things are brought on to their highest energy either
for good or bad; by Ferments fixed things are made volatile, and volatile
fixed; they are the keys of Nature whereby great changes and alterations are
made in bodies.

Now every thing that has a vegetating life has also a ferment implanted in it
which is a certain working power whereby the wheel of Nature becomes stirring and
active in that being and demonstrates its self in the several gradations of
the same thing both in its production, increase, (acmn) full growth, declining,
and at length passing off the stage into another form.

Now as Ferments are indemonstrable a priori, inasmuch as they are certain
original operative powers which God has implanted in every natural being, and
therefore there is not any thing (prius, or) before them by which they might be
evidenced what they are; but they show themselves sufficiently that they are,
and what they are by their fruits, effects and symptoms, which are
demonstrations a posteriori, and sufficient to evince the truth of their
existency; as for instance, that natural digestive power which God has placed
in the stomach of all creatures, whereby the Aliment that is taken in, though
of several sorts of food, is all reduced by the analyzing virtue thereof into
an acid cremor, (though taken in with other properties of sweet, bitter, etc.)
and so turns all into a primitive prepared juice for the nourishment of the
body after its transits through other digestions, fitted for the same purpose
to bring the nutriment on by several degrees to become a balsamic spirituous
liquor fit for irrigating and nourishing the solid parts, which no solitary
heat, though never so artificially contrived, could without these innate
digestions or ferments, ever bring to pass; therefore they demonstrate
themselves to be and to do, what no other things can be or do besides
themselves.

In like manner the Pest as also some other Diseases are entia realia, viz.
real beeings, which have a beginning, an increase, and growth, a fullness of
stature, whereby they either conquer that which they rise up against, viz. the
vital spirit, or they are conquered and begin to decline and are as other
natural beeings transmuted into other forms. Now I say, the Pest is not
demonstrable a priori, though the spirit o^ the humane life as considered in
its integrity and soundness is pre-existent before the seizing of the virulency
of the pestiferous ferment, yet then they are as two distinct beeings which at
their encounter strive for masterhood, as two Antagonists or Champions striving
to vanquish one another. Insultat hostem, etc.

And though the Pest have a real existency in its self, as for instance, its
lying dormant in rags, vestments, flax, walls, etc. Wherein it has yet all the
lineaments and proportions lurking within its own sphere, and as really the
same being of the Plague or pestiferous ens, as if it came in combat with the
vital spirit, yet I say, as to us and as to the effect it would work, it is as
nothing or a mere dormitant ens that lies buried in its ashes, unless it be
contemper'd with our humane Mummy and then it becomes an actual and fermental
pestiferous entity, producing its various effects, and symptoms within the
sphere of the Microcosm, mostwhat to the ruin of the vital structure; and does
not as most other diseases which with the suine of the vital flame extinguish
^lso themselves, but out-lives the ^^fe and skips into another body to ^ct the
same scene over again, after ^s tyrannical a manner as ever, viresque acquirit
eundo.

It is a poisonous ferment to the life, and therefore in its fermenting or
working it inverts the whole frame of Nature, and what other diseases effect in
a long time by, as it were, often biting and nibling and obscuring the vital
flame, till at length they worm out the life: this like a nimble Arsenical
combustible Mineral Sulphur, sets roughly upon the vital Taper, and with a
quick malignant Blast extinguisheth it, and that, as it were, it devours ore
operto.

2. This contagious Ferment is conceived either from within, or from without
the body: from within, as when an Idea of fear impresseth it^ character upon
some more then ordinary putrid excrementitious matter residing in the
Intestines or in the ultimate digestion, and the Idea clothes its self with
corporiety in the putrid excrement of the body and the putrid matter becomes
spiritful in the Idea, and both together become by irritating and invigorating
one another, a fermental poison which makes its onset upon the vital Archeus,
entering the lists of contention therewith; and, by this virulency that they
have one wrought the other into, it becomes contagious, so that every spark and
vibration of this fermental fire retains the Idea and platform of the whole
pestiferous contagion; Vnica prava pecus, etc.

For though one who is infected with this pernicious and most-what mortal
Disease does infect another, yet does it rage never awhit the less in the
first, nor is it in the second, or he who is infected at the second hand any
thing less, though but a spark of the first or original; so that every
vibration (though as to conception never so little) of a fermental contagion
retains the seed, and that the whole platform of the Disease it self, inasmuch
as every ferment is as an Imp or Scion of a Fruit-tree which hides in it self
the image of the whole Tree, and wants but time and the conspiring of seasons
(Art having Nature for its groundwork) to show forth the Idea of the same Tree
it was taken from, both as to leaves, flowers, and fruit: so that seeds are
small in bulk even scarce imaginable, and yet these, according to the
appointment of God in Nature have ferments annexed to them, whereby the Idea's
of things assume to themselves the elemental water for a body, wherein they
display the lively images of what lay dormant and not perceivable before in
their minute corpuscles of Seed.

All which solves us this Medical Phenomenon, viz. How it comes to pass that
those who most fear having the small Pox, spotted Fever, and such like
diseases which have a degree of virulency in them, and therefore are a kind of
Pest in an inferior manner; how such, I say, who are most afraid are the
soonest infected, as I knew a Physician who had such an inbred fear against the
small Pox, that he would scarce, if at all, venture into a house where any was
troubled with that disease; and yet, for all his curiosity of avoiding plates,
was snatched with it at length even in the flower of his years and ^ied. I say,
it appears to me from what is laid down before, what may ^asily loose this knot,
and that is, The Idea of fear or terror may so work upon an excrement even of
any of the digestions (for every digestion has its way of separating the impure
from the pure which is nutrimental) as to cause that excrement yet to
degenerate further, even to a putredness, and in that ^ntred matter the Idea
becomes corporeal, and the putrid matter in the Idea becomes active and
pestiferous, and both become fermental, and so work upon the blood and spirits,
defiling them with that inherent inquination, and spreading Miasm, whereby the
vital flame burns dimly, and at length becomes (through the prevalency of the
fermental Miasm) quite extinct.

Hence it also appears that every Disease that has any thing of a venenum or
venom in it, as all manner of malignant Fevers, are also fermental, and
therefore apt to propagate themselves by contagion o^ infection; some more,
some less according to the degrees of the conceived virulency.

And as the noble Helmont says (whom I confess to have given the greatest
light to these conceptions) that every Disease, as other natural Beeings, are
constituted of an efficient and a material cause, which two make up the
complexion and essence of a Disease as well as of other positive Beeings: for
every Disease (saving some casual obstructions which may also fore-run other
more complex Diseases) has a root or beginning either in the digestions, liquid
juyces of the body (as blood and other nutritive humors) spirits or solid
parts, and after that a growth or spreading into branches or symptoms which
carry along with them the Idea of the efficient and procatarctick or irritating
cause which was forged in the Minera morbi; so that the symptoms are
proportionate to the efficient, and bears the badges thereof as receiving its
signature therefrom: even as the fruit of a tree is answerable to the Idea
lodging in the root, a Pear Tree bears the Idea of the whole both in the root
and in every Scion, and the fruit thereof is Pears answerable to specific
difference of it from other trees and fruit. For the outward natural life of
the body, if considered as in health and its integrity is as a flourishing Tree
that puts forth, grows florid, and fruitful.

Which has all the digestions in right frame every one in their order, and all
its organs depurated and free from obstructions and offending sordes; the blood
freely circulating with its crimson hue in its own twisted Meanders of veins
and arteries, the motion of all the parts brisk and lively, and all conspiring
in that one point of co-incidence, the health and flourishing of the body.

But if the seeds of Diseases (as commonly through the evil access in nature
they do) become sown and grown up together with the life, then they break the
former harmony of health and life, and shoot forth branches or symptoms
answerable to their seeds or roots which disturb the economy of the natural
digestions, and pervert the order and method of nature, and at length subvert
the whole frame of the Microcosmick fabric; and that much the sooner if the
inseminated morbid seeds prove acute (as in all sorts of common Fevers;)
venomous, fermental, and contagious, as in small Pox, spotted and camp-Feaver,
and all other malignant Fevers (the greatest of which the Plague:) these
presently put to flight the vital forces, and strangle Nature with her own
cords, by baffling the digestions and stifling the vital powers.

As from within the body, so likewise from without may that unwelcom guest take
^nne, which appears by the many ways that contagious Disease may arrest the
body; as for example, the pestilent odor may lurk in old rags, garments, paper,
sweepings of houses, stone-walls, or any other body whose texture renders it
capable of retaining those contagious Effluvia's, which rebound either from
infected places or persons, and, for ought I know, even in the body of common
Salt it self may the pestilent odor reside, because that Salt in its
coagulation acquires an impure halicuous sordes, whereby it exasperates the
Scurvy, and may be retentive of a malignant fracedo or contagious hogoo.

Those bodies which will not admit of the pestilent odor, amongst Metals Gold
(though it may lurk in the sordes that casually may adhere to Gold) and, it may
be, polished Silver; amongst Minerals possibly Mineral Cinnaber sulphur, and
that also all Pearls, precious Stones, and Amber, which three last besides the
politeness of their external surface (which will not easily, no more will other
polished bodies admit of that venomous vapor) their intrinsic specific
virtues may be a defense to them against that virulent odor, whose virtues also
may probably make them become tutelary to those who use them; as, for instance,
a piece of red Amber which a Spanish Surgeon (as Helmont relates) used as
his only Zenexton or preservative for three years together being Master of the
Pesthouse, which he used to rub upon the seven principal and Planetary Pulses,
viz. upon both temples, wrists, ancles, and left breast, wherewith he was
preserved, as Helmont observes, though the rest of his assistants taken away by
the Plague.

Now as the Plague is (as by what is declared) a virulent and contagious
Ferment conceived both from a pestilent Miasm arising from within or from
without the body, so it seizes upon the vital Archeus or spirit of life with a
kind of fear and terror. For a noxious Ferment cannot work nor show its
propagating symptoms upon a cadaverous body, inasmuch as a dead body cannot be
infected nor can be stung with any Viper or Serpent, because it wants a vital
principle (which we call an Archeus) for the venom or infection to work upon;
so a potential or actual Cautery, the last whereof may stigmatize and burn a
dead body, but neither of them is able to raise a blister, swelling, or other
vital symptom, and that because all blisters, swellings, pustul's,
inflammations, pains, or other symptoms which arise from infection or from
biting of venomous beasts are vital products, whose spring is immediately from
the very fountain of life, the Archeus it self, which disgusting those virulent
impressions, and hostile exotic Ferments, as also all outward casual
perplexing accidents of bruises, bites, wounds, burnings, scaldings,
dislocations, etc. does show its own vital strength in opposing the injury done
to it by those vital symptoms of swellings, fieriness, frequent pulses, and
protrusion of the adjacent latex to the injured part, as buckets to allay the
scalefire.

The Archeus therefore is that in us which first feels and perceives the
pestilent ens, and becomes infected therewith, shaping an Idea of fear and
terror upon the most degenerate excrement of the body, which is (as Helmont
says) the Tartar of the blood, which speedily contracts a pestilent fracedo,
and becomes the seminary of this most-what mortal Enemy, by putting on the form
of a Cadaver or dead body, whence the Archeus becomes more powerfully
invigorated in its own primitive frightful Idea, which also gives entrance for
the seminal pestilent character to lord it over all the digestions, by putting
a stop thereto, and causing an inward putrefaction to overspread the whole
body; whence mortal symptoms and at length death it self ensue.

Now the Plague surprizeth the Archeus with an Idea of fear after a twofold
manner, viz. both by an external fear, as I may call it, which comes from the
hearing of such a mortal, unfrequent, tyrannous, infectious Disease stirring
abroad, whence oftentimes a present horror shakes a man at the unexpectedness
and uncothness of such news, and those who are most startled with the novelty
thereof, are the soonest apprehended thereby; for Idea's of fear and terror are
not mere empty nothings, nor yet mere entia rationis, nor are idle, but become
more active by induing forms, and assuming corporiety in the putrid excrements
of the body, more readily I say, and more actually in some persons then others.

For we see there are some constitutions and tempers so far different from
others, that though they may have Idea's of sorrow, heaviness, melancholy by
external crosses, and thwarting providence, yet those Idea's seize not upon
the body, so as to put an anxiousness and restlesness upon the spirits, nor to
become a Remora to the digestions, and induce a tabes from a fretting nature,
but are laid aside and they are cheerful even in the midst of otherwise
grieving Idea's.

Whereas on the other hand, some are of such a fearful nature, that Idea's are
not only begot in their imaginative part, as well from privative as positive
objects; but also these Idea's hew forth to themselves shapes and assume
corporiety, so as to become real morbid Entities, to the prejudice of health,
nay, hazard of the life it self; hence wastings, and consumptions from
solicitous, anxious, and careful thoughts or Idea's, which often accelerate old
age, and make a man become gray and withered, before he be well arrived to the
prime of his years. But I have not time to exspatiate.

And as from an external fear, so also from an internal fear, the Archeus may
be surprised with a venomous and pestilent ens; as when from some infectious
air, contaminated with unwholesom smells, the Archeus secretly and inwardly
(and, that it may be, without the expectation or supposition of the party) is
seized upon with a strange kind of fear and terror, which it keeps lurking
within its own bosom, and so hatcheth its own Cockatrice-eggs, which at length
become a lethal poison to it self: With this Panick fear, the Archeus of the
wisest and the soberest of men may be insensibly taken, so as not only to shape
and foster a Morbid Idea, but also, that that sickly Idea should incorporate it
self into an excrementitious matter, and become at length determined in a
common and more inferior Disease, or else in a virulent Ferment, which works
retrogradely upon the whole frame of Nature, and hastens the terror of terrors,
Death.

Of the like nature with this fear of the Archeus, which begets the Pest in the
vital part, is also those fears (though seizing after another manner) which
surprise the Archeus of those who have a secret antipathy against any
particular thing, who can give no rational account why they have such a fear or
horror upon them at the presence of such an object, nor why they disgust such
or such a thing with an utter detestation; as for instance, that some will
sweat, tremble, and fear at the sight of Cheese; another will have dread at the
sight of a Cat; a third will have an Idea of horror at the sight of a Toad;
another will sweat, tremble, and be in a kind of Agony at the presence of a
Paper put under the bottom of a Pie, which though not seen by the eye, yet the
Archeus is such an acute discerner of things, that can by an intuitive kind of
inspection, presently discover what is friendly, but chiefly what is
inimicicious to it; not that the object is really so as it is apprehended by
the Archeus, for then it would be so to all, which jet, we see daily experience
says to the contrary.

Therefore these disgusts are certain irregular Idea's wherewith the Archeus
has been either originally from the conception tainted, which Idea's become so
familiar, as that they co-incide with the very essential and constitutive
principles of the Archeus, and so are naturalized therewith, as that they seem
to hang both upon one root, or basis; or else in time through customs or
casual accidents, they become implanted into the very initials of the Archeus,
and so become natural: As for instance: when a man takes a disgust at a thing,
he has either eaten too much of, or that has had some nauseating quality
therein, whereat the Archeus has been offended, and roused up the natural
forces in the stomach and intestines, to expel it, either upwards or downwards,
then presently it shapes an Idea of hatred and utter detestation thereagainst,
insomuch that though it was very well pleased therewith before the Surfeit, yet
after it utterly hates and rejects; yea, and though the same should under a
disguise be so palliated as to be taken into the stomach, yet then the Archeus
seeing, and, as it were, sensibly feeling it, sets it self strenuously against
it, by conceiving of Antipathetical or discording Idea's, whence to execute its
commands (at whose beck all the powers, faculties, and humors of the whole body
are) it rallies up its forces, makes its onset upon the deceitful enemy that
took him unawares, and is not quiet till he have thrust him out by head and
shoulders.

If then these ordinary and frequent Idea's work thus powerfully upon the
Archeus of persons, even in the common transactions between meats with other
objects, and the stomach with its legislator the Archeus, so as to cause
sometimes strange and antic gestures, as in the biting of a Tarantula, that
Spider of Apulia, whose strange and heteroclite venenal Idea does take such
impression upon the Archeus of the bitten or infected person, as that (sub
jugum trahitur Archeus) it brings the Archeus under its hatches, signs it with
its own character, which is so fermental, as that it presently insinuates into
the whole Archeus, and so consequently into all its clyents, that it rests not,
putting the body into antic postures of dancing, till by the suitableness of
some peculiar tone of music which pleases the Tarantula (that impressed the
Ideal-venom) he falls into such a fit of dancing, as that together with the
motion of the body, the virulent matter which it has got in the body, is
wrought out by sweat and transspiration, and the poisonous antick-Idea becomes
worn out by the access of the other pleasant Idea, that the Archeus is brought
into from the consonancy and harmony of the Nusick which at length worms out
the other.

So likewise that strange fermental venomous Idea, that is communicated to a
man from the biting of a mad Dog, which causes a hydrophobia, which is very
plain, that what is done, more then what would have been from the bites of
another Dog, is purely Idea; for we see that a common wound from a Dog or other
beast (unless it self be venenous) has no such symptoms as accompany the wound
of a mad Dog, or other venomous creature, but is only a solitary wound, curable
by ordinary Balsoms; but from the venom of the biting of a mad Dog comes a kind
of madling Idea, which has its dimensions and lineaments almost exactly from
the madling Idea of the Dog; so that it is plainly Ideal, and also Fermental
both in the mad Dog, as also in the bitten Person; insomuch that the madling
Idea of the ^og by the medium of the bite, insinuates its self through the
Mummial Ferment into the Archeus, and becomes so prevalent, as that it shapes
its own ^dea therein, and works the imaginative part into a likeness with its
self: whence most-what the same ^oving madling symptoms arise in the one, as in
the other. And also we see that in the giving of Opium crudely prepared, what
strange Idea's, phantasms, wheeling motions are represented, much like those
Idea's and labyrinthal thoughts which are impressed upon those who are
sometimes in the beginnings of Fevers, Agues, etc. without any using of Opium,
as if the Archeus in such Diseases had shaped (...) its self such a stupifying
and floa^ing wheeling Idea, as is in Opium it self; which appears plainly to
me, as if the Archeus had a power of forming in it most kind of Idea's that are
wrapped up in the bosom of Plants, and Animals, either from its own exorbitant
power, shaping them in its own Forge, by its own Vulcan; or by propagation from
the Plants and Animals themselves Opium given well prepared, we se^ how it
allays the fretting, fumings boiling, and painful Idea's in Fevers, and other
Diseases, by the refreshing Idea whereof, the (otherwise disturbed, fretful,
and incensed) Archeus becomes quieted, lays aside its fury, and is as a meek
Lamb pleasantly reposed by the charming Idea of that well-prepared vegetable
juice.

All which instances (and many more I might urge if I had time) do clearly
evince the truth of what I assert, viz. that there is an Archeus which sits at
the stern of all the digestions, in which also are represented various kinds of
Idea's, or shapings in the imaginative part, which being roused up by an
executive power, or Archeal fiat, become such real Entities, as are able ^^ough
both to disturb the order and frame of Nature, and to be ^etermin'd in
Diseases: And further, that of those Idea's some are ^rulent, others not, and
amongst ^^ysons, those who consist in a vi^^ent Idea, are the most noxious
(...) humane life; such are all malignant and pestilent odors, which ^^rce the
Archeus to fabricate an ^^ea of fear; which Idea is invigorated, by acuating it
self upon the ^^acedinous odor of the Tartar of ^^e blood, which is an
excrement ^f the fourth digestion, and therefore the most susceptible of
viru^^nt impressions.

This Idea therefore of Fear, which ^^prizeth the Archeus of some ti^^erous and
low-spirited people, ^oner then others, when it indues ^orporiety from a
virulent Conta^ion, it begins to boil in the blood, which is the receptaculum
vitae, the very seat of life, and red sea wherein our Archeus navigates, tacks
to and fro for the safeguard of the Microcosm: when it espieth any enemies,
especially of a poysonful property, it either lowreth its topsails in
obedience thereto, or else it sets upon it with all its might and force; in
which combat the one masters the other.

The blood is the Scene, in which both the vital Archeus, and morbid Entities
act their parts vicissim, and if any corrupting Acidity enters its Confines, it
becomes presently hostile thereto, either coagulating the same, whereby the
Viscera become obstructed, and diseases thence arising; or putrefieth the same,
causing it to contract a fracedinous odor, whence it affords a putredinous
Aporrhoea, that gives the Materia substracta for a venenous Idea of fear to
work upon, whence also from the one, acting upon the other, are begot all
malignant Diseases, and especially the Disease I ^m now treating of, viz. the
Pest.

In which Disease, the putrefying ^erment is so great, that if any of ^he
Archeus his forts be safe, I mean, if any part of the blood be free from
putrefaction, the Archeus flies thither, as to his safest Port, and there
sculks awhile in ambush, ^till the malignity either overspreads the whole blood
and Archeus, or else that the Archeus gains by retreating the more forces,
whereby it makes more conquerable assaults upon the vital enemy.

Hence it is, that if the blood be ^^t forth by opening a Vein, it ^roves
mortal, both in this and all other malignant Diseases, because the most pure
and untainted part of the blood, and where the Archeus chiefly lodges (which
is the Pillar of life) is thereby exhausted, and the putrefied part only les^
which is become a mere Cadave^ and hasteneth all the rest of the parts into a
likeness with its sel^ whence death inevitably. Where fore in all sorts of
Fevers, the Physician should seriously consider and weigh, whether there may
no^ be somewhat of malignity in the Disease, whose Diagnosticks h^ propounds to
himself, as the rule (...) proceeds by in the Therapeutick o^ Curative part,
lest he order a Phlebotomy where there is a degree o^ malignity and virulency,
that an^guis sub herbis in all infectiou^ Fevers.

Therefore not only in the Plagu^ but also in the small Pox, camp-Feavers,
spotted Fevers, putrid and other malignant Fevers, the letting of blood is
most dangerous, if not presently mortal; for it takes away not only the weapon
Nature has to contend with, but also her very Champion, the Archeus, and ^aves
her destitute of help to strug^^e with a potent enemy; therefore she must needs
flag and fall before his fury.

And indeed to tell you the sum ^f my thoughts, I must needs say, that
bloodding is not only dange^^us and mortal in malignant Fea^^ers, but
unnecessary in all other ^eavers; though, if any, the Pleu^sie may seem to
plead a necessity, ^ut to whom? Only to the Gale^^sts, who know no better
remedy through their poverty in Chemical ^reparations of noble Medicines: ^^ea,
it is impertinent in most Chro^^ick Diseases, and also dangerous, where the
Ferments or Digestions ^f the body are weak, the blood im^overished for want of
due circulation (restagnating in the parts) and a through-want of illumination
from the aura vitalis, or vital ^last. And lastly, where all the powers and
faculties are at the d^clining hand, as in all lingering wasting, and
consumptive Disease where to let blood is to pump Nature of her very best
Treasury.

I must confess I have found (...) experience, that some persons have found
sensible good in some disease giving them a temporary ease, but if their
disease be Fevers, they li^ger long before they come to the^^ full strength,
especially if blood w^^ drawn, when Nature was brought to a low ebb, for then
it cannot regai^ strength nothing near so soon, a^ when without blooding, by a
powerful Medicine, Nature is helpe^ and returns to its strength. Als^ I have
found, that if Nature b^ strong, and some exotic pains, o^ some other slight
Disease, that aris^ from the too great repletion of the Veins, as sometimes
Megrims, and Vertigo's, pains in the head, etc. which arise from the intumescence
of the bloody vessels of those parts, or else from a pungent acidity either in
the blood, latex, or aqua lymphatica, which may prick the Nervous and
Membranous part of the Brain, I mean, the Pia-mater, where in defect of other
Medicines (which may correct that spurious acidity, and transpire the
superfluous lat ex which swelled the vessels:) blooding may be a little
indulged, but not with too prodigal a hand. Also those whose sanguinious
springsource is of a vegetating and strongly increasing property, may in some
cases have a little indulgence herein, though with moderation.

For if the spring of the fourth Digestion which is the Port to sanguification
be veget, the water, I mean, blood, may be exhausted better and with less loss
then where this spring is faint, therefore those who according to the common
Dialect say, their Liver is strong, and begets great store of blood (taking for
granted the common notion of sanguification in the Liver) may a great deal the
better bear the loss of blood by Phlebotomy, and perhaps too, may find some
present REMEDY for their MALADY, especially if they have been accustomed to be
blooded in the like cases, because custom habituats the Archeus to an
expectation of the same again, and repeated actions become a second nature. But
to return; but before I leave this subject, let me add one thing, and that is
this, That by blooding, Nature oftentimes becomes so languid, that if a Disease
follow after, she is not so able as with its wonted strength to give a strong
repulse to the invading enemy, which watches the slips and defects of Nature to
trip her up at her weakest point, for hereby her weapon the blood, which is the
seat of life, is surreptitiously taken from her.

Now to the point in hand, The blood boiling in the vessels from a virulent ens
impressed therein, ferments, and like an evil leaven (from which, as also from
the working of Eiquor, has the name Ferment had its original) works till it
have molded all the principal parts and humors of the body into its own
likeness, in manner of a gangrenated Ulcer, which feeds upon all near it, and
by its venomous Ferments, turns all, as far as it goes, into its own likeness
of mortified flesh: For the blood has in this Disease got such a poysonful
Ferment, or leaven in it, as that it cease not inwardly to putrefie, till it
either mortifies the whole, or a stop be put to its venomous progress.

In this inward putrefaction of the blood, the outward parts are not long free
from the Contagion, but breaks forth in one place or other, or all over, in its
own characters, viz. Spots, Bubo's, swellings, Sores, intolerable pains, etc.
which are outward badges of the inward mortification; for no Ferment can rest
till it either have a stop put thereto from some other more powerful
supervening Ferment, or have overrun the whole, so that the outward is signed
by the inward in respect of that concatenation of inward and outward parts.

Now if this pestilent Ferment putrefying the blood, and in its making its
issue forth, contracts and centers its self in one place, if within twenty four
hours after the Contagion has not universally overspread the whole, whence
death inevitably; then it is an argument that a stop is put to its spreading
inward Gangrene, and the outward issue is a Magnet which attracts, or at least,
by which other proper Magnets may attract the virulency and poison from the
whole.

But if the contagious Ferment acts furiously within, and that there is an
obstipation or locking up of the Pores, (those little Portals through which
sometimes the infectious odor is let in, as also sometimes lets forth the same
poysonful Gasi) then it commonly kills, before any greatly manifest symptoms of
the outward parts break forth, till after an expiring of the vital spirit, the
virulent Ferment goes on to overspread the vegetative life in the last
digestion, which it does after death; and so, I say, the last digestion, viz.
of the solid parts, becomes also infected and breaks forth, even after death,
into spots, pustul's, and swellings: for in these malignant Diseases where the
venom first seizes upon the vital parts or center, and so spreads to the
outward parts or circumference, the vegetative or growing life or property
which lodges in the ultimat digestion, viz. of the solid parts, is the last
that is wrought upon and slain, whose badges do betray the Serpent that lurkt in
the blood.

The intolerable pains that happen in these outward swellings, come from the
anxiety of the vital and animal spirits, I mean, the Archeus (for those
divisions of spirits are but different vibrations of one and the same Archeus)
which is sadly oppressed with the close dogging of this virulent Ferment that has
got footing in the Cottage of life: The Virulency in respect of its great
corrupting property, has an acute acidity annexed thereto, which pricking the
nervous and membranous parts of the body, especially of the part where the
Contagion works to a head in the swelled place; somewhat like to the pricking
pains of the Pleurisy (though more eminent in degree) which proceeds from a
punging acidity in the blood, whereby it becomes (Nature abhorring its hostile
enemy, and therefore where it has strength thrusts it forth) hostile to the
Archeus, and is therefore extravasated out of the azugal Vein into the Plura,
and there by reason of its acidity (which yet has not arrived to any virulency)
which is hostile to the Veins and Membranous parts, lacerates, and, as it were,
by pricking, tears the Membrain of the Plura, which is a most sensible part,
thence comes those smart pains and stitches frequent in that kind of Fever.

But in the Plague the corrupting acidity differs from others, in that it has a
contagious Ferment adjoining to it, and what the acidity, causing pains and
boylings in the blood, and what the virulency causing a gangrenating property
through the whole; this Disease becomes determined into the most deadly enemy
to the mortal life: And from the boiling of this venomous leaven in the blood
proceeds those direful symptoms which accompany this Disease, as an
inquenchable thirst, which would drink all before it, because of the fermental
fire that centers in the bosom of the blood, which boyls up continually in an
anxious dark firesource, darkens the vital beams which should be irradiated
through the whole, and makes the lamp of life burn dimly.

For this outward temporary life of ours, which at the best since the fall is
caduce, is truly and really a vital lamp or a luminous ens, of a middle nature,
between the immortal Soul, and the Elemental Body, and is (as the acute Helmont
well calls it) pedissequa, or receptaculum animae immortalis, not only the
Handmaid, but Cottage of the immortal Soul; or (if I might call it) the lowest
Sphere to which the Soul is banished, since it fell from the upper Sphere of
Paradise, where now its conversant amongst those Spinae and tribuli, those
Briers and Thorns of Morbid Entities, or Diseases and passions which disturb
the otherwise pure and serene economy of the generous Soul, as it is born in
the divine light.

The lives of all Creatures (as Helmont says) are entia luminosa and Dei dona,
Beeings of light, and gifts of God, implanted in every Creature for the
governing the structure of the body, with both the signatures of the life and
inward spirit, and also the stage wherein the Magia thereof produces its
wonders: this spark of fire or light which quickens every body, gives life,
motion, sense, capability of accepting or eschewing what is either of a like
nature, or what is of a different from its self, and gives all the concomitant
products of life, is yet but a little in bulk, and yet puts an activity into
great bodies, which otherwise would fall of their own weight, ruit and ipsa
mole.

This is that Plastic principle that shapes every thing in the Embrio, puts on
the watery Element for an outward garment, and appears in most delicate forms,
sporting it self (according to the appointment of God in Nature) in great
variety, to the wonderment of the great Spectator, Man; who if he be born with
eyes, cannot but admire the wisdom of the great Creator, who has placed a
vegetative spark in every Plant, Praesentemque refert, quaelibet herba Deum. If
these lights are darkened the Creature falls into disorder, deficiencies and
weaknesses, if it be extinct, the body falls like a cadaverous bulk.

That which I would aim at herein, is, That seeing the outward fragil life of
man consists in a spark of light, which is a warming, nourishing, and
inlightning lamp to the body, is therefore exposed to all those many dangers
which may hazard not only the dim, dull, and obscure burning of the lamp of
life, but also the extinction of the same, amongst those many puffs and blasts
that hazard the extinguishing this vital flame, that malignant blast of the
Pest, as also of other contagious fermental Diseases, does the soonest stifle
the same, and that because such infective odors are very active and nimble, and
therefore insinuate with their venom the more intimately, reaching to the very
root of life.

These pestilential Odors or Hogoo's surprise the vital flame of insected
persons, not much unlike the malignant Mineral Arsenical sulphur which is found
in Mines, that first darkens a Candle, and at length blows it out, which also
they in effect do the same to the workers in the Mine, by sometimes stifling
their vital flame, by the poysonful Arsenical vapor that comes out from the
Caverns of the earth, where there is as well unwholsom, nay, poisonous breaths
as well as healthful.

Thus you see I have (as succinctly as I could) run through the description of
the cause, essence, manner, and symptoms of this devouring Disease the Plague,
together with some transient hints of other malignant Diseases; so that Ex
ungue leonem, from one you may learn to measure another, and them all, in their
own proportions and dimentions: you may espy (i^ you observe) a secret
concatenation or cementing together of the notions laid down, in order to the
through discovery of this Monster, though I confess, much shorter then I might
have done if I had time.

The nature of a Zenexton.
HAving thus determined the essence of this Disease, it is now time to discover,
if we can, what may possibly concur to the assistance against it, as also what
may conduce probably to its Cure. For the way to seek a right Remedy, is first,
to be thoroughly satisfied of the Nature, Cause, and Essence of the Disease,
which may make way for a due application of Antidotes and Specificks.

That which is therefore incumbent upon every one, is, first, Every man to look
well to his own ways, that he be found doing that which is well-pleasing to the
Lord in all righteousness, to whom the blessing of health and long days belong
jure divino.

2. Then secondly, That as many as may, be of a cheerful, serene, and free
spirit, for a well-grounded cheerfulness, that has no guilt lying heavy upon
it, hic murus ahaeneus esto, nil conscire sibi, nec impallescere culpae: This
is the great Wall of defense, to be conscious of nothing that is unrighteous;
that spirit may (if any) be truly cheerful; and nothing does keep the natual
spirit in better frame then such a well-founded cheerfulness.

For this keeps out all foreign and timorous Idea's which mostwhat hasten the
infection in those dull and low-spirited people; inasmuch as Fear is the inlet
unto the many Miseries and Calamities that the humane life is exposed to, it
makes the Spirits dull and renders them like Wax, susceptable of every
contagious impression in the Air; whence it is, that a confident Physician may
almost (if not wholly sometimes) persuade a timorous spirited person into a
disease, through a slavish indulgence to his passion of Fear.

Whereas a cheerful, confident, and deboneir person, like a Champion conquers
those beasts of fear that lie in the way, and blots out those timorous Idea's,
whereby the fruits and effects thereof, viz. of being easily surpised with
that which many times is most hurtful, are prevented: For cheerfulness does not
only hinder the entrance of fears, and of what fears produce, but also blots
out those Idea's of too much carefulness and anxiousness in worldly affairs,
which prove often the very bane of the outward life, producing both trouble,
doubtful, and despairing thoughts, much to the prejudice of that person.

And though we say, there is no fence against fear, yet surely a cheerful and
pleasant spirit, being in counter-point to that of fear, cannot but must be its
Zenexton or Antidote, greatly preservative against that great Malady of Fear,
which brings oftentimes direful effects upon the stage of humane life; but upon
the entrance of a cheerful pleasant spirit, that of fear makes its exit, and so
the Scene is altered and a new face put upon things: so that I should commend
cheerfulness as one of the main hinges of Health, keeping out all Exotic
Idea's that might disturb the Archeus.

3. The next thing in order to a Preservative, is Vinum ad hilaritatem,
according to Hippocrates his advice, Sed non ad ebrietatem, To drink Wine
moderately, to make the heart merry, as Solomon says, which enlivens the
Spirits, and puts the Vitals upon action, so as to stand Sentinel against all
other bad impressions from malignant Contagions; for this exalts the Spirits to
that strein, as that they will not admit of any slavish passion (which often
subjugates the whole to its tyranny) but banisheth all Exotic strange, fears,
and other impressions, that would (if prevalent) make the life cumbersom to it
self.

The Spirits of Wine have different and something odd effects upon the Archeus,
for if moderately taken, they cause cheerfulness by strengthening the
Digestions, meliorating the blood, fortifying the Balsom of life against all
infectious breaths, and preventing the many enormous Idea's of fear, hatred,
anxiousness, sorrow, and other perplexing thoughts, which often worm out the
contents and comforts of life, if immoderately taken, then they subjugate the
Archeus to a stupidness, sottishness, and dullness, from its Narcotick
virulency, captivating the same into obedience to its stupifying Idea, which
works differently upon several Constitutions; some it besots and renders them
as blocks, others it makes courageous ready to attempt any desperate design,
witness the Spirits of Brandy in Hollanders Pates, make them fight like Bears,
without fear of loss of life; some it puts into an angry waspish frame, ready
to quarrel with every petty offending object; others it makes merry to a
frantic madness, rendering them for a time in their discourse and gestures not
unlike the Tenants of Bedlam.

Again, Wine moderately taken, in such a quantity, I mean, as will actuate the
Spirits into a brisk posture; to some, it brusheth off all those fears of want,
and to themselves they appear like Princes, and then they scorn to be base, or
to act in a sordid niggardly way, and think themselves no small fools: others
it inspires with a poetical vein, and makes their lines run with Bacchus his
feet; and in such Poetic furies, high and lofty streins have been warbled
forth. And lastly, some are so alevated, that they are extraordinarily
fore-sighted, insomuch as to speak Prophetically in some cases.

Therefore the drinking of good wholesome well-spirited Liquor, may be as one
assistance both against that Idea of fear wherewith the Archeus is frighted,
when it receives a pestilent odor, and against other melancholy solicitous
thoughts which often drive the Spirits to a low ebb, and dwine away the body in
a consumptive Tabes.

4. The fourth thing in order to a Zenexton, Antidote, or Preservative, ought
to be of a seasoning balsamic and preservative property, such as may absterse
the sordes or impurities from every digestion, and preserve the Ferments clear
from contagion, which commonly seizes upon those bodies whose digestions are
the most loosly performed and excrements more plentifully abound, there the
Idea of fear does most powerful work to superinduce a pestilent Ferment.

The preventing therefore of which requires a certain purefying of the
digestions and due separation of excremental sordes, which ought to be done not
by Solutives and common Purgatives, because they rather vitiate the digestions,
liquate or melt the Chile, Cruor, and Arterial blood; nay, sometimes even the
solid parts themselves into a putrilaginous corrupt excrement, corrupting the
whole, instead of duly separating the natural sordes of the digestions;
therefore they as well as all other corrupting Purgers, which work
indiscriminately upon the whole mass of humors, are herein to be eschewed.

That therefore which will sweetly do the work, without any trouble, comber, or
fretting to the Spirits, ought to be of the nature of a Salt, and that too
partly fixed, and partly volatile, that so it may pass the better through all
the digestions, opening obstructions as it goes along, correcting and
mitigating Pontick Acidities (the causes of pains, stitches, and gripings)
irritating the natural expulsive faculties, to let go at due seasons all
excremental separations, abstersing the engendered putrefied matter, that has
staid longer then of right in the bowels, which is the beginning and cause of
worms, and wormatick Fevers-

And, this partly a Mineral Salt purged from its Hydropick and Scorbutic
halituousness, and from its terrestrious ferulencies, and that by fire and
water, which is to take away only that which lets or hinders it from becoming a
noble Balsom, and, by yet further progress, according to the manuduction of the
Art of Chemistry, may be brought to a noble fermentative Elixir, which may
tinge the body from its feculent impurities, into a generous quintessence of
health; to such a height may Salts be brought by the assistance of the
Spagyrick Art imitating of Nature.

Now that which is truly of a preservative nature against infectious Diseases,
ought it self to be highly depurated, and freed from its own inherent sordes,
lest it be expected a thing should communicate that to another, it has not it
self: but the culinary Salt is susceptable of a contagious odor, and therefore
as such cannot be admitted as a Zenexton, though in it lurks a Virgin
untouchable by any Exotic pestilent Ferment, and by a further graduating
process may appear from it, as well as from other Mineral Salts, that Primum
ens salium, or great solvent Liquor of Paracelsus and Helmont.

I prepare therefore a Mineral Salt by separating from it its superfluous
sordes, which is purged by Vulcan and Neptune, who not at once, nor a second
time, is able sufficiently to be cleans'd from its contracted feculency;
inasmuch as all Mineral Salts in their coagulation, wrapped up together with
themselves, much of a terrestrious impurity, as also an Embrionative Faetid
sulphur close locked in their compaction; which Embrionative sulphur (the
constitutive cause (together with the dissolved body of the Salt) of of
sulphurious Wells, as of Knarsbrough, etc.) I have sometimes in working in
those Salts made to appear to my own satisfaction.

This prepared Salt being Specificated with a volatile Animal Salt, upon whose
wings the volatile Sulphur of a Mineral is carried, which volatile Salt being
purely saline, and therefore Cleansers of the Digestions, does carry the fixed
depurated Salt along with it, with a more facil current through the Digestions
then otherwise, if not assisted by such a friendly co-natural Salt, by whose
means the fixed becomes more acquainted, and enters more intimately into the
Digestions; by the one the obstructions are opened, and the vital Balsom
fortified according to the similitude of Nature; and by the other, the
Digestions make their separations o^ their impurities the better and with more
ease, and every Excrement is hastened to its own proper Emunctory.

Of which prepared Salt I have had some late instances of its efficacy in
depurating the Digestions, abstersing the clogging sordes that cling to the
Tunicles of the Ventricle and other bowels, of which I shall relate one or two,
viz. Of a Child that was deemed to be consumptive, vomited most of what it
took, and wasted away, in which I judged a corrupt sordes clogging the
Digestions, from which, Worms causing the foresaid symptoms: Upon the taking of
a few Doses of this prepared Salt, to which was added the third part of a
Mineral proper in the case, together with a little Cordial acuated with
vegetable fixed Salts; the vomiting presently left the Child, and it fell
freshly to its wonted food with a great deal of eagerness, and in a very little
time became lively, active, and fleshy.

A woman that had a great Cough, the economy of the Stomach and Lungs so
perverted, as that the Digestions were oppressed with an abundance of tuff
viscous humors, and she brought so weak, as her friends were glad to take away
the tuff Phlegm from her with a cloth, and every one that saw her judged her no
otherwise then a dead woman: upon the taking of the foresaid Medicine, together
with a few Doses of Sal martis, was, by the blessing of God, in a short time
freed from those oppressing Symptoms: other instances I could give of bringing
away Worms and Wormatick matter, but I have.

This Salt therefore seeing it thus mundifies the Digestions, and promotes due
separation of excremental sordes, cannot but thereby be very effectual as a
Preservative; inasmuch as it prevents or takes away those sordes, which by a
further degree of degenerating, become the Materia substrata, fitted matter for
infectious Ferments to work upon: And what this Salt may be further exalted to,
I have several graduating Experiments in work, which in time I may possibly
give an account of to the World. Therefore I would advise Physicians who make
their own Medicines (which certainly must be the best and surest of ways,
whereof I could give several reasons, but that I cannot now stand to insist
further) I say, chiefly to set up good Preparations of Salts, for they contain
in them the Key both for unlocking all manner of Obstructions (and Diseases
thence) in the body, and highly graduated for unlocking the bodies of Minerals
and Metals, whereby the noblest of Medicines are at hand.

5ly. The Zenexton.
THat which we assumed for our Title in this short Essay, comes now to view, It
is an Appensum or Amulet, carried or hung upon the left breast, as Helmont
orders, by the mediation of which all infectious Odors are kept off, it being
tutelary to the Archeus: Now there are of them in all the three Kingdoms of
Nature, viz. in Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals, of which Animals and
Minerals excel Vegetables; amongst Minerals, many precious Stones are richly
fraught with tutelary Idea's of keeping off all Pestilent Infections: nay, and
further, of attracting forth the virulency from an infected body; as for
instance, what is said of the Sapphirus lazureus, or Hyacinthus citrinus, which
being held for a quarter of an hour upon the painful part, so as the light from
the Gem may smite upon the infected or broken-forth part, and upon it collect
its Rays, the touched place will within one hour turn black, and is an
infallible token (as it is said) of the Plague, but if the touched place grows
not black, the suspected is free from the disease.

Also red Amber (which as I said before) applied to the Planetary Pulses, was
the secret Zenexton the Spanish Surgeon used (as Helmont relates) for three
years together: and amongst other Minerals, the Electrum minerale immaturum
Paracelsi; which, as Helmont says, hung about the neck, Abimmundo spiritu
liberat, and probably may be a Zenexton, and free the Bearer from this unclean
Spirit of the Pestilence. Amongst Vegetables, the Petasitis or larger Coltsfoot
is accounted by the Germans an Anti-pestilential Plant; but to hasten to what I
aim at.

That we must enquire after such a Zenexton, as may have an adiquate cause of
preventing timid Idea's, or correcting them being already impressed upon the
Archeus, which, as I said before, is the Proximate Agent (being determined from
a Fermental venenum) to work upon excremental sordes, whence from one actuating
the other, comes the Plague, or other malignant Diseases. Such a one, I say, it
must be as has an Idea exalted so highly as to correct the enormous, irregular,
and to its own hurt, too much inclining Idea's of the Archeus.

For nothing can correct those intimate and inherent Characters of the Archeus,
but such as stand in a counter-point, and are more prevalent than the former,
by warning out those preexistent morbid Idea's; as for instance, those venenal
and madling Idea's which have inverted the Eutaxy of the Archeus in mad people,
cannot better be rooted forth than by the super-inducing of a more powerful
Idea, which of all the Idea's, the Archeus is impressed with, that of Fear
seizes the most deeply, and so rooteth out those who are more loosly implanted.

Therefore such persons (though some kind of madnesses more than others) are
curable most probably, (and not only so, but has been found experimentally) by
almost drowning of them in water, keeping them so long under water, as that
they but hardly escape with their lives; and so they lose those morbid venenal
and madling Idea's, by the great Idea of Fear, which furpriz'd the Archeus,
lest it should forthwith be destroyed, which makes it quit those former and
more slightly impressed Characters.

By which means the Archeus sometimes gets quit of some Ideal Diseases,
characterized in the very spirit of life; as the Gout sometimes cured by a
sudden fright, as that instance of a Sow invited by the smell of a Pultiis,
laid to a Gouty man's feet, she endeavoring to take her prey, threw him, and
frighted him out of his Disease; as the learned and ingenious Esquire Boil in
his experimental Philosophy, makes mention occasionally. So sometimes an Ague
has been known cured by throwing the party upon the access of the Paroxisme
into a deep water, whereby, as in the former, the Archeus being impressed with
a strong Idea of Fear, lets go all those inferior and looslier hanging Idea's,
and so returns to its primitive simplicity: For the fewer Idea's, the Archeus
is amuz'd with, especially of those careful and perplexing ones, the more
quiet, free, and calm it is from troubles and diseases.

I remember to the confirmation of what I have said, a pretty Story out of
Helmont, in his Demens Idea, where he mentions something remarkable that he
was an eyewitness of, which was of an old man naked, and fastened with ropes in
the Ship, and weights to his feet at the Stern, asking what that uncoth sight
meant? One of the Mariners told him, he so bound was a Hydrophobus, being
bitten of a mad Dog, and therefore fearful of the water, which that madness
brings along with it: He stood to see the Experiment, they hois'd up the man on
height, and let him fall suddenly down (fastened in ropes that he could not be
carried away) into the Sea, and kept him under water for the space of Miserere,
which they repeated twice more for the space of Salutationis Angellicae, then
rolled forth the water out of his body, he revived and was cured of his madness.

Also of a Carpenter, who from some horrid Spectra's was struck mad, by chance
broke his bands, and leaped into a Ditch, was drawn forth for a dead Carcass,
but revived and lived eighteen years after, free from madness; of which manner
of cure, he made several trials himself, and they were always cured; unless
that some were drawn forth too soon through fear of death: other passages he
has that might further illustrate the present Theme, but that I have.

Now the same reason that salves these Difficulties, how these Ideal venenal
Characters, which have real Malady, either of mind or body hanging upon them,
are raised forth by the intervening of more powerful Idea's of another stamp,
which center so deeply into the Spirit (as above all that of Fear) as that it
blots out all other pre-existent diseased Idea's. I say, the same reason
(comparing efficient causes) gives us light to our present inquiry of a
Zenexton, that may powerfully both blot out the conceived Idea's of Fear, and
prevent the impressions of the same, which is the efficient of Pestilential
Diseases.

The ingenious and quick-sighted Van-Helmont, says, That there is an Ingenit
or inbred Idea of hatred in a Toad against a man, which if it be exasperated
by hanging them up in sight, becomes so highly exalted in its own venom as that
it is able to root out another pre-existent Idea of Fear in the humane Archeus,
being first approximated by a mummial Ferment to act upon our Archeus, wherein
are impressed all kinds of Idea's, some having deeper rooting than others.

The manner of preparing them he had from the famous Butler of Ireland, the
same as had the highly graduated Stone of Salt, which cured most diseases by a
slight touching of the tip of the Tongue therewith, or by dipping it in
Salet-oyl, a spoonful wherein it was but dipped, being poured into a bottle of
more Oil, made it all become a Medicine for all or most outward diseases: who,
as Helmont relates, cured some thousands of the Plague in London to his
knowledge.

He commanded Helmont to take a great Toad in an Afternoon in June, to hang
him up near the fireplace, and to place a waxen Platter underneath, and after
three days it vomited up Insects, viz. moving Flies, their wings shining with a
green color, which done, he told him, that now he had enough Mecine to cure
40000 infected with the Plague; he promised to show him the hinge of the
matter, but being banished presently after, he did not, therefore Helmont was
left to make Experiments of what he knew.

He took therefore those rejected sordes, and together with the exiccated
Cadaver wrought them into Trochy's, which he used happily both for the
preventing, as also the cure of the Plague: he orders them to be old Toads,
whose eyes abound with white Worms, and are almost wholly transformed into
Worms; these he commands to be hung at the left breast, which both drive away
contagion, and being bound to the infected place draws forth the poison.

Now the ground of this Medicine he supposes thus, viz. That the inbred Idea
of hatred in the Toad, is by hanging in the sight of a man, so exasperated
against the humane Archeus, as that it becomes a stronger impression than that
inbred Idea of Fear in us, and therefore being determined to act upon our
Archeus by the intervening of a mummial Ferment, roots out the pre-existent
Idea of Fear, and the consequents, therefore all contagious Ferments.

For, as the primitive cause of the Plague is a frightful Idea of terror in the
Archeus, which it may conceive in it self, though we know not thereof, as the
Archeus of him that is offended at the presence of such or such an object,
though the person himself neither sees nor knows its presence; so the curative
Idea must be such as may also reach the Archeus, so that the peccant Idea may
be blotted forth; just as in the foregoing instances I hinted.

That is, that as the humane Archeus is subjugated and brought under bondage by
the foreign Idea's of some toxical Plants, and inveterate Ferments of Animals,
as of Napellus and the Tarantula, at whose whistle it danceth, and is not at
liberty to stand in its own calmness, without the assistance of some counter
Idea, which in Nature one is always set against another. So likewise in this
Disease, the efficient being Ideal, I mean, that of Fear, which suddenly
catching hold of a contagious Ferment wandering in the Air, as some malignant
blast, must find an Ideal Remedy, either of the Archeus correcting it self from
its former erroneous conceptions (whereby its harm was of its self) or else
from another supervening Idea, implanted in some Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral,
and that either natural or artificial; ours is artificial, but grounded upon
the natural. For that the Toad has an odium against a man is natural, but that
it should be heightened by such a way as hanging the Toad up in a man's sight,
and then determining it to its proper end by the medium of a mummial Ferment,
that is artificial.

As to the discovering of the certainty, whether a person suspected have it,
yea or nay, the same thing may be used, Ego semper in dubiis, (says Helmont)
bufone pulverato sum usus, pultisque forma in aquae simplicis tantillo,
decocto; quod si mox inde dolor in eschera, anthrace and bubone, mitesceret,
secure pestem adesse conjeci. And though Paracelsus says, That they being
applied to a pestilent Tumor or Plague Sore, swell with the poison they
attract; yet Helmont says, He never could observe them swell though he used
them frequently, but that they drew forth the venomous degerat pestilent
Matter, as a Topic thereto applied, he affirms.

Now, though this kind of Creature seem a sordid thing, against which, we to
them, as well as they to us, bear a secret odium, so that we look upon them
commonly with a kind of horror, aversion, and detestation, yet even in this
very Idea in them, being aggravated against us, is seated the chiefest cure;
for ^eing exalted, and that gradually ^y a continued lingering death, the ^ery
Ideal odium is impressed upon the whole, and lives though the thing it self
dies, and in the ashes ^ears the same internal character, as while it was yet
alive.

To the same purpose of cure does Etzlerus in his Isogoge physicosmagi^medica
tells us, Bufo exiccatus a^etoque maceratus, and pestilenti bu^oni impositus,
venenum polentissime ^licit, and apostemata maturescere fa^it. And the
ingenious Doctor Villis tells us of an ash-color'd ^owder which a Courtier used
with ^ood success to many, whose Dose was half a Dram, which caused plentiful
sweat, and so freed from the virulency of the Disease, which Diaphoretick was
these Animals purged by Salt, washed in good Wine, and ^alcin'd in a Pot to a
Powder.

By which we see, that in this desperate Disease, they may be taken inwardly,
and, that not only without danger, but with good success. But however, I should
rather approve of them as an outward Appensum and external Zenexton, than as an
inward Medicine; for thus the Idea in which is the preserving virtue of the
Archeus, is more eminently apparent in mortifying those dull Idea's of Fear in
low-spirited Archeus's, and of dinting the virulency of the pestilent
contagious Ferment.

For outward application they are certainly the best by attracting the
virulency out of the infected body. Imprimis fateor (says Helmont) me bufones
applicuisse bubonibus and escharis, tam in pectore, capite, mammillis, quam
alibi, tam in viris, quam mulieribus: ac ub que, non sine prompto juvamine and
doloris mittigatione.

But for an inward Medicine, I should highly approve of Hippocrates his Remedy,
By which he cured the popular Pest of the Grecians, which a certain man
desirous to ^now, besought his Eu-daemon or Tutelary Angel, what that was
wherewith Hippocrates cured the Plague, ^e answered, That Hippocrates used
Sulphur, Salt, and Pitch.

Amongst all bodies, none resists ^oysonous Odors so much as Sulphur, whereupon
probably Hippo^rates called it, (...), quid divi^um, quod sulphur virus
pestilens ^anaret. This by its imbalming O^or keeps bodies from corrupting, and
therefore used for preserving Wines from decaying by fracedi^ous Odors of
Vessels, wherewith they are first fumed, and like a fire blots out every
footstep of contagious Odors where ever it finds them.

Vide (says Helmont) In chataracta Gandavensi integram le^gionem Neapolitanam
peste periisse ^erat autem cohors ibi Germanorum^ quae pulvere pyrio sua
tinxerat indu^ sia: horum si qui perirent, id pr^dysenteria, non autem peste.
So that their Shirts being dipped or rolled i^ Gunpowder, became thereby
preserved from the Plague: Now, that is made of Sulphur, Nitre, and dust of
Charcole, of which Sulphur is the chief Ingredient, though Nitre also is a
sulphurious Salt wholly flamable like Sulphur it self.

And therefore in a popular Pest, the shooting off of Guns often, is no small
assistance against the infections Myasm in the Air, and also the burning of
Sulphur in houses, roots out the footsteps of the wandering Fracedo; like the
fuming of Vessels therewith, for keeping Wines or other Liquors from
fracedinous putrefying Odors. Hippocrates fumed all his Wine that he gave in
the Plague after this manner, by burning a Match of Sulphur within the neck of
a Glass-bottle, ^ill'd one third, corking up the Bottle close, and after
shaking the Wine well about, and so reiterating until the Wine had at several
times ^mbibb'd into it self a competeut quantity of the Balsamic Odor of the
Sulphur, whereby it was both ^ept along time it self, as also was ^ble to
communicate a Balsamic, ^easoning and preserving quality to the blood, so as a
Pestilent Odor could scarcely find room.

Thus Juyces and other Liquors may after this manner be preserved a long time
without Sugar, which generally added in such a quantity ^s to reduce them into
Syrups, does by their great clog dull the Ferment of the Stomach and other
parts, and so cause an inclination to a Scorbatick habit: But this Su^phurus
Gas being well incorporate in them, will preserve them without that additament.

And as Fracedinous Odors and apt to seize upon Liquors, thereby inclining them
to putrefaction an^ corruption; so the Pestilent Odo^ is as apt to take hold of
the blood its Tartar (or Excrement of the fourth Digestion) and other humors of
the body, if not seasoned by its own innate preserving Balsom exalted, which
indeed if strong is a fire that keeps forth all infectious breaths; or else
seasoned with a Mineral Sulphur, which both help to dint venomous impressions
when contracted, as also to preserve against them.

And though there be a Vitriolin^ acidity in Sulphur (as by distilling the acid
Oil or spirit is made manifest) which taken too much (by the immediate Organs
of sense, the ^ostrils) become hostile to the ^erves and Membranous parts of
^he Brain, drying up the innate moisture thereof, by the more then ordinary
exiccating quality of the ^ulphur, and causing the Nerves to ^ag from their
natural tention; thence I have known a blindness appen to a friend of mine who
was ^o careful in taking up her Nostrils that Acid, and therefore hostile
li^uor to the Nerves as she was Lan^ering her fine linen, which she was the
more apt to do in respect of her ^ant of quick smell; these Fumes ^id so dry up
the natural moisture ^f her Brain, and so mortified the ^ptick Nerves from
their present ^ork, as that flagging, they suffered ^e Pupil of the eyes to be
extended unto that magnitude as we call a ^utta Serena, whereby she was wholly
blind: but by the blessing of God, I ordered her (after other advice) somewhat
of Volatile Spirits both inwardly, and also up her Nostrils, which did super
induce an irrigating moisture in the Pya-mater and Optic Nerves whereby the
Nerves were again brought into their wonted posture and the Pupil contracted,
and she in a short time received her sight again by the great mercy of God To
whom be Glory.

That which I aimed at in the fore said instance, was, That though Sulphur may
by the fume thereof taken too immediately into the se^citive Organs, prove
hurtful t^ Membranous parts or genus nervosum; yet when it is taken ln the
medium of another thing, the Acidity is castigated, and the fume o^ odor
thereof is as a Balm or Condiment that runs aloug in the Digestions, leaving
its Gas in every Stage as it posts from one part of the body to another. So
much for Sulphur as considered in its Gas or imbalming Odor.

Now, as for Sulphur to be taken inwardly in its own substance, requires a
previous preparation; therefore Hippocrates gives his, though a very slight
one; because in his days Chemistry or the art of Anatomizing things into their
constituent principles, by a retrograde Analysis, was but in Embrio, and scarce
got into swaddling Clouts, though considering the Genius of his time, he was one
that had as great an insight into the Wonders of Nature, as any man, then his
preparation was a levigating it with water upon a Marble, and then drying it,
and though this way may not want its commendation in the effect, yet a better
prepared one cannot, but must be more efficacious, in respect that all Minerals
are but in a way of melioration.

I have therefore a Sulphur by me, elevated from a few imbalming Vegetables,
whose virtues may not be a little contributary to the graduating of its
preserving qualities, which I give in Fevers that has any thing of malignity,
as a powerful Alexipharmick. And as his preparation of Sulphur was slight, so
his preparation of his Salt was but in the way to a further exaltation by
depuration, etc. (which, let be spoken without any unhandsom reflection upon so
noble a Physician.)

For though he did thereby free his Salt from those peregrine halituous vapors,
which orderly are inherent in common Sal marins, yet a terrestrious part was
left therein, which might dull it in his seasoning property; so that both the
terrestrious and Hydropick superfluities may be removed, its depuration must be
higher, by taking away that which defiles it, and exposes it even to the
contamination of infectious Odors, which the pure part is free from.

For seeing it must help to absterse those fracid Impurities in the stomach,
got by the degenerating of the Ferment thereof, after invasion of the Pest, its
self ought to be pure and clean. The Vehicle wherein these are to be taken, is
a generous Wine, and that hot, lest given tepid, it should cause a nauseousness
upon the stomach: With this he orders infected persons to sweat much, given for
three days together, and that twice a day, sweating for four hours together, if
they can bear it; and during the time of sweating, they are to have no kind of
drink; and after sweating, they are to be fed with Cream of Barley, and for
their drink pitched Wine, with a little of the aforesaid Powder.

For a Topic or outward application, the leaves of Asarum Macerated in
Vinegar, placed hot upon a Bubo to the soles of the Feet, and wrists of the
hands, which after twelve hours (then stinking strongly) he orders to be
buried, which by a secret Magnatism attracts the virulent contagious matter out
of the body, by those Emunctories whether Nature drives it. Also clothes dipped
in Greek Wine, in which a little Sulphur is boiled therein, applied to great
Bubo's.

All which argues the Sagacity of the Noble Hippocrates, who so levelled his
Medicines, as that they might directly hit the Mark aimed at; that whether we
consider his inward or outward Remedies, or both, they all strike at the
virulent contagious Ferment, and mortify the Pestilent vennum; and then Nature
thrusts it forth of its own accord, either through many small port-holes, the
Pores, or the proper Pestilent Emunctories, the Plague-sores.

There was another Arcanum, by which (as Helmont says) Hippocrates got Divine
Honors, and that was made of Vipers flesh, by cutting off their heads and
tails, taking off their skins, which together with the guts and gall was
rejected, only the heart and liver was reserved: the flesh with the foresaid
bowels and bones were bruised together, and dried to a Powder, which Powder was
sprinkled with dispum'd Honey, and to the palliating of the secret. The Aroma
of the Country was added, the reason of which Arcanum working so strangely, as
by a poisonous creature to take away a poisonous Disease: I shall not now stand
to show, only this in short, that every poysonful noxious creature has its
Antidote placed also in it, by the appointment of the great Creator, who in his
great work of the Creature, has placed the Enemy which appeared in the fall,
and by it stands his healing Virtue the badge of his Presence (according to the
capacity of the Creature) even in the same very Creature; and that as the
Pestilent Infection is from a certain venom, so this venenous Creature (as is
probable the like from other Sepents) contains a singular Antidote there
against: but I forbear.

As for the Diet of infected persons, it should be that which is light and
easy of digestion, and but very sparingly taken, for as in every Fever, so
especially in the Plague, the Digestions are defective, and therefore apter to
corrupt the body the more food is taken, according to Hippocrates his own
Aphoaism, (...) unclean bodies, by how much the more they are nourished, so
much they are the more hurt or corrupted.

Helmont commends the Potion of Hippocrates, to which he adds Ginger, and the
Black-berries of the Ivy; concerning which last, I remember what the most
ingenious Boil says in one place of his experimental Philosophy, that he had
an Arcanum communicated to him, from a person that had cured many of the Plague
in Ireland, which was the same aforesaid, viz. a good Dose of the Powder of
fully ripe Ivy-berries; to which in the same Disease, the juice of Horse-dung
was a Succedaneum, both which used to work plentifully by sweat: and Helmont
says concerning his, that they are Diaphoretick and grateful to the Stomach.

So that Diaphoreticks is most proper in this case, and not Solutives,
Phlebotomy, nor swimming, because the first liquates the blood into a
Putrilage, a second robs Nature of its sanguinary Treasure, and the third shuts
up the Wolf in the Stable, by locking up the Pores, keeps the virulent Ferment
within, which therefore works the more powerfully in its infecting the inward
Vitals.

Thus I have run through the descriptiou of this direful Disease, with its
Symptoms, Zenextons, and Cures, which I confess is short and it may be
defective, which yet is pardonable, because huddled up in have, in respect of
the urgency of the Season, that seems to threaten no less then an Epidemical
Disaster, which God in his mercy avert [or accomplish his own work thereby,
which no doubt will redound to the good of his Chosen.]

And though naturally few Nations there are but one of three Judgments of
Famine, Sword, or Pestilence, reach them once in tweenty years space, and that,
I say, grounded naturally, because where there is no one of these in any Nation
or Country, the Natives increase so fast, and multiply in such multitudes, that
unless they were swept away, they would even overrun one another, and, as it
were, devour one another, or prey upon each others Possessions, so as to become
burdensome to the Earth; therefore a Beesom of wrath comes once in 10. 12. 15.
or 20 years and sweeps away multitudes.

As to the foregoing Remedies against the Plague, the Zenexton and Hippocrates
his Alexipharmick, I look upon as the most eminent which I have partly ready by
me, together with other assisting Medicines, and the rest scarce yet finished,
but will be in a very short time, even in a few days: Other Medicines also
proper in other cases I have by me, having a Spagyrical Apparatus medicinalis,
which I have not now time to speak of.

June, 26. 1665. From my Elaboratory at York.
FINIS.

