A CRITICAL HISTORY Of the TEXT of the New Testament;

WHEREIN Is firmly Established the Truth of those Acts on which the Foundation
of CHRISTIAN RELIGION is laid.

By Richard Simon, Priest.

LONDON, Printed for R. Tailor, MDCLXXXIX.

THE PREFACE.
THe Church, from the first and most early Ages of Christianity, has been
constantly furnished with some Learned Men, by whose diligent care the Sacred
Writings have been purged from those Faults, which by the tract of Time have
insensibly crept into them. This kind of Labor, which requires an exact
knowledge of Books, joined with a strict enquiring into the Manuscripts, is
termed Critical; in as much as it Judges and Determines the most Authentic
Readings, which ought to be inserted into the Text. By this means Origin
acquired his Reputation, not only in Greece, but universally over the Eastern
part of the World, where the Bibles of his Correction are by the general
consent preferred to all others.

St Jerome, who may justly be styled the Latin Origin, has done very great
Service to the Western Church, by his Critical Correction of the Latin Bibles,
in Use in those Churches. Pope Damasus, very sensible of his profound Learning,
obliged him to review the ancient Latin Version of the Gospels, which was then
in a very miserable Condition. This looked like too bold an Attempt, and seemed
above the force of any private Person, who could never hope to escape the
Hatred of a multitude of Persons in the free exercising his Censure of Books,
which had long stood in the peaceable Possession of an universal Reputation.

In short, though it might perhaps be for the benefit of the Church, it was yet
a dangerous matter to attempt a Reformation of those ancient Errors, which
derive their Authority from their Age. Pius Labor, Hieron. Praef. in Evang. ad
Dam.
sed periculosa praesumptio judicare de caeteris, ipsum ab omnibus judicandum,
senis mutare linguam, and caneseentem jam mundum ad initia retranere
parvulorum. ['Tis a pious Work, (says that ancient Father) but very hazardous,
that he exposes himself to the universal Censure, who teaches old Men to change
their Language, and reduce the decaying World to a State of Infancy.] But
considering on the one Hand the powerful Protection and Patronage of so great a
Pope, and being on the other abundantly convinced of the manifest defect of
that Translation, which had prevailed universally in the West; he resolved
rather to expose himself to the Malice of an infinite number of ignorant
Persons, than fail in the discharge of his Quis enim doctus pariter vel
indoctus, cum in manus volumen assumpserit, and a saliva quam semel imbibit
viderit discrepare quod latitat, non statim erumpat in vocem, me falfarium, me
clamitans elle sacrilegum, qui audeam aliquid in veteribus libris addere,
mutare, corrigere? Hieron. Praef. in Evang. ad Dam.
Duty. He knew very well the charge of Innovation and Forgery, that would be
drawn up against him for endeavoring to alter those ancient Books, which till
his time had remained perfectly inviolable. But here he encouraged himself by
the Precedents of Origin, Pierius, and some other able Critics, who had
performed the very same thing in the Greek Original, which he then attempted in
the Latin Copies of the Gospel. For which reason he stoutly deposed all those
which after his Reformation remained Bigots to the ancient Latin Version.
Revertimur ad nostros bipedes asellos, Hieron. Epist. ad Marcell.
and illorum in aure buccina magis quam cithara concrepamus. Illi legant, spe
gaudentes, tempori servientes nos legamus, spe gaudentes, Domino servientes.

But time did Justice to that Father. And it is a very difficult matter at
present, to find any Copies of that Latin Version, which was then in Use in
the Western Church. Yet enough there are extant to be read as a Memorial to
convince those who defend Errors merely out of Veneration for their Antiquity,
that St. Jerome has done the Church no small Service, in Correcting and
Reviewing the ancient Latin Copies, according to the strictest Rules of
Criticism. This we endeavor to demonstrate in this work, and that the most
ancient Greek Exemplars of the New Testament are not the best, since they are
suited to those Latin Copies, which St. Jerome found so degenerous as to need
an Alteration.

Father Morin, and after him Father Amelot, who take such pride in those Noble
and Venerable Manuscripts, on account of their great Antiquity, never mind,
that a thousand or twelve hundred years can never warrant them correct, since
there is evident proof of their Corruption before that time. It was necessary
that I should examine to the bottom, the Circumstances of these Greek Texts,
which have been produced to this Time. It is not sufficient to consult those
Manuscripts with design only to mark their Antiquity, and quote the different
Readings. There is required a great deal of Discretion and Judgment, otherwise
we shall mistake those Books which are altered, for Primitive and Apostolical
Exemplars, which is the Case of the two Authors we are about to name.

Erasmus, who was well enough furnished with those sorts of Manuscripts, is
nevertheless guilty of very gross Errors. He accuses the Greeks without reason,
for correcting in some places, their Copies by those of the Latin, after their
Reunion with the Roman Church. This groundless Accusation can proceed from
nothing, but the want of knowledge of the Criticisms of those Copies, which he
consulted.

Beza, who was Master of a greater Collection of Manuscripts of the New
Testament than Erasmus, though assisted too by both Robert and Henry Stephens,
has not well distinguished the worth of his Manuscript Copies, whence I found
my self in some places obliged to correct his Errors. This Man was so
prejudiced by his Religion, as to accuse the Italians of Corrupting the old
Text, and forcing it to a Compliance with their Opinions.

This Critical History contains diverse other Remarks of the like Nature, upon
the Manuscript Copies of the New Testament, both in Greek and Latin. My
principal aim is to write a Supplement to the Defects of those who compile the
different Readings out of the Manuscripts, without distinguishing the Good from
the Bad. To which intent, it is necessary to read a great quantity, and nearly
examine them in a Critical manner. This Art, whose difficulty appears
formidable to some Divines in this Age, made part of their Occupation of some
Ladies in St. Jerome's time: Who not content to read, the Scripture in the
Vulgar Tongue, dispersed among the People, they diligently enquired after the
correctest Copies, learning those very Tongues in which they were writ.

I assert nothing, which cannot be maintained by the Letters of those Pious
Ladies, and the answers of that Learned Father, who has had oftentimes a
difficult Task to satisfy those Questions they propose on matters purely
Critical. St. Jerome had advanced, that the Apostles had never cited any
Passage in the Old Testament, which did not perfectly agree with the Hebrew
Text. Eustochium, Hieron. Prooem. in lib. 16. Comm. in Isai.
who perfectly understood the Greek and Hebrew Languages, opposed him with such
powerful Arguments, that he was forced to own himself almost overcome with the
strength of her Objections. Quod cum audissem, quasi a fortissimo pugile
percussus essem coepi tacitus aestuare.

It is no strange thing to find those Ages, when Barbarism reigned over all
Europe, neglect Critical Studies. Then they wanted abundance of those helps,
which they now enjoy to pursue those Studies, which are absolutely necessary to
a perfect Knowledge of Divinity. But that which amazes me, is, that in this very
Age, this Art should still remain in contempt; and those Men be thought no more
than Grammarians, who apply themselves to it. Besides, we cannot but see the
manifest Errors of some Divines in this Age, who know not the true Laws of
Criticism.

It is worth observing, that the ancient Heretics have been perpetually
accused of having corrupted the Books of the New Testament, and perverted them
to their own sense. That has often been thought a wilful and designed
Corruption, which proceeded only from the fault of the Transcribers, or
difference of Copies. The Ecclesiastical Writers of the first Ages have not
done that strict Justice to the Heretics of their times, in relation to the
New Testament, that they have given the Jews in the Disputes about the
different manners of explaining the Old Testament. Those pretended Corruptions
presently vanish upon Examination of the ancient Manuscripts, and the Original
of the various Readings. Wherefore in this Piece I have justified the Arrians,
Nestorians, and the rest of the Sectaries from that Imputation of having
falsified the Originals of the Evangelists and Apostles, to maintain their
Innovations. We have also plainly evinced, by some considerable Examples, that
the most Learned Critics of our Age are not exempted from those Prejudices in
their declaring too freely those Heretics falsifiers of the Text.

The case of some other Sectaries is not the same, who declared themselves
openly against the Writings of Christ's Disciples, which they have corrected
and altered according to their own Idea's of the Christian Religion. Some
daring to forge Supposititious Gospels, and Acts, the better to give authority
to their Fopperies. It would be very pertinent, for the better Distinction of
all the Genuine Pieces of the New Testament, to make a Collection of those
ancient Acts, and diligently examine them. Wherefore we have not concealed any
of those Arguments which those Heretics, or the other Enemies of Christianity
have brought to destroy the Truth of those Books, which were received by all
the Catholic Churches.

But as it would be a pernicious thing to expose these ill things, without
administering Remedies too proper for the cure, we have also produced the
strongest Reasons which the Ecclesiastical Writers have brought against them.
We entreat the Protestants to make Reflection on these matters, and observe
those methods of the first Ages of the Church, for establishing the Authority
of the Sacred Writings. They will find nothing impertinent in the Conduct.
Irenaeus, Tertullian, and the rest of the Defenders of those Writings, did not
object to the Enemies of the Christian Religion, their private Spirit, which
persuaded them of the Divinity of the Holy Scripture, but very substantial
Reasons, void of all such Fanaticism. Tho they were sufficiently persuaded of
the Divinity of the Holy Scripture, they never objected to the Adversaries,
that it had impressed upon it such lively Characters of its Original, that it was
a very difficult matter not to acknowledge it, when read with a Spirit of
Submission and Humility. Their Adversaries being Philosophers who consulted
their natural Reason, they opposed them from sure and indisputable Principles.

Again, I thought in a Work of this nature not convenient to suppress the
principal Objections of the Jews against the Books of the New Testament: For
although this miserable Nation is an Object of the contempt of the whole World,
yet has there appeared among them Men of great Address and Subtilty in the
Disputes against the Christians, which I have often found true in my own
Experience, when I have endeavored to convince them by their own Principles.
Since their Plea for Prescription is better, and their Pretensions are that the
Disciples of Jesus the Son of Mary, had no reason to change their Religion
which was delivered them by the Fathers. It is but necessary to examine what
they object against the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles.

In this Critical History I have treated diverse other important Questions: And
where I deviate from the Methods of the Divines of the School, it is because I
have found a more secure way. I have employed all my strength to avoid the
advancing any thing that is not grounded on authentic Records, instead of which
the School Divinity teaches us, to doubt of the most certain. Our Religion
consisting principally in Matters of Fact, the Subtilties of Divines, who are
not acquainted with Antiquity, can never discover certainty of such matters of
Fact: They rather serve to confound the Understanding, and form pernicious
Difficulties against the Mysteries of our Religion.

Let it not seem strange to any Person, that I recede from the Opinions which
are generally received in the Schools, and prefer to the Sentiments of whole
Universities the new Opinions of some modern Divines, which can hardly be taxed
as novel, when they are found conformable to the Ancient Doctors of the Church.
This I speak in reference to that Passage, where I handle the Dispute which was
formerly between the Divines of Louvain and Doway, and the Jesuits of that
Country, concerning the inspiration of the sacred Books. The Doctors of both
Faculties censured the Propositions of the Jesuits of Louvain in a manner very
injurious to the whole Society. But after a due examination of the Reasons on
which their grave Gentlemen founded their Censure, I could hardly believe their
Authority alone a sufficient Rule to oblige me to assent.

I propose Truth alone to my self in this Work, without any Deference to any
Master in particular. A true Christian who professes to believe the Catholic
Faith, ought not to style himself a Disciple of S. Austin, S. Jerome, or any
other particular Father, since his Faith is founded on the word of Jesus Christ
contained in the Writings of the Apostles, and constant Tradition of the
Catholic Churches. I wish to God the Divines of the Age were all of that
opinion, we then should not have seen so many useless Disputes, which only
prove the causes of Disorders in Church and State. I have no private Interest
which obliges me to any Party, the very name of Party is odious to me; I
solemnly protest, I have no other intentions in composing this Work, than the
benefit of the Church, and the establishing the most sacred and divine thing in
the World.

It is useless to repeat here what we said in another place concerning the word
Critic, which is a term of Art, which in some sense is bestowed on all Works
whose designs are to examine the various readings, and establish the true. The
aim of those which practice that Art, it not to destroy, but establish. As the
Holy Books are not exempt from faults, which either by the tract of Time, or
negligence of the Transcribers have slipped into 'em; some Learned Persons in all
Ages have taken care to render them correct. The most barbarous Ages have
produced Books, which they call, Correctoria Bibliae, or Corrections of the
Bible. The Emperor Constantine, spared nothing to procure for the Oriental
Churches correct Copies of all the Bibles. Charlemagne and his Successors have
done the same for the Latin Bibles of the VVestern Churches.

Besides those which were formerly employed in the Monasteries about
Transcribing of Books: There were some Critics who reviewed and corrected
them. This is the Reason why in some Manuscript ancient Bibles, there are some
Corrections found of equal Antiquity with the Books themselves. But without
ascending so far to have a Precedent for the Use of Critical Reflections on the
Sacred Books, we need only consider the Transactions of the Latter Age,
relating to the Latin Editions of our Bibles: What prodigious pains was
Robert Stephens at, according to the Relation of Hentenius a Divine of Louvain,
to give us an exact and correct Edition of the Bible? This Divine which
labored after Stephens in the same matter, admires the diligence and excessive
expense of that Printer, to whom he ingeniously acknowledges himself indebted.
Joann. Henten. Praef. in Bibl. Lovan. ann. 1547.
Nemo est, qui nesciat, ut unum pro multis in medium adferam, quantam
diligentiam, quantasque impensas tulerit Robertus Stephanus Regius apud
Lutetiam Typographus, quem honoris causa nomino, ut accuratissima and
castigatissima nobis Biblia traderet, propter quod plurimum etiam illi debent
quotquot Sacrarum Literarum lectioni sunt addicti, quem ob id etiam in multis
secuti sumus.

The Doctors of the Faculty of Divinity of Louvain, perfected afterward the
Edition of their Brother, with a greater Collection of Manuscripts, and
re-altered some places according to the Rules of Criticism, which they thought
not corrected with exactness enough. Nicolas Zegers, a Religious Man of the
Order of St. Francis, applied himself entirely to the Correction of the Books
of the New Testament. He dedicated his Critique to Julian III. under the Title
of Castigationes in Novum Testamentum, in quibus depravata restituuntur,
adjecta resecantur, and sublata adjiciuntur. Autore Tac. Nicolao Zeger. Colon.
ann. 1555.
Corrections on the New Testament, wherein it re-established what was
corrupted, expunged what was added, and added what was before expunged. He
assures that Pope in his Epistle Dedicatory, Haec est genuina, germana and
emendata veteris nostri Interpretis versio seu translatio, qua hactenus semper
a tempore fere Apostolorum, aut non ita diu post, usa cognoscitur Romana
Ecclesia, quam ab innumeris tum mendis, tum adulterinis adjectiunculis, non
sine magnis and multis molestiis repurgavimus. Zeger. Epist. ad Jul. III.
That he had freed from an infinite number of Faults and false Glosses the
ancient Latin Version, which bad been in Use among the VVestern Churches, from
the very Times of the Apostles.

There is nothing more exactly Notaticnes in Sacra Biblia, quibus variantia
discrepantibus exemplaribus loca summo studio discutiuntur. Antverp. ann. 1580.
performed than the Critical Remarks of Lucas Brugensis in his Edition of the
Latin Bible of the Divines of Louvain. Among the multitude of his Copies, he
mentions one which was corrected by some Dominicans on the Bibles of
Charlemagne. He sets some marks of Esteem on another Manuscript, entitled, The
Correction of the Bible. Praeter alia, id quod maximi facimus Manuscriptum
Bibliorum correctorium ab incerto auctore magna diligentia ac fide contextum.
Luc. Brug. Notat. in Genesis c. 8. v. 7.
And he assures us, Quae a nostri seculi scriptoribus ex manuscriptis codicibus
collectae sunt variae lectiones, omnes propemodum in eo comperimus, and ad
fontes fideliter examinatos deprehendimus. Luc. Brug. Notat. in Genesis c. 8. v. 7.
that the different Readings, which have been observed by the Critics of the
latter Times, are all found in this Book, where they are examined according to
the Hebrew Text.

I have elsewhere mentioned another Manuscript of like nature, which is in the
ancient Library of the College of Sorbon. I have likewise given Extracts out
of it, which manifestly prove that the Latins have not neglected the Critical
Study of the Sacred Books, in those very Ages when Barbarism reigned in Europe.

It is a Vanity in the admirers of the Hebrew Text of the Jews, to bestow such
great praises on the Massoreth, a good part of which consists in Trifles or
superstitious Observations. The Christians of both the Eastern and Western
Churches, with more Judgment, have taken care in the Correction of the Bibles,
as manifestly will appear by this Work. We ought to prefer to the Massoreth
those learned Romani Correctores.
Critics of Rome, which by the order of Pope Sixtus V. and Clement VIII.
corrected the Latin Bibles, which Correction serves instead of an exact
Massoreth to the Western Church. There are none but Protestants of ill minds,
such as Thomas James, Author of the Bellum Papale, who cavil at the differences
of the Editions of the Bible published by those two Popes. There may indeed be
a more perfect work, but that ought to be reserved for particular Notes, which
no ways diminish the Authority of those Books received into public Use.

I must only add two words concerning those Acts which are made use of in this
Work. For the Manuscripts, I mark the Libraries where they are found, I have
cited none without reading them; the Extracts being all done by my self, except
that of Cambridge, which contains the four Gospels, and the Acts of the
Apostles. I had procured out of England a faithful Copy of this last Manuscript
in what relates to the Greek, which I have exactly followed.

As for the Printed Books, of which there are numerous Quotations, for the most
part I have contented my self to relate the Passages in short following the
sense only, in the Body of the work. For long Citations of Passages where there
are but five or six words, perhaps, pertinent to the Occasion, must needs prove
very tiresom. This is the very same Method which I have followed in the
Critical History of the Old Testament. But some Persons desiring such Passages
at length, to avoid searching them in the Books, to comply with their Desires,
and keep to our Method; we judged it convenient to put them at large at the
bottom of the Page in the proper Languages of the respective Authors.

A CRITICAL HISTORY Of the TEXT of the New Testament, Wherein is established
The Truth of those ACTS on which CHRISTIANITY is founded.
PART I.
CHAPTER I. The Verity of the New Testament defended in general against the
ancient Heretics. Reflections upon the Principle made use of by the Fathers to
establish the Authority of these Books.
JEsus Christ having professed that he came not into the World to destroy the
Old Law, but rather to accomplish it, Matt. v. 17.
it seemed not to him necessary to publish his Doctrine in Writing. He was
content to prove his Mission by his Miracles, and to support his Reformation
upon the Books of the Old Testament which were received by all the Jews, to
whom the Messiah had been promised. So that we do not find him to have given
order to his Disciples to putany thing into Writing. He only commands them to
Preach his Gospel to all the Nations of the Earth; Go ye, says he to them, Mar.
xvi. 15.
into all the world, and preach the Gospel. The Books of the New Testament took
their Original from this preaching. This it was that caused Tertullian to say,
Constituimus in primis Evangelicum instrumentum Apostolos autores habere,
quibus hoc munus Evangelii promulgandi ab ipso Domino sit impositum. Tertul. l.
4. adv. Marcion. c. 2.
That the Apostles, to whom Jesus Christ had given this Command to promulge the
Gospel, were the Authors thereof. Upon the whole matter, the Gospels had not
been put in Writing but at the request of those People who were willing to
preserve the memory of that which the Apostles had preached to them. S. Paul
composed the greater part of his Epistles for the Instruction of Churches which
were already erected. That History which we call the Acts of the Apostles was
published to no other end but to show to the Faithful the Progress of the
Christian Religion upon its first advance into the World: and the Christians
not having at that time any State separate from that of the Jews, and being
present and assisting at all their Ceremonies in the Temple and in the
Synagogues, they had no Persons appointed to record any thing of importance
which passed among them. And this is the reason that we find not here, as in
the Old Testament, any public Writers who had the Charge of collecting the
Acts of their State. This, during the Primitive times of Christianity, gave a
pretense to several Heretics to doubt of the truth of those Apostolical Books
which to them seemed to want some public Attestation. S. Ignatius, in one of
his Epistles, complains, (...). Ignut. Ep. ad Philad.
That he understood there were some men who said they could not believe the
Gospel, except they could find it written in the There are some who read (...),
Ancients.
Archives. The holy Martyr answers them, That it was written, that the Death
and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and a Faith in him, were instead of the most
authentic Archives. It was then difficult to distinguish the Books which had
been composed by the Apostles, or by their Disciples, from those which had been
forged by false Apostles or by some Sectaries. Every one bore in its front
either the Name of the Apostles in general, or of some single one of their
number: and since there were no public Archives, to which recourse might be
had for the deciding and clearing of matters of this nature, the Heretics took
occasion from thence to publish a great number of false Acts; of which hardly
any thing is left to Posterity except the Titles of them and a few Fragments.

These Sectaries boasted that they taught the Doctrine of the Apostles, or at
least of their Disciples. Basilides, who was one of the most ancient Heretics,
avouched that he had for his Master, (...). Apud Clem. Alex. lib. 7. Strom.
Glaucias, one of St. Peter's Interpreters. Valentin affirmed with the same
boldness, that he had been instructed in Religion by Theodad, (...). Apud Clem.
Alex. ibid.
who was one of St. Paul 's familiar Acquaintance. But whereas they did not
agree amongst themselves, and on the contrary the Doctrine of the Apostles was
perfectly uniform in the Churches that they had planted; the Fathers made use
of this Uniformity of Doctrine to confirm and establish the truth of the
Apostolical Writings. Clemens Alexandrinus answers Basilides and Valentin, that
there was but one true ancient Church, that was before all Heresies. From
thence he brings an unquestionable proof of the falsity of the Doctrine of
these Sectaries, who durst be so bold as to give the Name of (...).
the Doctrine of the Apostles to their own Inventions: he represents to them,
that (...) Clem. Alex. ibid.
the Doctrine of the Apostles were one, as well as their Tradition. The
Primitive Christians argued against the Heretics of those times, from
Tradition, and from the Conformity of that Belief that was manifest in all the
Churches founded by the Apostles; as may be seen at large in the Works of St.
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Epiphanius, and St. Augustine, and in a word, of all the
Fathers that have defended the Writings of the Apostles against the Heretics.
Whenever any Sectary opposed the declared Gospel, they immediately convinced
him of the forgery of those Acts that he produced, by the true ones that were
kept in the Apostolical Churches, and were instead of Archives. (...). Epiph.
Haer. 42.
If any one, says St. Epiphanius, should go about to counterfeit the Edicts or
Ordinances of Emperors, the Cheat would be soon laid open, by producing the
true Copies taken from the Archives of the Court; In like manner, adds he,
false Gospels composed by Heretics may be detected; their spuriousness may be
easily discovered, by producing the true Gospels, that are kept in the Churches
as it were in Archives.

This manner of defending the Truth of the Apostolical Writings against the
ancient Sectaries, has proved so effectually convincing, that the Gnostics
were obliged to support their Novelties, to fly to I know not what secret
Tradition that was known to none but themselves. They were so insolent as to
prefer themselves before the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus Christ, accusing
them as not having preached the Purity of the Gospel with sincerity, because,
say they, they have retained many Ceremonies of the old Law. They thought by
this means, that they might be able with Authority to reform the Writings of
the Apostles. Cum autem ad eam iterum traditionem quae est ab Apostolis, quae
per successiones Presbyterorum in Ecclesiis custoditur, provocamus eos,
adversantur traditioni dicentes, se non solum. Presbyteris, sed etiam Apostolis
existentes superiores sinceram invenisse veritatem; Apostolos autem admiscuisse
ea quae sunt legalia Salvatoris verbis. Iren. lib. 3. adversus Haer. c. 2.
There is no way (says St Irenaeus) of convincing this sort of People, neither
by the Testimony of the Scriptures generally received in the Churches planted
by the Apostles, nor by authentic Traditions, because they imagine themselves
to be above all this. They were persuaded, that they alone were in possession
of the truth of Religion that contained hidden Mysteries: Se indubitate and
incontaminate and sincere absconditum scire mysterium. Iren. ibid.
And since they had joined Philosophy with Christianity, they intended also to
accommodate the one to the other. They argued on matters of fact after a pure
metaphysical manner; and being filled with an infinite number of Prejudices and
Notions taken from the Principles of their Philosophy, they reformed the
Doctrine of the Apostles, and even that of Jesus Christ on this foundation,
under pretense of bringing Religion to a greater Perfection. They pretended
that the Apostles had preached the Gospel before they had a perfect knowledge
of the Truth, and that therefore they were at liberty to correct them: Ante
praedicaverunt, quam perfectam haberent cognitionem. This was that which caused
them to take the ambitious Title of Learned and Knowing Men, or Gnostics, as
if none but they were endued with the true knowledge of Religion. They vainly
boasted also that they had reformed the Apostles: Iren. ibid.
Gloriantes emendatores se esse Apostolorum. S. Irenaeus sharply reproves their
rashness in bragging that they had made perfect that which was gross and
obscure in the Gospel published by the Apostles.

It has been necessary to make all these Reflections on the ancient Sect of
the Gnostics, because they have applied themselves more than any others in
those primitive times of the Christian Religion, to the obtruding of false Acts
under the Names of the Apostles, or other specious Titles. These are a sort of
Philosophers that ought not to pass but for half Christians, who have altered
the Traditions that the Disciples of Jesus Christ had left to the Churches. And
therefore no regard ought to be had to all the Books that they have produced
under what Name soever, since they have professed that they understand Religion
better than the Apostles themselves, and Existentes extra omnem timorem suas
conscriptiones praeferentes, plura habere gloriantur quam sint ipsa Evangelia.
Si quidem in tantum processerunt audaciae, uti quod ab his (Apostolis) non olim
conscriptum est veritatis Evangelium titulent, in nihilo conveniens Apostolorum
Evangelits, ut nec Evangelium quidem sit apud eos sine blasphemia. Iren. adv.
Haer. lib. 3. c. 11.
have been so bold as to publish new Gospels, to which they have given the
Title of The Gospel of Truth, although these Gospels do not agree with those of
the Apostles. This alone is sufficient to make it appear, that the Gospels of
the Gnostics were false Acts, that cannot be opposed to the Apostolical
Writings that have been acknowledged by the primitive Churches.

It were an easy matter to answer Celsus by this same Principle, who
heretofore objected to the Christians, that they changed their Gospel every
day, adding thereto, and diminishing what they thought fit, that they might be
able by this means to retract that which they had formerly alleged. Origin
judiciously answers this Philosopher, who was a great Enemy to the Christian
Religion, that he unhappily confounded the ancient Sectaries with the true
Faithful. He protests, that he knows not in the least, that the Gospel has
been corrupted by others than the Gnostics or Marcion: (...). Orig. lib. 2
contra Cell.
This is not a Crime (says he) that ought to be imputed to the Gospel, but to
them that have dared to corrupt in He brings an Example of the Sophisters,
whose false Doctrine cannot be attributed to true Philosophy. (...). Orig. ibid.
It is the same thing (says this great Man) with respect to the Sects that
have introduced Novelties into the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, which cannot be
charged on true Christianity. It is certain, that in all times, and in all
places there has been a perfect Conformity between the different Copies of
these Books; the Diversities that are found therein, and shall be remarked in
the Sequel of this Work, are not of so great moment, as that we may say with
Celsus, that the Christians have changed their Gospels, to the end that they
might suit them to their own opinions. This cannot be understood but of the
ancient Heretics, who having no certain Rules for their Belief, reformed them
according to their capricious humor. This is that for which the Orthodox
Christians heretofore censured the Theodosians, Eusebius. l. 5. Hist. Eccl. c. 28.
who corrupted the Sacred Books under a pretense of correcting them; and
whereas several among them had taken this liberty, all their Copies differed
one from another: there were of them under the Names of Asclepiades,
Theodosius, Hermophilus and Apollonius, that did not in the least agree
together.

I will say nothing here concerning the Gospel of the Marcionites whereof
Origin makes mention, because I design to treat of it in another place: I shall
only add, that if we compare the Gospels and the other Books of the New
Testament with the Liturgies that we have under the Names of several Apostles,
to whom the most part of the Eastern Christians do attribute them, we shall be
convinced that the Gospels are truly of the Apostles. For all the Churches have
preserved them in their ancient Purity; whereas every particular Nation has
added to their Liturgies, and has taken the liberty often to revise them. The
respect that has been always had to the Writings of the New Testament, without
inserting any considerable Additions therein, is an evident proof, that all
People have looked upon them as Divine Books, which it is not lawful for any to
alter. On the contrary they have been persuaded, that the Liturgies, although they
bear the Names of the Apostles, or of some Disciples of Jesus Christ, were not
originally written by them to whom they were attributed. And therefore it has
been left free to the Churches to add to them, or to diminish from them,
according as occasion requires.

The Principles that have been maintained above in discoursing of the
Gnostics, may serve to confute the Manicheans, who likewise acknowledge
nothing Divine in the Scriptures but that which pleased them, or rather was
agreeable to their Fancies. This caused S. Austin to say, addressing himself to
Faustus, who was one of the chief of this Party, Tu es ergo regula veritatis.
Quidquid contra te fuerit non est verum. Aug. lib. 11. cont. Faust. c. 2.
You are then the Rule of Truth, whatsoever is against you is not true. He
clearly demonstrates to them, that they were only upheld with false prejudices,
when they rejected the Writings of the Apostles against the Authority of all
the Churches of the World, and at the same time received the Apocryphal Books
that had no Authority. If any one (continues this Father) should oppose you,
and should make use of your own words, that that which you allege on your
behalf is false; and on the contrary that which is against you is true, Quid
ages? Quo te convertes? Quam libri a te prolati originem, quam vetustatem, quam
seriem successionis testem citabis? Aug. ibid.
what would you do? How could you defend the truth of those Acts that you
produce? How could you prove their Antiquity, not having any Witnesses in
Tradition by whose Testimony they might be confirmed? From whence he concludes
Vides in hac re quid Ecclesiae Catholicae valeat auctoritas, quae ab ipsis
fundatissimis sedibus Apostolorum usque ad hodiernum diem succedentium sibimet
Episcoporum serie and tot populorum consensione firmatur. Aug. ibid.
that it is absolutely necessary on this occasion to have recourse to the
Authority of those Churches that were established ever since the primitive
times of the Christian Religion, and to the consent of Nations that have
received the Books of the New Testament from the Apostles.

He observes further, and more close to the purpose; that if it were only
disputed concerning the variety of Copies, since they are but few in number, it
would be sufficient to consult the Copies of different Countries; and if they
did not agree in this point, the greater number should be preferred before the
lesser, or the more ancient before the later: Plures paucioribus, aut
vetustiores recentioribus praeferrentur. But the Manicheans, who judged not of
the Truth of these Books but with relation to their own Ideas, refused to
submit to this Authority, they consulted only their reason in matters of Fact,
wherein all Deference ought to be given to Authority; therefore when any
passage was urged to them that thwarted their Opinion, they boldly affirmed
that that part had been corrupted, or that the Book wherein it was found had
been composed by some Impostor under the name of the Apostles. Faustus, for
example, who avouched, that after having diligently perused the Books of Moses,
he could not find therein any Prophecy that had any regard to Jesus Christ,
takes this method in answering the Texts of the New Testament. Where express
mention is made of these Prophecies, Jesus Christ says in speaking of himself,
Moses has wrote of me; Faustus answers to this, Joann. v. 46.
that after a serious examination of this passage, Ratione cogebar in alterum e
duobus, ut aut falsum pronunciarem capitulum hoc, aut mendacem Jesum; sed id
quidem alienum pietatis erae Deum existimare mentitum, Rectius ergo visum est
scriptoribus adscribere falsitatem, quam veritatis auctoritati mendacium. Apud.
Aug. lib. 16. contra Faust. c. 2.
his reason obliged him to conclude, either that it was false, or that Jesus
Christ had not spoken the truth; and since it would be no less than impious
Blasphemy to say that God could lie, it would be more advisable to attribute
the falsification to the Writers themselves. When it was demanded of this
Heretic why he did not receive the Old Law and the Prophets whom Jesus Christ
himself has authorized in the New Testament, by his words, I am not come to
destroy the Law or the Peophets, Matthew. v. 17.
but to fulfill them: he objected against the Testimony of S. Matthew, because
he is the only Evangelist that has related this. It is supposed (says he)
that this Discourse was delivered in the Sermon that Jesus Christ made on the
Mountain. In the mean time S. John Testis idoneus tacet, loquitur autem minus
idoneus. Apud Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 17. c. 1.
who was there present speaks not a word thereof; and yet they would have S.
Matthew, who saw nothing, to mention it. He pretends that this has been wrote
by some other person, and not by S. Matthew.

After this manner the Manicheans who sacrificed all to their Reason, and
almost nothing to Authority, entirely destroyed the Books of the New Testament,
receiving them no farther than they were conformable to their Prejudices: they
had formed to themselves a certain Idea of Christianity, after which they
regulated the Writings of the Apostles. They would have it that all that which
could not be adjusted to this Idea had been inserted in their Books by later
Writers who were half Jews: Faustus says, Multa enim a majoribus vestris
eloquiis Domini nostri inserta verba sunt, Apud Aug. l. 33. cont. Faust. c. 3.
quae nomine signata ipsius cum fide non congruant; praesertim quia, ut jam
saepe probatum a nobis est, nec ab ipso haec sunt, nec ab ejus Apostolis
scripta; sed multa post eorum assumptionem a nescio quibus, and ipsis inter se
non concordantibus Semi-Judaeis, per famas opinionesque comperta sunt, etc.

But S. Augustine represents to them in this very same passage, that one must
renounce common sense to argue after this manner on matters of Fact, to which
imaginary reasons ought not to be opposed. De quo libro certum erit cujus sit,
si literae quas Apostolorum dicit and tenet Ecclesia ab ipsis Apostolis
propagata, and per omnes gentes tanta eminentia declarata, utrum Apostolorum
sint incertum est; and hoc erit certum scripsisse Apostolos quod huic Ecclesiae
contrarii haeretiot proferunt Auctorum suorum nominibus appellati long post
Apostolos existentium. Aug. ibid.
We cannot be certain (says he) of any Book, if once we call in question those
Works that the Church that is extended throughout the whole World receives with
a common consent, and if on the contrary we authorize as Apostolical Books that
dispute therewith, and that carry the name of Writers who have lived a long
time after the Apostles. He charges them Legunt Scripturas apocryphas Manichaei
a nescio quibus fabularum sutoribus sub Apostolorum nomine scriptas, quae
suorum scriptorum temporibus in auctoritatem sanctae Ecclesiae recipi,
mererentur, si sancti and docti bomines qui tunc in hac vita erant, and
examinare talia poterant, eos vera locutos esse cognoscerent. Aug. cont. Faust.
lib. 22. c. 79.
with making Fables and Apocryphal Works to pass for Apostolical Writings: and
he shows at the same time the falsity of these Acts, because they have not any
testimony of the Doctors of the Church that were then living. He urges Faustus
to prove what he has alleged, by Books that are Canonical, and generally
received in all the Churches: Non ex quibuscunque literis, sed Ecclesiasticis,
Canonicis, Catholicis. Aug. l. 23. adv. Faus. c. 9.
This Holy Doctor calls this way of arguing of the Manicheans folly, insaniam
and dementiam, who not being able to accommodate the Writings of the Apostles
to the Idea that they had formed to themselves of the Christian Religion, or
under color of certain contradictions in the Scriptures, which they could not
resolve Non a Christi Apostolis, sed longo post tempore a quibusdam incerti
nominis viris, qui ne sibi non haboretur fides scribentibus quae nescirent,
partim Apostolorum nomina, partim eorum qui Apostolos secuti viderentur,
scriptorum suorum frontibus indiderunt, asseverantes secundum eos se scripsisse
quae scripserint. Apud Aug. lib. 32. cont. Faust. c. 2.
would needs have it believed that these Books were composed after the Apostles
themselves by uncertain Authors, who had made bold to borrow the Names of these
Apostles to gain Credit and Authority to their Works.

To convince them the more easily of their folly, he sets before their eyes the
Books Platonis, Aristotelis, Ciceronis, Varronis, aliorumque ejusmodi autorum
libros, unde noverunt homines quod ipsorum sint, nisi temporum fibimet.
succedentium contestatione continua, August cont. Faust lib. 33. c. 6.
of Hippocrates, Plato, Aristotle, Varto and Cicero, and of several other
Writers, that are believed to be the Authors of those Works that we have under
their Names, because they have been attributed to them in the time wherein they
lived, and they have been always so attributed successively from Age to Age.
Now there is nothing more contrary to reason, than not to grant the same
privilege to the Church, and not to acknowledge that she has faithfully kept
the Writings of the Apostles, whose Doctrine she has always preserved by the
means of the Succession of Bishops.

We have enlarged a little on these Reflections of S. Augustine, and of the
other Fathers that preceded him, because they have mightily evinced the Truth
of the Books of the New Testament, without having recourse to I know not what
particular Spirit, which is an invention of these later times. We cannot
imagine any thing more opposite to good reason, than these Words of the
Confession of Faith of those that formerly took the Name of the Reformed of the
Churches of France: Confess. Art. 4.
We acknowledge these Books (in speaking of the whole Scriptures) to be
Canonical, not so much by the common agreement and consent of the Church, as by
the testimony and inward persuasion of the Holy Ghost. The Fathers nevertheless
have always confuted the ancient Heretics who refused to acknowledge these
Books as Canonical, by the common agreement and consent of the Church. It would
have been a pleasant way of reasoning, if every one in these primitive times of
Christianity, would not have acknowledged for divine Books, only those that his
private Spirit should dictate to him to be such. This has appeared to be so
great an extravagance to those of that Persuasion, who in the Low Countries are
called Remonstrants, that they look upon the Calvinists that follow this
Principle, as People that have renounced common sense. Simon Episcopius, who
has been one of the Champions of this Party, after having handled this
question with a great deal of subtilty, concludes that it is a very ill sort of
argumentation, to admit besides the testimony of the Church, another inward
testimony of the Holy Ghost, to know whether certain Books have a divine
Authority stamped upon them. Hinc patet (says this Protestant) ineptos esse
eos, qui vel praeter vel citra testimonium Ecclesiae requiri aiunt internum
Spiritus Sancti testimonium, ad hoc ut libros hos divinos esse, and
authoritatem divinam habere intelligamus. Remonst. Confess. c. 1. de scrip. n.
8.
It is sufficient according to the Remonstrants, that we have there upon the
testimony of Ecclesia primitiva quae temporibus Apostolorum fuit, certissime
resciscere potuit, and indubie etiam rescivit libros istos ab Apostolis
scriptos esse, vel saltem approbatos, nobisque istius rei scientiam quasi per
manus tradidit, ac veluti depositum quoddam reliquit. Remonst. Confess. cap. 1.
de Script. n. 8.
the primitive Church, that certainly knew that these Books were written by the
Apostles, or approved by them, and that this testimony is come down to us by a
constant Tradition. This Spirit that is diffused through the whole Church,
ought without doubt to be preferred to a private Spirit, that can only serve to
make a division therein. Grot. Animad. in Anim. Riv.
This is what Grotius has judiciously observed: Spiritus ille privatus (says
this Critic) Spiritus Ecclesiae divisor.

It would be to no purpose for the Calvinists to object to the Remonstrants,
that their Opinion is taken out of the Writings of Socinus; because an evident
truth ought not to be rejected, under pretense that it may be found in the
Books of Socinus. This Heretic has proved in his Treatise Of the Authority of
the Holy Scriptures, and in another Work entitled Sacred Lectures, the Truth
of the Sacred Books, and principally of those of the New Testament, by the very
same reasons, and after the same manner that S. Irenaeus, Tertullian and S.
Augustine have done. Socin. lib. de Auctor. Script. sac.
Legantur ea quae hac de re Eusebius scribit pluribus in locis Historiae
Ecclesiasticae, and invenietur usque ad illius Eusebit aetatem, hoc est per
250. circiter annorum perpetuum spatium, postquam scripta illa conscripta atque
edita fuerunt, nunquam fuisse in Ecclesia qui dubitaret quin quatuor quae
habemus Evangelia, liber Actorum Apostolorum, Epistolae omnes quae Pauli
Apostoli esse dicuntur, praeter eam quae ad Hebraeos est scripta, prior
Apostoli Petri, and prima Joannis Apostoli, haec, inquam, omnia ab iis scripta
fuissent quibus attribuuntur. Socin. lib. de Auctor. Script. Sac.
Let them read (says Socinus) that which Eusebius has written on this matter
in his Ecclesiastical History, and they will find therein a perpetual consent
of all the Churches of the World, since these Books were written, to the time
of this Author. He insists very much in these two Treatises on the Testimonies
of the ancient Fathers. Will any one say for this, that this is a Socinian
Method, because Socinus has made use of it after the most Learned
Ecclesiastical Writers? Would to God that this Enemy of the Traditions of the
Catholic Church had always followed this Principle! he would not have
introduced so many Innovations into Religion. Neither can he avoid an Objection
that may be made even by those of his own Party, that according to his
Principles, he ought necessarily to acknowledge a Tradition after the same
manner as it is maintained in the Church of Rome. We cannot (might they say to
him) receive the Gospel of S. Matthew, and reject that which has been
published under the Name of S. Thomas, without establishing Tradition at the
same time, because it is impossible to prove this by any Testimony of the
Scriptures.

Socinus, To answer this Objection without departing from his Principle, lays
down Est quiddam medium inter Scripturas and traditionem. Immo non quiddam
modo, sed multiplex quiddam, soriptae nimirum historiae, aliaque testimonia and
rations, ex quibus factum est and fit ut cordati homines Matthaei Evangelium
pro vera de Jesu Christo historin habeant, Thoma non habeant, nulla hic
intercedente autoritate Ecclesiae and Spiritiis quo ipsa porpetuo gubernetur.
Soc. Epist. 4. ad Christoph. Ostorod.
a certain Medium between the Scriptures and Tradition; which Medium consists,
according to his opinion, in written Histories, in other Testimonies and in
Ratiocinations, from whence it is proved without making application to any
Authority of the Church, that the Gospel of S. Matthew contains the true
History of Jesus Christ, and that on the contrary, that which carries the name
of S. Thomas is a suppositious Book. Episcopius and the other Remonstrants do
also make use of this Answer, that they may not be obliged to acknowledge the
Traditions of the Church. But this Medium which they suppose to be between the
Scriptures and Tradition, is a true Tradition, which differs in nothing from
that which S. Irenaeus, Tertullian, Epiphanius, S. Augustine and several other
Fathers have established, when they intended to convince the ancient Heretics
of the Truth of the Apostolical Books. These Histories, and these other Acts
whereof Socinus makes mention, are taken from the Churches, or from
Ecclesiastical Writers; and this is that which composeth Tradition. He ought to
agree to it himself, since he avoucheth in his Treatise of the Authority of the
Holy Scriptures, that since the times of the Apostles to those of Eusebius,
none have doubted in the Church, that the Books of the New Testament were not
composed by those, whose Names they bear. For it is certain that many Heretics
that were out of the Church, have not only doubted thereof, but have absolutely
rejected them. That which has deceived Socinus and the other Sectaries, is a
false notion that they have conceived of the Authority of the Church; they
imagine that she Judges by her own Authority only, and not upon good Acts and
Records, that the Books that compose the Old and New Testament are Divine and
Canonical.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Titles that are at the Head of the Gospels and other
Books of the New Testament: Whether these Titles were made by the Authors of
these Books, or whether they were since added?
WE have no solid proof in Antiquity, to make it appear to us, that the Names
that are set at the Head of every Gospel, were thereunto prefixed by those who
are the Authors of them: S. John Chrysostom assures us expressly of the contrary
in one of his Homelies: (...). Joann. Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in Epist. ad Romans
Moses (says this Learned Bishop) has not put his Name to the five Books of
the Law that he has wrote: those also that have collected the Acts after him,
have not set their Names at the beginning of their Histories. The same may be
said of the Evangelists Matthew, Mark, Luke and John. As for S. Paul, he has
always set his Name at the beginning of his Epistles, except that which is
directed to the Hebrews: and the Reason that S. John Chrysostom produces is,
because the former wrote for the use of Persons that were present; whereas S.
Paul wrote Letters to persons that were at a distance. If we should refer our
selves herein to the Testimony of this Father, we cannot prove precisely from
the Titles only that are at the Head of every Gospel, that these Gospels have
been composed by those whose Names they bear, at least if we do not join to
this, the Authority of the Primitive Church, that has added these Titles. On
this Principle it is that Tannerus and other Jesuits supported themselves in a
Conference that they had at Ratisbonne with some Protestants, to show that they
could not clearly prove the Title of S. Matthew, and without the Testimony of
the ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, that this Gospel was made by him whose name
it bore: they insisted that they could not bring other Proofs of this Truth
than those that were taken from humane Authority, and not from the Scriptures
themselves, since they had been added to them: Ex solo testimonio hominum,
eorumque non omnium, sed eorum tantum qui Ecclesiae corpus constituunt, David
Schramus Theologus and Ecclesiastes in aula ad austrum Neoburgica, edit.
Giessae Hassorum, ann. 1617.
A Protestant Divine who had assisted at this Conference, has composed a Book
on purpose on this Subject, to prove the contrary to that which the Jesuits
maintained. But to say the truth, there is more of Subtilty in these sorts of
Disputes than of solid Arguments: for although it were true that S. Matthew is
the Author of the Title of his Gospel, recourse must always be had to the
Authority of the ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, to show that this Title is of
him, and that this Gospel certainly belongs to him whose Name it bears; at
least if we decline flying to a private Spirit, which has been above
discoursed, and cannot be approved by any judicious Persons.

These Titles are so ancient in the Church, that Tertullian reproves Marcion,
who acknowledged the Gospel of St. Luke, from which he had only took away some
Passages, Marcion Evangelio scilicet suo nullum adscribit auctorem: quasi non
licuerit illi titulum quoque adfingere, cui nefas non fuit ipsum corpus
evertere. Tertull. lib. 4. adv. Marc. cap. 2.
for having no Title at the head of his Copy; as if it were not lawful for him
(says this Father) to annex a Title to a Work, the Text whereof he had
ventured to corrupt. He adds further in this same place, That he could not
proceed in the Dispute that he held with this Heretic, since he had a right to
reject a Book as suspected, the Title whereof did not appear; that he was
willing, nevertheless, thus far to condescend to him, because it is easy Ex
iis commentatoribus quos habemus, Lucam videtur Marcion elegisse quem caederet.
Tertull. ibid.
to judge by the Copy of S. Luke that was read in the Church, whether that of
Marcion were the same, excepting that which he had cut off from it. It is not
to be inferred that Tertullian was of Opinion that it might be proved by the
Titles only, that the Gospels belonged to those whose Names they bore;
otherwise he ought to have acknowledged as the true Gospels, an infinite number
of false Books that carried the Names of the Apostles: It was necessary,
according to his mind, to have besides this, a constant Tradition founded on
the Testimonies of those who had lived before; therefore he adds at the same
time, that Si sub ipsius Pauli nomine Evangelium Marcion intulisset, non
sufficeret ad fidem singularitas instrumenti destituta patrocinio antecessorum.
Tertull. ibid.
although Marcion should have published his Gospel even under the name of S. Paul,
this Title would have availed nothing, at least if it had not been accompanied
with these Testimonies.

He goes yet farther in declaring that he did not take advantage of the Title
that is at the beginning of S. Luke in the Copies of the Church, Ibid.
De titulo quoque funis ducendus est contentionis pari hinc inde nisu
fluctuante. For as to the Title alone Marcion might say, as well as the
Orthodox, That the Gospel which he produced was the true one. Ego meum dico
verum, Marcion suum. Ego Marcionis affirmo adulterat um, Marcion meum. Quis
inter nos determinabit, nisi temporis ratio ei praescribens auctoritatem, quod
antiquius reperietur, and ei praejudicans vitiationem, quod posterius
revincetur? Tertull. ibid. cap. 4.
To which then shall we adhere? (says Tertullian) by what Rule may we
determine which is the true Gospel, whether that of Marcion that has been
corrupted, or that of the Church which is supposed to be entire, at least if
regard be had to Antiquity? insomuch that the most ancient should be the true,
because the verity of an Act always preceeds the corruption of the same. In
quantum enim falsum corruption est very, in tantum praecedat necesse est veritas
falsum. On this uncontrollable Principle he makes it appear that the true Copy
of S. Luke was that which the Orthodox made use of, since Marcion himself had
not acknowledged any other before he had separated from the Church, which he
accused of Judaizing; and he chiefly defended himself with this pretended
Judaism, from the Charge of not receiving this Gospel entire, which he said had
been interpolated by those that authorized Judaism: Interpolatum a
protectoribus Judaismi.

Lastly, Tertullian concludes, That there was no other true Copy of S. Luke but
his, because it was before that which Marcion had corrected; and the Reason
that he alleges is this, That he could not amend any but that which was in
the Church, and was consequently antecedent to his. Id emendans quod invenit,
and id posterius quod de nostro, emendatione constituens suum and novum fecit.
But since it might be objected to him, that it is not always true, that the
most ancient Books are the most correct, because they also may have been
corrupted, at least if they be not the true Originals: he answers, that it is
necessary to look back to the time of the Apostles, to be certain that we have
their genuine Writings. In summa si constat id verius quod prius, id prius quod
and ab initio, ab initio quod ab Apostolis; pariter utique constabit, id esse
ab Apostolis traditum, quod apud Ecclesias Apostolorum fuerit sacrosanctum.
Tertull. ibid. cap. 5.
Now we are assured (according to his Opinion) that a thing belongs to the
times of the Apostles, when we see that it has been inviolably preserved in
the Apostolical Churches.

All these Arguments of Tertullian prove, that the constant Tradition of the
Church is the mark by which we distinguish the Divine and Canonical Books from
those that are not so; and that it is this same Church that has added, or at
least approved of the Titles of the four Gospels, to denote to us, that these
Gospels were written by Apostles, or by their Disciples; which does not in the
least agree with this private Spirit of some Protestants. In seems that Beza
believed that the Titles of the Gospels were no less dictated by the Holy Ghost
than the Text it self: Th. Bezae Resp. ad defens. and reprehens. Seb. Castal.
this he insinuates in his Answer to the Defense of Castalio, whom he
reprehends for having translated in his Latin Version of the New Testament
these Greek Words, (...), by these, auctore Matthaeo. Maldonat has observed
with much more Judgment, Non est Sacrorum Scriptorum consuetudo, ut ante
initium librorum ritulos ponant, sed ut vel omittant, vel prima libri verba
titulum faciant. Maldon. Comm. in cap. I. Matthew.
That it is not the custom of the sacred Writers to put Titles at the beginning
of their Works; but that they either omit them altogether, or they include them
within the first Words of their Books, which he demonstrates by Examples taken
out of the Old Testament; whence he infers, that it is probable that the
Evangelists are not the Authors of the Titles of their Gospels. He proves it
also by the Example of S. Mark, who would have put two Titles to his Book, if
he were the Author of the first that runs thus, The Gospel according to Mark,
because he begins his History with these other Words, The beginning of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. He adds farther, That if the Evangelists had been the
Authors of these Titles, there would not have been found so great an uniformity
amongst them as appears; they would have made use of different Expressions, as
they do in the other parts, where they relate the same things, but in different
terms: instead of writing all, The Gospel according to N. Again he confirms his
Opinion by the diversity that is found among the Greek and Latin Copies;
Maldon. ibid.
for these last read, The holy Gospel of Jesus Christ according to N. which
proceeds from this (says Maldonat) that the Greek Church has put the Greek
Title, and the Latin Church the Latin: quod Graecum Titulum Graeca, Latinum
Latina.

It seems that Beza in this case chose rather to prefer the Title of the Latin
Copy before that of the Greek, when he accuses Castalio of having falsely
translated auctore Matthaeo; as if S. Matthew had been the Author of his
Gospel: for, to confute his Adversary with more force, he says, Neque enim
legimus, Evangelium Matthaei, Marci, Lucae, vel Joannis; sed, Evangelium Jesu
Christi, ut habent omnes Latini codices, secundum Matthaeum, Marcum, Lucam, and
Joannem. Bez. Resp. ad Castal. p. 12.
That we read not the Gospel of Matthew, Mark, Luke or John, but the Gospel of
Jesus Christ according to Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, as it is in all the
Latin Copies. Nevertheless this Reading is not found but in the Latin Version,
and not in all the Latin Copies neither. If Maldonat may be believed, there is
only the Arabic Version printed at Rome, Nov. Test. Arab. edit. Romae, an.
1591.
where it is read, The Gospel of Jesus Christ according as it has been written
by S. Matthew, one of his twelve Disciples. But it is easy to judge, that this
Arabic Title has been taken in part from the Latin; and those who have copied
or translated these Arabic Gospels, have added the rest; therefore we read in
the two other Arabic Editions, The Gospel of Matthew, or of St. Matthew. It is
no otherwise in the Syriack, the Ethiopick, and the Persian: in a word, it is
only in the Latin Version where it is read, The Gospel of Jesus Christ; which
is an apparent Imitation of the first Words of the Gospel of St. Mark. However
it be, the Opinion of St. John Chrysostom, who believed that none of the
Gospels were written with the Titles that are at present prefixed to them,
seems to me more probable than that of some Authors, especially among the
Protestants, who attribute them to the Evangelists, and will have them to be a
part of the Gospels. It is much more likely, that the Primitive Christians have
annexed them thereunto in those times wherein it was evident that these Gospels
did truly belong to those Persons whose Names are put to them: on this account
it is, that we find the Name of S. Luke added to the beginning of some MSS.
Greek Copies of the Acts of the Apostles, as I have observed in three MSS. of
the King's Library. We read in two of these Manuscripts, (...). MSS. Reg. n.
2869. and 2248.
The Acts of the Apostles by Luke the Evangelist; and in the other, (...). MSS.
Reg. n. 2872.
The Acts of the Holy Apostles by Luke an Apostle.

Furthermore, the Greek Word (...), Gospel, which signifies literally Good
News, is taken here for Preaching, insomuch that the Gospel of S. Matthew is
nothing else but the Preaching of this Apostle, who has made a Collection of
the Actions and Words of his Master: therefore the Syrians have entitled this
Gospel, Nov. Test. Sir.
The Gospel, the Preaching of Matthew. The Arabic Versions that have been
taken from the Syriack, do also make use of an Arabic Word that signifies
Preaching.

I do not think it necessary that I should insist on these Words (...),
according to Matthew, according to Mark, as some Commentators on the New
Testament have done; it seems to me to be too nicely explained. They imagine,
that those that have put these Titles have made choice of this Expression on
purpose, to show that neither Matthew, Mark, Luke nor John, were the Authors of
the Gospels, but that they had only written them: this seems to me to be a pure
Subtilty; for, according to the Style of those times, (...), according to
Matthew, is the same thing with (...), of Matthew. It was said after the same
manner, the Gospel (...) according to the Hebrews, and (...), according to the
Egyptians, that is to say, of the Hebrews, and of the Egyptians; as it has
been also said (...), the Heresy according to the Phrygians, which is the same
thing as (...), the Heresy of the Phrygians. Beza himself, who was so
excessively transported against Castalio about the Version of these Words
(...), which he had translated auctore Matthaeo, confesses, that it is
commonly said, the Gospel of S. Matthew and of S. Mark, as it is said the
Epistles of S. Paul and of S. Peter: but he was afraid lest this Title of
Castalio should cause it to be believed that the Evangelists are strictly the
Authors of the Gospels that they have published, whereas they are only the
simple Scribes or Writers of them; as if in the very Elegancy of the Latin
Tongue, Auctor was not the same thing as Scriptor. They that affirm that this
Expression (...), according to Matthew, seems to denote that St. Matthew and
the other Evangelists had not written their Gospels themselves, have a great
deal more reason to fear, lest they should be only Collections that their
Disciples had made of the Preachings of their Masters. But this Objection is
answered at one stroke, by making it appear that there is no difference as to
the sense, between these two Expressions, (...) according to Matthew, and
(...), of Matthew. Castalio, who professes rather to render the Sense than the
Letter, has not ill translated auctore Matthaeo: and therefore Beza was in the
wrong, in taking an occasion from thence to accuse him for having denied the
Inspiration of the Sacred Books.

I cannot but wonder that Grotius should insist on this nicity of Beza, Grot.
Annot. in tit. Matthew.
and that he has remarked after him, in his Notes on this Passage of St.
Matthew, that the ancient Title was not simply (...), Gospel, but (...), the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, after the same manner as it is in the beginning of S.
Mark. He judges this to be the reason why it was not put (...), the Gospel of
Matthew, but (...), according to Matthew. This Observation has no foundation;
for (...), according to Matthew, and (...), of Matthew, are the same thing, as
has been proved above. We see also, that the Syriack Version, the Arabic
(except the Copy of Rome, that has been apparently altered in this point from
the Latin) the Ethiopick and the Persian, all read the Gospel of Matthew.

The great antiquity of this Title (...), Gospel, is ordinarily proved by these
words of St. Justin Martyr, in his Apology for the Christians, (...). Just.
Mart. in Apol.
The Apostles in the Acts that they have committed to Writing, that are called
Gospels. Instead of the word Acts, it is in the Greek of this Father (...). We
have at this day four Books of Xenophon extant, wherein he relates the Words
and Actions of Socrates, that are entitled (...), and in Latin, according to
the Translation of Cardinal Bessarion, Xenophontis de factis and dictis
Socratis memoratu dignis. It is in this same sense that this holy Martyr cites
the Gospels in his Dialogues against Tryphon, Just. Mar. in Dial. cont. Tryph.
under the Title of (...), as if the Apostles had had no other design in their
Writings that have been called Gospels, than to publish the Words and Actions
of Jesus Christ.

Moreover, it is worth the observing, that although the Apostles were not the
Authors of the Titles that are set at the head of their Gospels, we ought
nevertheless to receive them after the same manner as if they had put them
there themselves, because they are derived from the first beginnings of
Christianity, and are further authorized by a constant Tradition of all the
Churches of the World. Erasmus, who found a great difficulty in concluding
concerning the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, that bears not the Name of
St. Paul, protests, that if the Church has pronounced any thing thereupon, he
would readily submit to her Decision, which he prefers before all the Reasons
that may be proposed to him. Erasm. declar. ad Theol. Paris.
Plus apud me valet (says this Critic) Ecclesiae judicium, quam ullae
rations humanae.

CHAP. III Concerning Books that have been published under the Name of Jesus
Christ and the Apostles. Of several other Acts forged by the ancient Heretics.
Reflections on the whole matter.
IT has been observed above, that Jesus Christ never published any Work to
make known his Doctrine, and that he did not so much as give order to his
Disciples to write that which he had taught them, but only to preach it to all
the Nations of the Earth: nevertheless, there have been found Impostors who
have set forth Books under his Name, and have attributed to him certain Acts
written in form of Letters, the forgery whereof discovers it self, in regard
they are directed to Peter and Paul. They have not minded, when they composed
these Letters, that Paul was not the Disciple of Jesus Christ till after the
Death of the same Jesus Christ. Quomodo potuit libros quos, antequam moreretur,
eum scripsisse putari volunt, ad discipulos tanquam familiarissimos Petrum and
Paulum scribere, cum Paulus nondum fuerit discipulus ejus? August. de Consen.
Evan. lib. 1. c. 10.
How then could it be (says St. Augustine) that he should write to Peter and
Paul, as to his dear Disciples with whom he conversed familiarly, since this
latter was not then in the number of his Disciples? Besides, these Books were
full of Secrets, or rather Superstitions, of the Art that is called Magic;
which in no wise agrees with Jesus Christ, who has always professed, and the
Christians after him, to condemn this kind of Superstition. It is probable,
that whereas his extraordinary Actions were famous throughout the World, and
his Miracles surprising, they took occasion from thence to feign this Work to
disperse abroad I know not what magical Secrets, which they pretended he had
put in practice: indeed the Jews, who were his Enemies, not being able to deny
the truth of his Miracles, gave it out every where that he was a Magician. They
have not been ashamed also to set down these Fables in their Talmud, and to say
that Jesus had learned in Egypt the most subtle Mysteries of Magic. Apud
Origin, lib. 1. cont. Cells.
Celsus reproaches the ancient Christians almost after the same manner, under
the Person of a Jew whom he introduces to speak. This Epicurean Philosopher
attributes the miraculous Actions of Jesus to Magic, or rather to a certain
Art that was learned (as he says) in Egypt.

The Letter of Jesus Christ to Agbar King of Edessa, seems not to be so far
from Truth, because Eusebius that produces it with the Letter of this Prince
to Jesus, assures us, that he has taken these two pieces from the Archives of
Edessa, that contained the Records of what has passed under the Reign of
Agbar, and that they were still kept in his time written in Syriack, which was
the Language of the Country; from whence they were translated into Greek.
Nevertheless Pope Gelasius had reason to reject this Letter of our Savior to
Agbar as Apocryphal: Gelas. decr. 1. par. did. 15. c. 3.
Epistola Jesu ad Agbarum apocrypha. I am apt to believe that these Letters
were really found in the Archives of the City of Edessa; but we ought not too
easily to give credit to the first Originals of Churches: every one strives to
advance their Antiquity as much as is possible, and they make no scruple on
such occasions to counterfeit Acts when they have none that are true.

Eusebius appeared much more judicious when he rejected, as Tales made at
pleasure, certain Parables and Preachments that Papias attributed to Jesus
Christ, and avouched that he heard them reported by those very Persons that had
learnt them of the Apostles. We ought then to take it for a certain Maxim, that
Jesus Christ has written nothing, and that we have nothing of his but what we
have received from his Apostles. This gave occasion to some Pagans who had a
Veneration for him, to say, Nolunt Evangelio credere, quia non ab ipso (Jesu)
illa conscripta sunt, sed ab ejus Discipulis, quos existimant ei divinitatem,
qua crederetur Deus, errore tribuisse. Aug. lib. 2. Retract. c. 16.
That they could not believe the Gospel, because he had not written it himself;
and that his Disciples, who were the Authors thereof, had took upon them too
much in making him God. Aug. lib. 1. de cons. c. 7.
S. Augustine confutes these People in his first Book of the Consent of the
Gospels; They attribute (says he, in speaking of these Pagans) a most
excellent Wisdom to Jesus Christ; but they always consider him as a Man, (...).
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. c. 13.
and they pretend that his Disciples have bestowed Qualifications upon him that
he had not: they declare that they have a disposition to believe his Word, in
case he had himself committed it to Writing, but refuse notwithstanding to give
credit to the preaching of the Apostles. S. Augustine propounds to them the
example of Pythagoras and Socrates, two of the greatest Men of the Pagan
Antiquity, who have written nothing of their own Actions, no more than Jesus
Christ, and yet they do not for this reason decline referring themselves to
their Disciples herein. He demands of them Quid igitur causae est cur de istis
hoc credant, quod de illis discipuli eorum literis commendarunt, and de Christo
nolunt credere quod ejus de illo Discipuli conscripserunt? Aug. ibid.
why they rather believe the Disciples of these two Philosophers in that which
they have written concerning them?

This arguing of S. Augustine manifestly supposes that we have no Writings of
Jesus Christ: and this is what he affirms in express terms in another place,
where he answers Faustus, who pretended that we ought to seek for that which
Jesus had said of himself: Quaerendum esse quid de se Jesus ipse
praedicavaerit. Can this be known otherwise (says this Father) than by the
Writings of his Disciples? Numquid hoc sciri potest, nisi discipulis ejus
narrantibus? Vnde sieri poterat, ut si vere ipsius essent, non legerentur, non
acciperentur, non praecipuo culmine auctoritatis eminerent in ipsius Ecclesia,
quae ab ipso per. Apostolos succedentibus sibimet Episcopis usque ad haec
tempora propagata diditatur? Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 28. c. 4.
If there were (adds he) any Writings that had been truly of Jesus Christ, how
comes it to pass that they were not read nor received in his Church, and that
they were not set in the highest rank therein? This also is the Opinion of
Origin in his first Book against Celsus, Orig. l. 1. cont. Cells.
where he acknowledges that Jesus has published nothing of his Actions; that
we know them only by the Relations of his Disciples in their Gospels.

As for what concerns false Gospels, false Acts, false Apocalypses or
Revelations, and other pieces of the like nature that have been composed under
the Names of the Apostles, there has been so great a number of them, that it
would be very difficult to describe them all exactly. Pope Gelasius has
furnished a Catalogue of them long enough, which has been inserted into the
Decretal of Gratian: Decr. 1. part. did. 15. c. 3.
and although these false Books have been almost all lost, yet there are some
Fragments of them remaining in the ancient Ecclesiastical Writers. S. Luke
seems to have written his Gospel, only because some, who had undertaken the
same thing before him, had not acquitted themselves faithfully therein. This is
the Sense that the Fathers generally give to the first words of this
Evangelist, when they explain the Greek Word (...), Luc. i. 1.
which is translated in the vulgar Latin conati sunt. Many (says Theophylact)
have written Gospels, and (...). Theophyl. Comm. in c. 1. Luc. verse. 1.
we have Examples of them in that which is called The Gospel of the Egyptians,
and in another entitled The Gospel of the Twelve. These People (adds he) have
only made an attempt, but they have not finished. The common Opinion of the
ancient Interpreters of the Scriptures, whether Greek or Latin, is that S. Luke
designed to mark out in this place those Writers that durst publish false
Gospels. Pseudopostolos (says Baronius) and Pseudoscriptores his suggillatos
verbis a Luca firma est Patrum sententia. Baron. an. Christ. 58 n. 31.
Nevertheless many of them have been deceived, when they have produced as
Examples of these false Gospels, Writings that have not been published till
after the time of S. Luke.

This has given occasion to some Learned Commentators on the New Testament to
doubt of the Explication that the Fathers have brought of this Greek Word
(...), who take it in a bad sense in this passage. Maldonat after he has
rehearsed in few words what several Fathers have thought thereupon, adds, A qua
sententia, non quod certa mihi ratione probari posse videatur, sed quod omnibus
vulgo probari videam, nolo discedere. Maldon. Comm. in c. 1. Luc. verse. 1.
that he will not recede from the common Opinion, although it be not grounded on
any convincing Reason, because the Verb (...) may also be explained in a good
sense. But whether there were any false Gospels or not, before S. Luke
published his, we cannot doubt but a great number of them have been forged
since that time, of which the Heretics have been the Authors. I will not here
speak of that of the Nazareans, which was called also the Gospel (...),
according to the Hebrews, because I am persuaded that this Gospel was the
Original of S. Matthew, into which they afterward inserted some Additions, as
I shall show hereafter.

The Ebionites who read this same Gospel of S. Matthew according to the
Hebrews, (...). Epiph. Haer. 30. n. 23.
had others also which they had substituted under the Names of the Apostles,
especially of James and John, that they might the more easily impose on those
of their own Sect, by those false Gospels that went under the Names of the
Disciples of Jesus Christ. They had the impudence even to counterfeit new Acts
of the Apostles, which they filled with Impieties and Defamations against S.
Paul, whom they called, by way of raillery, The man of Tarsus, being desirous
to prove from thence that he was not a Jew by Nation, but a Proselyte, and one
born of Parents that had been converted from Gentilism to the Religion of the
Jews. Nevertheless Eusebius assures us, that these Heretics did not receive
any but the Gospel called According to the Hebrews, and that they had but
little esteem for the others. In regard that they had preserved Judaism with
the Christian Religion, Eusebius Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 27.
they absolutely rejected the Epistles of S. Paul, whom they treated as an
Apostate, because he had (said they) abandoned the old Law, (...).

The Gnostics who fancied themselves to have a more perfect knowledge of
Religion than all the other Christians, and looked upon the Apostles, as Men
that were but rude and stupid even when they* published their Gospels, composed
a Work in Verse, Epiph. Haer. 26. n. 22.
which they called (...), the Gospel of Perfection. (...). Epiph. ibid. n. 13.
They made use of a Gospel also that they attributed to S. Philip, a Disciple
of Jesus Christ, some words whereof Epiphanius relates. Some of this same Sect
that was divided into several Branches, had invented a Gospel entitled (...),
the Gospel of Eve, wherein they scattered their wild conceits under the Name of
this Woman, whom they considered as a perfect Gnostick, who had received great
illuminations in the Conference that she held with the Serpent.

The Sethians who were another sort of Gnostics, who boasted, that they took
their original from Seth, whom they believed to be Jesus Christ, had forged
(...). Epiph Haer. 39. n. 4.
an Apocalypse under the Name of the Patriarch Abraham. S. Epiphanius observes
judiciously, that the design of these Gnostics in publishing so many false
Books under such great Names was to delude the simple, and to cause them to
believe that they were ignorant of nothing concerning the Life of Jesus Christ.
Those amongst them who were called Marcosians, Epiph. Haer. 34. n. 18.
had composed certain false Histories of his Infancy, wherein they observed
after what manner he had learned to read.

The Encratites who acknowledged for the Author of their Sect the famous
Tatian, a Disciple of S. Justin Martyr, (...). Epiph. Haer. 47. n. 1.
adhered to the Acts of S. Andrew, S. John, S. Thomas, and some other
Apocryphal Books, as it were to the Authentical Scriptures. Those that took the
Name (...). Epiph Haer. 61. n. 1.
of Apostolical, and were a Branch of the Encratites relied after their example
on the false Acts of S. Andrew and S. Thomas (...). Epiph. Haer. 63. n. 2.
the Origenians, whose Opinions came near to those of Epiphanius, who was of
the Sect of the Gnostics, made use also of the Acts attributed to S. Andrew,
and of some other Books of the same nature. The (...). Cyril. Hierosol. Catech.
4.
Manicheans had composed a Gospel under the name of Thomas, and they made
choice of this name of a Gospel to impose on the simple. Cyril of Jerusalem who
lived a little after the first appearance of this Sect, attributes this Gospel
to one of the Disciples of Manes named Thomas (...). Id. Cyr. Catech. 6.
Let none (says this Holy Bishop) read the Gospel of Thomas; for he is not one
of the twelve Apostles, but one of the three wicked Disciples of Manes. The
Names of these three Disciples, according to the testimony of the same Cyril,
were Thomas, Baddas and Hermas. Nevertheless Pope Gelasius condemns it,
Gelasius decr. 1. par. did. 15. c. 3.
as belonging (as they said) to the Apostle S. Thomas. Evangelium nomine Thomae
Apostoli quo utuntur Manichaei apocryphum. S. Augustine writing against Faustus
has made mention of certain Apocryphal Books which the Manicheans made use of,
Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 22. c. 79.
wherein were related several Actions of S. Thomas, of which he has produced
some Examples. But not to be tedious, I shall pass by many other Gospels that
have been published under the Names of the Apostles; the Titles of them may be
seen in the Catalogne of Pope Gelasius, who has ranked them in the number of
Apocryphal Books.

Although the Church does acknowledge as Canonical only two Epistles of S. Peter,
that are also but short; yet (if we believe the ancient Heretics) he has
composed several other Works that are mentioned by S. Jerome, viz. certain
Acts, a Gospel, an Apocalypse, and two other Books, Vnus Actorum ejus
inscribitur; alius, Evangelit; tertius, Praedicationis; quartus, Apocalypseos;
quintus, Judicii. Hieron. de Scriptor. Eccl. in Petr.
one of which was entitled, The Preaching of Peter, and the other, The
Judgment. Eusebius who has also taken notice of these Books attributed to S.
Peter, adds, that they were generally rejected by all the Catholics, (...).
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib 3. c. 3.
because it did not appear that any Ecclesiastical Writer had ever subscribed
to their Authority: which is not true; for he avouches himself in another
place, that Clement of Alexandria has cited the Apocalypse of S. Peter: the
same Clement has also cited the Book that bears the Title of (...), The
Preaching of Peter; he has also produced some Fragments of these two Works;
which Origin has likewise done after him. It is probable, that Eusebius only
intended to say, that no Ecclesiastical Author had quoted these Books as Divine
and Canonical. After the same manner may be explained another Passage of his
History, where after he had rejected as Apocryphal, the Gospels that had been
published by the Heretics, under the Names of Peter, Thomas, Matthias and some
other Apostles, he adds, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 25.
that no Ecclesiastical Writer since the Apostles to his time had made mention
of these Gospels.

Serapion Bishop of Antioch has written a Letter on purpose against the Gospel
that bears the name of Peter, Seraph. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 12.
on occasion of certain Christians of Rhossus in Cilicia, who having read this
Gospel, were fallen into the Error. He says in this Letter, that he embraced
as well as they the Writings of S. Peter and the other Apostles, as the Word of
Jesus Christ; but that he rejected this false Gospel that had been forged under
the Name of S. Peter, and was not grounded on any Tradition. The Heretics that
were called Docites made use thereof; and Serapion himself before he had
examined it, had permitted those of Rhossus to read it; but afterward having
found some Passages therein contrary to the Orthodox Faith, he absolutely
forbad them the reading it. Sozomen affirms (...). Sozom. Hist. Eccles. lib. 7.
cap. 19.
that the Apocalypse attributed to S. Peter was read even in his time every
year on Good Friday in some Churches of Palestine, although this Piece had been
exploded by all Antiquity.

The ancient Ecclesiastical. Authors do moreover make mention of certain Acts
attributed to S. Paul, which Eusebius has rejected as Apocryphal. (...).
Eusebius. lib. 3. Hist. Eccles. cap. 3.
We receive not (says this Historian) among the Books that are not suspected,
that which is called the Acts of Paul; and he speaks of these Acts in another
place (...). Eusebius. ib. c. 24.
as a false and supposititious Writing. Many other Books have been compiled
under the Name of this Apostle, and among others an Apocalypse or Revelation,
which Pope Gelasius has inserted in the List of Apocryphal Pieces: Gelasius
decr. 1. part. did. 15. c. 3.
Revelatio quae appellatur Pauli Apostoli apocrypha. Sozomen has observed,
(...). Sozom. Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. c. 19.
that in his time the greatest part of the Monks very much esteemed this
Apocalypse, tho it had no testimony of Antiquity. To gain more authority to it,
they feigned that it had been found at Tarsus in Cilicia, buried under ground
in S. Paul's House. The Cainites who acknowledged Cain for their Father, from
whom they took their Name, had forged another Work, under the Title of (...),
Epiph. Haer. 38. n. 2.
that contains the History of that which happened to S. Paul when he ascended
into Heaven, where he learned things which he was not permitted to reveal. The
Gnostics adopted this Book for their use. I shall not insist on some Epistles
that have been also published under the Name of S. Paul, because I shall have
occasion to speak of them in another place.

Besides all these Acts counterfeited under the Names of the Apostles, of which
scarce any thing is left but the Titles, we have others more entire that have
been Printed, but they are so full of Fables and absurd Tales, that we cannot
read them without being at the same time convinced of their falsity. Is there
any thing for example, more ridiculous than the Gospel attributed to Nicodemus?
There is nothing also that comes nearer to Fable, than the little Book
entitled Protevangelium Jacobi, The first Gospel of James, wherein it is
treated among other things concerning the Birth and Infancy of the blessed
Virgin Mary. William Postel who first brought this false Gospel from the
Levant, would persuade all the World to believe, that it was read publicly in
the Eastern Churches, and that they did not there doubt of the Author thereof.
He translated it out of Greek into Latin, and having sent his Translation to
Oporinus, a Printer at Basil, Bibliander caused it to be Printed with this
specious Title, Protevangelion, sive de Natalibus Jesu Christi and ipsius
matris Virginis Mariae Sermo Historicus D. Jacobi Minoris consobrini and
fratris Domini Jesu, Protev. Jac. edit. Basil. in 3. ann. 1552.
Apostoli primarii, and Episcopi Christianorum primi Hierosolymis. He added
also some Notes thereto after his way with a Discourse, wherein he avoucheth
after Postel, that this History of the Birth of Jesus Christ, and of the
Virgin, passes for an authentic Book in the Oriental Churches: Biblian. in
Epist. nunenp.
Authenticus habetur in Orientalibus Ecclesias. The Greek of this little Work
has also been printed afterward at Basil with the Latin Version in a
Collection of several Pieces, entitled, Monumenta Orthodoxa. The Title that
answers to that of the Latin Translation is thus expressed; An. 1569.
(...).

If the Commentary on the six days of the Creation, that Leo Allatius has
published under the Name of Eustathius Bishop of Antioch who lived at the
beginning of the fourth Century, did certainly belong to that Bishop, the
Protevangelium would be of sufficient Antiquity: there is found in this Book a
considerable fragment of it, that is delivered in such manner, that the most
fabulous part thereof is omitted. The Expression that Eustathius uses in
citing it, makes it appear that he did not believe it to be of St. James, under
whose name they had published it, but of another James: for observe how he
speaks, (...). Eustath. Comm. in Hex.
It is convenient here to peruse the History that one James relates of the
Virgin Mary. However it be, we find in the ancient Ecclesiastical Authors a
part of the things that are contained in this little History, and that
apparently come from the Gnostics, who had written many Fables relating to the
Birth of Jesus Christ, and the Virgin.

I admire that the Protestants who have caused this Protevangelium of James to
be printed, have thought it worthy to be published with some other pieces of
the like nature under the Title of Orthodoxogr. edit. Basil. Lat. ann. 1555.
and ibid. Lat. and Gr. an. 1569. Biblian. ibid.
Orthodoxographa. Bibliander seriously divulgeth the Impostures of William
Postel, who had averred, that this Protevangelium was the beginning of the
Gospel of S. Mark, and even the foundation of Evangelical History: this he
repeats also in a little Discourse wherein he gives his Judgment of this Book.
Ipse Postellus (says he) aestimat [Protevangelium] ut gemmam inter Libros
Theologicos, and Basim atque fundamentum totius Historiae Evangelicae, and
caput Evangelii secundum Marcum. Biblian. in censu. and judic. Protevan.
In a word, he forgets nothing that might set a value on this wicked Piece,
which he thinks to be recommendable, because it has not been reckoned in the
number of the Apocryphal Books with the Gospels of Nicodemus, Thomas, and many
others that are recited at large in the Catalogue of Pope Gelasius. But this
proves only that the Protevangelium had not been as yet published in that time,
or that not being translated into Latin, this Pope had took no cognizance
thereof. Indeed he has placed among the Apocryphal Works, a Book that treated
on the same Subject, as may be judged by the Title; Liber de Nativitate
Salvatoris (says Gelasius) and de Sancta Maria, Gelas. apud Great. decr. 1.
part. did. 15. c. 3.
and de obstetrice Salvatoris, apocryphus. It were to be wished, that Father
Jerome Xavier, a Missionary Jesuit, had not inserted so many very improbable
things taken out of this sort of Books in his History of Jesus Christ written
in the Persian Tongue.

It would be to no purpose for me to enlarge any farther on the false Acts that
have been published under the names of the Apostles; it is enough to observe in
general, that they have been for the most part invented by Heretics that have
been willing to support their Novelties, by attributing them to some Disciples
of Jesus Christ. Hegisippus, who lived immediately after the Disciples of the
Apostles, speaking of Apocryphal Books, testifies (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccles.
lib. 4. cap. 22.
that a part of these Books have been composed by the Heretics of his time:
therefore when the Primitive Fathers designed to judge whether a Book were
Canonical or not, they have examined its Doctrine, to see if it were
conformable to that which was taught in the Catholic Church: they have
moreover consulted the ancient Ecclesiastical Authors who have lived since the
Apostles to their times, that they might by this means know the Tradition.
Serapion applied these two Rules to the Gospel that passed under the name of S.
Peter, which was read by those of the Church of Rhossus, thinking that it did
certainly belong to him whose name it bore. (...) Serap. apud Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 12.
We have found (says this holy Bishop) in this Gospel, Serap. apud Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. c. 12.
many things that agree with the true Religion of Jesus Christ; but there are
also some things that are far from it. He judges in the same place, that the
Act that had been produced to him was false, because it was not grounded on
Tradition.

Not but that the Fathers have sometimes made use of Apocryphal Books, and have
quoted even false Gospels; as for example, the Gospel that is called (...),
according to the Egyptians, is not to be allowed as authentic for this very
reason, that it is thought to be most ancient, and that mention is made thereof
in Clement of Alexandria: it ought not to be rejected neither, under this
pretense alone, that the Gnostics and Sabellians have maintained their Errors
by this Book. The Primitive Fathers, who have written against the Pagans and
Jews, do sometimes follow in their Disputes, and even in their other Works, the
method of Rhetoricians, who often employ Reasons purely probable, and doubtful
Acts, after which we must not always regulate our selves. This is to be seen
principally in the Works of Clement of Alexandria and Origin. Clement has on
this account related some Words of Jesus Christ, (...). Clem. Alex. lib. 3.
Strom.
that are not to be found in the four Evangelists authorized by the Tradition
of the Church; and he says that they are in the Gospel of the Egyptians. He
only quotes them after the Heretic Cassian, Clem. Al. l. 2. Strom.
and in arguing with the Followers of Basilides, he refers to certain Writings
attributed to St. Barnabas. On the other side, the Heretics making Profession
of Christianity as well as the Orthodox, have not always recourse to apocryphal
and supposititious Pieces to defend their Innovations. Therefore to judge
rightly of an Act, whether it be valuable or not, in point of Religion, and
whether it carries with it a Divine Authority, it is absolutely necessary to
apply to it the two Rules that have been above mentioned. S. Augustin's Advice
is, when any such Difficulties arise, Tenebit hunc modum in Scripturis
Canonicis, ut eas quae ab omnibus accipiuntur Ecclesiis Catholicis, praeponat
eis quas quaedam non accipiunt. In eis vero quae non accipiuntur ab omnibus,
praeponat eas quas plures gravioresque accipiunt, eis quas pauciores minorisque
autoritatis Ecclesiae tenent. Aug. lib. 2. de Doctr. Christ. cap. 8.
to have regard to the plurality of Churches, and to prefer those that are in a
greater number and of more eminent note, before the others that are in a lesser
number and less considerable.

There is another sort of Acts attributed to the Apostles or their Disciples,
that have been rejected as Apocryphal in process of time, though in the
beginning they did really belong to those to whom they were ascribed, or at
least to their Disciples who had published them under the name of their
Masters. But these Acts having been interpolated and mangled by the Heretics,
or else by others, we have been obliged not to allow them any longer as
authentic. St. Epiphanius seems to have put in this rank the Book called
(...), the Constitution of the Apostles, which he often quotes, as if it were
indeed theirs. He draws from thence Proofs to confirm the judgment of the
Church, when he examines the opinion of the Audians concerning the Passover,
who produced one of these Constitutions, attributing it to the Apostles. This
Father being very far from condemning, or even doubting of it, received it with
them as Apostolical, reproving them only for taking it in a wrong sense. And
whereas these Constitutions were from that time suspected by some, he adds that
they ought not to be rejected for this, because they contained the whole
Ecclesiastical Discipline; which makes me judge that he had another Copy
different from that which we read at present. He appeared to be so well
persuaded that these Constitutions were made by the Apostles, (...). Epiph.
Haer. 80. n. 7.
that he calls them the Word of God. Nevertheless, it is more probable that the
Apostles, who had received Orders from Jesus Christ to preach his Gospel, and
not to compose Books, are not the Authors of these Constitutions that bear
their Name. But as S. Mark calls his Gospel the Gospel of Jesus Christ, so in
like manner Apostolical Men, who succeeded the Apostles, have collected their
Doctrine and Constitutions, and published them under the Name of the Apostles.
It is in this sense that the Apostles Creed is so called, being that ancient
Confession of Faith that all the Churches undoubtedly received from the
Apostles, though they had not committed it to Writing.

CHAP. IV. The ancient Fathers have not produced the Originals of the New
Testament in their Disputes against the Heretics. An Examination of Proofs
that are brought to show that these Originals have been kept in some Churches.
WE may conclude from all that has been above related, that the most ancient
Fathers of the Church, when they designed to establish the truth of the Books
of the New Testament, have not had recourse to any Originals that had been kept
in the Apostolical Churches, but only to true and exact Copies of them, which
being found the same in all these Churches, were in the place of the Originals
themselves. On this depends all the Dispute of Tertullian against Marcion, and
that of S. Augustine against Faustus a Manichean Sectary. These two Heretics
refused to acknowledge the Copies that were approved in the Catholic Church.
Tertullian and S. Augustine did not oppose to them the Authority of any Original
Pieces, but only the constant Tradition of the Churches. Vides (says S.
Augustine speaking to Faustus) in hac re quid Ecclesiae Catholicae valeat
auctoritas? Aug. lib. 11. cont. Faust. c. 2.
Is it possible (may some say) that God has given to his Church, Books to
serve her for a Rule, and that he has at the same time permitted that the
first Originals of these Books should be lost ever since the beginning of the
Christian Religion? There have been from the very first planting of the Church,
Heretics who have disputed against the Writings of the Apostles, and therefore
it seems to behove the Divine Providence to preserve these Originals at least
for some time, from whence these Heretics might be solidly confuted.

But it has been already made appear elsewhere, Rep. a la Defense des Sent. de
quelq. Theol. de Holl. chapter 6. page 179.
that it is no wonder that the Primitive Christians, who had not a regular Body
of a State in which they lived, and whose Assemblies were on the contrary
furiously disturbed by the Jews and Pagans, had lost the Originals of their
Books. Besides, the Apostles had no order from Jesus Christ to write their
Books, as has been above observed: and although they should not have been
written, Religion would be equally preserved by the means of Tradition, after
the same manner as it had been established before the Apostles had committed
any thing to Writing. Iren. l. 3. adv. Haer. c. 4.
Quid si (says St. Irenaeus) neque Apostoli quidem Scripturas reliquissent
nobis, nonne oportebat ordinem sequi traditionis quam tradiderunt iis quibus
committebant Ecclesias? Upon the whole matter, Jesus Christ had sent his
Apostles to all the Nations of the Earth, only to preach his Doctrine to them.
That which the ancient Christians have called Gospel, is only a Collection of
the Preachings of these same Apostles, or of their Disciples.

As for what relates to the Primitive Heretics, they would not have been more
solidly confuted by opposing to them the Originals of the Writings of the
Apostles, since they took the liberty to reform their Doctrine, and to set up
in opposition to their Books I know not what Traditions, of which they
themselves were the Authors; as may be seen more at large in the Books of S.
Irenaeus, who understood perfectly well the Opinions of these ancient
Sectaries, of which he has left us some Records. He declares, for example, in
speaking of the Gnostics, Iren. adv. Haer. lib. 3. cap. 2.
that he had to do with Persons that did not acknowledge the Scriptures, nor
the Tradition of the Church, but that squared both the one and the other
according to the measure of their own Prejudices; therefore he forgets nothing
that may serve to establish the true Traditions by which Religion ought to be
regulated.

Although the Scriptures are a sure Rule on which our Faith is founded, yet
this Rule is not altogether sufficient of it self; it is necessary to know,
besides this, what are the Apostolical Traditions; and we cannot learn them but
from the Apostolical Churches, who have preserved the true Sense of Scriptures.
S. Irenaeus advises, Omnis sermo ei constabit, si and Scripturam diligenter
legerit apud eos qui in Ecclesia sunt Presbyteri, apud quos est Apostolica
doctrina. Iren. lib. 4. adv. Haer. cap. 51.
that the sacred Books should be read, to be informed from thence of Religion:
but at the same time he advises, that they should be read which those who being
the Successors of the Apostles, have been as it were the Depositaries or
Stewards of their Doctrine. There was no talk in those days of reading the Holy
Scriptures in the Originals; any Copy whatsoever, provided it were used in the
Orthodox Churches, might be relied on, as if it had been the first Original
written with the hand of the Apostles. We ought to give the same credit to
Copies that have been made of the Apostolical Writings, as to the very
Originals, because these Copies have been taken from thence even from the times
of the Apostles, and have been afterward dispersed almost throughout the whole
Earth: they have been preserved in all the Churches of the World, having been
translated into diverse Languages; insomuch, that there is no Book the Copies
whereof are more authentic than those of the New Testament: and in this we
ought chiefly to acknowledge the peculiar Providence of God in the preservation
of these Books that he has given to his Church by the Ministry of the
Apostles, or of their Disciples.

Some pretend nevertheless to make it appear by actual Proofs taken out of the
ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, that the original Writings of the Apostles have
been preserved in the Church during several Ages: and this must be examined in
particular, though I have already discoursed thereof elsewhere. In the first
place they produce a Passage of Tertullian in his Book of Prescription against
Heresies, where he says, in speaking of the Churches that had been founded by
the Apostles, Apud quos ipsae Authenticae Literae eorum recitantur. Tertull. de
Praescr. cap. 36.
that they yet kept in his time their Authentic Writings. Pamel. Annot. in
lib. Tertul. de Praescr. c. 36.
Pamelius, in his Notes on this Passage, affirms after another Author, that the
Word Authentic cannot be taken but for the Originals that had been written
with the very hand of the Apostles themselves; after the same manner as Lawyers
call a Testament Authentic that has been written with the hand of the
Testator, to distinguish it from a Copy. This is also the Sense that Grotius,
Grot. de Verit. Relig. Christ. lib. 3.
Walton, Huetius, and many others, have given of these Words of Tertullian.
Tertullianus (says Grotius) aliquot librorum ipsa Archetypa suo adhuc tempore
ait extitisse. He avoucheth, from this place of Tertullian, Archetypa nonnulla
ad annum usque ducentesimum servata sunt. Grot. de Verit. Relig. Christ. lib. 3.
that some Originals of the New Testament have been preserved till the
beginning of the third Century.

But if we carefully examine the different Passages wherein Tertullian makes
use of the Word Authentic in his Works, we shall find that he has meant
nothing else by this Expression than Books written in their Original Languages.
This is what Rigaltius has very well observed on this Sentence of Tertullian,
where explaining the Word Authenticae, he says, Rigalt. Annot. in lib. Tertul.
de Praescr. c. 36.
Lingua scilicet eadem qua fuerant ab Apostolis conscriptae sonantes vocem
uniuscujusque. Sic ipse lib. de Monogamia, ad Graecum authenticum Pauli
provocat. Whereas the Latin Version of the New Testament was only read in the
Churches of Africa, he gives the Name of Authentic to the Greek Text: and in
this Sense it is that quoting this Text in his Book of Monogamy, he says,
Sciamus plane non esse sic in Graeco authentico. St. Jerome also uses the like
Expression with respect to the Old Testament, when he opposes the Hebrew Text
to the Greek and Latin Versions; for he calls the former Veritatem Hebraicam,
the Hebrew Verity; designing thereby to denote the Originals of the Scriptures
which he likewise denominates as Tertullian does, Authenticos libros, Tertul.
lib. de Monog. c. 11.
in his Commentary on chap. 64. of the Prophet Isaiah: nevertheless he did not
believe that these were the first Originals written with the hand of the
Prophets. We express our selves also at this day after the same manner, when we
say that a Version of the Scriptures is not conformable to the Original.
Tertullian therefore does not speak of any other Originals in his Book of
Prescription, than those that we have just now remarked. As to the Authority of
Lawyers that Pamelius opposes, it is easy to remonstrate by the Testimony
even of the most learned Lawyers, that the Word Authentic is often taken in a
less strict sense. Every Act that proves and procures credit of it self,
whether it be an Original or not, is accounted Authentic. An Author that
publishes some Manuscript Piece, assures us that it is taken ex codice
authentico, from an authentic Copy; Does he mean by this that he has the
Original of the Book that he sets forth, in his own hands?

In the second place they offer an actual Proof taken from Eusebius. Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 10.
This Historian speaking of the Zeal and of the Charity of the ancient
Christians, who went to preach the Gospel to the most remote Nations, after the
Example of the Apostles, says that Pantenus quitted the City of Alexandria,
where he was the Principal of a School or College of Christians, to promulge
the Religion of Jesus Christ to the Indians. This faithful Evangelist being
among the Indians or Ethiopians, found there a Copy of S. Matthew's Gospel,
written in Hebrew, that S. Bartholomew, the Apostle of these People, had left,
and was believed to be preserved there to that time.

But besides that, Eusebius does not confirm this History by any Ecclesiastical
Writer, being content only to say that it was a common Report, (...). I do not
see that it can be unquestionably proved from these Words, that the Hebrew Copy
that Pantenus found at his Arrival in that Country, was the Original that St.
Bartholomew had left there. He only intended to say, That the Ethiopians, who
had been converted to the Faith of Jesus Christ by this Apostle, did not make
use of the Greek Gospel of S. Matthew, but of the Hebrew or Chaldaick that had
been written for the first Christians of Jerusalem. If this History were true,
the Primitive Christians of Ethiopia were descended from the Jews, and spoke
the same Language as those that inhabited Judea. This is all that can be
concluded from the Discourse of Eusebius, which has been amplified in process
of time. St. Hierom does not seem to have understood the sense of this
Historian, when he says in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers, that
Pantenus Quod Hebraicis literis scriptum revertens Alexandriam secum detulit.
Hier. de Scriptor. Eccles. in Panteno.
returning to Alexandria, carried back with him the Gospel of St. Matthew
written in Hebrew Characters. Eusebius says only, that the Christians of
Ethiopia had preserved this Hebrew Gospel until the Arrival of Pantenus.

The third material proof that is brought is taken from the Chronicle of
Alexandria, wherein it is observed, that a correct Book of the Gospel of St.
John, that had been written with that Evangelist's own hand, was preserved in
the Church of Ephesus. Peter Bishop of Alexandria maintained that it ought to
be read in the xix Chap. of S. John, ver. 4. (...), it was about the third
hour, (...). Chron. Alex. edit. Monachii, p. 521.
because (says he) this reading is found in the correct Copies, and in that
which had been written with St. John the Evangelist's own hand; which Copy is
kept at present, by the Grace of God, in the most holy Church of Ephesus, and
is there adored by the Faithful.

It is no difficult matter to judge that all that was said in that time at
Ephesus concerning the Original Writing of St. John, who had been Bishop of
that City, was only grounded on a popular Error; several like instances whereof
it were easy to produce. Can we see any thing more ridiculous than the
Tradition of the Venetians with respect to the Gospel of St. Mark, the Original
of which, written with his own hand, they pretend yet to keep even to this very
day? Baronius could not forbear rejecting this Tradition, as having no
foundation in Antiquity. Fertur traditione magis (says this learned Annalist)
quam antiquorum certo testimonio, ipsum Marcum, Evangelium suum quod Romae
Latin scripserat, cum Aqualejae moraretur, missus illuc a Petro ad eam
erigendam Ecclesiam, in Graecum transtulisse, ipsumque Originale diutius
asservatum Venetias demum esse translatum. Fabiano Justiniani, a Priest of the
Oratory of Rome, who has believed with Lucas Brugensis, that the Latin Gospel
of St. Mark which we have, has been translated from the Greek, does not stick
to declare Marcus cum in Aquilejam Venetae Provinciae civitatem a Sancto Petro
missus venisset, ibi idem Evangelium iterum Graeco eloquio exaravit, quod usque
hodie in Aquilejensi Ecclesia cum eburnea sede, in qua illud scripserat,
ostenditur, and congrua devotione reservari dicitur. Fabian. Justin. Comm. de
Sacr. Script. lib. 1. part. 2. c. 48. edit. Romae, ann. 1614.
to us the common belief of the People of the State of Venice, who show the
very Original of St. Mark written in Greek, and even the Ivory Chair wherein he
had written it. It is not necessary to confute this sort of vulgar Traditions,
that are grounded on no Acts, as Baronius himself has acknowledged.

The same thing may be said concerning the Tradition of those of Ephesus
related by Peter Bishop of Alexandria: we might demand of him who are the
ancient Ecclesiastical Writers that have made mention before him, of this
Gospel written with St. John's hand? It is requisite that they should explain
to us after what manner, and through what Channel this original Piece is
conveyed down to this time without having any knowledge thereof in the
preceding Ages. If St. Epiphanius had heard any News of this Original, he would
not have failed to refer the Alogians to it, who generally rejected all the
Books of St. John, which they ascribed to the Heretic Cerinthus: on the
contrary, he only opposes to them good Reasons; and being very far from
disputing with them on a vain Tradition that had no grounds but the simplicity
of the People, (...). Epiph. Haer. 51. n. 3.
he says, if they had only disallowed the Apocalypse, it might be thought that
a certain too curious criticizing Humor had obliged them to embrace this
Opinion, not to receive an Apocryphal Book, because there are some things in
this Book profound and obscure.

Lastly, they oppose that which happened under the Emperor Zeno in the Isle of
Cyprus, where Anthimius Bishop and Metropolitan of this Island, was advertised
in a dream of the ground-plot where the Body of St. Barnabas had been enterred,
which was found accordingly in the place that had been revealed to him, having
on his Breast the Gospel of St. Matthew written with his own hand. This Copy
was immediately sent to the Emperor, who received it with a profound respect,
and kept it as a precious Relick in a Church that was in his Palace. The Church
of Constantinople read the Gospel once every Year in this venerable and august
Copy of St. Barnabas. To render this Story more probable, they add the
Testimony of Cardinal Baronius, who averreth that we cannot doubt thereof, it
being generally received of all the World; besides that it has been written by
an Orthodox Monk named Alexander, who lived in that time.

It cannot be denied indeed, but that a great number of Greek Historians, one
after another, have related the matter of fact, as is above said. Theodorus
Lector (...). Theodor. Lect. Collect. lib. 2.
does even specify the name of the Tree under which the Body of St. Barnabas
was found who had on his Breast the Gospel of St. Matthew: Nicephorus,
Cedrenus, Joel, Nilus Doxapatrius, and some other Greek Writers, have also made
mention of this Gospel of St. Matthew written with the hand of St. Barnabas;
but they do not tell us whether it were Hebrew or Greek; which is the thing
that deserves to be most enquired into in all this Affair, and whereon entirely
depends the Discovery of the Vision of Anthimius to whom St. Barnabas appeared:
this is observed by all the Greek Historians, with the Monk Alexander, that
they of the Isle of Cyprus took occasion from thence to shake off the Yoke of
the Patriarch of Antioch, who pretended that they were of his dependence. This
was an old Quarrel between this Patriarch and the Bishops of this Island, who
refused to take Ordination of him, because their Church having been founded by
the Apostle St. Barnabas, ought to be (as they thought) independent. This
Affair had been decided in the Council of Ephesus in favor of the Bishops of
this Isle, who had represented that they had enjoyed this Privilege time out of
mind. Notwithstanding, the Patriarchs of Antioch continued to molest the
Bishops of Cyprus, and justified their Proceedings with the Canon of the
Council of Nice, that was favorable to them. It is also very probable, that
they of Cyprus did not withdraw themselves from the Jurisdiction of Antioch
till this Patriarchal Church fell into Schism. Anthimius, Metropolitan of
Constance, took an occasion at that time, in regard that Petrus Fullo who was
then Patriarch of Antioch, had declared himself Protector of the Eutychians.
But since the whole matter was of necessity to be referred to the Emperor, the
Metropolitan of Constance, who was not in his favor, thought fit to feign the
Vision above mentioned. Which being come to the knowledge of Zeno, he forthwith
forbad the Patriarch of Antioch for the future to disturb the Bishops of
Cyprus. Anthimio Constantiensi Episcopo, (says Father Morin, who epitomized
the History of Monk Alexander) eo quod apud Imperatorem minime gratiosus esset
fluctuanti; (...) dormitanti apparet S. Barnabas, qui corporis sui reliquias,
and S. Matthaei Evangelium, quod ipse descripserat, ei indigitat, atque
Apostolum fidei auctorem se in patria habere ut adversariis repenat, praecipit.

This is in a few words the discovery of this Vision of Bishop Anthimius, who
very opportunely caused St. Barnabas to appear tanquam Deum e Machina to oppose
Petrus Fullo Patriarch of Antioch: and that there might not remain any doubt of
his Revelation, he put into the hands of St. Barnabas the Gospel of St.
Matthew. Mr. le Mome, a learned Protestant, Mr. le Moine Prol. in var. opusc.
Gr.
and well versed in the Oriental Languages, assures us that it was written in
Hebrew, because St. Barnabas who had transcribed it for his own use, was born a
Jew, and preached to those of his Nation. But it is more likely that Anthimius,
who was not a Jew, should forge a Greek one; neither is it credible that it
should have been publicly read in the Church of Constantinople, if it had been
written in Hebrew. As for the deference that Baronius gives to the Testimony of
the Monk Alexander, Author of the Life of St. Barnabas, this Cardinal is not
very favorable to the said Monk in another part of his Annals, where Alexander
Graecus auctor, qui res Barnabae prosecutus est encomiastice, potius quam
historice, etc. Baron. ann. chapter 51. n. 53.
he speaks of him as an Inventor of Tales, that has not written the Life of
this Holy Apostle as an Historian.

I could bring other Examples of the like Revelations, that have as many
Circumstances as that of Bishop Anthimius, and yet for all this are never the
more true. Under the Reign of the Emperor Theodosius a Revelation was feigned
to authorize the false Apocalypse that was attributed to S. Paul. It was also
found under ground at Tarsus in Cicilia, in the House of this Holy Apostle.
There were also a great number of Alexanders or Monks in Palestine that every
where extolled this false Piece, as if it had truly belonged to him whose Title
it bore. Soz. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 19.
But Sozomon, who relates this History, informs us at the same time, that a
Priest of the City of Tarsus, who was a very old man, had assured him that this
was false.

Furthermore, we do not find that the two greatest men of the Church, I mean
Origin and St. Hierom, who have searched the ancient Copies of the Scriptures
with so much care and diligence, and have visited so many Churches in the East,
have ever spoken of Originals of the New Testament written with the hand of the
Apostles; which they would not have failed to do if there had been any in their
times; especially St. Hierom, who consulted a very great number of Greek and
Latin Copies, when by order of Pope Damasus, he revised the ancient Latin
Version of the Gospels. Where were then these pretended Originals? It is true
there was no talk as yet of the Revelation of Anthimius, nor of the History of
Monk Alexander. This Father has said well, that the Latin Copies were all
different one from another: Tot enim sunt exemplaria pene, quot codices.
Therefore Hoc certe cum in nostro sermon discordat, and in diversos rivulorum
tramites uno de font quaerendum est. Hieron. Praef. in Evang. ad Damas.
he judges it necessary in this great diversity of Copies, to have recourse to
the Original Greek from whence the Latin has been taken: but he makes no
mention of these first Originals, that Mr. Huet supposes Ex fide primigeniorum
illorum exemplarium quae servabantur in Ecclesiarum tabulariis, dirimebantur
controversiae, and haesitantium dubitatio tollebatur. D. Huet. in Demonst.
Evang. page 642. primae edit.
to have been kept in the Archives of the Churches since the time of St.
Ignatius, by which (says this learned man) they were regulated in their
Controversies and Disputes. The Jesuit Maldonat, on the contrary, proves by the
same Passage of St. Ignatius, Illis primis temporibus, ut ait Ignatius,
nonnulli erant qui adeo suspecta haberent omnia, ut negarent se Evangelio, nisi
in Ecclesiae archivis invenirent, credituros. Maldon. Praef. in Evang. cap. 2.
that in these Primitive Apostolical times there were People who doubted of the
truth of the Gospels, at least if they could not find them in the Archives of
the Church. To conclude, Tertullian and St. Augustine, who have so vigorously
disputed with the ancient Heretics that destroyed the Verity of the Writings
of the Apostles, have never objected these Originals to them: so that this is
by no means necessary for the establishing of the Christian Religion, as has
been above showed.

CHAP. V. Of the Books of the New Testament in particular, and first of the
Gospel of S. Matthew. The Original of this Gospel has been written in the
Hebrew Tongue which the Jews of Jerusalem spoke at that time. An Answer to the
Reasons that are contrary to this Opinion.
IT is a constant Tradition founded on the general consent of all the Churches
in the World, that there are but four Gospels, the first of which is that of S.
Matthew: Iren. l. 3. adv. Haer. l. 11.
Neque autem plura numero quam haec sunt (says S. Irenaeus) neque rursus
pauciora capit esse. Nevertheless there are found in these later times some
Authors who have believed that S. Matthew is not the first that has committed
the Gospel of Jesus Christ to Writing. They ground their Opinion on this, Luc.
i. 1.
that S. Luke seems to accuse those of little care and exactness that had
published Gospels before him: and since this Accusation cannot fall on any of
the three other Evangelists, they conclude from thence that none of them had
written before. But we ought not to oppose an Inference that at most carries
with it but a probability, to the Testimony of all Antiquity. Therefore Grotius
Refragatur vetustissimus librorum ordo apud omnes nationes, refragatur traditio
vetus Irenaeo Tertulliano testibus suffulta. Grot. Annot. in c. 1. Luc. v. 1.
rejects this Opinion as being contrary to the order of the four Gospels
established at all times among all Nations, and authorized by the most ancient
Fathers. Maldonat who attributes this Argument to Beza, refutes it also with no
other Reasons than that of Tradition; and adds at the same time that Si
haereticis crederemus, nihil in ipsa etiam Religione certum stabileque
haberemus. Maldon. Praef. in Evang. c. 4.
if we should refer our selves herein to Heretics, we should have no certainty
in point of Religion.

It cannot be denied also, at least without contradicting all Antiquity, but
that S. Matthew has written his Gospel in Hebrew, that is to say, in the
Language that the Jews of Jerusalem then spoke, that was called Hebrew, and was
either Chaldaick or Syriack. (...). Pap. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap.
39.
Papias, who lived with the Disciples of the Apostles, avoucheth this in
express terms; and S. Irenaeus, Origin and many other Fathers have afterward
confirmed it. S. Irenaeus says (...). Irea apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 5.
cap. 8.
that S. Matthew being among the Hebrews, composed his Gospel in their proper
Dialect. Origin in the Canon that he has given us of the Sacred Books, names
S. Matthew the first of the Evangelists (...). Orig. apud Eusebius. lib. 6. Hist.
Eccl. cap. 25.
who published it in Hebrew for the use of the Jews that had embraced the
Christian Religion. These primitive Christians were called Nazarenes by the
Jews, as appears from the Acts of the Apostles, where they accuse S. Paul of
being the Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarenes, Act. xxiv. 5.
(...). Ever since that time they have always given to the Christians the name
of Nazarenes, which is found in their Talmud, and in their other Books. There
were afterward certain Sectaries under this same name, who adopted this Hebrew
Gospel of S. Matthew, some Fragments of which are yet extant to this day,
whereof we shall discourse hereafter. It is expedient before we proceed any
further, to examine the Reasons of those that affirm that S. Matthew has not
composed his Gospel in Hebrew.

Erasmus, who had no knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue, has been one of the first
that has thereupon opposed the common sentiments of all Antiquity: but the
Reasons tha the produces are so weak, that he sometimes makes himself even
ridiculous, when he would talk like a Critic concerning a matter of which he
was altogether ignorant. He would refer in every thing that relates to the
Hebrew Tongue, to Oecolampadius who understood it no more than himself, which
caused him to fall into gross Errors, and gave occasion to his Adversaries,
especially Stunica a Learned Spaniard to reprehend his Ignorance. Jacob. Lop.
Stun. Annot. in Erasm.
Cardinal Cajetan who was skilled neither in Hebrew nor Greek, has blindly
followed the mistakes of Erasmus in this point, as not being capable of
correcting them. But the greatest part of the Catholics have herein abandoned
Cajetan, that they might not without reason and judgment withstand a Tradition
established on good Acts. Some Protestants on the contrary, who feared lest
they should not have the true Gospel of S. Matthew, if it were evident that it
had been written in Hebrew or Chaldaick, and lest the Greek that remains to us
should be only a Translation, have readily embraced the Opinion of Erasmus and
Cajetan. Flacius Illyricus has diligently enough collected the Reasons that
may be alleged in desence thereof, and has put them at the Head of his
Edition of the New Testament, which he has caused to be Printed in Greek and
Latin. This we must now take into examination.

This famous Protestant objects in the first place, with Cajetan, Matthias
Flac. Illyr, Praef. in Evang. Matthew.
several Hebrew Words that are explained in another Language in the Gospel of
S. Matthew; as for example, Eli, Eli, and lama sabactani. If S. Matthew (says
this Cardinal) had written his Gospel in Hebrew, it would not have been
necessary for him to expound these Words in a different Idiom. But these
Interpretations ought rather to be ascribed to the Translator than to the
Author. To which he replys, that if this came from the Interpreter, he ought to
have translated all the Hebrew of this Gospel, and not to have selected only
some Words as he has done. To which it may be answered, that it is the custom
of the Interpreters of the Sacred Books, to let certain Hebrew Words remain in
their Versions, which they think to have more energy or emphasie in them, and
that cannot be always exactly translated. This is easy to be proved from the
Septuagint, and other ancient Greek Interpreters of the Bible. Grotius, who
has also made this Objection in his Notes on S. Matthew, answers Solenne est
omnibus scriptoribus, etiam interpretibus, vocabula peregrina notabiliora
servare integra, sed addito interpretamento. Quod aliquoties etiam factum
videmus a Senibus Septuaginta. Grot. Annot. in tit. Matthew.
that it is an ordinary thing for Writers, and also Interpreters to retain
foreign Wards that are remarkable, adding the Interpretation to them, and that
this has been sometimes practiced by the Septuagint.

Illyrious opposes in the second place two Reasons of Erasmus; the first is,
that none have avouched that they have seen this Hebrew Gospel, because that of
which S. Jerome speaks, was the Gospel of the Nazarenes, which was written in
Syriack or Chaldaick. The second consists in this, that the style of the Gospel
of S. Matthew is like to that of S. Mark. From whence he concludes, that S.
Matthew has written in Greek as well as S. Mark.

S. Jerome himself answers to the first Reason, when he says Vocatur a
plerisque Matthaei authenticum. Hieron. Comm. in Cap. 12. Matthew.
that the most part of the ancient Doctors of the Church have believed that
this Hebrew Gospel was the Original of S. Matthew's. Certainly it is the very
same that this Apostle wrote for the primitive Christians of Judaea, who then
spoke the Chaldaick Language.

Erasmus tells us, that he never heard of this matter, when he objects that the
Gospel of the Nazarenes was not in Hebrew, but in Chaldaick or Syriack, not
knowing that this Chaldaick or Syriack was then called Hebrew. As for the Style
this Reason is too general to be able to conclude any thing from thence.
Stunica has very well answered, Non hoc mirum videri debet, si loquendi
idiomate omnes conveniant, etiamsi diversis linguis Evangelia conscripserint:
erant enim ejusdem generis, hoc est Hebraei ex Herbaeis; and qui Graece ex
illis scripserunt, patriae linguae proprietatem in Craeca scriptura saepissime
referunt. Jacob. Lop. Stun. init. Annotat. in Erasm.
that it is not to be admired that the style of the Gospel; appears to be the
same in all the Evangelists, although they had written in different Languages,
because that being Jews, those among them that have written in Greek have very
often kept the Genius and propriety of the Hebrew Tongue. This he proves by the
example of S. Luke, who, tho he has composed his Gospel and the Acts of the
Apostles in more elegant Greek than that of the other Evangelists, does not
forbear to make use of diverse Expressions that are purely Hebrew.

The third Objection is taken from Calvin, and is grounded on several Passages
of the Old Testament, cited by S. Matthew according to the Greek Version of the
Septuagint. Whence he infers, that S. Matthew has composed his Gospel in
Greek: otherwise writing for the use of the Hebrews, who read the Bible in
Hebrew, he would have rehearsed these Passages after the same manner as they
are in the Hebrew Text. But this reason is destructive of it self, because he
that has translated the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew into Greek, performing it
for persons that spoke Greek, and read the Bible in this Language, ought to
quote the Authorities of the Old Testament, rather according to the Greek
Version of the Septuagint, than according to the Hebrew Text which they
understood not.

Illyricus adds to all these Reasons, that there is no likelihood that S.
Matthew should design to write his Gospel in a Language that was no longer in
use, because at that time all People, and even the Jews themselves spoke Greek
or Chaldaick: Besides that the Holy Ghost, who was the Author of these Books,
knew that the Destruction of Jerusalem was not far off. Therefore there is no
appearance (says he) that he should intend to publish the Gospel in any other
Language but the Greek, which was the Language of the Empire.

This Protestant is grossly mistaken, when he believes after Erasmus, that it is
supposed that the Gospel of S. Matthew has been written in the ancient Hebrew;
whereas the Hebrew of the Jews at that time was the Chaldaick Language which
they had brought with them from Babylon, and had only a little altered it. It
has indeed been more convenient that the Books of the New Testament should be
written rather in Greek than in another Language. But here it is only argued
concerning the Jews of Palestine, to whom S. Matthew first preached the Gospel.
And since those People spoke Chaldaick, it was necessary for him to preach to
them in this same Language. On these grounds all Antiquity has relied, when
they have believed that S. Matthew had composed his Gospel in Hebrew.

He opposes moreover, that S. Macthew saw that the Jews did daily harden their
Hearts, and that they had an Abhorrence of the Religion of Jesus Christ. And
therefore it is not credible (says Illyricus) that this holy Apostle has
written his Gospel for their sake, and in their Language. But to what purpose
are reasons drawn from expediency against matters of fact that are evident? We
cannot doubt but many Jews of Palestine have received the Gospel of Jesus
Christ by the Ministry of S. Matthew; and whereas they spoke Chaldaick or
Syriack, he could not leave this Gospel with them in Writing, but in the
Language that was spoken by them. On this account we may judge of other the
like reasons alleged by Illyricus to the same purpose. He pretends, for
example, that Divine Providence would never have permitted the loss of so great
a Treasure, if it were certain that the Gospel of S. Matthew had been written
in Hebrew. He adds farther, that if S. Hierom had been truly persuaded that the
Hebrew was the Original of this Gospel, he would rather have translated it than
the Greek; now it cannot be said that he has translated it from the Hebrew
into Greek.

It is in vain that this Protestant calls the Providence of God to his
assistance, in opposition to a fact that cannot be reasonably doubted of. The
Fathers and the Jews themselves make no difficulty to acknowledge, that some
Sacred Books have been lost: which nevertheless cannot be said of the Gospel of
S. Matthew, since we have it in Greek in a state sufficiently perfect. The
reason why the Hebrew or Chaldaick Copy is not preserved, is because the
Churches of Judaea, for whose use it was primarily written, have not long
subsisted: On the contrary the Churches wherein the Greek Tongue flourished
have always endured, and it is through the means of these last Churches that we
have yet to this day the Greek Copy of S. Matthew.

This may serve also for an Answer to the Objection of Chamierus, Chamier.
Panstrat. lib. 11 c. 8. n. 8.
who could not imagine how it could come to pass that there should have been so
great a negligence in the Church in general, and in particular in that of
Jerusalem, that the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew has been lost from the first
Ages of Christianity. Nevertheless it is very easy to be apprehended, if we
consider that the Writings of the Apostles that were read in the Churches were
preserved by the means of the same: it is not therefore an extraordinary thing
to see that the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew has been lost in the loss of the
Churches of the Nazarenes. It is in the mean time worth the observing, that it
perished not entirely from the primitive times of Christianity; for the Sect of
the Nazarenes who took their original from the first Nazarenes or Christians of
Judaea, continued for a long time to read it in their Assemblies. It passed
also to the Ebionites, who altered it in some places: notwithstanding these
Alterations, it might always be said, that this was the Hebrew Gospel of S.
Matthew, especially if respect were had to the Copy of the Nazarenes, which was
more pure than that of the Ebionites, and was still extant in the time of S.
Hierom, who translated it into Greek and Latin. The other Christians neglected
it, because besides their not understanding the Language in which it was
written, they considered the Nazarenes as a sort of half Christians that still
kept the Ceremonies of the Law; and they rejected the Ebionites as Heretics.

Illyricus adds farther to all these Objections, that S. Matthew being a
Publican, was either half a Grecian or a Roman; and that for this reason he
ought rather to apply himself to write his Gospel in Greek for those of his
Nation, than in Hebrew for the Jews. If this way of reasoning concluded any
thing, it might be inferred from thence at the same time, that S. John who was
an Hebrew, and whose Mother Tongue was Syriack or Chaldaick should have
composed his Gospel in this Language for those of his own Nations. It avails
nothing to oppose simple reasons of convenience to manifest and clear matters
of Fact. Neither is there any weight in a proof that he brings in the same
place from certain Latin Words that are found in the Gospel of S. Matthew,
which are more agreeable (as he thinks) to a Greek Author, than to a Man that
writes in Hebrew, because the Grecians had more Intercourse with the Latins,
than the Hebrews. But may it not be said that these Latin Words do rather
belong to the Greek Translation, than to the original Hebrew? Besides, the Jews
of those times who were under subjection to the Romans, might have adopted
diverse Latin Words into their Language. This same Principle may serve to
resolve another Objection that he raises from the word Petrus which is in S.
Matthew. If this Apostle (says Illyricus) had written in Hebrew or Syriack, he
would have made use of the Word Cephas, and not of that of Petrus: as if it
might not be said that it is the Greeks Interpreter that has inserted the Word
Petrus. Lastly, he objects, that S. Matthew epitomizeth with too much liberty
in Chap. xii. of his Gospel, a Passage of Chap. 47. of Isaiah: Which he would
not have done (says he) if he had written in Hebrew, because he would have
produced the very Words of the Text. And it is not credible (adds he) that the
Interpreter should be the Author of this Abbreviation. All this Argumentation
that is grounded on no positive proof is nothing to the purpose. The Apostles
on the contrary do often cite the Passages of the Old Testament only according
to the sense, and they rehearse them sometimes in short, only producing that
which relates to their design. J. Wolz. Proleg. in 4. Evang. cap. 9.
Wolzogenius a famous Unitarian has also collected in the beginning of his
Commentaries on the Gospels a part of these same Reasons, to show that the
Original of S. Matthew has not been written in Hebrew; but he explains himself
after such a manner as makes it appear that the Fratres Poloni have but little
knowledge in facts that respect the Criticism of the Scriptures.

I shall pass by in silence the Reflections of Dr. Lightfoot on this Subject,
because they seem to me to be too Rabbinical, J. Lightf. Hor. Hebr. in cap. 1.
Matthew.
and even little intelligible. That which he adds in the same place, that the
Gospel of S. Matthew has not been immediately written in Hebrew, but in Greek,
and that it has been afterward translated from the Greek into Hebrew, to the
end that it might be read by the Learned Jews, is not supposed with any
Foundation, all Antiquity having believed the contrary.

There is not even at this day any Christian Society in the Levant, that is not
persuaded that the Greek Gospel of S. Matthew is only a Version of the Hebrew
Text. Therefore we find at the end of some Greek Manuscript Copies of this
Gospel, that it has been published (...), at Jerusalem. Nov. Test. Sir. edit.
Viennae, and in Bibl. Polygl.
We read also at the end of the Syriack Version of the same Gospel, that S.
Matthew has preached it in Hebrew in Palestine. Some Copies of the Arabic
Version and the Persian Translation have also in the Title that is at the
beginning of S. Matthew, that it has been written in the Hebrew Tongue. This
agrees perfectly with the ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, whose Sentiments have
been explained in a few words by S. Jerome: Hieron. Praef. Comm. in Matthew.
Matthaeus (says this Father). Evangelium in Judaea Hebraeo Sermon edidit ob
eorum maxim causam qui in Jesum crediderant ex Judaeis All this makes it
appear that Mr. Vossius has had reason to call some Divines of his own Party
who hold that S. Matthew has not written in Hebrew Audio semi-Theologos
quosdam Rabbinistas omnium Patrum omniumque Ecclesiarum testimonia conculcare,
ac serio adfirmare Matthaeum non Hebraice, sed Graece scripsisse. Stulti simus,
si istiusmodi deliriis aliquid reponamus. If. Voss. Praef. in Appen. ad lib de
LXX. Interp.
Demi-Theologues possessed with Rabbinism. He esteems them also so foolish,
that he would not have them answered. However I have thought that I ought not
to neglect their Reasons, that have given me ocasion to clear up this matter.
And there are at this day very many persons, especially among the Protestants,
that cannot yield to Mr. Vossius, who has attacked them with Injuries and
Reproaches rather than Arguments. The very Supposition it self that he makes,
that the Jews of Jerusalem spoke in the Greek Tongue amongst themselves, and
that they made use of the Greek Version of the Septuagint in their Assemblies
is a strong argument to prove that S. Matthew had indeed composed his Gospel in
Greek. This obliges me here to examine the Reasons on which Mr. Vossius
grounds this Paradox, and to show at the same time that the Jews of Jerusalem
spoke the Chaldaick or Syriack Language at the time of our Savior and the
Apostles.

CHAP. VI. The Jews of the Territory of Jerusalem at the time of Jesus Christ
and the Apostles spoke in the Chaldaick or Syriack Tongue. An Answer to the
Reasons that Mr. Vossius has published against this Opinion. At the same time
several Difficulties are cleared, appertaining to this Matter.
IT is to be feared lest these Protestant Divines whom Mr. Vossius seems so
much to despise should in their turn reprove him, because he overthrows all
Tradition, and contradicts the Holy Scriptures themselves and all Learned
Divines, Is. Voss. Resp. ad iter. P. Sim. Obj. p. 375.
when he avoucheth that in the time of Jesus Christ and the Apostles the Jems
of Jerusalem spoke no other Language but the Greek. In like manner he treats
those persons Semidoctorum and sanaticorum.
as half-learned and Fanatics, that believe that Jesus Christ and his
Disciples have spoken in the Syriack Tongue. At that rate all the World would
be filled with half-learned and fanatical People, and Mr. Vossius alone would
be truly learned and exempt from Fanaticism. Cor solus habet, solus and
ingenium. The ancient Ecclesiastical Authors who have affirmed that S. Matthew
has written his Gospel in Hebrew would be all Fanatics; for they declare that
they have embraced this Opinion only because the Jews of Jerusalem then spoke
Hebrew, that is to say, the Chaldaick or Syriack Tongue: and since they have
confirmed this their Judgment by express Passages of the New Testament, I think
it necessary here to produce some of them.

It is expressly said in the Acts of the Apostles, (...). Actor. 21.40.
that St. Paul made a discourse in Hebrew to the Jews of Jerusalem, (...).
Actor. 22.1.
who hearkened to him because he spoke their Language. This holy Apostle being
of Tarsus, a City of Cilicia, where he had learned Greek, would not have failed
to make an Oration to them in that Language, if it had been the vulgar Tongue
of the Jews of Jerusalem. But because he was an Hebrew, and of Hebrew Parents,
and had been educated in their City, studying under the Doctor Gamaliel, he
spoke to them in the Language that was understood by the People. It was for
this reason also that the Tribune demanded of S. Paul whether he could speak
Greek, Graece nosti? He supposed that the Jews of Jerusalem spoke in a
different Tongue from the Greek, Act. 21.37.
viz. the Chaldaick or Syriack, as appears manifestly from S. Luke, who says
(...). Act. 1.19.
that the Field of Judas was called Aceldama in the Language that was then
spoken at Jerusalem. Moreover, Act. 1.19.
we find in the New Testament diverse Chaldaick or Syriack Words, as for
example, Bethesda, Golgotha, Tabitha, and some others that the Evangelists call
Hebrew, according to the manner of speaking at that time. St. John making
mention of the Fish Pond or Pool of Jerusalem, says (...). Joann. 5.2.
that it was called in Hebrew, Bethesda; and in another place, that (...).
Joann. 19.13.
Gabbatha and (...). Ibid. ver. 17.
Golgotha are Hebrew Words.

One would think, that after so many Testimonies of the New Testament, we could
not doubt that the Jews of Jerusalem spoke Hebrew in the times of the Apostles.
In the mean time, Mr. Vossius, who has openly declared against the Hebrew Text
of the Jews, has thought, that he could not give a greater Authority to the
Greek Version of the LXX, than in making it appear that Jesus Christ and his
Apostles had read it in the Temple and in the Synagogues of Jerusalem. But it
was not necessary to cast himself into this extremity, and to argue against
actual proofs of matter of fact that are indisputable, to defend the ancient
Greek Translation against some Protestants that had unhappily attacked it. He
supposes, to establish his Opinion, that In Imperio Romano Graecus sermo and
Latinus omnibus erat in usu: Hebraea vero lingua ne ab ipsis quidem Judaeis
intelligebatur. Voss. Resp. ad Object. Theol. Leyd.
the Greek and Latin were the Languages in use throughout the whole Empire; and
that the Hebrew was not understood even by the Jews. We willingly agree with
him that the Greek and Latin were the Languages of the Empire; but this does
not prove that these two Languages only were spoken therein. There are on the
contrary, positive Proofs in the New Testament confirmed by all Antiquity, that
evidently show that the Jews of Jerusalem then spoke Hebrew or Chaldaick. We
agree also with him, that the ancient Hebrew Tongue was not at that time a
vulgar Language, and that none but the Priests understood it; but it cannot be
concluded from thence that they spoke Greek. Josephus, who was very well
skilled in the Greek Tongue, (...). Joseph. Praefat. Antiq. Jud.
affures us, that it was foreign to him and to those of his Nation.

Mr. Vossius, to whom all these difficulties have been represented, cannot
resolve them, but in supposing always, that Stante Imperio Romano solus ibi
regnabat Graeous sermo..... Graece omnes scripserc. Graece etiam loquebantur.
Voss. Resp. ad iter. P. Sim. Obj.
during the Subsistence of the Roman Empire, no other Language was spoken but
the Greek in Jerusalem and in all Palestin. He would have the Syriack sought
for without the Empire; this he proves by the Example of St. Ephraem and others
Fathers that have written in this Language, and have all been of the Parthian
or Arabian Nation; affirming that we must look for the Syriack Tongue amongst
the Assyrians and the Arabians that inhabited the lower Syria, and not amongst
the Syrians that were in the Roman Empire: and besides that, we ought not to
call that Syriack whick is called Chaldaick in the New Testament. He adds
farther, that the Jews of Jerusalem could not learn the Chaldaick but of the
Jews that were on the other side of the River Euphrates: that it is madness to
say that the said Jews of Jerusalem have kept this Language by Tradition in a
place where the Greek has been in use for many Ages; especially it being
impossible to bring any Example that may make it appear that a Language can be
preserved in a Country, when another has obtained therein. He concludes at
last, that the Jews of Jerusalem had no other vulgar Tongue in the time of our
Savior and the Apostles than the Greek and Latin; and that those who had some
knowledge of the Hebrew or Chaldaick, had attained it after the same manner as
we now learn the Latin at this day, or by the Commerce that they had with the
Jews that were on the farther side of Euphrates, where the Chaldaick was spoken.

Here it would be requisite to follow Mr. Vossius step by step, who has had no
other design in all this long Discourse, than to confound and intricate the
matter in hand, not being able to answer precisely to the Reasons that have
been proposed to him. It may be observed in the first place, that the present
Question is not concerning the ancient Fathers that have spoken Syriack, and
have written Books in this same Language; but only relating to the Jews; and
therefore the Examples that he produces of St. Ephraem and some other Doctors
of the Church, are nothing to the purpose; for we agree with him, that those
that have inhabited the Country that is on the farther side of Euphrates, have
spoken Syriack: it is agreed also, that the Jews of the Parthian or Arabian
Nation, who depended not on the Roman Empire, spoke the Chaldaick or Babylonish
Language. And not to insist on Questions about names, we are willing also to
call that Tongue Chaldaick rather than Syriack, which is called Hebrew in the
New Testament, though the ancient Fathers have named it Syriack, and though it
be properly neither Chaldaick nor Syriack, it being degenerated from the true
Chaldaick. All that Mr. Vossius can conclude from his Supposition, is, that the
Jews who were beyond Euphrates spoke only Chaldaick, whereas the Jews of
Jerusalem and of Palestine, at least the most polite of them, spoke, besides
the Chaldaick which their Fathers had brought from Babylon, the Greek Tongue,
which was become vulgar in these places.

It is madness to say that St. Paul, when he made his Oration in Hebrew or
Chaldaick in the presence of the Jews of Jerusalem, had only regard to those
that were beyond Euphrates, and to those that had learned the Chaldaick Tongue
of them. He directs his Words in general to all the Jews that were present: and
it cannot be said that he had only Strangers for his Auditors. Josephus was of
the number of the Jews of Jerusalem, and not of the Parthian or Arabian Nation:
he declares in the mean time, Joseph. Praefat. Antiq. Jud.
that that which had hindered him from writing the Antiquities of his Nation so
soon as he had intended it, was, that he found it difficult to express his mind
in the Greek Tongue that was foreign to him. He says in another place, that he
was born an Hebrew, that he is of Jerusalem, Joseph. Praefat. lib. de Bell. Jud.
and a Priest; and in this same Passage he calls the Chaldaick the Language of
his Country. This makes it evident that the Chaldaick cannot be restrained to
the Jews only that were on the other side of Euphrates, since Josephus was not
of that Country. Both the one and the other sort spoke in this Tongue, with
this difference only, that those that dwelled in the Countries that were beyond
Euphrates, spoke nothing but Chaldaick; and those of Jerusalem could besides
the Chaldaick speak the Greek Language that was dispersed through Palestin.

As to what Mr. Vossius objects, that it is impossible to show that a Language
has been preserved in a Country, when another has come in its place; I
answer, that it is easy to give him satisfaction in this Point, without
departing from the Jews of whom the Question is. The History of the Martyrdom
of the seven Brethren related in the second Book of Maccabees, informs us that
the Jews of that time spoke Greek and Hebrew: the Mother and the Children
answered in Greek to Antiochus, (...). II Maccab. 7.22.
whereas amongst themselves they spoke the Language of the Country, which was
Chaldaick: Antiochus having urged the Mother to exhort one of her Children to
yield to that which he required, (...). Ibid. v. 27.
she laughing the Tyrant to scorn spoke to her Sons in Hebrew or Chaldaick,
which was her proper Tongue.

This is a manifest Proof, that the Greek was the vulgar Tongue of the Country,
and that the Jews, besides the Greek, had preserved the Chaldaick which they
had brought from Babylon, and which they called the Language of the Nation. The
Jews of Jerusalem have also retained it always, tho the Greek was the vulgar
Tongue of Palestine. This is yet more apparently seen in another Example that
has been already opposed to Mr. Vossius, I mean the Jews of the Spanish Rite
who dwell at Constantinople and in some other Cities of the Levant: these Jews
do still keep their ancient Spanish, with the Language of the Countries which
they inhabit; and they have also Translations of the Bible in Spanish for their
use.

Mr. Vossius answers this Objection, that this might be in some manner true in
the time of Mariana, because when this Jesuit wrote his History, it was not an
Age since the Jews had been driven out of Spain. He adds farther, that the
other Historians who have written at that very time speak quite otherwise,
because the Jews Profugi ex Hispania Lusitaniaque Judaei, si qui in fuga non
periere, illi fere omnes per Maurorum dissipati fuere terras, ut nesciam omnino
quosnam hic intelligat P. Simonius Hispanici generis Judaeos, qui per Orientem
fuere dispersi. Voss. Resp. ad tert. P. Sim. Obj.
that were driven out of Spain and Portugal were all dispersed among the Moors;
and finally, that he knows not what is meant by the Spanish Jews that were
scattered in the Levant.

But it is in vain to argue against evident matters of fact that may be known
by all the World. We have not made use of the Authority of Mariana to prove
them, nor of any other Historian; but of the Books themselves of these Spanish
Jews that have been printed at Constantinople in the Spanish Tongue, and in
Hebrew Characters. We have their Pentateuch printed at that place not only in
Spanish, but also in Vulgar Greek, In 1547.
with the Hebrew Text and the Chaldaick Paraphrase. It is to be seen by the
first leaf of this Work, that there are two sorts of Jews in those Parts, some
of which speak Spanish, and the others the vulgar Greek; and that these two
Versions have been published for their use, that they might more easily
understand the Scriptures. The Hebrew Bible of Lombroso which has been printed
at Venice with Grammatical Notes, In 1639.
wherein the difficult Words are explained in Spanish, is also very common in
the Levant among these Spanish Jews. It is a matter of little moment to know
whether the Jews that departed from Spain and Portugal retired amongst the
Moors or elsewhere, since it is without doubt, that there are at this day Jews
of the Spanish Rite in the Levant, who beside that of the Places where they
reside, have still preserved their ancient Spanish Tongue. This is the ground
of the present Dispute: and by this it is made appear, that it is not
impossible that the Jews should retain their ancient Language where there is
another that is vulgarly spoken. We see moreover, that the Portugal Jews of the
Spanish Rite, who are settled at Amsterdam, do keep the Portugal, with the
Language of the Country; and that their Rabbis do also preach in Portugaise in
their Synagogue.

Furthermore, it is not true that all the Jews that were driven out of Spain
and Portugal took refuge among the Moors: there were many that withdrew
themselves into Italy, from whence some passed afterward into the Levant.
However it were, it is certain that there is at this day, in the Turkish
Territories, a considerable number of Jews, who follow the Spanish Rite; and
besides that of the Places where they remain, do speak their ancient Spanish
Language. I believe also, that a Party of these Jews was in those Countries
before those of their Nation were expelled out of Spain and Portugal.

Mr. Vossius, who cannot maintain his Paradoxes but with other Paradoxes,
corrects the Passage of the xxi. Chap. of the Acts, Act. xxi. v. 37.
where the Tribune demands of St. Paul whether he could speak Greek: He
pretends that it must not be read with the Point of Interrogation, Graece scis?
as all People read it; but that it ought to be read and translated after this
manner, Graece scis: Voss. ibid.
Non ergo es iste Aegyptius qui ante hos dies tumultum concitavit. Thou can
speak Greek: Therefore thou art not that Egyptian which before these days made
an Uproar, etc. But I see no reason to change the ordinary reading of the Greek
Text and ancient Versions in this place; neither would he have ever thought of
it, were it not that this Passage manifestly destroys his Opinion. It is true
that according to the most exact Rules of Criticism, no regard ought to be had
to Accents, Points, and Comma's: but it seems to me not to be permitted without
good Reasons to alter the ordinary Readings of the Text, especially when it is
supported by ancient Interpreters. It would be (might it be said) a strange
sort of sottish Stupidity, that the Tribune, who heard St. Paul talking in
Greek, should have demanded of him whether he could speak that Language:
nevertheless, there is nothing extraordinary in all this Discourse. St. Paul
finding himself oppressed by the People, demanded to speak with the Tribune,
who asked him in his turn, Whether he could speak Greek? This implies a
Supposition that all the Jews of Jerusalem did not speak in that Tongue. Mr.
Vossius, who is rich in Fictions, is obliged to make good his fancy, to suppose
that the Egyptian of whom mention is made Arabic was spoken. But to whatsoever
side he turns, he will not be able to avoid that which is related in the same
Chapter; to wit, that (...). Act. 21.40.
St. Paul spoke in Hebrew, that is to say, in Chaldaick, to all this multitude
that thronged about him, and attentively hearkened to his Speech, because he
spoke to them in their own Language.

There is yet less of solid Reason in the Answer that he makes to that which
has been objected to him, that the Field of Judas was called Haceldama,
according to the vulgar Language of Jerusalem, Voss. ibid.
which was consequently Chaldaick or Syriack, since this Word is Chaldaick. Who
knows not (says he) that the Jews do yet at this day give Hebrew Names to
their Fields, Burying-places, and diverse other things? I confess it; but it is
said expressy in the Acts, (...). Act. 1.19.
that this Field was called Haceldama in the Language that was spoken at
Jerusalem.

It has been also objected to him, that there can be no reason alleged why
the Title of the Cross has been written in Greek, Latin, and Hebrew, unless it
were that these three Languages were then spoken in Jerusalem. Now the Hebrew
or Chaldaick was the Language of that place. Although it should be granted that
there were also then at Jerusalem some Jews that came from beyond Euphrates;
yet he will never persuade People endued with common Sense that respect was had
only to this last sort of Jews, when this Title was written. It ought to have
been written, for the same reason, in the Languages of the other Jews that were
also present at that time at Jerusalem.

It has been represented to Mr. Vossius, that the Jews of Palestine did
understand even in the time of St. Jerome the Chaldaick Tongue, which their
Ancestors had brought from Babylon. He demands what Proofs there are of this,
and in what place of St. Jerome this is to be found? Nevertheless, he accounts
as nothing the Testimony of this Father in his Preface to Tobit; wherein he
says, Quia vicina est Chaldaeorum lingua sermoni Hebraico, utriusque linguae
peritissimum loquacem reperiens, unius diei laborem arripui; and quidquid ille
mihi Hebraicis verbis expressit, hoc ego and accito notario sermonibus Latinis
exposui. Hieron. Praef. in Tob.
that in translating this Book from Chaldaick into Latin, he was assisted by a
Jew, who spoke Hebrew and Chaldaick very well; and that he had put into Latin
whatsoever he had expressed to him in Hebrew terms. This Jew spoke Hebrew
because he was a Man of great Learning; and he spoke Chaldaick also, because it
was the Language that the Jews of those Places yet spoke amongst themselves,
and in which they wrote their Books. For this reason the Talmud of Jerusalem
has been written in this Tongue, as well as that of Babylon. The same has
happened to the Massora, which has been composed in Chaldaick by the Jews of
Tiberias. The Chaldaick Tongue has not been truly spoken in those Countries
for many Ages since: but we must not confound the other people with the Jews,
who had always continued to speak amongst themselves in the Language that they
had received from their Fathers.

We shall not need then to have recourse to the Parthians, with Mr. Vossius, to
introduce into those Places the Chaldaick or Babylonian Tongue in the time of
St. Jerome, no more than in the time of the Apostles; but according to the
custom that the Jews have to preserve their ancient Languages, though they are
not spoken in the Countries where they have their abode, as we have proved by
the Example of the Spanish Jews, who are in the Levant, and of those that are
at present at Amsterdam. These last write Books in Spanish and Portugaise,
although they be in a Country where the Flemish Tongue is spoken: they have
also translated, for the use of the People, out of Hebrew into Spanish, their
Book of Peayers called Seder tephiloth under the Title of Orden de Oraciones.

Furthermore, not to enter into a fruitless Dispute purely about Words, Mr.
Vossius shall be left to his liberty to call the Language that is styled Hebrew
in the Books of the New Testament, Chaldaick rather than Syriack. It is in vain
then that he enlarges so much on this Controversy of Words, and that he is so
angry with several learned Men for having called it Syriack or Syra Chaldaick.
Quae tamen lingua nisi in scriptis forsan neotericorum, qui quando se expedire
non possunt, istiusmodi fingunt voces, quas ipsa non capit rerum natura; nec
accurate se loqui existimarunt, nisi barbaris and monstrosis utantur
appellationibus. Voss. Resp. ad tert. P. Sim. Obj.
This Language (says he) is not to be found but in the Writings of modern
Authors who have forged these monstrous Words to wave the matter. But it seems
to me that it has been always permitted to any that would express something
new, especially in point of Criticism, to invent new Words, that may give a
clear and distinct Idea of the thing that is to be explained. Now it is certain
that the Tongue which is named Hebrew in the New Testament, is properly neither
Hebrew nor Syriack, nor even Chaldaick; for it is composed of a certain mixture
of the Hebrew and of the Chaldaick or Babylonian. They that have used these
Words, which are supposed to be barbarous, have been Persons very skilful in
these Languages, and have discoursed of them with a perfect knowledge. When S.
Hierom makes mention of the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew that was in use amongst
the Nazarenes, he authorizeth the barbarous Word of Syro-Chaldaick, quod
Chaldaico, (says he) Syroque sermon, sed Hebraicis literis scriptum est.
Hieron. lib. 3. adv. Pelag.
Hence it may be observed, that this learned Father made no difficulty to call
indifferently Chaldaick and Syriack the Language that the Jews of Jerusalem
spoke in the time of the Apostles. The greatest part of the Fathers, as well
Greek as Latin, do also call Syriack that which bears the name of Hebrew in the
New Testament. The most judicious Critics of our Age speak no otherwise: Mr.
Vossius alone is singular herein, who has thought fit of late to reject this
Syriack Tongue which he had already approved in his other Works. Voss. ibid.
He demands in what time, and after what manner the Hebrew Tongue became
Syriack? But as we have before said, he may, if he please, call it Chaldaick,
if he remains so obstinate as not to be willing to receive the Name of Syriack
with all Antiquity, and with the Suffrage of all People that are expert in
these Languages, which he seems not to understand. If he rightly apprehended
this matter, he would not insist on a Question that is only concerning a Name.

To avoid all the trifling and insignificant Circumstances to which Mr. Vossius
has purposely had recourse, that he might make a show of offering at least
something in answer to the Objections that have been made to him, it is
convenient that I should relate the Judgment as to this point of George Amira,
a learned Maronite, who has published at Rome an excellent Grammar of the
Syriack Tongue: he has entitled his Book, A Syriack or Chaldaick Grammar;
Georgii Amirae Gramm. Sir. sive Chald.
and thus he makes it appear from the Title of his Work, that these two Words
may be indifferently used: this he confirms at the same time by three
Dissertations that are annexed at the beginning of this Grammar; for in the
first he treats De linguae Chaldaicae sive Syriacae nominibus and discrimine.
Georg. Amir. Praelud. Gramm.
of the Names of the Chaldaick and Syriack Tongue, and of the difference
between them; in the second, De linguae Chaldaicae sive Syriacae antiquitate.
Ibid.
of the Antiquity of the Chaldaick or Syriack Tongue; and lastly, in the third,
De linguae Chaldaicae sive Syriacae dignitate ac praestantia. Ibid.
of the Excellency of the Chaldaick or Syriack Tongue. Since this ingenious
Maronite has had a very clear notion of this matter, I shall produce the sum
of what he says concerning these two Languages in his preliminary Discourses.

This Tongue whereof we now treat (says Amira) has been called Chaldaick,
from Chaldaea where it has been first in use, when the Confusion of Languages
happened; therefore it has been also named Babylonian, from Babylon the
Capital City of Chaldaea: it was afterward called Aramean or Syriack, from
Aram or Syria; and even Assyrian from Assyria, because it has also obtained in
those places. Diverse other Names have been given to it, which have been
borrowed from famous Nations and renowned Men, as that of Hebrew, because it
has been, during some time, spoken by the Hebrews. Although there is some
difference between the Chaldaick and the Syriack, nevertheless it cannot be
said that it is essential, for they agree almost in every thing: and this is
the cause that in the Holy Scriptures the Words of Chaldaick and Syriack are
promiscuously used to signify the very same Language: it is said for example,
Dan. 1.4.
that Daniel and some other young Hebrews were instructed in the Chaldaick
Tongue: and it is added in the mean time a little after, that the Chaldeans
spoke to the King in Syriack, Dan. 2.4.
which was the Tongue of that Prince: from whence it is evident, that the
Syriack and the Chaldaick are the same Language.

The same George Amira produces other Passages of the Scriptures to show that
this Tongue was also called Assyrian. This he confirnis in like manner from
profane Authors, who have confounded the Names of Chaldeans, Syrians and
Assyrians. From whence he conoludes Quare mirum esse non debet, si lingua
Chaldaica, Syriaca and Assyriaca una eademque sit, quandequidem and nomina quae
ei indita sunt pro eodem usurpantur. Georg. Amir. Praelud. Gramm. Sir. sive
Chald.
that it is no wonder that they have also confounded these three Languages.
Lastly, he avoucheth, that if the Chaldaick Tongue which has been in use
amongst the Jews had not been dressed by them after the Hebrew Fashion, it
would have differed much less than it does, from the Chaldaick or Syriack of
the natural Syrians. Ludovicus de Dieu who had thoroughly inquired into this
matter, is also of this Opinion. A Syriaca Chaldaicam distinguo, quia sic ab
aliis fieri solet, and non raro phrasi and flexione ab ea differt. Alioqui
eamdem esse linguam fateor Chaldaicam and Syriacam. Lud. de Dieu, Praef. Gramm.
Chald. and Sir.
He distinguishes, as is ordinarily done, the Chaldaick Tongue of Daniel and
Esdras from the Syriack Paraphrases: but he acknowledges at the same time,
that these two Languages ought not truly to be distinguished. He believes after
Amira Dialectus Chaldaica minus a Syriaca lingua differret, si punctatoribus
visum fuisset. Lud. de Dieu, ibid.
that they would be less different, if the Jews had not Printed the Chaldaick
of their Books after their manner; this he proves by some Examples. It would be
easy to produce many others, and even to make it appear that the great
resemblance between these two Tongues has given occasion to the Jews to take
from the Syrians whole Books of the Scriptures, which they have attributed to
their Paraphrasts; but this would lead us too far, and we must now return to
Mr. Vossius, who is so curious in this point, that he will not admit that the
Chaldaick Tongue, which is named Hebrew in the New Testament should be called
Syriack.

This dextrous Man calls the Jews to his assistance, Voss. Resp. ad tert. P.
Sim. Obj.
who have styled the Aramean or Syriack, the Tongue of the Gentiles: and to
make it more manifest to what degree the Jews hated the Syrians and their
Language, he makes use of the authority of the Talmud, wherein it is read, that
if any one prays in the Syrian Tongue, his Prayers are not heard, Voss. ibid.
because the Angels, who are the Ministers of God, do not understand this
Language. He adds farther, that the Jews who read in Syria the Version which
the Christians and the Arabians call Syriack, do term it Chaldaick. Lastly, he
demands who are those People of Syria that have introduced into Jerusalem this
Syriack Tongue, which is pretended to have been in use in the time of Jesus
Christ and the Apostles.

But if he had consulted the Talmud, or had but an indifferent knowledge in the
Chaldaick Tongue, he would not have made such weak Objections. It is evident
that there is nothing more usual in the Books of the Talmud than to call the
Chaldaick or Babylonian Tongue Arami or Syriack. The Rabbis who have
epitomized the Talmud, and have collected its Decisions, do also give the name
of Arami or Syriack to the Chaldaick Tongue. To convince Mr. Vossius, even by
the example that he has produced of the Prayer that ought not to be made in
the Syriack Tongue; the Talmudists give out this fantastic Story upon occasion
of the Prayer called Kadis, which is in the Chaldaick Tongue, and which
nevertheless they call in this place Arami or Syriack. This Prayer not being so
ancient as the others that have been composed in Hebrew, is written in the
Chaldaick Language, which was then understood by the People. The Rabbis who
are so nicely subtle on all occasions, and often tell Tales, instead of giving
solid Reasons, have invented this Fable which Mr. Vossius relates very
seriously. However it be, it is certain that this Prayer Kadis, which is
supposed, according to the Rabbis to be written in Syriack, that is not
understood by the Angels, is written in Chaldaick, and in the same Language as
the Paraphrases which we have upon the Bible.

As for the Objection, that in the Syriack Version of the New Testament, the
word Aram has been put to signify a Greek, a Gentile, and an Idolater, I do
not see that it can be proved from thence that the Jews have not confounded the
Words of Syriack and Chaldaick. For besides that experience shows us the
contrary, this only proves that the Jews have looked upon Syria as the Country
of Idolatry; they have made use of the word Arami in the same sense as that of
(...) Greek in the New Testament is applied to signify a Greek, a Gentile and
an Idolater.

I am willing to grant that the Jews give the name of Chaldaick to the Versions
which the Christians call Syriack. But what can be concluded from thence, since
these same Jews do indifferently call that Tongue in which they are written
Chaldaick or Syriack? The Christians of the Syrian Nation do very often call
their Syriack Tongue Chaldaick. The Syriack Missal which has been Printed at
Rome for the use of the Maronites, is entitled Missale Chaldaic. juxta ritum
Eccl. nationis Maronitarum edit. Romae. ann. 1594.
A Chaldaick Missal. This manifestly makes it appear that the Words Chaldaick
and Syriack are oftentimes confounded together by the Jews and by the
Christians that bear the Name of Syrians.

Lastly the Example of Josephus has been opposed to Mr. Vossius, Joseph.
Praef. lib. de Bell. Jud.
who was a Jew of Jerusalem, and who assures us, that before he published his
History of the Wars of the Jews in Greek, he had written it in Chaldaick, which
he calls the Language of his Country. Now forasmuch as he cannot deny the
matter of Fact which this Historian has so clearly delivered, he answers after
his usual way, that Josephus had composed this History in Chaldaick only for
the Jews on the other side of Euphrates. But is there any probability, that a
Man that makes profession to publish an Account of the Wars of the People of
his own Nation for their use, and for this reason to write in their Language,
should not have written it for those of Jerusalem, which was not only the
Capital City, but also his own Country? He would have it designed only for the
perusal of the Jews that were far distant: and since there is no appearance of
truth in this, he is obliged to have recourse to certain equivocal Terms used
by Josephus. This Historian says that in publishing his History in the
Chaldaick Tongue, he has had regard (...), that is to say, according to Mr.
Vossius's opinion, to those Barbarians or Jews that were beyond the Empire,
because this expression (...) can only denote People afar off. After this
manner he eludes a most clear testimony, under a pretense that these words
(...) according to the Grammatical Sense may be extended equally to time and
place. But the design of Josephus makes it evident enough, that he set forth
his History in Chaldaick generally for all those of his Nation, and even rather
for those of Palestine, than for the Jews that dwelt beyond Euphrates. They all
spoke in the Chaldaick or Syriack Tongue. Therefore this famous Writer makes no
distinction of Language in his Preface, when he speaks of those of his Nation;
he therein calls the Chaldaick the Tongue of his Country. He declares moreover
in another place, (...). Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. 20. cap. ult.
that he had attained to the knowledge of the Greek by study, and that he could
not pronounce it well because he was accustomed to the Accent of his
Mother Tongue. Now it is certain that he was not of the number of these
Parthian, Babylonian and Arabian Jews, but of those of Jerusalem, who
consequently had another vulgar Language different from the Greek. He praises
also in this same Passage those of his own Nation upon occasion of the Greek
Tongue, because they did not apply themselves to the knowledge of diverse
Languages, but to the study of their Sacred Books.

CHAP. VII. Of the Sect of the Nazarenes, and of their Hebrew or Chaldaick Copy
of the Gospel of S. Matthew.
BEsides all the Reasons that we have just now alleged to make it appear, that
S. Matthew at first composed his Gospel in Chaldaick, for the Jews of Jerusalem
who had embraced the Christian Religion, we might also produce the Example of
the Nazarene Sectaries, who made use of this same Hebrew or Chaldaick Gospel in
their Assemblies. S. Epiphanius who has written very accurately of this
ancient Sect, informs us (...). Epiph. Haer. 29. n. 7.
that they received with the New Testament all the Books of the Old, that were
in the Canon of the Jews, viz. the Law, the Prophets, and the other Parts of
Holy Writ; and that they differed in nothing from the Jews, as to Doctrine and
Ceremonies, save only that they believed in Jesus Christ: they made public
Profession to believe in one God, and in his Son Jesus Christ: they had
moreover a perfect knowledge in the Hebrew Tongue. He observes also, that these
ancient Nazarenes, whose principal abode was in the City of Berea, and who were
dispersed throughout all the lower Syria, were descended from the Primitive
Christians of the same Name, who retired from Jerusalem to Pella. Epiph. Haer.
29. n. 7.
From thence (says Epiphanius) the Sect of the Nazarenes derive their original
(...). This agrees very 'well with the Testimonies of the ancient
Ecclesiastical Authors, who affirm that S. Matthew preached the Gospel to the
Jews of Jerusalem and all Palestin in their vulgar Tongue. These Nazarene
Sectaries, who sprang from those primitive Christians of Jerusalem, and who
also spoke their Language, always preserved and read it in their Churches or
Assemblies.

The same S. Epiphanius adds, that the Jews mortally hated the Nazarenes, and
that (...). Epiph. Haer. 29. n. 9.
in their Synagogues, where they assemble thrice every day, they solemnly
cursed them, saying, Let God curse the Nazarenes. This Imprecation of the Jews
against the Christians, under the name of Nazarenes, is yet to be found even at
this day in their Books. S. Hierom also does mention it in his Commentaries on
the Prophet Isaiah; Hieron. lib. 2. Comm. in Es. cap. 5.
where he says, speaking of the Jews, Ter per singulos dies in omnibus
Synagogis sub nomine Nazarenorum anathematizant vocabulum Christianum. This
hatred came from hence, (...). Epiph. ibid.
because the Nazarenes, being Jews as well as they, and embracing the whole Law
of Moses, preached besides this, that Jesus was the Messiah.

We ought then to seek for the Original of the Gospel of S. Matthew amongst
these Nazarenes, who being desended from the primitive Christians of Jerusalem,
have preserved it in their Churches. S. Epiphanius, who seemed to be persuaded
of this Truth, (says freely (...). Epiph. ibid.
that they had for their use the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew most entire, and
that it was not to be doubted that they still kept it in his time written in
Hebrew Letters: he doubts only whether they had retrenched from this Gospel the
Genealogy of Jesus Christ, which was not in the Copy of the Ebionites, who read
it also. But it is most probable that the Nazarenes had not taken away this
Genealogy from their Copies. For (...). Epiph. Haer. 30. n. 14.
Cerinthus and Carpocras, Heretics of those primitive times, who also used the
Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew, read the Genealogy entire, and even proved from
thence that Jesus Christ was sprung from the Seed of Joseph and Mary.

S. Hierom, who had translated this same Gospel of the Nazarenes into Greek and
Latin, assures us In Evangelio juxta Hebraeos, quod Chaldaico quidem Syroque
sermon, sed Hebraicis literis, scriptum est, quo utuntur usque hodie Nazareni.
Hieron. lib. 3. adv. Pelag.
that these Sectaries still read it in his time in their Assemblies; he had
seen two Copies of them, one Ipsum Hebraicum habetur usque hodie in Caesareensi
bibliotheca, quam Pamphilus martyr studiosissime confecit. Mihi quoque a
Nazarenis qui in Beraea urbe Syriae hoc volumine utuntur, describendi facultas
fuit. Hieron. de Script. Eccles. in Matthew.
of which was kept in the Library of Caesarea, and he had borrowed the other
from the Nazarenes themselves of Berea to copy it out. This was the Copy from
which he made his Translation. He says moreover that In Evangelio quo utuntur
Nazareni and Ebionitae, quod nuper in Graecum sermonem transtulimus, quod
vocatur a plerisque Matthaei authenticum, etc. Idem, Comm. lib. 2. in Matthew. c.
12.
many People believed, that this Hebrew Gospel whereof the Nazarenes and the
Ebionites made use, was the original of S. Matthew. However it be, it seems
that the most ancient Ecclesiastical Writers have cited it as the true Gospel
of S. Matthew, several have believed that S. Ignatius Martyr had taken from
thence these words of our Savior to S. Peter, which he quotes in her Epistle
to those of Smyrna: (...). Ignat. Epist. ad Smyrn.
Touch me, and see that I am not a spirit. Eusebius and S. Hierom cite these
same words of S. Ignatius, which are still to be found at this day in this
Epistle. And this last observes that they are taken from the Hebrew Gospel of
the Nazarenes, which he had lately translated: Hieron. de script. Eccles. in
Ign.
De Evangelio quod nuper a me translatum est.

It is probable that S. Ignatius, being Bishop of Antioch, had read this Gospel
of the Hebrews that was spread abroad through Syria which the Nazarenes
inhabited. This induces me to believe that Tatian, who abode also in Syria,
had made use of the same Gospel, when after his manner he composed one out of
four, which some according to Epiphanius calls the Gospel according to the
Hebrews. Epiph. Haer. 46. n. 1.
This ought not to be understood, as if this Collection of Tatian had not been
different from the Gospel of the Hebrews; for this would make no sense.
Valestus has not made a sufficient Reflection on this Gospel of Tatian, Vales.
Annot. in l. 4. Hist. Eccl. Eus. c. 29. Grot. Annot. in tit. Matthew.
when he has discoursed thereof on this account in his Notes on Eusebius.
Grotius has made a much better Remark on occasion of this Passage of S.
Epiphanius, that Tatian in the Work which he composed from the four Gospels,
had related the words of S. Matthew, not only according to the Greek Copies,
but also according to those which were in Hebrew; and that for this reason,
this Gospel which was commonly called (...), because it was made out of four,
had been named by some Authors, according to the Hebrews. He believes moreover,
that it is also for this reason, that some others have given it the Name of
Some nevertheless believe that it should be read (...).
(...) of five, as having been collected from five Gospels. All this seems to
be most probable, were it not that the Gospel of Tatian which has been
published, does not contain that which was singular in the Hebrew Copy of the
Nazarenes.

Although Baronius is mistaken in several places of his Annals, wherein he treats
concerning the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew, nevertheless he has had reason to
consider it as an Original. He has been so bold as to say, according to this
Principle, that if there were a necessity of correcting the Latin Version of S.
Matthew, Baron. an. Christ. 34. n. 72.
it ought to be done rather after the Hebrew Text than the Greek: but he is
deceived when he attributes this Opinion to S. Hierom, and grounds it on the
Epistle of this Father to Pope Damasus. For S. Hierom speaks in this Epistle of
the whole New Testament in general, and he would have the faults that were in
the Latin to be amended from the Greek Text from whence the Latin has been
taken.

Casaubon, Casaub. Exercit. 15. ad Annal. Baron. Sect. 4. n. 18.
who has acknowledged with all antiquity, that S. Matthew has certainly
written his Gospel in Hebrew, could not allow the opinion of this Cardinal,
which he accuses of Impiety. Haec sententia (says he) fidem Catholicae
Ecclesiae facit pendere, nefas dictu, ab Haereticorum fide. He could not
comprehend how it could be said that the authority of the Greek Text of S.
Mattthew depends on the Hebrew Text which is lost. He affirms also that tho we
should still have at this day the Hebrew Copy, yet we could not consider it as
an original Piece from which we ought to correct the Greek Version, In antiquis
temporibus, quando Hebraea extabant, Nazareni and Ebionitae haeretici Hebraicum
textum sibi vindicarunt, ut testes sunt Hieronymus and Epiphanius. Catholici
Graecum semper a principio sunt amplexi. Casaub. Exercit. 16. ad Annal. Bar.
sect. 115.
because none but the Nazarene Heretics and the Ebionites have made use of it,
as may be proved (as he thinks) by the testimony of Epiphanius and S. Jerome. He
calls those among the Catholics that have given the name of Authentic to the
Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew, simple People. They have too easily (says he)
given credit to these Heretics who boasted that they had the original of this
Gospel. Sine injuria veteris Ecclesiae dici non potest passuram illam fuisse ut
impii haeretici vindicarent sibi ceu proprium eum textum quem constaret esse
Ecclesiae authenticum. Ibid.
This would be according to his Judgment to offer an injury to the Primitive
Church, to say that she had suffered wicked Heretics to ascribe to themselves
a Gospel which had been the true original. Lastly he adds, that the Hebrew
Gospel which has been in use among the Ebionites and some other Heretics, was
filled with Fables, and that it has been corrupted in diverse places: from
whence he concludes, that it cannot pass for an original Piece, according to
which the Greek Version received by the whole Church might be amended. He calls
this last proof an invincible Argument, Argumentum invictum. Casaub. ib


But it is an easy matter to show the weakness of all these Objections of
Casaubon. I am so far from thinking that the Opinion of Baronius can be called
impious, that I affirm it on the contrary to be grounded on the testimony of
all Antiquity and on good Reason. It is certain, and Casaubon himself agrees to
it, that S. Matthew has written his Gospel in Hebrew, of which the Greek is
only a Version. This being granted, why may not the Name of an Original be
given to this Hebrew Text? There is nothing in this that is not conformable to
reason and good sense. This is the Principle on which the Protestants rely when
they correct the Versions of the Old Testament from the original Hebrew: but
(say they) we have no longer the Hebrew of S. Matthew. It is true, but ought
this to hinder us from calling it Authentic with the ancient Ecclesiastical
Writers, since in effect it is so? If it were not lost, might we not have
recourse thereto at this day to resolve several Difficulties in the Greek
Version? We see that S. Hierom has consulted it on the second Verse of the
sixth Chapter of S. Matthew, where we read in the vulgar Latin, Panem nostrum
supersubstantialem da nobis hodie. Quod nos supersubstantialem expressimus, in
Graeco habetur (...). -- In Evangelio quod appellatur secundum Hebraeos, pro
substantiali pane reperi (...) quod dicitur crastinum, id est, futurum da nobis
hodie. Hieron. Comm. in Matthew. lib. 1. c. 6.
He observes that it is in the Greek word (...), and in the Hebrew (...), which
signifies of to morrow: from whence he infers, that the sense of this Passage
is, Give us this day our bread of to morrow, that is to say, of every day, as
it was in the ancient vulgar Latin; and S. Jerome has kept the word quotidianum
in S. Luke, Chap. xi. 3. This Exposition of the Greek word (...), which is
obscure, is considerable. The Grammarians do at this day dispute concerning its
signification: but the Hebrew word (...) which was in the Gospel of the
Nazarenes, resolves all their doubts. This has caused Grotius to say, that
after the Testimony of S. Jerome, Grot. Annot. in Evangel. Matthew. c. vi. v. 11.
who has thereupon consulted the Hebrew or Chaldaick Text, we ought not any
longer to dispute about the Original of the Greek word (...) to know the
meaning of it.

Although we should have at this very day (continues Casaubon) the Hebrew Gospel
of the Nazarenes, we could not make it pass for an original, because it has
been used by Heretics, and that the Catholics have always adhered to the
Greek Copy ever since the first beginning of the Church. But tho we should
suppose with Casaubon, that the Nazarenes have been Heretics, would this
hinder their Hebrew Gospel which had been written in this Language by S.
Matthew, from being a true Original? I would willingly know whether the Hebrew
Text of the Law of Moses is less authentic in the Hands of the Samaritans, and
of the Jews called Caraites, than it is in the Hands of the other Jews who bear
the name of Rabbanites, and from whom we have received it? The Protestants are
on the same bottom with respect to the Church of Rome, as the Ebionites were
heretofore with respect to the Orthodox. This Church reckons them equally in
the number of Heretics; may it be said for this reason that the New Testament
which is in use among the Protestants is not authentic? This no rational
Catholic will ever avouch. And therefore the proof that Casaubon brings from
the pretended Heresy of the Nazarenes, and from that of the Ebionites, is of
no weight.

Besides it is not true that the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew has been in use
among the Heretics only, since, as has been above shown, it has been
composed for the Primitive Christians of Palestin, from whom the Nazarene
Sectaries were descended, and the Greek is only a Version of it. Neither can it
be averred, that the Catholics have not acknowledged any other Copy of S.
Matthew than that which is in Greek, since the Jews of the Territory of
Jerusalem who embraced the Christian Religion, and were called Nazarenes, have
been the first Christians in the World, it would be a piece of injustice in us
to treat them as Heretics, for this reason only, because they retained the
Ceremonies of the Old Law with Christianity: otherwise we must treat the
Apostles as Heretics, who observed them also at the beginning: this might be
then tolerated in these Primitive Christians who sprang out from the middle of
the Jews, and who had before their eyes the Example of Jesus Christ and the
Apostles.

That which has misled Casaubon and many others, as well Protestants as
Catholics, who have rejected the Hebrew Gospel of the Nazarenes as an
Apocryphal Piece, is that they have not duly reflected on the Original of the
Christian Religion. The Primitive Christians of Jerusalem and of Palestin, who
made use of this Hebrew Gospel, having not long subsisted in their first
estate, and the others on the contrary who spoke Greek, being dispersed
throughout the whole earth; it has happened from thence that the Greek Gospel
only has been preserved amongst the Catholics, because all the other
Christians have taken their Versions from this Copy. The Chaldaick Tongue, in
which the Gospel of the Nazarenes was written, was not understood but by some
Jews: besides, the Nazarenes, who had retained Judaism with Christianity,
became odious to the other Christians who were converted from Gentilism, and
there was an irreconcilable Hatred between them. If the ancient Nazarenes for
whom S. Matthew had written his Gospel were yet in being, their Hebrew Copy
would be without doubt preferred before the Greek Version which we have.

S. Jerome and S. Epiphanius are so far from being favorable to the Judgment of
Casaubon, that on the contrary they overthrow it in express terms, as appears
from their Testimonies which we have above related. This is so true, that
Casaubon, to justify his Opinion, has on purpose corrupted a Passage of St.
Epiphanius, who calls the Hebrew Gospel of the Nazarenes (...), most entire; he
would have it read, (...), that was not entire, against all the Editions of the
Works of this Father, and without producing any Manuscript to prove an
Alteration of this Importance: he says only, that this place of S. Epiphanius
is contrary to another, wherein he calls the Hebrew Gospel of the Ebionites, a
Gospel (...), that was not entire, but (...), corrupted and mutilated. Casaubon
has not taken heed that although the Nazarenes and the Ebionites did equally
make use of the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew, their Copies were nevertheless
different: these last, as S. Epiphanius himself has remarked, had corrupted
their Copy, and had retrenched from it the Genealogy of Jesus Christ, which he
says not of the Nazarenes, who had it (if you will believe him) (...), most
entire.

It is true that in the very Copy of the Nazarenes there were some Additions
that seemed to have been inserted therein; but we must not reject an Act that
is altogether entire, under color that something has been annexed to it
afterward, especially when these Augmentations come not from suspected Persons
that have a design to corrupt it: otherwise we must lay aside the greatest part
of Books, there being very few of them wherein some Additions may not be found.
There would not be at this day any Copy even of the New Testament, either
Greek, Latin, Syriack or Arabic, that might be truly called authentic,
because there is not one, in whatsoever Language it be written, that is
absolutely exempt from Additions. I might also avouch, that the Greek
Transcribers have taken a very great liberty in writing their Copies, as shall
be proved in another place.

Not that I would go about here to defend the vicious Additions and the
Corruptions of the Hebrew Copy of the Ebionites: Baronius himself has never
thought of this: he is content to say, Nazaraei Evangelium Matthaei, quod semel
acceperant, aliquandiu illibatum incorruptumque servarunt. Baron. Ann. Chapter 41.
n. 18.
that the Nazarenes during some time preserved the true Gospel of S. Matthew
entire, and without any Additions: he confutes the Opinion of Bid, who has
believed that this Hebrew Gospel ought not to be reckoned in the number of
Apocryphal Books: he judges, that it ought to be placed in the rank of
Apocryphal Pieces, because S. Jerome has quoted in his Works several Passages
out of it, which are not to be found in the Copies that have been received and
approved of by the Church. Periculosum esse putamus id in aliam quam in
apocryphorum classem refer, cum non nisi una possit esse veritas. Bar. ibid.
It is dangerous (says this Cardinal) to put it in any other Class than that
of Apocryphal Books, because there can be but one Truth. If we understand in
the mean time by Apocryphal, a false Book, it is not true in that sense, that
the Gospel of the Nazarenes is Apocryphal; it may be only said, that if there
are considerable Additions therein that alter the sense, it is no more
Authentic: and this is that which is to be proved. I speak only of the Copy of
the Nazarenes, and not of that of the Ebionites, who had corrupted it on
purpose to adjust it to their Prejudices.

We ought not, notwithstanding, to compare the Hebrew Gospel of the Nazarenes,
Casaub. Exercit. 16. ad Annal. Bar. n. 126.
as Casaubon has done, with the Gospel entitled according to the Egyptians,
the Acts of Barnabas, the Prophecy of Cham, and other Books that have been
forged by Impostors. It is not to be doubted on the contrary, that the Gospel
of the Nazarenes has been certainly composed by the Apostle whose Name it
bears: as for what concerns the Additions which the Nazarenes might have
inserted in the first Original of S. Matthew, it may happen that they are not
false: we ought rather to attribute them to their Simplicity, and to their good
Faith, than to their malice. It was the custom in these Primitive times of
Christianity, to take a great deal of pains to inform themselves of that which
the Disciples of the Apostles had learned of their Masters, as appears by the
Example of Papias who lived in those times, of S. Irenaeus who was not long
after, and of some others of the Ancient. It is probable that the Nazarenes
have annexed to their Gospel of S. Matthew the like Histories which they had
learned, and which they believed to be founded on good Testimonies: therefore
they are not all to be rejected as false, though they are not to be found in
any of the Copies that are used and allowed by the Church. It may be observed,
that all the Churches of the World have taken their Versions from the Greek
Copy wherein these Additions are not expressed, because the Gospel of S.
Matthew had been apparently translated out of Hebrew into Greek before the
Nazarenes had inserted them.

Furthermore, these Differences of the Hebrew Gospel of the Nazarenes from our
Copy, seem to have been numerous enough, if we may judge of them by those that
S. Jerome has left us in diverse Passages of his Works, a part of which has
been collected by some Commentators on the New Testament. Nevertheless, there
is a diversity of Opinions as to some of these Histories or Additions of the
Nazarenes: all men, for example, are not agreed that the History of the
adulterous Woman, of whom mention is made Chap. viii. of S. John, has been in
their Hebrew Gospel. That which has given occasion to believe it, is the
Testimony of Papias, who had lived with the Disciples of the Apostles: he says
(...). Pap. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 39.
that the History of the Woman who was accused of many Sins before our Savior,
is to be read in the Gospel that was called according to the Hebrews; which
seems not to be meant of any other than that adulterous Woman, whom S. John
has mentioned. Nevertheless, Baron. Ann. c. 99. n. 6.
Baronius has thought, and some others after him, that the History related in
Eusebius by Papias is different from that whereof S. John speaks, because Cum
Papias multorum criminum dicat illam fominam accusatam, Joannes vero habeat
unius tantum facinoris, nempe quod deprehensa esset in adulterio, insimulatam,
plane diversam ab illa fuisse, cujus nulla esset mentio apud Evangelistas,
significare videtur. Baron. ann. Christ. 99. n. 6.
Papias discourses of a Woman accused of many Crimes in general, whereas S.
John simply takes notice of an adulterous Woman: but there is but little
likelihood that Papias should have designed to describe in this Passage any
other than the adulterous Woman, though his Expression runs in general terms.
This has caused several learned men to believe, that the History of the
adulterous Woman has been taken from the Hebrew Gospel of the Nazarenes, and
that it has been afterward inserted into that of S. John: indeed it is not
found in a great number of Copies of this Gospel, as we shall show hereafter.

I shall only observe here, that if this be true, we ought not to cast away, as
false Histories, all the Additions that the Nazarenes had inserted into their
Hebrew Copy of S. Matthew, because they might have received them from good
hands.

It is for this reason that Cardinal Baronius authorizeth an Apparition of our
Savior to S. James, Baron. Ann. c 34. n. 182.
which was found only in the Copy of the Nazarenes, and is related after this
manner by S. Jerome; Evangelium quoque quod appellatur secundum Hebraeos,
Hieron. de Script. Eccl. in Jacobo.
and a me nuper in Graecum Latinumque sermonem translatum est, quo and Origines
saepe utitur, post resurrectionem Salvatoris refert: "Dominus autem cum
dedisset sindonem servo sacerdotis, ivit ad Jacobum, and apparuit ei. Juraverat
enim Jacobus, se non comesturum panem ab illa hora qua biberat calicem Domini,
donec videret eum resurgentem a mortuis. Rursusque post paululum: Afferte, ait
Dominus, mensam and panem. Statimque additur, Tulit panem, and benedixit ac
fregit, and post dedit Jacobo Justo, and dixit ei, Frater mi, comede panem
tuum, quia resurrexit filius hominis a dormientibus. Baronius, who has also
inserted into his Annals this Extract of the Gospel of the Nazarenes, adds,
that Hactenus ex dicto Evangelio Nazaraeorum Hieronymus, qui cum non excipiat
de apocrypho, ut de aliis assolet, se ejusdem historiae fidem haud impugnasse
demonstras. Baron. ibid.
S. Jerome did not believe that it was false, because he rejected it not in that
place, as he was wont to do when he cited Apocryphal Pieces. If this
observation of the Cardinal be true, the greatest part of the Additions of this
Gospel will then be admitted, because S. Jerome is ordinarily content to
rehearse them simply without disapproving them.

After this manner also on Chap. xii. of S. Matthew, Hieron. Comm. lib. 2. in
c. 12. Matthew.
wherein mention is made of a Man who had his hand withered, and was healed by
Jesus Christ, he quotes the Hebrew Gospel of the Nazarenes and Ebionites, where
this History is written more at large, and with other Circumstances. It is
specified therein, that this Man was a Mason by Trade, and that he thus
addressed himself to our Savior; I was a Mason, that gained my Livelihood by
working. I pray thee, Jesus, to heal me, that I may not be obliged shamefully
to beg. S. Jerome is so far from rejecting this History as a Fable, that he
says on the contrary in this same Passage, that the Gospel of the Nazarenes,
from whence he has taken it, passes for Authentic in the Judgment of many
People. In Evangelio (says this learned Father) quo utuntur Nazareni and
Ebionitae, quod nuper in Graecum de Hebraeo sermon transtulimus, and quod
vocatur a plerisque Matthaei Authenticum, homo iste qui aridam habet manum
cementarius scribitur, istiusmodi vocibus auxilium precans: "Cementarius eram
manibus victum quaeritans. Precor te, Jesu, ut mihi restituas sanitatem, ne
turpiter mendicem cibos.

Moreover, S. Jerome cites two other considerable Passages of this same Gospel
at the beginning of his third Book against the Pelagians, without lessening
their credit by any Restriction. The first has regard to the Baptism of S.
John, whereof Jesus Christ said that he had no need; and the other is a various
reading of the 21 and 22 Verses of the xviii. Chap. of S. Matthew. In Evangelio
(says S. Jerome) juxta Hebraeos, quod Chaldaico quidem Syroque sermon, Hieron.
lib. 3. adv. Pelag.
sed Hebraicis literis scriptum est, quo utuntur usque hodie Nazareni secundum
Apostolos, sive ut plerique autumant, juxta Matthaum, quod and in Caesariensi
habetur Bibliotheca, narrat historia. "Ecce matter Domini and fratres ejus
dicebant ei, Joannes Baptista baptizat in remissionem peccatorum, eamus and
baptizemur ab eo. Dixit autem eis, quid peccavi ut vadam and baptizer ab eo,
nisi forte hoc ipsum quod dixi ignorantia est. Et in eodem volumine. Si
peccaverit, inquit, frater tuus in verbo, and satis tibi fecerit, septies in
die suscipe eum. Dixit illi Simon discipulus ejus, septies in die? Respondit
Dominus, and dixit ei, etiam ego dico tibi usque septuagesies. Etenim in
Prophetis quoque, postquam uncti sunt Spiritu Sancto, inventus est sermo
peccati.

The same Nazarenes read also otherwise than we have it in our Copies, the 16
and 17 Verses of the iii. Chapter of S. Matthew, when the Baptism of Jesus
Christ is mentioned. S. Jerome has taken notice in his Commentary on Isaiah,
that they read it after this manner: Factum est autem cum ascendisset Dominus
de aqua, Evang. Nazar. apud. Hier. l. 4. Comm. in Es. c. 11.
descendit fons omnis Spiritus Sancti, and requievit super eum, and dixit illi,
fili mi, in omnibus Prophetis expectabam te ut venires, and requiescerem in te:
tu es enim requies mea, tu es filius meus primogenitus qui regnas in
sempiternum.

Amongst the Miracles that happened at the Death of our Savior, and that are
declared in the xxvii Chap. of S. Matthew, the Nazarenes relate this in their
Gospel, In Evangelio cujus saepe facimus mentionem, superliminare templi
infinitae magnitudinis fractum esse atque divisum legimus. Hieron. lib. 4.
Comment. in Matthew. c. 27.
that the top of the Gate of the Temple, that was of a prodigious bigness, was
broken in pieces; whereas we read only in our Copies, that the Vail of the
Temple was rent in twain. Mat. xxvii. 51.


I shall take no notice of some other Examples that I might produce of the
diversity that was found between the Hebrew Gospel of the Nazarenes and the
Greek, which has remained alone in use throughout all the Churches in the
World. I shall only add to what has been already observed, that in the xxiii.
Chapter of S. Matthew, ver. 25. where we read Zacharias Son of Barachias, In
Evangelio quo utuntur Nazareni, pro filio Barachiae, filium Jojadae, reperimus.
Hieron. lib. 4. Comm. in Matthew. c. 23.
the Nazarenes had in their Copy according to the Testimony of S. Jerome,
Zacharias Son of Jojada: and this Reading is confirmed by that which is related
concerning this Zacharias in the Old Testament. Now according to our Copies,
the Father of Zacharias must have had two Names: and since this does not appear
to us, I believe that in this place the Hebrew Gospel ought to be preferred
before the other Copies, especially there being no prejudice that could have
obliged the Nazarenes or the Ebionites to make any alteration in this Point.

We may see plainly, by all these Examples, what has been the Hebrew Gospel of
S. Matthew; or as others call it, of the twelve Apostles, which has been used
by the Nazarenes: we may judge also, at the same time, that it was different
enough from our Copies. It would be in the mean time a piece of Rashness to put
all these diversities in the number of Fables with Casaubon, Tam igitur
apocryphum hoc Evangelium, quam illud quod Thaddaei dicebatur, aut quod Thomae
adscribebant, and pro vero usurpabant Manichaei. Casaub. ad Ann. Eccles. Baron.
who has made no scruple to rank this Gospel amongst those that have been
counterfeited under the Names of S. Thaddaeus and S. Thomas. Grotius, who
discourses thereof with more Moderation, Narrationes quaedam non praescriptae
a Mattheo, sed auditu perceptae videntur paulatim a Nazaraeis assutae iis quae
penes ipsos erant exemplaribus. Grot. Annot. in tit. Matthew.
believes that the Nazarenes have inserted that which they have in their Copies
and which is not in ours, relying upon certain Relations that they had heard.
It is for this reason that when he speaks of the History of the adulterous
Woman, of whom mention is made in S. John, and which he judges to have been
taken out of the Gospel of these Nazarenes, that he forbears not to ascribe to
it the same Authority, as if the Apostles were the true Authors of it. He
acknowledges nevertheless, that it was not originally neither in the Hebrew of
S. Matthew, nor in the Greek of S. John; nec a Matthaeo scriptam in Hebraeo
Evangelio, nec a Joanne in Graeco. He believes that Quia Apostoli viva voce
hanc historiam saepe narraverant, attextam a Nazarenis quidem Palestinae
Hebraeo Evangelio, a Papia autem aliisque Joannis discipulis Graeco Joannis,
and ab Ecclesia probatam, ideo quod satis certo testimonio constaret ab
Apostolis traditam. Grot. Annot. in c. 8. Joann.
the Nazarenes of Palestine had added it to their Hebrew Gospel, because it
came from the Apostles; and that afterward Papias and the other Disciples of
S. John had put it into his Gospel written in Greek, which said History has
been approved by the Church, because it was grounded on an Apostolical
Tradition. Jansenius Bishop of Gand, who had written the same thing before
Grotius Ex quibus satis patet hanc historiam non in primis fuisse ab
Evangelista hoc loco descriptam, sed vel ex apocrypho illo Evangelio additam,
quae tamen autoritatem obtinuerit, non quod in apocryphis scripta fuerit, sed
quod eam Papias e suo doctore audierit, quodque hanc Ecclesiae consensus, ut
Evangelio dignam comprobarit, vel Joannem post semel descriptum a se Evangelium
adjecisse hanc partem suo Evangelio, ut ob id contigerit in quibusdam codicibus
haberi, in quibusdam non. Jans. Episc. Gand. Comm. in Concor. Eu. c. 76.
would have this History considered as Canonical, because Papias had received
it from his Master, and because it has been allowed by the Church; he says
nevertheless, that it might happen that S. John has added it himself to his
Gospel after he had written it; and that for this reason it was not found in
some Copies.

But there seems to be but little Probability in this last Remark, and there
can be nothing determined thereupon with any certainty. We only know that
Papias reckons in the number of Histories which he had learned from the
Disciples of the Apostles, that which has regard to the Woman accused of many
Crimes in the Presence of our Savior; and that he adds at the same time, that
it was related in the Gospel which was called according to the Hebrews. Now
since it is not unlikely that this Woman accused of many Crimes is the same
with the adulterous Woman of whom S. John makes mention, it seems as if it
might be inferred from thence, that in the time of Papias this History was not
to be found but in the Hebrew Gospel of the Nazarenes. This makes it appear,
that all the Additions which have been inserted into this Gospel ought not to
be accounted as Fables, since Papias has produced one of them which came from
an Apostolical Tradition: this might be also said of the others with some
Probability. Hegesippus, who was familiarly acquainted with the Disciples of
the Apostles, (...). Eusebius. Hin. Eccl. lib. 4. c. 22.
has also sometimes made use of the Hebrew or Syriack Gospel of the Nazarenes,
and he has quoted it even in Hebrew: from whence Eusebius concludes, that he
must needs be of the number of the Hebrews that had embraced the Christian
Religion.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Ebionites. Of their Copy of the Gospel of S. Matthew. Of
some other ancient Heretics who have made use of this same Gospel.
WE have already observed in discoursing of the Nazarenes, that the Ebionites
did also make use of the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew as well as they; but that
they had nevertheless altered and corrupted it in some places, to make it
agreeable to their false Notions and Prejudices. Ebionaei (says S. Irenaeus)
eo Evangelio, quod est secundum Matthaeum, Iren. l. 3. adv. Haer. c. 4.
solo utentes, ex illo ipso convincuntur. The ancient Ecclesiastical Writers
(according to Eusebius) have called these Sectaries Ebionites, from a Word that
signifies in Hebrew Poor, because they had poor Conceptions concerning Jesus
Christ, whom they believed to be a simple Man. (...). Eusebius Hist. Eccl. lib. 3.
c. 27.
They made use of that Gospel only (adds this Historian) which was called
according to the Hebrews, little esteeming the rest. Origin, who has been
followed by Eusebius, (...). Orig. lib. 4. de princ. apud Vales. Annot. in lib.
3. Hist. Eccles. Eusebius.
does also derive the Etymology of the Name of these Heretics from the Hebrew
Word Ebion, which signifies Poor, because they were (says he) poor in
Judgment, and wanted Understanding.

But all this seems to me to be ill grounded, and to be but a simple Allusion
to the Name of these Sectaries, which indeed signifies Poor in the Hebrew
Tongue. It is more probable that the Jews called them so in derision and scorn;
because in these Primitive times of Christianity there were scarce any but poor
People that had embraced it. This gave occasion to Jesus Christ to say to his
Disciples, Luke vi. 20.
Blessed be ye poor, for yours is the Kingdom of God. This Kingdom of God was
the Gospel on which they believed: therefore our Savior says in another
place, Luke vii. 20.
that the Gospel is preached to the Poor. Origin himself seems to confirm this
Opinion in his Books against Celsus, Matthew. xi. 15.
where he observes, that (...). Orig. lib. 2. contra Celsum.
the Word Ebion signifies Poor in Hebrew, and that they have given the name of
Ebionites or poor to those among the Jews who have believed that Jesus was the
Messiah.

Since then the Jews called those of their own Nation that turned Christians,
Nazarenes. and Galileans, by way of contempt, it is also very probable, that
they have named them Ebionites or poor. It may be further said, that these
Primitive Christians took this Name themselves conformably to their Profession.
This agrees very well with the Remark of S. Epiphanius, who informs us, that
the Ebionites (...). Epiph. Haer. 30. n. 17.
boasted of this Name, giving it out, that they were poor in imitation of the
Apostles; the custom being in those times to sell their Goods, and to lay them
at their Feet. This Name degenerated afterward into that of a Sect, which was
a Branch of the Nazarenes, and held certain particular Opinions; but in the
rest they agreed with them in the same Foundation of Religion as to every thing
that concerned the Old Law, which they kept equally with Christianity. S.
Epiphanius in the mean time will have it that there has certainly been a Man
called Ebion, from whom the Ebionites took their original, who lived at the
same time with the Nazarenes and Cerinthians. It may well be, that this Father
and all the others who have thought that there was indeed a Man named Ebion,
Author of the Sect of the Ebionites, have had no better grounds whereon to
establish this Ebion, than a certain Spanish Historian, who has written the
History of the Popes in his Language, has had in like manner to invent a Man
called Hugo a Sacramentarian Arch-Heretick, Hugo Haeresiarcha Sacramentarius,
Hugo de quien se llaman los herejes de Francia Hugonotes. Illescas lib. 6. de
la Hist. Pontif. fol. 453.
from whom the Heretics of France have been named Hugonots.

The same S. Epiphanius more exactly describes the original of these Sectaries,
whose beginning and first appearance he dates after the destruction of
Jerusalem, and at that time when the Primitive Christians that were called
Nazarenes, and were lately departed from this City, came to dwell at Pella in
the Province of Decapolis. It appears from thence that the Ebionites are only
an Offspring of the ancient Nazarenes, having nevertheless corrupted the
purity and simplicity of the Faith of these primitive Christians. Therefore
they revised the original Hebrew of S. Matthew, to make it more conformable to
their Opinions. It will not be amiss here to produce some Fragments of their
Gospel which Epiphanius has transmitted to us.

In the first place he says in general (...), etc. Epiph. Haer. 30. n. 13.
that the Gospel of the Ebionites was not entire, but corrupted and mutilated.
They had taken out of it the Genealogy of Jesus Christ, and all that follows to
Chapter 3. of S. Matthew (...). Epiph. ibid.
beginning their Gospel with these words, It came to pass in the days of Herod
the King of Judaea, that John came baptizing the baptism of repentance in the
river Jordan, who was said to be of the race of Aaron the priest the son of
Zacharias and Elizabeth, and all people came unto him.

The Baptism of our Savior by S. John was related after this manner in the
Gospel of the Ebionites. (...). Evang. Ebion. apud Epiph. ibid.
After the people had been baptized, Jesus came also, and was baptized by John,
and as he ascended out of the water, the Heavens were opened, and he saw the
Holy Spirit of God in the form of a Dove, which descended and came toward him;
and a voice was heard from heaven saying, thou art my beloved son, in thee have
I been well pleased. And continuing (...). Evang. Ebion. ibid.
This day have I begotten thee, and immediately a great light shone about the
place: and John having seen it, says unto him, who art thou, Lord? And again a
voice from heaven said unto him, this is my beloved son in whom I have been
well pleased; and then John falling down before him said, I pray thee, Lord,
baptize thou me: but he forbad him, saying, suffer it to be so; for thus it
becomes all things to be fulfilled.

We may judge by that which we have now produced of the Gospel of the
Ebionites, that the order of the words was not altogether the same as in our
Copies, and that there were besides some Alterations and Additions. There is
another Passage at the beginning of the Gospel, from whence we may be able to
take a better estimate thereof (...). Evang Ebion. apud Epiph. ibid.
There was a certain man, Jesus by name, of about thirty years of age, who has
chosen us, and being come to Caphernaum he entered into the house of Simon
surnamed Peter, and opening his mouth he said, When I passed along the lake of
Tiberias I chose John and James the sons of Zebedee, and Simon and Andrew and
Thaddeus and Simon Zelotes and Judas Iscariot, and I called thee Matthew
sitting at the receipt of custom, and thou have followed me. I will then that
you be twelve Apostles for a testimony unto Israel. And John was baptising, and
the Pharisees came unto him, and were baptized and all Jerusalem, and John had
his raiment os camels hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins, and his food
was wild honey, that had the taste of Manna, as a cake dipped in oil. S.
Epiphanius here reproves the Ebionites for having corrupted the Gospel of S.
Matthew, in reading (...) instead of (...). But this alteration could have
happened only in the Greek, and not in their Hebrew or Syriack Copy, wherein
there is no such resemblance of words. They must either have a particular Greek
Translation, which they had made for their own use, or they must have adjusted
ours to their Text.

Furthermore these Sectaries were different from the Nazarenes, with respect to
the Holy Scriptures: for whereas these received, as has been already observed,
all the Old Testament, as it was in the Canon of the Jews; the Ebionites on the
contrary rejected all the Prophets. They abhorred the Names of David, Solomon,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel and Ezechiel: they only adhered to the Pentateuch, and
they did not much regard that neither. (...). Ebion. apud Epiph. ibid. n. 18.
What use (said they) can there be made of the Law after the coming of the
Gospel? And when they were asked why they had a veneration for Moses, Abraham
and the other ancient Patriarchs: they answered, That they therein followed the
example of Jesus Christ.

It is probable that the Ebionites who received no other but the five Books of
Moses, and only considered Joshua in quality of his Successor, were descended
from some Samaritans who embraced Christianity in imitation of the Nazarenes.
Epiph. ib. n. 1.
Thus Epiphanius has observed that Ebion was infected with the Superstitions
of the Samaritans: (...). Whereas they both retain the Old Law with the Gospel,
the Ebionites do only keep the Books of Moses, because the Samaritans have
never received any but these five Books as Canonical. But the Nazarenes who
passed from Judaism to the Christian Religion, continued to read the whole Old
Testament, as they read it before in their Synagogues. S. Epiphanius has
further remarked, that these Ebionites (...). Epiph. ibid.
had their Priests or Elders, and their Chiefs of the Synagogue. For they call
not (says he) their Assembly a Church, but a Synagogue. He speaks apparently
of the Ebionites that understood the Greek Tongue, and even read a Greek
Translation of their Hebrew or Syriack Gospel: For this distinction between the
Words Synagogue and Church is not to be found in the Hebrew or Syriack, and the
sense of these two words is the same in the Greek; as it is easy to prove from
the Greek Version of the Septuagint.

The Ebionites were not content only to have corrupted the Gospel of S.
Matthew, but they forged also diverse Books, (according to Epiphanius) (...).
Epiph. ibid. n. 22.
under the Names of James, Matthew and other Disciples of Jesus Christ. They
read one in like manner under the Name of S. John, abusing by this means the
Names of the Apostles, that they might the more easily impose on those of their
party. (...). Epiph. ibid. n. 15.
Besides they made use of the Voyages of S. Peter, written by S. Clement: but
they had so altered and mangled them, that there hardly remained any thing of
Truth; they modelled them after a new manner, and suited them to their humors,
to cause S. Peter to utter abundance of Falsities that authorized that which
was practiced among them. These Heretics may be easily convinced of having
retrenched from their Copy of S. Matthew the Genealogy of Jesus Christ: for the
Cerinthians and the Carpocratians who read it, and who held the same Opinions
as they do touching the Birth of our Savior, had this Genealogy in their Copy,
they refer to this to prove that Jesus Christ was a mere Man. Now these
Cerinthians had established their Sect before that of the Ebionites appeared.
S. Epiphanius believes (...). Epiph. ibid. n. 3.
that these last had chosen for their use the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew only,
in imitation of the Cerinthians.

Cerinthus was a zealous Defender of the Circumcision as well as the Nazarenes
and Ebionites. I know not from whence the same S. Epiphanius has taken that
which he reports concerning him, to wit, that he was the Ringleader of a
Faction that rose up at Jerusalem against S. Peter, on occasion that he was
found among the uncircumcised, and had eaten with them. It is recorded in the
Acts of the Apostles, that the Faithful that were circumcised disputed on this
Subject against this holy Apostle. Cerinthus (if we may believe S. Epiphanius)
was the chief in this Dispute, when he was yet in the number of the Faithful,
and took this pretense to separate himself from them. The Church was divided
from that time into different Opinions. Some of them that were circumcised
would not submit to the Revelation that had been made to S. Peter in the City
of Joppa; they insisted that none ought to be received into the Church but
those that were circumcised; and they that were of this Sect retained the
Hebrew Gospel of S. Mattew, because they were come from Judaism. Therefore the
ancient Ecclesiastical Writers have called this Gospel according to the
Hebrews. The others on the contrary, who were for the most part converted from
Gentilism, made use of the Greek Copy of this same Gospel; and this last alone
is preserved in the Church: that of the Hebrews remained only among some
Sectaries, and has been lost at the same time when these Sects have been
extinct.

CHAP. IX. Of the Greek Copy of S. Matthew, and its Authority. A Comparison of
this Copy with the Hebrew or Chaldaick. An Answer to the Objections of some
Heretics against this Gospel.
ALL Antiquity is agreed, that the Original of the Gospel of S. Matthew has
been written in the Language that the Jews of Jerusalem spoke at that time, and
that it has been since translated into Greek. But we have nothing certain
concerning the Author of this Greek Version. Matthaeus, qui and Levi, ex
publicano Apostolus primus in Judaea propter eos qui ex circumcisione
crediderunt, Evangelium Christi Hebraicis literis verbisque composuit. Quod
quis postea in Graecum transtulerit, non satis certum est. Hieron. de Script.
Eccl. in Matthew.
Matthew (says S. Jerome) is the first that has written the Gospel of Jesus
Christ in Hebrew for the use of the Jews that had embraced Christianity; but it
is not known who has translated it out of Hebrew into Greek. The Author of the
Synopsis, attributed to S. Athanasius, affirms nevertheless (...). Athan in
Synops. S Script.
that it has been first composed in Hebrew by S. Matthew, who published it in
Jerusalem in this same Tongue; and that S. James who has been the first Bishop
of this City translated it into Greek. He produces no Act of the ancient
Writers of the Church to justify this Opinion. Papias on the contrary, who was
not far distant from the time of the Apostles, declares, (...). Pap. apud
Eusebius. lib. 3. Hist. Eccl. c. 39.
that the Original of S. Matthew was in Hebrew, and that afterward every one
interpreted it as he was able. This makes me think that in these primitive
times of the Christian Religion diverse private persons had translated this
Gospel for their own use, and almost after the same manner as there have been
several Latin Versions from the Greek, tho there was one that was more
generally received in the Churches than the others. It is probable also that
the Cerinthians, the Carpocratians, the Ebionites, and in one word all the
ancient Sectaries, who preferred the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew before the
others, made Greek Versions of it for their use, as well as the Orthodox.

Casaubon, Casaub. Exercit. 15. ad Annal. Baron. n. 12.
who has used his utmost endeavors to decry the Hebrew Gospel which the
Nazarenes and the Ebionites had kept, that he might give the greater authority
to the Greek, avoucheth freely that the Fathers are very much divided in their
Opinions on this Subject; some ascribing this Version to S. James, others to S.
John, others to S. Barnabas; and lastly some few to S. Paul and S. Luke. Quae
diversitas sententiarum, ut de vero autore certo pronuntiare nos vetat: ita
illud certissime demonstrat, ipsis Apostolorum temporibus ab uno illorum, aut
illorum auspiciis, vel potius Spiritus Sancti, cujus ipsi erant organa, Graecum
Textum ex Hebraico esse confectum. Casaubon. Exercit. 15. ad Annal. Baron. n.
12.
This diversity of Opinions (adds he) plainly shows that it cannot be certainly
affirmed who has been the Author of this Greek Version: but it serves (says
he) for a demonstration to make it appear that it is derived from the very
times of the Apostles, who are the Authors or Promoters of it; or rather it
ought to be attributed to the Holy Ghost, whose Instruments they have been.

But can that be called a Demonstration which is only grounded on uncertain
Conjectures? Would it not be more prudent to refer our selves herein to the
testimony of Papias, who has lived with the Disciples of the Apostles? If
there had been in his time a Greek Version of the Gospel of S. Matthew, which
had been made by some Apostle, he would not have failed to have told us of it.
He declares on the contrary, that every one translated it as he was able. There
is nothing therefore but the constant Tradition of the Church alone that gives
authority to this Version, and that can oblige us to prefer it before the
Hebrew or Chaldaick Copy of the Nazarenes.

Whereas the Protestants make the Holy Ghost to descend on the Apostles to
translate the Gospel of S. Matthew out of Greek into Hebrew: some Catholic
Divines on the other side pretend also that the ancient Latin Version of the
New Testament has been inspired. But it is much more reasonable only to admit
this Inspiration for the Originals of the Holy Scriptures, which have been
translated into different Languages according to the necessities and occasions
of the Churches. If we hearken in the mean time to Casaubon and some other
Protestants, the Greek only of S. Matthew would be accounted Canonical, Constat
sane Ecclesiam Dei hunc ipsum textum inter libros Canonis Sacri relatum pari
cum caeteris libris veneratione esse persecutam, quod neque in Syriaca
Versione, neque in ulla alia reperitur esse factum. Casaub. ibid.
because the Church has put this Text into the Canon that she has made of the
Sacred Books, and she has not put therein the Syriack Version which is most
ancient, nor any other Translation: but where is it to be found that the Church
in placing the Gospel of S. Matthew in the rank of Canonical Books, has spoken
of the sole Greek Version, and has excluded all others? She only speaks in
general of the Gospel of S. Matthew, which is Divine and Canonical in
whatsoever Language it be written. It may be said nevertheless that there are
some Nations that have exacter Translations of them than others; this hinders
not but that it may be averred, that they all have a Canonical Copy of the
Gospel of S. Matthew. The Grecians and the Latins have this advantage over the
other Christians, that their Versions are the most ancient and the most exact,
and the Syrians after them, However there is no Christian Nation that does not
believe but that they have in possession the true Gospel of S. Matthew, tho
they all have only Copies of it.

It does not appear that Casaubon, who is usually moderate in his Opinions,
has sufficiently considered this matter, when he has unadvisedly taken the
part of some Protestants against Baronius. I do not pretend to defend all that
Baronius has alleged in this point: but it seems to me that those of the
Roman Church cannot with Justice be reproached Error est in fide
periculosissimus, ne dicam Haeresis, obtentu Hebraici contextus, qui sam inde a
principio reperiri desiit in orbis nostri notis Ecclesiis, Graeci auctoritatem
velle elevare; quod omnes hodie Hildebrandinorum sacrorum mystae in hac
quaestione faciunt. Casaub. ibid.
as Heretics, when they defend the Hebrew Text of S. Matthew, to detract (say
they) from the Authority of the Greek Copy. The Defense that they undertake of
the Hebrew Text of S. Matthew does not in the least diminish the Authority of
the Greek Version. They only insist that the Greek is not the original, but the
Hebrew; and if this Original were come to our hands, it might with reason be
preferred before the Greek, which is but a Translation. In the mean time since
this Hebrew Text has not been preserved in its purity in the Orthodox
Churches, but on the contrary has been adopted by the Ebionite Heretics, who
have corrupted it, the Fragments thereof that are now extant are looked upon as
Apocryphal Pieces. By the word Apocryphal we ought only to understand that
those Acts are doubtful, and not false, nor supposititious. This hinders not
but that good use may be made of them in those parts that are acknowledged not
to have been altered; an instance whereof has been above propounded taken from
S. Jerome's Commentaries on S. Matthew.

It were to be wished that we had at this day this Hebrew or Chaldaick Gospel
entire, even after the manner as it has been interpolated by the Nazarenes,
and altered by the Ebionites; we should not reckon it in the number of those
Gospels that have been forged by Impostors, as Casaubon has indiscreetly done:
we should esteem it on the contrary, as the most ancient Act of the Christian
Religion. Is there not reason to conjecture that he that has translated the
Original of S. Matthew out of Hebrew into Greek, has epitomized it in some
places, and sometimes taken the liberty rather to give us the Sense than the
Words? at least he seems to have used this liberty in the Quotations of the Old
Testament that are therein produced, which are more conformable to the Greek
Version of the Seventy, than to the Hebrew Text: in the mean while, there is
very little appearance that S. Matthew writing his Gospel for the use of the
Hebrews, who read the Bible in Hebrew in their Synagogues, should have quoted
the Passages of the Old Testament otherwise than they were read in their
Copies. It is sufficient to authorize this Greek Version, that it has been
read in the Churches that were constituted by the Apostles, and that it has
been delivered down to us from Age to Age by a constant Tradition: it is on
this uninterrupted Tradition of the Churches that we ought to rely, in showing
that the Greek Copy of S. Matthew is authentic, and not on the imaginary
Reasons of some Protestants.

This same Tradition of all the Churches in the World ought to be opposed to
some Heretics, who have believed that the Gospel of S. Matthew has been
mangled and corrupted in several places. Faustus, a famous Manichean, who could
not adjust the Genealogy of Jesus Christ that is at the beginning of S. Matthew
to the Opinions of his Party, has sought for Reasons to make it appear, that
it was false; whereas he ought to have considered, that having been received
continually in the Church, as well as the rest of this Gospel, it bore the same
stamp of Authority: he compares S. Matthew with S. Luke, who have related this
Genealogy in a different manner; and because Offensus duorum maxim
Evangelistarum dissensione, qui genealogiam ejus scribunt, Lucae and Matthaei,
haesi incertus quemnam potissimum sequerer. Apud Aug. lib. 3. cont. Faust. c. 1.
he could not make them agree, he abandons them to follow S. Mark and S. John
who have made no mention thereof, and who correspond in this, that they do not
make Jesus the Son of David; for S. John calls him God, and S. Mark the Son of
God: from whence he concludes, that Jesus Christ was not born as S. Matthew and
S. Luke have written.

S. Augustine answers Faustus, that he is not the first that has taken notice
of this seeming Contradiction of the two Evangelists: that an infinite number
of learned Men, especially in the Greek Church, have spared no pains to
reconcile them; which he endeavors to do in this place: and by this he
condemns the rash Judgment of the Manicheans, who rejected as false, all that
was contrary to their Prejudices. Indeed those People were so obstinate in
their Opinions, that the same Faustus reviled the Orthodox who received the
Genealogy that is at the beginning of S. Matthew, as not being Catholics, but
Followers of Matthew; and he maintained also, Apud Aug. l. 23. cont. Faust. c.
2.
that it was contrary to their Creed. Quod si tu credas (says this Heretic)
ita ut scriptum est, eris jam quidem Matthaeanus, sic enim mihi dicendum est;
Catholicus vero nequaquam. De duobus vos unum fateri oportet, aut hunc non esse
Matthaeum qui haec videtur asserere, aut vos non tenere Apostolicam fidem. Apud
Aug. lib. 23. cont. Faust. c. 22.
You must either acknowledge (added he) that St. Matthew has not written this
Genealogy (which he called in derision Genesidium) or that you do not hold the
Apostolical Faith.

But it were an easy matter, without arguing at large on all the Difficulties
that Faustus propounded, to represent to him that this Genealogy had been
always read in the Churches ever since the Apostles: besides, that Fides
Catholica eademque Apostolica est, Dominum nostrum and Salvatorem Jesum
Christum, and filium Dei esse secundum Divinitatem, and filium David secundum
carnem: quod ita probamus ex Evangelicis and Apostolicis literis, ut nemo
possit contradicere, nisi qui ipsis literis contradicit. Aug. lib. 23. cont.
Faust. c. 5.
it was the Belief of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, (as S. Augustine
says) that Jesus Christ is the Son of God according to his Divinity, and the
Son of David according to the Flesh: that this Truth was so clearly proved by
the Writings of the Apostles, that they could not contradict it, at least if
they did not reject them altogether.

By this same Principle the Arguments of certain Anabaptists, of whom Sixtus
Senensis, and Baronius makes mention, might be confuted; but since their
Objections are almost the same as those of the Manicheans, it would be to no
purpose to insist on them. They have accounted as false that which S. Matthew
has related concerning the Wise Men that came to worship Jesus in the Cradle,
as also the History of the Children whom Herod caused to be put to death:
against the credit of these two Relations, they have opposed the silence of the
other Evangelists, and of Josephus, an Historian of that time.

Sixtus Senensis replies judiciously, Sixth. Sen. Bibl. S.l. 7.
that by the same reason they ought not to believe the Resurrection of Lazarus,
because none but S. John has spoken of it: neither does the silence of Josephus
prove any thing; for he has not mentioned diverse other Actions, which
nevertheless do not cease to be true. They that make such Objections as these,
ought to allege positive Proofs, as for example, from the diversity of ancient
Copies, some of which they should produce wherein these Histories are not to be
found; then they might infer with some probability that they had been added
afterward: but on the contrary they are to be seen in all our most ancient
Records; and the greatest Enemies of the Christian Religion have cited them
ever since the first Ages. Apud Orig. l. 1. cont. Cells.
Celsus has read them in the Gospel after the same manner as we do at present.
Porphyrius and Julian have also made some Objections against the Gospel of S.
Matthew, or rather against all the Books of the New Testament: but we shall
have occasion to examine them in the sequel of this Work.

CHAP. X. Of the Time and Order of every Gospel. Some Greek Manuscript Copies
are produced thereupon. Of S. Mark and his Gospel, which is commonly believed
to be the second. Of his Office of Interpreter to S. Peter.
ALthough some Ecclesiastical Writers have carefully set down the time in which
they have believed that every Evangelist has published his Gospel, we cannot
nevertheless determine any thing thereupon. Because we have no ancient and
certain Acts on which we might rely, I shall only relate what I have read on
this Subject at the end of some Manuscript Copies: The most ancient of these
Manuscripts that I have seen is at most but 700 Years old, as may be judged by
the Character: it is written in great Letters with the Accents and Points, and
may be seen in Mr. Colbert's Library, having been brought from Cyprus. There
are also many in the King's Library, wherein the time in which every Evangelist
has written his Gospel is specified: but as I have just now said, these
Manuscripts are not ancient. Indeed there are no such Remarks as these in the
most ancient, the custom of those Primitive times being only to put at the end
of every Book of the New Testament, The End of such a Book; the beginning of
this other Book.

To return to the Manuscripts that contain the Dates of the Gospels, see that
which is found in the Copy of Cyprus which is in Mr. Colbert's Library. (...).
MS. Colb. n. 5149.
The Gospel according to Matthew has been published by himself at Jerusalem
eight years after the Ascension of Jesus Christ. This Word at Jerusalem is of a
later Writing than the rest. (...). Id MS.
The Gospel according to Mark has been published ten years after the Ascension
of Jesus Christ. (...). Id. MS.
The Gospel according to Luke has been published fifteen years after the
Ascension of Jesus Christ.

In another Copy that is in the King's Library, and contains all the New
Testament, the Date of every Gospel is therein expressed after this manner in
the beginning of them. (...). MS. Reg. n 2871.
The Holy Gospel according to Matthew, written in the Hebrew Tongue, has been
published at Jerusalem, and interpreted by John eight years after the Ascension
of Jesus Christ. (...). Id. MS.
The Gospel according to Mark has been published ten years after the Ascension
of Jesus Christ, and preached by Peter at Rome. (...). Id. MS.
The Gospel according to Luke has been published fifteen years after the
Ascension of Jesus Christ, and preached by Paul at Rome. (...). Id. MS.
The Gospel according to John has been preached by himself in the Isle of
Patmos thirty years after the Ascension of Jesus Christ.

By this it may be seen what is the belief of the Greek Church touching the
time wherein every Gospel has been written: and though we cannot conclude any
thing as from certain Acts, nevertheless we may infer from thence, that S. Mark
obtains the second place amongst the Evangelists, if respect be had to the time
in which they wrote: they are also placed in this order in a great number of
Manuscript Copies which I have read: they are notwithstanding disposed
otherwise in the Greek and Latin Copy of Cambridge, which is one of the most
ancient that we have at this day, and contains the four Evangelists, with the
Acts of the Apostles. S. John, in this Copy follows immediately after S.
Matthew, S. Luke after S. John, and S. Mark is the last of the four. This Order
cannot be attributed to him that has bound the Leafs of this Manuscript
together; for the ranking of them is expressed at the end of every Gospel. See
what is read at the end of S. Matthew, Cod. MSS. Cantabr.
(...). MS. Cantabrig.
The Gospel according to Matthew is ended; the Gospel according to John
begins: afterward it is read at the end of S. John, (...). Id. MS.
The Gospel according to John is ended, the Gospel according to Luke begins:
and at the end of S. Luke it is read, (...). Id. MS.
The Gospel according to Luke is ended, the Gospel according to Mark begins:
and lastly these Words are to be read at the end of S. Mark, (...). Id. MS.
The Gospel according to Mark is ended, the Acts of the Apostles begin. This
way of specifying the end of one Book, and the beginning of that which follows,
is natural and the most ancient: there is no other to be found in the most
ancient Manuscripts of the New Testament. The Manuscript Copy of the Epistles
of S. Paul, which is in the Library of the Benedictin Monks of the Abbey of S.
Germain, and is not inferior in Antiquity, nor in the Beauty of its Characters,
to that of Cambridge, ranketh the Epistles of S. Paul in order after the same
manner; whereas in the Manuscripts that are of a later date, and in the printed
Books, some other Circumstances have been added, that show the place from
whence these Epistles have been written, and the Persons by whom they have been
sent. Moreover, the order of the Gospels which the Cambridge Manuscript follows
is not peculiar to it; for it may be seen also in an ancient Catalogue of the
Books of the Holy Scriptures which is at the end of the before mentioned MS.
Copy of the Benedictines. It is probable that this Alteration has been made by
the Latins who have transcribed the Greek Copies for their use. Druthmar, an
ancient Benedictin Monk, Christ. Druthm. Expos. in. Matthew. cap. 1.
declares that he had seen a Copy like to that of Cambridge, wherein the Gospel
of S. John immediately followed after that of S. Matthew: and it was believed,
that this Copy heretofore belonged to S. Hilary.

But this different Disposition in point of order of the Copies of the Gospels,
does not interfere with the general Opinion of the Ecclesiastical Writers, who
all give the second place among the Evangelists to S. Mark. It is also commonly
believed, that he was only the Disciple of the Apostles, and that therefore he
could not be an Eyewitness of the Actions which he relates: he has only
published that which he had learned from them, more especially from S. Peter,
whose Interpreter it is affirmed that he has been. Marcus (says S. Irenaeus)
interpres and sectator Petri; as if S. Peter had only preached this Gospel, and
that it had been afterward written by S. Mark. This Opinion is very ancient;
for Papias, who had received it from one of the Disciples of the Apostles,
declares it after him in these Words: (...). Apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3.
cap. 39.
Mark, who was Peter 's Interpreter, has written exactly all that he had
retained in his memory, without observing the order of the Words and Actions of
Jesus Christ; for he had not himself heard Jesus Christ, not having followed
him; but he had followed Peter, who preached to the People according as their
necessities required, without taking care to put the Words of our Savior in
order. Therefore Mark cannot be accused of any fault, who has recorded some
Actions as they came into his mind. He has applied himself solely not to
forget any thing that he had heard, and to say nothing but what was true.

This Testimony of Papias confirms that which has been abovesaid, that the
Gospels are only Collections of the Preachings of the Apostles, that have been
committed to Writing without having too scrupulous a regard to the times when
those Actions happened which are related therein. Indeed, these sacred Writers
have made it their business rather to exhibit a true History, than exactly to
describe the circumstances and order of Time. Clemens Alexandrinus informs us
moreover, that S. Peter publicly preached the Gospel at Rome; and that S.
Mark, who for a long time followed this Apostle, put it in Writing at the
request of the Faithful of that place: he adds also, that (...) Clem. Alex.
apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. c. 14.
S. Peter having known it, did neither dissuade him from it nor exhort him to
it. Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 15.
Eusebius nevertheless relying on the Authority of the same Clement, will have
it, that S. Peter after he had been informed of the great Zeal that the
Faithful of Rome testified to have his Preachings in Writing, approved of the
Collection that S. Mark had made of them; to the end that being authorized by
himself, it should be read in the Churches.

S. Jerome has only copied and epitomized after his manner the Words of
Eusebius, in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers, Hier. de Script. Eccles.
in Marco.
where he says, in speaking of S. Mark, Marcus Discipulus and Interpres Petri
juxta quod Petrum referentem audierat rogatus Romae a fratribus, breve scripsit
Evangelium: quod cum Petrus audisset, probavit, and Ecclesiae legendum sua
autoritate dedit. The Author of the Synopsis of the Holy Scriptures has also
believed that S. Mark has only published the Preachings of S. Peter: (...).
Athanas. in Synops. S. Script.
The Gospel according to Mark (says he) has been preached at Rome by the
Apostle Peter, and has been published by the blessed Apostle Mark, who has
also preached it at Alexandria in Egypt, in Pentapolis and in Lybia. In a word,
it has been the Judgment of all Antiquity after Papias, who was contemporary
with the Disciples of the Apostles, that the Gospel of S. Mark is only a
Collection of the Preachings of S. Peter, whose Interpreter he was; and the
most part of the Fathers have avouched at the same time, that it was made at
Rome, at the entreaty of the Primitive Christians of that City.

Papias, nevertheless, says nothing of the place in the Passage that we have
above cited; and S. Irenaeus speaks of it a little otherwise than the other
Fathers; he declares that S. Mark wrote not his Gospel till after the Death of
S. Peter and S. Paul; at least this is the most natural sense that can be given
to his Words, according as they are set down in the ancient Latin Edition of
the Works of this Father: observe what he says, Matthaeus in Hebraeis ipsorum
lingua Scripturam edidit Evangelii, cum Petrus and Paulus Romae Evangelizarent,
Iren. adv. Haer. lib. 3. cap. 1.
and fundarent Ecclesiam. Post vero horum excessum, Marcus Discipulus and
Interpres Petri, and ipsa quae a Petro annuntiata erant per scripta nobis
tradidit. Eusebius has rehearsed in Greek these very Words of Irenaeus.
Feuardent, Eus. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 8.
in his Edition of the Works of this Father, has observed that these words
post horum excessum, are not found in Eusebius: but he may be convinced of the
contrary by the Greek of Eusebius, where there is (...), which the ancient
Interpreter of S. Irenaeus has translated post horum excessum, and Ruffinus,
post quorum exitum. That whichg has deceived Feuardent is the Error of
Christopherson, who has left them out in his Latin Version, having thought
that it should be read in the Greek(...), quo edito.

If this reading were grounded on any Manuscript Copies, without doubt it ought
to be preferred before the other: but Christopherson seems to have corrected
this place on purpose in his Translation, to reconcile S. Irenaeus with the
other Greek Fathers, which ought never to be done; for if it were permitted to
alter the Text of the ancient Ecclesiastical Writers in those places where they
do not agree, especially where they treat of Chronology and the Designation of
Times, we must of necessity cast them into a new model: therefore Jacobus
Grynaeus has judiciously re-established this Passage in the Edition which he
has set forth with his Amendments of Christopherson's Version: he has put in
the body of the Translation post obitum autem illorum, and in the Margin these
Greek Words (...), to show that it must be read so, and not (...). Valesius
has also followed this same reading in his History of Eusebius, and he has
put in his Latin Version post horum interitum. He reprehends also, in his Notes
on this place, the Translation of Christopherson, as being contrary to all the
Greek Copies, and to Ruffinus. We may observe in the mean time, that the Greek
Word (...), and the Latin Excessus or Exitus, which the ancient Interpreter of
S. Irenaeus and Ruffinus have used, is equivocal; for it signifies Departure
as well as Death. According to the first sense, S. Irenaeus would have only
said, that S. Mark published his Gospel after S. Peter and S. Paul were
departed from Rome.

St. John Chrysostom has believed contrary to the Judgment of most part of the
Fathers, that S. Mark has written his Gospel in Egypt, and not at Rome;
nevertheless, he does not ground his Opinion on any ancient Acts, but only on
this, That it was commonly said so, viz. (...). Joann. Chrysostom. Homil. 1. in
Matthew.
that as S. Matthew had composed his Gospel at the Suit of the Jews whom he had
converted to the Faith of Jesus Christ, and that desired to have his Preachings
in Writing; in like manner S. Mark had written his Gospel at the Request of his
Disciples in Egypt. This seems so much the more probable, in regard that the
Apostles and their Disciples were wholly employed in preaching the Gospel, and
that they never would have thought of committing their Preachings to Writing,
if they had not been pressed to do it by the People whom they instructed. I
doubt not that S. John Chrysostom has had respect to this general Maxim of the
Apostles and their Disciples, and that he has considered that S. Mark has
been the first Apostle of Egypt; not but that the Opinion of this learned
Bishop might be easily reconciled with that of the other Fathers, in saying
that S. Mark has delivered his Gospel to the Faithful of Rome in quality of
Interpreter of S. Peter, who preached the Religion of Jesus Christ in that
great City; and that he has also given it afterward to the Primitive
Christians of Egypt in quality of Apostle or Bishop. We cannot however
determine any thing hereupon but in general, because we have no certain Acts
whereon we may confide. Therefore it is no wonder that the Fathers do not agree
amongst themselves when they speak in particular of such Transactions as these,
having oftentimes nothing to rely on but Conjectures.

S. Augustine seems to have considered S. Mark only as it were an Abbreviator of
the Gospel of S. Matthew. Marcus (says this Father) Matthaeum subsecutus,
tanquam pedissequus and breviator ejus videtur. Aug. l. 1. de Cons. Eccl. c. 2.
Indeed if we compare these two Gospels together, we shall find not only the
same things, but also the very same expressions, which S. Mark sometimes
epitomizeth, as if he had designed only to make an Abstract of the Gospel of S.
Matthew. This would seem to prove that this last had been written in Greek, and
not in Hebrew or Chaldaick; at least it might be said that the Greek Version of
S. Matthew's Gospel was already published when S. Mark composed his. Grotius is
of a different Persuasion, viz. that Sicut autem Marcus usus est Matthaei
hebraeo ni fallor codice; ita Marcilibro Graeco usus mihi videtur quisquis is
fuit Matthaei Graecus interpres. Nam quae Marcus ex Matthaeo desumpserat, idem
hic iisdem prope verbis posuit, nisi quod quaedam a Marco Hebraico aut
Chaldaico loquendi genere expressa propius ad Graeci sermonis normam emollivit.
Grot. Annot. in tit. Matthew.
S. Mark has made use of the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew, and that afterward
he that translated the latter out of Hebrew into Greek has followed the Greek
Copy of S. Mark, whose dialect or way of speaking he has only mollified, as
being somewhat harsh, and too near the Hebrew, suiting it to the Genius of the
Greek Tongue. But we can expect nothing but Conjectures herein.

It is worth the observing, that S. Mark cannot pass for a simple Abbreviator
of S. Matthew, because he insists more at large than he does in some places;
besides, if he had only a design to publish an Epitome of S. Matthew's Gospel,
he would not have taken away the entire Genealogy of Jesus Christ, which makes
one of the most principal parts of it: it is not the custom of those that
epitomize the Works of others, to retrench the most considerable parts of them.
And we must take heed of this, lest we unadvisedly authorize the Opinion of the
Ebionites and Manicheans, who would have the Genealogy which is at the
beginning of S. Matthew and S. Luke, to be added afterward by some later
Writers, who had (as they said) revised and interpolated these two Gospels.

The Office of Interpreter to S. Peter, which the ancient Doctors of the Church
have unanimously attributed to S. Mark, admits of some difficulties; for how
could it be (may it be objected) that this Apostle who had received of the Holy
Ghost the gift of Tongues, should have need of an Interpreter either in Writing
or in speaking in public? But there is nothing very surprising in this: S.
Paul, who was very well skilled in the Greek Tongue, because he had learned it
from his Youth at Tarsus, where it was spoken, did not forbear to take Titus
for his Interpreter. Therefore S. Jerome expounding these Words of this Apostle,
God that comfort those that are cast down, Epist. 2. ad Cor. c. 7. v. 6.
comforted us by the coming of Titus, declares, Ergo and Paulus contristatur,
quia praedicationis suae in praesentiarum fistulam organumque per quod Christo
caneret non invenerat. Hier. Epist. ad Hedib. qu. 11.
that the Joy that S. Paul had in the Presence of Titus sprang from this, that
in his Absence he was not able to preach the Gospel as he desired, because
Titus, who was his Interpreter, and spoke Greek more fluently than he, served
him as an Organ to promulge the Gospel of Jesus Christ to the People. Cumque
Paulus haberet scientiam sanctarum scripturarum, and sermonis diversarumque
linguarum gratiam possideret, unde ipse gloriatur in domino -- divinorum
sensuum majestatem digno non poterat Graeci eloquii explicare sermon; habebat
ergo Titum interpretem, sicut and B. Petrus Marcum. Hieron. ibid.
He ascribes to S. Paul all possible knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, and of
diverse Languages, but he could not (says he) express the Majesty of the Divine
Oracles after so noble and eloquent a manner as he wished; which obliged him to
take Titus for his Interpreter, as S. Peter also made choice of S. Mark for the
same Function. Joseph. Antiq. l. 20. c. ult.
We know that Josephus, who understood the Greek Tongue perfectly, and had
diligently studied it, says of himself, that it was impossible for him to
pronounce it well, by reason of his Mother Tongue. Bar. Ann. c. 45 n. 34.
Baronius, who has considered this Example of Josephus, could not,
nevertheless, absolutely give his Suffrage to S. Jerome. Quod pertinet ad
Apostolos, cum una cum caeteris Linguis and Graecam fuerint divinitus assecuti,
Deique dona perfecta sint, eos nihilominus Graecam linguam ea facilitate qua
Hebraeam pronuntiasse, mihi facile persuadeo. Baron. ann. c. 45. n. 34.
He is persuaded, that the Apostles who have received from God the gift of
Tongues, have not received them imperfect; and that therefore they knew as well
how to pronounce the Greek as the Hebrew: insomuch that he is obliged to have
recourse to another sort of Interpreters, of whom mention is made in the first
Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians. Epist. 1. ad Cor. cap. 14.
Whereas there were sometimes Persons of different Nations and Languages in the
Primitive Assemblies of Christians, it was necessary that there should be
Interpreters, who might explain to them in their own, what the Apostles
delivered in the vulgar Tongue of the Country. It is certain that the Church of
Corinth mentioned by S. Paul, was composed of diverse Jews who spoke Chaldaick
or Syriack: and this seems to have given occasion to all this Discourse of S.
Paul touching the gift of Prophecy and that of Tongues. This holy Apostle
excludes none from the Assembly; he permits those that had no knowledge of the
Language of the Place to speak in their own proper Dialect, though it were not
understood by the others: he only requires them in this case to make use of an
Interpreter, according to the Custom of the Synagogues at that time. Epist. 1.
ad Cor. c. 14. v. 5.
Greater is he that prophesies (says he) than he that speaks with Tongues,
except he interpret that the Church may receive edifying.

But it is evident that Papias and the other ancient Ecclesiastical Authors,
did not intend to describe this sort of Interpreters, when they said that S.
Mark had been the Interpreter of S. Peter. Baron. an. c. 45. n. 29.
Baronius himself has believed that S. Peter had written his Epistles in
Hebrew or Syriack, and that they had been afterward put into Greek: he
insinuates, that S. Mark who was his Interpreter translated the first. However
it be, I see no reason that can hinder us from affording to S. Peter and the
other Apostles who did not perfectly understand the Greek Tongue, the use of
true Interpreters, either in speaking or writing. It is in this sense that all
Antiquity has given to S. Mark the Title of Interpreter to S. Peter.

CHAP. XI. In what Language St. Mark has written his Gospel. Of the twelve
last Verses of this Gospel, which are not found in several Greek Manuscript
Copies.
CArdinal Baronius has forgot nothing in his Annals that might serve to prove
that S. Mark, who was the Interpreter of S. Peter at Rome, has written his
Gospel in Latin: he confesses nevertheless, that S. Jerome and S. Augustine are
of a different Opinion. But he might have said, that all Antiquity has
believed with one accord, that S. Mark has composed his Gospel in Greek, and
that the Author of the Lives of the Popes is the first that has written the
contrary. As for S. Gregory Nazianzen, whose Testimony this Cardinal produces
as if it were favorable to his Opinion; he only says, that S. Mark has
published his Gospel for the Latins, and not in Latin. Therefore the Jesuit
Maldonat Constantissima autem apud omnes veteres auctores fuit opinio, caeteros
quidem Graece, Matthaeum vero Hebraico scripsisse sermon. Mald. Praef. in 4
Evang. c. 5.
frankly declares, that if we except S. Matthew who has written in Hebrew, the
ancient Ecclesiastical Authors do all agree, that the other Evangelists have
written in Greek.

It is true that we read at the end of S. Mark in the Syriack Version, that he
has preached his Gospel in Latin in the City of Rome. But it is sufficiently
known of what Authority these Inscriptions can be, which are at the beginning
and at the end of the Sacred Books, especially in the Oriental Versions. I
account as nothing the Arabic and Persian Translations wherein the same is
read, because they have been made from the Syriack. That which has misled the
Syrians, is their believing, as Cardinal Baronius has done after the Writer of
the Lives of the Popes, that S. Mark could not have written his Gospel at Rome
otherwise than in the Language of the Country, having composed it at the
request of the Faithful of that City who spoke Latin. Neminem puto
existimaturum Apostolos, cum gentibus praedicarent Evangelium, aliis usos
fuisse linguis ab his quibus gentes illae uterentur, quibus Dei verbum
annuntiarent. Baron. ann. c. 45. n. 37.
It cannot be imagined (says he) that the Apostles should have preached the
Gospel of Jesus Christ to the Nations in any other Languages but those that
were in use amongst them. He has not taken notice that S. Peter came to Rome
to preach the Gospel to his own Countrymen; and that therefore S. Mark ought
to have published it in a Language that was most known to them. Now it is
certain that the Jews who were dispersed throughout the whole Roman Empire, and
even the greatest part of those that were then at Rome, understood the Greek;
and that there were very few, on the contrary, that had any knowledge of the
Latin Tongue. This has been very judiciously observed by Grotius in the
beginning of his Notes on S. Mark; Judaei (says this learned Critic) qui
Romae agebant plerique Latini sermonis ignari, Grot. Annot. in tit. Marci.
longa per Asiam and Graeciam habitatione Graecam linguam didicerant, and
Romanorum vix quisquam erat non Graece intelligens.

This may be sufficient to answer all the Reasons alleged by Baronius, who
could not apprehend how S. Mark, who exercised the Function of an Interpreter
at Rome, should speak and write in any other Language but the Latin. It is
certain (says this Cardinal) that S. Peter spoke at Rome in the Language of
the Romans; how then could it come to pass that S. Mark the Interpreter should
have translated the Preachings of this holy Apostle out of Latin into Greek? If
it be said (adds he) that S. Peter spoke Greek or Hebrew, S. Mark could not
have interpreted his words but in Latin. All this arguing proves nothing, if we
consider that S. Peter spoke to the Jews at Rome in a Language which they
understood, and that S. Mark has collected the Preachings of this Apostle in
the same, at the desire of those Jews that were lately converted.

Baronius adds to all these Reasons another proof which is taken from the style
of S. Mark; he affirms that they that have any knowledge of the Greek Tongue
may easily judge that he has written his Gospel in Latin, because several
improper Words are found therein which are not in the least Greek, but Latin
Grecised. He thereupon quotes Cardinal Sirlet, who has made an exact
Collection of them; from whence at last he concludes, His igitur prope
necessariis rationibus non solum suademur, sed obstricti ferme devincimur atque
plane cogimur affirmare, Evangelium Marci ab eo Latin potius quam Graece esse
conscriptum. Baron. ann. Chapter 45. n. 41.
that the Reasons which he has produced to make it appear that S. Mark has
written in Latin, are so strong and cogent, that they seem to be Demonstrations.

These Reasons on the contrary cannot but appear very weak to those who are
versed in the Criticism of the Sacred Books. If this last proof concluded any
thing, it would conclude at the same time that the other Evangelists have also
written in Latin, because the like Expressions are found in their Gospels, that
is to say, Latin words Grecised. It might be proved moreover after this manner
that the Syriack and Arabic Versions of the Bible had been first composed in
Greek, and afterward translated into Syriack and Arabic, because there are in
these Translations many Greek words that have been Syriacised and Arabised. It
is no wonder that S. Mark, who is supposed to have written in Greek at Rome,
should have made use of Latin words Grecised. Since it is the custom of all
Nations that speak a foreign Language to mingle with it some of their own
words, and so S. Mark would have spoken Greek, as it was spoken at Rome, and
even in many other Cities of the Empire, where the Grecians had adopted diverse
Roman words.

If it were true that the very Original of S. Mark is at this day kept at
Venice, as they of this Country do avouch, all this Dispute would be quickly
ended; but Baronius had no mind rashly to give credit to a popular Tradition
that had no Foundation in Antiquity. Ciaconius, who has written the Lives of
the Popes, speaks but doubtfully concerning this question; he durst not
pronounce magisterially as Baronius has done, that S. Mark has written in
Latin, tho he cites the Archives of the Venetians, who pretend to have the true
Original in their possession. He chiefly relies on the testimony of the
Syrians, and on this, that it is improbable that a Gospel should have been
written in any other but the Latin Tongue, that was made for the use of the
Latins. Notwithstanding this he leaves the matter undetermined. Alfons. Ciacon.
Vit. Sum. Pontif. edit. Romans ann. 1601. in Petro.
Marcus (says this Historian) Petri discipulus and sectator, and in baptismo
filius, Evangelium, quod ipse Apostolorum princeps praedicaverat, Romanorum
hortatu and precibus Graece itidem conscripsit, seu, ut alii volunt, Latin,
cujus ea lingua archetypum adservari putant Venetiis in Marcianis thesauris.
Syri omnes huic rei fidem faciunt, and ratio suadet, ut non alia quam Latina
Lingua Evangelium in usum Latinis futurum conscriberetur. Alterutrum horum sit,
etc. One would think, to hear this Author speak, that S. Mark had only composed
his Gospel for the Latins. On this account I do not wonder that the Original
thereof is kept at Venice in the Treasury of S. Mark.

It remains for us to examine the twelve last Verses of this Chapter, which are
not found in several Greek Manuscript Copies. S. Jerome who had seen a great
number of these Manuscripts, Hieron. Epist. ad Hedib. qu. 3.
declares in his Letter to Hedibia, that there were in his time very few Greek
Copies wherein they were read: Omnibus Graeciae libris pene hoc capitulum non
habentibus. We must not understand, as the most part of Commentators on the New
Testament have done, by this word Capitulum that is in S. Jerome, the last
Chapter of S. Mark entire, but only from these words of the ninth Verse, (...),
etc. to the end, as it appears by the Manuscript Copies which I have above
consulted; and it shall be shown in the Sequel of this Work, that the ancient
Ecclesiastical Writers have denoted quite another thing by the word Capitulum,
Chapter, than what we now mean at this day by the Chapters of the New
Testament, and also of the whole Bible.

Grotius has believed with many other Authors, that it is not possible that S.
Mark should have omitted in his Gospel the entire History of the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ. Grot. Annot. in c. 16. Marci.
He cannot also imagine that it has been written, and lost afterward,
insomuch that that which we read at present is only a Supplement made by a
later Writer. It is not credible (says he) that this should have happened to a
Book of which so many Copies have been made as soon as it was published.
Besides, he that is supposed to have added this Supplement would have followed
S. Matthew. He adds farther that the Latin, Syriack and Arabic Copies, as also
S. Irenaeus, who is a most ancient Witness, do all confirm this Chapter. He
confesses nevertheless that it was not found in some Greek Copies from the
time of S. Gregory Nyssen. Lastly he judges for the Reasons that we have now
related, that this defect in the Greek Copies ought to be attributed to the
Transcribers, who not being able to make that which this Evangelist says
touching the Resurrection of Jesus Christ conformable to S. Matthew, have taken
away from S. Mark all this History. Indeed the Emperor Julian has opposed to
the Christians the contradiction of their Gospels in this place; and there have
been Learned Writers among the Grecians who have composed Works on purpose on
this Subject to reconcile them.

Maldonat Quod nonnulli repugnantiam, quae inter Marcum hoc loco and Matthaeum
videtur esse, causam putant ejusmodi suspicioni tribuisse, absurda prorsus est
ratio. Mald. Comm. in c. 16. Marci.
on the contrary could not admit the Opinion of those that ascribe this defect
in the Greek Copies to the Transcribers, who could not make this Place of S.
Mark agree with S. Matthew, because if this reason were good, they ought to
have done the same thing, with respect to the last Chapter of S. Luke, and the
last Chapter but one of S. John, which differ yet more from S. Matthew in this
point, than S. Matthew does from S. Mark. Major enim (says this Learned
Jesuit) inter illos and Matthaeum, quam inter Matthaeum and Marcum, apparet
repugnantia. Magis etiam miror non majore Hieronymum studio ejus auctoritatem
asseruisse, quod nulla prorsus conjectura sit ulla ex part probabilis fuisse
ad Marci Evangelium adjectum. Mald. ibid.
Moreover he admires that S. Jerome who has took so much pains in observing the
diversity of the Copies, has applied himself so little to establish the
Authority of this Chapter, which cannot be affirmed not to belong to the Gospel
of S. Mark.

The harsh manner of expression that the same S. Jerome has used in discoursing
of these twelve last Verses of S. Mark has yet more offended Baronius, Baron.
an. Chapter 34. n. 134.
who could hardly believe that he should let fall such words as seemed to
destroy the Authority of this last Chapter. This Learned Father in answering
Hedibia, who had desired him to reconcile the Evangelists in the matter of the
Resurrection of our Savior, says Hujus quaestionis duplex est solutio: aut
enim non recipimus Marci testimonium quod in raris fertur Evangeliis, omnibus
Graeciae libris pene hoc capitulum in fine non habentibus, etc. Hieron. Epist.
ad Hedib. qu. 3.
that this difficulty might be resolved two several ways; the first of which
is, Hieron. Epist. ad Hedib. qu. 3.
that this Testimony of S. Mark might be rejected as being found but in a very
few Greek Copies.

Baronius uses his utmost endeavors to show even by the authority of S. Jerome
himself, that there is no reason to suspect that this last Chapter has been
added afterward to the Gospel of S. Mark. He opposes to this Father his own
words in his second Book against the Pelagians, wherein he observes, that in
some Greek Copies there was a long addition at the end of the Gospel of S.
Mark, which he also produces. From whence this Cardinal concludes, that even
according to the Report of S. Jerome, this Chapter now in dispute was not only
in the Greek Copies, but that there were also some found wherein an Addition
had been inserted; and takes an occasion thereupon to correct the words of this
Father in his Letter to Hedibia Pro eo quod dicere debuisset, in Graecis
codicibus Marci ultimum caput quibusdam auctum reperiri, illud ipsum in iis
desiderari dixisse. Baron. ann. Chr. 34. n. 185.
where he ought not to have said, (if we may believe Baronius) that this last
Chapter was wanting in some Greek. Copies, but only that a considerable
Addition had been annexed to them, which said Addition (according to his
opinion) might come from the Manicheans who had altered some Copies of the
Scriptures. Lastly he infers from the Premises, that the Church has amended
these Greek Copies from the Latin. Baron. ib.
Quamobrem Dei Ecclesiam adinstar Latinorum correxisse Graecorum exemplaria
certum est. And after all these Reasons Haec quidem omnia si comperta satisque
explorata habuisset quidam ex recentioribus, nequaquam adeo temere in re tanta
Catholico homine indignam tulisset sententiam, dicens ultimum Marci capitulum
non esse solidae auctoritatis ad firmandam fidem. Baron. ibid.
he sharply reproves Cardinal Cajetan, because he doubted, being induced
thereto by the Testimony of S. Jerome, of the verity of the last Chapter of S.
Mark.

But after all, I think that Cajetan might have been treated more mildly, who
has entertained a doubt on the sole authority of S. Jerome, concerning the
verity of this last Chapter, before the Council of Trent had determined any
thing thereupon, because this Father has grounded his Judgment on diverse
Copies that he had read. I find moreover that Baronius has only copied Sixtus
Senensis without thoroughly examining this matter: If he had consulted the
ancient Greek Copies he would not have took so much liberty to correct S.
Jerome's Remark on the twelve last Verses of this Chapter: for this Father has
very well distinguished these Verses which he mentions in his Letter to
Hedibia, from this other Addition of which he discourses in his second Book
against the Pelagians. And therefore the Observation of Sixtus Senensis Quod
autem subtexuit Hieronymus, olim caput istud in Graecis exemplaribus non
fuisse, and ob id ab aliquibus rejectum, eo quod aliis Evangelistis videretur
contraria continere, non de tota hujus capituli scriptura intellexit, sed de
quibusdam apocryphis capituli hujus periodis ab incertis auctoribus in
quibusdam codicibus immissis, quae quia vel dubiae, vel aliis Evangelistis
contrariae viderentur, idcirco a Patribus de Graecis codicibus, subductae sunt.
Quod ipse D. Hieronymus lib. 2. adv. Pelag. declarat. Sixth. Sen. Biblioth. S.
lib. 7.
who urges that S. Jerome's words can only be understood of certain Apocryphal
Periods which had been adjoined to some Greek Copies by uncertain Authors, is
very far from truth. It is sufficient only to read the words of this Reverend
Doctor as well in his Epistle to Hedibia, as in his Work against the Pelagians,
to judge that he speaks apparently in those two places of two different
Additions. And that there may remain no doubt thereof, I shall here produce
what I could observe on this Subject in reading the ancient Greek Copies.

It is to be supposed, as has been above said, that the question is not
concerning the whole last Chapter of S. Mark, but only the twelve last Verses.
This is that part which S. Jerome has called Capitulum Chapter, wherein is
described the History of the Resurrection. The most ancient Greek Copy of the
Gospels of those that are in the King of France his Library, contains after
these words (...), this Remark written as the rest of the Text, and with the
same Hand, (...).
(...), it is read in some places as follows: (...). They declared in a few
words to those that were with Peter all things that had been commanded them; Ex
cod. MS. Bibl. Reg. n. 2861.
and afterward Jesus himself published by their Ministry this holy and
incorruptible preaching of eternal Salvation.

There follows afterward in this Manuscript this Observation written in the
Body of the Book, and with the same Hand as the Text (...).
(...). After these words (...) is found that which follows (...), etc. to the
end of the Gospel. We may easily judge by this, that they that have written
this Greek Copy which is ancient, have believed that the Gospel of S. Mark
ended at these words (...). They have nevertheless added the rest written with
the same hand, but only in form of a Remark, because it was not read in their
Church, which is altogether conformable to the Testimony of S. Jerome in his
Letter to Hedibia. Since this diversity is considerable, it is necessary for me
to make some Reflections thereon, grounded on this ancient Manuscript of the
King's Library.

It seems that Beza has seen this Manuscript; or at least one like it; Bez.
Annot. in c. 16. Marci v. 9.
for he says in his Notes on Mark xvi. that he has found in one Copy these
words added, (...), and the rest, as has been above related. But he ought to
have explained himself more distinctly thereupon, and to have observed that
this Addition was written in the Manuscript only in form of a Schotion or Note,
and not as belonging to the Text of S. Mark's Gospel. This appears manifestly
in the Manuscript of the King's Library.

We ought to judge after the same manner of this other Addition which S. Jerome
declares that he has read in some Greek Copies, and which he publishes in
these terms. In quibusdam exemplaribus, and maxim in Graecis codicibus, juxta
Marcum in fine ejus Evangelii sic scribitur: Postea cum accubuissent undecim,
apparuit eis Jesus, and exprobravit incredulitatem and duritiem cordis eorum,
quia iis qui viderant eum resurgentem non crediderunt. Et illi satisfaciebant
dicentes: Seculum istud iniquitatis and incredulitatis substantia est, quae non
sinit per immundos spiritus very Dei apprehendi virtutem. Idcirco jam nunc
revela justitiam tuam. This has been apparently taken out of some Apocryphal
Gospels, as we have above seen a like Addition taken from that of the
Nazarenes. The Greek Transcribers thinking thereby to make their diligence and
exactness more apparent have inserted them into their Copies. But they have
done it by way of Remark; and there have been others afterward who have left
these Additions in the Text, without annexing any thing that denoted that they
were only as it were Observations: because these Additions were not read in
their Churches, they did not think these little Notes necessary.

By this same method we may justify the Observation of S. Jerome in his Letter
to Hedibia, wherein he declares that the last Chapter of S. Mark, that is to
say, the twelve last Verses were not read in the greatest part of the Greek
Copies. Beza on the contrary Testor in omnibus vetustis codicibus quos nobis
videre contigit hoc caput inveniri. Bez. Annot. in cap. 16. Marci, v. 9.
protests that this Chapter is found in all the old Manuscripts that he has
read; but he has not regarded, that although it be found in the ancient Greek
Manuscripts, yet there are many of them in which it is written only as it were
an Addition that does not appertain to the Text. This evidently appears in the
King's ancient Manuscript above cited. For tho these words (...), and the rest
to the end of the Gospel be written therein with the same Hand as the whole
Body of the Book, nevertheless the Remark that is adjoined makes it plainly
appear, that they that have written this Copy have not considered them as part
of the Text. It is to be observed moreover, that the Sections are marked in the
Margin of the Greek Manuscripts of the New Testament by the Letters of the
Alphabet, which serve instead of Numbers of Figures. These Marks are in the
first Editions of the Greek New Testament of Erasmus, in Robert Stephen's
Edition in Folio, and in some others. Now there are none of these found in the
King's Manuscript over against these twelve Verses, which is a proof that they
were not read in their Church that have transcribed this Copy. This will appear
yet more clearly in the Sequel of this Discourse, wherein I shall explain the
use of these Marks or Sections in the Greek Copies of the New Testament.

Euthymius who has made Learned and Judicious Annotations on the New
Testament, confirms all this that we have just now alleged, and justifies at
the same time S. Jerome's Observation in his Letter to Hedibia. See what he
says on these words of S. Mark, (...), Chap. xvi. 9. (...). Euthym. in cap.
16. Marci, ex cod. MS. Biblioth. Reg. n. 2401.
Some Interpreters say that the Gospel of S. Mark is ended here, and that that
which follows is a later Addition. We must nevertheless explain this also,
because it contains nothing contrary to the truth.

There is also another Manuscript Copy of the Gospels in the King's Library,
ancient enough, and written very exactly, wherein is also read this Observation
on the same Passage (...), (...), etc. MS. Reg. n. 2868.
The Evangelist ends here in some Copies; but in many the following words are
found, (...), and the rest to the end of the Gospel. The little Sections are
marked in this Copy over against these last Verses, as well as in the rest of
the Gospel; which proves that they were read in that Church for whose use it
was written. And there is annexed to it a Synaxarion or Lectionary that
contains in order the Gospels of the whole year, and the day on which this
Gospel was to be read. I have also seen another Copy in Monsieur Colbert's
Library, Ex Cod. MS. Bibl. Colb. n. 2467.
which was written with a great deal of care, wherein this same Note is found
after these words (...), and is expressed in the same Terms.

It seems to me that these Observations that are grounded on good Greek
Manuscript Copies are more than sufficient to justify the Critical Remark of
S. Jerome in his Letter to Hedibia, on the twelve last Verses of the Gospel of
S. Mark. It must needs be that in his time they were not read in the most part
of the Greek Churches. This Father nevertheless does not believe that they
ought to be absolutely rejected; for he endeavors in this Epistle to reconcile
S. Mark with S. Matthew, after the same manner as Euthymius does; and after he
has taken notice that some Interpreters of the New Testament have thought that
those words have been added, he forbears not to expound them however, whether
they belong to S. Mark's Gospel or not.

But notwithstanding all these Reflections, we ought by no means to doubt of
the verity of this Chapter, which is as ancient as the Gospel of S. Mark.
Therefore the Grecians do all generally read it at this day in their Churches,
as may be proved by their Lectionaries, one of which in Manuscript is kept in
the King's Library. Ex Cod. Bibl. Reg. n. 1884.
This Manuscript indeed is not ancient, but it is magnificent and has served
some Church of Constantinople. Neither can we find a more ancient Testimony
than that of S. Irenaeus, who lived before all this happened that has been
produced concerning this difference of the Greek Copies. This Father cites in
express words the end of the Gospel of S. Mark: In fine autem (says he)
Evangelii ait Marcus: Iren. adv. Haer. lib. 3. c. 11.
"Et quidem Dominus Jesus, postquam locutus est eis, receptus est in Coelo, and
sedet ad dextram Dei. He quotes in this Passage the nineteenth Verse of the
last Chapter of this Gospel; and the whole Chapter contains but twenty.

Lastly, there is no diversity in the most ancient Latin Copies, nor in the
Syriack; whereby it may be proved that this Chapter was read in the Greek
Copies, from whence these Versions that are very ancient, especially the Latin,
have been taken. It is found also in the Cambridge Copy, and in that which is
called the Alexandrian, which are the two most ancient Greek Manuscripts of the
Gospel that we now have in Europe.

CHAP. XII. Of the Gospel of S. Luke; what has obliged him to publish it,
since there were two others that had been written before his. Of Marcion, and
his Copy of S. Luke's Gospel. The Catholics have also altered this Gospel in
some places.
AS it has been the general Opinion of the ancient Ecclesiastical Writers,
that S. Mark has collected his Gospel from the Preachings of S. Peter, whose
Interpreter he was; in like manner, they have also believed that S. Luke, who
has followed S. Paul in his Travels, has done nothing else but gathered
together the Preachings of this Holy Apostle. (...). Iren. apud Eusebius Hist.
Eccl lib. 5. c. 8.
Luke (says S. Irenaeus) who followed Paul, has committed to Writing the
Gospel which he preached. This Luke, (if we give credit to the Testimony of
these ancient Writers) is he of whom S. Paul speaks in his Epistle to the
Colossians, Epist. ad Colos. c. 4. v. 14.
where he says, Luke, the beloved Physician, greeteth you. The Author of the
Synopsis of the Holy Scriptures bestows on S. Luke the Titles of (...). Athan.
in Synops. Script. S.
Blessed Apostle and Physician; and he adds, that he has published the Gospel
that had been preached by S. Paul. We ought not, nevertheless, to place him in
the same rank with the true Apostles of Jesus Christ, as having been no more
than their Disciple: he declares himself, in the beginning of his Gospel, that
he has only undertook to write what he had learned from those who had been
eyewitnesses of the things which he related. Therefore Tertullian Lucas non
Apostolus, sed Apostolicus, non magister, sed discipulus. Tertul. lib. 4. adv.
Marc. c. 2.
does not call him an Apostle, but an Apostolical Person; he speaks after the
same manner of S. Mark, Ex Apostolicis Lucas and Marcus. Ibid.
who (according to his Opinion) was but the Disciple of the Apostles.

S. Luke, in the Introduction to his History, protests that he would write
nothing but what he had received from very good Information: indeed his design
was to divert the Christians from the reading of some false Gospels that had
been published in his time: and since it might have been opposed against him,
that not having been himself a Witness of the Actions which he related, he was
not endued with Qualifications necessary to an Historian, he immediately
prevents this Objection in the Preface to his Gospel, where he assures us, that
he has avouched nothing but what had been faithfully reported to him by
Persons that had seen those things with their own eyes. Luc. i. 2.
This has caused S. Jerome to say, Evangelium sicut audierat scripsit, Acta
vero Apostolorum sicut viderat ipse composuit. Hieron. de Script. Eccles. in
Luca.
that S. Luke had written his Gospel on that which he had heard, and that he
had composed the Acts of the Apostles on that which he had seen himself. S.
Irenaeus has also observed, Lucas nemini invidens ea quae ab Apostolis
didicerat tradidit nobis. Iren. adv. Haer. l. 3. c. 14.
that this Evangelist had truly related that which he had learned from the
Apostles.

We do not certainly know the time when S. Luke wrote his Gospel: Grotius
conjectures, after some other Authors, that he published it with the Acts of
the Apostles, a little after S. Paul had departed from Rome to go into Spain,
because his History of the Acts ends about that time. Hieron. Prooem. Comm. in
Matthew.
If we believe S. Jerome in this Point, he composed it in Achaia, when S. Paul
traveled into that Country. In Achaiae Boeotiaeque partibus volumen condidit.
Baronius makes use of the Authority of this Father to confute Euthymius and
several other Writers, who have affirmed that S. Luke had written fifteen Years
after the Ascension of our Savior; which time is also set down at the end of
many Greek Manuscript Copies. Baron. an. c. 58. n. 32.
This cannot be (says Baronius) because it is certain that neither S. Luke nor
S. Paul have been in Achaia at that time, nor even a great while after.

In the mean time, we have no certain Acts from whence we may exactly gather
the time of the Publication of this Gospel by S. Luke: we only know in general,
that the ancient Ecclesiastical Writers do all agree that it was not written
till after those of S. Matthew and S. Mark. This being granted, it may be
demanded what reason he had, who was only a Disciple of the Apostles, to
publish a third Gospel, knowing that S. Matthew, who was an Apostle, and a
Witness of the most part of the Actions of Jesus Christ, had already published
one, which had been epitomized by S. Mark? These two Gospels were then in the
hands of all the Christians; What necessity was there that S. Luke should make
a new one, and that he should give notice in his Preface, that they who had
written before him on this same Subject were not very accurate?

This has given occasion to some Authors to believe, that the Gospels of S.
Matthew and S. Mark had not been yet published when S. Luke composed his: but
since this Opinion is contrary to all Antiquity, Baronius insists that these
two Gospels, one of which was in Hebrew and the other in Greek, were not then
known to the Grecians, and that consequently S. Luke and S. Paul could not make
use of them in their Instructions. Grotius also thinks, that Credibile est ad
id tempus Matthaei librum nonnisi sermon Hebraeo extitisse. Marcus autem
Graece compendium magis historiae, quam historiam scripserat. Grot. Annot. in
Praef. Luc.
S. Matthew had not been as yet translated out of Hebrew into Greek: and as for
S. Mark, he confesses that his Gospel was in Greek; but since it was only an
Epitome, this could not hinder S. Luke from writing his History. But it is not
probable that the Gospel of S. Matthew should have been unknown till then to
the Christians that spoke the Greek Language; especially if we follow the
Judgment of these two Writers, who give it out that S. Luke had not composed
his History till after S. Paul had left Rome.

It is much more credible, that this Evangelist published his History upon
occasion of some false Apostles who were set up in opposition to S. Paul, whose
faithful Companion he was. It is a part of Prudence to obviate, as much as is
possible, present Evils; therefore S. Luke, seeing that false Gospels had been
dispersed in those Places where he preached with S. Paul, thought himself
obliged to compose a true one, and to leave it in Writing to those whom he had
instructed: whereas the business in hand was only to suppress and stop the
course of false Gospels that had been scattered abroad; this had no regard to
S. Matthew and S. Mark. It might also happen that he had compiled this Gospel
at the desire of those whom he had converted, and more especially of
Theophilus, to whom he dedicates it. It is certain that the other Evangelists,
as has been already observed, have written their Histories only at the suit of
those People to whom they had preached the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Marcion and his Followers, who in the time of Epiphanius were dispersed
through Italy, Egypt, Palestine, Syria, Arabia, Persia, and many other
Countries, acknowledged none but the Gospel of S. Luke; they had, nevertheless,
retrenched diverse Passages of it: Besides, the Name of this Evangelist was not
at the head of their Copy; whether it were that they received it in this
manner, or that they did not believe it to be made by S. Luke, S. Irenaeus
Marcion, and qui ab eo sunt, ad intercidendas conversi sunt scripturas. Quasdam
quidem in totum non cognoscentes, secundum Lucam autem Evangelium and Epistolas
Pauli decurtantes, haec sola legitima esse dicunt quae ipse minoraverunt. Iren.
adv. Haer. l. 3. c. 12.
reproves these Heretics for having altered according to their humor the
Scriptures which the Church had authorized, as being founded on a constant
Tradition; and for accounting no part of S. Luke's Gospel and of the Epistles
of S. Paul as legitimate, but that which they had reserved, after they had
taken away from these Books whatsoever they pleased. And since they
contradicted in this all the Tradition of the Churches, Hi qui a Marcione sunt
non babent Evangelium: hoc enim quod est secundum Lucam decurtantes gloriantur
se habere Evangelium. Iren. ibid.
he affirms, that these Sectaries who boasted that they had a Gospel, have none.

Tertullian has written a Work on purpose against Marcion, Aiunt Marcionem non
tam innovasse regulam separatione Legis and Evangelii, quam retro adulteratam
recurasse. Apud Tertul. l. 4. adv. Marc. c. 3.
whose Disciples gave it out that their Master had not brought any Innovation
into Religion, in separating the Law from the Gospel, but that he had only
rectified the Rule of Faith which was corrupted. This Arch-Heretick, who
followed the Opinions of Cerdon, (...). Epiph. Haer. 42. n. 4.
rejected the Law and all the Prophets; and to authorize their Novelties, they
supported themselves with the Words of S. Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians,
Epist. ad Gal. c 2.
where this Apostle says, that he had withstood Peter and some other Apostles
to the face, because they did not walk uprightly according to the Truth of the
Gospel. Marcion Connititur ad destruendum statum eorum Evangeliorum quae
propria and sub Apostolorum nomine eduntur, vel etiam Apostolicorum, ut
scilicet fidem quam illis adimit suo conferat. Tertull. lib. 4. adv. Marc. c. 3.
had taken occasion from thence to reform and even to destroy the true Gospels,
to give more Authority to his own. Tertullian answers him, that he could not
charge the Apostles with corrupting the Gospels, without accusing Jesus Christ
at the same time, who had chosen them: he adds, Si vero Apostoli quidem
integrum Evangelium contulerunt, Pseudapostoli autem veritatem eorum
interpolaverunt, and inde sunt nostra digesta, quod erit germanum-illud
Apostolorum quod adulteros passum est -- aut si tam funditus deletum est, ut
cataclysmo quodam ita inundatione falsariorum obliteratum, jam ergo nec Marcion
habet verum. Tertull. ibid.
That if Marcion acknowledged that their Gospel had been entire, but that it
was interpolated by false Apostles, and that this imperfect Copy was now in
use; he ought at least to show which was the true and original Gospel that had
been corrupted: lastly, he demands of Marcion how it could happen that he
should have the true Gospel, if it had been so falsified by Impostors that
there was nothing of it left?

Tertullian moreover establishes the true Gospel of S. Luke on the universal
Consent of the Churches that were planted by the Apostles, Tertul. ib. c. 5.
and of other Churches that derived their Original from them: all these
Churches preserved the Copy of S. Luke in the same condition as it had been
published from the beginning; whereas that of Marcion, on the contrary, was
hardly known; or if it were known it was at the same time condemned: he relieth
also on this same Tradition of the Churches in representing to Marcion, Et de
his Marcion flagitandus, quod omissis eis Lucae potius institerit, quasi non
and haec apud Ecclesias a primordio fuerint quemadmodum and Luc. Tertull. ib.
cap. 5.
that he had no reason out of all the Gospels to select that of S. Luke, and to
neglect the others, as if they were not to be esteemed, and as if they had not
been as generally received in all the Churches ever since their first
Foundation.

He comes afterward to some particular Passages that Marcion had taken away
from his Gospel: He charges him with having retrenched that place where Jesus
Christ says that he was not come to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but
rather to fulfill them: but this Objection appears to be ill grounded; for these
Words are to be found only in S. Matthew's Gospel, which was not owned by
Marcion. Tertullian seems here to have confounded S. Luke with S. Matthew, when
he read in S. Luke's Gospel that which is not therein at present. He objects to
him in the second place, that he had taken away from the Gospel these other
Words, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. This
Passage is also found in S. Matthew only, and not in S. Luke; which may induce
us to believe that these two Objections of Tertullian have respect to the
Gospel in general, as if he had supposed that Marcion had no reason to receive
one Gospel more than another: but then he would have proved nothing directly
against his Adversary. It might be that Tertullian's Copy was not exact, and
that the Lessons of several Gospels had been blended together. Since S.
Epiphanius has much more accurately treated on this matter, and has carefully
examined the Passages that Marcion had altered in his Copy of S. Luke, we shall
here produce the particular Remarks of this Father, that we may have a better
knowledge of the Gospel of the Marcionites.

Marcion had not in his Gospel all the beginning of S. Luke to these Words, in
the fifteenth year of the Reign of Tiberius Caesar; that is to say, he had cut
off the two first Chapters of our Edition; neither did he read as we do at this
day, the Particle (...) which signifies now, and has some relation to that
which proceeds. S. Epiphanius adds, (...). Epiph. Haer. 42. n. 11.
that besides the Passages which this Heretic had taken away from his Gospel,
he observed no Order nor Coherence, and that he had also inserted some
Additions, which he describes in particular. See the Alterations that he has
remarked, on which I shall make some Reflections.

In the fifth Chapter of S. Luke, and the fourteenth Verse, where we read
(...), for a testimony unto them, Marcion read, (...), that this may be a
testimony unto you; making that to fall on them that were healed by Jesus
Christ, which relates to the Priests in our Copies. Moreover, S. Epiphanius
reads in this same place after (...) the word (...), an Offering, which was not
in Marcion's Copy no more than in the greatest part of ours: but this diversity
is of no importance, the sense being always the same, after whatsoever manner
we read it; and it could not happen but from the Transcribers, who have omitted
or added it.

Chap. 16. v. 17. (...) (or (...), as S. Epiphanius read it) (...), being come
down with them. Marcion read, (...), he came down in them. This may be also a
various reading that does not alter the sense; it may be an Hebraism commonly
used in the Sacred Books: the Particle (...) may signify in this place the
same thing as the Particle (...) in Hebrew, to which the Greek (...) answers;
now the Particle (...) signifies indifferently (...) in, and (...) with.
Therefore it ought not to be translated here (as Father Petau would have it) he
came down in them; but according to the Hebraism, he came down with them: this
sort of Hebraisms is found in S. Luke as well as in the other Evangelists.

Chap. 8. v. 19. (...), his Mother and his Brethren. Marcion did not read these
Words in his Copy, but only in the beginning Verse, (...), thy Mother and thy
Brethren. This does not appear nevertheless to be a vicious Alteration, since
these Words being repeated, the sense will remain always the same, though they
be read but once: it is possible then that Marcion might read it so in his Copy
without altering it.

Chap. 9. v. 40. and 41. Marcion did not read in his Copy these Words, (...).
They could not cast it out, and he said unto them, O faithless Generation, how
long shall I suffer you? S. Epiphanius reads it thus, but Marcion's way of
reading it is more concise; however the sense is preserved. It may be that he
thought the other Words superfluous, and would not put into the mouth of Jesus
Christ speaking to his Disciples, this expression that seemed harsh to him, O
faithless Generation. He ought not in the mean time to have corrected this
Passage according to his own Conceptions, and without being supported by good
Copies.

Chap. 10. v. 21. where we read, I thank thee, O Father, Marcion had not in his
Copy the Word (...), O Father. S. Epiphanius affirms that it ought to be
read, because it is repeated in the following Verse: he says moreover, that
Marcion had retrenched it only (...). Epiph, ibid.
that it might not be proved from this Passage, that Jesus Christ had called
his Father (...) or Creator. But this Repetition seems rather to show that this
Heretic had not maliciously taken away from his Copy the Word (...), O Father;
for whether we read it or not, the sense is not changed. Marcion had not also
in his Copy, (...) and of Earth, but only, Lord of Heaven.

Chap. 11. v. 29 and 30. Marcion had taken away from his Gospel all that is
said in this place concerning Jonas, reading only these Words (...), there
shall be no sign given to this Generation. He did not read also the two
following Verses, wherein mention is made of the Queen of the South, of
Solomon, and the Ninivites.

In this same Chapter, v. 42. where it is in our Copies (...), Judgment,
Marcion had in his (...), Vocation. This Epiphanius condemns as a vicious
Alteration, and made on purpose, because the following Words show clearly that
it ought to be read (...) and not (...). It might be, nevertheless, that the
little difference that there is between these two Words in the Greek has
caused this diversity of reading, and that Marcion had retained this fault of
the Transcriber in his Copy.

He did not read also in his Copy in the 49 Verse of this same Chapter these
Words, (...). Therefore also said the Wisdom of God, I will send them Prophets.
Now since he rejected the Prophets, it is not to be doubted but that he has
retrenched this Passage from his Copy, that has so clearly established them:
neither did he read these other Words which are in the same place, v. 51.
(...), it shall be required of this Generation.

Chap. 12. v. 6. He had not in his Copy these Words, (...). Are not five
Sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before God.

In the same Chapter, v. 8. instead of these Words (...), the Angels of God,
Marcion read only (...), God. This might be an Omission of the Transcriber that
does not interrupt the sense in this place; nevertheless, S. Epiphanius
accuses Marcion of Infidelity and Prevarication as much in this minute tittle
as in any other Alteration of greater consequence; because (...). Epiph. ibid.
he that durst alter any thing of that which has been written from the
beginning, is not in the way of truth.

He did not read these words of the 28 Verse of the same Chap. (...), God
clotheth the grass; and in the 32 verse, where we have it (...), your Father,
he read it simply, (...), Father. In the same Chapter, ver. 38. instead of
these Words (...), in the second or third watch, he read, (...) in the evening
watch.

Marcion had also expunged out of his Copy the three first Verses of the 13
Chapter, and especially these words of the fifth Verse, (...), Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

In the same Chapter, Verse 28. in place of these words, (...), then ye shall
see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God;
Marcion had put these, (...), then you shall see all the just in the Kingdom of
God, and you your selves thrust out. He adds, (says S. Epiphanius) (...),
detained without, and these other words, (...), there is weeping and gnashing
of teeth. These last words are not an Addition, but a Transposition; for the
same words are found in our Copies at the beginning of this Verse: besides,
whereas S. Epiphanius reads (...), it ought to be read (...). This Father, who
quotes the Scriptures according to his Memory, or applies them to his present
Discourse, does sometimes change the words into others, or abbreviate them; and
this is to be observed likewise in other places. The true difference of
Marcion's Copy consists in the Word (...), Prophets, which he has changed into
that of (...), just; and he has added (...), detained without, without
altering the sense.

Marcion had taken away diverse other words of this Chapter out of his Copy:
viz. I. These words of the twenty ninth Verse (...), They shall come from the
East, and from the West, and shall sit down in the Kingdom. II. These of the
thirtieth Verse, (...), The last shall be first. III. These words of the thirty
first Verse, (...), There came certain of the Pharisees, saying unto him, Get
thee out, and depart hence, for Herod will kill thee. IV. The whole thirty
second Verse, and part of the thirty third Verse to these words, (...), For it
cannot be. And from the thirty fourth Verse he had cut off these Words, (...),
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee. And these other words of the same Verse, (...), How often would
I have gathered thy children together, as a hen. These words from the thirty
fifth Verse, (...), Your house is left. And lastly he had retrenched these
other words from the same Verse, (...), Ye shall not see me, until the time
come when ye shall say, blessed is,

This Heretic had cut off from his Gospel the whole Parable of the prodigal
Son, which is in the fifteenth Chapter; as also these words, chap. 17. verse.
10. (...). Say, we are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our
duty to do. He had taken away a little after in the same Chapter several parts
of the Passage wherein mention is made of the Lepers that met Jesus Christ. See
what he reads in that place, (...). He sent them away saying, show your selves
to the Priests. He had in like manner altered diverse other Circumstances in
this History, where he read, (...). There were many lepers in the time of the
prophet Elisha, and none were cleansed except Neeman the Syrian.

Chap. 18. verse. 19. After these words, (...), None is good save one, Marcion
added, (...), the Father; and at the twentieth verse instead of (...), thou
know, he read (...), I know. He had also retrenched the thirty first Verse
of this same Chapter and these words from the thirty second and thirty third
Verses, (...). He shall be delivered, he shall be put to death, and the third
day he shall rise again.

Cap. 19. (...). Epiph. ib.
he had expunged out of his Copy that which belongs to the History of the
arrival of Jesus Christ at the Mount of Olives, which was near Bethphage, and
all that which is related in this same Chapter, concerning the Ass on which our
Savior rode when he made his entry into Jerusalem, as also the other Verses
wherein mention is made of the Temple.

Chap. 20. He left out of his Copy the whole Parable of the Vineyard that was
let forth to Husbandmen, beginning at the ninth Verse, and ending at the
sixteenth. He had also taken away these words of the seventeenth Verse, (...),
What is this then that is written, the stone which the builders rejected, etc.
He had in like manner retrenched the thirty seventh Verse, and a part of the
thirty eighth in which the Resurrection of the dead is declared.

Chap. 21. Verse. 18. These words, (...), There shall not an hair of your head
perish, were not in his Copy, nor these other words of the twenty first Verse,
(...) Then let them which are in Judea, flee to the Mountains: nor the rest of
this History, which he had expunged because of these words of the thirty second
verse, (...), till all be fulfilled.

Chap. 22. He had not in his Copy the sixteenth Verse of this Chapter, nor the
thirty fifth and thirty sixth Verses; because of these words of the thirty
seventh Verse, (...), This that is written must yet be accomplished: nor these
other words that are in the same place (...), And he was reckoned among the
transgressors. He had also retrenched that which is said of S. Peter in the
fiftieth Verse, when he cut off the ear of one of the Servants of the High
Priest.

Chap. 23. Verse 2. To these words (...), We found this fellow perverting the
Nation, he had added these other, (...), And destroying the law and the
prophets. In the same Passage after these words (...), Forbidding to give
tribute, he had also added these other words, (...), and perverting the women
and the children.

In the same Chapter, Verse. 43. he did not read (...), To day shall thou be
with me in paradise.

Lastly Marcion had taken away from his Copy the twenty fifth Verse of the
twenty fourth Chapter, and these words of the twenty sixth Verse, (...). Ought
he not to have suffered? And instead of these words, in verse. 25. (...), That
the prophets have spoken, he had put (...), That I have spoken to you.

Thus we have seen what was the Gospel of Marcion, who was not far from the
Apostolical Times, when the Verity of the Gospels might have been more easily
justified from the Copies that the Apostle; had left to the Churches which were
founded by them. S. Justin Martyr had written a Book to convince this Heretic,
Justin. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 11.
who was then living at that time when he wrote against him. S. Epiphanius who
has transmitted to us this Gospel of Marcion, confutes him by his own Copy,
which was not so much altered, but that there remained some Passages that were
sufficient to overthrow his Novelties. S. Irenaeus, who has also disputed
against the Opinions of this Arch-Heretick, had observed this long before.
Marcion autem id quod est secundum Lucam circumcidens ex his quae adhuc
servantur penes eum, blasphemus in solum existentem Deum ostenditur. Irenadv.
Haer. lib. 3. c. 11.
It may be proved (says this Father) by the rest of the Gospel that Marcion
has left, that he has blasphemed against the only God that exists.

Although some Diversities of Marcion's Copy might be attributed to the
Transcribers, especially in those Passages that are of no moment; nevertheless
it ought to be done with a great deal of Precaution, because it is certain,
that this Heretic has not followed in his Alterations any ancient Copies: he
has taken care only to adjust the Gospel of S. Luke to the prejudices of his
Sect, as appears by what has been above related. Therefore Tertullian, after
he had objected to him all that S. Luke has specified in the two first
Chapters of his Gospel touching the Birth and Infancy of Jesus Christ, and many
other Circumstances that clearly show that he had a real Body, adds His opinor
consiliis tot originalia instrumenta Christi delere ausus est, ne caro ejus
probaretur. Tertull. lib. de carne Chr. c. 2.
that Marcion had retrenched all this from his Gospel on purpose, lest it
should be proved from thence that Jesus Christ had flesh as well as we.

Besides these Amendments that Marcion had inserted into the Gospel of S. Luke,
there have been also some Catholics who have altered it in some places; who
would not have that read in the Gospels which did not suit with their
prejudices. Therefore they have expunged the Passage wherein it is said, Chap.
xix. 41. That Jesus Christ wept over the City of Jerusalem, because this
Lamentatation seemed to them to be a weakness unworthy of our Savior. S.
Epiphanius, who quotes these Words, observes (...). Epiph. in Ancor. n. 31.
that they were found in the Copies that had not been For so the Greek word in
this Passage of Epiphanius ought to be translated.
corrected, and by this he informs us that the Grecians have sometimes taken
the liberty to correct their Copies, and to take away from them that which did
not please them (...). Epiph. ibid.
The Orthodox (says this Father) have retrenched these words, being moved
thereto by fear, and not considering the end nor the force of them. But they
are found at this day in the Copies of all the Christians of what Nation
soever; and S. Epiphanius shows that they certainly belong to S. Luke, by
(...), etc. Iren. apud Epiph ibid.
the testimony of S. Irenaeus, who made use of them against some Heretics.

If we may give credit to the Testimony of S. Hilary, Nec sane ignorandum nobis
est, and in Graecis and in Latinis codicibus complurimis vel de adveniente
Angelo, vel de sudore sanguineo nihil scriptum reperiri. Hilar. lib. 10. de
Trin.
the forty third and forty fourth Verses of the twenty second Chapter were not
read in many Greek, and even Latin Copies of S. Luke's Gospel. Mention is made
in this place of the Angel that came to comfort Jesus Christ, and of the bloody
Sweat that fell from his Body. This S. Jerome seems also to confirm. Hieron.
lib. 2. adv. Pelag.
But it is easy to judge, that the Grecians had taken the liberty to raze
these two Verses out of their Copies, for the same reason as they had taken
away the Passage wherein it is said, that our Savior wept. This Alteration
afterward crept into the Latin Copies. Haec erasa videntur a quibusdam, qui
verebantur Christo tribuere tam insignia humanae infirmitatis argumenta.
Jansen. Gand. Concord. Evang. c. 137.
These words (says Jansenius) seem to have been retrenched by some that were
afraid to attribute to Jesus Christ such notable marks of human infirmity.
There are no Copies at this day, nor for a long time since, either in Greek or
Latin in which this Imperfection is to be found. The Syrians and the other
People of the Levant do all read these two Verses in their Copies. This Defect
then must take its rise from some superstitious persons, who thought that Jesus
Christ could never be obnoxious to so great a Weakness. There is no probability
that these two Histories should have been added to the Text of S. Luke. Potius
credendum est a nonnullis id fuisse deletum, quam a quoquam adjunctum. Mald.
Comm. in Matthew. c. 26.
It is much more credible (says Maldonat) that they had been blotted out of it.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Gospel of S. John; and of Heretics that have rejected this
Gospel. Their Reasons with an Answer to them. An Inquiry concerning the twelve
Verses of this Gospel which are not found in some ancient Copies. Several Greek
Manuscript Copies are cited to clear this Difficulty. Some Critics have
imagined without any grounds that the last Chapter of this Gospel did not
belong to S. John.
WE cannot precisely determine in what time S. John published his Gospel. It is
only known that he has written it the last of all. Neither have we any very
certain Acts that might inform us of the Motives that induced this holy Apostle
to undertake this Work after he had seen the Gospels of S. Matthew, S. Mark and
S. Luke. Clemens Alexandrinus reports what was generally believed in his time,
viz. that John having read these three Gospels, and having approved them as
true, (found (...). Clem. Alex. apud Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 24.
that there was yet wanting the History of those things that had been done by
Jesus Christ at the beginning of his Preaching. This was the reason (according
to the Judgment of this Learned Father) that caused him to write his Gospel,
especially being entreated to do it. And by this he supplied that which seemed
to be deficient in the History of the other Evangelists. He did not think it
necessary (...). Clem. ibid.
to repeat what S. Matthew and S. Luke had already written; and this is the
principal cause that obliged him to say nothing concerning the Genealogy of our
Savior. He judged it more requisite to promulge that which appertained to his
Divinity. (...). Clem. Alex. apud Eus. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. c. 14.
John who is the last of the Evangelists (says the same Clement) having
observed that those things that related to the Incarnation of Jesus Christ had
been made manifest in the three other Gospels, being inspired by God, and at
the request of his Friends, composed a spiritual Gospel. S. Epiphanius says
also, (...). Epiph. Haer. 51. n. 12.
that it would have been to no purpose for S. John to insist any farther on
that which belonged to Jesus Christ according to the Flesh, because that had
been already done. Therefore he applied himself to the declaring of those Acts
of which the other Evangelists had made no mention.

S. Irenaeus only says, Joannes discipulus Domini -- and ipse edidit
Evangelium Ephesi Asiae commorans. Iren. adv. Haer. lib. 3. cap. 1.
that S. John set forth his Gospel at Ephesus, where he abode, without taking
any notice of the time when, or of the Reasons that induced him to it. The
Author of the Synopsis of the Holy Scriptures, will have it that this Apostle
(...). Athan. in Synops. Script. S.
preached it when he was banished in the Isle of Patmos, and that he afterward
published it at Ephesus. S. Jerome discourses more particularly than the other
Fathers of the Considerations that engaged S. John to write his Gospel. He
affirms Joannes cum esset in Asia, and jam tunc haereticorum semina
pullularent Cerinthi, Ebionis and caeterorum qui negant Christum in carne
venisse, quos and ipse in Epistola sua Antichristos vocat, and Apostolus Paulus
frequenter peroutit, coactus est ab omnibus pene tunc Asie Episcopis and
multarum Ecclesiarum legationibus de Divinitate Salvatoris altius scribere --
unde and Ecclesiastica narrat bistoria cum a fratribus cogeretur ut scriberet,
ita facturum se respondisse si indicto jejunio in communo omnes Deum
deprecarentur. Quo expleto, revelatione saturatus illud prooemium e coelo
veniens eructavit, In principio erat Verbum, etc. Hier. prooem. Comm. in Matthew.
that S. John being in Asia, where the Heresy of Cerinthus and Ebion obtained,
who denied that Jesus Christ had been really in the Flesh, was forced to write
concerning the Divinity of our Savior, at the solicitation of almost all the
Bishops of Asia, and of many Churches that desired him to do it. He adds
moreover, that it was related in the Ecclesiastical History, that this Apostle
seeing himself so vehemently urged by his Brethren, granted that which they
demanded, upon condition that a day should be set apart for a public Fast on
this occasion: And that the Fast being ended, S. John, who was filled with the
Holy Ghost, began his Gospel with these words which came from Heaven, In the
beginning was the word, etc. Whereas this History might pass in the Opinion of
some for Apocryphal, and for one of those Fictions that are ordinarily made use
of by the Jews when they would give authority to a Work of great value. Baron.
ann. Chapter 99. n. 4.
Baronius has judiciously observed, that S. Jerome has not grounded this
Relation on Apocryphal Books, Non ex apocrypho aliquo, but on an ancient and
true History that had been already explained more at large by other Writers,
Sed ex antiqud veraque historia, ab aliis jam fusius explicata.

There are found on the contrary since the first Ages of Christianity, certain
Heretics who maintained an Opinion altogether opposite to that of S. Jerome;
for being very far from believing with him, that S. John wrote his Gospel to
confute the Errors of Cerinthus, they ascribed it to Cerinthus himself,
avouching that he was the Author thereof. S. Epiphanius, who knew not the Name
of these Heretics, has given them that of (...), Alogians, because they
denied the Word called in Greek Logos (...). Epiph. Haer. 51. n. 3.
Because they do not receive (says this Father) the Word that has been
preached by S. John, they shall be called Alogians.

These Alogians rejected the Gospel of S. John, as also his Epistles and
Revelation, pretending (...). Epiph. ibid.
that all these Works had been invented in Asia by Cerinthus, who lived at the
same time with him; and they accounted them even unworthy to be read in the
Church. To the end that it might not be imagined that they called in question
the Authority of S. John, whom they believed to be an Apostle as well as the
Catholics, they endeavored to support their Novelties with some Reasons. They
said amongst other things that (...). Epiph, ibid. n. 4.
these Books attributed to S. John did not agree with the Writings of the other
Apostles; and that consequently they ought not to be acknowledged as Divine.
Whether tends (said they) the beginning of this Gospel: In the beginning was
the word, and the word was with God. And these other words; And the word was
made flesh and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the
only begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth. To what purpose (added
these Heretics) is that which immediately follows, John bare witness of him,
and cried saying, This was he of whom I spoke. And a little after; Behold the
Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. The Alogians produced
several other Passages of S. John, no part of which was found in the other
Evangelists.

S. Epiphanius answers them very prudently, that if they had no other Reasons
to object against the Verity of S. John's Gospel, they might also reject the
Gospels of S. Matthew, S. Mark and S. Luke, who have all used the same manner
of Writing, and who have every one something that is singular. He said (...).
Epiph. ibid
that their Method depended not on them, but that it came from the Holy Ghost
as well as their Doctrine. This he explains more particularly, and at large.
This Father confutes them also by the Doctrine of S. John, which he affirms to
be altogether opposite to that of Cerinthus. This Heretic believed that Jesus
Christ was born a mere Man. S. John on the contrary testifyeth in his Gospel,
that the Word was from all eternity, that he came down from Heaven, and that he
was made Man. It is certain that Cerinthus believed with some other Heretics
of those primitive times that Jesus was (...).
a mere Man. Which Opinion they grounded on the Genealogy that is in the
beginning of S. Matthew. Therefore one would think, that if Cerinthus had
designed to forge a New Gospel to authorize his Heresy, he would not have
omitted this Genealogy.

It may be observed nevertheless that this Heretic acknowledged in Jesus
Christ somewhat more than mere Man. This Epiphanius himself explains after this
manner. (...). Epiph. Haer. 28. n. 1.
He pretends that the World was not created by the first and supreme Power; but
that Jesus who was begotten of the Seed of Joseph and Mary being become great,
had received from above of the Supreme God the Christ in himself, that is to
say, the Holy Ghost, in the form of a Dove when he was baptized in the River
Jordan. He attributed to this celestial Virtue that Jesus (as he thought) had
received in his Baptism, all the Miracles that he wrought afterward. He said
moreover, that this Virtue left him at the time of his Passion, and that it
returned to Heaven from whence it came. Perhaps the Alogians took occasion from
hence to ascribe the Gospel of S. John to Cerinthus, because this Heretic
distinguished two things in Jesus Christ; for besides that they thought that he
was born of Joseph and Mary after the same manner as other Men, they
acknowledged in him a Celestial Virtue that had been communicated to him by the
Sovereign God of the Universe: he called this Virtue Christ, distinguishing
Christ from Jesus.

S. Irenaeus has also observed, Hi qui a Valentino sunt eo quod est secundum
Joannem plenissime utentes ad ostensionem conjugationum suarum. Iren. adv.
Haer. lib. 3. c. 11.
that the Gnostics, the Followers of Valentin, altogether made use of the
Gospel of S. John to establish their Opinions, (...). Theod. Haeret. Fabul.
lib. 2. Haer. 7. de Valent.
They gave to Jesus (says Theodoret) the Name of Savior and of Christ the
Word. The Sethians, who were a branch of the Gnostics, maintained also, that
Jesus differed from Christ; (...). Theod. ibid. lib. 2. Haer. 14. de Sethian.
that Jesus was born of the Virgin, but that the Christ descended on him from
Heaven. That which might farther confirm the Alogians in their erroneous
Conceits was this, that there were some very learned Men, and those too very
Orthodox, who had affirmed that the Apocalypse was made by Cerinthus, who
insolently boasted that he was the true Apostle of Jesus Christ.

Besides these Alogians who refused to receive with the whole Catholic Church
the Writings of S. John as Divine and Canonical, there was one Theodotus of
Byzantium, the Chief of a Sect that were called Theodotians, who after their
example rejected the Gospel and Revelation of S. John, as not belonging to him.
Nevertheless, Celsus Porphyrius and the Emperor Julian, who opposed the Gospels
with all their Might, have not denied that they were certainly composed by them
whose Names they bore; they have been content only to decry them, as if they
had been filled with Falsities and Contradictions. When Julian speaks of the
Gospel of S. John, he does not disown it to be his, but he accuses this
Apostle of having introduced Innovations into the Christian Religion: he says,
that neither (...). Cyrill. Alex. lib. 10. contra Julian.
Matthew, nor Mark, nor Luke, nor even Paul, durst make Jesus Christ to pass
for a God; that S. John was the first that has published it, after he had
observed that a great party of simple People; as well among the Grecians as
Latins, was of this Opinion: thus this Emperor, who was persuaded that S.
John's Gospel could not be charged with falsity, gives out his imaginary
Reasons that were grounded on no Authority.

As we have above remarked, that the twelve last Verses of S. Mark were not
read in some Greek Manuscript Copies, so there are also twelve that are not
found in diverse Greek Manuscript Copies of the Gospel of S. John, nor in some
Versions of the Oriental Church. These Verses begin at the end of Chap. vii. v.
53. and end at the 11 verse of the following Chapter, insomuch that they
comprehend the whole History of the Woman taken in Adultery. S. Jerome's manner
of Expression in speaking of this Relation, makes it appear that it was not
read in his time in some Greek and Latin Copies. In Evangelio secundum Joannem,
Hieron. l. 2. adv. Pelag.
(says this Father) in multis and Graecis and Latinis codicibus invenitur de
adultera muliere quae accusata est apud Dominum. Sixtus Senensis, who has
observed that the Anabaptists made use of the Authority of S. Jerome and the
Testimony of some other ancient Writers, Sixth. Sen. l. 7. Bibl. S.
to show that the History of the adulterous Woman had been added to the Gospel
of S. John, has not sufficiently answered their Objections.

Maldonat, who had thereupon consulted the ancient Interpreters of the New
Testament, and many Manuscript Copies, is much more exact: he freely
confesses, Consului veteres Graecorum codices multos: nullus ex manuscriptis
habebat praeter unum. Maldon. Comm. in c. 8. Joann.
that of a considerable number of Greek Copies which he had read, he found it
but in one. Non habebat antiquissimus ille Vaticani codex quem saepe
nominavimus, non Graeca Catena, in qua, cum tres and viginti auctores sint,
nemo ejus meminit. Habemus Graecos impressos multos, Origenem, Clementem
Alexandrinum, Chrysostomum, Nonnum, Theophylactum. Nemo eorum legit, cum
Chrysostomus and Theophylactus scripserint in totum Joannem Commentarios. Mald.
ibid.
It was not (says he) in the most ancient Copy of the Vatican, which I have
often cited; nor in the Catena or Collection of Greek Fathers, that contains
twenty three Authors: and yet there is not one of them that makes mention of
this History; even those that are printed, viz. Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Chrysostom, Nonnus and Theophylact, do say nothing to it, though Chrysostom and
Theophylact have written Commentaries on the whole Gospel of S. John. Lastly,
Maldonat adds, that of all the Greek Authors that have written on S. John,
Euthymius alone, who is a Writer of these later times, has expounded in his
Annotations this History of the adulterous Woman, and he has done it after
such a manner, as rather seems to derogate from, than to establish the
Authority thereof: for he informs us at the same time, that it was not read in
the most correct Copies; and that even in those where it was found, it was
marked with an Asterisk, to show that it has been added to the Text of S. John.

However, this learned Jesuit, notwithstanding these Reasons and some others
which he adds in this same place, insists, that all this Criticism ought not to
be preferred before the Authority of the Council of Trent, which has
acknowledged as Divine and Canonical all the parts of the Holy Scriptures, as
they are at present read in the Church: he concludes from thence, that it has
also approved of the History of the adulterous Woman as Canonical, because it
is a part of S. John's Gospel; and that it might not be thought that he
absolutely relies on the sole Authority of the Church, he produces several
Acts, viz. the very Words of S. Jerome above related.

This Father says, Hieron. l. 2. adv. Pelag.
that this Revelation was found in his time in many Copies as well Greek as
Latin; In multis and Graecis and Latinis codicibus invenitur: Moreover,
Ammonius, who is much more ancient than S. Jerome, has made mention thereof in
his Harmony of the Gospels; and St. Athanasius in his Synopsis of the Holy
Scriptures.

As for the Authority of S. Chrysostom, who has taken no notice of it in his
Homilies on S. John, he answers, That since this History is plain and easy to
be understood, he has not judged it necessary to expound it; besides, this
Father has spoken of the adulterous Woman in another Homily on S. John;
Chrysostom. Hom. 60. in Joann.
and there is no probability (adds he) that what he says in that place has
been afterward inserted into his Text, as some have thought. He adjoineth to
all these Proofs the Testimony of S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and many other
Fathers, who have all read this History, and have explained it in their
Commentaries; from whence he concludes at last, that it has been no less
written by S. John than the rest of his Gospel: he conjectures that it has
been taken away by some Grecian, who has exercised his critical Talent on this
place with too much liberty.

I have a little enlarged on these Reflections of Maldonat, because they clear
all the Difficulties that relate to the History of the adulterous Woman, which
is not found in a great number of ancient Copies: but since this Jesuit speaks
only in general of the Manuscript Books which he quotes, and does not produce
in particular what is contained in them, I shall endeavor to supply this
defect, by the search that I have made into these Manuscripts with as much
exactness as possibly I could.

I shall begin with the Commentary of Euthymius, of which I have only seen the
Latin Version, the Greek Copy of this Author being very scarce. See his own
words in his Remark on the last Verse of the vii. Chap. of S. John, (...).
Euthym. Comm. in Joann. ex cod. MS. Biblioth. Reg. n. 2401.
We must know that that which is read here to these words, Then spoke Jesus
again unto them, saying, I am the Light of the World, either is not found in
the exact Copies, or is marked with an Obelus. Therefore it seems to have been
written afterward, and added; and this is a proof, that S. Chrysostom has
made no mention thereof. This Observation of Euthymius is justified by the
Greek Manuscript Copies, some of which do not contain this History; or if they
do, it is marked with an Obelus or little stroke, or some such like note, to
show that it does not belong to the Text of the Gospel.

The most ancient Manuscript Copy of the Gospels, of those that are in the
King's Library, Cod. MS. Bibl. Reg. n. 2861.
has not the twelve Verses that are now in question; but a blank space is left
in the place wherein they should have been written, to signify that they were
in some Copies. It is probable that the Transcriber that has written this
Manuscript had not these Verses in his Copy, because they were not read in his
Church. It has been a custom in this sort of Manuscripts to annex to the end
of the Gospel of S. John these same Verses, with some little critical Remark;
but since there are some Leaves wanting at the end of this, I can say nothing
to it, only that this is found in the greatest part of other Manuscripts of
this nature, as we may judge by the Manuscript that follows this.

There is in the same Library another Manuscript of the Gospels, to which is
adjoined a Collection of Commentators, which is commonly called Catena, or a
Chain. There are found in this, these twelve Verses written at the end of the
Gospel of S. John, with this note, (...). MS. Bibl. Reg. n. 1883.
The Verses marked with an [Obelus] are not in some Copies, nor in the
Apolinarian; but they are all in the ancient.

I have seen in the Library of the Fathers of the Oratory at Paris, a like
Collection or Chain of Greek Commentators on the Gospel of S. John, gathered
together by Nicetas: The History of the adulterous Woman is not joined to the
Text of this Chain, but only to the end, with this remark, (x) The end of the
Gospel of S. John; (...), etc. Cod. MS. Bibl. PP. Orat. Paris.
and afterward, But there are found some other things in the ancient Copies,
which we think convenient to write at the end of this same Gospel, viz. And
every man went unto his own house, etc. to the end of the eleventh Verse of the
eighth Chapter of this Gospel. This same note is found at the end of another
like Manuscript Collection of Greek Fathers on the four Gospels, which is in
the King's Library: and the same thing is read therein at the end of S. John
(...). MS. Bibl. Reg. n. 1869.
as in the Copy of the Oratory, and expressed after the same manner. This
confirms that which Maldonat has above observed in speaking of these Greek
Chains, in which the History of the adulterous Woman was not found.

Furthermore, it may be seen by the Remarks that are at the end of the
Manuscript Copies above produced, that some Grecians have thought that there
was no reason why this History should not be read in the Text of S. John's
Gospel since it was extant in the ancient Copies: I believe that on this
account it has been added in the Margin of another Copy in the King's Library,
Ex Cod. MS. Bibl. Reg. n. 2868.
wherein it is not written; nevertheless, the Addition is of a later and
different hand from the Text: This Copy is written very curiously, and the
musical Notes that are marked on certain Words for the more easy singing of
the Gospels, make it appear that it has been made for the use of some Greek
Church. It is very probable also, that these Verses were not read in S.
Chrysostom's Church, since he does not expound them in his Homily on the
Section of S. John where we read them at present. I have not read them in
another Copy in the King's Library indorsed 2860, nor in one of those that are
in Mr. Colbert's Library, which is very rich in all sorts of Manuscripts. Ex
Cod. MS. Bibl. Reg. n. 2860. Ex Cod. MS. Bibl. Colb. n. 4112.
There is in this last another Manuscript, wherein all this History of the
adulterous Woman is indeed written with the same hand as the whole Text of S.
John; but this mark in form of an Asterisk was put at the beginning of every
line, as if it were designed to denote that it was taken from other Copies, and
that it had been inserted into the Text.

But after all, it is certain that the Greek Manuscripts in which this History
is written, very much exceed those in number in which it is not to be found;
and among these first there are some very ancient; for it is read in the Copy
of Cambridge, which is the most ancient of any that we have at this day: we can
say nothing of the Alexandrian Copy, which is imperfect in this place: it is
also found in a very ancient Manuscript written in Capital Letters, which is in
Mr. Colbert's Library, Cod. MS. Bibl. Colb. n. 5149.
and was brought from Cyprus.

It is worth the observing, that there are some Manuscripts wherein these
Verses are not only read after the same manner as the rest of the Text, but the
(...) or Chapter that answers to this History is marked in the Margin: thus in
one of the Manuscripts of the King's Library, we read in this place at the
bottom of the Page these Words, Cod. MS. Bibl. Reg. n. 2863.
(...), of the adulterous Woman; and in the beginning of the Gospel of S. John,
wherein are put (according to the usual manner of Greek Manuscripts) all the
(...), Chapters or Contents of this Gospel, that of (...), the adulterous
Woman, is found with the other Chapters. But out of a very great number of
Manuscripts that I have consulted thereupon, in which the (...), Contents, are
set at the Head of every Gospel, I could find but two, that are in the King's
Library, in which there was a particular (...) or Summary for this History.

Nevertheless, it is certain that it has been read, at least for some Ages, in
all the Greek Churches, because it is contained in their Lectionaries of the
Gospels: Cod. MS. Bibl. Reg. n. 1884.
I have read it in a Manuscript Copy of this Lectionary, but it is not ancient:
we may observe, that there are at the end of them some Gospels for certain
Festivals, which seem to be as it were without the Work: they might be added
according as the Ecclesiastical Office of the Grecians has been augmented; and
this is common to all these Offices. See the Title, (...). Lection. Evang.
Gospels for diverse Commemorations of Saints. These Gospels are not for the
Festivals of Saints in particular, but only in general; as for example (...),
etc. Lection. Evangel. ex cod. MS. Bibl. Reg. n. 1884.
for the Angels, for the Prophets, for an Apostle, for the chief Priests, for
the Martyrs, and for many others; there are some also for the habit of a Monk,
and of a Nun, for the infirm, for Earthquakes, etc. Lastly, there are two for
those that confess, one of which is for Men, and the other that is for Women is
taken out of the eighth Chapter of S. John, and is expressed in these terms,
(...), etc. usque ad (...). Lection. Evang.
In that time the Scribes and Pharisees brought unto Jesus a Woman taken in
Adultery, and the rest to those Words, go, and sin no more. There is in the
King's Library a very ancient Lectionary of the Gospels; but since it is not
entire, and the latter part of it being wanting, I can say nothing of the
Antiquity of this Gospel that is recited to Women when they confess, and is
entitled, (...).

The Proof that Maldonat alleges, taken out of the Harmony of Ammonius
Alexandrinus, wherein this History of the Adultress is found, is more positive
and concluding, because this Writer lived in the first Ages of the Church: I
shall only observe by the way, that in the Bibliotheca Patrum, the Work of
Tatian has been printed under the Name of Ammonius, and that of Ammonius under
the Name of Tatian, who has also inserted this History into his Epitome of the
four Gospels. There are nevertheless some Reasons that may cause us to question
whether this Work were Tatian's or not: now whereas he has written before
Ammonius, a better testimony of the Antiquity of this History cannot be given
than that which is taken from his Collection: but because there are some
Arguments that seem to prove that he composed it as well from the Hebrew as
from the four Greek Gospels, there will be always matter of doubt whether he
has not followed in this the Hebrew or Chaldaick Gospel of S. Matthew wherein
it was contained; insomuch that it cannot be certainly demonstrated what was
the Gospel of S. John from the time of Tatian the Disciple of S. Justin Martyr.

Seldom, nevertheless, who has been cited by Walaeus on this place of S. John,
insists very much upon these two ancient Writers, to show that this History was
ever since the Primitive Ages, in the Copies of the Eastern Church: this he
confirms by the Canons that Eusebius has added to the Harmony of Ammonius: and
he concludes from thence, that Eusebius also read it in his Copy of the New
Testament, because it is marked in these Canons: but it does not appear that
Seldom has very carefully examined the Canons of Eusebius; for there is no
number or mark of a Section that answers in particular to the History of the
adulterous Woman: the twelve Verses of which it is composed, are comained in
the preceding (...). 86. Section, as may be seen in these Sections or Numbers
that are printed in the Greek New Testament of Robert Stephen, and in some
other Editions: the Greek Manuscript Copies do agree in this Point with the
printed: and that which clearly proves that there is no number or Section of
the Canons of Eusebius that refers in particular to the aforesaid twelve
Verses, is, that this same number (...) 86. is also marked in the Manuscript
Copies wherein they are not found: therefore it cannot be inferred from the
distribution or order of the Canons, that Eusebius has read the History of the
Adultress in that Book to which he has annexed them; however, it is not to be
denied that Seldom and Walaeus have had reason Mirum non est in seculis
primitivis exemplaria fuisse hodieque manner, quibus hae aliaeve periochae
sacrae deessent, cum scilicet audacium nimis exscriptorum complurium mos tum
esset aliter atque aliter pro multiplici judiciorum discrimine Evangelia
variatim emendare, augere, minuere. Quod monet Hieronymus, etc. Seld. apud Wall.
Comm. in Joann.
to accuse the Grecians in general of assuming to themselves too much liberty
in correcting their Copies, Seld. apud Wall. Com. in Joan.
adding to, or diminishing from them sometimes according to their own humor;
and perhaps they have exercised this critical Faculty too liberally on this
place of S. John as well as on many others.

This same History of the adulterous Woman is not found neither in the Syriack
Version that Widmanstadius has published from good Manuscript Copies, of which
there has been since several other Editions; nevertheless it is in some
Syriack Copies, from whence it has been taken, and inserted into the Polyglott
Bible of England; it is read also in the Arabic Translations that have been
printed at Rome and in Holland: from whence we may conclude, that it is read at
present as well in all the Eastern as in the Western Churches.

However, Beza, after he has affirmed, Ex vetustis nostris codicibus 17. unus
duntaxat illam non habebat. In reliquis scripta quidem est, sed ita ut mira sit
lectionis varietas. Bez Annot. in Joan. c. 7. v. 53.
that of seventeen ancient Manuscripts which he had read, this History was
wanting but in one of them, does not forbear to suspect it, because the ancient
Ecclesiastical Writers (as he says) have either unanimously rejected it, or
have been silent therein: he says moreover, that it is not probable that Jesus
Christ should have remained alone in the Temple with a Woman; that this
Relation does not cohere with what follows; and that that which is said of
Jesus Christ, that he wrote with his finger on the ground, is a very
extraordinary thing, and difficult to be explained. Lastly, the great diversity
of Readings that is found in the Greek Copies in that place, causes him to
doubt of the Verity of this History.

Calvin discourses with a great deal more moderation, and seems also to be
more reasonable than his Disciple, in his Commentary on this Passage; Calv.
Com. sur S. Jean. c. 8. v. 1.
It is well known (says he) that the ancient Grecians knew nothing of this
present History; and therefore some have conjectured that it has been taken
from some other place, and added here: but forasmuch as it has been always
received in the Latin Churches, and is found in many Copies and ancient Books
of the Grecians, and contains nothing that is unworthy of an Apostolical
Spirit, there is no cause why we should refuse to make a good use of it.

Besides that which we have just now observed concerning the History of the
Woman taken in Adultery, which is not found in many Greek Copies, some Critics
have also believed, that the last Chapter of the Gospel of S. John was not
written by this Evangelist. Indeed it seems as if he designed to finish his
History with these words, Chap. 20.30. And many other signs truly did Jesus in
the presence of his Disciples, which are not written in this Book, etc.
Grotius, who is of this Opinion, Sicut caput ultimum Pentateuchi and caput
ultimum Josuae post Mosis and Josuae mortem additum est a Synedrio Hebraeorum:
ita and caput quod sequitur post mortem Joannis additum ab Ecclesia Ephesina.
Grot. Annot. ad. cap. 20. Joan. verse. 30.
affirms, that the rest of this Gospel has been added after the Death of S.
John by the Church of Ephesus, after the same manner as the last Chapter of the
Pentateuch, and the last Chapter of the History of Joshua have been annexed to
these Books of the Sanhedrim of the Jews; but he alleges no solid proof of
what he so freely avoucheth: something indeed might have been added to the
History of Moses and Joshua after their decease, because (as I have elsewhere
observed) they whose Office it was amongst the Hebrews to write the Annals of
this Republic, have continued their Histories; and therefore these two
Chapters cannot be properly called Additions, but rather a Continuation of the
Chronicle of this Commonwealth. This case is not the same as that of the Gospel
of S. John, for the Church of Ephesus was not charged to continue it. It may be
said, that the last Chapter of this Gospel has not been put in its proper
place, and that there has happened some change with respect to the order and
sequence of the Words; but if we reflect on the Still of S. John, and the
little regard to a Method or Coherence that appears throughout his whole Book,
we shall rather impute to himself these small Defects which alter not the
Verity of this History.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Acts of the Apostles that have been received in the Church.
Other Acts of the Apostles that have been forged.
ALthough there have been several different Acts that bear the Name of the
Apostles, yet the Church has received none as true but those that we now read
at this day under this Title, and which all Antiquity attributes to S. Luke:
this is the reason that in some Manuscript Greek Copies we find the name of
this Evangelist at the beginning of this Work; he declares himself in his
Preface, that he is the Author of it, presenting it to his Friend Theophilus,
to whom he had already dedicated his Gospel.

S. Jerome affirms, Cujus historia usque ad biennium Romae commorantis Pauli
pervenit, id est usque ad quartum Neronis annum. Ex quo intelligimus in eadem
urbe librum esse compositum. Hieron. de Script. Eccl. in Luca.
that this History was written at Rome, and that it extends to the fourth Year
of Nero, which was (according to his Opinion) the second of S. Paul's abode in
that great City. The Author of the Synopsis of the Holy Scriptures, thought
(...). Athan. in Synops.
that the Acts of the Apostles had been preached by S. Peter, and that S. Luke
had afterward committed them to Writing; but S. Luke has recorded almost
nothing else but matters of fact of which he himself had been a witness.
Hieron. ibid.
And this is the difference that S. Jerome makes between the Gospel of this
Disciple of the Apostles, and the Acts, in regard that not having seen Jesus
Christ, he could not write his Gospel, but on that which he had learned from
others, sicut audierat scripsit; whereas having followed S. Paul in the most
part of his Travels, he was an eyewitness of his Actions, and therefore he
has published nothing but what he had seen himself, sicut viderat ipse
composuit.

Although the Title indeed of this History bears the name of all the Apostles
in general, nevertheless it informs us of very few things concerning them, only
conducting them to the time when they dispersed themselves into diverse
Provinces to preach the Gospel. S. Luke comes after this to S. Paul's Travels,
who was accompanied with S. Barnabas, without describing the Itineraries of the
other Apostles; neither does he finish even those of S. Paul. If it be demanded
why S. Luke has not perfected his History, and why he has not left us in
Writing the rest of those Actions of which he was a Witness? I have no other
Answer to make, but that which S. John Chrysostom has already made to those
that in his time asked the same Question. This learned Bishop says, Joann.
Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in Act. Apos.
That what S. Luke has written in this matter is sufficient for those that
will apply themselves to it; that the Apostles moreover, and their Disciples,
who preached the Gospel of Jesus Christ, (...). Joann. Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in
Act. Apost.
have always insisted on that which was most necessary; that they did not study
to write Histories, because they have left many things to the Churches by
Tradition only. And this ought to be considered; for it is certain that the
principal business and care of the Apostles was to preach the Gospel, and that
they would have written nothing of their Preachings, if they had not been
earnestly solicited by the People whom they had instructed. The Christian
Religion might be preserved without any Writings, by Tradition alone.

S. Chrysostom complains in the same place, Chrysostom. ib.
that that little we have of the History of the Apostles was so neglected in
his time, that many were not only ignorant of the Author, but they did not know
whether it had been written. It seems that the Gospels and the Epistles of S.
Paul were then only accounted to belong to the New Testament; perhaps none but
these two Works were read in the Churches in these Primitive Ages. We see also,
that the Books that are consecrated for the use of the Greek Churches, do only
bear these two Titles, viz. (...) Gospel, and (...) Apostle; nevertheless,
afterward this last Book has been named (...), because it contains, besides
the Epistles of S. Paul, the best part of the Acts of the Apostles, and even
the other Books of the New Testament.

Whereas this History that comprehends the principal Actions of S. Paul is
short, a certain Priest of Asia, since the Primitive times of Christianity,
thought fit to add to it, in form of a Supplement, another Book, entitled, The
Travels of Paul and Thecla. We are informed by Tertullian, Quod si quae Pauli
perperam scripta legunt exemplum Theclae ad licentiam mulierum docendi
tingendique defendunt, sciant in Asia presbyterum qui eam scripturam construxit
quasi titulo Pauli de suo cumulans, convictum atque confessum, id se amore
Pauli fecisse, loco decessisse. Tertull. lib. de Bapt. c. 17.
that some Women made use of these Acts, to prove by the Authority of this Holy
Apostle, that it was lawful for them to preach in the Churches and to baptize.
This Father answers those that alleged the Testimony of S. Paul taken from
these Acts, that the Priest of Asia, the Author of them, had been convicted
that he had forged them, and that he himself had avouched that he was induced
to compose them by the love that he had for this Apostle. He solidly confutes
them, by making it appear, that these Acts contained a Doctrine altogether
contrary to that of S. Paul. Quam enim fidei proximum videretur, ut is docendi
and tingendi daret feminae potestatem, qui ne discere quidem constanter mulieri
permisit. Tertull. ibid.
What probability is there (says he) that S. Paul should grant to Women a
power to teach and to baptize, who has not so much as permitted them to learn
in the Church, forbidding them absolutely to speak therein?

S. Jerome, who has made mention of these Acts published under the Title of the
Travels of Paul and Thecla, Hieron. de script. Eccles. in Luca.
adds, that it was S. John that caused the Priest that composed them to be
convicted of Forgery: Tertullian nevertheless, whom he cites in this Passage,
does not speak of S. John; he says only, that this Priest was of Asia. Pope
Gelasius has put this Book in the number of Apocryphal Works. Baronius
distinguishes these false Acts of Thecla from others that give an account of
the Life and Martyrdom of this Saint: Gelas. Decr. 1. part. did. 15. c. 3.
he supports the Authority of these last by the Testimony of several Fathers
who have quoted them; Baron. an. c. 47. n. 3, 4, and 5. Epiph. Haer. 78. n. 16.
and among others, by that of S. Epiphanius, who relying on the credit of these
Acts, relates that Thecla having espoused a very rich and noble man, broke off
her Marriage after she had heard S. Paul: This Cardinal adds, that Faustus, a
famous Manichean, has produced this same History of Thecla, and that he has
taken occasion from thence to condemn the Doctrine of S. Paul as abominable,
because he had compelled by his Discourses a married Woman to continue in
perpetual Continency. S. Augustine (adds Baronius farther) who rehearses these
Words of Faustus, and exactly answers his Objections, does not reject as
Apocryphal these last Acts that are entitled the Martyrdom of Thecla.

But it is probable, that these last Acts have been taken from the former; and
it is no wonder that the Fathers have made use of an Apocryphal Book, that was
composed by an Impostor, because there were many true things in these Travels
of Paul and Thecla. However it be, I think it is more convenient to reject them
altogether, than to approve of one part and to condemn the other, because it
would be very difficult to distinguish that which was true from the false. If
we may judge by the Fragments that remain, this Work was filled with Fables;
for we find therein, that Thecla, being the Companion of S. Paul in his
Travels, had in some measure a share in his Apostleship: it is declared in
these Acts that she preached and baptized; and S. Jerome, who without doubt had
read them, Hieron. ib.
makes mention of the Baptism of a Lion, which is the cause that he esteems
them as false and Apocryphal Books. (...) Pauli and Theclae (says this Father)
and totam baptizati leonis fabulam inter apocryphas scripturas computamus.

Whereas the Apostles and their Disciples have left us no relations of their
Travels in Writing, but that which we have concerning those of S. Paul and S.
Barnabas, this gave occasion to the counterfeiting of some under their Names.
Some false Acts have been published under these Titles, The Travels of Peter,
the Travels of John, the Travels of Thomas, and many others of this sort: there
was one also called in general, The Itinerary, or Travels of the Apostles. Thus
have they endeavored ever since the Primitive Ages of the Christian Religion,
by this means to supply that which seemed to be wanting in the History of the
Apostles, as if it were necessary that the Church should have all their Actions
in Writing: but these Books were rejected with the common consent of all the
Catholic Churches, as Supposititious and Apocryphal; insomuch, that of all the
Acts of the Apostles that have been published, none have been preserved but
those that were composed by S. Luke.

Nevertheless, there were some Sectaries from the very first beginning of
Christianity, who being Enemies to S. Paul, absolutely condemned this History
written by S. Luke his faithful Companion in his Travels. The Ebionites, who
treated this Apostle as an Apostate, seeing that the Acts that had been
received in the Church contradicted their Doctrine, (...). Epiph. Haer. 30. n.
16.
composed new ones, which they filled with Impieties and Calumnies against S.
Paul, that no credit might be given to the History of S Luke: they invented I
know not what Fables to render this holy Apostle odious; and they gave them out
as the true Reasons that had obliged him (...). Epiph. ibid.
to write against the Circumcision, the Sabbath, and the Old Law. (...). Epiph.
ibid.
They made use of these new Acts of the Apostles (says Epiphanius) to
invalidate the Truth. The Encratites or Severians, (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl.
lib. 4. cap. 29.
who acknowledged, with the Orthodox, the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospels,
loaded S. Paul also with bitter Invectives and Reproaches, and entirely
rejected his Epistles with the Acts of the Apostles.

Lastly, the Manicheans, who esteemed their Patriarch Manichee not only as an
Apostle, but as the Paraclet or Comforter that was promised, did not allow the
Acts of the Apostles, because the descent of the Holy Ghost is therein
declared. Si illos Actus Apostolorum acciperent, in quibus evidenter adventus
Spiritus Sancti praedicatur, non invenirent quomodo id immissum esse dicerent.
Aug. de utilit. cred. cap. 3.
If they should receive these Acts (says S. Augustine) in which express mention
is made of the coming of the Holy Ghost, they could not say that he had been
sent to them in the Person of Manichee. But let us leave these Enthusiasts, who
had no other reason to refuse the Books that were approved by the whole Church
than this, because they did not suit with the Idea that they had formed of the
Christian Religion: This was the cause (according to Tertullian) that the
Marcionites did not regard the Acts of the Apostle. Tertul. lib. 5. adv. Mare.
c. 2.
I shall say nothing here concerning the Acts of Barnabas that have been
published under the Name of John surnamed Mark; Quaedam Barnabae Acta ab
aliquo, ut apparet, nebulone scripta circumferuntur, and ab imperitis magno
applausu accipiuntur. Baron. Annal. Chap. 51. numer. 51.
which are very displeasing to Baronius, and have been manifestly forged, being
also contrary in some things to the true Acts of the Apostles, as this Cardinal
has observed.

CHAP. XV. Of the Epistles of St. Paul in general. Of Marcion, and of his Copy
of these Epistles. False Letters attributed to St. Paul.
THE Name of S. Paul that is prefixed at the head of all his Epistles, except
that which is written to the Hebrews, does plainly discover the Author: and
since they are for the most part directed to particular Churches, who read them
publicly in their Assemblies, they have been afterward communicated to other
neighboring Churches, and at last, by the same means, to all the Faithful. I
shall not here make it my business too critically to enquire into their order,
nor the time when they were written, because in whatsoever manner they are
placed, as to their distribution or circumstances of time, this will cause no
alteration in the Text which will always remain the same: nevertheless, thus
much may be observed with S. Chrysostom, who has diligently examined this
matter, that though the Epistle to the Romans stands in the first rank, Joann.
Chrysostom. Praef. Hom. in Epist. ad Romans
yet it was not written first; there are clear proofs, that the two Epistles
inscribed to the Corinthians were written before it: this learned Bishop
believes also, that S. Paul had written to the Thessalonians before he wrote to
those of Corinth; this may be seen more at large in the Preface before his
Homilies on the Epistle to the Romans, wherein he gives an Example of the
Prophets who have not been ranked according to the order of the time of their
respective Prophecies. Theodoret, who has treated on this Subject after S.
Chrysostom, whom he often epitomizeth, alleges, as an instance of the same
order as that of S. Paul's Epistles, the distribution of the Psalms of David.
(...). Theodor. Praef. in Epist. Paul.
As David (says he) being inspired by God has written the Psalms, and others
afterward have put them into what method they thought fit, without having
regard to the time when they were composed: so in like manner, the same thing
has been done with respect to the Epistles of S. Paul.

Marcion, who received the greatest part of the Epistles of S. Paul, from which
nevertheless he had retrenched some Passages, had placed them after this
manner: Marc. apud Epiph. Haeret. 42.
The Epistle to the Galatians was the first of all, and afterward the two to
the Corinthians; the Epistle to the Romans was the fourth; afterward followed
the two to the Thessalonians, and after these the Epistles to the Ephesians,
Colossians, to Philemon, and to the Philippians. He acknowledged none but these
ten Epistles in the aforesaid order; for as to the Epistle directed to those of
Laodicea, some Portions of which he received (according to Epiphanius) it is
the same as that which is written to the Ephesians, as it is easy to prove
from the Passages that this Heretic has cited, and are also related by S.
Epiphanius.

Marcion had entitled his Collection of the Epistles of S. Paul, (...),
Apostolic. The Marcionite that is introduced in the Dialogue against those of
this Sect, attributed to Origin, did often refuse to acknowledge some
Quotations out of S. Paul's Epistles, and says in speaking to Adamantius, who
objected to him some words of this Apostle (...). Orig. Dial. adv. Marc. sect.
1.
I do not believe your false Apostolic. And in another place he answers
Adamantius, who asked him whether he believed the Apostle, that is to say, S.
Paul, (...), I believe my own Apostolic. Ib. Sect. 2.
Therefore Adamantius does not oppose to him the Epistles of S. Paul after the
same manner as they were read in the Church, but that which the Marcionites
called their Apostolic, which was a Collection that they had made of these
Epistles. I have (says Adamantius) your Apostolic: (...). This caused S.
Jerome to say, speaking of this Collection of the Marcionites, Cum Apostolorum
Epistolas non Apostolorum Christi fecerunt esse, sed proprias, miror quomodo
sibi Christianorum nomen audeant vendicare. Hieron. prooem. in Epist. ad Tit.
that they had forged Epistles of the Apostles of their own invention, and that
he admired how those people durst take upon them the name of Christians.

S. Epiphanius has observed some Passages that Marcion had altered in the
Epistles of S. Paul, which I shall here produce according to their order. In
chap. 5. v. 31. of the Epistle to the Ephesians, where we read these words; A
man shall leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, this
Heretic had taken away (...), to his wife.

In the Epistle to the Galatians, chap. 5. verse 9. instead of the word (...),
leaveneth, he had put (...), corrupts, which does not interrupt the sense in
this place, and therefore it seems rather to be a various reading, than an
alteration made on purpose. Indeed in the ancient Copy of Clermont that is kept
in the King's Library it is read (...), and in the Latin Version that is
annexed to it, which is the ancient vulgar, there is according to this reading
corrumpit, as in the vulgar used at this day.

In the first Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. 9. verse. 8. where we read
(...), Or says not the law the same also? He had in his Copy (...), Tho the
law of Moses does not say the same.

Chap. 14. ver. 19. of this same Epistle Marcion had altered the sense of these
words, Yet in the Church I had rather speak five words with my understanding.
He read in his Copy, instead of (...), In my understanding, (...), because of
the law. But it is probable, that this reading of Marcion came from a fault of
the Transcriber, who has read (...) instead of (...), as it is in the present
Greek Copies, which reading approaches nearer to that of Marcion, than that of
S. Epiphanius, which agrees nevertheless with the two most ancient Greek Copies
that we have, viz. the Alexandrian, and that of Clermont in the King's Library.
It is read in these two Copies (...), and in the ancient Latin Version which is
joined to the Copy of Clermont there is sensu meo. It is also read (...) in the
ancient Copy of the Epistles of S. Paul, which is in the Library of the
Benedictin Fathers of the Abbey of S. Germain; but there is in the Latin
Version that is added to it per sensum meum. This causes me to believe that
the Author of this ancient Translation has read in his Greek Copy (...), as it
is read at present. Nevertheless S. Epiphanius accuses Marcion of making this
alteration on purpose, to wrest the words of S. Paul to his own Conceptions.

In the second Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. iv. 13. where we read, Having
the same spirit of faith according as it is written, Marcion had retrenched
from his Copy these words, (...), According as it is written. S. Epiphanius
reproves him in this place. Because (says he) whether he reads these words or
not, the scope of the Discourse is plainly evident. Indeed it might happen that
he did not read them in his Copy. And if this Heretic had made no other
alterations in S. Paul's Epistles than those that we have above marked, there
would be no cause to charge him with corrupting them; for there are found in
our Greek Copies greater diversities than those, and very many more in number.

Neither do I see that Marcion has committed a great fault in placing the
Epistle to the Romans the fourth in his Copy. Nevertheless, if we believe
Epiphanius, this Heretic (...). Epiph. Her. 42.
has only set it in this order, because he would have nothing right. But S.
Paul himself has not ranked his Epistles after the same manner as we have done
at present; as this Father always supposes in his Dispute against Marcion. He
confesses himself that the Greek Copies do not all agree in this point. For
when he accuses him of having placed the Epistle to Philemon the ninth, which
S. Paul (according to his opinion) had set the last, he says that in some
Copies it was found immediately before that which was written to the Hebrews,
and which was the fourteenth in these Copies. He adds (...). Epiph. ibid.
that there are others wherein the Epistle to the Hebrews is the tenth,
immediately before the two that are written to Timothy, and those that are
directed to Titus and Philemon.

S. Epiphanius declares in the same place, (...). Epiph. ibid.
that he has remarked nothing in the Epistle to Philemon, because Marcion had
entirely corrupted it. Tertullian Soli huic Epistolae brevitas sua profuit, ut
falsarias manus Marcionis evaderet. Tertull. lib. 5. adv. Marc. c. 21.
on the contrary affirms that this Epistle has not been vitiated by Marcion,
because it was too short. He admires only Miror tamen, cum ad unum hominem
literas factas receperit, quid ad Timotheum duas, and unam ad Titum de
Ecclesiastico statu compositas, recusaverit. Affectavit etiam numerum
Epistolarum interpolare. Tertull. ibid.
that this Heretic having received a Letter directed to a single person, would
not acknowledge the two that are written to Timothy, and that to Titus, which
treat of Ecclesiastical Affairs. I believe (says he) that he has affected to
diminish the number of these Epistles. S. Jerome speaks also of this Epistle to
Philemon after the same manner as Tertullian, Pauli esse Epistolam ad
Philemonem saltem Marcione auctore doceantur, qui cum caeteras Epistolas
ejusdem, vel non susceperit, vel quaedam in his mutaverit atque corroserit, in
hanc solam manus non est ausus mittere, quia sua illam brevitas defendebat.
Hieron. prooem. Comm. in Epist. ad Philem.
and he proves also by the authority of Marcion, that it is one of S. Paul's
Epistles, since this Heretic who has rejected a part of them, and has
altered those which he approved, has received this entire, and has not so
much as touched it because it was too short.

If we may give credit to Epiphanius, Marcion had inserted into his Book which
he had entitled (...), Apostolic, an Epistle of S. Paul to the Laodiceans.
But he confesses at the same time that that which this Heretic cites out of
the Epistle to those of Laodicea, is found in that which is inscribed to the
Ephesians; therefore it ought not to be put in Marcion's Collection under the
name of Laodiceans, but under that of Ephesians; otherwise he would have
received eleven Epistles of S. Paul, whereas he never acknowledged but ten.
Tertullian indeed rebukes him Ecclesiae quidem veritate Epistolam istam ad
Ephesios habemus emissam, non ad Laodicenos; sed Marcion ei titulum aliquando
interpolare gestiit, quasi and in isto diligentissimus explorator. Tertull.
lib. 5. adv. Marc. c. 17.
for changing the Title of the Epistle to the Ephesians; nevertheless he
judiciously observes, that this alteration of the Title is of no importance,
because S. Paul writing to a particular Church, wrote at the same time to all
the others. Nihil autem de titulis interest, cum ad omnes Apostolus scripserit,
dum ad quosdam.

He accuses him with more reason of taking away from his Copy of this Epistle
to the Ephesians, chap. 2. v. 20. the word Prophets; for where we read it as
the Church does, And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Marcion read only, Are built upon the foundation of the Apostles. It
seems also that Tertullian has reproved Marcion for taking away these words
from the same Epistle, chap. 6. v. 2. Which is the first commandment with
promise. Nam etsi Marcion, (says he) abstulit, Hoc est enim primum in
promissione praeceptum; Lex loquitur, Honora patrem and matrem. S. Jerome
moreover Sciendum quoque in Marcionis Apostolo non esse scriptum, and per Deum
patrem, volentis exponere Christum non a Deo patre, sed per sometipsum
suscitatum. Hieron. lib. 1. Comm. in Epist. ad Gal. c. 1. v. 1.
has charged Marcion with expunging out of his Copy of the Epistle to the
Galatians, chap. 1. v. 1. these words, And God the Father, to make it appear
that Jesus Christ was himself the Author of his Resurrection, and not his
Father.

Besides these various Readings of the Apostolic of the Marcionites above
remarked, the Marcionite in the Dialogue attributed to Origin, Orig. Dial.
cont. Marc. Sect. 5.
says that it was not read in this Apostolic, 2 Cor. xv. 38. (...), God
gives it a body as it has pleased him; but (...), God gives it a spirit as
it has pleased him. And after those words immediately follow these in the
Apostolic: (...). It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body; it
is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorrruption. These last words are also
found in our Copies, but in another order.

Tertullian solidly confutes these Sectaries who would receive nothing of S.
Paul but what was agreeable to their notions, in representing to them, that
they might as well reject his Works all together as a part of them. He demands
of Marcion what proofs he has of his Apostolic which he ascribed to S. Paul,
Pauli quoque originem a Marcione desidero. He requires him Edas velim nobis quo
Symbolo susceperis Apostolum Paulum, quis illum tituli charactere percusserit,
quis transmiserit tibi, quis imposuerit ut possis eum constanter exponere.
Tertull. lib. 5. adv. Marc. c. 1.
to produce some certain marks that this Book did really belong to that
Apostle, and to declare who has given it this Title, and by what Tradition it
came to his hands?

The same Objections might be made at this day to some Protestants who receive
the Works of the Apostles, and refuse at the same time to submit to the true
Traditions of the Church, to which they are beholden for these Apostolical
Writings. For who has told them that that which they read under the name of S.
Paul is certainly his? Is it (says Tertullian, speaking to Marcion) because
this Apostle has said so himself? Ipse se Apostolum est professus. Profiteri
potest semetipsum quivis: verum professio ejus alterius auctoritate conficitur.
Alius scribit, alius subscribit. Alius obsignat, alius actis refert. Nemo sibi
and professor and testis est. Tertull. ibid.
Every one (adds he) might give a testimony of himself; but it is not believed,
at least if it be not attested by others, because no Man can be a Witness of
his own Actions. This is a very strong proof against the Marcionites, because
they not allow the Acts of the Apostles, which afford a great Testimony to the
Doctrine contained in the Epistles of S. Paul.

The Author of the Dialogue against the Marcionites makes use of this same
argument to convince his Marcionite. (...). Apud Orig. Dial. contr. Marc. sect.
2.
We do not receive (said this Marcionite) neither the Prophets nor the Law,
because they are not of our God, but we receive the Gospel and the Apostle.
What Apostle do you mean (answers Adamantius) for there are many? Paul, says
the Marcionite. To whom Adamantius replies, How can you be assured that Paul
has written the Epistles that you read under his name, since there is no
mention thereof made in the Gospel? And whereas these Heretics acknowledged
none but the Gospel of S. Luke, which they had adjusted to their Notions, and
their Apostolic. Adamantius presses them very much thereupon, and concludes
against them, that according to their Principle no Scriptures give a Testimony
to S. Paul, since he is not mentioned in the Gospel. The Marcionite is obliged
to have recourse to S. Paul, who has written of himself, 2 Cor. 1.1.
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ. But Adamantius opposes to him those other
words of S. Paul, He that bears witness of himself is not approved. He makes it
appear from hence, (...). Ibid.
that he is not to be believed that only gives his own Testimony of himself.

S. Epiphanius moreover reproves Marcion, for having quoted a Passage out of S.
Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians, under the Title of an Epistle written by this
Apostle to the Laodiceans, Epiph. Haer. 42. n. 12.
which (says he) was never in the number of the Epistles of S. Paul, (...).
But we can only infer from thence, that Marcion was mistaken in the Title of
this Epistle, reading under the name of the Laodiceans that which is written to
the Ephesians. Nevertheless S. Epiphanius has reason to say, that there never
was any Epistle to the Laodiceans. The Fragment that Jacobus Faber, Sixtus
Senensis and some other Authors have published under this Title, and has been
Printed even in some Bibles, is a Piece of no Authority; not but that in the
Primitive Ages of the Church there has been read an Epistle under this Title
attributed to S. Paul, but the most Learned Fathers have rejected it as an
Apocryphal Act. Therefore S. Jerome Legunt quidam and ad Laodicenses, sed ab
omnibus exploditur. Hieron. de Script. Eccles. in Paulo.
affirms, that in his time it was generally exploded by all the world; insomuch
that there is no other true Epistle to the Laodiceans, but that which is
written to the Ephesians, the Title of which the Marcionites had only changed.
The Heretics (says Tertullian, in speaking of the Marcionites Epistola quam
nos ad Ephesios praescriptam habemus, haeretici ad Laodicenos. Tertull. lib. 5.
adv. Marc. c 11.
have entitled to the Laodiceans that Epistle which we read directed to the
Ephesians.

They that have forged an Epistle of S. Paul to the Laodiceans, have taken
occasion from these words of his Epistle to the Colossians, chap. 4. verse. 16.
And when this Epistle is read amongst you, cause that it be read also in the
Church of the Laodiceans, and that ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea.
Chrysostom. Homil. 12. in Epist. ad Coloss.
S. Chrysostom has observed on these last words, (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in
Epist. ad Coloss.
that some Writers had taken notice before him, that it was not a Letter that
S. Paul had sent to the Laodiceans, but one that they of Laodicea had written
to S. Paul, because it is not in the Text to the Laodiceans, but from Laodicea.
This has caused Theodoret, who repeats the same thing in his Commentary on the
Epistle to the Colossians, to conclude that the Letter to the Laodiceans that
some produced in his time was a counterfeit, (...). Baronius has had reason to
prefer the Judgment of these two Greek Fathers before that of some Latin
Writers, who have thought that S. Paul has written fifteen Epistles one of
which (as they say) has been lost. P. Amilote seems to have favored this
Opinion, when he translated this Passage of the Epistle to the Colossians, Ye
shall likewise read that which I have written to the Laodiceans. But if there
were an ambiguous expression in his Text, he ought also to retain it in his
Version, and not to limit it, by giving us an Epistle of S. Paul to the
Laodiceans which never was, according to the Sentiments of the ancient
Ecclesiastical Writers.

I shall take no notice of two other Epistles that have been heretofore
published under the Name of S. Paul, viz. a third to the Corinthians, and a
third to the Thessalonians, because they have much less foundation than that
which is supposed to have been written to the Laodiceans. I shall only observe,
that some Impostors in his time dispersed abroad false Letters in his name,
that they might thereby authorize their false Doctrines, which obliged him to
write his Name at the bottom of his Epistles with a certain particular Mark, 2 Thessalonians. 3.17.
as he declares himself at the end of his second Epistle to the Thessalonians.

I shall not here insist on the Ebionites, concerning whom I have already
sufficiently discoursed. Since these Heretics had declared openly against S.
Paul, and had also composed false Acts to defame his Person and Doctrine, they
were very far from receiving his Epistles which contradicted their Opinions.
The Encratites Severians (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. c. 29.
who had no less an aversion for this Holy Apostle, absolutely rejected his
Epistles. Origin moreover makes mention of a certain Sect that took the name of
Helcesaites, (...). Orig. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 38.
who acknowledged but a part of the Canon of the Holy Scriptures as well of the
Old as the New Testament. But they altogether disapproved of S. Paul, and
(...). Orig. ibid.
had forged I know not what Book, which they feigned to have fallen down from
Heaven.

It is no wonder that so many ancient Heretics have publicly exploded the
Writings of S. Paul; because they pretended that not having seen Jesus Christ
in the flesh, he could not call himself his Apostle. They accused him moreover
of having taught things that were contrary to the Law of God. In a word, they
esteemed him as an Innovator, who under pretense (said they) of introducing
Christianity among the Gentiles had abolished the Sabbath, the Circumcision,
and the other Ceremonies of the Old Law. Therefore this Holy Apostle speaks
often in his Epistles concerning his Apostleship, which his Enemies opposed in
vain. Tho he had not seen Jesus Christ, yet he invincibly proves that he has
not brought any Novelties into the Gospel, since he has avouched nothing
before he had thereupon conferred with the other Apostles. This has caused
Tertullian to say, that S. Paul Propterea Hierosolymam ascendit ad cognoscendos
Apostolos and consultandos, ne forte in vacuum cucurrisset, id est, ne non
secundum illos evangelizaret. Denique ut cum auctoribus contulit and convenit
de regula fidei, dexteras miscuere, and exinde officia praedicandi
distinxerunt. Tertull. lib. 4. adv. Marc. c. 2.
went on purpose to Jerusalem, to deliberate with the Apostles on all things
that appertained to the preaching of the Gospel, that he might do nothing that
was opposite to their Doctrine. He adds that after this Apostle had had a
Conference with them, and that they had all agreed on a certain and sure Rule
of Faith, they separated to go every one to his respective station to promulge
the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

S. Augustine relies on the same Principle in disproving a false Epistle that
the Manicheans had published under the Name of Jesus Christ. Is there any one
so foolish, (says this Learned Father) as to believe that the Epistle that
Manichee attributes to Jesus Christ is true, and that the Gospel of S. Matthew
which has been always preserved in the Church, does not belong to this
Apostle? He demands whether they could with any color of Reason believe an
obscure Man, who appeared not in the World till more than two hundred years
after Jesus Christ, Cum ipse Apostolus Paulus post ascensionem Domini de coelo
vocatus, si non inveniret in carne Apostolos, quibus communicando and cum
quibus conferendo Evangelium ejusdem esse societatis appareret, Ecclesia illi
omnino non crederet. Aug. lib. 28. cont. Manich. c. 4.
since the Church would not have given credit to S. Paul himself, who was
called to the Apostleship immediately after the Ascension of our Savior, if he
had not conferred with the Apostles touching the Doctrine that he preached.

It is a Maxim generally received among all the ancient Ecclesiastical Writers,
that Jesus Christ alone is the Author of the Christian Religion, and that his
Apostles who have been the Witnesses of his Actions and Words, have only
related to us those things that they had seen or learned from their Master.
When it was objected to the primitive Fathers, that the Gospels of S. Mark and
S. Luke, as also the Epistles of S. Paul ought not to be received as Canonical,
because the Authors of these Writings were not Apostles, but only Apostolical
Men. They have answered that these Apostolical Persons have written nothing but
what they had received from their Masters. They have concluded from thence,
that the same authority ought to be given to their Writings, as if the Apostles
themselves had been the Authors of them. Therefore when Tertullian speaks of S.
Luke and S. Mark, who (according to his Opinion) were only Apostolical, he adds
at the same time, that these Apostolical Men were not Si and Apostolicos, non
tamen solos, sed cum Apostolis and post Apostolos, quoniam praedicatio
discipulorum suspecta fieri posset de gloriae studio, si non adsistat illi
auctoritas magistrorum, imo Christi qui magistros Apostolos fecit. Tertull.
lib. 4. adv. Marc. c. 2.
alone, having written jointly with the Apostles, and after them; and that
therefore their Doctrine could not be suspected, since it has been authorized
by their Masters, and even by Jesus Christ who had constituted these Masters.
We may apply unto S. Paul that which Tertullian says here of S. Mark and S.
Luke. And this may serve to resolve all the Objections of the ancient Heretics
who refused to allow his Writings, because they denied that he was truly an
Apostle.

I have already given an account of the Manicheans, who acknowledged nothing of
S. Paul, but what was agreeable to the Idea that they had formed of the
Christian Religion. These Sectaries argued against common Sense. For in as much
as they were not able to reconcile two Passages of this Apostle, they thought
it sufficient to conclude from thence that one of the two must of necessity be
corrupted; since it was not possible (said they) that he should contradict in
one place what he had affirmed in another. When it was demanded of Faustus
whether he received the Apostle, Apostolum accipis? He answered that he did.
And when it was proved to him by the Writings of S. Paul, that he ought to
believe that Jesus Christ the Son of God derived his Original from David,
according to the flesh, he then replied, Non equidem crediderim Apostolum Dei
contraria sibi scribere potuisse, and modo hanc, modo illam de Domino nostro
habuisse sententiam. Apud Aug. lib. 11. cont. Faust. c. 1.
that it is not credible that the Apostle of God should have written things
that are contrary, and overthrow one another: he maintained that the Epistles
of S. Paul had been interpolated as well as the Gospels; and to make his
Subtilty more apparent in inventing new Answers, he adds, that this Apostle
might be reconciled with himself, in saying that he had two Conceptions
thereupon, and that that which was objected was his old Opinion, which he had
abandoned after he had been better instructed.

But let us leave these Heretics who had no certain Principles, and were
therefore obliged sometimes to have recourse to their Paraclet, which was their
great Engine. We see almost the same thing at present in some illuminated and
enthusiastic Persons, who for want of good reasons are forced to fly to I know
not what private Spirit that discovers to them the most hidden Mysteries of the
Christian Religion. I would entreat these People to reflect a little on the
Conduct of the ancient Ecclesiastical Writers in their Disputes against the
Heretics, and on their manner of arguing; they will find therein neither
Paraclet, nor private Spirit, but solid Arguments, that are very far from the
Fanaticism which is predominant in our Age.

Lastly, to return to S. Paul, the vanity of these ancient Heretics was so
great, that S. Irenaeus was compelled to confute some Sectaries, Eos autem qui
dicunt, solum Paulum veritatem cognovisse, cui per revelationem manifestum est
mysterium, ipse Paulus convincat eos dicens unum and ipsum Deum operatum Petro
in Apostolatu circumcisionis, and sibi in Gentes. Iren. adv. Haer. lib. 3. c.
13.
who affirmed that this Apostle only was endued with the knowledge of the
Truth, and that he alone had the Revelation of the Mysteries of the Gospel: but
this Father convinces them by the very Words of S. Paul, who has born witness
to the Apostleship of S. Peter.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Epistle to the Hebrews in particular. Whether it be St.
Paul's, and Canonical. What Antiquity has believed thereupon, as well in the
Eastern as in the Western Countries. The Opinions of these later Ages
concerning this Epistle.
SInce I have no other design in this Work than to treat of the Text of the New
Testament, and to establish as much as is possible the Writings of the
Apostles, I shall not insist in particular on the Subject of every Epistle of
S. Paul; this is a task that belongs rather to a Commentator of the Scriptures,
than to a Critical History of the Text: for this reason I come immediately to
the Epistle to the Hebrews, that seems to have been disputed in Antiquity,
principally in the Western Churches, some of which have refused to read it in
their public Assemblies: there are also at this day some learned Critics,
that doubt whether S. Paul be the Author thereof, though they acknowledge it as
Divine and Canonical. Wherefore it is convenient to examine the Acts that we
have relating to this matter.

If we follow this Rule of Tertullian that is grounded on good reason, That
that is true which is most ancient, Illud verum quod prius, there will be no
occasion to enquire whether the Epistle to the Hebrews was certainly written by
S. Paul; for all the Eastern Churches seem not to have doubted thereof: the
Arians have been the first amongst them that have obstinately rejected it,
seeing that it was not favorable to their Innovations: this caused Theodoret,
speaking of these Heretics, to say, (...). Theod. Praef. Comm. in Epist. ad
Hebr.
that they ought at least to have respect to the length of time, and to
consider that this Epistle had been read in the Churches ever since they had
received the Writings of the Apostles. (...). Theod. ibid.
He opposes to them moreover, the Testimony of Eusebius Caesariensis, who
could not be suspected by them, because they esteemed him as their Chief. Now
this Eusebius has acknowledged, that the Epistle directed to the Hebrews was
S. Paul's, and that all the Ancients had believed it so to be.

As for the Testimony of the Ancients, this cannot be true but of those of the
Eastern Church; for Eusebius himself has observed, that some in the Western
Church did not receive this Epistle: but the Authority of these Western Writers
ought not to be regarded, since S. Clement Bishop of Rome, who lived before
them, has cited it in the Letter that he wrote in the name of his Church to
those of Corinth, as the same Eusebius assures us. He proves by the Authority
of this Disciple of the Apostles, that the Epistle to the Hebrews has been
reckoned with good reason in the number of the Apostolical Writings, and does
not in the least doubt of the Authors, because the most part of the ancient
Doctors of the Church, especially in the East, have believed that it did truly
belong to S. Paul: but since they supposed that he wrote it in Hebrew, they do
not agree as to the Interpreter: (...) Eusebius. Hi. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 38.
some (says Eusebius) affirm, that it has been translated by S. Luke, and
others by S. Clement. He confirms this last Opinion by the Style of this
Epistle, which is very like to that of S. Clement; nevertheless, Clemens
Alexandrinus proves on the contrary, Cl. Alex. in Hypot. apud Eus. Hist. Eccl.
l. 6. c. 14.
by this resemblance of Style, that the Epistle to the Hebrews which he
avoucheth to be St. Paul's, has been interpreted by St. Luke.

Origin, who has written Homilies on the Epistle to the Hebrews, was of
opinion, (...). Orig. Homil. in Epist. ad Hebr. apud Eusebius. (...). Eccl. lib.
6. cap. 25.
that the matter indeed was S. Paul's, but that the Expressions were too lofty
and too elegant to be his, who wrote in a very simple and plain Style. This
learned Critic does not attribute this diversity of Style to the Translator,
but to the Amanuensis that committed the Doctrine of S. Paul to Writing. (...).
Orig. ibid.
I believe (says Origin) that the Sense and Conceptions are of this Apostle,
but that the Phrase and Composition is another's who has collected the Sayings
of his Master, and set them down in writing: nevertheless, what he adds in the
same place makes it appear, that in his time there were some Churches that did
not ascribe this Epistle to the Hebrews to S. Paul; and he judges also, that
it cannot be certainly determined who has written it: (...). Orig. ibid.
If any Churches (says he) reads this Epistle as S. Paul's they are to be
commended in this, for it is not without reason that the Ancients have thought
that it was his, but God alone knows the truth thereof.

The Greek Fathers who have lived before and after Origin, and even the
greatest part of the Heretics, have quoted it under no other name than that of
this Holy Apostle. Melchis. ap. Epiph. Haer. 55.
The Melchisedecians, who preferred Melchisedec before Jesus Christ, grounded
their Opinion on the Epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews. The Catharians, who
were a branch of the Novatians, relied also on these Words of this Epistle,
Cath. ap. Epiph. Haer. 59.
Chap. vi. v. 4, 5, 6. For it is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the
World to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance,
Hierac. ap. Epiph. Haer. 67.
etc. Hieracqs an Egyptian, who was the Chief of the Sect of the Hieracites,
which was embraced by diverse Monks of Egypt, pretended to prove by this same
Epistle to the Hebrews, that Melchisedec was the Holy Ghost. Lastly, many other
Heretics who separated themselves from the Church, attributed it to no other
but S. Paul; which induces me to believe, that this Opinion was founded on an
ancient Tradition of the Churches.

Cajus in the mean time, a famous Writer who lived at the beginning of the
third Century under Pope Zephyrinus, in a Dispute that he had at Rome with the
Cataphryges, and which was published, acknowledges only thirteen Epistles of
S. Paul, not mentioning that which is directed to the Hebrews. Eusebius, who
has taken notice of this Dispute, observes, (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c.
20.
that some Romans in his time had not as yet received the Epistle to the
Hebrews as S. Paul's: and in another place where he speaks of the Epistles of
the Apostles, after he had said that the fourteen Epistles of S. Paul were
known to all the World, he adds, (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 3.
that some have rejected this which is written to the Hebrews, under pretense
that the Roman Church did not believe it to belong to S. Paul.

Baronius has not done justice to this Historian, when he accuses him of
favoring in these Words the Party of the Arians, his good Friends, and of
insinuating that the Church of Rome had doubted of the Verity of this Epistle;
for besides that Eusebius does only relate a simple matter of fact that was
evident, and which S. Jerome has afterward explained more at large, he openly
declares in this very place in favor of those that believed that the Epistle
to the Hebrews was certainly written by S. Paul, when he adds, that he will
give an account, in the sequel of his History, what has been the belief of the
ancient Ecclesiastical Writers as to this point: and he acquits himself after
such a manner, as makes it manifest, that none of these Ancients, nor even the
Roman Church, have ever doubted before the time of Cajus, of the Authority of
the Epistle to the Hebrews. Tertullian, nevertheless, has attributed it to S.
Barnabas, but without showing any Reasons.

The same Baronius is very much perplexed when he would explain the Sense of S.
Jerome, who avoucheth, that although this Epistle has been always received as
S. Paul's in the Eastern Churches, Eam Latinorum consuetudo non recipit inter
Scripturas Canonicas. Hier. Epist. ad Dardan.
yet the Latins do not put it in the number of the Canonical Epistles: this he
repeats in several other Passages of his Works. But whereas most part of the
Latin Fathers before him, and even in his time, have acknowledged this Epistle
not only to be Canonical, but also to be written by S. Paul; this Cardinal
thinks that S. Jerome was deceived in relying altogether on the Testimony of
Cajus and Eusebius, without consulting the custom of the Latin Churches.

I confess that this Father in his Book of Ecclesiastical Writers, according to
his usual method, has only copied the Words of Eusebius, when he speaks of
Cajus; but the same thing cannot be said of the other Passages, where he
affirms distinctly from Eusebius, that this Epistle is not generally received
amongst the Latins. Paulus Apostolus (says he in his Commentary on Isaiah) in
Epistola ad Hebraeos, quam Latina consuetudo non recipit. He adds a little
after, Pauli quoque idcirco ad Hebraeos Epistolae contradicitur, quod ad
Hebraeos scribens utatur testimoniis quae in Hebraeis voluminibus non habentur.
Hier. Comm. in Is. l 2. c. 6.
that this Epistle of S. Paul was rejected, because that in writing to the
Hebrews he made use of such Testimonies of the Holy Scriptures as were not
found in their Copies. This evidently proves that there were some Churches in
those times in which the Epistle to the Hebrews was not acknowledged as
Canonical; Hier. ib.
this can only be understood of the Western Churches, since he grants that it
was universally approved in all those of the East. He declares moreover, in his
Letter to Dardanus, Quod si Epistolam ad Hebraeos Latinorum consuetudo non
recipit, inter Scripturas Canonicas, nec Graecorum quidem Ecclesiae Apocalypsim
Joannis eadem liberate suscipiunt, and tamen nos utramque suscipimus,
nequaquam hujus temporis consuetudinem, sed veterum scriptorum auctoritatem
sequentes, qui plerumque utriusque abutuntur testimoniis, non ut interdum de
apocryphis facere solent, sed quasi canonicis and ecclesiasticis. Hier. Epist.
ad Dard.
that without having regard to the Custom of his Time, he received the Epistle
to the Hebrews and the Apocalypse as Canonical Books, though the Latins did not
allow the first, nor the Grecians the second. He prefers in this place the
Authority of the Ancients who had cited these two Works as Canonical, before
the practice of his time. It cannot be said then, with Cardinal Baronius, that
S. Jerome, when he affirms that in his time the Epistle to the Hebrews was not
commonly received amongst the Latins, had only respect to the Testimony of
Cajus, and that he has done nothing but transcribed the Words of Eusebius; for
he speaks plainly of the Custom of his time.

But it may be objected, that S. Hilary, Optatus, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and
some other Fathers who lived before S. Jerome, or were contemporary with him,
have not doubted that this Epistle was not only Canonical and Divine, but they
have likewise believed that it was S. Paul's; how then could it come to pass
that this Father should avouch that it was not acknowledged in his time amongst
the Latins? It is true, that these Fathers who were Latins, and some of whom
lived at the same time with S. Jerome, have all ascribed the Epistle directed to
the Hebrews to S. Paul, which he does also himself in diverse Passages of his
Works: however, I will not conclude from thence with Baronius, that this
learned Man has not sufficiently considered the Practice of his Church, Haec
igitur oum ex Eusebio Hieronymus exsoripserit, majorem illi quam par erat sidem
tribuit, dum putavit Latinos dictam Epistolam non recipere. Baron. ann. chapter 60.
n. 52.
and that he has too easily given credit to the Testimony of Eusebius; but I
will say that a difference ought to be put between the Custom of Churches, and
the Attestation of particular Writers. When S. Jerome has written that in his
time the Epistle to the Hebrews was not allowed among the Latins, he has
declared the Practice of many Churches of the West who did not read it in their
public Assemblies: this does not hinder but that the Fathers of those times
might esteem it as Canonical, and also as S. Paul's. It would be an easy
matter by this means to reconcile S. Jerome with some other Latin Fathers.

That which confirms the distinction that I have now made between the Custom of
Churches and that of private Writers, is this, that we find some very ancient
Greek Manuscripts of the Epistles of S. Paul with the old Latin Version annexed
to them, in which the Epistle to the Hebrews has been separated on purpose
from the body of the Epistles. It seems to me that there can be no other reason
given of this Separation but this, that the Latins who have transcribed these
Copies (as I shall prove hereafter) did not read this Epistle in their
Churches: furthermore, it may be observed, that all the ancient Latin Authors
have not attributed the Epistle to the Hebrews to S. Paul; for besides that
Tertullian does not refer to it but under the name of S. Barnabas, there is no
probability that it was received as Canonical in the Church of S. Cyprian,
since he never makes use of its Authority in all his Works. If we should say
with Baronius, that this holy Bishop has followed Tertullian in this, whom he
read always, and called his Master, this would not resolve the difficulty: I
doubt not but if the Epistle to the Hebrews had been publicly read at that
time in his Church, as being S. Paul's, he would have quoted it as well as the
others.

As for the Reasons that are alleged against this Epistle, they are not of
that weight as to make void the Testimonies of so great a number of Authors who
have attributed it to S. Paul. First, Hieron. Comm. in Is. l. 2. c. 6.
The Objection proposed by S. Jerome in his Commentaries on Isaiah, that is
taken from the Passages of the old Testament, which the Author of this Epistle
has not cited from the Hebrew Text, but from the Greek Version of the Seventy,
is of no force at all: he should have first made it appear that it was
originally written in Hebrew, which cannot be easily proved; and though it were
true, yet might it be always said, as of the Gospel of S. Matthew, that the
Greek Translator has inserted into his Version the Passages of the Old
Testament according to the Septuagint, which was read at that time by the most
part of the Jews.

If we follow the Opinion of Origin who was well versed in the Criticism of the
Sacred Books, this Epistle has been composed in Greek by one of the Scribes or
Disciples of S. Paul, who has only committed to Writing that which he learned
from his Master. This may serve to answer another Objection that is ordinarily
offered against this Epistle, by reason of the diversity of Style, which is
pretended to be very different from that of the other Epistles of S. Paul.
Theophylact, who has taken notice of this, declares (...). Theoph. Comm. in c.
1. Epist. ad Hebr.
that S. Paul has written it in Hebrew, and that it was afterwars translated
into Greek by S. Luke, as some think, or by S. Clement, which he judges most
probable, because of the resemblance of the Style.

It is objected in the third place, that if this Epistle were S. Paul's, he
would have set his Name at the head of it, as he has done in his other
Epistles. Theodor. Praef. Com. in Epist. ad Hebr.
Theodoret, who has related this Objection from the Arians, answers, that
there is a great deal of difference between this Letter, and the others that
bear the Name of this Apostle: he has prefixed his Name (according to his
Opinion) at the beginning of those that were written to the Gentiles, because
he was their Apostle; whereas in writing to the Jews, whose Apostle he was not,
it was not requisite for him to do the like. The Arians might have seen this
Answer in the Works of Clemens Alexandrinus who lived before the appearing of
their Heresy, as also another that he gives in the same place; but it is
grounded as the former, only on a Conjecture: he says (...). Clem. Alex. in
Hypotyp. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 14.
that it was a piece of Wisdom in S. Paul not to set his Name at the head of an
Epistle that he wrote to a sort of People that were possessed with a prejudice
against him; and that he did very prudently in concealing his Name, that he
might not hinder them from reading it.

There is a fourth Reason that appears to be much stronger than the preceding,
against the ascribing the Epistle to the Hebrews to S. Paul. Epist. ad Heb. c.
6. v. 4, 5, 6.
It seems as if the Author designed absolutely to condemn all Repentance after
Baptism; for he says; Chap. 6. that it is impossible that those that have been
once enlightened, that is to say, baptized, and have fallen away after this,
should be renewed by Repentance; this is manifestly contrary to the Doctrine of
the New Testament, and to the Practice of the Church. There is a great deal of
probability, that this was that which obliged some Latin Churches not to read
this Epistle publicly in their Assemblies, especially since the Novatians had
made use of it to support their Schism. (...). Theod. Comm. in c. 6. Epist. ad
Hebr.
The Novatians (says Theodoret) used these Words to oppose the Truth. I have
found an Answer to this Objection in an ancient Latin Translation that has
been made before the time of S. Jerome; for whereas in the present vulgar, the
Greek Word (...) is translated impossible, it is in this ancient Version
difficile; and that which deserves further to be observed, is that it
ordinarily follows the words of the Greek Text; but in this place it is rather
according to the Sense, than the strictness of the Letter. This makes it
evident that in those times the Latins found this expression somewhat harsh,
and contrary to the Judgment of the Church; and this partly induced Luther to
deny that the Epistle to the Hebrews was written by S. Paul, or any other of
the Apostles.

Erasmus has affirmed in his Notes on this Epistle, that S. Ambrose, Erasm.
Not. in Epist. ad Hebr.
who has written Commentaries on the Epistles of S. Paul, has made none upon
this, because it was received but very lately in the Roman Church. He adds,
that the Grecians have already embraced it, because it was contrary to the
Arians, who rejected it. But he is mistaken in attributing Commentaries to S.
Ambrose that are not his, and which the most judicious Critics believe to be
made by S. Hilary, Deacon of Rome: neither is it true that it has been more
approved by the Grecians, since it was exploded by the Arians; for Clemens
Alexandrinus, who lived before Arius, has avouched that it was S. Paul's.
Besides they that have disputed against the Arians, have thereupon opposed to
them the universal Consent of the Ecclesiastical Writers before the appearing
of their Heresy.

The same Erasmus offended the greatest part of the Divines, especially those
of the Faculty of Paris, by these two Propositions. De Epistolae ad Hebraeos
auctore semper est dubitatum; and, ut ipse ingenue fatear, adhuc dubito. Erasm.
Propos.
It has been always doubted of the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews: and
to say the truth, I do still doubt thereof. This so exasperated the Reverend
Doctors of Paris, that they censured the aforesaid Propositions after this
manner. He duae propositiones arroganter and schismatice asseruntur, contra
usum and determinationem Ecclesiae in multis conciliis Nicaeno, Laodicensi,
Carthaginensi tertio, cui adfuit Augustinus, and in Concilio 70. Episcoporum
praeside Gelasio. Cens. Facult. Theol. Paris. tit. de Auctor. libr Novi Test.
These two Propositions are insolent and schismatical against the Practice and
Decrees of the Church in the Councils of Nice, Laodicea, the third of Carthage,
in which S. Augustine assisted, and in a Council of seventy Bishops wherein Pope
Gelasius presided. These Divines added to this the Testimonies of S. Denis,
whom they called the Disciple of S. Paul, of S. Clement, Innocent I. S Gregory
Nazianzen and of some other Fathers. From whence they conclude Nec verum est
semper dubitatum esse de auctore hujus Epistolae ad Hebraeos, cum scribat
Origenes quod ante tempora suaomnes antiqui and majores eam ut Pauli Apostoli
suscipiebant. Cens. Facult. Theol. Paris. ibid.
that it is not true that it has been always doubted of the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, since Origin avoucheth that all the ancient
Ecclesiastical Writers that have lived before him, have received it as S.
Paul's.

Moreover these same Divines opposed to Erasmus the words of S. Peter, 2 Pet.
3.15.
that are at the end of his second Canonical Epistle directed to the Hebrews,
wherein he says expressly, that his beloved Brother Paul had also written unto
them; they do not doubt but S. Peter designed in this place to hint at the
Epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews. Erasmus in his answer to these Doctors of
Paris, Erasm. Declar. ad Theol. Paris.
is content to say that all these Councils do not speak of the Author of this
Epistle, but only of its Authority; that this Title has been added to it to
denote the Epistle, and that it is not denied that many have cited it under the
name of S. Paul.

Whereas this Answer is is too general, and does not fully satisfy the
Authority of these Councils that attribute the Epistle to the Hebrews to S.
Paul, Guill Est. praef. Com. in Epist. ad Hebr.
I shall produce what Estius a Learned Doctor of the Faculty of Doway has
judiciously remarked on all these difficulties. This Divine after he has
treated of the Question concerning the Author of this Epistle, adds this other,
viz. whether it be a point of Faith to believe that S. Paul is the Author,
insomuch that the contrary opinion is to be accounted Heretical, as Catharinus,
Sixtus Senensis, Alfonsus and some other modern Writers have averred, being
supported by the authority of some Councils, and by the practice of the whole
Church that reads it in her Offices under the name of S. Paul?

Estius, nothwithstanding all these Authorities, does not judge it to be a
matter of Faith. This he proves by the positive words of diverse Fathers, and
among others of S. Jerome and S. Augustine. We have already seen what the first
has thought thereupon. And as for S. Augustine, he says expressly in
discoursing of this Epistle, Epistola quae inscribitur ad Hebraeos, quamplures
Apostoli Pauli esse dicunt, qudam vero negant, etc. Aug. lib. 16. de Civ. Dei
2.22.
that many believe it to be S. Paul's, and that others deny it to be his. Now
it is certain that this Father speaks in this place of Orthodox Authors. As for
what concerns the Councils, the same Estius answers, that some of those have
been holden before the time of these two Fathers, and that consequently nothing
can be concluded from them.

He insists further, that nothing can be inferred from the others, Neque enim
Patribus horum Conciliorum propositum erat definire cujus ea Epistela sit
auctoris, sed quod una cum caeteris Pauli Epistolis, quibus receptissimo
Ecclesiae more eam annumerant, inter Divinas Scripturas sit habenda. Est praef.
Comment in Epist. ad Hebr.
because the design of the Bishops that were there assembled, was not to
determine who has been the Author of this Epistle, but only to put it in the
number of the Canonical Scriputures with the other Letters of S. Paul. Then he
justifies by these same Councils, and he proves it also by these words of the
Council of Carthage, Pauli Epistolae tredecim, ad Hebraeos una. This Council
has (as he thought) separately mentioned this that is directed to the Hebrews,
because they were not so well assured, as of the others, that it was S. Paul's,
he adds Verum sciebat Augustinus, non omnia quae quoquo modo dicuntur in
Conciliis definitive dici. Est. ibid.
that S. Augustine, who had a Veneration for this Council, would not have
doubted of the Author of this Epistle, if he were persuaded that this had been
therein defined. This Father (says he) knew well that all things that are said
or disputed in Councils are not Articles of Faith; and he proves it by some
Examples. But after all, Estius Censeo quidem cum Theologica Facultate
Parisiensi, cum Melchiore Cano, temerarium esse si quis Epistolam ad Hebraeos
negaret esse Pauli Apostoli; sed haereticum ob id solum pronunciare non ausim.
Est. ibid.
concludes with the Divines of Paris and Melchior Canus, that it would be a
piece of rashness to maintain that S. Paul is not the Author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews. Nevertheless he durst not pronounce the opinion of those to be
Heretical, who deny that it was written by this Apostle; and in this he appears
very judicious, for indeed there is no matter of Heresy in it. Furthermore I
have enlarged a little on this Remark of Estius, because it clears every thing
that has respect to the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and teaches the
Divines at the same time not to run too fast in point of Heresy.

The Divines of Paris do not only condemn Erasmus as being too rash, but they
add also in their Censure touching the Authors of every Book of the New
Testament, Jam non est fas Christiano de illis dubitare. Cens. Fac. Theol.
Paris.
that it is no longer lawful for any Christian to doubt of them. On this
account every man that is not fully satisfied that S. Paul wrote the Epistle to
the Hebrews, is a bad Christian, according to the determination of the Faculty
of Divinity at Paris; nevertheless he is not an Heretic. Erasmus instead of
replying punctually to these Learned Doctors, elndes their Decrees by general
Answers. He says that he does not believe Quidquid receptum est usu
Ecclesiastico, non protinus obligat noi ad credendum tanquam articulum fidei.
Erasm. Declar. ad Theol. Paris.
that every thing that is received by an Ecclesiastical Custom, becomes
immediately an Article of Faith. However he shows his submission to the Decrees
of the Church, when he adds in this same place, that if he follows his Reason,
Juxta sensum humanum nec credo Epistolam ad Hebraeos esse Pauli aut Lucae, nec
secundam Petri esse Petri, nec Apocalypsin esse Joannis Apostoli qui scripsit
Evangelium-solus ille scrupulus habet animum meum, an Ecclesia receperit
titulos, ut non solum velit haberi pro indubitatis quae in his libris scripta
sunt, verum pariter exigat ut pro indubitato habeamus ab his auctoribus esse
profecta quorum titulos gerunt. Id si est, damno ac rejicio dubitationem
meam-plus apud me valet expressum Ecclesiae judicium, quam ullae rations
humanae. Erasm. Declar. ad Theol. Paris.
he cannot judge that the Epistle to the Hebrews is S. Paul's, nor S. Luke's;
neither that the second under the name of S. Peter, was written by this
Apostle; nor that the Revelation does belong to the Apostle S. John: that all
his scruple is to know, whether the Church has so authorized the Titles of
holy Writ, that she has decreed, not only that that which is contained in
these Books is most true, but also that those persons to whom they are
attributed are certainly the Authors of them. If this be so (says Erasmus) I
condemn my Reasons of doubting; for I prefer the express Judgment of the
Church, before any human Reasons whatsoever.

Upon the whole matter, all this Difficulty may be reduced to this, to know
whether the Church in pronouncing the Books of the Old and New Testament to be
Canonical and Divine, has declared at the same time that they were written by
the Authors whose Names they bear. This is necessary to be observed here, that
it may be applied to the other Books of the New Testament, of which we shall
treat in the Sequel of this Work.

It has been often objected to the Lutherans, that their Patriarch has
rejected this Epistle, who believed not that it was written by any Apostle. But
besides their reading it in their German Bibles with the other Epistles of S.
Paul, they answer that it might be permitted to their Master to raise this
Doubt after so many ancient Authors: and that he has nevertheless acknowledged
Esse tamen pulcherrimam and insignem Epistolam a discipulo quodam Apostolorum
scriptam. Raith. Vind. Verse. Germ. Luth. th. 22.
that it was most excellent, Calv. argum de ses Comm. sur l' Epist. aux Hebr.
and composed by some Disciple of the Apostles. Calvin has presixed to his
Commentaries on this Epistle, a Discourse where he says, For my part I cannot
believe that S. Paul is the Author of it.

One would think that the Socinians should expunge this Epistle to the Hebrews
out of the Catalogue of the Canonical Books, in imitation of the Arians. In the
mean time tho they are persuaded that there is no certainty as to the Author of
it, yet they do not forbear to receive it with the other Epistles of S. Paul.
Therefore Socinus himself after he has produced some Arguments Videtur mihi
ipsa in universum scribendi ratio auctoris illius Epistolae admodum diversa ab
ea qua quam secutus est Paulus, quamvis aeque divina. Soc. de Auctor. Script.
Sac. n. 2.
that give occasion to a scruple whether it appertains to this Apostle, adds
that however it is no less Divine; he confesses that it is not without reason
that it is doubted whether the person to whom it is commonly attributed be
certainly the Author: but he says at the same time, that tho the name of an
Author of a Book be not known, it does not follow that this Book is of no
authority, or even of less than if it were known. Enjedinus a subtle Unitarian
insists also at large on this Subject when he examins some Passages of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Georg. Enjed. locor. Epist. ad Hebr.
he relates all that he has read thereupon in the Writings of Erasmus and
Beza, and of some other Commentators on the holy Scriptures. But after he has
too nicely alleged such Reasons as not only take away this Epistle from S.
Paul, but also render it suspected, he does not fail to reckon it in the number
of the Canonical Books.

It is well worth the observing, that the Epistle to the Hebrews is not so
favorable to the Orthodox against the Arians, but that they have likewise made
use of it against the Catholics to authorize their Novelties. This may be seen
in the Works of S. Epiphanius, who takes notice that although these Heretics did
not acknowledge it as an Apostolical Writing, yet they did not forbear to
oppose the Faith of the Church with these words of this same Epistle, chap. 3.
v. 1, 2. (...). Epist. ad Hebr. cap. 3. v. 2.
Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Jesus Christ; who was
faithful to him that appointed him (...). Epiph. Haer. 69. n. 37.
From these words, who was faithful to him that appointed [or made] him, they
concluded that Jesus Christ was a Creature.

As for the Language in which the Epistle to the Hebrews was composed, the
ancient Ecclesiastical Writers have all judged that the Greek Text which we now
have is too pure and elegant to be S. Paul's; but it cannot be necessarily
concluded from thence that it was at first written in Hebrew or Chaldaick by
this holy Apostle. I am rather inclined to believe with Origin, that it has
been compiled by one of the Amanuenses or Interpreters of S. Paul, to whom all
Antiquity has ascribed it, by reason of the Grandeur of the Conceptions in
which there is a certain Art that could proceed only from a Learned Jew of the
Sect of the Pharisees. The Jews themselves at this day who have any knowledge
of their ancient Authors, do freely confess that there is something in it that
is great and sublime. If we knew precisely to what sort of Jews it was
directed, we might more easily judge of the Language in which it was written.
But since this question is but of little moment, and we can have nothing but
Conjectures thereupon, I shall not insist any longer on it.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Catholic or Canonical Epistles in general, and in
particular.
THE Grecians have called Catholic or universal the seven Epistles which we
read under this Name; because for the most part they were not written to
particular Churches, as those of S. Paul. The Title of Canonical seems to have
been affected, especially in the Western Churches, because it has been doubted
whether some of them ought to be put in the number of the Canonical Books.
Cardinal Cajetan has thought that the Epistle of S. James, which is directed
to the twelve Tribes of the Jews in general, Magis libri quam epistolae titulum
merebatur: scripta est enim non ut deferretur duodecim Tribubus dispersis, cum
hoc esset impossible, sed ad instruendum eos. Cajet. Comm. in c. 1. Epist. Jac.
deserves rather the Name of a Book than of an Epistle, because it was not
written to be carried to the Jews that were dispersed amongst diverse Nations;
but he is mistaken in this, for we write as well to Communities, even those
that are separated in different Countries, as to particular Assemblies. And
these Letters are called (...), Catholic, or Circulary.

The Author of the Preface at the beginning of the Canonical Epistles, which is
attributed to S. Jerome, and is found in the most part of Manuscript Copies, and
in the first Latin Editions of the Bible, has observed Non ita est ordo apud
Graecos qui integre sapiunt, fidemque rectam sectantur, Epistolarum septem quae
Canonicae nuncupantur, sicut in Latinis codicibus invenitur, ut quod Petrus
primus in ordine Apostolorum, prinae sint etiam ejus Epistolae in ordine
caeterarum. Hieron. Prolog. in VII. Epist. Can.
that the Order of these Epistles in his time was not the same in the Latin, as
in the Greek Copies of the Orthodox. The Epistle of S. James was the first in
the Greek; whereas the Latins had placed that of S. Peter at the head of all
the rest, having had regard to the Primacy of his Apostleship. This Author
declares that he has re-established their ancient Order, putting that of St.
James at the beginning, and afterward the two of St. Peter, the three of St.
John, and at last that of St. Jude: this indeed is the Order that is found in
the Greek Manuscript Copies, and even in the ancient Latin Bibles written about
seven or eight hundred years ago. St. Jerome also has followed this method in
his great Prologue called Galeatus.

The Syrians have preserved this same Order in their Version, as appears from
the Edition of Widmanstadius, nevertheless they have not in their ancient
Copies (according to which this Edition of Widmanstadius was regulated) the
second Epistle of St. Peter, nor the second and third of St. John, nor that of
St. Jude. These Epistles were not apparently in the Greek Copies which the
Syrians have Translated into their Language: However it seems as if there were
nothing very certain concerning the Order of these Epistles; for in the last of
the Canons that bear the name of the Apostles, those of St. Peter are set down
first, and afterward those of St. John, and that of St. James stands in the
third rank: the Bishops assembled at Trent have also named them after this same
manner, conformably to the Council of Florence. Calvin himself has set the
Epistle of St. Peter at the head of all, in his Commentaries on the Canonical
Epistles. But we ought to prefer the Order that is observed in the Greek and
Latin Copies, and also in the Oriental Versions.

As for what concerns the Authority of these Epistles, very great difficulties
arise from thence; for as we have already seen, the Syrians have not inserted
some of them in their Version of the New Testament, which they would have done
if they had been read in the Eastern Churches, when they Interpreted them out
of the Greek into Syriack, nevertheless they have since Translated them, and
they have been likewise Printed; therefore they are also found in the Arabic
Versions of the New Testament. I shall have occasion to examine this matter more
exactly in the second Book of this Work, wherein I shall Treat of Versions in
particular; but since my design at present is only to speak of the Text, let us
see what the Ancients have thought thereupon.

Eusebius, who avoucheth (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 23.
that the Epistle of St. James, the Brother of our Savior, with the other
Canonical Epistles, was publicly read in his time in the most part of the
Churches, observes nevertheless that not many of the ancient Writers have made
mention of it, as neither of that of St. Jude; he would say, without doubt,
that there are few of the ancient Doctors of the Church that have cited it as
Canonical; therefore in another part of his History where he produces a
Catalogue of the Books of the New Testament (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3.
cap. 25.
he reckons the same Epistle of St. James, that of St. Jude, the second of St.
Peter, and the second and third of St. John among the Scriptures that were not
generally received as Canonical by all the Churches, though several ancient
Fathers had spoken of them.

St. Jerome, who usually transcribes Eusebius, in his Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers, expresses himself almost after the same manner as this
Historian does, on the Epistle of St. James; for after he has said Jacobus qui
appellatur frater Domini-unam tantum scripsit Epistolam, quae de septem
Catholicis est, quae and ipsa ab alio quodam sub nomine ejus edita asseritur,
licet paulatim tempore procedente obtinuerit auctoritatem. Hieron. de Script.
Eccl. in Jac.
that St. James the first Bishop of Jerusalem has written but one Letter,
which is in the number of the seven Canonical Epistles, he adds (to show that
all People were not agreed that it was certainly his) that it was said that it
has been written by another in his name, though it has obtained Authority in
process of time.

Cardinal Cajetan makes use of this same Passage of S. Jerome, Cajet. Comm. in
c. 1. Epist. Jac.
to prove that it is not absolutely certain that this Epistle was composed by
S. James the Brother of our Lord; Non usquequaque certum an Epistola haec sit
Jacobi fratris Domini. He has also entitled his Annotations on this Epistle,
Commentaries on the Epistle that bears the Name of S. James; In eam quae Divo
Jacobo inscribitur Commentarii: in which point he is more scrupulous than S.
Jerome, who has made no difficulty to quote it under this Title. Indeed this
Father simply relates in this place the various Opinions of several Persons
concerning the Author of this Epistle: but forasmuch as it was read in the
Churches under the Name of S. James, and it has been read therein ever since
that time, this Cardinal discovers too nice a curiosity, as well as when he
adds in this very place, that the manner of saluting that is at the beginning
of this Salutatio hic posita tam pura est, ut nulli salutationi cujuscunque
alterius Apostolicae Epistolae conformis sit, nam nihil Dei, nihil Jesu
Christi, nihil gratiae, nihilve pacis sonat, sed profano more salutem, nec ipse
seipsum nominat Apostolum, sed tantum servum Jesu Christi. Cajet. Comm. in c.
1. Epist. Jac.
Epistle contains nothing Apostolical; on the contrary, that it is altogether
profane, no mention being therein made of Jesus Christ, nor of Grace, nor
Peace; and he does not call himself (says he) an Apostle, but a Servant of
Jesus Christ.

Sixtus Senensis has rehearsed these Words amongst the Objections that Luther
has made against this Epistle, and perhaps Cajetan has taken the best part of
these Expressions from him: but this Objection is so weak, and even so
irrational, that the Lutherans have had no regard to it, no more than to diverse
other Reasons that their Master has alleged against the Epistle of S. James;
for they receive it at this day after the same manner as the Catholics:
nevertheless, they are not to be excused in this respect, because they still
retain in some Editions of their German Bible, the Prefaces of Luther that are
at the beginning of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and of that of S. James, after
they have admitted them as Canonical; for they disown by these Prefaces what
they authorize in the body of their Bible.

I could have wished that Melchior Canus, Melch. Can. de loc. Theol. l. 2. c.
11.
and some other learned Divines, had not made use of the Authority of certain
Decretal Epistles falsely attributed to the first Popes, to show that ever since
the Primitive Times of Christianity it has been believed that this Epistle did
certainly belong to S. James: there is no need of this sort of Proofs; for
though the Ancients have been divided as to this Point, it is enough that the
succeeding Ages, after a due reflection on this matter, have found in Antiquity
certain Acts sufficient to justify the placing this Epistle of S. James in the
rank of the Canonical Books of the New Testament, and that all the Churches of
the World do at this day receive it as such.

Calvin, who has been more moderate herein than Luther, has chose rather to
reconcile the Doctrine of S. James, touching Faith and Works, with that of S.
Paul, than unadvisedly to reject this Epistle under color that it appears to
be contrary to the same S. Paul. To receive (says he) this Epistle, this seems
to me to be sufficient, Calv. arg. de son Comm. sur l'Epist. de St. Jaq.
that it contains nothing unworthy of an Apostle of Christ. The Lutherans
themselves soon perceived that their Master sometimes gave out Opinions without
a due consideration of what he affirmed. Raithius, who has made an Apology for
Luther, confesses, that he had written in the first Edition of his German
Bible to this effect, that if this Epistle were compared with those of S. Peter
and S. Paul it would appear only an Epistle of Straw, Epistola straminea: but,
Post majorem illuminationem, ut dies diem docet, verba illa duriuscula
postertoribus Saerorum Bibliorum editionibus sunt omissa, nec post annum 1526.
in ulla amplius editione straminea vocatur. Raith. Vind. Verse. Germ. Luth. th.
21.
after he had been more enlightened, these Words were taken away in the
following Editions, and they are not to be found in those that have been made
since the Year 1526. Nevertheless, a certain Lutheran published a Book at
Strasbourg in the Year 1527, wherein he speaks after a strange manner of the
Epistle of S. James. He affirms Non possumus hic defendere Jacobum: citat enim
Scripturas falso; and solus Spiritui Saucto, Legi, Prophetis, Christo
Apostolisque omnibus contradicit. Testimomum ipsius vanum est. Vni ipsi testi
credendum non esse supra annotavimus, praesertim cum quo ipse Spiritus Sanctus
and tot testes veritatis dissentiant. Ne igitur succenseas nobis, lector, si
durius and vehementius calamo quandoque in auctorem invecti sumus. Meretur enim
hoc odium and hanc spiritus vehementiam, dum aliam perfectionem atque justitiam
a nobis contendit quam fidei. Andr. Altham. apud Grot. de discuss. Rivet.
Apolog. p. 722.
that he cannot defend it, because the Author alleges false Quotations of the
Scriptures, and alone contradicts the Law, the Prophets, Jesus Christ and the
Apostles; he condemns the Testimony of this Writer as vain, boldly affirming
that we ought not to believe him being a single Witness, especially since the
Holy Ghost, and a great number of the Witnesses of the Truth, do dissent from
him: lastly, this man, after he has taken so much liberty to declaim against
the Author of this Epistle, adds at the end of his Book, that none ought to be
offended that he has treated him so severely; for, (says he) he deserves this
hatred, because he has proposed to us another Righteousness than that of
Faith. Can there be any thing more insolent than the Words of this Sectary who
durst oppose his false Conceptions against the Testimony of all the Churches of
the World?

Socinus speaks with a great deal more moderation and judgment concerning the
Authority of this Epistle. This Champion of the Unitarians declares that it was
doubted in the beginning touching the Authors of the Epistle of S. James, of
the second of S. Peter, and of that of S. Jude, because they were found after
the Collection of the other Books of the New Testament had been made: Cum
postea tempore procedente ex judiciis huic rei aptis cognitum fuisset istas
Epistolas illorum ipsorum Apostolorum esse, exempta plerisque illa dubitatio
fuit; and sic inter alias sunt numeratae, and ea quidem quae Jacobi est, ante
duas reliquas. Soc. de auctor. Script. Sac. c. 1. n. 2.
but forasmuch as it was acknowledged afterward that they were certainly
composed by the Apostles whose Names they bore, the most part of the Churches
did no longer doubt thereof; and the Epistle of S. James was placed before the
two others: moreover, with respect to that of S. James, he proves the Antiquity
of this Tradition by the ancient Syriack Copies. Therefore he does not only
receive them as Canonical, but believes also that they do certainly belong to
them to whom they are attributed.

Although it be agreed that the first of these Catholic Epistles was written
by S. James, nevertheless it remains to be known who this James is. The Title
of this Epistle does not resolve this difficulty, because it is different
according to the various Greek Copies: and indeed we ought not to rely on this
sort of Title that are later than the Authors of the Books It is read simply in
some Manuscript Copies, (...), God. MS. Bibl. Reg. n. 2872.
The Catholic Epistle of S. James; and in others, (...), The Catholic Epistle
of the Apostle S. James. This is also the Title that has been prefixed in the
Vulgar Latin, Epistola Catholica beati Jacobi Apostoli, and which Beza has
retained in his Greek Edition of the New Testament, where we read (...), The
Catholic Epistle of the Apostle James. But Robert Stephen, in his curious
Greek Edition of the New Testament in folio, has simply put (...), The
Catholic Epistle of James. It is no otherwise in Crespin's Edition at Geneva
in the Year 1565. It is read according to the same sense, (...), The Epistle of
S. James, in that of Wolfius at Strasbourg in 1524. We read also after the same
manner in the Edition of Melchior Sessa at Venice in 1538, and in that of Simon
de Colines at Paris in 1534, and in many others. This is most natural and most
conformable to the Greek Text, where S. James, at the beginning of his Epistle,
takes upon him no other Quality than that of a Servant of God and of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Therefore Grotius has also preserved this same Title, and he has reason not
to approve the Opinion of those that attribute it to James the Son of Zebedee,
because this James had been put to Death by Herod before the Gospel of Jesus
Christ was much spread abroad beyond Judea: neither does he believe that James
the Son of Alpheus was the Author of it, because he would have taken at the
beginning of his Epistle the Name of an Apostle, which was a quality in those
Primitive Times that gave a great Authority to their Words: from whence he
concludes, that it ought to be ascribed to that James whom the Apostles
constituted first Bishop of Jerusalem. Hieron. de Script. Eccles. in Jac.
This is not very far from the Words of S. Jerome in his Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers, James, who is called the Brother of our Lord, and
surnamed the Just, as some think, was the Son of Joseph by another Wife; but
according to my Opinion, of Mary the Sister of our Lord, of whom John makes
mention in his Book: he was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem by the Apostles
immediately after the Passion of our Lord, and has written one Letter only,
which is in the number of the seven Catholic Epistles. He does not nominate
this James as an Apostle, but only as the Brother of our Lord, which is the
sole Qualification that is given him by the Arabic Interpreter published by
Erpenius, in the Title of this Epistle.

S. Jerome has said nothing in this place but what is agreeable to the judgment
of Hegisippus a grave Author, who lived not long after the times of the
Apostles. This great man has observed, that diverse Persons at that time bore
the Name of James, and says of this James (of whom we now discourse) (...)
Hegesipp. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. c. 23.
that being the Brother of our Lord, he took the Government of the Church of
Jerusalem jointly with the Apostles; that the Name of Just was also given to
him with one common Consent, which was continued ever since the time of our
Savior Jesus Christ: Hegisippus then did not believe that he was an Apostle,
forasmuch as he says that he took upon him the care of the Church of Jerusalem
with the Apostles; and he distinguishes him from others that went under the
Name of James, only by the Surname of Just.

In the mean time Baronius, and after him Estius, declare that this third
James, distinguished from the two others, who was simply Bishop of Jerusalem
without being an Apostle, is a chimerical James that never was. But since this
Cardinal grounds his Opinion on very weak Reasons, and contradicts Antiquity in
this point, no regard ought to be had to what he affirms against the Judgment
of Hegisippus and S. Jerome, and even against the Testimony of the Author of
this Epistle, who would not have failed to have styled himself an Apostle of
Jesus Christ in the beginning of his Letter, if he had been really so.

This may serve at the same time for a sufficient Answer to Cardinal Cajetan,
Cajet. Comm. in c. 1. Epist. Jac.
who has objected, to derogate from the Authority of this Epistle, that this
James has not taken upon him the Name of an Apostle, but only that of a
Servant; nec ipse seipsum nominat Apostolum, sed tantum servum. As to what this
Cardinal says in the same place, that this Writer has made no mention of God,
nor of Jesus Christ, the contrary is apparent from the first Words of this
Epistle, in which he attributes to himself no other Quality than that of (...),
Jac. 1. v. 1.
James a Servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ. He could not have chosen
a Title that might better express his Qualifications, especially writing to the
Jews, who were already accustomed by the reading of the Old Testament to the
Phrase of the Servant of God: and when he adds these other Words, and of the
Lord Jesus Christ, he lets them know that he is one of the Ministers of the new
Law that had been promulged by the Messiah.

Lastly we may observe, that in the Title of the Syriack Version these Words
are read, The Epistle of James an Apostle; it is no otherwise in the Ethiopick
Version: but in the general Title of the three Catholic Epistles which the
Syrians have in their ancient Copies, we read that these three Epistles were
written by James, Peter, and John, who were the Witnesses of the
Transfiguration of our Lord. This would prove that this James was the Son of
Zebedee; but it is a manifest error of the Syrians, who have inserted this
Inscription into their Copy.

As for what relates to the Epistles of S. Peter and S. John, Eusebius. Hist.
Ecel. l. 3. c. 25.
Eusebius puts the first Epistles of these two Apostles in the number of the
Canonical Books of the New Testament, that have been received with the common
Consent of all the Churches: but he observes at the same time, that there has
been some doubt concerning the Second of S. Peter, as well as of the Second and
Third of S. John. S. Jerome adds, Simon Petrus -- scripsit duas Epistolas quae
Catholicae nominantur, quarum secunda a plerisque negatur propter stili cum
priore dissonantiam. Hier. de Script. Eccl. in Sim. Pet.
that that which has caused the Ancients to doubt of the second Epistle of S.
Peter, is the difference of the Style of these two Epistles.

We cannot rely on the Testimony of Clemens Alexandrinus, who reckons in the
number of the Canonical Writings of the New Testament all the Epistles that we
call Catholic; for he places amongst them, at the same time, the Epistle of
Barnabas, Clem. Al. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 14.
and the Book entitled, The Revelation of Peter, (...). This Father, who was
an extraordinary learned man, has not been very exact in distinguishing the
Books of the Holy Scriptures that were generally received by all the Churches,
from the others that are either dubious or Apocryphal: he makes use of all
equally on several occasions; following in this the method of the ancient
Rhetoricians, who took no care to be very punctual in their Argumentations.

Origin, his Disciple, durst not altogether venture to rank the above said
Epistles amongst the Canonical Scriptures: and whereas they had not obtained in
his time the general Approbation of all the Christian World, he explains
himself thereupon with a great deal of Precaution. (...). Orig. apud Eus. Hist.
Eccles. l. 6. c. 25.
Peter, (says he) on whom the Church of Jesus Christ is built, has left an
Epistle which is generally received, and a second if you please; for it is
doubted. (...), Orig. ibid.
John has likewise left a very short Epistle, and a second and third if you
please; but all people are not agreed that these two last are genuine. This
proves that the Church has never doubted of the Authority of the first
Epistles of these two Apostles, and that they were certainly composed by them
whose Names they bear; moreover, that although some have doubted of the others,
yet this Scruple was not universal, since Origin agrees that they were received
as really belonging to these Apostles to whom they were attributed.

The Author of the Synopsis of the Holy Scriptures makes no question thereof;
he avoucheth, (...). Athan. in Syn. Scrip. S.
that the second Epistle of S. Peter was written by this Apostle as well as the
first, and that he sent it to those that had then embraced Christianity.

Cajetan, who has started so many Difficulties against the Epistle to the
Hebrews, and against that of S. James, is much more moderate with respect to
this: he insists, that the Argument that is taken from the difference of the
Style of the two Epistles of S. Peter, is not a sufficient proof to show that
the second is not his; Haec ratio non minus infert primam quam secundam non
esse Petri: nam tuntum dissonas prima a secunda quantum secunda a prima. Gajet.
praef. Comm. in post. Epist. Pet
because this Reason might as well be applied to the first as to the second:
but this Cardinal has not considered that it was never doubted in any Church
whether the first Epistle of S. Peter was certainly written by him; and
therefore from this Act which is unquestionable we should judge of the other
that has not the same certainty. If the diversity of Style only be a sure
Touchstone whereby the verity of a Piece may be tried, the reason of the
ancient Ecclesiastical Writers taken from the difference of the Style, and
related by S. Jerome, is a good proof to show that the second Epistle ascribed
to S. Peter is not this Apostle's. That which Cajetan adds in the same place,
that a diversity of Style does not necessarily infer a diversity of Authors, is
on much better grounds. It is certain, that St. Jerome, who acknowledged this
diversity of Style, has attributed it to the different Interpreters of St.
Peter: he supposes that St. Peter did not write his Epistles in Greek himself,
but that he had Interpreters with him who understood that Language: mention is
also made in the New Testament of those that exercised the Function of
Interpreters in those Primitive and Apostolical Times.

According to this Opinion, which is maintained by the ancient Doctors of the
Church, St. Jerome says, Ex quo intelligimus pro necessitate rerum diversis eum
usum interpretibus. Hioron. Epist. ad Hedib. qu. 11.
that St. Peter has made use of diverse Interpreters as different Occasions
required. Baronius has concluded from thence, Bar. ann. c 45. n. 28.
that this Father believed that Saint Mark had translated the first Epistle of
Saint Peter out of Hebrew into Greek; but Saint Jerome only declares in this
place, that the Apostles who did not very well express themselves in the Greek
Tongue, emploved Scribes or Interpreters.

Calvin, after he has a little enlarged on this diversity of Style, which
seems to denote a difference between the Authors of these two Epistles, does
not forbear to acknowledge the second as Divine and Canonical. Calv. arg. de
ses Com. sur la 2. Epist. de S. Pier.
However it be (says he) since in all the parts of the Epistle the Majesty of
the Spirit of Christ is clearly manifest, I cannot in conscience reject it
altogether, though I do not find therein the true and natural Phrose of Saint
Peter. Flaccius Illyricus has written Notes on this Epistle, without doubting
in the least whether it was made by him whose Name it bears.

Grotius has chosen rather to attribute it to another Simeon or Simon the
Successor of St. James in the Bishopric of Jerusalem, than to Simon Peter: He
believes that the ancient Title of this Epistle has been changed, and that it
was not Simon Peter a Servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, as it is read at
this day; but simply Simeon a Servant of Jesus Christ: there would be some
likelihood of this, if it were grounded on any Manuscript Copies or ancient
Acts; but he only confirms his Opinion by a Critical Argument that is not
concluding: he urges, that this Epistle, at least the third Chapter of it,
could not have been written till after the Destruction of Jerusalem, because
mention is therein made of the entire ruin of the World, which was impatiently
expected by the Christians of those times. Now S. Peter died under Nero. No
Christian (says Grotius) could look for this last Destruction of the World,
till after that of the State of the Jews.

But it does not follow from thence, that Jerusalem ought to have been then
destroyed; for this Persuasion was generally received amongst the Disciples of
Jesus Christ, whilst he was yet living: ever since that time they waited with
Impatience for his happy Reign, which could not be established (as they
thought) but on the ruin of the State of the Jews: therefore when Jesus Christ
speaks to them, Chap. xxiv. of S. Matthew, of the ruin of the Temple, he mixeth
some things concerning his coming. Existimabant Apostoli haec esse conjuncta
finem templi and finem mundi. Noluit Christus hunc illis errorem eripere, ne
post templi eversionem in longum expectationem porrigentes securi essent. Mald.
Comm. in c. 24. Matthew. v. 25.
The Apostles (says Maldonat) thought that the end of the Temple, and the end
of the World were necessarily joined together. Jesus Christ would not undeceive
them, lest after the destruction of the Temple, seeing their Expectations
deferred they might grow negligent and secure.

S. Peter then might have written this Epistle before the Destruction of
Jerusalem, and might have declared to the Faithful in the third Chapter
thereof, that Jesus Christ had not delayed the accomplishment of his word, as
some amongst them imagined. The Primitive Christians expected with impatience
the ruin of the Temple, and thought that the general destruction of the whole
World would follow soon after: S. Peter exhorts them in this place to wait
patiently, because One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, 2 Pet. 3. v. 8.
and a thousand years as one day. Therefore the Conjecture of Grotius seems to
have no better Foundation than that of Didymus, Didym. Comm. in Epist. 2. Pet.
who lived at the beginning of the fourth Century, and has rejected this
Epistle as suppositious, because mention is made (as he thinks) in this same
Chap. 3. of I know not what renovation of the world conformably to the Opinion
of the Platonic Philosophers. But there is nothing in this whole Chapter that
does not perfectly agree with the Doctrine of the Primitive Christians touching
the end of the World.

It is not necessary to spend much time in insisting on the second and third
Epistles of S. John, of which it has been also doubted in the Primitive Ages
of the Church. Papias, Pap. apud Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 29.
who lived with the Disciples of the Apostles, distinguishes two John's, who
have dwelt in Asia, the first of which is our Apostle, and the other was a
Priest and Disciple of the Apostles.

Papias, who was the Disciple of this last John, ascribes to him no other
quality than that of a Priest; and this has caused diverse Ecclesiastical
Writers to believe, that he was the Author of the second and third Epistles
attributed to the Apostle S. John. Indeed he does not take the name of Apostle,
but simply that of Priest or Elder, (...).

Eusebius relying on the Testimony of Papias, Eusebius. ib.
approves the Opinion of those that believed that there were two persons in
Asia that were called by the name of John: this Persuasion was further
confirmed, in regard that there was yet seen in his time at Ephesus two Tombs
of John. S. Jerome, Hieron. de Script. Eccl. in Joann.
who often translates the words of Eusebius out of Greek into Latin, has also
made this same Remark, Reliquae autem duae; (says he, speaking of these two
Epistles of S. John) Joannis Presbyteri asseruntur, cujus hodie alterum
sepulchrum apud Ephesum ostenditur. He adds nevertheless that some thought that
these two Monuments were of S. John the Evangelist, Nonnulli putant duas
memorias ejusdem Joannis Evangelistae esse. He repeats this same History when
he makes mention of Papias, and says Hoc autem diximus propter superiorem
opinionem, quam a plerisque retulimus traditam, duas posteriores Epistolas
Joannis non Apostoli esse, sed Presbyteri. Hieron. de Script. Eccles. in Papia.
that he relates it for the sake of a a great number of persons that believed
that this second John, to whom the simple name of Priest is given, was the
Author of these two Epistles, and not the Apostle.

However, Athan. in Synops.
the Author of the Synopsis of the Holy Scriptures attributes these two last
Epistles no less to the Apostle S. John than the first. And it seems that the
Latin Church that reads it in her Offices under the same Name, has authorized
this Opinion, which is likewise conformable to the Testimony of the most
ancient Writers of this Church. Therefore the Name of this Apostle, Beati
Joannis Apostoli, is retained in the Latin Title of these three Epistles in the
vulgar Edition. In the Syriack Copy of these two last Epistles that have been
Printed in the Polyglott Bible of England, the simple Name of John is put;
whereas in the first it is read of John the Apostle. This seems to have been
done on purpose to distinguish the Authors of these Epistles. In the Arabic
Copy published by Erpenius, these three Epistles are ascribed to the Apostle S.
John, who is named in the Title of the two first, John the son of Zebedee, and
in the Title of the third, John the Apostle.

Lastly, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 25.
there have been raised no lest doubts in the Primitive Ages of the Church,
concerning the Epistle of S. Jude, than of the preceding Letters; for this
reason Eusebius has reckoned it in the number of those Books of the New
Testament that were not generally received by all the Churches. S. Jerome who
has made the same observation, Judas frater Jacobi parvam quae de septem
Catholicis est epistolam reliquit: and quia de libro Enoch qui apocryphus est
in ea assumit testimonium, a plerisque rejicitur. Tamen auctoritatem vetustate
jam and usu meruit, and inter Scripturas Sacras computatur. Hieron. de Script.
Eccles. in Juda.
adds, that that which gave occasion to reject it, was the Apocryphal Book of
Enoch, which is cited therein. And that this nevertheless has not hindered it
from being placed in the rank of the Sacred Books, its Antiquity and Use having
given it this Authority. In like manner it has been generally received by all
the Churches, as well Eastern as Western. The Unitarians and Protestants also
have put it amongst the other Canonical Books of the New Testament.

Luther has nevertheless doubted of it, as well as of the Epistle of St.
James: but they that follow his Opinion, are so far from rejecting it at
present, that they use their utmost endeavors to put a fair Construction on
their Masters words. Calvin after he has acknowledged that the Ancients have
differed very much amongst themselves touching this Epistle, Calv. argum. de
ses Comm. sur l'ep. de Saint Jude.
expresses himself thus; However because the reading of it is very profitable,
and it contains nothing but what is agreeable to the purity of the Apostolical
Doctrine: and in regard also that it has been accounted Authentic for a long
time amongst all good People, for my part I willingly place it in the number of
the other Epistles.

Cajetan has inserred from the above cited words of St. Jerome, Ex quibus
apparet minoris esse aucloritatis hanc Epistolam iis quae sunt certae
Scripturae Sacrae. Cajet. Comm. in Epist. Jud.
that this Epistle is of less Authority than these Writings of the Apostles, of
the verity of which we have been certainly assured: but this might have been
properly said in those ancient times when it was not approved by all the
Churches: whereas when this Cardinal wrote, there were none that did not
receive it as Divine and Canonical: and therefore it has no less Authority
than the other Sacred Books that are comprehended in the Canon of the Church.
Grot. Annot. in Epist. Jud.


Grotius did not believe that this Epistle was written by St. Jude the Apostle,
because the Author has taken upon him only the quality of a Servant of Jesus
Christ, (...) he says moreover that Si Apostolica fuisset habita haec
Epistola, versa fuisset in linguas omnes, and recepta per omnes Ecclesias.
Grot. Annot. in Epist. Jud.
if it were certainly esteemed Apostolical, it would have been Translated into
all Languages, and received by all the Churches: therefore he judges that it
belongs to Jude Bishop of Jerusalem, who lived under the Emperor Adrian. But
the first words of this Epistle do declare to us that it can come from no other
hand than that of the Apostle St. Jude, since he calls himself, Jude the
servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James. For to say with Grotius, that
these words Brother of James, have been afterward added by the Transcribers
that it might be believed that this Jude was certainly an Apostle, is to beg
the question; they that would prove that this has been inserted by the
Transcribers ought to produce good Copies of this Epistle, or certain ancient
Acts on which we might rely. Any Man that should have a mind absolutely to
reject the Epistle of St. Jude, might easily say with as much reason as
Grotius, that he that has forged it, has put therein the name of Jude the
Brother of James. Therefore Arguments that are purely Critical ought never to
be opposed against Acts that are ancient and generally received by all the
World.

It is true that the Epistle of St. Jude is less quoted by the ancient Doctors
of the Church, than the most part of the other Books of the New Testament, and
that it is not found in the ancient Copies of the Syriack Version. But it can
be only concluded from thence, that it was not at first received in all the
Churches: it might however have been published ever since the Primitive times
of the Christian Religion, under the name of St. Jude the Brother of James, and
yet not be Translated into all the Languages of the Churches, because it was
then doubted in the most part of these Churches, whether it was his whose name
it bore, Clemens Alexandrinus has placed it amongst the other Books of the
Holy Scriptures; but as it has been already observed, that this Father has
inserted in his Catalogue some Pieces that were not Canonical, though they
passed under the names of the Apostles; it can only be inferred from thence
that at least ever since the time of Clement, this Epistle was attributed to
the Apostle St. Jude. When Eusebius makes mention of it in his Ecclesiastical
History, he does not set it in the rank of counterfeit Acts, but of those
concerning which some Churches have doubted, nevertheless there are none at
this day that do not acknowledge it as Divine and Canonical: It is entitled in
the Syriack Copy which has been Printed, The Letter of Jude the Brother of
James: neither has it any other Title in the Arabic Version published by
Erpenius. In the Arabic Printed in the Polyglott Bible of England, is is
Entitled The Catholic Epistle of the blessed Jude, the Brother of the Lord.

The End of the First Part.
The Second Part will be Published in Five Days.

A CRITICAL HISTORY Of the TEXT of the New Testament; WHEREIN Is firmly
Established the Truth of those Acts on which the Foundation of CHRISTIAN
RELIGION is laid.

PART II.

By Richard Simon, Priest.

LONDON, Printed for R. Tailor, MDCLXXXIX.

A CRITICAL HISTORY OF THE New Testament.
PART II.
CHAP. XVIII. A Critical Observation on a Passage in S. John's First Epistle,
Chap. v. verse. 7. which is wanting in the most Greek Copies, Eastern Editions,
and the most ancient Latin Copies. The Preface to the Canonical Epistles in
some Latin Bibles, under the name of S. Jerome, was not penned by that Father.
It cannot be proved that S. Cyprian had the Passage of S. John's Epistle in his
Copy.
THE Reflections which many Learned Men have made on that Passage in the First
Epistle of S. John, Chap. v. verse. 7. have not discouraged me from examining it
afresh, and consulting the most part of the Greek and Latin Manuscripts that I
could find about the same. The Greeks at this day, in their Copy entitled
(...), read (as the Latin Church) these words (...). 1 Joann. c. 5. v. 7.
For there are three that bear witness in Heaven, 1 John c. 5. v. 7.
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. Yet it is
hard to find among the Greeks any Manuscript Copies that have that Passage; I
speak not only of the Ancients, but also of those of the latter times. Erasmus
alleged the Greeks had their Books more correct than the Latin Copies, but he
is mistaken, as it shall appear by what follows in this Discourse. It Is much
more probable, that that Doctrinal Point was formerly written the Margin, by
way of Scolium or Note, but afterward inserted in the Text by those who
transcribed the Copies. Such were my thoughts when I perused some of the Greek
Editions; and there is no less probability, that it was supplied after the same
manner in the ancient Latin Copies; which nevertheless happened not till after
S. Jerome's time, who is not the Author of that Addition, which Socinus, next to
Erasmus, had laid to his charge.

After the most diligent search in the King's Library, and that of Mr. Colbert,
in which there are a great many good Manuscript Volumes, I found no Copy that
had that Passage in it, tho I read seven of them in the Royal Library, Codd.
MSS. Bibl. Reg.
six whereof are marked 1885. 2247. 2248. 2870. 2871. 2872. Some of the
Manuscripts have Notes; but no Scholiast or Annotator does make mention of that
Passage, neither have I found it in five Manuscript Copies belonging to Mr.
Colbert's Library, Codd. MSS. Bibl. Colb.
which are marked 871. 6123. 4785. 6584. 2844. Yet some of these Manuscripts
are only in Paper, and much later than the rest. There is also one in 16, well
written, and I believe since the Impression: Yet the Passage in question is not
found therein, any more than in the rest of the ancient Copies.

I could produce yet other Greek Manuscript Copies which I have seen, whose
various Readings I observed; but that which most deserves our notice, is that
in the Margin of some of the King's and Mr. Colbert's Copies, there are small
Notes set over against the said Passage, which in all likelihood have slipped
afterward into the Body of the Text. Take an Example from the King's Copy,
marked 2247. over against these words, (...), there is this Remark, (...). By
which we may perceive that the Author of the said Remark, understood The
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, to be signified by the Three Witnesses
mentioned by S. John, The Spirit, the Water, and the Blood: And what was
formerly written by way of Note, passed afterward into the Text, as it often
falls out. In the same Copy over against these other words, (...), this Note is
added, (...), that is, One Deity, One God. That Manuscript is about 500 Years
old, and there are but very few places therein that have Notes. There is the
like Remark in one of the Manuscripts belonging to Mr. Colbert's Library, Numb.
871. For besides these words that are set in the Margin, (...), One God, One
Deity; the Scholiast has also added these, (...), The testimony of God the
Father, and of the Holy Ghost.

This, in my opinion, is the original of the Passage in question, which it is
very hard to find in the Greek Manuscript Copies, tho at this day the read it
in their Version. This is much more likely than what Erasmus alleges; that the
Greek Copies he had occasion to inspect, were much more correct than the Latin,
which obliged that judicious person to omit the forementioned Passage in his
first Editions of the New Testament; in which he was not altogether to be
blamed, not being obliged to insert in the Impression what he could not find in
any of his Manuscripts; He has nevertheless been charged with a design of
favoring the Arrian Party by the omission. James Lopes Stunica has mightily
accused him for his unlucky rejecting the said Passage in his Edition, Sciendum
est hoc loco Graecorum codices apertissime esse corruptos; nostros vero
veritatem ipsam ut a prima origin traducti sunt continere: quod ex Prologo
Beati Hieronymi super Epistolas Canonicas manifest apparet. Jac. Lop. Stun.
Annot. in Eras.
supposing that the Greek Copies had been corrupted in that place. But this
Spanish Critic, We must in this place know, that the Greek Copies are
notoriously corrupted, and that ours contain the very truth, as they were
translated from the Original.
who had read ancient Manuscripts, does not quote any to justify his own
Sentiments: He contents himself with an Appeal he makes to S. Jerome's Preface
to the Canonical Epistles, from which he proves that the Passage was extant in
the ancient Greek Copies, out of which that Father compiled his ancient Latin
Edition.

Erasmus in his answer to Stunica, does vindicate himself well enough by the
authority of those Greek Copies he had; yet he was wrought upon by some other
consideration, contrary to the Authority of all his Manuscripts, to insert the
Passage of S. John in a new Edition of his New Testament. He declares that what
obliged him to make that Change, was his seeing a Greek Copy in England, which
he believed was more perfect than any Latin Edition. I shall afterward show
that he is mistaken, in believing that the Greeks reformed their Copies of the
New Testament to a degree of perfection, above those of the Latins, after their
Reunion with the Roman Church.

If that were so, as that judicious Person does suppose, with what warrant and
freedom could he correct his Greek Edition by one single Copy, which as he
himself believed, had suffered some alteration. He does disparage his own
judgment, by inveighing against S. Jerome, as if that Father had been the
Author of the Addition that is found in the Latin Copies, in which there are
these words, Quoniam tres sunt qui testimonium dant in coelo, Pater, Verbum and
Spiritus Sanctus, and hi tres unum sunt; i. e. Because there are three who bear
witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three
are one. Ille saepenumero violentus est parumque sibi pudens, saepe varius
parumque sibi constans. Erasm. Apol. adv. Stun.
He on this occasion brings a heavy Charge against him, as being more forward
than wise; that is to say, if the matter be referred to Erasmus's judgment, S.
Jerome must stand chargeable with Forgery, a bold and presumptuous undertaking
to correct the ancient Latin Edition according to his own fancy, without the
Authority of good Copies.

Faustus Socinus knew very well what advantage to make of this Answer of
Erasmus; but withal adds, that Hieronymus, ut is qui, ut recte de eo Erasmus
alicubi scribit, non satis prudenter saepe ad victoriam and ad causae suae
defensionem and favorem multa trahebat, nactus forte exemplar aliquod, aut
etiam plura exemplaria in quibus particula ista adjecta fuerat, ut fraus
animadverti non posset, adversus fidem aliorum omnium exemplarium tam Latinorum
quam Graecorum lectionem particulae, istius tanquam germanam defendere and
promovere coepit, conquerens public eam culpa and fraud hereticorum abrasam a
vulgatis codicibus fuisse. Soc. Comm. in 1 Joann. c. 5. v. 7.
S. Jerome might have had one or more Copies, in which this Addition might be
so managed, as to make it a hard matter to discover the Fraud, and that this is
the reason obliged him to maintain that additional Passage against the
Authority of so many Copies. In this manner that Unitary argues, according to
his custom, with more subtilty than solidity. But Reason alone is not
sufficient to judge of such matters; for besides that, it is necessary to be well
acquainted with, and to examine strictly such Writings as are on public record,
and may give light in this affair. If Erasmus, who had read many Greek and
Latin Copies of the New Testament, and frequently consulted S. Jerome's
Manuscripts, had applied himself to a strict examination of the Preface to the
Canonical Epistles, which he thinks was written by that Father, he would rather
have been inclined to reject that Preface, as supposititious, than to charge S.
Jerome with Forgery.

It Is not amiss to set down in this place some part of the Preface to the
Canonical Epistles, Hieron. Prolog. in VII. E. pist. Can. ex edit. Paris. ann.
1523.
that is thought to be S. Jerome's, which is only found in the first Latin
Editions of the Bible with this Title. Incipit prologus beati Hieronymi
presbyteri in septem Epistolas Canonicas. i. e. The beginning of the Preface of
S. Jerome the Presbyter, to the seven Canonical Epistles.

The Author complains, that Interpreters have not faithfully translated those
Epistles, Illo praecipue loco ubi de unitate Trinitatis in prima Joannis
Epistola positum legimus. In qua etiam ab infidelibus translatoribus multum
erratum esse a fidei veritate comperimus, trium tantummodo vocabula, hoc est,
aquae, sanguinis and spiritus in ipsa sua editione ponentibus, and Patris
ubique ac Spiritus testimonium omittentibus, in quo maxim and fides Catholica
roboratur, and Patris and Filii and Spiritus Sancti una Divinitatis substantia
comprobatur. Hieron. Prol. in VII. Epist. Can.
especially that place of S. John's First Epistle, Chap. v. verse. 7. where
there is mention made of the Unity of Persons in the Blessed Trinity. He
accuses those unfaithful Translators of falling into great Errors, whilst they
retained in their Version these words only, The Water, the Blood, and the
Spirit, and left out the words, The Father, and the Spirit, which are an
authentic Testimony of the Catholic Faith, about the Mystery of the Trinity.

The Bishop of Oxford, who has lately published a new Edition of S. Cyprian's
Works with Observations, makes mention of a great number of Latin Bibles, where
S. Jerome's supposed Preface is found: In the mean time he complains, that it
is left out of the Latin Bibles that are printed in our Age. Vtrum hoc ex casit
an maleficio contigerit dispiciant eruditi. Joann. Oxon. Episc. Not. in Cypr.
de unit. Eccl.
Let those (says that learned Bishop) who are men of Judgment determine, if that
omission happened by chance, or was the effect of some bad Design. He could not
imagine for what reasons it was taken from the last Editions of the Latin Bible,
since he found it in the Manuscript Copies, and almost in all the ancient
Impressions: Libris manuscriptis passim and fere omnibus codicibus impressis
antiquioribus.

But it is not just to accuse, upon this account, those who were concerned in
the Translation of the Latin Bibles without that Preface. This is true, that it
is found with other Prefaces of S. Jerome to the Bible, in such Latin Copies as
have been made not above six Hundred Years ago, and in all probability the
first Latin Bibles were printed according to such Manuscripts.

But it is not altogether so in those that were written about seven or eight
Hundred Years ago, but in some few only of such Copies: And it is very likely
that as to the rest, there was a Regulation made, according to the later
Manuscripts in such Editions of the Bible; as have not that Preface. It Is
further observable, that neither the Name of S. Jerome, nor of any other
Writer, is prefixed to the Preface, in some of the ancient Copies where it is
found, which sufficiently shows, that we may on good grounds question S.
Jerome's being the Author of it.

The Preface in controversy is not in a certain Manuscript Copy of the whole
Bible, Cod. MSS. Bibl. Reg.
that is in the Royal Library, marked 3564. and has been extant these seven
Hundred Years; neither is it in two other Manuscript Copies of the like
antiquity, belonging to the Library of the Benedictine Monks of the Abbey of S.
Germain. Cod. MSS. Bibl. Benedict. S. Germ. Paris.
It is found I confess in Charles le Chauve's fair Bible that is in the King's
Library; but S. Jerome's Name is not there, any more than it is in some other
ancient Copies.

Whoever will take the pains to compare the most of the ancient Latin Bibles
together, shall easily discover, that he who gathered all the Books of the
Latin Bible into one Body, (the better part of which was translated or revised
by S. Jerome) is really the Author of that Preface. Since he was not furnished
with that Father's Preface to all those Books, he supplied, in his Collection,
what was wanting with an addition of some of his own composure, and others,
which he gathered from S. Jerome's Works. Hence, for example, in Charles le
Chauve's Copy, there is, before the Acts of the Apostles, a Preface with this
Title, Praefatio Hieronymi: Yet it is certain, that S. Jerome was not the Author
of that Preface to the Acts, as it is there in express words, but the Author of
the Collection of the Books of the Latin Bible, took the same out of that
Father's large Preface, entitled Prologus Galeatus; and it is expressed in
these words, Actus Apostolorum nudam quidem resanare historiam videntur, and
nascentis Ecclesiae historiam texere: Sed si noverimus scriptorem eorum Lucam
esse Medicum, cujus laus in Evangelio, animadvertemus pariter omnia verba
illius animae languentis esse Medicinam: that is, The Acts of the Apostles seem
to be a bare History, affording us a prospect of the Church in its Birth: But
if we consider that the Writer was Luke the Physician, who is famous in the
Gospel, we shall also perceive, that all his words are the Medicine of a
languishing Soul. It Is also probable, that the Compiler of the Books of the
Latin Version, which we call the Vulgar, not finding in S. Jerome a particular
Preface to the Canonical Epistles, made one according to that Father's Style,
some of whose Expressions he has made use of, and amongst others, has inserted
that word Eustochium.

It Is likewise probable, that the Addition of the Witness of three Persons was
extant before that time, in some Copies of S. John's Epistles, or at least in
some Latin Writers, at the time when that Preface was made. Upon this account
the Author, who possibly had not the occasion of consulting the Creek Copies,
supposed, that if that Passage was not extant in any Latin Copy, the
Translators were to be blamed. It Is observable that the Addition is not in most
of the old Copies of S. Jerome's Bible, to which nevertheless the Preface is
prefixed, as I have observed in two Copies, one whereof is in the Royal Library,
and the other in that belonging to Mr. Colbert. How incongruous is it, to see a
Preface at the beginning of the Canonical Epistles, where S. Jerome complains
of the unfaithfulness of the ancient Latin Translators, who have omitted in the
First Epistle of S. John, Chap. 1. a whole Verse which he restores to the
Greek; and yet, if one turn to the place of S. John's Epistle in the very same
Copy, the passage is not to be found there. There can be no other reason given,
in my opinion, of this incoherency, but this, that the Transcribers who writ
out the Preface, made use of such Latin Copies, in which that Verse was not
extant; because neither S. Jerome, nor the ancient Latin Version had any thing
of it. If that Father had been the Author of the Preface, and of the Addition
inserted in S. John's Epistle, that Addition would have been extant in all S.
Jerome's Latin Bibles. This diversity of Copies is in my judgment an evident
proof, that he did not compose that Preface to prefix it to the Canonical
Epistles.

And that which makes it further manifest, that S. Jerome was not the true
Author either of the Preface or Addition, is, that that Addition is placed in
the Margin of mose of the ancient Copies, in the Body of which it is not
extant. It was no less than surprising, Quantum a nostra aliorum distet editio,
lectoris judicio relinquo. Hier. Prol. in VII. Epist. Can.
that the pretended S. Jerome should in his Preface, commend his new Edition of
the Canonical Epistles, upon the account of the change he had made, especially
in the First of S. John, whilst there was nothing of such change or amendment
to be seen therein. Upon which account the Transcribers, or they to whom the
Copies did belong, thought fit to regulate the Text according to the Preface,
by supplying, in the Margin, the Verse concerning the Witness of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost; which, before that time was extant in some
Ecclesiastical Authors. But since it was a matter of difficulty for those who
placed that Addition in the Margin of their Copies, to observe a general and
perfect uniformity of words, it so fell out, that the Expressions in the
various Copies did likewise vary. This diversity does evidently prove that S.
Jerome could not be the Author of the Addition in controversy, but that it was
done by those who had a mind to adjust the Text in S. James to the Preface. I
shall here give some Examples of that Regulation, of the manner how it was
added to most of the old Latin Copies of S. Jerome's Bible.

In that Copy of the Royal Library that is marked 3584. in the Margin over
against these words, Cod. MSS. Bibl. Reg.
Tres sunt qui testimonium dant, i. e. There are three which bear witness;
there are these other words added, In coelo, Pater, Verbum, and Spiritus: and
tres sunt qui testimonium dant in terra, and hi tres unum sunt. i. e. In
Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit: and there are three which bear
witness on earth, and these three are one. The writing of the Addition appears
to be no less ancient than that of the Text. The like Addition is to be seen in
a Copy that is in Mr. Colbert's Library, Cod. MSS. Bibl. Colb.
that is marked 158. where in the Margin, over against these words, Tres sunt
qui testimonium dant, these are added, In coelo, Pater, Verbum, and Spiritus,
and tres sunt qui testimonium dant in terra, sanguis, aqua, and caro. And to
make the Text and Addition agree the better, there are some of the words of the
Text amended or put out. There is nothing of this Addition to be read in the
three ancient Copies of the Library belonging to the Benedictines of the Abbey
of S. Germans, only it is placed in the Margin of one of these Copies, Cod.
MSS. Bibl. Ben. S. Germ. Paris.
and the Addition is as old therein as the Text it self.

It Is true, that it is extant in a Copy written eight Hundred Years ago, in the
time of Lotharius II. But it is strangely disfigured in that place; Cod. MSS.
Bibl. Ben. S. Germ.
in that Copy the Reading was formerly thus, Sunt tres qui testimonium dant,
(the words in terra being interlined) spiritus, aqua, and sanguis; and tres
unum sunt: and tres sunt qui de coelo testificantur, pater, verbum, and
spiritus, and tres unum sunt. But some time afterward, the words ( de coelo
testificantur, i. e. bear witness of Heaven) were defaced, to make room for
these, testimonium dicunt in coelo, i. e. bear witness in Heaven.

All which different Alterations are evident proofs that there was nothing of
that Addition in the first Copies which were published of S. Jerome's Bible;
for which reason it is not to be found in a certain Version of the French
Church, which is at least a Thousand Years old, and which was published by F.
Mabillon a Benedictine Monk, and the first who in effect seems to have inserted
that Passage in his Works, is Victor Bishop of Vite, who lived a Hundred Years
after S. Jerome. Take his own words in his Second Book of the Persecution of
the Vandals: Et ut adhuc luce clarius unius Divinitatis esse cum Patre and
Filio Spiritum Sanctum doceamus, Joannis Evangelistae testimonio comprobatur.
Victor Vitensis, l. 2. persec. Afric. Provinc. edit. Basil. ann. 1539.
Ait namque, tres sunt qui testimonium prohibent in coelo, Pater, Verbum, and
Spiritus Sanctus, and hi tres unum sunt: i. e. And further, to show, that it is
most evident, that the Holy Ghost is the same God with the Father and the Son,
the testimony of S. John the Evangelist is sufficient; for he says, that there
are three that bear witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, and these three are one. St. Fulgence a little after did also quote him.
But I refer that to a larger Discourse in the II. Book of this Work, where I
shall particularly treat of the Versions of the New Testament.

I know that a great many Men of Learning have alleged that St. Cyprian, (who
lived a long time before St. Jerome,) had quoted that passage in his Books. The
Bishop of Oxford brought the testimony of St. Cyprian, Cui gravissimae
calumniae de D. Hieronymo falsario and S. Scripturarum interpolatore amoliendae
sufficere poterit Cyprianum citasse non modo ante Hieronymi tempora, sed Arii
ipsius and litem de dogmate illo quod adeo displicet Socino de trino and uno
Deo scriptorem. Joann. Episc. Oxon. Not. in Cyp. de unit. Eccles.
to justify St. Jerome's Preface, and at the same time, to show, that that
Father could not be accused of any unfair dealing, because he only
re-established the Ancient Latin Edition in its first purity. Father Amelote,
who belongs to the Chapel, freely declares that the same passage is wanting in
St. Athanasius, St. Cyril, St. Gregory, St. Nazianzen, St. Chrysostom; Didymus,
and (as to the Fathers of the Latin Church,) in St. Augustine, St. Leon, Beda,
and in diverse others; and yet does assure us, that it is extant in a Treatise
of St. Cyprian concerning the Unity of the Church.

But can we imagine, if St. Cyprian had had it in his Copy of the New
Testament, that St. Augustine would not have made use of it against the Arians
of his time? The truth is, after I had strictly examined that passage of St.
Cyprian, which is the matter in Question, I fully persuaded my self that that
Pious Prelate had only made mention of these words, and hi tres unum sunt, i.e.
and these three are one, about which there is no contest, and that from thence
he would prove, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to be one and the
same. It is written (says he) of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
and these three are one. He applies to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, what we
read in all the Greek and Latin Copies concerning the testimony of the Spirit,
the Water and the Blood, of which it is said, that they are one, and hi tres
unum sunt, which differs very much from an express quotation of those Words, as
if they were in the Text it self.

And that there may be no doubt left, but that this is St. Cyprian's true sense
of the words, it is but consulting the Learned Facundus, who was of the same
African Church, and gives their explication at large, evincing the mystery of
the Trinity from them, Facund. prodefens. Tri. capit. l. 1. c. 3.
after his example. He does suppose through his whole Discourse, that in St.
John's Epistle, Chap. v. there are only these words extant, Tres sunt qui
testificantur in terra, spiritus, aqua and sanguis. i. e. There are three which
bear witness on earth, the Spirit, the Water and the Blood. But he adds at the
same time, that they are to be understood of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
De Patre Filio and Spiritu Sancto dicit, tres sunt qui testimonium dant in
terra, spiritus, aqua and sanguis, and hi tres unum sunt; in spiritu
significans Patrem, in aqua Spiritum Sanctum, in sanguine vero Filium
significans. His meaning is that the three Persons are signified by the three
Witnesses of the Earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood. And the more to
confirm his Opinion, he adds, that St. Cyprian was of the mind, that this is
proper sense of that passage in St. John. Quod Joannis Apostoli testimonium
beatus Cyprianus Carthaginiensis Antistes and Martyr, in Epistola sive libro
quem de Vnitate.
Trinitate scripsit, de Patre, Filio and Spiritu Sancto dictum intelligit.

If the Bishop of Oxford had compared the words of Facundus with those of St.
Cyprian, he had not brought such weak Arguments against Erasmus and Socinus, in
the defense of St. Jerome, who stood in no need of that service, seeing he was
not the Author of the Preface to the Canonical Epistles, nor of the Addition
inserted in St. John's Epistle, Chap. v. Victor the Bishop, not having
considered the matter so narrowly, brings in the Witness of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, as if St. John had expressly made mention of them, whereas St.
Cyprian and Facundus, bring it only as an explication of the Witness of the
Spirit, the Water, and the Blood. The same thing happened to those who caused to
Print St. Athanasius's Works, with a Table of the passages of Holy Scripture,
which are quoted therein. They have set down at large there, the seventh Verse
of the fifth Chapter of the first Epistle of St. John, as if that Holy Man had
quoted that place after that manner. Yet in his dispute against the Arians, he
only made use of these words, (...), and these Three are One, and applied the
same to the Trinity.

I make no question but that this Explication of St. Athanasius, was the
occasion that some Greek Scoliastes placed in the Margin of their Copies the
formentioned Note, which afterward was put in the Text. And that is more
probable than what Erasmus thought concerning this matter, who was of opinion,
that the Greek Copies, which make mention of the Witness of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, were more Correct than the Latin Copies. If he had only spoken
of such Greek Copies as were written by those of the Latin Church, and which
served for their use, what he alleged, would be the more credible. But that
the Greeks, after their reunion with the Latin Church, made their Copies of the
New Testament more Correct than the Latin, is against all appearance of Truth.
On the contrary, it is manifest that the Copies that have been since that time,
make no mention of that Testimony.

The Observation that Fromondus, a Divine of Louvain, made on that place of St.
John, after some other Commentators is without any ground. He acknowledged that
St. Augustine, and many other Latin Fathers, had not that passage of St. John
extant in their Copies; but at the same time he adds, Videneur Graeci Ariani ex
multis codicibus Graecis primum erasisse, and deinde translationem Latinam, qua
S. Augustinus and multi Patres usi sunt, ex codice Graeco mutilato factam
fuisse. From Comm. in Epist. 1. Joann. c. 5.
that the Arians had taken away the same out of many Copies, and that the Latin
Version which St. Augustine, and those other Fathers made use of, was compiled
out of those Books that were corrupted by the Arians. This opinion is most
absurd, and can have no other ground, but the Preface that is fathered on St.
Jerome. With what reason could they accuse the Arians of changing the Greek
Copies of the New Testament in that place, seeing St Cyprian, who lived before
Arius's name was known in the World, had no such Verse in his Copy? Besides,
the same alteration must of necessity have reached all other Churches: for
neither the Syrians of any Sect whatsoever, nor any other Eastern Church have
it in their Editions of the New Testament.

And I cannot imagine what advantage the Antitrinitarians can get against the
Catholics, upon this ground, that that passage is not found in the most part
of the Greek Manuscripts, nor those others of the Eastern Church, nor yet in
the old Latin Copies. For the most learned Interpreters of the New Testament do
not Expound it with reference to the Trinity. Such ancient Ecclesiastical
Writers as have applied it to that Mystery, followed the Custom of that time,
which was to give the Scripture such a Theological sense, as was accommodated
to the Faith then received in the Church. Now whether that Verse be Read in the
I. Epistle of St. John, as all those of the Greek and Latin Churches do at this
day, or it be not Read; yet the Doctrine of the Trinity may always be very well
proved from that place, against those who deny that Mystery; because the
Fathers from the first Ages of the Church, have applied the Witness of the
Spirit, of the Water, and of the Blood, to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
They have proved, by the Unity of those Witnesses, that the three Persons of
the Trinity are one.

It is therefore to no purpose to dispute about the Addition or Omission of a
passage, which by it self, does not clearly establish, but only suppose a
Trinity of Persons, according to the opinion of the most Ancient Divines of the
Church. I do not believe, that the most of the Modern Divines had any intention
of favoring Arianism, when they observed that that place shows that the
Witnesses are One. Those three (says Father Amelote) are one in their
Testimony, the Father gave a Testimony to Jesus Christ, in Jordan. The Word, by
his Words and Actions, the Holy Ghost, in the form of a Dove, and by his
miraculous Gifts.

I cannot after all, in any wise conceive for what use or purpose Sandius has
quoted, Herman. Cingal. Script. S. Trinit. Revelat. p. 105.
upon the credit of others, so many different Editions of the New Testament, in
which the Verse in question is not to be found. Seeing the most part of those
Greek Editions were taken from one another, and but very few of them from
Manuscript Copies, their great number signifies nothing. I do not think, for
example, that that of Strasburg, An. 1524. or that of Simon de Colines, at
Paris, An. 1534. were compiled by the help of Manuscripts. Wolfius, who
published that of Strasburg, makes no mention of it in his Preface. On the
contrary, he declares, that he only Reprinted in a new Letter, and another
Volume, what had been Printed before that time. Simon de Colines made no
Preface to his Greek Edition; which makes me think he compiled it according to
the best of his skill, by Editions that were extant before. Erasmus is one of
the first, who gave occasion for the omission of that Verse, in those Greek
Editions of the New Testament that came after his own, which was An. 1516. And
he published another, An. 1519. where that Verse is also wanting. Those
Editions, on the contrary, which came out after the Complute or Alcala, An.
1515. have all that Verse. Hence it is, that it is extant in Robert Stephen's
Fair Edition, and in the most part of the other Editions. The Manuscript, and
not the Printed Copies, are to be heeded, unless these be taken from the
Manuscripts, such as the Edition of Alcala, and that of Erasmus.

Nor is there any account to be made of the great number of Editions, of
Luther's Dutch Version, that Sandius brings against the Lutherans. For they are
only repetitions of the first, in which Luther had followed the Edition of
Erasmus, or some other, there being at that time many, even in Holland, which
had been published without that Verse. I do not think that that Patriarch of
the North was well Read in the Greek Manuscript Copies, though the most part of
his followers do justify him in this manner, when it is objected to them, that
their Master has corrupted the Scripture, by leaving out a passage of the New
Testament, that asserts the Mystery of the Trinity. He might (say they) very
well omit that Verse, with the Greek Edition of the Haguenau, An. 1521.
Raithius, in answer to this objection, Quid mirum, si Lutherus qui indubitata
tantum scribere decreverat, haec non extra aleam dubitationis posita
praetermisit, aut quod in Aldi Manutie Veneta editione qua usus creditur non
occurrit, etiam non vertit, cum praesertim Trinitatem etiam sublato hoc loco
nihilominus firmissimis documentis aliis stabiliri intelligeret. Raith. Vind.
Verse. Germ. Luth.
says, that Luther did think fit to put that only in his Version, which was
constantly, and by all agreed on, and that consequently, he might omit a Verse
about which some doubts had arisen, and which was not in Aldus's Edition, which
he made use of, as it is believed. Besides, he was persuaded that there were
other passages, which afforded a lasting Foundation for the belief of the
Trinity.

This is a plausible Reason, because Luther took upon him the Translating a
Greek Copy into his own Language. But if the Master was to be justified in this
respect, I see no reason why his Disciples should alter his Version in that
place, and that they should commend to the people, for the true word of God, a
thing they believed to be doubtful. It might possibly have been more to the
purpose, according to their principle, to preserve their ancient Dutch Version,
and content themselves with placing that Verse in the Margin, by way of remark.
On the contrary they bring it at this day against the Antitrinitarians, as a
strong proof of the Mystery of the Trinity; little thinking, that they give
them, by that means, the fairest occasion imaginable of Triumphing over them.
It is the bare Authority of the Church that does at present oblige us to
receive that passage as Authentic. The Greeks, though otherwise disaffected to
the Latin Church, fully agree with them in this matter.

There is a greater Uniformity amongst the Calvinists, in their Versions of the
New Testament, than amongst the Lutherans. For though they pretend, as well as
they to Translate the Original Greek, yet they have retained that Verse in all
their Translations. Beza, who openly declares that it is not to be found in the
most part of the Ancients, yet says withal, Hic versiculus omnino mihi
retinendus videtur. Beza Not. in 1 Joann. c. 5. v. 7.
that it ought to be kept in the Text, whereof it is a part. Diodati, who has
likewise retained it in his Italian Version, is of Opinion, Cosi in essenza
come in unione e consentimento di questa testimonianza. Diod. Not. in 1 Joann.
c. 5.
that the Unity mentioned in that place, is as well an Unity of Nature, as an
Unity or Consent of Testimony. But Calvin is much more reserved on this
occasion, according to his wonted precaution, never to make us weak Arguments
against the Antitrinitarians. That Expression, (says he) Three are One does not
denote the Essence, but the Consent. Calv. Comm. in Epist. 1. Joann. c. 5. v. 7.


He perceived, no less than Luther, that that passage was not in the most
Copies, and was very sensible that it would be a matter of no small difficulty
to reconcile the words of St. Jerome, (in that Preface which is alleged to be
his) to the ancient Greek Books. He durst not deal freely in the matter, lest
he should have offended his weak Brethren. I shall here set down his own words,
that the World may see how this Man carried himself, when upon any occasion he
was obliged to Critisize on such places of Scripture as appeared to him
doubtful. Calv. ibid.
All this has been omitted by some. Which St. Jerome thought, did proceed
rather from malice, than ignorance or inadvertency, and which was not done but
by those of the Latin Church. But forasmuch as the Greek Books do not agree
amongst themselves, it is not easy for me to be positive about the matter.
Nevertheless, because the Text runs very well with that Addition, and, as I
observe, it is extant in the best, and most Correct Copies, for my part I am
very willing to admit of it.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Book of the Revelation. What was the Belief of the Ancients
concerning it. The Heretics that did reject it. Their Reasons; which are
Examined. There have been also Learned Catholics of ancient time, who have
ascribed it to Cerinthus. The Opinion of these latter times about the same Book.
WHat remains of the Books of the New Testament, to be examined, is the
Apocalypse, which St. Jerome makes mention of, Hierom. Epist. ad Dard.
in one of his Epistles, as being a Book that was not commonly received in the
Greek Churches of his time. But if Tertullian's Maxim have any weight with us,
illud verum quod prius, i. e. That is most likely to be true that was first. We
will prefer the Universal Opinion of the ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, to
that of some Greek Churches, of later times. It is upon this ground, that
Grotius gives his Judgment of this Book, when he says, that Apostoli Joannis
esse hunc librum credidere illi quibus merito creditur, Justinus contra
Tryphonem, Irenaeus, Tertullianus adversus Marcionem, and aliis multis in
locis, quibus consentiunt Clemens Alexandrinus, Origenes, Cyprianus, and post
eos alii multi. Grot. Annot. in tit. Apoc.
St. Justin, St. Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, Origin, St.
Cyprian, who may be believed in this matter, have by one common consent,
avouched St. John as the Author of that Book. Flaccus Illyricus had affirmed
the same thing before, assuring us Si iis habeatur fides Patribus, qui propius
ad hoc accesserunt seculum, uti certe aequissimum est, quales sunt Justinus,
Tertullianus, Irenaeus, Apollonius, Theophylus Antiochenus -- affirmari poterit
eam ut Joannis Apostoli illo primo seculo habitam. Cur enim tam certoo Joannis
Apostoli esse confirmarent, si dubias de ea extitisse sententias antecessorum
cognovissent. Flac. Illyr. arg. in Apoc.
that it is very reasonable we should refer this to the Fathers, who lived near
the time of the Author.

And therefore Baronius has judiciously observed, that what St. Jerome does
allege, concerning the Opinion of the Greek Churches about the Apocalypse,
cannot be altogether true, seeing that St. Epiphanius who lived at that time,
Baron. ann. Chapter 97. n. 6.
and who was not much older than he, defended the Authority of that Book,
against the Alogian, and Theodotian Heretics. That Cardinal does nevertheless
declare, that he cannot in this respect blame St. Jerome; for having unhappily
traduced the Greek Churches in his time. He believed that he meant St. Basil,
Amphilochius, the two Gregory's of Nazianzen and Nysse, and the Council of
Laodicea, Baron. ibid. n. 7.
who did not reckon the Apocalypse amongst the Canonical Books of Scripture. He
distinguishes betwixt those Fathers, and the Alogians and Theodotians, upon
this account, that the former had not impeached the Authority of that Book,
with an avowed obstinacy as the latter had done. And even St. Epiphanius is not
so much against St. Jerome, but that he insinuates, that the Alogians, (who
rejected in general all that is extant of St. John's Writings,) would have been
in some respect excusable, if they had rejected nothing but the Revelation,
which is an obscure and unintelligible Book.

The Alogians pretended that the Apocalips, and the rest of St. John's
Writings, were composed by the Heretic Cerinthus. Which they endeavored to
show, by the agreement that the Doctrine which Cerinthus professed, had to that
contained in the Books of that Apostle, and especially in his Revelation.

They likewise drew up particular objections against this latter Work. (...).
Alog. apud Epiph. Haer. 51. n. 32.
Of what use (say they) can the Revelation of St. John be to us, when he tells
us of seven Angels, and of seven Trumpets? St. Epiphanius gives them this
answer, Epiph. ibid.
that God was pleased to reveal to his servant John, what was most mysterious
in the Law and the Prophets, to the end that he might treat of them in a
spiritual and intelligible manner. And seeing those Heretics were so bold as
to ridicule what is said of the seven Trumpets, he charges them, upon that
account, either of malice or ignorance, from the words of St. Paul, who has
also made mention of those Trumpets, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, 1
Cor. xv. 52.
where he says, The trumpet shall sound, and at the sound of this trumpet the
dead shall rise.

Some of the Alogians, to disparage the Authority of the Apocalypse, another
argument; make use of these words, for in Chap. ii. ver. 18. of the Book, To
the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, write: (...). Alog. apud Epiph. ibid. n.
33.
There was not at that time (say they,) any Christian Church in Thyatira. How
could St. John write to a Church, which had no being? St. Epiphanius being of
the same opinion with the Alogians, that there was no Church in that place, at
that time, that he may answer their objection, is forced to have recourse to
the Spirit of Prophecy. He thinks that St. John, who was inspired by God,
foresaw what should happen in process of time. And therefore he gives us the
most exact account that he can, of the City of Thyatira, about the time when
the Phrygian Heretics did bear sway there. He shows how it afterward became
an Orthodox and most famous Church. (...). Epiph. ibid.
The design of the Holy Ghost (says he) was to reveal, in that place of the
Apocalypse, that that Church should fall from the Truth, after the time of St.
John, and the other Apostles. Which happened, as Epiphanius himself does tell
us, ninety three years after the Ascension of our Lord and Savior.

Seeing this answer of St. Epiphanius does agree with the Opinion of the
Alogians, that there was no Christian Church in effect, in the City of
Thyatira, at that time, Socinus Mihi quidem, ut verum fatear, responsio ista
non admodum probatur, cum propter alia, tum propter id quod nimis aperte ex
ipsa historia Apacalypsis constare videtur, jam istam Ecclesiam Thyatirensem
revera extitisse. Soc. Lect. Sacr. p. 306.
could by no means admit of it, being persuaded that the Text of the Apocalypse
does evidently show that there was a Church therein. He believed that there
were several Cities of that name. But for all that, he does not prove against
the Alogians, that there was a Church in Thyatira. When he brings the plain
words of the Apocalypse against them, he gets the thing in Question for an
Answer, seeing those Sectaries endeavored by that means to lessen the
Authority of that Book. It is probable that at that time, when St. Epiphanius
lived, there was no Catalogue of the Bishops of that Church, nor of other
public Records, that might make it manifest, that there had beed a Church
founded in that City, from the times of the Apostles. And therefore Grotius
does give a more judicious answer, That the truth is, Grot. Annot. ad c. 2.
Apoc. v. 18.
there was not any Church of the Gentiles in Thyatira, when St. John writ the
Revelation, but there was a Church of the Jews, as also, there was the like at
Thessalonica before St. Paul Preached there.

The Alogians do also cavil about that which is mentioned in the same Book,
Chap. ix. ver. 14. Of the four Angels which were bound on the River Euphrates.
Epiph. ibid.
But St. Epiphanius does in this charge them with ignorance, because those
Angels, who were placed on the River Euphrates, do signify, according to his
Opinion, so many Nations that were situated on that River, viz. the Assyrians,
Babylonians, Medes and Persians. And adds, that seeing Nations are subject to
Angels, those words of the Apocalypse, Loose the four Angels which are upon
Euphrates, make very good sense, St. John intending to show thereby, that those
Nations being loosed should make War against another People. I shall not here
examine whether or no, the Exposition given by St. Epiphanius be agreeable to
the Text, but content my self to observe in general, that seeing that Book, is
a Prophecy, and no History, the Author was to write as Prophets were wont to
do, in a Figurative Style. And so the Alogians were inexcusable for their
prejudice against this Book, upon the account of the expressions; (which to
them appeared very strange) unless they imagined that there was no such thing
as a Prophecy in the New Testament.

Cajus, an Orthodox Writer, who lived at Rome, under Pope Zephyrin, and of whom
we have spoken before, did also believe that Cerinthus was the Author of the
Revelation of St. John. He treated that Heretic with derision, (...). Caj.
apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 28.
who, As if he had been a great Apostle, writ Revelations which he pretended to
have received from Angels, and in which, he assured us, that after the
Resurrection, Jesus Christ shall reign upon the Earth. He allowed the space of
a thousand years to this Carnal Kingdom, which was to be accompanied with all
sorts of pleasures. For this cause he calls Cerinthus an Enemy to the Holy
Scriptures, and spoke in this manner of the Apocalypse, which he thought, was
written by him, and not by St. John.

Denis, Dion. Alex. apud Eus. bid.
Bishop of Alexandria, who vigorously defended the Authority of this Book, did
likewise observe that some Authors did ascribe the Apocalypse to Cerinthus, who
(according to their Opinion) had prefixed St. John's Name to the Book, to give
Authority to his Babbling about the Carnal Reign of Jesus Christ on the Earth.
Seeing this Opinion that maintained a Chimerical Dominion of a thousand years
was spread in the Church, this Learned Bishop writ two Treatises against it,
Entitled (...).
Of the Promises. Wherein he takes to task (...). Eusebius. l. 7. Hist. Eccl. c.
24.
Nepos, a certain Bishop of Egypt, who Expounded the Promises, which God in
Scripture has made to Mankind, in a sense that speaks the Expositor to have
been more Jew than Christian; dreaming of a Carnal Kingdom upon the Earth, that
should continue for the space of a thousand years, during which time all manner
of Pleasures should be enjoyed.

Upon this subject Nepos did publish a Book, Entitled (...).
A Refutation of Allegorists, laughing at such Catholics as Expounded
Allegorically that place in the Apocalypse, that makes mention of the Reign of a
thousand years. Which Work made a great impression on the minds of those who
read it, because the Author, who had carefully applied himself to the study of
the Holy Scriptures, had acquired a very great Reputation. Besides, his Reasons
appeared to be the more probable, because they were founded on the Literal
Sense of Scripture, whereas the contrary Opinion was grounded upon Allegories
only, from which nothing can be concluded. Denis does likewise (...). Eusebius.
ibid.
declare the honorable esteem he had for the Memory of his then deceased
Adversary, whose Faith and Parts he commends. But withal, he adds, that the
love which he bore to the Truth above all other things, was a sufficient motive
that engaged him to write against that Work, that was so much admired in Egypt,
that many preferred the Doctrine therein contained, to the Gospels and the
Epistles of the Apostles: they were so much puffed up with the Idea of the
thousand years Reign on the Earth. The matter was brought to that pass, that
Nepos his Followers, chused rather to make a Schism, than to abdicate their
Opinion. But Denis, afterward, in a public Dispute, having discovered the
falsity thereof, brought them to renounce their error.

It is a very judicious course that that Learned Bishop takes, as to his manner
of defending the Authority of the Apocalypse against those who rejected it as a
supposititious Book, and done by Cerinthus. He appeared to be in no wise
biased by any preoccupation, as to his own Opinion; nor guilty of concealing
the Reasons of his Adversaries. And therefore he freely declares, that (...)
Dion. Alex. apud Eusebius. ibid. cap. 25.
some Ecclesiastical Writers who lived in his time, had opposed that Book with
all their might, refuting it with a nice and resolute eagerness, alleging that
it was written without Sense, and without Reason. They further assured us that
the Title of that Work was forged by Cerinthus, and that the Title Apocalypse,
or Revelation, could not be attributed to a Book, which in their Opinion was
stuffed with things that manifest a profound ignorance.

Notwithstanding all those Objections, Denis avows that he cannot reject it, as
perceiving that it was approved by the most part of his Brethren: and to the
Reasons on the other side, he replies, that there is a sublime and hidden Sense
in the Expressions of that Author; for which he is resolved to have an high
veneration, though he does not comprehend it, being persuaded, that Faith, and
not his own knowledge, ought to be the Rule in that case. (...). Ibid.
I do not (says he) condemn that which I cannot understand; on the contrary I
admire it, because I cannot comprehend it. Which nevertheless does not hinder
him from examining all the parts of the Books particularly; and he shows,
(...). Ibid.
That it is impossible to Expound it according to the Letter, or Sense which
the words at first view seem to warrant. He further declares that it was
composed by a Man, called John, who was inspired by God. But he does not think,
that that John was an Apostle; and grounds his Opinion on this, that the
Apostle St. John did put his Name to none of his Works, and that he never
speaks of himself. On the contrary, the Author of the Revelation does name
himself at the beginning, and frequently in the Body of his Work; for example,
in the Letter he writes to the seven Churches of Asia, he begins with these
words, John to the seven Churches which are in Asia. But St. John does not so
much as put his name to his Catholic Epistle, in his entrance upon the matter.
Neither is it seen at the beginning of his two other Epistles that are very
short, and pass under his name.

This difference of Style makes Denis the Bishop of Alexandria to conclude,
that the Revelation was not written by St. John; and he affirms at the same
time, that it is uncertain who that John was. He proves nevertheless, that it
is in no wise likely that he was John, Surnamed Mark, made mention of in the
Acts of the Apostles, and who was Companion to Paul and Barnabas in their
Travels; because he did not follow them into Asia. And therefore he judges that
he was one of those who lived at Ephesus, where there were two Sepulchers with
that name. Once he has recourse to the difference of Style, from which he
pretends to prove, that the Apostle St. John, who writ the Gospel, and one
Epistle, cannot be the Author of the Apocalypse. According to his Opinion, the
same things, and the same expressions are found in the former Books. The
Revelation, on the contrary, is quite different from both.

Thus I have considered at large, the judgment of Denis, the Bishop of
Alexandria, upon the Apocalypse, (upon which Eusebius has more fully
Paraphrased) because it contains, in a few words, all that can be said upon
this subject. He informs us at the same time, that the ancient Doctors of the
Church made a great account of Tradition, upon such an emergent occasion as
required their Judgment, whether a Book was Canonical or no. We also see, that
in such junctures they observed the Rules that are commonly received amongst
Critics. For the Bishop, according to the rigorous Laws of Criticism, does
examine the Diction, or Style of the Apocalypse, (...). Dionis. apud Eusebius. ibid.
Which (says he) is in no wise good Greek, being full of Barbarisms, and
Solecisms.

The distinction he uses concerning two John's, who lived in Ephesus, is
grounded upon the Testimony of Papias, who was Contemporary with the Disciples
of the Apostles. Eusebius, who inserted that Testimony in his History, does
add, that he is positive in it: For (...). Eusebius.
if the Apostle St. John is not the true Author of the Apocalypse, which bears
the name of John, it is probable that it was written by that second John.
Nevertheless the most ancient Fathers, viz. Justin, and Irenaeus made no
account of this distinction, nor difference of Style, on which Denis so much
insists upon.

Nor can there be any thing concluded from the Title of the Apocalypse, that in
the most of Greek Copies, whether Manuscript or Printed, there is the name of
(...).
John the Divine, and not of the Apostle St. John set therein. Those who
annexed that Title meant only to describe St. John the Evangelist, whom the
Greek Fathers do call the Divine; by way of Excellency, to distinguish him from
other Evangelists.

All the Eastern Churches at this day, read that Book under the name of the
Apostle St. John. It is true, that it is not so in the ancient Syriack Copies,
because it was not in the Greek one, from which those were taken. It is
ascribed to St. John, in the Syriack Edition of the English Polyglott Bible:
and also in the Arabic Printed in the same Polyglott, it bears the name of
John the Apostle, Evangelist; and lastly in the Arabic published by Erpenius,
that of John the Evangelist. Not that I believe such Titles, (which are but
late,) to be of any great Authority. I produce them only to show the Universal
consent of the Churches, as well that of the East, as that of the West,
concerning the Author of the Revelation.

As to what concerns such singular expressions, as are no where to be found,
but in this Book; chiefly, that, where there is mention made of the Reign of
Jesus Christ upon the Earth with the Saints, which shall continue for the space
of a thousand years. Illyricus has very well observed, that since that Book
Phrases illas mystice ut in sermon prophetico intelligendas. Illyr. argum. in
Apoc.
is written in a Prophetical Style, the expressions used therein ought to be
taken in a Mystical sense. In which he had apparently, as to his Judgment, the
advantage of Luther, who could not avoid the reproach that was put upon him by
Bellarmin, and some other Opponents, for not considering the Apocalypse as a
Prophetical and Apostolical Work; yet his Disciples, who acknowledged all that
Book to be Divine and Canonical, have endeavored to justify him. They
alleged, Lutherum quod attinet, quidquid olim seripserit in veteri
praefatione, in ea sane quae hodie in codicibus legitur nihil de Apocalypsi
asserit aliud, quam in dubio se relinquere utrum sit Joannis Apostoli, quod
nonnulli ex vetustioribus Patribus id inficiati sint, nihil tamen hoc ipso se
prejudicare velle aliis. Christ. Korthol. de Canon. Script. S. c. 18.
without any regard to his ancient Preface, that he said nothing else in that,
which is found in his Works, but what has been observed by some of the ancient
Fathers, viz. that it was not generally agreed upon that St. John was the
Author of the Apocalypse.

And Erasmus had likewise enough to do upon the like account with the Divines
of Paris, who censure one of his propositions, wherein he affirmed, De
Apocalypsi diu dubitatum est, non dico ab haereticis, sed ab orthodoxis viris,
qui scriptum tamen ut a Spiritu Sancto profectum amplectebantur, de scriptoris
nomine incerti. Erasm. decl. ad Theol. Paris.
that there had been, for a long time, some doubting about that Book, not only
amongst the Heretics, but also the Orthodox; who though they received it as
Canonical, did profess they were not certain who was the Author. What Erasmus
does affirm in this case, is not to be charged with falsehood, since it is
grounded upon a matter of Fact, that may be easily proved from the Writings of
the ancient Doctors of the Church. Yet the Parisian Divines were so forward to
censure him, since they persuaded themselves that he manifestly knew, by the
usage of the Church, and the definitions of Councils, that the Apocalypse was
published by St. John. Cons. Facul. Theol. Paris.
The Councils on which they stood, were the three of Carthage, that of Rome,
under Pope Gelasius, and that of Toledo, in which Isidore of Sevile, was an
Assistant. To this they joined the Authority of St. Denis, called the
Areopagite, St. Irenaeus, St. Justin, Pope Innocent I. St. Augustine, and St.
John of Damascus.

Erasmus, as it should seem, ought to have answered, that notwithstanding all
those Authorities, his supposition might be true, seeing he had also Orthodox
Authors on his side. He might also have said, that none of those Councils stood
much on the Author of the Apocalypse, but barely complied with the opinion that
commonly obtained in their time, which ascribed that Book to St. John. But in
stead of that, he only returned such answers as were extravagant and
impertinent. He affirms, that the World was at that time filled with Apocryphal
Books bearing forged Titles, and that the most part of honest Men, were then
persuaded that such sort of falsities might be debated. He afterward inveighs
against Isidorus Hispalensis scripsit rudi seculo, and habuisse videtur
locupletem bibliothecam, qua potuisset rectius uti, si fuisset exact doctus.
Certe rhapsodus fuit, quemadmodum Beda. Quanquam Beda meo judicio fuit illo tum
eruditior, tum cloquentior. Erasm. declar. ad cens. Fac. Theol. Paris.
Isidore, as being a Man of mean capacity and judgment, who had not the sense
to make use of a very good Library which he had in his possession. He was
(says he) as unskilful in making Collections as Beda, but the latter was the
more Judicious and Eloquent of the two.

This is an instance of Learning, whereof there is an ill use made. If Isidore
and Bid, were justly charged by him on that account, he ought to have proved
that they were much in the wrong here, in preferring the opinion of St. Justin,
St. Irenaeus, and the most ancient Fathers, to that of some other Writers, who
were not so near the first Age. The answer he made to the Divines of Paris, was
more likely to provoke them than his first Proposition was. For he thereby
plainly reproached those sage Masters, that they were conversant in no good
Authors, but only Rhapsodists, and unskilful Compilers of History.

It is true, that he might not offend them, he adds at the same time, that
Profiteor me de titulis quoque credere quod credit universalis Ecclesia, cujus
auctoritati facile sensum meum submitto, non hic tantum, sed in omnibus quoque
caeteris, modo ne protinus Ecclesiae sit quidquid quocunque modo in usum
Christianorum irrepsit, aut cuivis Episcopo placuit. Erasm. ibid.
as to what concerns the Titles of the Books of Scripture, he does refer
himself to the Judgment of the Universal Church, to which he does entirely
submit, provided that the name of the Church Universal be not ascribed to all
that is so called according to the custom and use, which has been introduced,
and does obtain amongst Christians, nor to the particular Opinions of every
Bishop.

If we measure the Opinion of the Unitaries by that of Socinus, who is one of
their Heroes, they have affirmed nothing concerning the Apocalypse, but what is
agreeable to good sense. This Unitary does assure us, that that Book was
always, by common consent, attributed to St. John: Soc. de Auctor. Scrip. Sac.
c. 1. n. 2.
Quod Scriptum semper communi consensu tributum fuit Joauni Apostolo and
Evangelistae. To that objection, that many Authors have doubted thereof, he
makes answer, that the Judgment of Justin and Irenaeus, who lived some little
time after that Book was Composed, ought to be preferred to the Opinion of
those Authors. He further affirms, Non videtur propter parvam aliquam aut etiam
magnam dissimilitudinem rationis scribendi in universum ac styli ab aliis
ejusdem Joannis scriptis long diversi generis debere aut posse dubitari quin
ejus sit opus, maxim cum simul adsint tot alia testimonia and conjecturae, ut
illi ipsi qui prorsus negarent ejus esse, illudque rejecerunt, coacti fuerint
fateri a quopiam conscriptum fuisse qui persuadere voluerit istum ipsum Joannem
illud conscripsisse. Soc. ibid.
that as to the difference of Style, betwixt that Work, and those others which
were written by St. John, this Objection does not oblige him to give those
Reasons which prove it to be St. John's, since they appeared so convincing to
those very persons who rejected the Book, that they were forced to acknowledge
that it was written by a Man who endeavored to persuade others, that St. John
was the Author thereof. This last Observation seems to be more subtle than
solid; a crime that is pardonable in the Unitaries, who never applied
themselves to the study of the Ancient Ecclesiastical Authors.

In the last place, the Commentaries on the Apocalypse made by the Calvinists,
are undeniable proofs, that they do receive it into the number of Divine and
Prophetical Books. Besides they would be very sorry to be without that
Prophecy. Beza made a Discourse, Treating expressly on that Subject, by way of
Preface to his Notes on that Work; where he answers the Objections which
Erasmus had published to diminish the Authority thereof: That which he had not
observed as to any other Books of the New Testament. Calvin, fearing that he
should make himself ridiculous by his false Expositions, of a Book that is so
very obscure, has taken the best side, by not publishing any Commentary on the
Apocalypse. His example had no influence on his Followers; for many amongst
them, did with a Prophetical tone lowdly recommend to the World their own
Visions upon that Book.

Besides the Books of the New Testament, which we have hitherto spoken of, and
that are generally received in all the Churches, as Divine and Canonical, some
others have been read in many Churches, which yet never had the same Authority.
Nevertheless it has so fallen out, that those who have made Catalogues of the
Sacred Books, have not always observed this distinction. For they have placed
all of them in an equal rank, for Books of the Holy Scripture. There have been
also some Fathers, who quoted some Books of this sort, as if they had been
truly given by Divine Inspiration. But it is easy to find, even by the
Writings of the Fathers, that those Works were approved by none but particular
persons, whose Opinion cannot reasonably be looked upon as a Law. If I had not
resolved to confine my Discourse to the Books of the New Testament, which are
generally approved of in all Churches, I would have insisted at large on those
other Books, but I am obliged to keep within the limits of my first purpose. I
shall only observe, that in a certain Catalogue of the Books of the Bible,
which is at the end of two very ancient Copies of St. Paul's Epistles, there
follows (immediately after the Epistle of St. Jude) Judae Epistola, Barnabae
Epistola, Joannis Revelatio, Actus Apostolorum, Pastor, Actus Pauli, Revelatio
Petri. Catal. libror. Script. S. ex Codd. MSS. Bibl. Reg. and S. Germ.
the Epistle of Barnabas, the Revelation, or the Apocalypse of John, the Acts of
the Apostles, the Book of the Pastor, the Acts of Paul, and the Revelation of
Peter. The number also of the Verses contained in each Book of the Bible is set
down in the Catalogue. And what is most of all observable, is, that the Epistle
to the Hebrews is not comprehended therein. It is nevertheless in those two
Greek and Latin Manuscripts that are written with the same Hand, as the rest of
St. Paul's Epistles; but it is placed by it self, and after the Catalogue, as
if it did not belong to that Apostle. In this matter, they followed the Custom
of some of the Western Churches.

CHAP. XX. The Objections of the Jews, and other Enemies of the Christian
Religion, against the Books of the New Testament. Inquiry is made if the
Evangelists and Apostles made use of the Greek Version of the Septuagint, in
the Passages which they quote out of the Old Testament. St. Jerome's Opinion
upon the Matter. That Father declared himself for the Hebrew Text of the Jews,
in opposition to that of the Septuagint.
THE Books of the New Testament having been maintained, as well in general, as
in particular, it is worth the while to examine the principal Objections that
are made against those Books; and at the same time against the Apostles who
published them. The Mahometans endeavor to evince the necessity of the coming
of their Prophet, from this, that seeing the Canonical Books of the Jews and
Christians, are (according to their Opinion,) wholly corrupted, it was
necessary that God should send a new Prophet upon the Earth, to teach Men the
True Religion. But because they bring no solid reasons for the confirmation of
what they allege, it is to no purpose to refute them. The Jews and some
Philosophers, who are Enemies to the Christians, have more particularly
attacked the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles. They have had the
impudence to charge them with Forgery, or at least with ignorance, seeing (as
they object) they have quoted the Books of the Old Testament otherwise than
they are in themselves. They further accuse them, of annexing to the Passages
they produce, a sense that was very far from the mind of the Authors. Hereupon
they draw up the strongest objections they can, against the Authority of the
New Testament; which of necessity must be answered.

As to the first Objections; the Jews do suppose, that when a public Record is
produced for confirmation of a Matter of Fact, it is necessary, that the very
words of the Record be delivered in the same manner as they are in the
Original, or in faithful Copies; but (say they) the Disciples of Jesus Christ
have not done that. For if the passages of the Old Testament which they have
quoted in their Writings, be compared with the Original Hebrew Text, it will be
found, that in many places they bear a quite different meaning. Whence they
conclude that they are either chargeable with falsehood, or that their Writings
have been altered, and therefore that there is no credit to be given to them.

I answer this Objection, that it was not necessary for the Apostles, when they
Preached the Gospel of Jesus Christ, to make use of the Hebrew Bible. On the
contrary, it was more for their purpose that they should make mention of the
passages of the Old Testament, so as they were read in the Greek Copies that
were in the Hands of the most part of the World. Very few of the Jews at that
time understood the Hebrew Language: whereas the Greek Language was spread
through the whole Empire. Since therefore Jesus Christ did not send his
Disciples to Preach the Gospel to a handful of Learned Jews, who understood the
Hebrew, but to all the Nations of the Earth, the most part whereof spoke Greek;
they ought not only to speak in that Language, but also to report the passages
of the Old Testament, after the same manner as had been written for a long time
in the same Language. There was at that time, a Greek Version of the whole
Bible, that had been made by Jews many Ages before, and therefore could not be
suspected. And so the Evangelists and the Apostles could not justly be charged
with falsehood, for quoting passages otherwise than they were in the Original,
since they made use of such Writings as were approved by the Jews, and were in
use amongst them.

It is true, that if they to whom the Gospel was Preached, had understood the
Hebrew Language, it had been better to quote the Original Hebrew, than the
Greek Version of the LXX, because the Original ought always to be preferred to
Translations. But as things were then, the Apostles acted most wisely, in
preferring the Greek Copy of the Bible to the Hebrew, which was understood
almost by none. And therefore the Church from its first beginning, had no other
Scripture but the Ancient Greek Version; and the whole Eastern Church, (the
Syrians being excepted) have no other at this day.

I do not think it necessary to prove, that the Apostles, in their Writings,
quoted the passages of the Old Testament, according to the Greek of the
Septuagint, and not according to the Hebrew Text. It requires no extraordinary
skill in both the Languages, to make one capable of judging aright in this
matter. It is certain that Crebro dixisse me novi, Apostolos and Evangelistas
ubicunque de Veteri Instrumento ponunt testimonia, si inter Hebraicum and
Septuaginta nulla diversitas sit, vel suis, vel Septuaginta Interpretum verbis
uti solitos. Sin autem aliter in Hebraico, aliter in Veteri Editione sensus
est, Hebraicum magis quam Septuaginta Interpretes sequi. Hieron. prooem. lib.
15. Comm. in Is.
St. Jerome once endeavored to persuade the World to the contrary, and to
confirm his Opinion, gave instances of some places of the Old Testament that
were quoted in the New, which yet are not (as he alleged) in the Original
Hebrew. But it is easy to judge by that Learned Father's own words, that he
maintained that Opinion, only to give the more Authority to a new Translation
which he had made out of the Hebrew, because the most knowing Men of his time
did strongly oppose him, as if he had designed to introduce the Jewish Religion
into the Church.

It will appear therefore, that St. Jerome in that place does give an answer to
his Adversaries, and endeavors as much as in him lies, to make an honorable
retreat. Hieron. ibid.
Aemuli nostri doceant (says he) assumpta aliquot testimonia quae non sint in
Hebraeorum libris; and finita contentio est. i. e. Let our Adversaries show
what testimonies are made use of, that are not in the Hebrew Books, and the
Dispute is at an end. I desire no other Witness of what I allege but himself,
seeing he does establish for a general Maxim, for all the citations out of the
Old Testament, that are not only made use of by the Apostles, but also by their
Disciples, Hoc autem generaliter observandum, quod ubicunque sancti Apostoli
aut Apostolici viri loquuntur ad populos, his plerunque abuti testimoniis quae
jam fuerant in gentibus divulgata. Hieron. Qu. Heb. in Genesis
That when the Apostles, or Apostolical Men speak to the people, they commonly
make use of such testimonies as had been published before that time amongst the
Nations. That is to say, of the Version of the Septuagint, which being written
in Greek, was published amongst all those Nations which spoke the Language,
whereas the Hebrew Text was only read in the Jews Synagogues. He proves by the
same Principle, that St. Luke, (when he wrote the Acts of the Apostles, to
declare to the Nations, the first beginnings of the Christian Religion) was to
quote the Passages of the Old Testament, in the same manner as they were in the
Version of the Scripture, which was before that time spread amongst the People.

There is therefore nothing so absurd as the Opinion of some Protestants, who
(notwithstanding the agreement that is found betwixt the quotations of the
Apostles, and the Greek Version of the LXX) maintain with no small Zeal, that
the Apostles reported the Passages of the Old Testament according to the Hebrew
Text. They attribute that agreement to some Writers, whom they suppose to have
lived after the times of the Apostles, and who (according to their Opinion)
corrected the Version of the Septuagint, in all such Passages as are quoted in
the New Testament. The Evangelists and the Apostles (say they) regarded the
sense only, and not the Words of Scripture. If any one ask these Men the Reason
why they maintain so strange a Paradox, their answer will be but this Quis
credat spiritum Apostolorum spiritui Graeculi interpretis se subjecisse, aut
limpidos fontes coenosis Hellenistarum rivulis praetulisse; and ubi passim de
capite aliquo Religionis adversus Judeos agebatur, Apostolos, relicto Canone
Hebraeo, Lesbiam Graecorum regulam usurpasse. Auctor. Diss. apud Capp. in qu.
de loc. parall.
that it cannot be imagined, that the spirit of the Apostles should be subject
to the spirit of a little Greek Interpreter; and that they preferred the
Streams to the Fountain, by leaving the Hebrew Canon to follow an uncertain
Rule, especially when there was an occasion for defending the Fundamental
Points of Religion against the Jews.

Thus some Protestants extremely addicted to the Hebrew, do argue agreeable to
the Ideas they have framed, about matters of Fact that are as clear as the day;
instead of examining the things in themselves. Seeing Lewis Cappel has solidly
refuted this Opinion, which has not the least appearance of truth, it will be
to no purpose to spend time about it. That Learned Protestant judiciously
observed, that the spirit of the Apostles is not subject to the spirit of an
Interpreter; Pia (...) quadam and sancta charitatisque plena prudentia
Christiana versionem tum receptam secuti sunt iis in locis in quibus parum aut
nihil omnino ad rem ipsam interest utrum textum Hebraicum, an vero Graecam
(...) Septuaginta versionem sequaris. Lud. Capp. qu. de loc. parall. page 450.
but through a Pious condescendency, and by a true Christian Prudence, they
followed the Greek Version which was publicly received, it being indifferent
to them to quote the Hebrew or the Greek in those Passages.

Although the Apostles did prefer the Greek of the Septuagint, to the Hebrew
Text, it cannot be inferred from thence, that the Greek Version is better than
the Hebrew of the Jews, as some Authors, especially amongst the Catholics,
have too easily believed. We ought to consider by what motives the Apostles
were led, to give this preference to the Greek. Seeing they did it for no other
end, but to accommodate themselves to the capacity of the People, whom they
instructed, and who read the Bible in Greek, there can be no consequence drawn
from thence, to give more Authority to the Version of the Septuagint than to
the Hebrew Text, which they did not meddle with. In the Hebrew or Chaldaick
Gospel of St. Matthew, the Passages of the Old Testament were quoted according
to the Hebrew Text; because the Jews of Palestine, for whose sake it was
written, read the Bible in that Language. The People, who at that time
understood not the Hebrew Language, had Glosses on the Hebrew Text, written in
the Chaldee, so that if that Evangelist had quoted the Bible in the vulgar
Language, he had quoted the same according to the Chaldaick Glosses, and not
according to the Greek of the Septuagint, which was not in use amongst the Jews
of Palestine.

It will further appear, that the Evangelists and the Apostles did not confine
themselves in their quotations to the rigor of the Letter, because that was in
no wise needful for carrying on their Work. They did content themselves
sometimes, with delivering the sense of the Words, which they adapted to their
Discourse. A thing commonly practiced; and they cannot be branded with Falsehood
or Imposture, who set down after this manner, such Records in their Works, as
serve for proofs. A Copy of Record cannot be alleged to be false, unless the
sense be changed. But this can never be found in the quotations of the
Apostles, who followed a received custom, and which could be blamed by none.
The same thing happened to most of the Fathers, when they quoted in the Works,
the Passages of Scripture; for they made no scruple to change the Words, so
long as that change was of no importance to the Sense. Which ought to be the
Standard of our Judgment, about the Passages of the Old Testament, which are
quoted in the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, for though they were
taken from the Greek Version, they do not always express the very Words.

I know it may be objected, that this Version has very much degenerated from
its ancient purity, and that therefore, it can no more serve as a Rule by which
we may judge of the Truth of the Apostolical quotations. But what ever change
has happened to this Translation, it is sufficient as it remains, to decide the
matter of Fact we are now about. It is agreed by all the ancient Ecclesiastical
Authors, that the Evangelists and Apostles, in the Passages they quote out of
the Old Testament, were more ready to express the Sense than the Words: which
is the meaning of these Words of St. Jerome, Hieron. Comm. in Is. l. 3. c. 7.
In multis testimoniis (says he) quae Evangelistae vel Apostoli de libris
veteribus assumpserunt, curiosius attendendum est, non eos verborum ordinem
secutos esse sed sensum. Which he often repeats in his works, Notare debemus
illud quod plerumque admonuimus, Evangelistas and Apostolos non verbum
interpretatos esse de verbo, nec Septuaginta Interpretum auctoritatem secutos,
quorum editio illo jam tempore legebatur; sed quasi Hebraeos and instructos in
Lege absque damno sensuum suis usos esse sermonibus. Hieron. Comm. in Isai.
lib. 9. cap. 29.
We ought to observe well (says he in another place) what I have often said
before, viz. That the Evangelists and Apostles did not make a Translation, word
for word, and that they followed not the Version of the Septuagint, that was
read in their days; but being Hebrews, and skilful in the Law, they made use of
their Terms.

That Learned Man does agree with the other Fathers, in assuring us, that the
Apostles did not in their Writings, report the passages of the Old Testament
word for word: But, since he was prepossessed with an opinion, in favor of the
Hebrew Text, when he composed his Commentaries on the most part of the
Prophets; he affirms, that the same Apostles made use of their own Expressions,
and not those of the Septuagint. Yet it is easy to prove the contrary; and in
this, the most part of the Protestants are very much to be blamed, for
neglecting this Ancient Greek Version: For it is impossible for him to
understand the Books of the New Testament well, who is not first much employed
in the reading of the Septuagint. It was upon those Seventy Ancient
Interpreters that the Apostles formed their Style, and not upon the Hebrew Text
of the Jews: I do not in the least comprehend, upon what ground St. Jerome
could allege, that Paraphr asim hujus testimonii quasi Hebraeus ex Hebraeis
assumit Apostolus Paulus de authenticis libris in Epistola quam scribit ad
Corinthios, non verbum ex verbo reddens, quod facere ommno contemnit, sed
sensuum exprimens veritatem, quibus utitur ad id quod voluerit roborandum.
Hieron. Comm. in Is. lib. 17. cap. 64.
St. Paul being an Hebrew born, did, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
Chap. 2. give a paraphrase on the words of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 64. v. 4.
as they are in the Hebrew, and had regard to nothing but the sense, according
to his Custom: Yet there is nothing in that place, that can oblige us to have
recourse to the Hebrew, rather than the Greek, for understanding the Apostles
meaning.

St. Jerome dreamed then of nothing else, but settling his New Translation of
the Scriptures upon the Hebrew, thereby to give satisfaction to a great number
of People, who spoke evil of him upon that occasion. This Spirit reigns in his
Commentaries on the Old Testament, in those chiefly which are on the great
Prophets. He endeavors to prevent, with an assiduous Persecution, that which
might be objected against from all sides; that the Church ought not to receive
any other Scripture of the Old Testament, than that which was Authorized by the
Apostles. Indeed this Objection which was a terrible one, must needs have made
a great impression on his Spirit, and if he dare not say, that the Apostles
always followed the Hebrew Text; he endeavors at least to shelter himself by
assuring us, that sometimes they did not adhere either to the one or the other,
because ordinarily, that which was considered by them, was the sense and not
the Words.

And this he does affirm of the words of the Prophet Jeremy, Jerem. cap. 31. v.
15.
a Voice was heard in Rama, etc. St. Matthew (says he) does neither report
that passage, according to the Hebrew, nor according to the Greek: nec juxta
Hebraicum, nec juxta Septuaginta sumpsit testimonium. Ex quo perspicuum est
Evangelistas and Apostolos nequaquam ex Hebraeo interpretationem alicujus
secutos, sed quasi Hebraeos ex Hebraeis quod legebant Hebraice suis sermonibus
expressisse. Hieron. Comm. in Is. lib. 6. c. 31.
Whence he does conclude, that the Evangelists and Apostles did not tie
themselves to the Version of any Interpreter; but that being Hebrews, they used
their own words, in expressing that which they read in the Hebrew Text; this
general answer is what he gives almost every where.

But it may be said, and more truly, that the Apostles and Evangelists, when
they instructed the People, who read the Bible in Greek, used, in their
quotations, the expressions of the Bible, yet did not scrupulously adhere to
the words, because they had the sense only in their view. To convince St.
Jerome of this, there needs no other Passage of Scripture than that which was
mentioned by himself: For which it is only needful to look into the Hebrew Text,
and the Greek of the Septuagint; for, whereas it is in Hebrew (...) which that
Father (together with some Jews) in his Version, translated in excelso i. e. on
high; the Septuagint who have made it a proper Name, have rendered it (...), in
Rama, and St. Matthew followed them in his citation of the same passage: It is
true, that in the other words, St. Matthew does rather agree with the Hebrew
than the Septuagint, as St. Jerome has mentioned them, agreeable to the Edition
of Rome; for it is in St. Matthew, (...), and he refused to be comforted, as it
is in the Hebrew at this day; whereas in the Septuagint it is rendered, (...),
he refused rest.

But it is probable, that the ancient reading of the Septuagint was agreeable
to St. Matthew; and at this day it is extant in the Copy of Alexandria, in the
Editions of Alde, and Complutum or Alcala; and likewise in the Arabian Version,
which was taken from the Septuagint. And here it is observable, that although
that of Rome, is the best of all the Editions of the Septuagint, because it is
the most ancient and pure of any of them, yet it is not free from errors. It Is
to be supposed, that long before Origin, the Greek of the Septuagint was
altered in some places, by some half-learned Men, whether Jews or Christians,
who were far from a through knowledge of the Hebrew Language, but rather
consulted their Dictionaries about the Hebrew words of the Bible; I believe
that that place of Jeremy, is of the number of those which were altered in the
Septuagint.

Amendments of that nature were then only placed in the Margin of the Greek
Copies, by way of Notes; to show that the Hebrew words might have been
interpreted in another manner, and it happened afterward, that the Marginal
Note or reading passed into the Text: Seeing it was the custom at that time, to
have Dictionaries of the words of every famous Author; I make no Question, but
that there was also composed a Dictionary, containing the words of the Bible,
and also of every Book thereof in particular. The Jewish Greeks, who read in
their Synagogues the Hebrew Text of the Law and the Prophets, and who joined
thereunto the Greek Version of the Septuagint, had their Dictionaries of that
kind written in Greek, in which they marked the different significations of the
Hebrew words. There is for example, in that Passage of Jeremy we now treat of,
the Hebrew word (...) which in the Septuagint, is rendered (...). But seeing in
other places they have translated the same Hebrew word (...), and that was
noted in the Dictionaries; some one or other would place in the Margin of his
Copy, (...) over against (...), and this first reading which was then in the
Margin, by way of note only, was afterward put in the Text, and it has
remained alone in the Edition of Rome.

This observation is absolutely necessary, for the diserning of many false
Glosses that are in the Septuagint, from the true reading; some examples of
which I would set down, but that I fear it will take up too much room. St.
Jerome, who had not considered this, judged of the Version of the Septuagint by
the Copy which he had; and took no notice that that Version was altered by
false Glosses in the most ancient Copies; and even a long time before Origin,
whose critical observations afforded no remedy for that imperfection. This
principle being once established, may serve as a rule to justify the citations
of the Evangelists and the Apostles, which differ not so much from the ancient
Greek Version, as St. Jerome believed.

Nevertheless that Learned Father found four or five Passages, which he
pretends to be cited in the New Testament as they are in the Hebrew; whereas
they are otherwise in the Septuagint: He does frequently object the same to his
Adversaries, to show them, that the Evangelists and Apostles being Hebrews, had
consulted the Hebrew more than the Greek Version. Therein he takes Sanctuary,
to avoid the reproaches which from all sides are cast upon him, about his new
Translation of the Bible: And thus, (as he thinks) St. Matthew has rendered the
words of Hosea, I have called my Son out of Egypt. Pro eo quod nos diximus, ex
Aegypto vocavi filium meum, Septuaginta transtulerunt, ex Aegypto vocavi filios
ejus, quod in Hebraico non habetur; nullique dubium est Matthaeum de hoc loco
sumpsisse testimonium juxta Hebraicom veritatem. Ergo qui detrahunt nostrae
translationi videant Scripturam de qua Evangelista hoc testimomum sumpserit.
Hieron. Comm. in Os. lib. 3. cap. 11.
There is no doubt (says he) but that St. Matthew did make use of the Hebrew
here; because the Septuagint has it thus, I have called my Children out of
Egypt. Let those (he adds) who traduce my Version, consult the Scripture from
whence the Evangelists took this Passage; he repeats the same thing in his
Commentary on St. Matthew; Respondeant qui Hebraicorum voluminum denegant
veritatem, ubi hoc in Septuaginta legatur Interpretibus: quod cum non
invenerint, nos eis dicemus in Osee Propheta scriptum, sicut and exemplaria
probare possunt quae nuper edidimus. Hieron. Comm. in Matthew. lib. 1. cap. 2.
where he does ask those who reject the Hebrew Copy of the Jews, in what place
of the Septuagint, they shall find that which is cited there: And seeing he
believed that they could not possibly find the passage, he does refer them to
his new Translation of the Prophet Hosea. But he himself resolves the doubt, by
adding, in favor of those who did oppose him, propter contentiosos, that St.
Matthew in that place, had cited the words of Chap. 23. of Numbers; Number. 23.22.
(...) i.e. God who brought him out of Egypt. And this is in effect the Opinion
of the most Learned Greek Commentators on the Scriptures, who lived before St.
Jerome. (...). Theod. Heracl. in Cat. Gr. in Matthew.
It is written in the Book of Numbers (says Theodore of Heraclea, upon this
place of St. Matthew, God called him out of Egypt.

When it is also supposed, that St. Matthew had in his view that Passage of the
Prophet Hosea, which is more probable; why does he deny that it was from the
beginning in the Septuagint, as St Matthew has cited it; and that that
difference does proceed from those who altered the ancient Greek Version by
their Glosses? They believed, that by translating (...), his Children, (as if
it had been in the Hebrew, (...) instead of (...),) the sense would be the more
clear, because that which follows is put in the Plural Number. There might
other examples be given of alterations of that kind, which must be imputed to
those who changed the ancient Greek Version of the Septuagint, by their false
Glosses. It Is therefore very probable, that the reading in that place of the
Septuagint, was formerly the same as it is in St. Matthew, and likewise in
Aquila, who also translated that passage of the Prophet Hosea, by these words,
(...), I have called my Son out of Egypt.

St. Jerome does yet triumph over his Adversaries, in his Commentary upon the
words of the Prophet Zechary; Zach. 12.10.
They looked upon me whom they have pierced: St. John, who cited that passage
in his Gospel, does give it in the same manner, according to the Hebrew Text;
whereas in the Septuagint, it is, They looked upon me, because they have
insulted. Joannes Evangelista qui de pectore Domini hausit sapientiam, Hebraeus
ex Hebraeis, quem Salvator amabat plurimum, non magnopere curavit quid Graece
literae continerent, sed verbum interpretatus verbo est, ut in Hebraeo legerat,
and tempore dominicae passionis dixit esse completum. Quod si quis non recipit,
det testimomum de quo sanctarum scripturarum loco Joannes ista protulerit.
Hieron. Comm. in Zach. lib. 3. c. 12.
St. John, (says that Father) being an Hebrew born, did not much regard its
being read in the Greek Version of the Septuagint: On the contrary, he has
rendered that place of Zechary, word for word, as it was in the Hebrew. But if
one will not believe him, he must show the place of Scripture, from which St.
John took the same. He further adds, that the likeness of the Letter R and D in
the Hebrew, was the cause of the false Translation of the Seventy Interpreters,
ob similitudinem literarum error est natus, because they read (as he thinks)
(...) for (...).

But in my opinion, seeing St. John did follow the Septuagint more than the
Hebrew, in all the Passages of his Gospel, there is no reason to maintain,
that, in that place, he consulted the Hebrew Copy of the Jews; without any
regard to the Greek Version of the Septuagint: Which makes me believe, that at
the beginning, it was read in the Septuagint, as it was in the Hebrew, and in
St. John. The change of Letters of that nature, gave occasion of altering the
true and ancient Text in other places: And this happened to that Passage of
Zechary, which ought to be amended in the Greek Version of the Septuagint,
according to the reading in the Gospel of St. John. That which does confirm
this Opinion, is, that St. Cyprian did read it after that manner, in the
ancient Latin Version, which was taken from the Septuagint: The Rendition of
that Father has more Authority in this case, than that of some Greek
Scholiasts, who have also read it (...) they insulted; as it is in St. John,
agreeable to the Hebrew Text. For these Scholiasts in their Expositions, do
frequently follow Aquila, or some other Greek Interpreter without declaring
that they do so: And therefore it is necessary that we be cautious herein, that
we do not confound the Version of the Septuagint, with other ancient Greek
Interpreters.

This should be the place for the examples of the alterations we spoke of,
whereby the ancient Greek Rendition was very much changed; but it would take up
too much time: It suffices that we have touched something of it, in general, to
justify the Citations of the Evangelists and of the Apostles. Neither will I
stay, to examine particularly, some other Passages of the Old Testament, which
St. Jerome pretends to have been cited by the Apostles, in their Writings,
rather according to the Hebrew than according to the Septuagint. For besides
that it does require a long time to discuss them, the rules that are confirmed
already, are sufficient to Answer all that Father's Objections, who himself has
acknowledged, in many places of his Works, that the Disciples of Jesus Christ,
who Preached the Gospel to a People that spoke the Greek Tongue, must have made
use of the ancient Greek Version of the Septuagint, which was in the hands of
every one; and not of the Hebrew Bible, which was read by none but the Jews:
Besides there were but few amongst them, who could have understood it. We come
now to the other Objection, which is brought against the Books of the New
Testament, and which consists in a supposition, that the Apostles and the
Evangelists have not only changed the words of the Passages which they cite,
but that they have likewise wrested the same, by giving them a sense altogether
different from the meaning of the Authors.

CHAP. XXI. A Discussion of some other Objections against the Books of the New
Testament: The Evangelists and Apostles (in the manner of their explaining the
Passages of the Old Testament, and applying them to the Messiah) followed the
Custom which then obtained amongst the Jews. There are many words in the New
Testament, which have a larger signification than they have in the Old: And
that can be attributed to nothing but to that usage, and to a tradition
received amongst the Jews.
THE Present Times gave not a beginning to the very great and difficult
Objections, that have been formed against the Testimonies of the Old Testament,
which the Evangelists and Apostles have made use of in their Writings, for the
Confirmation of the Truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Celsus, Porphyrius,
Julian and the Jews have brought them against the Christians, that they might
thereby show, (as they think) the weakness of those Proofs, upon which the
Christian Religion is founded: But they are deceived, when they persuade
themselves, that Christianity has nothing else but such sort of Proofs, for its
Foundation. The Miracles of Jesus Christ are evident Proofs of his Mission: And
therefore, if it should be supposed with them, that the Passages we speak of,
are not always justly applied, it cannot be concluded from thence, that the
Christian Religion is built on a false Foundation.

That we may make a right judgment of the Reasonings of Jesus Christ and his
Disciples, in the Books of the New Testament, we must have recourse to the
practice of the Jews at that time; and if it be proved, that their manner of
reasoning and applying to the Messiah certain Passages of Scripture, is
agreeable to the usage of that time, they cannot without great injustice be
blamed. They will be sufficiently acquitted of that which is charged upon them,
if we consult the ancient Books of the Jews, especially the Chaldaick
Paraphrases, and the Medraschim, or ancient Allegorical Commentaries. They
have; in those Works, attributed to the Messiah, many Places of Scripture,
which seem to have a quite different sense, if the Letter be only considered.

The Rabbis likewise give two senses to many Passages, one of which is merely
Historical, and another that is more large, which in some sort may be called
Mystical or Allegorical; although in effect it is as much literal in its own
nature as the former. Thus they expound the same Passage of David, and of the
Messiah: All their old Medraschim or Allegorical Commentaries, which are the
most ancient Expositions that they have of the Bible, follow this Method. Their
Doctors never began to insist on the literal sense, till they had occasion to
dispute with the Christians: and it was easy to make Answer to them, according
to no other Principles than those which they themselves had established. Why
then do they think it strange, that the Evangelists and Apostles, who came from
amongst them, should make use of the same Principles to oppose them? Why do
they persuade us, that in the matter of the Messiah, there ought to be no such
Proofs used, as are Founded on the Mystical and Allegorical sense of
Scriptures, since they themselves have always observed that Method?

The truth is, if the Jews be much pressed about those Passages of the Old
Testament, which they make use of to confirm the belief of a Messiah, which
they have placed amongst the Fundamental Articles of their Religion; it will be
hard enough for them to Answer those Objections that may be brought against
them upon the point; unless they have recourse to those Mystical and
Allegorical senses, which being Founded upon the Tradition of their Fathers,
ought to pass for real Proofs. There has been a certain Rabbin amongst their
ancient Doctors, who absolutely denied that the Messiah should come, because he
did not believe, that it was Founded upon the literal and evident Proofs of
Scripture. They did not, for all that, exclude him from their Communion; by
which it does appear, that the Article was not yet (at that time) in the number
of those they call Fundamental.

The Jews do renounce their Principle, when they object against the Disciples
of Jesus Christ, that their Expositions are not purely literal, but
Allegorical, and that there can nothing be concluded from an Allegory. It Is
true, that that which is merely Allegorical cannot suffice as a positive Proof
for the Confirmation of a Religion: But when those Allegories are Founded on
Tradition, they may be used and applied to Matters of Fact, which are already
agreed upon by that Tradition. In this manner, all the Objections of the Jews
may be Answered, without a particular enumeration of those Passages, which they
pretend to have been falsely applied to our Messiah in the New Testament: for
they cannot abdicate that Principle which is taken from their own Doctors, and
their Custom, lest they themselves should renounce the belief of a Messiah to
come.

Moses Bar-cepha, a Syrian Author, having considered this Truth, Sicut inter
haereticos qui contendun. minime convenire ut Veteris Testamenti scripta
mystice atque aliter quam de ipsis rebus interpretentur, graviterque accusant
eos qui contra faciunt. At qui si ita statuas, multa ut consequantur absurda
necesse est. -- obfirmabitur Manetis and Marcionis sententia, qui dicebant
Vetus Testamentum nequaquam ab auctore Deo Christi Patre esse. Praeterea nisi
in illo recondita fuerint arcana sensa, unde potuere prisci Patres, Prophetae
aliique sancti viri intelligere Christum olim venturum? -- Denique si ita cum
illis haereticis sentimus, profecto in Judaismum incidimus. Mos. Barcepha,
Comm. de Parad. part. 1. c. 3.
does put those in the number of Heretics, who allege that the Old Testament
ought not to be Mystically Explained, but only Literally, and according to the
Historical Sense. If that be so (says that Author) the Heresies of the
Manichees, and the Marcionites, are thereby set up. It cannot henceforth be
shown whence the ancient Fathers, and the Prophets, had the account which they
gave us of the coming of the Messiah. In a word, he does assure us, that that
Opinion is mere Judaism. To which it may be added, that it is mere Sadduceism:
for the true Jews are all agreed, that a Sense that is merely Literal and
Historical, separated from Tradition, cannot in any wise confirm the Articles
of their Religion.

This Principle is so true, that the Antitrinitarians, (who refuse to receive
the Traditions of the Catholics, in the Disputes betwixt them, and who do only
admit the Literal Expositions of Scripture, without any dependence on
Tradition) do plainly see themselves obliged to acknowledge some other Sense
than what is Literal, when they are to enter into the Lists with the Jews. This
does plainly appear in the Works of Socinus, Enjedine, and of some other
Unitaries. In which they give evident proofs of the inconstancy of their
Principle. They did not foresee, that whilst they framed certain Maxims against
the Catholics, they did at the same time give Authority to Sadduceism, and
Manicheism.

Faustus one of the Heroes of the Manichean Party, not finding in the Books of
Moses any Passage which he could literally understand of Jesus Christ, and
otherwise perceiving that it was in plain terms asserted in the New Testament,
that Moses had written concerning Jesus Christ, chose rather to say that the
Writings of the Evangelists had been corrupted, than to renounce his own
Principle. There was a greater Harmony manifest in his Reasonings and Maxims,
than in those of the Antitrinitarians, who received Tradition in some things
and in others did reject it. They argue against the Jews in the matters of
Religion, after another manner than against the Catholics, seeing those things
do consist in matters of Fact, they cannot be proved merely by the light of
Reason; Tradition is likewise to be consulted. And therefore, so long as the
Jews, shall with bare Reasons, oppose the Exposition of the Passages of the Old
Testament, which the Evangelists and the Apostles have cited in the New, they
cannot possibly conclude any thing against them. For it will be easily
demonstrated, that those Writers, in that matter, followed the custom and
Tradition of their Time.

The Book where the most of that sort of citations are found, is the Epistle of
St. Paul to the Hebrews, where we find nothing else but Passages of the Old
Testament, explained in a manner that is altogether Allegorical and Foreign to
the Letter; which has also given an occasion to some Writers to suspect that
St. Paul was not the Author. But it seems, on the contrary, that if we reflect
upon the Pharisees Method, in their Expounding Scripture, it cannot be
attributed to any other than to that Holy Apostle, who having Studied in
Jerusalem, under the Doctor Gamaliel, did penetrate into all the most refined
Points of their secret and mystical Interpretations of the Bible. In effect,
after I had recommended the reading of this Epistle to a Jew, who was well Read
in his own ancient Authors; he having perused it, freely declared that it must
needs have been written by some great A Man of Tradition.
Mekubal of his own Nation. And he was so far from telling me that St. Paul had
wrested the true Sense of Scripture with his Allegories at pleasure, that he
extolled his profound skill in the sublime Sense of the Bible, and always
returned to his great Mekubal, of whom he never spoke but with admiration.

Enjedine, a subtle Unitary, was so much persuaded of this Truth, that after he
had proposed the most part of those Reasons which are ordinarily objected
against the Epistle to the Hebrews, he adds Praemonemus omnia pene testimonia
and exempla quae ex Veteri Testamento huc transferuntur, non secundum historiae
veritatem and sensum, ut vocant, literalem, sed mystice and sensu spirituali
intelligi and allegorico ad Novuon Testamentum applicari and explicari. Quod
ita manifestum est, ut nisi quis hoc admittat, in absurda manifestissima
incidat. Georg. Enjed. explic. loc. Vet. and Nov. Test. explic. loc. Epist. ad
Heb.
that the most part of the Passages, which are cited in this Epistle, out of
the Old Testament, are not to be understood in a literal, but in a mystical and
spiritual Sense, otherwise it were impossible to avoid several manifest
absurdities. He does likewise suppose in another place, that this manner of
Exposition of Scripture, was then approved by the Jews, and that Jesus Christ
made use of it, when he disputed with the Pharisees, who received the same. He
brings for an example these Words of Psalm cix. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord,
etc. which Jesus Christ understood of the Messiah, and not of David, Cuod autem
Christus hoc loco usus est mystica interpretandi Scripturas forma, observavit
(...). Cum enim essent tres Judaeorum sectae, and Sadducaei solum literalem
Scripturae sensum admitterent, Pharisaei vero etiam mysticum approbarent, cum
Pharisaeis disputans arripuit hoc quod illi pro confesso and concesso habebant,
licere nimirum Scripturas mystice interpretari: and quia norat illum Psalmum
qui literaliter de Salomone, aut potius de ipso Davide est compositus, spiritu
aliter referri solere ad Messiam, ideo tam confidenter hunc Psalmum de Davide,
de Messia conscriptum esse affirmat. Quod illi negare, nisi sectae suae
renunciare vellent, non poterant. Enjed. explic. loc. Matthew.
when Christ, (says Enjedine) explained that Passage in a mystical Sense, he
did nothing but what was very pertinent: for there were three Sects amongst the
Jews at that time. The Sadducees did only receive the Literal Sense of the
Scripture. The Pharisees on the contrary, besides the Literal, did also approve
of the Mystical Sense. And therefore in his Disputing with the Pharisees, he
followed a Custom in which they were agreed, that is, of giving Mystical
Expositions to Scripture. Seeing he knew that the Psalm, which was understood
of Solomon, or rather of David, according to the Literal Sense, was ordinarily
applied to the Messiah, he freely declares that David had the Messiah in his
view, when he writ it. Which the Pharisees could not deny, unless they would
have renounced their own Sect.

This observation of Enjedine, does agree with the Principle which was formerly
established in this Discourse for answering the Jews, who accused the
Evangelists, and the Apostles, of giving false Interpretations to the Passages
of the Old Testament. I will further say, that there were certain Traditions,
which were not only received by the Pharisees, but also by the other Sects. I
reckon in the number of those Traditions, the belief of a Messiah, which it
would have been hard to prove, only by the Books of Moses. Nevertheless the
Samaritans, who owned nothing but the Pentateuch, to be Divine and Canonical
Scripture, did believe at that time, and still believe the Messiah at this day:
and the ground that they have for it, is taken from some Passages of the Law,
which appear to have another Sense, if they be Interally Expounded. Whence I
conclude, that this Spiritual and Mystical Sense, was not only in use amongst
the Pharisees, but also amongst the other Sects. Nevertheless the Pharisees had
abused it, by allowing it too great a latitude. And therefore our Lord does
sometimes reproach them, for this bad use which they had made of Traditions,
yet without condemning the Traditions themselves. The Jews Caraites also, who
very much despised the Fables that abound in the Talmud, do not absolutely
reject all the Traditions which are contained in that Book.

If the Unitaries would make a just reflection on the Principle which has
established, and which may serve as an answer to the most part of the
objections of the Jews against the Books of the Old Testament, they would not
so much insist upon the Literal Exposition of certain Passages of Scripture,
which they oppose to the Theological Expositions of the ancient Fathers. Seeing
the Jews have Authorized, by their Traditions, some Interpretations of the Old
Testament, that are in no wise Literal: the Doctors of the Church have also
used the like in their Exposition of Scripture. Interpretations of that kind
are found in all the ancient Ecclesiastical Writers. I shall content my self to
produce in this place the Testimony of an Author, who cannot be suspected by
the Unitaries. That is Theodore of Heraclea, a favourer of the Arian Party, and
who writ learned Commentaries on the Bible: but there remains nothing of them,
but some fragments in the Collections, or Chains of the Greek Fathers.

That famous Divine does establish these two sorts of Senses, viz. the Literal,
and the Theological, and he does apply them to those words of the Psalmist,
(...).
The heavens were established by the word of the Lord, and all their host by
the breath of his mouth. he does Expound Literally the word de (...), Word, by
(...), Decree; and the other words (...), the breath of his mouth, by (...),
his Power: so that according to the Literal Sense of that Passage, the World
was Created by the Will, and by the Omnipotency of God. (...). Theod. Heracl.
Cat. in Psalm. 32.
This (says Theodore) is the Sense which does here present it self: and he
does afterward add, that according to the true Theological Sense, we ought to
understand the Word of God and the Holy Ghost. We may also call that a
Theological Sense which was given to many Passages of the Old Testament, by
Jesus Christ and his Apostles; because it was agreeable to the Theology of the
Jews of those times, chiefly to that of the Pharisees, who Composed the leading
Sect, and the most received amongst the People. The Jews at this day, do
altogether follow their Opinions. The first Christians, who received the Sacred
Writings from them, have likewise imitated them in their manner of Expounding
those Books.

Michael Servetus, did also, in many places of his Works, acknowledge this
Mystical and Spiritual Sense, which he makes to go jointly with the Literal. He
does allege, that by that way Jesus Christ may be clearly found in the Books
of the Law. He thinks that there is nothing but what is Natural in the
Application that St. Paul made of these words, Psalm ci. (Thou have created the
earth from the beginning,) to Jesus Christ as the Creator of Heaven and Earth.
Which words, (says he) though in the opinion of some they have but a forced
Sense, when they are applied to Christ, yet that is the proper Sense, as the
Apostle does show, Hebr. i. He does insist somewhat long on this Subject,
Expounding in the same manner, many other Psalms, which he understands of Jesus
Christ, although it seems, that according to the Natural Sense, they ought to
be understood in general of God. The like is to be judged of other Psalms,
though they, by reason of their ignorance of Christ, do otherwise expound them.
This is no place for to examine the Consequences which Servetus does draw from
his Principle. I brought his words, only to show, that the greatest Enemies of
Tradition, are obliged in their Expositions of many Passages of Scripture to
acknowledge a Theological Sense, which can be founded on nothing but Tradition,
and common Belief, seeing they do agree that they who are ignorant of Jesus
Christ, put others Senses on the Scriptures.

Faustus Socinus did not find a more short or effectual way than this, to
answer the objections that the Jews, and other enemies of the Christian
Religion, make against the Books of the New Testament. He does suppose it to
have been constantly agreed upon Saepe Spiritus Sanctus una praedictione aut
affirmatione plura complecti voluit, idque ut semper mos praecipue
vaticinationum fuit ad rem ipsam praedictam occultandam, saltem aliqua ex
part, donec ipsa res existeret. Soc. Lect. Sac.
that the Passages of the Old Testament, that are cited in the New, have had
several Senses, it being true, especially as to the Prophesies, which
(according to his Opinion) were so Composed, that the things foretold might be
concealed till their accomplishment should happen. He further says, that we
ought not to think variety to be surprising, seeing the Jews, who opposed the
Evangelists and Apostles, do agree to it. But I question if that Unitary can
convince the Jews of this Truth, if he build on no other Principles than those
which he makes use of in his Disputing against the Catholics. Indeed to speak
exactly, there is but one (Literal) Sense of every particular Passage of
Scripture. That other Sense, which admits of a greater latitude, and which the
Christians are obliged to own, is founded on the received and warranted
traditions of the Jews. Seeing the Jews have, as well as the Catholics,
approved of Traditions of that kind, they cannot accuse the Apostles of having
wrested the true Sense of several Passages of Scripture by false
Interpretations, unless they themselves do renounce the Expositions of their
own Doctors. Let us now particularly examine some of those Passages, which the
Emperor Julian, and the Jews have objected against the Christians.

The first that presents it self, is taken from those Words of the Prophet
Esaias, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a Son, Is. vii. 14.
and thou shall call his name Emmanuel. St. Matthew has applied them to the
Messiah, who was born of a Virgin, and has rendered them after this manner.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a Son, and they shall call his
name Emmanuel. The Jews do accuse this Evangelist, of an unfaithful citation,
and also a false application of the words of the Prophet. They say first, that
the Hebrew word Alma does not signify a Virgin, as St. Matthew has rendered it,
but simply, a young Woman, whether she be a Virgin or not, which they endeavor
to prove from other places of Scripture.

St. Jerome does assure us on the contrary, that the Hebrew word Alma non solum
puella vel virgo, sed cum (...) virgo abscondita dicitur and secreta, quae
nunquam virorum patuerit aspectibus, sed magna parentum diligentia custodita
sit. Lingua quoque Punica, quae de Hebraeorum fontibus emanare dicitur, proprie
virgo alma appellatur. Hieron. Comm. in Is. lib. 3. c. 7.
Alma does properly signify a Virgin, and also a Virgin hid or shut up; and
that it has likewise that signification in the Carthaginian Language, which
derives its Original from the Hebrew. The learned observation of that Father is
very pertinent, not only to justify St. Matthew, but also to show, that in the
Septuagint, the Hebrew word Alma is very well Translated. And therefore seeing
it not necessary to prosecute this matter, with a long train of critical
observations, nor run through all the places of the Old Testament, in
particular, where this word Alma is found, it will suffice to bring against the
Jews, their own ancient Greek Version, which St. Matthew, or rather his
Interpreter, has followed. It cannot be said that those Jews, who lived so long
a time before Jesus Christ, did by a false Translation, on purpose, corrupt the
Sense of that place. The accusations with which they charge St. Matthew, fall
on those of their own Nation.

They say in the second place, that in the Hebrew, it is not (...), i.e. they
shall call, but (...), thou shall call, which does regard the young Woman, who
was to call her Son Emmanuel. St. Jerome declares, that all the ancient
Interpreters, have rendered it according to the Hebrew, thou shall call. But at
the same time does add, In multis testimoniis quae Evangelistae vel Apostoli de
libris veteribus assumpserunt curiosius attendendum est non eos verborum
ordinem secutos esse, sed sensum. Hieron.
that the Evangelists and the Apostles did not scrupulously limit themselves to
the very words of the Passages of the Old Testament, contenting themselves to
give their Sense. This is sufficient; though (...), thou shall call, is
likewise found in some Greek Copies.

As for the Sense of this Passage, the Jews pretend that it cannot be applied
to the Messiah, as St. Matthew has done it, seeing that place does make mention
of a thing that should happen very soon afterward. St. Jerome observes that
they understood it of Hezekiah, the Son of Achaz, because Samaria was invaded
under his Reign. But he does solidly refute them, by making it appear to them,
that Achaz was already far advanced in years before he came to the Kingdom. He
brings, in the same place, another Exposition of a Quidam de nostris judaizans
Esaiam Prophetam duos filios habuisse contendit, Jesub and Emmanuel; and
Emmanuel de Prophetissa uxore ejus esse generatum in typum Domini Salvatoris.
Hieron. ibid.
Christian, who (in his Opinion) did Judaize. That Author believed, that in
that place it was spoken of the Prophet Esay's Wife, who had two Children,
Jesub and Emmanuel, that the latter was the Type of Jesus Christ. But whatever
St. Jerome does say of it, I do not perceive, that there is any thing affirmed
therein, but what is altogether consonant to the Principles of the Christian
Religion, and also to those which he does elsewhere maintain. That Prophecy,
as the most part of the rest, has a double Sense: the one, which is here spoken
of, has relation to the Prophet Esay's Wife, the other, which is of a greater
latitude, and may be called Spiritual or Mystical, does point at the times of
the Messiah; and it is also in some manner Literal, because it is founded on
the Theology and Traditions of the Jews. It will be easy to answer their
objections, by supposing these two Senses: whereas if the Exposition of that
Prophecy be rigorously restrained to the Messiah, it will be more difficult to
satisfy them. Seeing this Principle is of great importance, and may be useful
for the resolution of many difficulties of this nature, it is fit to confirm it
by the Authority of the ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, and chiefly St. Jerome,
who has mentioned it in his Commentaries upon the Prophet Daniel. Porphyrius
did pretend that there is nothing in that Book but what is Historical. He
applied to Antiochus that which the Christians Expound of Antichrist, aand the
end of the World. The Christians nevertheless, did not wholly reject the
Interpretation of Porphyrius; but they affirmed that Antiochus was a Type of
Antichrist. Typum eum volunt, (says St. Jerome in speaking of the ancient
Doctors of the Church) Antichristi habere, and quae in illo ex part
praecesserint, in Antichristo ex toto esse implenda. And to make their Opinion
the more clear, he further adds this excellent Maxim: Hunc esse morem
Scripturae Sanctae, ut futurorum veritatem praemittat in typis, juxta illud
quod de Domino Salvatore in 71. Psalm dicitur, qui praenotatur Salomonis, and
omnia quae de eo dicuntur Salomoni non valent convenire. Apud Hieron. Comm. in
Dan. c. 11.
that it is usual for the Holy Scripture to describe the Truth of future things
by Types. Which he confirmed by Psalm lxxi. which is understood of Jesus
Christ, and which is nevertheless applied to Solomon, though every thing spoken
in that Psalm cannot agree to him.

Those ancient Ecclesiastical Writers did conclude from thence, that Sicut
igitur Salvator habet and Salomonem and caeteros sanctos in typum adventus sui;
sic and Antichristus pessimum Regem Antiochum qui sanctos persecutus est,
templumque violavit, recte typum sui habuisse credendus est. Hieron. ibid.
seeing Jesus Christ had Solomon, and other Saints of the Old Testament for
Types; we ought likewise to believe, that Antichrist had Antiochus for a Type;
he having been a very wicked King, who persecuted the Saints, and violated the
Temple. St. Jerome does explain the Prophecy of Daniel according to those two
Senses: and seeing in that he cannot be charged with having favored the
impieties of Porphyrius, who alleged that the Book of Daniel was not so
ancient as the Jews and Christians did pretend; those cancot be accused of
Judaism, who received a part of the Expositions that the Jews have given of the
Prophesies, and who do withal, (with the Evangelists and Apostles, apply them
to the Messiah in a larger Sense.

CHAP. XXII. A particular Examination of many Passages of the Old Testament,
cited by the Apostles in a sense that seems to be altogether Foreign. Some
difficulties formed against their Writings are cleared; some Principles are
established, which may Answer the Objections of the Jews, and the Emperor
Julian.
AS it would require much time, so it is of no use, to explain here all the
Passages of the Old Testament, which the Evangelists and the Apostles have
cited in their Writings, because Commentators may be consulted thereupon,
especially Maldonat and Grotius, who commonly follow the Principle that we have
already established. That Principle did appear so much the more reasonable, as
being equally founded on a joint suffrage of the Jews and Christians: Seeing I
design to give general Rules, for answering the Objections of the Jews, against
the Books of the New Testament, it is sufficient, if I only take notice of some
of those citations, by which means these Rules may be the more manifest.

One of the places that are most difficult to be reconciled, is the Passage of
the Prophet Micah, which is cited in the eleventh Chap. of St. Matthew, v. 6.
Quod testimonium nec Hebraico nec Septuaginta Interpretibus convenire, me
quoque tacente, perspicuum est. Hieron. lib. 2. in Mic. c. 5.
St. Jerome does assure us, that it is as clear as the day, that it does
neither agree with the Hebrew Text, nor with the Greek of the Septuagint. He
brings at the same time, the Opinion of some Authors, who believed Sunt autem
qui asserant in omnibus pene testimoniis quae de Veteri Testamento sumuntur,
istiusmodi esse errorem, ut aut ordo mutetur, aut verba, and interdum sensus
quoque ipse diversus sit, vel Apostolis vel Evangelistis non ex libro
carpentibus testimonia, sed memoriae credentibus quae nonnunquam fallitur.
Hieron. ibid.
that the Evangelists and Apostles were not at all exact in their citations,
because they trusted to their memory: But seeing this Answer does rather
destroy than establish the truth of the Gospels, he has recourse to another
solution. He says, that they are the Jewish Doctors, who speak in that place;
so that St. Matthew intending to show, that those Doctors neglected the study
of the Scripture, has cited that Passage in the same manner as they had
delivered it. But it does not at all appear, that the Evangelist meant to
accuse them of ignorance.

Yet it cannot be denied, but that they were Jews who spoke to Herod, to whom
we ought consequently to impute the citation of that Passage of Micah. St.
Matthew as an Historian, does only report that which passed betwixt Herod and
the Principal Doctors of the Jews. That Prince did ask them, where their
Messiah should be Born; they made Answer, that he should be Born in Bethlehem,
of the Tribe of Juda; and they proved it by that Passage of the Prophet Micah,
and thou Bethlehem in the Land of Judah, art not the least amongst the Princes
of Judah, for out of thee a Governor shall come, who shall rule my People
Israel. If this is not a faithful citation, the error ought not to be imputed
to St. Matthew, but to the Jewish Doctors who spoke it. Was it possible (they
may say) that all the Learned Men who were in Jerusalem at that time, should be
deceived in citing a Passage that was so well known to them? Ought they not to
have reported it, as it is in the Hebrew Text, where we read that Bethlehem is
a little City? On the contrary the Doctors affirmed, in St. Matthew, that it
was not a little one.

Some Commentators have endeavored to reconcile this contradiction, by
supposing the Jews to have read that place with an Interrogation: And the truth
is, seeing there are no marks in the Hebrew for such Interrogations; it may be
expounded in that sense, without changing the Prophetical Text; which it were
easy to confirm by many Examples from the Writings of the Jews. Gabriel
Sionita has also translated the Syriack in that place, with an Interrogation,
though it be wholly agreeable to the Hebrew. Tertullian and St. Cyprian did
likewise read non, in the ancient Latin Version, as if it were to be read in
the Greek of the Septuagint, (...), Orig. lib. 1. cont. Cells.
which Reading is confirmed by Origin: Nevertheless, it might have so been,
that St. Matthew's rendition instead of the reading of the Prophet, was put in
those Writers, or that they themselves did cite the words of Micah, as they are
in St. Matthew: St. Jerome, in his ancient Version, read modica es, thou art
little, without a negation, agreeable to the Hebrew Text.

Mr. Pocock found another way of reconciling those two places, without having
recourse to an interrogation: He does allege, that the Hebrew word (...) which
is in the Prophet Micah; and which is ordinarily interpreted small, does in
that place signify great, because it does equally signify both. And this he
does likewise prove by the testimony of some Rabbis; and it may be further
proved by the ancient Greek Interpreters. It Is probable that the Jewish Doctors
reported that Passage to King Herod, according to the exposition it received in
the Glosses of that time, which were read to the People, without keeping to the
words of their Text, which was only understood by the Learned. That which
confirms me in this Opinion, is, that instead of these words, and thou
Bethlehem Ephrata, or as it is in the Septuagint, Bethlehem the House of
Ephrata, they put these words, which were more known at that time, and thou
Bethlehem in the Land of Judah.

There is likewise read in the Hebrew, and in the Septuagint, amongst the
Thousands of Judah, and in St. Matthew, amongst the Princes of Judah: This
different Interpretation does proceed from this, that the same Hebrew word that
is in the Prophet, may be interpreted both ways, according to the different
vowels, or rather according to the caprice of the Transcribers, who did add or
take away at their pleasure, the letter vau, in which the difference of
interpretation does consist. The Scribes did read it with the letter vau (...),
aluphe, whereas the Septuagint read it, as it is at this day amongst the Jews,
in the Hebrew of the Masorets (...) alphe. There is nothing more ordinary in
the Hebrew Manuscript Copies of the Bible, than this kind of alteration: And
therefore, when it does occur, the sense is rather to be regarded than the
manner wherein the Hebrew words are written. The Jews of that time, expounded
that Passage of Micah, as if it had been in the Hebrew Text, (...), aluphe,
with the letter vau.

St. Jerome, endeavoring to justify the liberty he took, in giving more heed
to the sense than words, did produce this Passage of the Prophet Micah, to
show, that it is quite otherwise in the Hebrew and in the Septuagint, than in
St. Matthew. He adds withal, Haec replico, non ut Evangelistas arguam
falsitatis, hoc quippe impiorum est Celsi, Porphyrii and Juliani; sed ut
reprehensores meos arguam imperitiae, and impetrem ab eis veniam, ut concedant
mihi in simplici epistola quod in Scripturis Sanctis velint nolint Apostolis
concessuri sunt. Hieron. de opt. genesis interp. ad Pammach.
that he did not, by that answer, charge the Evangelists with falsehood; as
Celsus, Porphyrius and the Emperor Julian had done; but to convince his
Adversaries of ignorance, and to show them, that he might in one single Letter,
take the same liberty that the Apostles had taken in Translating the Sacred
Writings. It seems, that that Learned Father, does here attribute to St.
Matthew, what he attributed to the Jewish Doctors, in his Commentaries upon the
Prophet Micah: However, it is more to the purpose, that we reconcile those two
different Interpretations, by having recourse to the Fountain, then by
increasing the difficulty.

St. Matthew applied to the Messiah, in the same Chapter of his Gospel, the
words of the Prophet Hosea, Out of Egypt I have called my Son: It is evident,
that the Prophet speaks of the People of Israel, whom God calls his Son. Answer
may be made to this Objection of the Jews, that that People was a Type of the
Messiah, to whom, that which was spoken of Israel, in a literal sense, might,
according to the custom of that time, be applied in a Mystical and Spiritual
sense. See Maldonat in his Commentary on this place of St. Matthew, where that
Learned Jesuit does, at the same time, establish solid Principles, for the
exposition of the most part of the Prophetical Texts, that have been cited by
the Evangelists and the Apostles. He does judiciously observe, that a Prophecy
is reckoned to be accomplished, not only when it is truly, and in the Letter
fulfilled, but also, when the thing which is figuratively signified by the
words, is accomplished: He brings St. Paul for an example, who, in his Epistle
to the Hebrews, Chap. 1. has applied to the Messiah, that which is spoken of
Solomon in the second Book of Samuel, Chap. 7. v. 14. I will be his Father, and
he shall be my Son. And the same may be said of the Prophecy of Hosea. Populus
ille in Aegypto exulans Christi ibidem exulaturi figura dici potest; sicut nunc
corpus mystieum Ecclesiae corporis naturalis Christi figura est; and Christus
populo in eo similis est, quod uterque Dei filius appelletur. Mald. Comm. in c.
2. Matthew. v. 15.
The People of Israel (says Maldonat) in the time of their exile in Egypt, may
be said to be a figure of Jesus Christ, who was also to be there in Exile; as
at this day, the Mystical Body of the Church, is a Figure of the natural Body
of the same Jesus Christ, who is like to Israel in this; that both the one and
the other is called the Son of God.

The Jews could not deny this Mystical and Spiritual sense, which is founded on
Theology and their Ancient Doctors, and whereof there are Examples in the most
part of their Writings: And therefore, all that they object against the Authors
of the New Testament, does fall on their own heads, seeing the Evangelists and
Apostles have only imitated them. In their application of the Prophecies to the
Messiah; they followed a Method which was approved by the Jews, especially by
the Pharisees. All that does remain of the Jews in the World (if we except the
Jews Caraites, who are in a very small number) derive their original from the
Pharisees, who, besides the Literal and Historical sense of Scripture, do
acknowledge a Sublime and Mystical sense: Whence it is, that those senses are
frequently to be found in the Commentaries of their Rabbis.

Origin, in his Writings against Celsus, maintained with all his might that
sublime sense of the Prophecies: He calls that sense a Mystical Theory of the
Prophets, (...). He says, (...), etc. Orig. lib. 2. cont. Cells.
that the Prophets did not confine their thoughts to the Historical sense,
which came first in view; nor to the Words and bare Letter of the Law. He does
moreover establish this general Rule (...). Orig. lib. 2. cont. Cells.
that the predictions of the Prophets, concerning the Messiah are different,
some being Enigmatical, and others Allegorical, or of some other sort, there
being also some of them that are Literal. It will suffice, as an Answer to the
Jews, (who, in their disputes against the Christians, do very much insist on
the Literal and Historical sense of the Prophecies,) to bring that which
Origin, upon the like occasion answered Celsus; who brought in a Jew speaking
in his Writings. He does reproach him, (...). Orig. ibid.
that he does not make the Jew speak pertinently, and according to the
Character he had given him, because he put such words in his mouth as did agree
rather to a Samanitane or Sadducee, than to a true Jew.

I always followed this Method, when at any time I met with such Jews, as
impugned the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, in the manner as I have
already shown: For, perceiving that they were pressed by the very Principles of
their own Doctors; they never returned me any Answer but this, that the
Mystical and Allegorical Interpretations of their Ancient Masters, gave a great
advantage to the Christian Religion. When I asked them, if they would renounce
the Principles of their Rabbis, to embrace those of the Sadducees, or even of
the Caraites; they declared to me, that they had a very great aversion to Men
of that stamp. This way is to be taken in our disputes with the Jews about
Religion: They are mightily puzzled, when ever this Method is employed against
them; because we fight against them with the same Arms that they themselves
make use of, against the Sectaries whom we have already mentioned.

To return to the testimonies of the Prophets, that are cited in the New
Testament; St. Matthew has, in the same second Chapter of his Gospel, applied
to the Messiah, that which is written in Jeremiah, Chap. 31. which seems to
have no such meaning, if it be expounded literally. A voice was heard in Rama,
a voice of lamentation and great weeping; Rachel weeping for her Children, and
would not be comforted, because they are not. Hebraei de abductione duarum
tribuum Judae and Benjamin interpretantur; nec dubium est ex circumstantiis
Jeremiae, quin de illis intelligatur, and per Rachelem tota regio duarum
tribuum significetur. Mald. Comm. in c. 2. Matthew. v. 18.
The Jews, Jerem. 31.15.
(as Maldonat affirms) in their exposition of this Passage of Jeremy, apply it
to the carrying away of the two Tribes; and there is no doubt but that is the
true sense, and that by Rachel, all the Cities of those two Tribes are to be
understood.

If it be so, the Jews may say, why has your Evangelist expounded it of the
murder of the Children, that happened upon the occasion of your Messiah? It Is
easy to make Answer, that as to that, there is nothing that is extraordinary,
and which is not agreeable to the expositions of their own Authors. Aderas, (to
use their own terms) or an Allegorical sense, does very well agree to the
murder of those Infants: The similitude that was between those two Events, gave
an occasion to St. Matthew, to apply that which had been already accomplished
in the time of the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin. This was observed by Crellius,
after Maldonat, referuntur a Matthaeo, (says that Unitary,) ad caedem
Infantium Bethlehemiticorum propter rei similitudinem, quia id quod olim quidem
impletum fuit in aliis, in illis infantibus impletum fuit. Faustus Socinus,
(who also believed, that the Jews stood upon the literal sense of that Passage
of Jeremy) observed, that Tremellius and Junius alleged, that it could not be
understood literally, any other way than according to St. Matthew's
Interpretation. Verum nulla hic est absurditas, si duplici sensu intelligantur
praedictiones Veteris Testamenti esse prolatae. Imo hoc videtur proprium and
consentaneum praedictionibus esse. Soc. Lect. Sac.
But in that (says he) there is no absurdity, if two senses be admitted in the
Prophecies of the Old Testament: It does also appear, that it is proper and
agreeable to those Prophecies. The truth is, if those two senses be not owned,
we shall give an occasion to the Jews to accuse the Evangelists and the
Apostles, for having falsely applied the Ancient Prophecies.

We find in the same Chapter of St. Matthew, another citation out of the
Prophets, in general, which seems to be more Foreign, than any that has been
yet taken notice of. That Evangelist says, that, Jesus came and dwelt in a
City called Nazareth, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
Prophet, he shall be called a Nazarene. Seeing he named no Prophet in
particular, the difficulty is to know, what Prophet it was who foretold that
the Messiah should be called a Nazarene. St. John Chrysostom, who had not
observed those words in any of the Prophets, did believe, (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 9.
in Matthew.
that we ought not to involve our selves in the trouble of an endless search,
because there have been several Books of the Prophets lost, which may be proved
(as he says) by the History of the Chronicles. The Author of the Imperfect Work
on St. Matthew, does observe, that the Evangelist does not say, Dum dicit per
Prophetas, non per Prophetam, manifestat quod non certam auctoritatem Prophetae
protulerit, sed sensum Prophetarum colligens dixit, aut forte legerunt alios
Prophetas ita dicentes qui non sunt nobis canonizati. Auct. Op. imp. in c. 2.
Matthew.
per Prophetam, by a Prophet, but per Prophetas, by the Prophets; to signify,
that he did not mean the testimony of any Prophet in particular, but only, that
it might be gathered from the Prophets in general. He adds afterward, that
there were probably at that time, other Prophetical Books; which were not
placed in the Canon of the Sacred Writings. The ground of this Answer seems to
be, that St. Jerome has in his Works, made mention of some other Prophetical
Books than those we have at this day, and which were read by the Nazarene
Sectaries, who came from the first Christians of Jerusalem, who were also
called Nazarenes, for whom St. Matthew writ his Gospel.

Nevertheless that Father had no recourse to this solution, in his Commentaries
upon this place, where he plainly affirms the same thing with the Author of the
Imperfect Work, viz. That St. Matthew Pluraliter Prophetas vocans ostendit se
non verba de Scripturis sumpsisse, sed sensum. Nazaraeus sanctus interpretatur.
Sanctum autem Dominum futurum omnis Scriptura commemorat. Hieron. lib. 1. Comm.
in Matthew. c. 2.
having cited the Prophets in general, intended to show, that he made no
mention of the words of any one in particular, but only of the sense: But
seeing the word Nazarene does signify Holy, the Scripture does declare
throughout, that the Lord should be Holy. He does yet subjoyn another more
particular explication, and which appeared to be more probable, as being
founded on a Passage of the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 11. v. 1. Possumus and aliter
dicere, quod etiam eisdem verbis juxta Hebraicam veritatem in Esaia scriptum
sit, Exiet virga de radice Jesse, and Nazaraeus de radice ejus ascendet.
Hieron. ibid.
And there shall come forth a Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, and a Nazarene
(vulg. Branch) shall grow out of his Roots. I make no Question, but that the
Jews will condemn this Translation of the words of Esaias, as well as St.
Matthew's citation, because it is not in the Hebrew, Nazaraeus, Nazarene, as
St. Jerome has rendered it, but netser, which does signify a flower; as he
himself had expounded it in the Version of that Prophet. He likewise observed
in his Commentary upon this place of Esaias, that the Hebrew word which does
signify Nazarene, is written with the letter zain, and that in this place, it
is written with a (...) tsade, where it does signify a flower.

This critical Observation of St. Jerome, upon the 11. Chap. of the Prophet
Esaias, seems to destroy what he had observed in his Commentary upon the 2. Chap.
of St. Matthew: The truth is, 'twas the custom of that Learned Father, in his
Commentaries upon the Scripture, rather to report that which he had read in
other Commentators, than to establish an opinion of his own. And therefore,
it is not surprising if we sometimes do find opposite opinions therein:
Nevertheless his Learning does afford us great help, for finding out the sense
of the most difficult Passages of the Sacred Writings. The Opinion of those who
believed that St. Matthew, in that place, had cited the Passage of Chap. 11. of
the Prophet Esaias, seems, in my opinion to be the most probable. It Is very
likely, that St. Jerome did apply it to the Nazarenes, when he says, in his
Commentary upon that Prophet, that the Learned amongst the Jews took it from
that place: Eruditi Hebraeorum de hoc loco assumptum putant. Those Hebrews are
the Sect of the Nazarenes, who were called Hebrews, and who were so in effect:
Seeing they read the Gospel of St. Matthew in the Chaldee or Syriack, the
allusion to the Hebrew word netser, that is in Esaias, is better known in their
Copy than in the Greek; and it was also better perceived by those who had the
Hebrew and Chaldaick Languages.

That we make a right judgment hereof, that Passage of St. Matthew ought to be
read in the Syriack Version, which in that place, should not differ from the
Original Chaldee of St. Matthew: But the Syrians do read these two words,
Nazareth and Nazarene alike, with the letter (...) tsade. And after this manner
they ought in effect, to be read in St. Matthew; who intended not to signify
the Nazarites of the Old Testament, whose name is written with a (...) zain. He
made a bare allusion, according to the method of that time, to the Hebrew word
netser of Esaias, which does signify a flower, and which is written with a (...)
tsade, as well as that of the City Nazareth. It Is of importance carefully to
observe, that the Jews do agree with the Christians; that that Passage of Esaias,
which speaks of that flower, called in Hebrew netser, is understood of the
Messiah. Which being known at that time to all the World, St. Matthew, (who
wrote in the Chaldee, for the Jews of Jerusalem then newly converted, who were
accustomed to expositions of that nature) made an allusion to this Hebrew word
netser or flower.

It Is but consulting the Jewish Talmud, their Book entitled Zohar, and their
Ancient Medraschim, or Allegorical Commentaries; for we may there find the like
Interpretations of Scripture to be extant, founded on bare allusions, and
similitudes, not only of words, but even of letters. If the Jews could but
seriously reflect on all these considerations, they would not brand, with the
title of either false or ridiculous, the citation of St. Matthew; who has (say
they) perverted the words of the Prophet Esaias, to apply them to their Messiah.
For, seeing that Evangelist, writing for Jews who were enclining to embrace the
Religion of Jesus Christ, did follow the custom and usage that obtained at that
time amongst them: Unless we go back to that ancient custom; we shall meet with
great difficulties in the most part of the Passages of the Old Testament, which
the Evangelists and Apostles have cited in their Writings, for the confirmation
of their own Sentiments.

We ought to pursue this Method, for answering the Jews solidly; we are to
represent to them the course their Fathers took, which, unless they renounce
their Religion, they cannot reject. This Principle also may serve for the
refutation of Julian's impious charge, Apud Cyril. lib. 7. adv. Jul.
who accused the Christians for having abandoned the Law and the Prophets;
although they made a profession of following them: He likewise reproached them
for their boldness in calling themselves Israelites, having (as he alleged) a
Doctrine altogether opposite to that of Moses and the Ancient Prophets. Apud
Cyril. lib. 8. adv. Jul.
But it is easy to convince him, that the Christians are truly Israelites,
since they have neither renounced the Law nor the Prophets, although sometimes
they do expound them in a Mystical and Spiritual sense, such an exposition, as
has been said, is not contrary to the Doctrine of the Ancient Jews.

That Emperor, seeing he owned no other sense of the Books of Moses, but an
Historical and Literal, did object against the Christians; that those words of
Deuteronomy, Chap. 18. v. 15. The Lord shall raise up a Prophet like unto me,
could not be understood of Jesus the Son of Mary; seeing Moses does expressly
speak (...). Julian. apud Cyr. ibid.
of a Prophet, who was to be a Man as he was, and not the Son of God. It is
true, Act. c. 3. v. 22. c. 7. v. 37.
that St. Peter and St. Stephen applied to Jesus Christ, that Passage of
Deuteronomy, which is literally understood of Joshua, who was to succeed to
Moses, and also of other Judges and Prophets, who have been in the Commonwealth
of the Hebrews. But if those Judges and Prophets were the Types of the Messiah,
why does he oppose the application of the same words to him according to a
Sublime and Spiritual Sense, of which we have already spoken, seeing the
Rabbis do frequently make the like applications.

By the Principles that we have established, it will be very easy to resolve
the most part of the other Objections which the Jews do raise against the
Citations which are found throughout the Books of the New Testament. The
Apostles, who did exactly follow the Expositions which were in use in their
time, have observed the same method, almost through all their Writings. The
Jews could not oppose them without destroying their own Principles, and
favoring at the same time the Sadducees. According to this method St. Matthew
applied to St. John the words of the Prophet Esaias, The voice of one crying in
the wilderness, make straight the way of the Lord. It is manifest that the
Evangelist did, by a deras, or Spiritual and Allegorical Sense, Expound that
which we ought to understand Literally, and Historically of the returning of
the Jews from their Captivity out of Babylon to Jerusalem.

Besides all those observations which serve as Principles for answering the
Objections of the Jews, and the Emperor Julian, this is likewise remarkable,
that there are many words in the New Testament, which have a larger Sense than
in the Old, which can be only attributed to the Custom of that time, and to a
Tradition received amongst the Jews. There is nothing in the Books of Moses,
that does afford us any clear discovery of the state of a future Life, which
the Jews do call olam habba, i.e. The World to come,, there is no manifest
Record in the ancient Law, of a Heaven or a Hell, any more than there is of a
Recompense to the Just, and Punishment to the Wicked in that other Life.
Neither have they proper words to express those things; they are obliged to
make use of Metaphorical terms. The word Gehenna, for example, which is taken
from the Hebrew Gehennam, has quite another Sense in the Books of the Old
Testament, than in the New, where it does signify the Fire of Hell. Which made
St. Jerome say Nomen gehennae in veteribus libris non invenitur, sed primum a
Salvatore ponitur. Hieron. Comm. in Matthew.
that he does not find the word Gehenna in ancient Books; that Jesus Christ is
the first who used it. Yet this does not prove that he was in effect the first
that used it in that Sense, as it is in the New Testament; for it was before
that time in use amongst the Jews, in the same very Sense, and especially
amongst the Pharisees. St. Jerome meant no more than this, that he did not find
it, in the Old Testament, under that signification, although their Paraphrasts,
and their most ancient Rabbis used it in the same Sense as Jesus Christ did
afterward.

The Hebrew word Sceol will come under the same consideration, for in the
Hebrew of the Old Testament, it does signify a Sepulcher; it is almost every
where in the Septuagint, rendered (...), Hell, as if they had frequently
intended to signify by that word, a subterranean place, where Souls are after
their separation from the Body. St. Peter in the Acts of the Apostles, does
Expound of the Messiah, according to that Sense, the words of Psalm xv. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption.
Which Passage is Literally understood of David, who said to God that he would
not suffer his Enemies to take away his Life: and thus the Hebrew words Sceol
and Scahat, according to the former Sense, do signify Literally a Sepulcher,
and a Ditch. But according to the Spiritual and Mystical Sense, which St. Peter
gives to this Psalm that he applies to the Messiah, whose Type David was, the
Greek words (...) and (...) which he took from the ancient Version of the
Septuagint, do signify in the Acts of the Apostles, Hell and Corruption. The
Application that the Apostle made of the words of that Psalm, to the
Resurrection of the Messiah, does contain nothing but what is agreeable to the
belief of the Jews of that time, who believed the Resurrection of the dead.
They further acknowledged a subterranean place, to which Souls do go after
their separation from the Body. Without a due regard to all these
considerations, it is impossible to understand the New Testament.

Therefore it is to be supposed as a thing constantly agreed upon, that the
Jews, in the time of our Savior and the Apostles, believed many things,
whereof they had no Literal proofs in all the Old Testament, being only founded
on their Traditions. And the Writings of the Evangelists and the Apostles,
ought to be Expounded with a relation to this Idea of the Jewish Faith, and not
to that which may be conceived of their belief, with a reference to the Books
of the Old Testament only; because those Books contain but one part of their
Religion, the other part being comprehended in their Traditions. The Jews do
own this Principle. The Jews, even the Caraites, who do mightily oppose the
Traditions of the Talmudists, which had degenerated into Fables, have preserved
those which they believed to be founded on sufficient Records.

The ancient Heretics, who did not weigh all these considerations, did rather
choose to deny the truth of the Books of the New Testament, and say, that in
after times there were interpolations made therein, than to attribute to the
Apostles such things as they did not understand. It is upon this supposed
ground that the Manichees, (who found no express Passages in the Law of Moses,
that made mention of Jesus Christ,) rejected as false, all those Places of the
Pentateuch, that were applied to him in the New Testament. They did not
consider that at the time of Christ and the Apostles, there was a Mystical and
Spiritual Sense approved of by all the Jews, some Sadducees possibly excepted.
And with respect to this Sense, the Writings of the Evangelists and the
Apostles are to be Expounded.

And therefore they deceive themselves, who pretend that there ought to be a
Literal Sense in all the Citations of the Apostles, especially in those which
they bring in for Proofs. It is true, that a Passage of Scripture taken
Allegorically, cannot serve for a Proof; but we speak here of such Allegorical
Senses as were received, and which were also founded on Traditions that were
warranted by Authority. They were therefore permitted to apply them to their
Discourse, and likewise to draw such Consequences from them as might promote
their design, in the same manner as the Pharisees made use of them in their
Disputes against the Sadducees. Those Allegorical Senses prove nothing for
their own confirmation, but suppose a belief already established, upon which
they were founded.

It is probable that Theodore de Mopsueste, Expounded the Psalms and the
Prophesies according to this Method, and that he had regard to nothing, when he
was condemned as a favourer of the Jews, but the Literal and Historical Sense,
which he gave to those ancient Prophesies. They will not consider the
Application he made thereof, with the whole Church, to the Messiah, according
to a Spiritual and Mystical Sense. If we believe Facundus, there is no justice
done to that great Man, who had a perfect knowledge of the Sacred Writings. Eum
dicunt evacuasse omnes in Christum factas Prophetias, quod Manichaeorum erroris
est. Fac. pro def. tri. cap. Conc. Calc. lib. 9. c. 1.
They accused him of destroying the Prophesies that related to Jesus Christ, by
an error like to that of the Manichees. But he shows the falsehood of this
accusation, by producing the very words of Theodore, taken out of his
Commentaries upon the Psalms. Quod autem (says Facundus) nec evacuet omnes in
Christum prophetias palam est quia rursus in ejusdem Psalmi expositione dicit,
etc. Whence he concludes, Non ergo Theodorus Judaicae impietatis arguendus est,
tanquam hominem putaverit Christum, cum potius Judaeos irrideat. Fac. ibid.
That it was hard to make Theodore pass for an impious person, who believed
with the Jews that Jesus Christ was a mere Man, seeing he vigorously defended
the contrary. This is no place to inquire if Theodore was unjustly condemned,
as Facundus does assure us. I have only made mention of the Passage that I
might show, that great Men have of a long time acknowledged two Senses of
Scripture, as we have already made evident.

It is certain that the Christian Religion is founded on that of the Jews. The
Christians have this in common with them, that they adore the same God, and
that they believe a Messiah promised in the Writings of the Old Testament;
which they receive equally. And therefore the Christians who Expound those
Writings in a Literal and Historical Sense, cannot be blamed, as if they
favored Judaism, in exclusion of the Christian Religion, seeing they
acknowledged a second Sense, called Spiritual and Mystical, which they apply to
the Messiah. This latter Sense is the same that the Jews call deras. In a word,
it is impossible to arrive at a perfect knowledge of the Christian Religion,
and the Principles upon which it is established, so long as that of the Jews is
not known, to which the former does owe its Original.

Celsus, Porphyrius, Julian, and the Jews have brought some other Objections
against the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles. The Principal is that
which is drawn from the Genealogy of Jesus Christ, Recorded in a different
manner by St. Matthew and St. Luke. They allege, that besides that these two
Evangelists do not agree, they have delivered manifest falsities. But this
aspersion has been so clearly wiped off, by many Commentators upon the New
Testament, and also in the Volumes that purposely have been written for that
end, that it is needless to insist on it. I shall only observe in general, that
it is easy to make answer to the Jews, upon such objections as are drawn from
Genealogies. When they bring against the Christians, the difference that is
betwixt our Evangelists and the Books of the Old Testament, their Mouths will
be stopped, if we show them, that there is no less in this matter betwixt the
Chronicles, which they attribute to Esdras, and the rest of the Historical
Writings of the Old Testament. Their Rabbis, who could not reconcile things
that appeared so remote from one another, are forced to own, that the same
Genealogies, which are written in a different manner, were taken out of Records
that did likewise differ. And may not we also affirm, that the Evangelists
Collected the Genealogy of Jesus Christ out of such Records as were amongst the
Jews at that time, but are not extant at this day? And therefore it is better
to leave the things as they are, than to judge rashly of them, or correct that
Genealogy upon bare conjectures.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Inspiration of the Books of the New Testament. A
Refutation of the Opinion of Grotius and Spinosa. The Cardinal of Perron has
given a very bad Exposition of the Words of the second Epistle of St. Paul to
Timothy, Chap. 3. v. 16. which makes mention of this Inspiration. The Disputes
betwixt the Jesuits of Louvain, and the Divines of the same place, upon this
matter. Three Propositions of the Jesuits Censured by the Doctors of Louvain
and Douay. A Defense of those Propositions against the Censure of those Divines.
I Have Treated elsewhere of the Inspiration of the Sacred Writings in general.
But seeing I only Treated of them occasionally, and by way of Answer to some
Objections which were brought against the Critical History of the Old
Testament, I shall here Handle it more particularly, with respect to the
Writings of the Evangelists and the Apostles. It is the common Belief of the
Jews, that the Books of the Old Testament were written by Persons who were
Inspired: which Belief was transmitted from the Jews to the Christians. Upon
which occasion Origin affirmed (...). Orig. lib. 5. cont. Cells.
that both the one and the other did equally acknowledge, that the Sacred
Scripture was written by the Spirit of God.

The Christians have also extended that Inspiration to the Books of the New
Testament. There are but very few Critics who are of the Opinion, that there
is nothing of Inpiration in Scripture, but only in that part of it that was
Composed by the Prophets. They say the Historical Books were not inspired,
because (as they allege) it is not necessary for him that writes History, to
be a Prophet. Grotius is of that Opinion, in his Book Entitled, Votum pro pace
Ecclesiastica; Si Lucas divino afflatu dictante sua scripsisset, inde potius
sibi sumpsisset auctoritatem, ut Prophetae faciunt, quam a testibus quorum
fidem est secutus. Sic in iis quae Paulum agentem vidit scribendis nullo ipsi
dictante afflatu opus. Quid ergo est cur Lucae libri sint canonici? Quia pie
and fideliter soriptos, and de rebus momenti ad salutem maximi Ecclesia
primorum temporum judicavit. Grot. Vot. pro Pac. Eccl. tit. de Can. Script.
If St. Luke, (says that Critic) had been Inspired by God, when he writ his
History, he would rather have made use of that Inspiration, by the example of
the Prophets, than the Authority of those whom he takes for Witnesses of his
faithfulness. He had no need, (he further says) of any Inspiration for writing
the Actions of St. Paul, of which he himself was a Witness. Whence he does
conclude, that the Writings of St. Luke are Canonical, not because they were
Inspired, but because the Primitive Church did Judge that they were written by
godly Men, with great faithfulness, and Treat of things that are of very great
importance to our Salvation. He does repeat the same thing elsewhere, in his
Works against Rivetus, who opposed that Opinion as being impious. He does there
affirm, Neque Esdras neque Lucas Prophetae fuere, sed viri graves and
prudentes, qui nec fallere vellent, nec falli se sinerent. Dixitne Lucas,
Factum est ad Lucam verbum Domini; and dixit ei Dominus, Scribe? Grot. Riv.
Apolog. discuss. page 723.
that Esdras and St. Luke were not Prophets, but Grave and Prudent Men, who
would neither deceive others, nor be deceived themselves. He does further
affirm, That St. Luke does not say in the Prophetical Style, The word of the
Lord came unto Luke, that the Lord did not say to him, Write.

Spinosa did exactly follow the Opinion of Grotius; which he has explained more
at large in his Book, Entitled Tractatus Theologico-Politicus; where he does
not indeed deny, but that the Apostles were Prophets, but he affirms Dubitare
possumus number Apostoli tanquam Prophetae ex revelatione and expresso mandato, ut
Moses, Jeremias and alii, an vero ut privati, vel Doctores, Epistolas
scripserint. Spin. Tract. Theol. polit. c. 11.
that it may be doubted, if they writ their Books in the quality of Prophets,
by the express command of God inspiring them, as Moses, Jeremy, and others had
done. He does allege, that Si ad eorum stilum attendere volumus, eum a stilo
Prophetiae alienissimum inveniemus. Nam Prophetis usitatissimum erat ubique
testari se ex Dei edicto loqui, nempe, Sic dicit Deus, Ait Deus exercituum,
Edictum Dei, and c. Atque hoc non tantum videtur locum habuisse in publicis
Prophetarum concionibus, sed etiam in Epistolis quae revelationes continebant.
Spin. ibid.
if we judge of the Works of the Apostles by their Style, we shall find that
they writ as particular Doctors, and not as Prophets, because they have nothing
that is Prophetical. Which he does prove by the same way of reasoning, as
Grotius. It is (says he) the custom of the Prophets, to declare through all
their Writings, that they spoke by God's order; and they have observed that,
not only in their Prophecies, but in their Letters which contain revelations.

This Opinion of Grotius and Spinosa, has been lately renewed in two Letters,
Published in a Treatise, Entitled, The Opinions of some Divines of Holland upon
the Critical History of the Old Testament. Seeing I have given a sufficient
Answer to those two Letters, and also to the new Explications thereof, which
have been since published; it is to no purpose to repeat here what has been said
elsewhere: We shall only observe in general, that those Men do deceive
themselves, whilst they will not own any Inspiration, but that of the
Prophecies. It is true, that the manner of writing a History, and Letters is
not the same as writing Prophecies; And therefore, these words ( The word of
God that came to Luke) do not begin the History of St. Luke or any other
Evangelist. The Books of Moses, Joshua, and in a word, all the Historical Books
of the Old Testament, are not written in that Style which Grotius does call
Prophetical: Yet Josephus and all the Ancient Jews call them Prophetical,
believing that they were given by Divine Inspiration.

It Is not necessary, for a Book's being inspired, that it should be indicted by
God, word for word. The false Idea that those Authors have conceived of the
Inspiration of the Sacred Writings, made them embrace an opinion which is
contrary to all Antiquity, as well Judaical as Christian. Jesus Christ, who
promised to his Apostles; that the Spirit of God should guide them in all the
functions of their Ministry, did not therefore, deprive them of their Reason
and Memory: Although they were inspired, they continued to be Men still, and
managed their Affairs as other Men. I freely own, that there was no need of
Inspiration, to put in record such matters of Fact, whereof they themselves
were Witnesses. But this does not hinder, but that they were directed by the
Spirit of God in all that they put in Writing, so as not to fall into error.

It is certain, that all the Ancient Ecclesiastical Writers did acknowledge
this Inspiration of the Evangelists and Apostles. Nevertheless they speak of
their care, and exactness in penning their Works, in the same manner, as they
speak of other Writers, who are not inspired. Can Grotius conclude from thence,
that those Ancient Doctors of the Church did not believe, that the Books of the
New Testament were given by Divine Inspirations. This he cannot do, seeing
those very Doctors have clearly maintained it. We need but call to mind what
has been said in the 10th Chap. concerning the Opinion of Papias, who was
contemporary with the Disciples of the Apostles: He does assure us, that if
that Evangelist, did not observe in his History, the order of things as to
their Event, that he was not in the least to be blamed for that; because he
made mention of the things according as he remembered them, not being so careful
to relate them in their order, as he was, to say nothing but what was Truth.
Papias, or rather one of the Disciples of the Apostles, (whose words Papias
does produce in that place) did not thereby pretend to reject the Inspiration
of the Gospel of St. Mark. We need but consult the other Ancient Ecclesiastical
Writers, who expressed themselves in such a manner, as might oblige Grotius and
Spinosa to believe, that they owned no Inspiration in the Books of the New
Testament, if they had not expressly maintained it in other places of their
Works.

That which, II. Epist. ad Tim. c. 3. v. 16.
amongst Christians does most of all confirm the Inspiration of the Sacred
Writings; is the strong Foundation that the Apostle Paul has in one of his
Epistles to Timothy, all Scripture is given by Divine Inspiration. We have
elsewhere refuted all the subtle allegations that were brought by Grotius, who
endeavored to the utmost of his power, to put quite another sense on that
Passage. But I made it most manifest, that that able Critic was to be blamed,
on many accounts, in attempting to wrest the interpretation of those words of
St. Paul, that he might accommodate them to his own Idea's.

It is surprising, that the Cardinal of Perron, who was persuaded of the
Inspiration of the Holy Scripture, should nevertheless have made his strongest
efforts, Answ. to the Def. of some Holl. Div. c. 10.
for depriving Christians of this proof of Inspiration. It is customary amongst
those who write Books of Controversy, to think of nothing, but answering the
Objections of their Adversaries, without examining the proper and natural sense
of the Passages of Scripture, for the confirmation of their own Opinions. He
followed this Method of Polemical Authors, in his Answer to the King of Great
Britain: Seeing the Protestants forget nothing, that may recommend the
Authority of the Scripture alone, without the aid of Traditions, II. Epist. ad
Tim. c. 3. v. 16.
du Perron likewise, for his part, forgot nothing that might enhance the
Authority of Traditions. The Protestants did object to him those words of the
Apostle Paul, All Scripture is given by Divine Inspiration, and it profitable
for Doctriue. Thus in effect, that place of St. Paul to Timothy ought to be
rendered; nevertheless he does loudly oppose this Translation, Du Perr. lib. 3.
de Trad. Apost. c. 4.
under a pretense, that there is not the word (...), tota, all or the whole, in
the Greek, but (...), omnis, all or every; and that we do not read with the
Article, (...), all the Scripture, but without the Article, (...), all
Scripture.

To what purpose are all those niceties of Grammar and Dialect, which the
Cardinal does use in that place? It is true, that he does allege the Authority
of St. John Chrysostom, Theodoret and some other Fathers, for the confirmation
of his Opinion. But I desire no other testimony but theirs, to bring it under
condemnation: And to avoid being tedious, in a thing so easy to be justified,
seeing the Works of those Fathers are every where to be had, it will suffice,
if we inform our selves of St. Jerome's thoughts in the case; he is of a quite
different Opinion from that which the Cardinal has Fathered on him. That
Learned Bishop does not say, with the Cardinal, that that Passage ought to be
understood, distributively, by translating it, all Scripture, and not
collectively, by translating it, all the Scripture: He does on the contrary,
assure us in his Homily, Chrysostom. Hom. 9. in Ep. II. ad Tim.
upon those words of St. Paul, that that Holy Apostle does speak of all the
Holy Scripture, which Timothy had studied from his Infancy; and he concludes,
that all that Scripture is profitable, and given by the Inspiration of God.
(...). But by the Scripture that is spoken of in that place, it is evident that
we must understand all the Old Testament.

It is in no wise likely, that du Perron himself had read St. John
Chrysostom's Homily, or any other of the Greek Fathers whom he cites. That
which deceived those who read them for him, and gave him an abstract of their
pretended sentiments, is, that they consulted only the Latin Version of that
Homily, where it is, according to the vulgar Translation, Omnis Scriptura
divinitus inspirata est utilis, i. e. All Scripture that is given by the
Inspiration of God is profitable. But it was shown elsewhere, that in the
ancient vulgar, it was Inspirata and utilis i. e. is inspired and profitable;
as it is in the Greek, and that we are to expound that Passage collectively and
not distributively.

We may nevertheless, very well give that sense also to the vulgar, as the
rendition is at this day; according to that reading the Translation will be,
All the Scripture which was given by Inspiration is profitable, and not with
Amelote, and with the Authors of the Mons Translation, All Scripture that has
been given by Divine Inspiration, is profitable. The Syriack, Arabic, and
Ethiopick Versions, which that Cardinal pretends to be favorable to him, have
quite another sense than what he does attribute to them, as I have shown, in
the Answer to the Defense of the Opinions of some Holland Divines, Answ. to the
Def. of the Op. Chapter 10.
concerning the Critical History of the Old Testament.

But to proceed, I do not comprehend, why the Cardinal du Perron does dispute
with so much vigor about the manner of Translating that Passage of St. Paul,
and that from thence he does infer, that if it prove any thing, it must be,
that every Canonical Writing was sufficient, by it self, for universal
instruction in all the Christian Religion. The word (...) (says he) without an
Article, does denote every piece of the Holy Scripture, distributively. But the
Greek Fathers did not wire-draw St. Paul's words after that manner, but did
expound them, as if in effect, they had read (...), all the Scripture, with the
Article. The Catholics ought also to agree with the Protestants, that all the
Scripture is profitable for instruction: which does not at all exclude
Traditions, which being joined to Scripture, does compose the Principle upon
which the Christian Religion is Founded: And therefore there is nothing but
subtilty in all the Cardinal's dispute, who would pass his refined
impertinencies for a Comment on those words of the Apostle; and who bids
defiance, in that adventure to all Antiquity.

Estius on the contrary, has allowed too large a sense to the same Passage. He
has indeed, interpreted the Vulgar very well, according to the Greek Text; from
which the Latin was taken. But he went beyond the sense, Recte igitur and
verissime ex hoc loco statuitur, omnem Scripturam Sacram and Canonicam Spiritu
Sancto dictante esse conscriptam; ita nimirum, ut non solum sententiae, sed and
verba singula and verborum ordo ac tota dispositio sit a Deo tanquam per
semetipsum loquente. Est. Comm. in Epist. II. ad Timot. c. 3. v. 16.
when he did conclude from thence, that all the Holy Scripture was indicted by
the Spirit of God, not only as to the matter, or things therein contained, but
also in respect of the words and all their circumstances; so as there is no
word in Scripture, nor any order by ranging of words, but what comes from God.
This Opinion is very little agreeable to the Doctrine of the Ancient
Ecclesiastical Writers, who seemed not to have stretched that Inspiration
beyond the things themselves. But Estius, who taught Theology in the University
of Douay, was obliged to speak the Language of the Divines of that place, who
had made a Decree, upon that matter, against the Fathers, the Jesuits of
Louvain, who had set out some propositions directly opposite thereunto.
Besides, Estius was the Principal Author of the censure to which those
propositions were exposed. We shall give here a full account of the difference,
that happened between those Doctors of Louvain and Douay, and the Jesuits of
the College of Louvain about the Point of Inspiration.

It is not of late, that the Divines, who make profession of following St.
Augustine in their Schools and Books, have opposed the Theology of the Fathers
the Jesuits. Those Fathers having an 1586. maintained in their College of
Louvain some Propositions upon the Subject of Grace, Predestination and the
Holy Scripture, which appeared new to the Doctors of Louvain and Douay; these
Doctors did censure them, and withal published the reasons of their censure:
Seeing we do not speak in this place, of Grace and Predestination, but only of
the Holy Scripture, I shall insist on such things only as concern the
Scripture. You may take a view of the Title of the Censure issued out by the
Divines of Louvain, as it was Printed at Paris, at the end of a Book entitled,
Florentii Conrii Peregrinus Jerichuntinus, Censura Facultatum Sacrae Theologiae
Lovaniensis ac Duacensis super quibusdam Articulis de Sacra Scriptura, etc.
anno Domini 1586. Scripto traditis. The Censure is directed to all the Body of
the Jesuits of Louvain, in these Terms; Reverendis in Christo Patribus, Patri
Rectori ac Professoribus caeterisque Patribus Collegii Societatis nominis Jesu
in Universitate Lovaniensi, Decanus and reliqui Facultatis in eadem
Vniversitate Magistri, aeternam salutem pacemque precamur.

Those Wise Masters, whilst they declared against the Jesuits a War that was
never to have an end, do not fail to wish them eternal Peace: They call their
Doctrine, strange, scandalous and dangerous, peregrina, offensiva and periculosa
dogmata. Amongst the Propositions which they censured, there are three which
run thus. Vt aliquid sit Scriptura Sacra, non est necessarium singula ejus
verba inspirata esse a Spiritu Sancto. II. Non est necessarium ut singulae
veritates and sententiae sint immediate a Spiritu Sancto ipsi scriptori
inspiratae. III. Liber aliquis, qualis fortasse est secundus Maccabaeorum,
humana industria sine assistentia Spiritus Sancti scriptus, si Spiritus Sanctus
postea testetur ibi nihil esse falsum, efficitur Scriptura Sacra. Jesuit.
Colleg. Lovan. assert. apud Flor. Conr.
1. That a thing should be Holy Scripture, it is not necessary that all the
words thereof should be inspired by God. 2. It is not necessary for all Truths
and Sentences, to be immediately indicted by Inspiration to the Writer. 3. A
Book, as for example, the second of the Maccabees, which was written by Men
only without the assistance of the Holy Ghost, does afterward become Holy
Scripture, if the Holy Spirit does testify that there is nothing that is
false, in that Book.

These three Propositions were extracted out of the Writings of the Fathers the
Jesuits, who taught Theology in the College of Louvain; and they were so far
from condemning them, upon a remonstrance made to them, that they were
scandalous, that they freely defended them, adding thereunto new explications:
ab iisdem ibidem Professoribus pro suis agnitae, comprobatae, scholiisque
illustratae. They appeared to be really agreeable to good sense, neither do
they much vary from the Theology of the Ancient Fathers, whom we are more bound
to hear, upon this Subject, than the Sacred Faculty of Theology of Louvain;
who, in condemning them as they did, were guilty of a great act of injustice
against the Society of the Jesuits: The words of the Censure, as to their
purport, are Tres illae assertiones accedere videntur ad damnatam olim
Anomaeorum opinionem, qui Prophetas and Apostolos in multis volebant ut homines
fuisse locutos, ut refert Epiphanius, Haeresi 76. and ad eorum sententiam quam
praefatione in Epistolam ad Philemonem and alibi Hieronymus reprehendit, de qua
and notatus Erasmus fuit. Cens. Fac. Theol. Lovan.
that those three Assertions, did come near to the ancient Heresy of the
Anomeans, who were of Opinion, that the Prophets and the Apostles had
frequently spoken, as other private Men, and to the sentiments of those, of
whom St. Jerome makes mention, in the Preface of his Commentaries upon the
Epistle of St. Paul to Philemon; which Opinion was censured in the Person of
Erasmus. They do further oppose to those Assertions, the Council of Trent, the
words of St. Peter, in his second Epistle; of St. Paul, in his second Epistle
to Timothy, and finally, the Authority of the Ancient Fathers; who assure us,
that the Tongue and Hand of the Holy Writers, were made use of as a Pen by the
Holy Ghost.

Before we enter upon a discussion of what concerns the Divines of Louvain, we
shall relate the Censure of the Faculty of Theology of Douay. These Divines
declare, that they have examined the Propositions of the Jesuits, by the Order
of the Archbishops of Cambray and of Malines, and of the Bishop of Gand: They
do not condemn them in gross, as the Doctors of Louvain had done, but they
apply their Censure to each Proposition in particular. To the two first they
oppose St. Augustine, who did (according to their Opinion) believe, that the
Sacred Writers received from God, a partioular faculty and method of delivering
and composing their discourse. They do also quote Gabriel a Scholastic Divine;
who affirmed, that the Apostles were Inspired with many natural Truths, and
that a Book might be inspired, although there be pains and meditation used in
its composure. Those Divines do likewise give for an Example, Jesus Christ, Si
scribere voluisset, laborem nonnunquam and meditationem simulque industriam
aliquam adhibere potuit humanam, quamvis interim spiritus ejus humanus, itemque
os, lingua, manus, digiti perpetua quaedam essent instrumenta Divini Spiritus.
Cens. Theol. Duac.
who (say they) if he had written any Book, might as a Man have meditated, and
applied himself to that Work, although his Spirit, his Mouth, his Tongue, his
Hands, and his Fingers would continually have been the Instruments of the Holy
Ghost. And thus the Doctors of Douay do endeavor to destroy the Propositions
of the Jesuits of Louvain, which to them appeared to be scandalous: And also
under a pretense of showing, that they subvert all Religion, in speaking to the
second Proposition, they add, that Si non est necessarium ut singulae veritates
and sententiae quae sunt in Sacris Literis immediate sint a Spiritu Sancto ipsi
scriptori inspiratae, non modo sequetur indeterminabilis altercatio super
sententiis immediate vel non immediate inspiratis, verum etiam de integris
Evangeliis, quorum historia potuit humanitus esse nota; imo and de omnibus
Scripturis non Propheticis dubitabitur, an immediate Spiritus Sanctus eas
scriptoribus inspiraverit. Theol. Duac. ibid.
if it be once granted, that it is not necessary, that every Truth and Sentence
should be immediately indicted by the Spirit of God; there will be endless
disputes, not only about that which is particularly delivered in Scripture by
immediate Inspiration, but also about entire Gospels, the History of which may
be known in a humane manner: It will be also questioned, in general, if all the
Books of the Scripture that are not Prophetical, have been immediately suggested
by the Holy Ghost, to those who were the Writers thereof.

The third Proposition appeared to those Divines, to be the most dangerous of
all, and opposite to the words of St. Paul, who does assure us, that all the
Scripture is given by the Inspiration of God, and a Divine Doctrine, which was
indicted by the Holy Spirit. It is for this Reason, (say they) that the Decrees
of Popes and of Councils, were never reckoned in the number of Divine Writings;
although the Holy Ghost does testify by the Church, that there is nothing that
is false in those Decrees. And finally they add, that that third Proposition of
the Jesuits of Louvain could not be maintained, without acknowledging, that the
Histories of Thucydides, and of Livie, might for the same reason be reckoned
amongst the Books of the Scripture; if the Holy Ghost should testify to us,
that there is nothing of falsehood in those Histories. They conclude their
Censure with this Maxim: Non enim ideo inspiratum aliquid divinitus est quod
postea sit approbatum; sed ideo est approbatum, quia fuerat divinitus
inspiratum. ibid.
That a thing is not therefore given by Divine Inspiration; because it so falls
out, that it is approved of afterward; but that, on the contrary, it is
approved, because it was Inspired. Let us now see, if the Doctors of the two
Faculties of Theology had reason to condemn those three Propositions, in terms
that are injurious to the Society of the Jesuits.

It Is observable, that before all these things, the Jesuits, who published at
Rome, an. 1586. a Directory for the Studies of their Society, Entitled, Ratio
Studiorum, have placed this Proposition concerning the Inspiration of the
Sacred Writings, amongst those which their Divines ought to prefer to others:
Probabilius est verba primorum exemplarium ac fontium incorruptorum fuisse
omnia and singula a Spiritu Sancto dictata secundum substantiam, multiformiter
tamen pro varia instrumentorum condition. Rat. stud. edit. Romans tit. de reliq.
opin. del. in Theol. fac.
It is more probable (say they) that the first and Original Copies, which were
not corrupted, were all particularly indicted by the Holy Ghost, as to what
concerns the substance, but in a different manner according to the different
condition of the Instruments.

By that we see, that the Jesuits of Rome did not believe at that time, that
the same Inspiration is to be acknowledged in all the Books of the Scripture;
and when they say, that every word was Inspired, they add withal, as to what
concerns the Substance. Besides, they do not maintain this Inspiration of
words, as to what belongs to the substance, but as a probable Opinion; so that
they believe, that that may be also denied with probability. It is true, that
the Opinion of those two Faculties of Theology, belonging to Louvain and Douay,
was then most received in the Schools. But the Jesuits, who from that time,
have had Learned Men in their Society, saw very well, that it was contradictory
to good sense; and likewise opposite to the most Ancient Doctors of the Church.
Those of their College of Louvain, did nothing that was contrary to the Rule or
Constitution of their Foundation; which Fundator constitutionum, 3. part. c.
10. disertis verbis cavet ne novae opiniones admittantur. Quod tamen ut suavius
fieret additum est, hac formula, nisi ex consensu praepositorum. Rat. stud.
tit. de del. opin.
does expressly forbid the introducing of new Opinions, for the same rule does
proceed, unless it be done with the consent of the Superiors.

There is nothing more judicious, than the Liberty of Opinion, which is granted
by the Constitutions of that Society to its Professors, in the manner as it is
limited. Sequantur, ait Ignatius, in quavis facultate securiorem and magis
approbatam doctrinam, and eos auctores qui eam docent. Et ne singulis liberum
esset judicium de magis approbata and securiore doctrina deligenda, statim
subdit, Cujus rei penes Rectorem, qui quod statuetur in universa Societate ad
majorem Dei gloriam secuturus est, cura sit. ibid.
Father Ignatius did ordain, that in every Science whatsoever, they should
follow the most certain and the most received Doctrine. But seeing it is not
easy to distinguish, what are the most certain and the most received Opinions;
he decreed, that the choice should depend on the Rector, who ought to embrace,
for the greater Glory of God, that which was maintained in the whole Society.

And the truth is, the Jesuits did no sooner appear in the World, but there was
a birth given to much more considerable assistances, for the study of Theology,
than had ever been before that time. And therefore they did wisely, that they
were not altogether devoted to the Opinions of St. Thomas, and St. Augustine,
though they were zealously embraced in the most part of the Universities at
that time. They had reason in that case, not to follow blindly the Opinions
that were most received in the Schools in their time, concerning the
Inspiration of the Sacred Writings. This liberty of Prophecy, which had been
agreed upon, in behalf of their Professors of Theology, did afford them an
occasion of making new discoveries in this Science: and to this I impute the
rigor with which the Jesuits of Louvain maintain their Opinions about
Inspiration, without troubling themselves about the Belief of the two Faculties
of Theology of Louvain and Douay, who had not carefully enough examined that
matter.

Notwithstanding the Censures of those two Faculties, they continued to teach,
in their College of Louvain, the same Opinions concerning the Inspiration of
the Sacred Writings. Father Cornelius a Lapide, a few years after that time,
kept up, in the same place, public Lectures on the Holy Scriptures; which he
continued for the space of sixteen years. He likewise published those Lectures
by the Order of the Archbishop of Malines, and of his Superiors, beginning in
his Commentaries with the Epistles of St. Paul, which he did Dedicate to the
Archbishop. But in the Exposition which he gives of the Passage of that
Apostle, where he speaks of the Scriptures being given by the Inspiration of
God, he is altogether against Estius, who was at the same time Professor in the
University of Douay. It is manifest, that that Jesuit did insist on that
difficulty on purpose, and that he then had an Eye to the Censures of the
Divines of Louvain and Douay. He maintained in his Commentaries upon that place
of St. Paul, the Propositions which his Doctors had condemned.

Although the Commentaries of Cornelius a Lapide may be had every where, it is
convenient to set down his own words in this place, by which we may perceive
that the Jesuits of Louvain did not regard the Censures of the Divines there.
Nota Spiritum Sanctum non eodem modo dictasse omnes Sacras Literas. Nam Legem
and Prophetas ad verbum revelavit and dictavit Mosi and Prophetis. Historias
vero and morales exhortationes, quas antea vel visu, vel auditu, vel lectione,
vel meditatione didicerant ipsi scriptores hagiographi, non fuit necesse
inspirari aut dictari a Spiritu Sancto, utpote cum eas scirent aut callerent
ipsi scriptores. Sic S. Joannes, c. 19. v. 35. dicit se scribere quae vidit. S.
Lueas vero, c. 1. v. 2. dicit se scribere Evangelium quod audivit and
traditione accepit ab Apostolis. Cornel. a Lap. Comm. in Epist. II. ad Tim. c.
3. v. 16.
Observe, (says that Jesuit,) that the Holy Ghost did not indite all the
Sacred Writings after the same manner. For he indicted the Words of the Law and
the Prophets, to Moses and the Prophets. But as to the Histories, and the
Exhortations to Piety, which the Holy Penmen had learned, by seeing, hearing,
reading, or meditation, it was not at all necessary, that they should be
Inspired or Indicted by the Spirit of God; because those Writers knew such
things very well. And thus St. John Chap. xix. 25. does say, that he writ that
which he had seen. St. Luke does also declare, Chap. i. 2. That he writ his
Gospel, according to what he had learned of the Apostles. All this is
manifestly contrary to the Censures of the Doctors of Louvain and Douay. That
Jesuit does deliver himself in a clear and distinct manner. He very exquisitely
confirms the Opinion of those of his Society, who had taught Theology before
him in the College of Louvain.

But seeing it may be objected that this Opinion is the same with that of
Grotius and Spinosa, who acknowledged no other Inspiration but that of the
Prophetical Writings, it is worth the while to subjoyn that which Cornelius a
Lapide observed in the same place, concerning the manner of Inspiration that
concerns Historical and Moral part of the Holy Scripture. Dicitur tamen
Spiritus Sanctus ea quoque illis dictasse, primo, quia scribentibus adstitit,
ne vel in puncto a veritate aberrarent: secundo, quia eos excitavit and
suggessit, ut haec potius scriberent quam illa. Conceptum ergo and memoriam
eorum quae sciebant non eis ingessit Spiritus Sanctus, sed inspiravit ut hunc
potius conceptum quam illum scriberent. Corn. a Lapid. ibid.
Nevertheless, they affirm (says he) that these latter Works were also Indicted
by the Holy Ghost, first, because he did assist the Writers; that they could
never be deceived: and again, because he suggested to them, that one thing
should be rather written than another. So that the Holy Spirit did not suggest
to them either their conceptions, or the remembrance of those things which they
knew; but did Inspire them in this respect only, that they might put one
conception in writing, rather than another. In this, the Inspiration of the
Historical, and Moral Writings of the Holy Scripture did consist, according to
the Opinion of that learned Jesuit; wherein nothing appears but what is good
Sense; whereas in the Opinion of the Doctors of Louvain and Douay, (which is
the same with that of the Calvinists) there is something unintelligible, that
does violence both to Reason and Experience.

It cannot be said that this Opinion is a Novelty that was unadvisedly asserted
by that Jesuit. For he maintained it in the same Schools, where that Dispute
had made so great a noise, upon the occasion of some Propositions that were put
out upon that Subject, by some Divines of his Society. He was very much
desirous to clear that Question in his Commentaries upon St. Paul, to make it
appear to all the World, that the Censures of the two Faculties of Theology of
Louvain and Douay had no Foundation, and that they were against Reason.
Further, the Provincial of the Jesuits of the Low Countries, who gave his
approbation to that Book, does declare that he himself had read it, and had
committed it to the Examination of four Divines of his Society. There is also
at the beginning of those Commentaries, and Approbation of the Censor of the
Books of that place, who is a Canon of Anvers. But that the World may be
entirely satisfied, that there is nothing either scandalous or dangerous, in
the Opinion of the Jesuits of the Low Countries, touching the Inspiration of
the Sacred Writings, we shall proceed to examine the Reasons upon which the
Divines of Louvain and of Douay did found their Censures.

CHAP. XXIV. An Examination of the Reasons that the Doctors of Louvain and
Douay made use of, in their Censure of the Propositions of the Jesuits of
Louvain, touching the Inspiration of the Sacred Writings. A very free Opinion
of a Learned Divine of Paris about the same thing.
SEeing I have no other public Records of the Fathers the Jesuits of Louvain,
to justify their Propositions concerning the Inspiration of Scripture, than
what I have already mentioned, I shall endeavor to supply that defect, by
examining the Reasons of the Censure of the two Faculties of Theology of
Louvain and of Douay. I am willing to believe that those Divines had no other
design therein, but what was for the Defense of the Truth, or rather their own
old Opinions, and that Passion had no part in all that Dispute. As to what
concerns the Jesuits, it is probable, that they had not introduced that Opinion
into the Colleges of Flanders, but in conformity to the Liberty which had been
granted to their Professors, not to engage themselves easily in the
maintenance of any Opinions, how old soever, when they did not appear to be
warrantable. In a word, the Jesuits make no profession of submitting to the
decisions of a Master, as a Rule from which there is no Appeal, non jurant in
verba Magistri. And seeing there is nothing in that conduct, but what does
become wise Men, they are much to be blamed who accuse them for opposing the
Opinions that are received and authorized in the most part of the Schools; when
those Opinions have no good Foundation: which happened to them in the matter
which we now handle.

The Divines of Louvain bring for one of the principal motives of their
Censure, the conformity that the three Propositions of the Jesuits have to an
old Opinion that was condemned in the Anomeans, whereof St. Epiphanius all
through makes mention. But to show the falsehood of this objection, it will be
sufficient to bring the Testimony of Epiphanius. That Father does say, that the
Anomeans (...). Epiph. Haer. 76. n. 6.
traduced the Prophets and the Evangelists: that when they were much urged,
they avoided the difficulty by answering, that the Apostle spoke as a Man. Is
there any thing in those three Propositions above mentioned that comes near
this? Did the Jesuits of the College of Louvain allege, that there might
possibly be something that is false in the Writings of the Apostles, under the
pretext that they were Men that spoke it? Yet that is the Opinion of the
Anomeans, who being unable to satisfy the Reasons that were brought against
them, out of the Books of the New Testament, said that the Authors of those
Books had spoken as Men in those places.

We shall apply the same Answer to another Objection which those Doctors did
take from the Preface of St. Jerome's Commentaries upon the Epistle of the
Apostle Paul to Philemon. That Father does, in that place, make mention of
certain Heretics who rejected that Epistle, because they alleged that that
Holy Apostle was not guided by the Spirit of God in writing it. Hieron. prooem.
Comm. in Epist. ad Philem.
Those who will not (says he) receive the Epistle written to Philemon, as one
of the Epistles of Paul, do say, that the Apostle did not speak always, nor all
things, by the immediate assistance of Christ speaking in him; because human
frailty could not suffer one constant tenor of the Holy Ghost. But if it should
be granted to those Heretics, that St. Paul, and the rest of the Apostles were
not Inspired in all that they writ, it does not therefore follow, that we ought
to reject a part of their Writings. It is sufficient, that we own with the
Jesuits, that there is nothing but Truth in those very places which were not
Inspired, and that the Holy Ghost had committed them to us as such.

Those Sectaries asked the Orthodox, Apud Hieron. ibid. Epist. II. ad Tim. c.
4. v. 13.
if St. Paul stood in need of any Inspiration to say; When thou do come,
bring my Cloak which I left at Troas with Carpus, and especially the
parchments; and many other things of that nature. I do declare, that it was in
no ways necessary that God should Indite such kind of things to St. Paul, and
other Holy Writers. This is the Opinion of the Jesuits of Louvain, which was
afterward confirmed in the same place by Cornelius a Lapide, whose words I
have already mentioned. But they did not conclude from thence, that we are not
obliged to receive the Books of Scripture, in any parts or places thereof, but
those only that were Indicted by the Holy Ghost. It is sufficient that they were
persuaded that the Holy Writers were guided by the Spirit of God in every part
of their Writings, so as not to fall into any error.

The Divines of Louvain further objected against the Jesuits, that they had
renewed an Opinion, which had been condemned in the Person of Erasmus. But it
is easy to make it appear, that those Fathers maintained nothing that had
affinity to the Proposition which Erasmus owned. That Critic was accused for
believing that there were (...).
some errors in the Writing of the Apostles; which were to be attributed to a
defect of their Memory. We shall find nothing like this in the three
Propositions of the Jesuits of Louvain, for although they be very well
satisfied, that there was no need of any Inspiration for Writing those things
that they knew, they do not upon that account imagine that the Writers were at
any time mistaken through a defect of Memory. Erasmus also used his utmost
endeavor in one of his Apologies, to wipe off that accusation. He does
protest, that he only reported that which St. Jerome had observed upon the
matter, and that there had been nothing said, but what was agreeable to St.
Augustine's Opinion. Howsoever it is, that Critic does assure us, Nunc testor
me abhorrere ab ulla oblivione tribuenda Apostolis. Erasm. Apol. adv. Monach.
quosd. Hisp.
that he never intended to charge the Apostles with any defect of Memory. I do
not inquire if Erasmus was wronged in this. It is enough that I have shown the
Proposition, that is supposed to have been condemned on his account, and have
withal made it appear, that there is nothing of that nature contained in the
three Propositions of the Jesuits that were Censured.

Those very Divines did also by way of Objection, bring the Authority of the
Council of Trent, Sess. IV. the words of St. Peter, Epist. II. chapter 1. v. 21.
and those of St. Paul, Epist. II. to Timothy, chapter 3. v. 16. But there is
nothing in all those places to which the Jesuits of Louvain do not agree. The
strongest Passage is that of the Epistle to Timothy, and yet it is the same,
upon which Cornelius a Lapide made Observations, as I have shown. As to the
Testimony of the ancient Fathers, who said, that the Tongue, and the Hand of
the Holy, were the Holy Ghosts Pen, the Jesuits do not deny it. The same
Cornelius a Lapide has explained it at large, in his Commentary upon the second
Epistle of the Apostle Paul to Timothy, where he makes it appear that it is not
contrary to his Opinion about the Inspiration of Scripture. And the truth is,
we cannot imagine that the Holy Ghost deprived the Evangelists and the Apostles
of the use of their Reason and Memory.

The Reasons of the Doctors of the Faculty of Theology of Douay are no more
Conclusive than those of the Divines of Louvain. They chiefly depend upon some
Passages of St. Augustine. But since there is nothing that is positive in all
those Passages, it will not be worth the while to insist on them. They bring
for example, by way of. Objection, some places of his Books Concerning the
consent of the Evangelists. Yet there is no Work, where that Father has more
shown than in that Treatise, that the Sacred Writers made use of their Reason
and Memory, when they writ their Gospels. That Work has also given occasion to
Erasmus, and some other Writers to affirm that the Memory of the Apostles was
not always sure, and that they put sometimes one word for another.

It is true, that St. Augustine is withal of the Opinion, that that defect in
the Apostles was guided by the Holy Ghost. But I think it had been much better
not to make them fall into error, than to maintain afterward with that Father,
that they would not so much as amend the faults of that Nature, after they had
acknowledged them, upon a Pretext that they were persuaded they had done every
thing relating thereunto, by the Spirit of God directing their thoughts.
Erasmus had also recourse in one of his Apologies to this Answer of St.
Augustine, seeing he could not deny that he had charged the Evangelists with a
defect of Memory, which was the occasion that they put the name of one Prophet
for another; he endeavors to get off by answering, That Vbi memoriam and
oblivionem gubernat Spiritus Sanctus, ibi tam est utilis oblivio quam memoria.
Erasm. ibid.
when Memory and Forgetfulness are equally governed by the Holy Ghost,
Forgetfulness is then as useful as Memory. Maldonat, who attributes this
Opinion to St. Augustine and Beda, had reason to reject it; and indeed it is not
to be maintained. Nor can we find any thing in the Propositions of the Jesuits
of Louvain that has any affinity with it.

That which the Divines of Douay borrowed of Gabriel, for showing that many
Natural Truths were discovered to the Apostles by Inspiration, and that we may
very well reconcile Inspiration to the Labor and Meditation of the Sacred
Writers, would be agreeable to good Sense, if by that Inspiration we understand
a single direction of the Spirit of God, that kept the Apostles from falling
into any error. If it be meant on the contrary, that the Holy Spirit did indite
the matters of Fact, of which they had been Witnesses, that cannot be
maintained, as Cornelius a Lapide has observed. Nor is their Opinion
established by the example which they bring of Jesus Christ, who could (say
they) use such Meditation and Application that is ordinary amongst other Men,
if he had Composed any Books; for this proves nothing, because if it be
supposed that he had written Books treating of such things as he had seen with
his Eyes, we will always maintain, that it was not necessary that he should be
the Instrument of the Holy Ghost for Writing things of that nature. This
example does moreover appear to be somewhat Metaphysical, and can only be
relished by those who are accustomed to the subtilties of the School.

To that which they object, That all the Truths of the Scripture ought to be
immediately Inspired; that otherwise, there will be eternal Disputes about what
is, and what is not immediately Inspired: I answer, that it is easy to
distinguish these two sorts of Inspirations, according to the Principles of the
Jesuit a Lapide. He does suppose with good Reason, that in Histories of things
which were seen and heard, and in the Exhortations that concern Morality, there
is no need for any immediate Inspiration, because there is nothing that is
Prophetical therein.

But we may (say they) according to this Principle, doubt of all those Writings
that are not Prophetical, as the Gospels, for example, if they were immediately
Inspired. I affirm, on the contrary that there is no ground for any doubt here.
For the same Jesuit has clearly shown, by the words of St. John, and of St.
Luke, that an immediate Inspiration was not necessary for Writing of Histories.
The Evangelists writ that which they had seen, or that which they learned upon
certain grounds.

And upon this account, Maldonat explaining these words of Jesus Christ, Matthew.
xxvi. 28. This is my blood of the New Testament, and comparing them with these
words of St. Luke, Luc. (...) 20.
This cup is the New Testament in my blood; does freely declare that the very
words of Jesus Christ, were those that were Recorded by St. Matthew, and not
those of St. Luke. The Reason which that Learned Jesuit brings for this
Opinion, is, that St. Matthew was present at the Action, Matthaeus qui aderat.
Whence he does conclude, that seeing Jesus Christ expressed himself only in one
manner, it is Credendum igitur est verbis potius Matthaei and Marci, quam Lueae
and Pauli Christum usum fuisse. Mald. Comm. in Matthew. c. xxvi. v. 28.
better to believe St. Matthew who was an Eye Witness, and who was followed by
St. Mark, than St. Luke and St. Paul, who were not present at the Action. It is
easy to judge, that in that place Maldonat had not recourse to Inspiration,
since he affirms that St. Matthew had barely reported that which he had seen.

Yet for all this, I do not believe, that the Proof which that Jesuit does use
against the Protestants, is altogether Conclusive. For it is to be supposed,
that the manner wherein the Evangelists express the same thing, does wholly
proceed from themselves. It is sufficient that they all agree in the substance
of the things, whilst it is not necessary that they should join in the
Expressions. Every one of them might choose his own Words according to his
pleasure. And therefore it cannot be necessarily inferred from Maldonat's
Reasoning, that Jesus Christ did rather say that which was mentioned by St.
Matthew, than that which is Recorded by St. Luke, and by St. Paul.

The Divines of Douay do insist yet more vigorously on the third Proposition of
the Jesuits of Louvain, than upon the two others. This last Proposition does
contain (as they think) a manifest error, manifesti erroris periculum
continens; for it does Authorize such Books for Divine and Canonical, as have
been written by Men without any assistance of the Holy Spirit, humana
industria, sine assistentia Spiruus Sancti. It cannot be denied but that the
Jesuits set out this Proposition, which seems to be much like the Opinion of
Grotius and Spinosa: but they add withal, that it is sufficient that the Holy
Spirit does assure us, that there is nothing but Truth in those Writings. Si
Spinitus Sanctus postea testetur ibi nihil esse falsum, efficitur Scriptura.

We may by the same Reason (say the Doctors of Douay) call the Decrees of Popes
and Councils Holy Scripture, because we are also assured that there is no
falsehood in those Decrees. We may also place Livy, and Thucydides in the number
of the Holy Writings, if the Holy Ghost testify that they contain nothing that
is false. But this Consequence does not at all follow from the third
Proposition of the Jesuits of Louvain. For they Suppose that the Holy Ghost
does propose those Books to us as Canonical, to be for a Rule in Religion. The
Decrees of Councils, and of Popes, have no such thing in them; if it were so,
they would not be any longer considered as bare Decrees of the Church, but as
works that had been to the same Church, to serve for a Rule as well in Faith as
in Manners. The Example of the Histories of Thucydides and of Livy, which they
bring, is nothing to the purpose; for those Authors have not written of things
that concern our Salvation.

As to the Maxim of those Divines, That a thing is not Inspired, because it was
afterward approved, but that, on the contrary it is approved, because it was
Inspired, it does not contradict the Proposition of the Jesuits; who
continually suppose, that the Books we chiefly treat of, have the testimony of
the Holy Ghost, although they had not been immediately Inspired; which may
suffice to render them approved. The truth is, many Learned Divines believed,
that it was not necessary, that God should Inspire Moses with a knowledge of
every thing that he has written in Genesis, concerning the Creation of the
World, and the Genealogies of the Ancient Patriarchs. He could be furnished (as
they judged) with sufficient light about those things, by what he learned of
his Ancestors, who had kept Memoirs of the same. Doctus and eruditus (says the
Jesuit Pererius) a Majoribus suis, Perer. praef. in Pentat.
ad quos ejusmodi rerum doctrina inde ab Adamo usque fidelissima posterorum
traditione, quasi per manus transmissa, and ad Mosem usque producta fuerat. Was
it necessary, for Example, that Moses should be inspired of God, to set down in
Writing all the Journeys and different Encampings of the Israelites in the
Desert, after their coming out of Egypt? But I need not stay longer on a thing
that has, in my Opinion, been sufficiently cleared. And therefore, I am so far
from accusing the Propositions of the Jesuits of Louvain as erroneous, that I
find nothing to be contained therein, but what is agreeable to Truth and good
Sense. The Doctors who opposed them with so great heat, had never exercised
their thoughts sufficiently upon Questions of that nature: They followed the
old Opinion of their own Schools; and seeing they only consulted their own
prejudices, they condemned that with a great deal of precipitation, which they
did not altogether understand.

A Learned Doctor of the Faculty of Theology of Paris, maintained upon the same
subject, a Proposition very opposite to the opinion of the Divines of Louvain
and Douay; which possibly will not appear to be very Orthodox in the judgment
of many. His Book was nevertheless many times Printed, with the approbation of
several of his Brethren. There was a new Edition thereof Published lately at
Paris, with the approbation of Mr. Cocquelin, in 1685.
a Doctor of that Faculty and Chancellor of the University; who does assure us,
that he had read that Work once and again, legi ac relegi. Which by
anticipation does show, that I intend to speak of the Analysis of Faith of
Henry Holden, who made it manifest, through the whole Work, that he had
meditated much on the Principles of Theology. Take therefore the Opinion of
this Learned Person, concerning the Inspiration of the Holy Scripture; The
special assistance which God afforded to every Author of those Books which the
Church has received for the Word of God, does extend it self to those things
only that are mere matters of Doctrine, or that have a near and necessary
relation thereunto. But in such things as are not the main business of the
Author, or have a relation to other things, I reckon that God did assist them
in no other manner than he used to assist other Writers, that were Men of great
Piety. I shall content my self to explain the Opinion of this Doctor, without
presuming to offer Arguments against it, since I know it is authorized by very
sage Masters. Yet I dare not maintain it in its full extent: It would have done
well, if he had given us some examples of what he understands by things that
are not mere matters of Doctrine, or that have not an entire relation thereunto.
Auxilium speciale divinitus praestitum auctori cujuslibet scripti quod pro
verbo Dei recipit Ecclesia, ad ea solummodo se porrigit quae vel sint pure
doctrinalia, vel proximum aliquem aut necessarium habeant ad doctrinalia
respectum. In iis vero quae non sunt de instituto scriptoris, vel ad alia
referuntur, eo tantum subsidio Deum illi adfuisse judicamus, quod piissimis
caeteris auctoribus commune sit. Henr. Hold. div. fid. Annal. lib. 1. c. 5.
Non omnia quae in Scripturis continentur esse simpliciter and absolute
objectum nostrae fidei, seu spectare ad articulos fidei: sola enim revelata
sunt objectum fidei, ac non omnia quae Scriptura habet, docet aut narrat, sunt
revelata. De. Dom. lib. 7. c. 1.


De Dominis, of whom it would seem Holden had his Principles, does much insist
on this Subject, which he explains with a great deal of subtilty. He says, that
all that is in the Scripture, is not simply and absolutely the Object of our
Faith, that is to say, it does not belong to the Articles of our Creed; because
it is only the things that are revealed, that can be the Object of our Faith.
But (says that Author) the things that are contained in Scripture are not all
revealed: From this Principle, (which he does illustrate by some Examples) he
draws this Consequence, that we may in some manner, excuse some very Learned
Catholic Divines, who imputed to the Evangelists, a few faults which proceeded
from a defect of their memory, as in putting one name for another, in
disagreeing amongst themselves about the time, or any other circumstances of
the actions which they relate, provided that it falls not upon the substance,
and upon the things themselves: Tales enim lapsus extra substantiam facti nihil
fidei obsunt aut obesse possunt, neque sunt circa aliquid fide divina
credendum, sed circa id quod solam humanam sensatam secum fert notitiam.
Humanam porro notitiam subesse posse lapsui non videtur absurdum, etiam in
sacris Spiritus Sancti scriptoribus, quoties lapsus humanae notitiae in facti
substantiam and adjunctam revelationem non redundat. Ibid.
Errors of that kind, (he adds) which touch not the substance of the things,
cannot in the least, be any prejudice to our belief, seeing they do not relate
to that which we are obliged to believe of Divine Faith, but only to that which
is known by the senses; which may be deceived, even in the Sacred Writers, when
the substance does not come under debate.

Yet although de Dominis does explain this opinion at good length, he declares,
that he dares not prosecute the same to the full. He avows, that there are many
places in the Bible, in which it seems that the Writers are mistaken; that the
solutions that are given for removing difficulties of that nature, are very
much constrained, with which pious Souls ought nevertheless to be content,
although they do not satisfy those who severely examine every thing. Ego sane
quod in me est rigorem depono, and malo cum difficultate piam amplecti
interpretationem, quam lapsum etiam istum levem and circa solas circumstantias
admittere. Ibid.
He does choose rather to take the part of those who are far from rigor, than
charge the Holy Writers with the least fault, even in the things of small
importance. But after all, he does not disapprove the Opinion of the Catholic
Doctors, who alleged mistakes of that kind, which are not prejudicial to our
Faith: There is nothing that does more diminish the Authority of the Holy
Scripture, even in things Essential and Revealed, than constrained Answers,
that provoke laughter in those, who are not of the same belief with us: By this
we perceive, that the Archbishop of Spalatro was in a strait, whose part he was
to take, about a Question of this delicacy.

As for Doctor Holden, of all he says upon that Subject, this is most full of
good sense, Veritates Philosophicae nec probandae nec improbandae sunt ex puris
nudisque Sacrae Scripturae verbis and sententiis. Quamvis enim nullam
complectatur Scriptura falsitatem, attamen ipsius loquendi modus utplurimum
vulgaris est, at que ad communem hominum captum, potius quam ad loquelae
proprietatem and sermonis rigorem adaptatus. Hold. ibid.
That we ought not to approve or condemn, upon the bare words of Scripture, all
that belongs solely to Philosophy. For as he observes in the same place, though
there is nothing false in Scripture; the expressions therein are frequently
accommodated to the Opinions commonly received amongst the People, and they are
not always very exact; which is agreeable to St. John Chrysostom's Opinion,
who observed (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 9. in Epist. ad Philipp. c. 2.
that St Paul does often speak according to the Sentiments of the Populace,
that he may accommodate himself to his Auditors.

CHAP. XXV. Spinosa's Objections against the Inspiration of the Books of the
New Testament are Examined.
ALthough Spinosa had very little or no knowledge of the Books of the New
Testament, yet he would by all means, insert in his Treatise Entitled
Theologico-politicus, a whole Chapter against the Inspiration of those Books;
where he only gives a greater light to that which Grotius had formerly written
upon this matter, in many places of his Works. His great Principle is, Apostoli
non tanquam Prophetae, sed tanquam Doctores scripserunt, and viam ad docendum
elegerunt quam faciliorem judicaverunt fore discipulis quos tum docere
volebant. Spin. Tract. Theol. polit. cap. 12.
that the Apostles did not write as Prophets, but as single Doctors; and that
therefore it was not necessary that they should be Inspired. But this
distinction betwixt Prophets and Doctors, does not at all destroy that
Inspiration, which is attributed to the Apostles; which does only consist in a
bare direction of the Spirit of God, as has been shown before.

God (say they) did not command them to write, as he commanded the Prophets to
publish their Prophecies: We have also observed from the beginning of this
Work, that, when the Ancient Ecclesiastical Writers speak of the Gospels, they
declare, that they were composed only occasionally, and at the request of the
first Believers. It does not indeed so evidently appear to us, that the
Evangelists and Apostles had an express Commandment of God, or even of Jesus
Christ, to publish Books for the Instruction of the first Christians, as it
does appear, that the Prophets did speak to the People of Israel, by Gods
Order. But we see, that Jesus Christ commanded his Disciples to go and Preach
the Gospel, to all Nations of the Earth: But their Histories, which we call
Gospels, are nothing else but Collections of their Sermons, which were animated
by the Spirit of God, whom their Master had promised to them.

The Prophets ( Spinosa continues,) do not only observe in their Prophecies,
but also in their Letters, that it was God who spoke by their Mouth; which he
proves by the Letter that the Prophet Elias writ to King Joram, and is
mentioned 2 Chronicles. Chapter 21. v. 12. Which begins with these words, Thus says the
Lord, In Epistolis Apostolorum nihil simile legimus, sed contra in I. ad Cor.
7.40. Paulus secundum suam sententiam loquitur. Spin. ibid. cap. 11.
we read no such thing, (says he) in the Letters of the Apostles. St. Paul on
the contrary, speaks as from himself, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
Chap. 7. v. 40.

If the Style of the Apostles be not altogether the same as that of the
Prophets; it cannot from thence be concluded, that the former were not guided
by the Spirit of God, in all the actions of their Ministry. It was in no wise
necessary, that they should repeat in every discourse, that it was the Lord who
spoke. It was sufficient, for them to declare in general, that Jesus Christ had
sent them to Preach the Truths of the Gospel, and that he, who had given them
that Mission in his Father's Name, had told them expressly, It is not you that
speak, but the Spirit of your Heavenly Father who speaks in you.

It is true, that St. Paul does speak as from himself, in the first Epistle to
the Corinth. Chap. 7. where he makes use of this Expression; I give my
judgment, (...). But he adds withal, that he thinks he has the Spirit of God:
(...) The ground of Spinosa's error was, that a Man could not use his Reason,
and be also guided by the Spirit of God, at the same time; as if by becoming
God's Interpreter, he must cease to be a Man, and be only a Passive Instrument,
if I may use the Term: To proceed, it is not true, that the Apostles never
observed at the beginning of their Letters, that it was God who spoke by their
Mouth. For they begin their Letter, which they write to their Brethren of
Antioch, by these words, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us; Acts xv.
28.
to let them know, that what they laid upon them came from God, whose
Inrerpreters they only were.

The other expressions of St. Paul, which Spinosa, in the same place, makes use
of to show, that that Apostle writ to gratify his own inclination, without
being encouraged thereunto by the Spirit of God; may be easily explained by the
Principle which we have established. That Man does always suppose, that
Inspiration does wholly deprive one of the use of his Reason; which is most
false: Apostoli ubique ratiocinantur: it a ut non prophetare sed disputare
videantur. Spin. ibid.
The Apostles, (says he) are every where upon Reasoning, so that they are more
like Disputants than Prophets. But besides, that he has formed to himself a
false Idea, of the Inspiration of the Prophets, it is sufficient if we object
against him, the example formerly given, where the Apostles, after they had
deliberated and reasoned in an Assembly; did nevertheless use this expression,
it seemed to the Holy Ghost and to us: Which does evidently show, that the
Spirit of God, who had guided them in that Assembly, did not deprive them of
the use of their Reason: There is in effect, a Subordination betwixt them two;
the one does not destroy the other.

Spinosa's Prophets are Enthusiasts, who are more like Men pushed on by a
Spirit of Fury, than by a Spirit of Prophecy. He does allege Prophetiae
auctoritas ratiocinari non patitur. Quisquis enim vult sua dogmata ratione
consirmare, eo ipso ea arbitrali uniuscujusque judicio submittit. Spin. ibid.
that the quality of a Prophet does not admit of the use of his Reason; because
he, who confirms his Doctrines by Reasons, does submit to the judgment of
others. But if one will carefully read the Books of Moses, whom he reckons
amongst the Prophets, he will own, that that Lawgiver does Reason sometimes:
There is indeed a submission to the judgment of others, where there is nothing
but Reasonings. But this cannot be said, when such Reasonings are guided by the
Spirit of God: And this was the Case of Moses and the other Prophets. Spinosa
himself gives an Example here; For there is none, but thinks these Words of
Moses, Deuteronomy. Chap. 31. v. 27. While I am yet alive with you this day, ye have
been rebellious against the Lord; and how much more after my Death, to be very
formal Reasoning. And indeed, the Prophets who directed their discourse to Men
who made use of their Reason, did not in the least destroy their Spirit of
Prophecy, when they proposed the Will of God to those Men, by way of Reasoning.

But Spinosa (who reasons in all this Discourse upon a false Idea which he had
of Prophecy,) does allege, Verba illa Mosis moralis locutio tantum sunt, qua
rheterice and prout futuram populi defectionem vividius imaginari potuerat,
praedicit. Spin. ibid.
that that expression of Moses, was a Moral kind of speaking, which he used as
an Orator, to foretell, and represent to the life (so far as he could imagine)
the future Rebellion of the Israelites. But what does it signify, that Moses
did express himself an Orator, or in any other manner, does that prove, that he
did not truly Reason in that, and several other places, where he explains
himself as other Men? It was not necessary that God should indite all his
Reasonings and all his Exhortations. It is enough that he guided him by his
Spirit, and that he prevented his falling into error. This being supposed, we
will freely agree with Spinosa, that Moses said many things, that were not
revealed to him; and this we have proved elsewhere.

He is also obliged Nolo tamen absolute negare Prophetas ex revelatione
argumentari potuisse. Ib.
to declare, that the Prophets could Reason by Revelation; and consequently
Prophecy and Revelation are not incompatible. The Apostles then, could by way
of reasoning, propose to the People the truths they delivered, and be at the
same time, Inspired with the Spirit of God. Spinosa does nevertheless add, that
the more that the Prophets do reason in form, the Knowledge that they had of
things revealed, did come so much the more near to natural Knowledge; and that
that which does characterize the supernatural Knowledge of the Prophets, is,
when they pronounce Sentences and Degrees without any Reasoning. For this
reason it is, (says he) Moses, who was the greatest of the Prophets, made no
Argument in form; that on the contrary, St. Paul does reason every where, and
draws consequences from the Principles which he does establish, as appears in
his Epistle to the Romans. Upon this account, he believed, that the Epistles of
the Apostle were not written by supernatural Revelation.

That Man does always confound Prophecy with Enthusiasm. Moses, who was a
Lawgiver, pronounced Sentences and Judgments by warrant from God; which did
not hinder him from Reasoning in some places: If he did not so, as frequently
as St. Paul, the occasion was, he writ Histories, which require no reasoning;
whereas St. Paul does write as a Doctor who instructs the People, and draws
consequences from Principles which he had laid down. From thence it cannot be
concluded, that he followed nothing but his Reason, because that very Reason of
his might have been supernaturally enlightened, and guided by the Spirit of God.
And therefore, all that Spinosa does object for showing, that the most part of
that Apostle's Discourse, does only consist in Advertisements and Moral
Exhortations, does not destroy the Inspiration of the Apostles, in the manner
as we have formerly supposed it with the Jesuits of Louvain: For we made it
plain, that it was not necessary, for that purpose, that God should indite to
St. Paul and the other Apostles, all their Discourses of Morality. It was
permitted them to make use of their natural Lights, and to use all the means
with which their Reason could furnish them, for persuading the People.

After the same manner, all Spinosa's objections may be answered; seeing he
does continually reason upon a false Idea, which he has formed, of the
Inspiration of the Penmen of the New Testament: We may also give our assent to
a great part of what he says in his Objections, without giving advantage, for
drawing any Conclusions against that Inspiration, according to the true
Explication thereof. Seeing I insisted long enough upon this Subject, in my two
Answers To the Opinions of some Divines of Holland, it is needless for me to
repeat here, what I have said in those two Books. The truth is, those Divines,
by opposing the Inspiration of the Holy Scripture, have only given a more
advantageous light to Spinosa's reasons, who squared this matter, to the false
prejudices with which he was prepossessed. If he had read the Works of some
Catholic Doctors who have treated judiciously of this Subject, he would soon
have acknowledged, to what little purpose the most part of his Objections
serve, because they stumble upon those things in which we do agree with him.
And therefore, we ought to be very cautious, in refuting his Opinion, that we
do not contest with him in vain, about the things that are true, and from which
he does nevertheless draw consequences, that are directly false or too wide;
otherwise, we shall rather strengthen, than destroy his errors.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Style of the Evangelists and the Apostles. The Opinion of
Modern Writers, and of the Ancient Doctors of the Church upon this matter; with
many Critical Reflections.
IN this last Age, there have been Works composed, that treat of the Style of
the Evangelists and the Apostles. Henry Stephen has handled this matter in the
Preface to his Greek New Testament. Henr. Steph. Nov. Test. in 12. edit. ann.
1576.
He had also promised to publish a Treatise on purpose upon this Subject, to
demonstrate, that those Sacred Writers are much more Polite than some Authors
have believed. He likewise gives some examples thereof, in his Preface, by way
of anticipation. He does sometimes admire them, for the elegancy of their
Style, and does wish, that they were not treated as rude and barbarous Persons,
in respect of their manner of Writing, as they have been by some. He does
particularly undertake the defense of St. Paul, whom he believed to have been
very conversant with the Greek Authors, and amongst the rest, with the Poets,
whom he did imitate (as he believes) for his Expression, in sundry places. Haec
cum ita sint, and cum aliunde pateat Paulum Apostolum Graecos scriptores
evolvisse, qui credibile sit illum Graecae linguae non satis peritum fuisse?
Henr. Steph. ibid.
Whence he does conclude, that to affirm that that Holy Apostle was not Master
enough of the Greek Language, is a supposition that is altogether incredible.

We have moreover a Differtation published by Phochen, which is Entitled,
Diatribe de linguae Graecae Novi Testamenti puritate.
Of the purity of the Greek Language of the New Testament, where the Author
forgot nothing which might make it manifest, that the Text of that Book is true
Greek, and that it does not differ very much from the Style of Profane Authors.
Textum Novi Testamenti, (says Phochen) vere Graecum nec alienum plane a Stilo
Graeco profano esse asserimus. He does refute all those Hebraisms, which as
some allege, are contained in the Writings of the Apostles: and to make it the
more evidently appear, that they object those Hebraisms in vain, he does
justify those Expressions on which they are charged, by the like Expressions
of Profane Authors.

There are on the contrary some Learned Critics, who, very far from allowing
the Apostles a Pure and Elegant Style, have not scrupled to make them pass for
Barbarous Writers, whose Books are stuffed with Hebraisms. Castalio, who
understood Hebrew and Greek sufficiently, to be judge of this Question, says,
in speaking of the Apostles, Erant Apostoli natu Hebraei, and peregrina, hoc
est Graeca lingua scribentes hebraizabant, non qui juberet Spiritus; neque enim
pluris facit Spiritus hebraismos quam graecismos... res enim dictat Spiritus,
verba quidem and linguam scribendi liberam permittit. Sebast. Castal. defens.
Translat. Bibl.
that being born Hebrews, they did Hebraize when they writ in Greek, whilst the
Holy Ghost had no part in that, because the Spirit of God does not love
Hebraism any more than Graecisms. He only Indicted the thing to them, (says
that Author,) and not the Words, leaving them at liberty to express themselves
after their own fashion. Which is agreeable enough to the Opinion of the
Jesuits of Louvain.

Castalio does further show, why the Apostles did no more improve themselves in
the Greek, so as to speak it well, seeing that Language is Copious in Words,
full of Sense, and easy to be understood, whereas the Hebrew Phrases render
their Discourses intricate and obscure. He says, Cur igitur hebraizarunt?
Primum quia erant Saeris Literis assueti; deinde quia cum essent Graecae
linguae non usque adeo periti, id quod eorum scripea ostendunt, facile in
patriam consuetudinem deflectebant. Castal. ibid.
that they were accustomed to the reading of the Sacred Writings, and that
since they did not sufficiently understand the Greek Language, (as it is easy
to prove by their Works) those expressions that were proper to their Mother
Tongue did first present themselves to them on all occasions. Which he confirms
by the example of the French and the Dutch, who cannot write in Latin, without
intermingling something of their own Language therewith. Dum Latin scribunt,
Gallizant and Germanizant. This latter Opinion, which has been followed by very
able Critics, is more agreeable, than the former, to the Opinion of the
ancient Ecclesiastical Writers. I think we ought to acquiesce in the Judgment
of the Greek Fathers, who are faithful Witnesses of the Greek Style of the
Evangelists and the Apostles.

Origin was the only Man of all the Greek Fathers, who applied himself most to
the Study of the Scripture, in a manner that was most exact and Critical. And
therefore his Judgment upon the Question, ought of all others to have the most
weight with us. When that Learned Person Disputes against the Enemies of our
Religion, who despised the Prophets and the Apostles, because of their Style,
and because the same things (say they) were much better expressed in the
Writings of the Ancient Philosophers. He makes answer to them, that we ought
not upon that account to despise the Books of the Jews and the Christians,
because it has been always agreed, that the Jews had written before the Greeks.
As to the Style, he does own that the Greeks have the advantage; but he does
withal allege that it cannot be inferred from thence, that their Works are
better than those of the Jews and of the Christians. He does likewise observe,
that the Books of the Old Testament are not destitute of their ornament in the
Hebrew Language. Which he does affirm of the Writings of the Apostles, because,
the truth is, they had no Politeness in their Expressions, having applied
themselves more to the Eloquence of Things, than of Words.

(...). Orig adv. Cells. lib. 7.
The Prophets of the Jews (says Origin,) and the Disciples of Jesus renounced
all Ornaments of Discourse, and every thing which the Scripture does call human
Wisdom; and according to the Flesh. If any Greek (that Learned Father
continues) should have a design to teach a Doctrine, that were profitable to the
Egyptians and the Syrians, he would rather choose to learn the Barbarous
Languages of those Nations, than to be useless by speaking Greek to them.
(...). Orig. ibid.
The thing is the same (according to him) in the Providence of God, who did not
only consider those amongst the Greeks who were Men of Learning, but rather the
ignorant Community. And therefore it was suitable to the exigency at that time,
that they should accommodate themselves to the Style of the meaner sort, that
they might gain them, in speaking their Language.

Upon this Principle we ought to form an Idea of the Apostolical and
Evangelical Style, and not upon the prejudices of some Protestants, who believe
that they stand for the Authority of the Scripture, by allowing nothing that is
very mean to have proceeded out of the Mouth of the Apostles. But St. Paul
himself declared to the Corinthians, who despised him, because of his Language;
that he came not to Preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ with excellency of
Speech, or of Wisdom. 1 Cor. ii. 1. 1 Cor. i. 17.
For Christ (says that Apostle) sent me to Preach the Gospel, not with wisdom
of Words. St. John Chrysostom has observed, upon this Passage of St. Paul, that
if the Apostles in their Sermons, did not use the Style of the wise Men of the
Earth, (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Epist. 1. ad Cor. cap. 1.
that ought not to be attributed to the weakness of the Gift of Tongues which
they had received, seeing they took that course, that they might not obstruct
the Preaching of the Gospel. If it be so, (that Father adds) why was Apollo,
who was an Eloquent Man, sent to the Corinthians? To which he answers, that he
was not chosen because of his Eloquence, but because he was mighty in the
Scriptures, and vigorously refuted the Jews: (...).

St. Chrysostom does very much insist upon this, to show that the Apostles were
rude in their Expressions, and unskilful in the Greek Tongue. (...). Chrysostom.
ibid.
When the Greeks shall accuse (says he) the Disciples of Jesus Christ, for not
using a Discourse more polished than what the commonalty did pretend to, and
for being altogether unlearned, we ought to grant all this, and to enforce the
like charge, more than they. He also reproves those of his time, who alleged
that St. Paul was a Learned and an Eloquent Man. He makes mention of a Dispute
which was held about it in his time, betwixt a Greek and a Christian. He
thought it was a ridiculous thing in the Christian to maintain that St. Paul
understood the Greek Language perfectly. All (...). Chrysostom. ibid.
that Dispute went upon a comparison of St. Paul with Plato. The Grecian
endeavored to demonstrate that St. Paul was an illiterate Man. The Christian,
on the contrary, was so silly as to undertake to prove, that St. Paul was more
Learned and Eloquent than Plato. But as that Holy Bishop observes, the Grecian
on that occasion, said what the Christian ought to have said: the Christian on
the contrary, made use of such words as would have better become the Grecian.

It is no new thing to find Christians defend the purity of the Style of the
Apostles. If Henry Stephen, Phochen, and some others had lived in St.
Chrysostom's time, he would have found also in them the like Conduct, which he
would not have failed to brand with the title of ridiculous. He would have said
to them, as to those who lived in his days, (...). Chrysostom. ibid.
that the same thing therefore may not befall you, and that the Greeks may not
deride us in Dispute, let us accuse the Apostles of being illiterate persons;
for such an accusation is their praise. And the truth is, the Power of the
Gospel did not consist in the Knowledge and Eloquence of the Apostles, but in
the Efficacy of the Word of God. The Mahometans admire the greatness and
majesty of the Style of their Alcoran. The Christians on the contrary, who
acknowledge the most part of the Writings of the New Testament to be but simple
and mean as to the Style, are nevertheless persuaded of the truth of their
Religion, which was Preached by Men, (...). Chrysostom. ibid.
who were obscure and illiterate. (...). Chrysostom. ibid.
This is no matter of defamation (St Chrysostom does add) when we speak of such
Disciples of Jesus Christ. It is rather matter of their praise, who being such
persons made themselves renowned through the whole World.

And therefore Origin made no scruple to give some examples of the simple and
mean Style of the Apostles, and also to observe their Solecisms; which some
Fathers have done after him. He says that (...). Orig. Philoc. c. 4.
the Apostles who were persuaded of their mean capacity, as to human
literature, to which they had never applied themselves, did freely declare the
simplicity of their Style, and that they were very little acquainted with the
Rules of Discourse, although they were very skilful in the matters of Religion.
The same Father does observe in many places of his Works, that St. Paul's
diction is full of Hyperbates, nay even of Barbarisms, which made him obscure.
St. Irenaeus Quoniam autem hyperbatis frequenter utitur Apostolus propter
velocitatem sermonum suorum, and propter impetum qui in ipso est spiritus ex
multis quidem aliis est invenire. Iren. adv. Haer. lib. 3. c. 7.
who also acknowledged those Hyperbates in that Apostles Style, did attribute
the same to the readiness of his Discourse, and to the vigor of that Spirit
which was in him. I should never have done, if I should particularly relate all
the Testimonies of the Greek Writers concerning the simple and low Style of the
Evangelists and the Apostles. They have not so much as excepted St. Luke,
though it is generally believed that he had a more exact knowledge of the Greek
Language, than the rest of the Writers of the New Testament.

The Greek Scholiasts who have written on St. John, observe, after St.
Chrysostom, in the Prefaces which they prefix to that Evangelist, that St. John
was (...), etc. Schol. Gr. in IV. Evang. ex cod. MS Bibl. Colb.
of a pitiful Village called Bethsaida in Galilee, the Son of a poor Fisher,
who was altogether ignorant of that which the Men of the World call good
Literature, himself a rude and plain Fisherman, who could neither speak nor
write. The Cardinal Toletus, who writ a judicious Commentary upon St. John's
Gospel, speaks no otherwise of that Evangelists Style, in a Summary prefixed to
his Commentary. There he affirms that St. John Minus quam caeteri Evangelistae
Graece locutus est. Hebraicis phrasibus abundat. Vnde fit ut Hebraici sermonis
peritia, non minus quam Graeci, ad sensum sententiarum assequendum sit
necessaria. Franc. Tol. argum. Comm. in Joann.
does speak worse Greek than the other Evangelists, that he is stuffed with
Hebraisms; and that to understand him, it is necessary to know the Hebrew as
well as the Greek. He desires us to Attendendum est maximam vim in particulis
causalibus, illativis, continuativis, caeterisque ejusmodi esse positam, ut
interdum una particula integrum sententiae sensum contineat and ostendat. Tol.
ibid.
observe well the Causal Particles, the Illatives, the Conjunctives, and others
of that Nature, which have a great force in all his Discourse, because the
Sense does sometimes wholly depend on those Particles.

Enjedine, a subtle Unitary, did also enlarge his Observations on the Style of
that Evangelist, which he looked upon as very obscure, and very hard to be
understood, Si obscuritas concisa, abrupta, minime sibi cohaerens, and ex
allegoriis constans oration sublimitas dicenda est, fateor Joannem esse
sublimem. Nam vix ullam Christi concionem ab eo relatam invenias, quae tota non
sit allegerica and intellectu difficillima. Georg. Enjed. prooem. in Joann.
If we (says he) ought to call that greatness of Style which is an obscure
Discourse, abridged and interrupted, without any connection, and which is full
of Allegories, I avow, that in that Sense, St. John's Style is sublime: for he
makes no Harangue concerning Jesus Christ which is not Allegorical, and very
difficult to be understood. He does strongly insist Principium Evangelii
Joannis est obscurissimum, quod figuratae voces, inusitatae loquendi formulae,
praecipue autem diversitas and opinionum in verbis Joannis explicandis varietas
and contrarietas ostendit. Nulla enim fere vocula est, certe nulla clausula,
quae multiplices and inter se dissidentes interpretationes non habeat. Enjed.
ibid.
on the obscurity of the beginning of that Gospel, where (as he thinks) we can
find nothing but figurative words, and uncouth forms of Speech. There is not a
Word or Diction therein (as that Unitary does add) but what may be Expounded,
several, different, nay even opposite ways. This being so, I admire the
headstrong prejudice of the Protestants and Unitaries, who dare oppose the
common Belief of all the Churches of the World, having no other Foundation but
that of Records, which they acknowledge to be so obscure and difficult to be
understood. It is true that the Protestants do not altogether agree about the
obscurity of Scripture; especially in the most important places; but the
Unitaries in this matter, show more Candor, not denying a thing which is
obvious. They only desire that the number of the Fundamental Points of our
Faith be limited.

It is not sufficient to study the Greek Language in Profane Authors; seeing
the Writers of the New Testament have a particular Style that is abstruse, and
requires an extraordinary Application. Hentenius has very patly observed in his
Preface which he prefixed to his Version of the Commentaries of Euthymius upon
the Gospels. Animadvertendum est Evangelistas and Apostolos cum genere Hebraei
essent hac in re, sicut and in aliis multis, Hebraicum secutos idioma, quo illi
frequentissime pro praesenti quod proprium non habent, aut pro futuro efferunt
praeteritum. Vtque in universum dicam, tempus unum pro alio Hebraei saepenumero
collocant. Quod etiam Evangelistae non raro fecerunt, nec solus Matthaeus, qui
patria scripsit lingua, hoc est Hebraea, sed and caeteri qui Graece
scripserunt, etc. Joann. Hent. praef. Verse. Comm. Euthym. in Evang.
That the Apostles and the Evangelists being born Hebrews, did follow; in their
Writings, the Genius of the Hebrew Language, which frequently puts one time for
another, and has many other things pecuhar to it. He adds, it is not only St.
Matthew, who does imitate this Style of the Hebrew; but the other Evangelists
do it also. That one may be acquainted with this Style, it is fit to read the
Greek Version of the Septuagint, which the Apostles have imitated. It is
further necessary to study particularly the Style of every Book of the New
Testament. For although they are written in a certain Language, which I
elsewhere called the Language of the Synagogue, every Writer has something
peculiar to himself.

Of all the Holy Writers, St. Paul is most hard to be understood; who sometimes
comes to a full stop before he has done: which has given occasion to so great a
number of Hyperbates, or Transpositions in his Epistles. Gagnejus, who writ
very judicious Notes upon those Epistles, calls the Reading, or Style of St.
Paul, Lectionem turbulentam and salebrosam, i.e. an obscure and rugged Style.
Salebrosas illas Pauli Epistolas plerumque lectitanti mihi tam longis
byperbatis hiulcas, tot anapodotis inabsolutas, tanta sensuum profunditate
inaccessas and invias visum est non hic divinatore Apollinis Pythone, sed
divino Pauli spiritu opus esse. Vnde non possum illorum non admirari
impudentiam, qui cum non Pauli, id est pacis ac quietis, sed schismatum ac
dissensionis spiritum habeant, confestim nullo interpret absque sanctorum and
doctorum hominum Commentariis quae cavillari solent, unos se Pauli mentem
tenere impudenter arrogant. Gagn. Epist. dedic. Schol. in Epist. Pauli.
He is persuaded of their obscurity, because of their abstruse Style wherein
they were written, which he thinks almost impossible to be explained, without
the same Spirit that St. Paul had. He does withal admire the impudence of the
Protestants, who having quite another sort of Spirit than what the Apostle had,
do insolently boast, that they understand them, without any other assistance,
than that of their own Spirit: I should have some cause to glory, (says that
Divine) if I could give some light to St. Paul's obscure Style, which (as many
think) that Apostle did expressly affect. Non parum gloriabor, si quid lucis
Pauli tenebris adjecisse inveniar, ut multi putant, de industria affectlatis.
But that Apostle, in that, did the rather follow his Spirit, which represented
to him many things at once. And therefore, sometimes he only begins a
Discourse, and leaves it incomplete, nay he raises some objections to which he
makes no answer.

I know that St. Augustine in his Books concerning the Christian Religion, Aug.
l. 4. de Doct. Christ. c. 7.
composed a Chapter expressly to show that there was true Eloquence in the Holy
Scripture, especially in St. Paul's Writings, where he finds perfection of
Wisdom, accompanied with the greatness of Eloquence. But seeing that Father did
not understand the Greek Language, we ought in this case to prefer the Opinion
of the Greek Fathers to his. He seems nevertheless, in that place, to speak
only of a kind of Eloquence, that he calls Wisdom, and which he makes to
consist rather in Things, than in Expressions. If St. Paul was Eloquent,
because of some Figures which St. Augustine observed in his Style, there is
almost no Author but may pass for Eloquent upon that score. There is indeed a
force in that Apostle's discourse: There are very high thoughts, and a perfect
knowledge of Religion: But all this is not called Eloquence, according to the
common notion which we have of the Word. He himself declares, writing to the
Corinthians, who charged him with rudeness of Speech, that his discourse was
mean, and that he had not the art of speaking, or did not use enticing words of
Man's wisdom.

St. Jerome does plainly assure us, Illud quod crebro diximus, etsi imperitus
sermon, non tamen scientia, nequaquam Paulum de humilitate, sed de
consciontiae veritate dixisse etiam nunc approbamus. Profundos enim and
reonditos sensus lingua non explicat; and cum ipse sentiat quid loquatur, in
alienas aures puro non potest transfer sermon, quem cum in vernacula lingua
habeat disertissimum, quippe Hebraeus ex Hebraeis eruditus ad pedes Gamalielis
viri in lege doctissimi scriptum interpretari cupiens involvitur. Hier. Epist.
ad Alg. qu. 10.
that that acknowledgment of St. Paul did not so much proceed from the deep
humility that was in him, as from the Truth which he owned, because his Tongue
could not well express his profound and hidden thoughts. That Apostle, (says
he) being an Hebrew, and having studied under Gamaliel, a Doctor of the Law, is
put hard to it, when he would express what is upon his Spirit, although he had
from his Infancy, Learned the Greek Language at Tarsus in Cilicia. He does
allege after Origin, that St. Paul Multa sunt verba quibus juxta morem urbis
and provinciae suae familiarius Apostolus utitur -- Nec hoc miremur in
Apostolo, si utatur ejus linguae consuetudine in qua natus est and nutritus;
cum Virgilius alter Homerus apud nos patriae suae sequens consuetudinem
sceleratum frigus appellet. Hieron. ibid.
used many forms of Speech, which were peculiar to those of Cilicia, where he
was bred, and likewise he gives some examples thereof, which I do not here
examine. He adds, that that is no surprising thing, seeing Virgil, who was a
perfect Master of the Latin Tongue, has nevertheless made use of some
expressions that were peculiar to those of his Country.

That Father, as to what he further alleges with so great freedom of St.
Paul's Style, has given us nothing but what he had read in the Ancient
Ecclesiastical Authors, and what St. John Chrysostom, who lived at the same
time, has shown at large in his Eloquent Homilies, which he Preached to the
People. Yet St. Augustine was of a belief, contrary to the Opinion of St.
Chrysostom, and the most Learned of the Ancient time Male doctis hominibus
respondendum fuit, qui nostros auctores contemnendos putant, non quia non
babent, sed quia non ostentant quam nimis isti diligunt eloquentiam. Aug. de
Doct. Christ. lib. 4. c. 7.
that he ought to make an Apology for St. Paul, by answering a sort of Men of
his time, who despised that Apostle, because he made no show of Eloquence in
his discourse.

But Origin, who was not ashamed to produce St. Paul's Solecismes, did
judiciously observe (...). Orig. Philoc. cap. 4.
that that Apostle, who was appointed by God to be the Minister of the New
Testamment, had in his Preaching, and not in Men's Wisdom, shown the virtue and
efficacy of the Gospel, that the Conversion of Nations might not be attributed
to that Worldly Wisdom. And therefore St. Paul and the other Apostles have no
need of Apologies, which might afford him a Sanctuary, against those reproaches
which may be cast on them, about the manner of their Writing, seeing God was
pleased, not to make use of Orators for the Preaching of the Gospel, but simple
Fishermen who had no Learning.

Further, it does not yet follow, but that it is demonstrable, that the most
part of the words that St. Paul, and the other Writers of the New Testament
have used, are good Greek; only the Symetry of their Phrases, and their modes
of Speech are not always accommodated to the Greek, which is not extraordinary.
For every Nation has a peculiar manner of expressing their own thoughts; and
though they deliver them in terms that are purely Greek or Latin, we soon
perceive, that the Order is not altogether Greek or Latin. We need only for
Example, look on the Greek Version of the Psalms, and upon the Ancient Latin
Translation, which was done out of the Greek; we see there something that is
singular, and not agreeable either to the Greek or the Latin Genius; when it is
even supposed, that the words are pure Greek and Latin. And for this reason,
those amongst the Greek Fathers, who had a perfect knowledge of the Greek
Language, were sometimes at a loss, as to their comprehending the Greek of the
Septuagint.

We may further observe, that if the Ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, had known
the Hebrew as well as the Greek; they would not have found the Style of the
Sacred Writings so barbarous as some of them believed. I am astonished, that
St. Jerome who understood both Languages, did not take this way to explain what
seemed to be most strange in their Style, rather than accuse them of Solecisms
and Barbarisms. I believe, that in those places, he followed the Opinion of
Origin, whom he frequently transcribes. Indeed, he does sometimes admire the
greatness of St. Paul's thoughts: He acknowledged, that that Holy Apostle had
applied himself to the study of Profane Authors, whom he sometimes quotes. But
after all, he is of the mind, that we ought not to look for Eloquent Discourses
in the Writings of the Apostles, because Jesus Christ did not intend to have
his Church composed of Orators and Philosophers, but of Men who were the Dregs
of the People. Ecclesia Christi non de Academia and Lyceo, sed de vili plebe
congregata est.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Language of the Hellenists or Grecians; if that which
bears that name, be in effect, a Language: The Reasons of Salmasius against
that Language, do rather establish than destroy it. The Greek of the New
Testament may be called the Greek of the Synagogue, the Jews Hellenists read in
their Synagogues the Hebrew Text of the Bible, as well as the Jews.
THere are some Passages in the Acts of the Apostles, from which there are
Proofs commonly drawn, that the Jews, when Christianity began, were divided
into two Parties. The one were (...).
purely called Hebrews, and the other Hellenists or Grecians. Those who
remained in the Territory of Babylon, after they were first dispersed, retained
the name of Hebrews; because they spoke the very Language, which was used
beyond the River Euphrates, and which, for that reason ought to be called
Hebrew, although it was Chaldee. And the Jews who dwelt in Palestine, after
their return from the Babylonish Captivity, were also purely called Hebrews;
because they brought from Babylon the Chaldaick Language, which they called
Hebrew. These Hebrews, in their Synagogues, read the Hebrew Text of the Law and
the Prophets, to which they joined Glosses that were written in the Chaldee,
which was their Vulgar Tongue.

They called those Grecians, who were Jews of Alexandria, and many other places
where they spoke the Greek Language. These read in their Assemblies, the Greek
Version of the Septuagint, which they joined to the Hebrew Text, to be used as
an Interpretation. They were called Hellenists or Greeks, because they spoke
Greek, and read no other Books, in their ordinary custom, than what were
written in Greek: Yet they always maintained a particular respect for the
Original Hebrew of the Bible. And therefore in their Synagogues, they continued
to read it in Hebrew, no less than the other Jews; which is still practiced by
the Jews at this day, in all places where they are, through the whole World.
The Jews, for Example, of the Spanish Nation and Rite, the Dutch Jews, who live
in Holland and the Neighboring Provinces; and in a word, all the Jews of what
Nation soever, read in their Synagogues, the Holy Scripture in the Original
Language: They are called Spanish and Dutch, because of their Vulgar Tongue.

There were at that time also, Jews who spoke Greek, whom they likewise called
Greeks or Hellenists, and the Language in which the most part of their Books
were written, has been called in this Age, the Hellenistick Language. This
Language is Greek in respect of the words, but the order of the Phrase is
Hebrew or Chaldee; as we still see at this day, that the Spanish Jews have
composed the Translations of the Bible in a kind of Spanish Language, which is
hard to be understood by any one who does not understand the Hebrew: It is the
same thing in their other Versions of the Bible, in whatsoever Language they
are written. They do not only continually mix therewith, some Hebrew or half
Hebrew words; but their manner of expression, in all the Vulgar Languages, has
also a great affinity with the Hebrew. The Ancient Greek Version of the
Septuagint was written in this sort of Greek, as well as the Books of the New
Testament, and they called this Language Hellenistick, because it was in use
among the Jews who spoke the Greek Language, and who are called Hellenists or
Greeks in the Acts of the Apostles.

Vossius, who frequently frames Maxims, which he does not confirm by any solid
Proofs, does allege, that those were called Hellenists, who favored the
Greeks; and that the Word (...) does signify that, in the same manner as (...)
and (...) do signify to favor the Romans and the Persians. And thus that
incomparable Person does often judge of things merely by Grammatical Notions,
without being in any measure concerned, whether those notions do, or do not
agree to the things, to which he applies them. But if we should confine our
selves only to the Grammatical sense of the Word (...), it is certain, that it
does signify, as well in Profane as Ecclesiastical Authors, to speak Greek;
and likewise, to speak that Language in its purity. He thinks that those among
the Jews, were called Hebrews; who, by reason of the great zeal they had for
their Law, were unwilling to submit to the Greeks and the Romans, and would by
no means allow that their Nation should pay tribute to Strangers: The rest on
the contrary, were called Hellenists who paid tribute with good will.

But all this is a mere imagination, that has not the least shadow of Reason,
and which signifies nothing; as to that Passage of the Acts of the Apostles,
Chap. 6. where there is mention made of the Hebrews and Hellenists, or Greeks.
St. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and many other Fathers, did not by those
Grecians understand any other Jews, but those who had the Greek for their
Vulgar Language; whereas the rest spoke the Chaldee or Babylonish Tongue. St.
Luke (says Oecumenius speaking of the former) (...). Oecum. in c. 6. Act.
Apost.
calls them Greeks or Hellenists, not upon the account of their Religion, but
because they spoke the Greek Language: Although they were Jews as well as
others, they are not commonly called Hebrews, because they spoke not the
Hebrew, or rather the Chaldee Language. That Hebrew Language had continued
among the Jews of Palestine since their return from Babylon, and they looked
upon themselves to be more considerable than the rest of the Jews, who were
dispersed through the several Provinces of the Roman Empire where they spoke
Greek.

The most able Critics of our Age, have owned the Hellenistick Language, to
which they have had frequent recourse for explaining many Passages of the New
Testament. Yet Salmasius, and after him Crojus, have used their utmost
endeavor to cry down this new Language, which (as they imagine) was unknown to
all the Ancients, and which is, as they allege, chymerical, seeing it cannot
be reduced to any of the Ancient Greek Dialects.

The former has expressly written two Books upon this Subject, one whereof is
entitled, De Hellenistica Commentarius, and another, Funus Linguae
Hellenisticae. He does really, in these two Works, show himself to be a Man of
great Learning: But he is so far from destroying that Language, as he pretends,
that he does confirm it in several places.

The Patrons of the Hellenistick Language never believed, that there was a
Greek Dialect of that name; and so, all Salmasius's long Discourse upon the
several Greek Dialects, is nothing to the purpose. Further, seeing we intend
not to dispute with him on words, it shall be granted, that the word Hellenist
does signify Greek; and that those who speak not that Language properly, ought
rather to be called Non Hellenists than Hellenists. The truth is, in the
Prohibition that Julian laid on the Christians, not to apply themselves to the
Study of the Greek Language, he uses this word (...); as it does signify to
speak pure Greek. And therefore St. Gregory of Nazianzen calls him in derision,
(...), a lover of the Greek Language; and he tells him, (...). Greg. Naz. Orat.
1. adv. Jul.
he who made this Law, has forbidden us to speak in the Attick Dialect, but he
has not restrained us from speaking the Truth.

In this sense, there are no true Hellenists, but those who have a perfect
Knowledge of the Greek Language: which does differ from the Hellenistick
Language, and this I would rather call the Greek of the Synagogue, because it
owes its Original to the Synagogues of the Jews. But those who first called
this Language the Hellenistick, did it only in conformity to that place of the
Acts, where the Jews are called Hellenists, and not according to the ordinary
notion of the word Hellenist. Salmasius does grant, that there are many
Hebraisms in the Version of the Septuagint, and in the Writings of the
Apostles. He only denies, that we ought, upon that account, to call that the
Hellenistick Language, in which those Books were written: Otherwise, (says he)
we ought to give the same name to the Ancient Latin Version of the Bible,
because there is also a great many Hebraisms in that Version: But it was
necessary that it should have been written in Greek, before it could be called
an Hellenistick Version. We do not call the Language of the Septuagint, and of
the New Testament Hellenistick, merely because it contains many Hebraisms, but
because it is Greek mixed with Hebraisms.

There may be any name chosen and applied in this case, provided that there be
an agreement in the thing it self: It is vain to dispute on words, when the
matter is past dispute. Now Salmasius does, in his two Books, suppose certain
Principles which manifestly establish the Language which some Critics, in this
last Age, have called the Hellenistick. He assures us, for example, that the
Seventy Interpreters, who understood the Greek very well, Nisi verbum verbo in
pluribus reddere curassent, long, ut ita dicam, Graecatiorem and omnibus
Hebraismis totidemque barbarismis repurgatam potuissent edere translationem.
Hebraismi non aliunde exorti sunt, quam ex vertendi modo qui se verbis alligat,
qui sensa non exprimere contentus, etiam vim ipsam vocularum repraesent are
satagit. Salm. Epist. dedic. Comm. de Hellenist.
could have made a Version, of better Greek, and free from all the Hebraisms
and Barbarisms with which it abounds. He is of the Opinion that these
Hebraisms, were occasioned by the too great care they took to render the Hebrew
words literally, and to express the force they have in the Original. According
to this supposition, the Greek of the Septuagint is not pure, but Greek mixed
with Hebraisms; and they have likewise given new significations to Greek words,
the better to express the sense of the Original. This is that which is called
the Hellenistick Language: Thus you see, how Salmasius is become a great
Hellenisticary, whilst he never dreamed any such thing.

Cum Hebraicos loquendi modos inseruere, non ex Graeca copia qua abundabant eos
hauserunt, sed ex textu Hebraico, cui nimis se in vertendo adstringebant,
sumpserunt. Salm. ibid.
When they inserted (says he, speaking of the Septuagint,) the Hebrew modes of
Speech, they did not draw them from the copiousness of the Greek Language, but
from the Hebrew Text, to which they adhered very closely: Salmasius does use
his utmost endeavor, to confirm by those words, the Greek Language of the
Synagogue, otherwise called the Hellenistick Language. It Is no great matter how
it is called, provided the thing be plain. He declares, that he always allowed,
that the words of that Version are Greek, but that the Phrase is Hebrew; De re
semper inter omnes constitit verba esse Graeca, Phrasim Hebraicam: If it be so,
why did he write two pretty large Books, in which he disputes on nothing else
but the name that is to be given to that Language? The only thing that he is
careful for, is to show, that there never was a Dialect amongst the Greeks,
that was called the Hellenistick. De re tota (says he) disputatur, and
quaeritur, an omnino fuerit, hoc est, an Hellenistica aliqua dialectus fuerit:
We freely grant, that there never was any Dialect of this name, amongst the
Greeks. And therefore, I have elsewhere called this Language of the
Jews-Hellenists, a Greek of the Synagogue: And in the same manner, we may at
this day distinguish the pure Spanish amongst the Jews, from the Spanish of the
Synagogue, into which they have translated the Bible of that Language. They
have also framed on the same Model, an Arabic of the Synagogue, a Persian
Language of the Synagogue, in which they have written their Translations of the
Bible, and their Prayer-Books. If we have not this Idea, in reading the Greek
of the Septuagint and the New Testament; we cannot have an exact knowledge of
the Style of those Books, which are not written in a Language that is purely
Greek, as Salmasius himself does suppose, with those whom he calls
Hellenisticaries.

Seeing it is so, I do not see to what purpose the most part of that Critick's
Questions do serve, which he has proposed in his Commentary concerning the
Hellenistick Language. To what end, for example, does he so exactly inquire, An
dialectus peculiaris constituenda sit ea eloquutio qua Septuaginta Interpretes
in Bibliis transferendis usi sunt. An plures quam quinque dialectos Graeci
noverint, and an Hellenisticae inter eas dialectos meminerint. An Hellenisticae
nomen conveniat ei phrasi quae verbis Graecis Hebraeos concipit intellectus.
Salm. init. Comm. de Hellen.
if the Language which the Seventy Interpreters use in their Version, does
constitute a particular Dialect, and if they reckoned amongst those Dialects,
that which was called Hellenistick? If the appellation of the Hellenistick
Language does agree to that sort of Phrase, whereof the words are Greek and the
conceptions Hebrew; it was an easy matter for him to compile large Treatises,
by that Method, because he does seldom or never treat of the matter in
Question: After he had enumerated all the Dialects of the Greeks, he concludes,
Ex his quae proposuimus sole manifestius liquet, ejusmodi eloquutionem Graecam,
quae nec ullius certae gentis unquam propria fuit, nec certas habuit notas
verbis inhaerentes quibus discerneretur ab aliis dialectis, non posse videri
dialectum, nec teneri definitione dialecti. Salm. Comm. de Hellen. p. 84.
that it is more clear than the day; that that Greek Language that belonged to
no Nation, and that had no mark, to characterise or distinguish it from other
Dialects, is not a true Dialect.

But that was not the thing he was to prove, because we are of the same Opinion
with him, that that which some able Critics have called the Hellenistick
Language is none of the Greek Dialects. They only think, that that Language is
not pure Greek, by reason of the Hebraisms with which it abounds. The
Hellenistick Language, according to those Critics is a Language that contains
Greek words and Hebrew Phrases: Lingua Hellenistica est quae verbis Graecis
utitur, phrasibus Hebraicis. All the Question then is to know, if the Version
of the Septuagint, and the Books of the Old Testament be written in this
manner: Since he himself does grant this, it may be concluded from hence, that
those Writers have no particular and proper Language. It is not to be looked
for in any Dialect of the Greeks, nor in any Nation in particular, but in the
Synagogues of the Jews-Greeks or Hellenists. As, if at this day, I would know,
what is the Language of the Bibles Printed in Spanish at Ferrara, and at
Constantinople; I would not look for a particular Nation that speaks that
Language, but would consult the usage of their Synagogues. The Apostles who
frequented the Synagogues of the Jews-Hellenists, and who read with them, the
Greek Version of the Septuagint, borrowed the expressions thereof; besides,
being Jews by Birth, and the Chaldee being their Mother Tongue, it was very
hard for them not to mix some Hebraisms and Chaldaisms with the Greek in which
they writ.

Crojus, who is of the same Opinion with Salmasius upon this Subject, did
likewise establish the Hellenistick Language in the same manner as Salmasius
had done, though he had at the same time, an intention to destroy it. That
Author, after he had recounted many things, which were no way for the purpose
he designed them, does conclude against Heinsius, a Hero of the Hellenisticary
Party, that the Evangelists and the Apostles are not Hellenists (...), because
they did not speak good Greek, but did Hebraize or Chaldaize, (...), their
Phrases being Hebrew, Chaldee and Syriack. Whereby he does establish that
Hellenistick Language, whereof the words are Greek, and the Phrases Hebrew. He
asks Heinsius, how he can reconcile these two things, viz. Si Apostolus ejusque
collegae (...), ut in omnibus fere observationibus contendit Heinsius, quomodo
profiteri potest eos (...). Joann. Croj. Sacr. Obs. in N. T. c. 34.
That St. Paul and the other Writers of the New Testament are Hellenists, and
at the same time do Hebraize: It Is easy to reconcile the Two. For Heinsius and
the rest of the Hellenisticaries, do not take (as it has been already observed)
the word (...) To be an Hellenist, in the sense that the Greeks ordinarily used
it in; they do not think, that it does in that place, signify to speak pure
Greek, but that which has been mentioned before. And therefore Crojus does, no
less than Salmasius, dispute about words: For the avoiding of which
inconveniency, we shall call that Language the Greek of the Synagogue.

But whence was it (it may be said) that those Jews-Hellenists, whose Vulgar
Language was the Greek, spoke that Greek of the Synagogue, that is to say, a
Greek mixed with Hebraisms and Chaldaisms; seeing the Hebrew and Chaldee was
not then in use amongst them? Philon for Example, who was one of those Jews
that were called Hellenists, spoke Greek very well. He does not in the least
make any thing appear in his Works, that comes near the Greek of the Synagogue.

To this it may be answered, that the Greek Hellenists did continually read the
Hebrew Bible in their Synagogues, as well as the other Jews, who called
themselves purely Hebrews: Although those Hellenists writ some particular Works
in pure Greek, which had nothing of the Greek of the Synagogue, it was not the
same thing as their Greek Versions of the Bible, and some other of their Books.
Seeing in these Works, they confined themselves to the Hebrew Text, they
expressed the form of the Hebrew Phrase. This may be justified by the Arabic,
Persian, Spanish, and the Vulgar Greek Versions of the Bible, which were made
by the Jews. There are pure Hebraisms owned to be in all these, although the
Authors thereof were Jews, who spoke those Languages: Which could proceed from
nothing else but their scrupulous adhering in their Translations, to the Words
of the Original Hebrew.

It is true, that the most part of those who defend the Hellenistick Language,
believe, that the Jews-Hellenists did read no other Bible in their Synagogues,
but the Greek Version of the Septuagint; but they are mistaken in that. Even
Salmasius, who declared himself very much against the Hellenisticaries, does
assure us, that the Jews in whatsoever place they were, did continually read
the Hebrew Text of the Bible in their Synagogues. They who pretend to prove the
contrary, by the 146 Constitution of Justinian, did not narrowly enough observe
the words of that Constitution, which shows it quite otherwise: Yet Lewis
Cappel and several other Learned Critics Quin and inter Hellenistas ad septimi
usque seculi initium liturgia Judaeorum Graeca lingua peragebatur, non
Hebraica. Singulis enim Sabbatis lectio ex Mose and Prophetis in Synagogis ex
Graeca (...) Septuaginta Versione fiebat: quod liquet ex novella Justiniani
constitutione 146. Lud. Capp. qu. de loc. parall. Vet. and Nov. Test.
depend on that Emperor's Novel to demonstrate, that the Greek Hellenists, in
their Liturgy or Office, did use the Greek Language, till the beginning of the
Seventh Age, and that they had read no other Scripture, in their Synagogues
until that time, but the Greek Version of the Septuagint. Grotius was also of
this Opinion in his Note on the sixth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles,
where there is mention made of the Hellenists. (...). Judaeorum Religione, sed
qui cum Alexandriae and vicinis in locis vixissent antea, morem inde
retinuerant sacra scripta legendi Graece, (...) -- qui mos mansit ad Justiniani
tempora, ut cognoscimus ex Novella 146. Grot. Annot. in c. 6. Act. Apost.
Those Jews (says he) were Religious Jews, and having lived at Alexandria and
the neighboring places, had retained the custom of reading the Scripture in
Greek, which custom continued till Justinian's time, as appears by the 146
Novel.

But the words of that Novel, which it is fit to set down in this place, do
expressly make the contrary manifest. The Jews, in Justinian's time, were
divided into two Parties: The one was for reading only the pure Hebrew Text in
their Synagogues; the other, besides that Text, read the Ancient Greek Version
of the Septuagint, instead of an Interpretation, because they understood not
the Hebrew Language. The Emperor Justinian does declare, (...). Novel. 146. ut.
de Ebr.
that having understood their discord, he thought it expedient to apply a
remedy thereunto by a Judgment: The account of their dispute is conceived in
these terms. (...). Ibid.
Some amongst them, who only retained the Hebrew Text of the Bible, were for
reading it alone, at the public Service in the Synagogues. (...). Ibid.
Others, on the contrary, alleged that besides the Original Hebrew, the Greek
Interpretation ought to have been used. We ought chiefly to take notice of
these last Words, which give us to understand, that the matter in agitation was
not simply to have the Bible in Greek in the Synagogues of the Jews-Hellenists,
as is commonly believed, but to join the Reading of the Greek Version to the
Reading of the Hebrew Text.

This will yet more clearly appear by the very words of Justinian's Decree,
(...). Ibid.
who pronounced Sentence in favor of those, who, besides the Original Hebrew,
read in their Assemblies a Version in Greek, or in another Vulgar Language,
according to the places of their abode. (...). Ibid.
He Ordained therefore, that it should be permitted to the Jews, who had a mind
to it, to read the Holy Writings in Greek, in those places where the People
understood the Greek, and in every other Language, for example, in Latin,
according to the Language of the Country were they dwelt.

Cappel did not understand the Sense of this Ordinance of Justinian, when he
endeavored to prove that the Jewish Doctors did at that time forbid, under the
pain of an Anathema, the public reading of any other Scripture but the
Original Hebrew in their Synagogues. Whence he concludes, that the Custom which
is at this day amongst the Jews, of not having their Liturgy in the Vulgar
Tongue, but in Hebrew, was not introduced amongst them, but since the
publication of the Talmud. If he had diligently read Justinian's Constitution,
he would have been satisfied, that they read in those days the Law and the
Prophets in Hebrew, in all the Synagogues of the World. But they added
afterward to the Hebrew, a Version or Paraphrase in the Vulgar Language of
every Country. They of Jerusalem, for example, and all Palestine, who called
themselves purely Hebrews, joined an Interpretation in Chaldee to the reading
of the Original. There is also a probability, that the Custom the Jews have
still at this day, of reading privately every Saturday, a Parasca, or Section
of the Chaldee Paraphrase, did proceed from that ancient usage of the
Synagogues who joined the reading of the Paraphrase to the Hebrew Text.

The Jewish Doctors did not therefore, prohibit at that time, the reading of
the Greek Version, and other Translations of Scripture, as if they had read
those Versions only in their Synagogues; but they decreed that there should be
no Version added to the reading of the Original Text, which had been practiced
till that time. They had used an Interpreter till that time, who rendered the
words of the Hebrew Text in the Language of the People. Which appears by the
Talmud, and all other Books which Treat of the Jewish Laws and Customs. That
ancient usage has altogether ceased amongst them. They have indeed Translations
of the Bible in their Vulgar Tongues, but they read these only privately. This
they also observe as to their Service Books, which they read in Hebrew in all
their Synagogues, although they have Translations of them in several Languages.

CHAP. XXVIII. A more particular Discussion of the Reasons alleged by
Salmasius, against the Language that is called Hellenistick. Several
difficulties also relating to this matter are cleared.
THis should be the place to observe particularly the principal Hebraisms,
which are scattered through the whole New Testament: but besides that my only
design is to explain the Style of those Books in general, they may be found
Collected in the Sacred Philology of John Vorstius, who has enlarged
sufficiently on this Subject. The answer of Thomas Gatakerus to the
Dissertation of Phochen, ( vid. if he be the English Whittaker -- if this
Authors Name was Thomas) may likewise be consulted in this matter. I shall
speak of these two Books, and some other the like, in the third Part of this
Critical History. I shall only confine my self here to Salmasius his Reasons,
by which he pretends to show, that all that is said of the Hellenistick
Language is without a Foundation.

This Learned Critic does absolutely deny that the Seventy Interpreters were
Hellenists, Salm. in Epist. dedic. Comm. de Hellen.
because this Name can only be attributed to the Jews, who were dispersed into
several Countries, out of the Land of Judah. But it is Universally agreed upon,
that the Seventy belonged to Jerusalem, and that consequently they were purely
Hebrews. In Jerusalem they did read the Bible in Hebrew, and not in Greek. If
they joined to it any Gloss, it was written in the Language of the Jews of that
Place, that is to say in the Chaldee. The same thing (says Salmasius) may be
alleged as to the Apostles, who for the most part were Jews Originally, and
who lived in Judah, even after the death of Jesus Christ. How then is it
possible that they could be Greeks or Hellenists? There was only St. Paul
amongst them, who (being of Tarsus in Cilicia, where they spoke the Greek
Language) could assume the quality of a Jew-Hellenist. But having been bred at
Jerusalem, where he Studied under the Renowned Rabbin Gamaliel, he denominates
himself a mere Hebrew, Hebraeus ex Hebraeis. Indeed, since he was of the
Pharisees, he cannot be reckoned in the number of the Jews-Hellenists, who did
read the Bible in Greek in their Synagogues.

It is easy to solve all these difficulties with the least trouble imaginable.
It may be observed, that although the Appellation of Jews-Hellenists, was given
to those who were scattered out of Judaea, into those several Countries where
they spoke the Greek Language, this does not hinder, but that there may be
found true Hellenists even in the Land of Judah: for every Jew who writ in that
Greek, which we have formerly called the Greek of the Synagogue, may be called
a Hellenist, by reason of the Language he used in writing his Works. Upon this
ground, when it shall be supposed, that the Authors of the ancient Greek
Version, which is ascribed to the Seventy Interpreters, were of Jerusalem, they
are truly Hellenists, because they Composed their Version in a Greek, that is
full of Hebraisms and of Chaldaisms. The Apostles who were of Galilee, and
consequently natural born Jews, are also in this Sense Jews-Hellenists, if they
be considered as the Authors of such Books as they writ in the Greek of the
Synagogue. St. Paul was indeed born a Hellenist, having learned the Greek
Language from his Infancy: but being afterward Educated in the Schools at
Jerusalem, he became a pure Hebrew, as to what concerned the Rites and Usages
of those of his Nation. Yet he ought to be reckoned among the Hellenists, if we
consider his Works, which are written in a Greek Style full of Hebraisms, in
which, by common suffrage, the Hellenistick Language does consist.

Salmasius does object against this, that the modes of Speech in a Language do
change according to the Times, whilst the name of the Language does not change.
If so, it cannot be said, that an Hebrew or Syriack Phrase, Salm. de Lang.
Hellen. p. 131.
which is delivered in pure Greek terms, can constitute a particular Language
or Dialect of a Nation. It does only give a new Character of the Language. The
Style of the Poets, for example, is very remote from the ordinary Greek. Yet
none ever affirmed that that was a particular Language. So it cannot be said
that the Hellenistick Language, does make a particular Dialect common to a
whole Nation, as if it were a Language spoken by the Community. They were
content to confine it to their Synagogues, and the Works of those who writ in
the Language of the Synagogue. Let it be only called, if one please, a new
Character in the Greek Language. But this is nothing to the Question, seeing we
Dispute not of the Word, but of the Thing. Salmasius does grant, that the Greek
Version of the Septuagint, and of the Books of the New Testament are written in
Greek, full of Hebraisms: we require no more for the Confirmation of the
Hellenistick Language.

It is possible that the Hellenisticaries abuse the Word Language. But it is
sufficient that they do explain what they understand by this Word, and that
they own, that they did not intend thereby the General Language of a Nation.
For it is certain, that the Jews, Greeks, or Hellenists, did every one speak
the Greek Language of the places where they were. St. Paul, for example, spoke
the Greek which was in his time used at Tarsus. Philon spoke the Greek of those
of Alexandria: and seeing he had Studied that Language with great Application,
he writ in a Style that was exceedingly polished. Nevertheless all the Jews,
who were Greeks or Hellenists, did not write in the Language which is here
called the Hellenistick, because it was Consecrated chiefly to the use of the
Synagogues, and was framed according to the Language of the Holy Writings. The
Jews who were purely Hebrews, and who writ in Greek, were more
Hellenisticaries, than the Jews-Hellenists themselves, because their Style did
more abound with Hebraisms, and Chaldaisms, than that of the Hellenists, who
had the Greek for their Vulgar Language.

And though we should suppose with Salmasius, that the most part of the
Disciples of Jesus Christ, being Galileans, and of the Dregs of the People,
spoke no other Language but the Syriack, it could not from thence be proved,
that the Books of the Old Testament that are in Greek, are not written in the
Hellenistick Language. All that can be proved from that supposition is, that
the Apostles did then compose their Works in their Mother Tongue, which was the
Syriack, and that they were afterward Translated into Greek by Interpreters,
who accompanied them in their Travels, and who understood the Greek Language.
This is truly the Opinion of that Critic, who believed that the most part of
the Apostles were but very slow in learning the Greek, at that time when they
were commanded to Preach the Gospel to the Gentiles. Sed and plures ex iis
verisimile est per interpretem Graecis and Romany Evangelium adnuntiasse,
exceptis si qui Graece noverant, ut pote inter Graecos nati, quod de Paulo
certum est. Salm. de Hellen. p. 254.
It is likewise probable, (says he) that several of them Preached the Gospel
to the Greeks and Romans, by Interpreters, there being only those of them who
were Greeks by Birth, (for example, St. Paul,) who Preached in Greek.

But that supposition is so far from destroying the Hellenistick Language of
the Books of the New Testament, that it does establish it the more. For
Salmasius assures us in the same place, that the Greek Books that were
Translated out of the Hebrew and the Syriack, do more abound with Hebraisms and
Chaldaisms, than those which had been written in Greek before that time. And
therefore he alleges, that there are much fewer Hebraisms in St. Luke, and in
St. Paul, who understood the Greek Language, than in St. Matthew, who had been
Translated out of the Hebrew or Chaldee. Hanc differentiam stili in Graece
translatis, and mere Graecis, notavit aliquot locis Hieronymus. Salm. ibid. p.
258.
He confirms his Observation by the Authority of St. Jerome, who acknowledged,
(as he thinks) this difference of Style, betwixt the Books that were written in
Greek, and those which were Translated into that Language. All that can be
concluded from his Supposition is, that the Books which were written by the
Disciples of Jesus Christ, who were Galileans, were not composed by
Jews-Hellenists, but by mere Hebrews, in the Language of their Country, which
was the Chaldaick Language.

He cannot conclude from thence, that the Greek of the Books which we have at
this day, is not a Greek of the Synagogues. On the contrary, the Distinction
that he makes betwixt the Works, which were then written in Greek, and those
which were Translated out of the Hebrew and the Chaldee, does manifestly
suppose it. Nevertheless we ought not to oppose, in this matter, all the
Ancients, who believed that of the four Evangelists, St. Matthew did only write
his Gospel in Hebrew. As for the Hebraisms, which he thinks abound more in the
Books that were Translated out of Hebrew into Greek, than in others, Vorstius
is not altogether of the same mind. For he believes that there are more
Hebraisms in St. Luke's Gospel, than in the other Gospels. He likewise adds,
Ego contenderim S. Lucam plus Hebraismorum usurpasse, quam ullum caeterorum
Novi Testamenti Scriptorum, and in uno capite primo Evangelii Lucae vel
quinquaginta: in uno vero ejusdem capitis versiculo, vel quatuor, aut plures
Hebraismos demonstrare possim. Joann. Vorst. Philolog. Sac. part. alt. Epist.
dedic.
that he could easily show fifty Hebraisms in the first Chapter of that
Evangelist, and four and more, even in one Verse: indeed it may very well be
that St. Luke may make use of more pure Greek Terms, than the other Evangelists
do, and yet for all this, have a Phrase that is altogether Hebrew or Syriack.

Salmasius does further assure us, against the Opinion of the ancient
Ecclesiastical Writers, Graece nescisse Apostolos vel uno vincitur argumento,
quod ex Septuaginta Interpretum Versione testimonia non citarint, sed ex
Hebraico textu. Salm. de Hellen. page 255.
that amongst all the Apostles, it was only St. Paul who understood the Greek.
Which he proves by their citing the Old Testament according to the Hebrew Text,
and not according to the Greek of the Septuagint. But we have already shown the
contrary: and although St. Jerome is sometimes of that Opinion, he frequently
takes the opposite side upon very good Reasons. The Reason, ( Salmasius adds)
why the Passages of the Old Testament, which are cited in the New, do not agree
with the Greek of the Septuagint, is because the Evangelists and the Apostles
took them from the Hebrew, and the Interpreters, Translating them into Greek,
do not always agree with the Septuagint. But if it were so, those Translators
would at least have expressed the Hebrew by other Greek Words, and would have
been conformable to that Hebrew: which yet is not true, for they agree more
often with the Septuagint, than with the Hebrew Text. This difference, as it
has been elsewhere observed, proceeds from this, that the Apostles according to
the usage of their time, did not trouble themselves in their citations to
relate the express Words of Scripture, because they adhered chiefly to the
Sense.

But was it necessary ( Salmasius continues) that St. Peter, who was an Apostle
of the Jews, should understand the Greek Language, seeing the Jews of that time
understood the Syriack and the Hebrew? It is not true that all the Jews of that
time understood the Hebrew and the Syriack. For in all the Roman Empire, only
those of Palestine knew the Syriack or the Chaldee, and yet those of that
Country who were above the Common Rank, did likewise understand the Greek
Language. As for the Hebrew, there were only a very few Learned Men amongst
them who understood it; whereas the Greek Language was spread through a
considerable part of the Empire, and the Jews of Rome, where St. Peter was,
accompanied with St. Mark, spoke Greek more than any other Language. To that
which is objected, that St. Mark, according to the testimony of all Antiquity,
was St. Peter's Interpreter; I answer, that it cannot be proved from thence
that S. Peter was altogether ignorant of the Greek Language, seeing all those
ancient Doctors of the Church, who make St. Mark to be St. Peter's Interpreter,
do not deny but that this Holy Apostle understood the Greek. St. Paul had
likewise Titus for his Interpreter; and yet Salmasius thinks that that Apostle
knew the Greek better than the Hebrew.

We will freely grant to this Critic, that St. John, who was a Galilean, had a
more exact knowledge of the Hebrew, or rather of the Chaldaick Language, than
of the Greek. But it cannot be from thence inferred with him, that that Apostle
did Write his Gospel in the Hebrew, rather than in the Greek. For having
established his abode in the places where the Greek was spoken, he instructed
the several People whose Apostle he was, in the Language which they spoke. And
seeing his Gospel is only a Collection of his Sermons, he writ it in the same
Language. And therefore I do not apprehend that Salmasius has established
undoubted Principles for warranting this general Consequence, Scribebant igitur
Apostoli idiomate suo and lingua sibi familiari and vernacla, quae protinus a
Syris (...), vel Graecis ipsis ad fidem conversis, quos secum habebant
Evangelii praedicandi adjutores and administros, in Graecum transferebantur.
Salmas. ibid. p. 258.
That the Apostles writ their Books in their Mother Tongue, which was the
Syriack Language, and that afterward they were Translated into Greek by the
Syrians, who understood the Greek, or yet by the Converted Greeks, whom they
used as Coadjutors, and Interpreters for the Preaching of the Gospel. But
besides that we have formerly spoken of these Interpreters and Fellow helpers,
though they should be acknowledged to have been in the same manner as Salmasius
does suppose, it might be always said, that the Books of the New Testament are
written in the Greek of the Synagogue. It is much more probable that the
Apostles, who were Galileans, are the Authors thereof. For if they had made use
of Persons Learned in the Greek Language, there would not be found so many
Hebraisms in them. The Style of St. John's Gospel does show that it was written
by a Galilean, rather than a Grecian.

However it be, Salmasius is obliged to declare that the Writings of the New
Testament are full of modes of Speech that are altogether Syriack: and herein
the Hellenistick Language is made to consist. He only differs from those whom
he calls Hellenisticaries Illi Syriasmi quibus totus conspersus est Novi
Testamenti Graeci textus ex charactere nimirum (...), quo de verbo ad verbum
expressa peragitur transtatio. Salm. ibid.
in this, that he attributes the form of the Syriack Phrases to the
Interpreters of the Apostles; whereas the Hellenisticaries do ascribe them to
the Apostles themselves. But whether it be, that the Apostles themselves, or
their Interpreters were the Authors thereof, the thing it self will be always
granted. And thus he does rather establish, than destroy the Hellenistick
Language.

As for St. Paul and St. Luke, who understood the Greek Language, Salmasius
does also acknowledge that their Writings are full of Chaldaisms: and the
Reason that he brings, is, Quod de Paulo and Luca licet asserere, qui utriusque
linguae periti, in eam qua scripserunt ex altera phrases and genera lequendi
transfuderunt. Salm. ibid.
that seeing they understood the Greek and the Chaldee, they made a mixture of
these two Languages. In what manner soever it happened, he cannot deny but that
the Language of the Synagogue does appear in the Works of St. Paul and of St.
Luke, as well as in the Writings of the other Apostles. He only thinks that St.
Paul and St. Luke let Hebraisms drop more seldom than the Interpreters, who (as
he believes) Translated the Books of the other Apostles out of the Hebrew and
the Chaldee, into the Greek. Yet Vorstius, as I have already observed, has
marked more Hebraisms in St. Luke, than in the other Writers of the New
Testament. And therefore it is better to attribute them to the Apostles
themselves, if St. Matthew be excepted, than to their Fellow Helpers or
Interpreters.

For what remains we agree with Salmasius, or rather with the Greek Fathers,
whom he follows in this matter, that the Apostles being rude and destitute of
Literature, writ their Books in a very mean Style, and in a Language that was
used by the Dregs of the People. Which in some manner renders their Discourse
more intelligible, because that Language does commonly contain nothing that is
Figurative as to what concerns the Expressions. We shall observe nevertheless,
that although the Apostles do ordinarily make use of Words that are mean and
received amongst the People, and consequently easy to be understood, they have
a certain form of Phrase, and certain Expressions which were proper to those of
their Nation; which appear sometimes obscure to us, because we know not the
usage of that time. Although their Style is oftentimes simple and very plain, if
we look only to the Grammatical Sense, it is hard enough to be understood, when
we intend to reach the true Sense of their Thoughts. The Jews had then ways of
Expressing themselves, very different from those that are in use amongst us:
And in this, the obscurity of the Books of the N. Testament does chiefly
consist.

They who Translate those Books into another Language, ought especially to take
care to keep as close as possible to the Words of the Original. For when they
endeavor to render the bare Sense, without adhering to the Words, they run a
risque of deceiving themselves, and making their Author speak those things
which he never thought of. Beza and Castalio had great Disputes about this. The
former alleged, that in Translating the New Testament several Hebraisms ought
to be retained, because it is impossible to render them exactly in another
Language. Further, Cum saepe multiplex sit ratio Hebraismes explicandi, quis
non videt rectius and religiosius eos facere qui intactos illos and integros
sinunt, quam qui suam opinionem secuti, nullum conjecturae aut privati judicii
locum lectoribus relinquunt. Bez. Resp. ad Def. Cast.
seeing those Hebraisms are capable of various renditions, it is more to the
purpose to keep them, than to Interpret them in a Sense which may possibly be
false; and withal deprive others of their liberty of judgment concerning them.
Castalio, on the contrary, was of Opinion that an Interpreter ought to content
himself to mark the Hebraisms by Notes on the Margin. We shall have occasion to
speak more fully of those Hebraisms in the second Book of this History, when we
examine the several Versions of the New Testament.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Manscript Greek Copies in general, and of those who have
spoken of them. Collections which have been made of diverse Readings drawn from
those Manuscripts. Observations upon the whole Matter. The Heretics have been
accused sometimes, but without any ground, for corrupting the Books of the New
Testament.
Although there have been many Learned Critics in the Greek Church, who applied
themselves to correct the Books of the New Testament, we do not see, that any
one Greek Copy has been altogether preferred to others, that it might be
followed by all the Greek Churches. Which was the occasion that there was a
great difference observed in the various Copies that were in several Churches.
Origin, who was a very knowing person in this matter, (...). Orig. tom. 15.
Comm. in Matthew.
has observed, this great diversity of the Greek Copies, which he attributed
partly to the negligence of the Transcribers, and partly to the liberty that
Critics assumed, in correcting the Books of the New Testament, adding to, and
taking away from it, according as they judged it convenient. Indeed, if it be
remembered what was briefly said of it, upon the occasion of the last Chapter of
S. Mark, and of the History of the adulterous Woman, Chap. 8. of S. John, we
shall find evident proofs there of this observation of Origin: which would
further appear, if we had several Copies of that time, which we might compare
with those that remain, whereas we have very few that are above a thousand
years continuance; and which, as we shall show in the next Chapter, do very
much differ from those others we have at this day. They have likewise all those
Errors that we have observed.

That Father does add, in the same place, that he had in some sort remedied the
diversity of the Greek Copies of the Septuagint Version, which he had revised
and corrected according to the ordinary Rules of Criticism. He likewise
declares in what manner he had gone through that great Work, that had all the
success that he could hope for. But he did not the like as to the Books of the
New Testament, unless it be that he carefully searched for the most correct
Copies, and made many Critical Reflections on sundry places, according as
occasions did present themselves for that purpose. Neither do we find that the
Ecclesiastical Writers, who lived after Origin, made a distinction of two sorts
of Editions of the New Testament, as they have of two Editions of the Version
of the Septuagint. They made a difference betwixt that which was called (...)
vulgar, which was publicly used, and that which was corrected according to the
Rules of Criticism. They considered this latter as the true Edition of the
Septuagint, although it was as yet very imperfect, and the most part of the
Oriental Churches made use of it for correcting their Copies.

Yet for all this, Origin as well as several other Critics did correct some
Greek Copies of the New Testament, and S. Jerome does sometimes cite them. But
it does not appear that his Critical Observations were in the place of a Law,
as to those Books, as they were as to an ancient Greek Version of the Old
Testament. If it had been so, we should have had a Massore of the Greek Text of
the Writings of the Evangelists and the Apostles, in the same manner as the
Jews had of the Hebrew Text of the Bible. We should not find so many different
Readings as there are at this day. For every one would have exactly followed
Origen's Copy, as the Jews followed the Copy that was corrected by their
Doctors, whom they commonly called Massorets. And from hence it is that we find
not at this day any ancient Hebrew Copies of the Scripture amongst them. For
they reformed them all by the Massore: and seeing they hold it for infallible,
they wholly neglected their ancient Books. They are so much persuaded, that the
Books of the Law which they now read, are perfectly conformable to the Original
of Moses, that they do keep in their Synagogues any old Roll or Volume. The
Jews of the Portuguese Synagogue of Amsterdam have at least fifty Rolls of
their Sepher tora, or Book of the Law, which, for the most part, are very well
written, but they are all new. If any ask for ancient ones, they take no
notice, because they are prepossessed with a Belief, that there can be no
difference betwixt the ancient and the modern.

It is not so amongst the Christians who have had no Massorets, whom they
altogether follow in copying their Greek Copies of the New Testament. And
therefore we ought not to be surprised, to find therein a much greater number
of various Renditions than in the Hebrew Copies of the Jews. I dare also be
bold to say, that this manifold variety ought to gain a greater authority to
them, than if there had been no such difference. For it is impossible, that a
Book which has passed through so many hands should always continue the same,
unless they have corrected it, and afterward follow exactly that Correction,
as it happened to the Jews, in respect of the Hebrew Text of the Old Testament.
It is the advantage of a Book, that there have been several different Copies
thereof, to the end that a better Judgment may be given of the true Rendition.
And upon this account, the Books of the New Testament are to be preferred to
the most part of the others, because the Christian Religion having spread into
so many different Countries, every Nation has Copies and Versions thereof.

These are the different Copies by which we are to be guided at this day,
because we have not now the first Original. We shall with all possible
exactness examine the Greek Manuscript Copies, and also the most ancient
Versions which have been taken from the Greek. We are not to depend upon one
Greek Edition more than upon another, if it be not founded on better
Manuscripts. We shall prefer the Editions which, together with the Text, do
contain diverse Renditions of sundry Copies. It is a rare thing to find Greek
Manuscripts where such variations are noted in the Margin; for seeing those
Books are read in the Churches, they observe commonly no other Reading than
what is authorized by custom. They did content themselves to mark them in
distinct Works, especially in the Notes which they joined to the Greek Text of
the New Testament. And therefore besides the various Manuscript Copies, we
ought to consult the Notes which it is easy enough to find in good Libraries.

Many Learned Critics of the latter Days, when the Study of the Greek Language
was re-established, applied themselves carefully to this Labor. Valla was the
first who made search for the Greek Copies of the New Testament, and also for
the Latin. Laur. Vall. Annot. in Nov. Test. Edit. Basil. in 8. an. 1526.
He cites many of them in his Remarks which Erasmus took care to Print at
Basle; and although he does much insist upon the little Niceties of the Latin
Grammar, yet we are obliged to him for the new Discoveries which he has made to
us in a time when Barbarity did still reign in Europe. It was by the force of
his Example, that Erasmus was induced to write Notes on the New Testament,
where he cites a much greater number of Greek and Latin Manuscripts which he
had read. There is also annexed to some Editions of his New Testament a
Collection of diverse Readings taken from the Greek Copies. He seemed to be
better versed than Valla, in this sort of Reasoning, especially as to his
knowledge of Manuscripts. Nevertheless his Critical Reflections do speak the
Author's liberty more than their own evidence. When he meets with Greek
Manuscripts agreeable to the Latin, he does judge that the former were
corrected by the latter. He thinks, for example, that the English Greek Copy,
where we read, Epist. I. of S. John, chap. 5. verse. 7. of the Testimony of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, Ad Latinorum codices fuisse
castigatum. Posteaquam enim Graeci concordiam interunt cum Ecclesia Romana,
studuerunt and hac in part cum Romany consentire. Erasm. Apol. adv. Jac. Lop.
Stun.
was reformed by the Greeks themselves, according to the Latin Edition, since
the Reconciliation of those two Churches. But he will never be able to prove
this. Besides, the places which he alleges to have been corrected, have no
relation to the Disputes that were betwixt the Greeks and the Latins. To which
we may add, that the Greeks were never greater enemies to the Latins than since
their Reconciliation in the Council of Florence. The most part of those who had
subscribed to that Council, were hardly well returned home, when they assembled
at Constantinople, where they protested against all that they had done at
Florence. The Record of that Protestation is yet extant, with the Names of
those who subscribed it.

We cannot enough admire, In 1550.
Robert Stephen's Fair Edition of the New Testament in Greek, in Folio, wherein
he gives us proofs of his Learning, and of his Judgment. The Cardinal Ximenes,
In 1515.
to whom we are obliged for his first Edition of the New Testament, had made a
search into good Manuscript Copies; but he has not marked in the Margin of his
Edition, the various renditions of those Copies, having only kept in the Text
that which he judged to be the best. Stephen has wisely redressed this fault.
For he has placed the various Readings of six Manuscript Copies, in the Margin
of his Edition, and thus, though he commonly follows the Edition of Ximenes in
his Text, he is not obliged to adhere to it, unless he were persuaded, that the
renditions of the Cardinal's Copy are the best in those places. It is no great
matter for a Reading to be inserted in the Body of a Book, or to be placed in
the Margin, provided that it be known that those which are in the Margin are
taken from good Manuscript Copies, as well as those which are in the Text. It
were also much to be desired, for observing a greater uniformity, that those
who have published new Editions of the New Testament in Greek, had all of them
exactly followed the Alcala, or the Complutum Edition, which is the first, and
that they had contented themselves to refer to the Margin the various Readings
of their Manuscripts.

Yet Beza has produced a greater number of different Readings in several Copies
of the N. T. than Robert Stephen has done. But he has only observed them in his
Notes which are full of things that serve to no purpose, whereas he ought to
have placed them, after Stephen's example, in the Margin of the Greek Text.
Neither has he marked all of them, that he might not give offense to those who
were weak amongst his Party, who would not have had so great a Veneration for
the Word of God, if they had observed so great a number of various Readings. He
declares, that Ad haec omnia accessit exemplar ex Stephani nostri Bibliotheca
cum viginti quinque plus minus manuscriptis codicibus, and omnibus pene
impressis ab Henrico Stephano ejus filio and paternae sedulitatis haerede quam
diligentissime collatum. Bez. in Epist. de. lic. ad Elizab. Angl. Reg.
he was indebted for the greatest part of those Manuscripts to Henry Stephen,
from whom he had a Copy that had been compared with twenty five Manuscripts,
and with the most part of those that were Printed. He had besides that, a very
ancient Copy, whereof he makes mention in his Notes, the first part of which is
yet extant, (containing the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles) reserved in
Cambridge, and the second part, in which the Epistles of St. Paul are
comprehended in the King's Library. We shall examine in the following Chapter,
that ancient Manuscript with which Beza was not well enough acquainted.

The English have inserted in the sixteenth Tome of their Polyglott Bible, a
larger Collection taken from the different Manuscript Copies of the New
Testament, than any had been before that time. They likewise joined thereto,
the observations of some Learned Critics upon this matter, and amongst others,
that of Luke of Bruges. Which cleared the thing very much. For a single
Catalogue of diverse renditions is not sufficient. They are also all in a
considerable error, who have published the different Readings of the Manuscript
Copies which they consulted. They have not been at the pains to examine those
Manuscripts particularly, and to observe the good and the evil qualities
thereof. Which frequently happens, because they who produce those Collections,
have not themselves read those Manuscripts. Seeing they commonly depend upon
the Credit of those whom they employed in that Work, which is very troublesome,
their Collections are not always exact.

The New Testament Printed at Oxford in octavo, In 1675.
ought to be preferred to all other Editions, because it contains a greater
variety than any we have as yet seen upon it. There is moreover this advantage,
that these various renditions are at once joined to the Text. But seeing they
have hardly done any thing else in that Collection, but Compiled that which had
been Printed before that time, they have not Corrected the faults that were in
other Collections with that care that was requisite, but on the contrary have
increased them to a far greater number. It would be to no purpose to give
examples in this place, of those errors, because I am informed that they intend
to publish a new Greek Edition of the New Testament, which will be more ample
than the former, which must needs be very useful, if it chance to be well done.

Stephen Courcel caused to Print the New Testament in Greek, In 1658.
with a considerable Collection of various Readings, which had formerly been in
the Possession of Elzevir. He has only marked the Varieties, without mentioning
of the Manuscript Copies whence they are taken. Which renders his Work the less
perfect, seeing he did content himself to point at them in his Preface. He had
an intention to put forth a larger Edition In qua si Deus dederit ut eam
aliquando adornare vacet, Vulgatam Versionem Latinam una cum variantibus ejus
lectionibus aliaque ejus generis plara adjungere meditamur. Curc. Praef. N. T.
to which he promised to join the Latin Text of the Vulgar, to the various
Readings of the different Latin Copies: but it did not appear that he was so
good as his Word. In 1675.
For there was published a new Edition of that Greek New Testament, which
differed in nothing from the former, unless it was that they writ under every
particular Page, some Varieties, that had been separately Printed in the first
Edition, at the end of the Acts of the Apostles, and of the Epistles of St.
Paul.

If Mr. Saubert had continued on the Books of the Old Testament, that which he
did upon St. Matthew's Gospel, that Work had been as considerable as any that
has been done as yet. For besides all the various Readings of the Greek Copies,
he has observed those which may be taken from several Versions, or which
confirm those various renditions. He has also added some Critical Notes by way
of illustration; in which he appeared to be exact, although he is mistaken in
some Passages. It is a matter of difficulty for one Man to perform a Work of
that importance; seeing it does require that he himself should read all the
Manuscripts: which is impossible. So one must be obliged to depend upon the
Authority of other Men. Nevertheless that Critic has observed some errors that
are in Walton's Collections; In 1672.
and he prefixed a learned Preface to his Work that was Printed at Helmstat,
where he discourses judiciously of the various Greek Copies of the New
Testament, and of the different renditions.

I might produce several other Authors who have treated of this same Subject.
But seeing the most part have only done it occasionally, I will refer it to
another place, where there will be occasion to speak something of their Works. I
will only here make mention of those who have spoken of various Greek Readings
which establish the ancient Latin Version. Beza, who did not spare that ancient
Version, was obliged to acknowledge Aliquot locis animadvertimus veteris
interpretis lectionem, quamvis cum nostris Graecis exemplaribus interdum ei non
conveniat, tamen ipsis rebus multo melius quadrare, nempe quod ille quisquis
fuit emendatius aliquod exemplar nactus est. Bez. Epist. ad Regin. Eliz.
that there were sometimes Greek Copies more exact, than those which we have at
present. Quam immerito (Erasmus) multis veterem interpretem reprehendit tanquam
a Graecis dissentientem? Dissentiebat fateor ab iis exemplaribus quae ille
nactus erat; sed non uno loco comperimus aliorum codicum, and quidem
vetustissimorum auctoritate eam intorpretationem niti quam ille reprehendit;
Bez. ibid.
He does allege, that Erasmus did sometimes reject the ancient Latin
Interpreter, without any show of Reason, under a pretense that it did very
little agree with the Greek. Which is true, says Beza, if we only consider the
New Greek Copies. But that Interpreter does agree with other more ancient Greek
Copies. Upon this ground it would seem, that the Protestants do not always act
with Reason, when they forsake the ancient Latin Edition, and adhere to the
Greek at this day. Beza himself, who owned this fault in the Version of
Erasmus, is not yet free from the same himself. Not but that he believes that
those ancient Manuscripts ought always to be preferred to others: for there is
none but the Original of the Apostles alone, which can admit of this
perfection. They pretend only to prove thereby, that those who made New
Translations of the New Testament from the Greek, were not always exact in
their Versions, because they only consulted a very small number of Greek
Editions, whereas they ought to have likewise consulted several Manuscript
Copies, which afforded a great many Readings.

Peter Faxard a Noble Spanish Marquess of Veles, was the first who was at the
pains to make this sort of Collections; of which we now treat. Mariana does
assure us, that Ad Novi Testamenti Graeci exteriorem marginem minio varias
lectiones sua manu suoque labor 16. codicum facta collatione, in quibus octo
erant ex Regia Bibliotheca D. Laurentii, plerique vetustate insignes, adjecerat
Petrus Fagiardus Velesius Marchio. Ingens thesaurus magnopere aestimandus, si
vir ille optimus and Graecae linguae praestans, quibus ex libris singulae
lectiones essent depromptae notasset. Mar. pro Edit. Vulg. c. 17.
that Marquess had compared sixteen Greek Manuscripts, with our Vulgar Edition:
Eight of these Manuscripts were in the King of Spain's Library. And he had
carefully marked in the Margin of a Greek Copy of the New Testament, the
various Readings of those Manuscripts, upon which the Ancient Latin Edition is
Founded; as to those places in which it does not agree with the Greek at this
day. But that which was wanting to so laudable a Work, and which could not be
sufficiently valued, is, that the Copies whence those various Readings had been
taken, were not pointed out. Mariana, who had not seen those Manuscripts, does
nevertheless say, that they were, for the most part Ancient: This was, in all
probability the only Remark, which the Marquess of Veles had made upon the
Quality of his Manuscripts. This Jesuit, who had transcribed the Marquess's
Copy, in which those various Readings were recorded, Dono Reverendissimi
Joannis Marianae e Societate nostra habco exemplar Novi Testamenti, in quo
variae lectiones sunt manu transcriptae exceptae ex exemplari, quas item manu
propria adnotarat illustrissimus Marchio Velesius Petrus Faxardus, facta
collatione 16. exemplarium, in quibus erant octo ex Bibliotheca Regia D.
Laurentii. Lacerd. Advers. Sac. c. 91.
made a present thereof to Lacerda of the same Society, who published them in
his Book Entitled, Adversaria Sacra; and they were afterward inserted in many
Collections of diverse Readings of the New Testament.

Father Morin did likewise insert in his Exercitations upon the Bible, the
various Readings of some Greek Copies of the New Testament, in the places that
confirm our Latin Version. He pretends that he had shown the conformity of the
vulgar to the ancient Greek Manuscripts, in more than 440 places: Conformitatem
illam Vulgatae cum vetustissimis Exemplaribus -- in locis plusquam 440
Demonstramus. He made it his business to mark, especially those of the
Cambridge Copy, upon the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles, and he followed,
upon the Epistles of St. Paul, the Copy which Beza calls Claromontanum, of
Clermont: Seeing his design was to prove to the Protestants, that there was a
great number of various Readings, as well in the Old, as in the New Testament;
he could not, upon the New, make choice of any Books, in which there was more
to be found than in those two Books. He likewise does add some Notes, for the
illustration of this matter; and after having produced a sufficient number of
those various Readings, which established the vulgar, he concludes, Plurimis in
locis testantur in omnibus antiquis codicibus aliter legi quam in vulgato textu
Graeco. Ipsi tamen in versiombus suis contra omnium exemplarium fidem textum
Graece semel excusum amplectuntur, and ad illum invitis omnibus codicibus MSS.
versiones exigunt. Jo. Mor. Exercit. lib. 1. Exerc. 2. cap. 4.
that the Protestants are to blame, for that they frequently follow, in their
Versions, the vulgar Edition of the Hebrew Text, against the Authority of the
Manuscript Copies, although they themselves do cite these Manuscripts. He
brings for an Example, Beza's Translation, who, in several places, has
preferred this vulgar Edition of the Greek Text to his Ancient Manuscript
Copies. He does observe withal, that Robert Stephen has also left out of his
Greek Edition of the New Testament, many Readings which are not agreeable to
any of the Manuscripts which he does produce: And yet the Protestants, in their
Translations of the New Testament, choosed rather to follow Robert Stephen,
than the various Readings of the Manuscripts, which he had marked in the Margin
of his Edition. There would have been nothing which deserved reprehension, in
that, if the Protestants in their Versions, had imitated Stephen's Method in
his Greek New Testament. For if they had placed the Translation of all those
various Renditions, in the Margin of their Works, they could not have been
accused for preferring the Greek Vulgar Edition to the Ancient Manuscripts.
They would have only placed in the body of their Translations, that Edition
which they believed to be the most exact, to the end that they might observe
some uniformity amongst themselves, without any prejudice done to other
Examples upon that account.

The care that Father Amelote took, to insert in his French Version of the New
Testament, the various Readings of the Manuscript Copies, which are agreeable
to the ancient Latin Interpreters, deserves to be praised. But he offends
against Modesty, and even against Truth, when he speaks of those Venerable and
August Manuscripts, which he pretends to have examined with such exactness, as
the like was never seen before. P. Amel. Pref. Franc. de sa Verse. du Nouv. Test.
I have (says he) used such diligence, that there has not been the like heard
of before, to show the conformity of the Latin, with the Ancient Greek and the
first Original, I have narrowly examined all the Manuscripts extant for above
these thousand years, which are kept through all the Christian World, and I
have obtained extracts of them all. I have had more than twenty of that sort
from France; all those of the Vatican, and the famous Italian Libraries;
sixteen from Spain, not to reckon others, with which Cardinal Ximenes used to
perfect his Bible of Alcala; those of England and the Northern Countries, and
many from the innermost Parts of Greece, with those that belonged to the
several Fathers.

There is none who reads those Words but would believe, that that Father had in
his hands all those Copies whereof he makes mention, at least the Extracts of
the Manuscripts. But all that long Discourse is only a Rhetorical flourish
which he uses, that the Subject of which he treats of may be embellished with a
noble expression, according to the lofty Idea which he had of it. And this he
avowed to one of his Fraternity, to whom he showed his Preface in Writing, and
who advised him to amend it, especially in that place where he makes mention of
his Manuscripts. He made no other Answer about it, to his Brother, who at the
same time showed him those various Readings in Print, but, that the subject
matter required, that he should express himself in a noble manner, to make the
greater impression in the minds of those who read his Works. So that all those
Venerable and August Manuscripts, which F. Amelote consulted are nothing else
but a Figure of Rhetoric.

Indeed, if he had made such an exact scrutiny into those Manuscripts, he ought
to have told us another story than what is found in the Catalogues, that have
been Printed of them. It is true, that he writ into Spain, to know what had
become of those that belonged to the Marquess of Veles. Mr. d' Aubusseau.
The Archbishop of Ambrun, the French Ambassador, then at that Court, who was
one of his Friends, made him Answer, that he had no account at Madrid, of the
Manuscripts of that Marquess. He continued the same Rhetorical Figure, when he
would persuade us, that he obtained Copies of many various readings by the
means of his Friends; For he showed nothing of that nature, but what was
contained in the Sixth Volume of the Polyglott of England, or in Lacerda the
Jesuit, or in F. Morin. It was by the assistance of the latter, that he framed
a design of collecting the various Readings that establish the ancient Latin
Edition: It were easy to let him see, by his own words, that he did not very
well understand that sort of Criticism. He was so far from having all the
Extracts of the Manuscript mentioned by him, that it seems, that he had not the
skill to read the Catalogues of those Manuscripts perfectly. For I would fain
know, what he meant by the two Manuscripts of Magdebourg College in Oxford,
which he mentions in the two Prefaces to his French New Testament. He had read
in the Catalogue of Manuscripts, Printed in the Sixth Volume of the Polyglott
of England, Magd. 1. Novum Testamentum integrum, excepta Apocalypsi, in
Collegio Magd. Oxon. Further, Magd. 2. Epistolae ad Romans and Corinth. cum
aecum. Colleg. Oxon. All the World knows, that this abbreviation Coll. Magd.
Oxon. does denote Magdalen College in Oxford. But F. Amelote, who used such
diligence, that we have not heard of the like before, does give us two
Manuscripts of the New Testament, which are extant in Magdeburg College in
Oxford; and if we believe him, he had the Copies thereof extracted. You may see
in what manner he marks them in his Latin Preface Magd. 1. Magdeburgensis
Collegii apud Oxonium Novum Testamentum integrum, excepta Apocalypsi. Magd. 2.
Magdeburgensis Collegii Codex Epistolarum ad Romanos and ad Corinthios; which
he repeats in his French Preface: Seeing we shall have occasion in the Second
Part of this Book, to speak of the French Version of this Father, I shall there
treat of his Collection of the various Readings.

It was easy for Mr. Arnauld to refute him upon this Subject, in his New
defense of the Translation of the New Testament, Printed at Mons. I could only
have wished that he had not reckoned as Chimerical, that which F. Amelote, and
after him Mr. Mallet, call the Vulgar Greek, that is to say, for the explaining
of the Vulgar Edition of the Greek Text of the New Testament. It is true, that
these two Authors had a false notion of this Vulgar Greek; but that does not
hinder, but that they might very well have used that expression, when they
compared the ordinary Editions of the Greek New Testament, with the various
Readings of many. Ancient Manuscripts. And in this sense, they gave the
appellation of (...) or Vulgar, to the Ancient Greek Edition of the Septuagint,
which was in every ones hands, to distinguish it from Origen's corrected Copy.
It may be also said upon good grounds, that this Vulgar Greek was altered in
sundry places, and that therefore it is not justifiable, that we should forsake
the Vulgar, whenever it does not agree with the Vulgar Greek. Upon this ground
Mariana the Jesuit observed, that it is not likely, that the Ancient Latin
Interpreter is the Author of all the various Readings, that make so great a
difference betwixt the Greek and the Latin. Neque enim tam multis locis, quibus
a Graecis Latina discrepant, de suo capite finxisse verisimile est. Suspicabar
ex variis olim codicibus eam lectionem fuisse secutum, eosque codices qui
communi eruditorum sententia ea aetate maxim probabantur ex alio quopiam uno
aut paucis minoris fidei transfusos Graecos codices qui nostra aetate formis
expressi vulgo circumferuntur. Mar. pro Edit. Vulg. c. 17.
He thinks that that Interpreter, in making his Version, followed the best
Copies of his time, and that those which have been Printed in this last Age,
were taken from a very few Copies, which were not very correct.

According to this Observation, the Greek of the New Testament may be called,
as it was Printed, a Vulgar Greek, if it be compared with the Ancient
Manuscripts, which the Latin Interpreter made use of, and yet for all that,
those Manuscripts ought not to have the denomination of the Apostolical Greek,
and of the first Original. F. Morin has also given it the name of the Vulgar
Greek, or that which has been published in our time. Cogitent ergo (says he to
the Protestants, who are very apt to leave the Ancient Latin Edition) quoties
Vulgatam a Graeco Vulgato dissentientem deprehendunt, sed cum vetustissimis
codicibus esse consensum, a quibus degeneres sunt neoterici Graeci.

It is moreover a long time, since this difference has been observed in the
Greek Copies of the New Testament, which is founded upon the Rules of
Criticism. The appellation of Vulgar has been always given to the common Copies
of the Bible, to distinguish them from those that were corrected by Critics,
and are therefore believed to be more exact. The Jews for example, reform their
common and ordinary Copies by those of the Massoret. Hilarious Deacon of Rome
puts a great value on this Rule, in his Commentary upon the fifth Chapter of
the Epistle to the Romans, v. 14. He rejects the Vulgar Reading of the Greek
Copies, assuring us, that they can never be used so as to prevail against the
Latin Edition, seeing they vary. Sic praescribitur nobis, (says he) de Graecis
codicibus quasi non ipsi ab invicem discrepent. He has recourse to the most
Ancient Greek Copies, from which the Latin Version was taken. And seeing
Constat autem hoc per quosdam Latinos de veteribus Graecis olim translatos
codicibus, quos incorruptos simplicitas temporum servavit and servat.
Ambrosiast. Comm. in Epist. ad Romans c. 5. v. 14.
he is persuaded that the Latin Copies were not corrupted, he believes, that
the Greek from which they were taken is ancient and true.

F. Amelote, might according to this sense, have distinguished the Greek at
this day, from the ancient and true Greek, and have called the former the
Vulgar Greek. But it does not follow from thence, that that Ancient Greek is
free from all faults, and that it must be always preferred to the Greek which
is called New. For this latter Greek is no otherwise New, but in respect of its
being published in these latter times. And it may happen, that this New Greek
may be found agreeable to the most Ancient Authors, and that it is consequently
very ancient. And therefore Hilarious the Deacon gives us three Qualities, the
consideration of which ought to induce us to prefer one Copy to another. Hoc
verum arbitror, (says he) quando and Ratio and Historia and Authoritas
observatur: Ambros. ibid.
He grounds the Reading, which he believes to be the best in that place, upon
the Authority of Tertullian, of Victorin, and St. Cyprian. Whence he does
conclude, that the Vulgar Greek of his time was not to be followed, seeing
there were more ancient and more true Copies, in which the Reading was
otherwise. I do not inquire, if that Deacon was justifiable in the matter of
which he treated: I content my self with proposing the Rule that he gives us,
by which we may distinguish the Copies that are called Vulgar or Common, from
others that are more Ancient and more Correct.

This being once supposed, we shall avoid many unprofitable Questions, which
Mr. Arnauld does seriously handle, upon the occasion of the Vulgar Greek, which
he alleges to be extant in notion only, and which (says he) we ought first to
make, before we speak of it. This Learned Man does afterward endeavor to
prove, that that name is neither to be given to Robert Stephen's Edition, nor
to that of the Cardinal Ximenes, nor to any other, because, (as he thinks) it
is Chimerical, and of F. Amelote's invention, who framed to himself a certain
Vulgar Greek, the most erroneous that could be imagined, in opposition to the
Vulgar, that the faults of the one might balance the perfections of the other.
I am apt to believe, that that Father does entertain false Idea's of that which
is called the Vulgar Greek? But if he be understood in the manner we have
already shown, it is no Chimera nor fancy. If the Authors of the Translation of
the New Testament, Printed at Mons, have sometimes followed the Vulgar Greek in
their Version, without making mention of any other Greek, they are in that to
be blamed: For it cannot be absolutely affirmed, that the Greek is read in some
places, otherwise than the Latin, when there are Greek Copies where the Reading
is the same with the Latin: Neither must we always prefer the Greek Copies that
agree with the Latin Edition, to the Common and Ordinary. We are to judge of
those Readings according to the Rules of Criticism, and examine with the Deacon
Hilary; which of those Copies are Founded on Reason, on History, and on
Authority. The Greek wherein these things do meet, shall be the most ancient
and the most correct, whether it be found in the Old Manuscripts, or in the
Printed Books.

There is then nothing more false, than the Idea that School Divines, and some
Canonists have formed, of the Greek Copies of the New Testament. For under the
pretense of defending the Authority of the Ancient Latin Edition, they allege,
that when there is any difference betwixt the Greek Copies at this day and the
Latin, we ought always to prefer the Latin to the Greek; because the Greeks
(say they) being Schismatics have corrupted their Books, whereas the Truth has
remained in the Roman Church; there is nothing more unjust than this thought;
For it is easy to go back to the time before the Schism, and to show that the
Origen's, the Chrysostom's, and several other Fathers of that Church had the
Reading in their Copies, in the same manner as these have it, whom at this day
we call Schismatics.

This most unjust accusation is nevertheless very Ancient: So soon as ever
there is a difference perceived in Copies, if this difference do favor the
Opinions of some Party, they will be sure to accuse that Party of corrupting
the Sacred Writings, although that difference does for the most part come from
the Transcribers. Hilary the Deacon has made a general Rule, in that place
formerly mentioned: He assures us, Quod fecit studium contentionis. Quia enim
propria quis auctoritate uti non potest ad victoriam, verba legis adulterat, ut
sensum suum quasi verba legis asserat, ut non ratio, sed auctoritas
praescribere videatur. Ambros. ibid.
that the Spirit of dispute, that is betwixt different Parties is the cause of
different Renditions. Every one (says he) seeing he cannot on such occasions,
justify himself by his own Authority, does corrupt the Words of the Law, that
he may make his own Opinions pass for the Words of the Law.

Although that has happened sometimes, especially to those ancient Heretics of
whom we spoke in the beginning of this Work, I am persuaded, that they have
frequently attributed to different Parties, such various Renditions in the
Copies of the New Testament, as had no other cause Originally, but what those
have which are found in all other Books. How many Divines are there, for
example, who believe at this day, that they have taken away from the Ancient
Greek Copies, the Testimony of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost;
of which mention is made in the first Epistle of St. John, Chap. 5. v. 7. to
favor the Arian Heresy. Others, on the contrary do allege, that it was the
Arrians who added these Words expressly to the Greek Text, to show, the Unity of
the Persons of the Trinity is not an Unity of Essence, but of Consent. Grotius
is of this latter Opinion: He thinks Neque vero Arianis ablatas esse voces
quasdam, sed potius additas, unde colligerent Patrem and Filium and Spiritum
Sanctum non esse unum nisi consensu, quomodo spiritus, aqua and sanguis in unum
testimonium consentiunt. Quod cum viderent Catholici, abstulisse quidem illud
quod de Patre, Filio and Spiritu Sancto insertum fuerat, sed reliquisse illud,
tres unum esse, quia id ita positum nocere non poterat. Grot. Annot. in 1.
Epist. Joann. c. 5. v. 7.
that the Arians, for this reason, were so far from retrenching some Words from
the Text, that they added some thereunto: that, on the contrary, the Catholics
had taken away that which is said of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit, leaving only these Words, These three are the same; which can do them
no hurt, and which (as he thinks) were likewise added by the Arians. But all
this is only founded on Conjectures: and seeing every one does reason according
to his Prejudices, some will have the Arians to be the Authors of that
Addition, and others do attribute the same to the Catholics. This diversity of
Opinions proceeds from nothing else but a neglect of examining with sufficient
care, the ancient Manuscript Copies and other Records which were necessary for
the discovery of the Original of those Variations. It would be to no purpose
for me to repeat here the Critical Reflections which I have formerly made on
that Passage of the first Epistle of St. John, it having been made evident in
what manner it came to pass that those Words, that were neither in the Greek
Copies nor in the Latin, were inserted in the Text.

No credit therefore is easily to be given to all those Accusations of the
ancient Ecclesiastical Writers against the Heretics, upon the point of the
Alterations that have happened to the Sacred Writings. We have already seen, in
the Critical History of the Old Testament, that the most part of the Fathers
did cast the same reproach on the Jews, without any ground. Seeing the most
part of Heresies sprung up in the Greek Church, those who maintain the
preference of the Latin Copies of the New Testament, do not fail to bring this
Reason, to show that the Books of the Latins are more ancient than those of the
Greeks. But before this Accusation is brought, it ought to be examined if these
Objections have a good foundation: for if the thing be considered in general,
the Original must needs be more perfect than the Versions, unless it be in some
places, where it may be demonstrated that the Version is instead of the
Original which has been altered.

The Sect of the Macedonians were at another time accused, as being the Authors
of the Word (...) Chap. vii. of St. John, v. 39. where we read, (...), The Holy
Ghost was not as yet; whereas it is in the Vulgar, For the Holy Ghost was not
yet given. The ancient Latin Interpreter did not read the Word (...) in his
Greek Copy; which is likewise wanting in some Greek Manuscripts, and in others
belonging to Mr. Colbert's most ancient Library. Cod. MSS. Bibl. Colb. n. 5149.
Neither is it extant in the Syriack Version: which makes me believe that it
was added, and that it was not in the first Original Greek. But it must not be
inferred from hence, that those who favored the Party of Macedonius were the
Authors of that Addition, there being the like Examples in other places, with
which they cannot be charged. It is much more probable, that it was occasioned
by the Greek Scholiasts, who placed the Word (...) in the Margin, to show that
that place spoke of the Holy Spirit, and it passed into the Text afterward.

There is also in the same Passage the Latin Word datus, which is not read in
the Greek, unless it be in the ancient Copy of the Vatican, where there is,
according to Lewis of Bruges, (...). It is very likely that this Word was added
by the Latin Interpreter, who had in his view the sense of that Passage where
the Gifts of the Holy Ghost are spoken of. It would be likewise added after the
same manner in the Margin of some Greek Copy. We also read in the Syriack
Version, was not yet given; which does wholly agree with the Latin: and in the
three Arabic Versions which have been published, it is in the same sense, was
not yet come. Grotius believed that the Greek Word (...), or as it is in the
Latin, datus, was added for the avoiding the reproach of the Followers of
Macedonius; In nonnullis, datus, ad vitandam calumniam Macedoniorum. Grot.
Annot. in hunc loc.
But it is not at all necessary that they should have had any regard to those
Sectaries to induce them to add that Word, seeing they only explained the sense
of the Greek Verb, (...) was, which in this place is not taken substantively.
Jansenius Bishop of Gand, who had read in all the Greek Copies, (...), for the
Spirit was not yet, did likewise believe, that they had changed the Greek Word
(...) Holy into that of Datus in the Latin Edition, Quoniam ea lectio prima
front impium sensum prae se ferebat, quasi scilicet Spiritus aliquando non
fuerit, offensus quispiam, ut verisimile est, mutavit illud in datus. Jans.
Gand. Concord. Eu. c. 75.
because that sense did then seem to be impious, as if there had been no Holy
Ghost as yet.

But, as we have observed, Alterations of that kind do happen of themselves,
without all those Theological Considerations. When the Words of a Text are
equivocal or very general, they are illustrated by Notes; and when this
Illustration does consist of a few Words, the Note does easily pass into the
Text; which yet happens with greater freedom in a Version. Salmeron's Sentiment
upon this matter appeared to me to be more just than that of Jansenius and of
Grotius. That Jesuit did content himself to say, Graeca exemplaria antiqua pro
datus habent sanctus, and in sensu nulla est prorsus a nostra lectione
diversitas, quia etsi non exprimatur verbum datus, supplendum est necessario.
Salmer. tom. 8. tract. 37.
that there was Sanctus instead of Datus, in the ancient Greek Copies; but that
this does make no difference of reading in respect of the sense, because the
Word datus must of necessity be supplied, although it be not expressed in the
Greek. Moreover, the true and ancient reading of that Passage in the Greek Text
was (...), for the Spirit was not as yet: and it was also read in the ancient
Latin Version, Nondum enim erat Spiritus, as it is in some Latin Copies. Luke
of Bruges does observe, that St. Augustine did not read it otherwise when he
treated expressly of that Passage: and indeed, as this Reading is the most
plain, so it appears to be the most natural and the most ancient.

It is requisite that one use great Precaution in reading the ancient
Ecclesiastical Authors in those Places where they accuse the Heretics of
having corrupted the Sacred Writings, to establish their new Doctrine; for
these Accusations are oftentimes groundless. We do not now read, for example,
in any Latin Copy of the New Testament, Chap. 3. of S. John's Gospel, v. 6.
these Words, Quia Deus spiritus est, for God is a Spirit, which St. Ambrose had
in his Copy, and which apparently was the Gloss of some Catholic; yet that
Holy Bishop does mightily exclaim against the Arians on the occasion of that
Passage: Quem locum ita express Ariani testificamini esse de Spiritu, ut eum
de vestris codicibus auferatis. Atque utinam de vestris, and non etiam de
Ecclesiae codicibus tolleretis. Eo enim tempore quo impie infidelis Auxentius
Mediolanensem Ecclesiam armis exercituque occupaverat, vel a Valente atque
Vrsacio nutantibus Sacerdotibus suis incursabatur, Ecclesia Sirmiensis falsum
hoc and sacrilegum in Ecclesiasticis codicibus deprohensum est. Et fortasse hoc
etiam in Orient fecistis, and literas quidem potuistis abolere, sed fidem non
potuistis auferre. Ambr. l. 3. de Spir. San. c. 11.
he does accuse them of taking those Words out of their Copies. Would to God
(says he) you had only retrenched them for your own Copies, and not from those
of the Church. He is also so punctual in his Accusation, that he marks the time
in which he believed that Impiety to have received its Birth; and he is afraid,
that the Greek Copies of the Eastern Churches have been likewise corrupted
after the same manner. You could (he adds speaking to the Arians) take away
those Words, but you could not abolish the Faith.

If we examine according to Critical Rules, that which St. Ambrose does assure
us was retrenched by the Arians from St. John's Text, we shall easily judge
that it was an Addition of some Catholics who read in their Copy of the
ancient Latin Edition, chap. 5. v. 6. of the Gospel of St. John, Quod natum est
ex Spiritu, Spiritus est, quia Deus est Spiritus; which Edition was never
publicly approved by any Church. Yet Fulbert Bishop of Chartres did zealously
continue the same Accusation against the Arian Party; Arii auditores quoniam
Spiritum Sanctum Deum esse negabant, de Evangelio eraserunt illud quod Salvator
ait, Spiritus est Deus. Fulb. Carnot. Episc. Epist. 1.
Because they deny (says he) the Holy Ghost, they have taken away from the
Gospel of St. John these words of our Savior, The Spirit of God.

There is yet less probability in the reproachful Charge that Socrates has used
against the Nestorians, for having retrenched from their Copies these words of
the first Epistle of St. John, chap. 4. v. 3. (...). Whatsoever Spirit does
divide Christ, is not of God. He pretends that Nestorius knew not that this
Reading was founded upon ancient Copies, (...). (...). Socr. Hist. Eccles. lib.
7. c. 32.
Those (says he) who have separated the Divine from the Humane Nature in Jesus
Christ, have taken away these words from their Copies: and therefore the
ancient Commentators on the Scripture have observed, that some who would
separate the Humanity from the Godhead have corrupted that Epistle. Bishop
Fulbert did likewise observe in the place lately quoted, Et de Epistola Joannis
eraserunt, Et omnis spiritus qui solvit Jesum, ex Deo non est, ficut Nestorius,
etc. Fulb. Carnot. ibid.
that the Heretics have taken away from St. John's Epistle these words, and
whatsoever Spirit does separate Jesus Christ is not of God; as Nestorius and
the rest.

But can Nestorius and his Followers be accused for authorizing a false
Reading, which is at this day in all the Greek Copies, and in the Oriental
Versions, seeing the same Reading is not only found in S. Cyprian, but is
likewise authorized by S. Polycarp, who was contemporary with the Disciples of
the Apostles? It cannot be denied but that the other Reading, which is
confirmed by the Author of the Vulgar, is also very ancient: but it is
probable, that it is a Note or Gloss that in process of time passed into the
Text. They would explain these words (...) does not confess, by this (...) does
separate, the more effectually to refute the ancient Heretics who denied the
Divinity of Jesus Christ, or who did separate Jesus from Christ. And upon this
account it is, that both these Readings are extant in some ancient Fathers,
where they are sometimes joined both together. However it be, Socrates had no
reason to reject the ancient and the true Reading of the Greek Text of S. John,
under a Pretext that the Nestorians did believe that it favored their Opinion.
It can only be said, that they are two different Readings of the same Passage,
which are very ancient. It cannot be discovered which is the true one, or at
least which is to be preferred, unless, for that end, we observe with Hilary
the Deacon, the Rules of Criticism, which have been already taken notice of.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Greek Copies of the New Testament in particular. The most
ancient that we have at this day, were written by the Latins, and were used by
them. Those which were printed came from the Greek Churches. The ancient Latin
Version which was in the Churches of the West before St. Jerome, were made by
those first Copies which were not very correct. Of the ancient Cambridge Copy;
why it does differ so much from other Greek Copies.
THose who have published the diverse Readings of different Greek Copies of the
New Testament, ought in the same time to have observed what sort of Copies they
were. Seeing they have not done this, I shall endeavor to supply this defect,
that we may be the more able to judge what are the best Renditions among so
many various Readings. In the former Chapter, it was shown from a Passage of
Origin, that the Greek Amanuenses who writ out the Books of the New Testament,
and likewise the Critics who corrected them, had assumed a very great liberty;
and that that was the occasion of a mighty confusion. St. Jerome does confirm
the same thing, especially with respect to the ancient Latin Copies, in his
Letter to Pope Damasus, who had commanded him to revise the ancient Latin
Version.

That Father believed Si enim Latinis exemplaribus fides est adhibenda,
respondeant quibus: tot enim sunt exemplaria pene quot codices. Sin autem
veritas est quaerenda de pluribus, cur non ad Graecam originem revertentes, ea
quae vel a vitiosis interpretibus male reddita, vel a praesumptoribus imperitis
emendata perversius, vel a librariis dormitantibus aut addita sunt, aut mutata,
corrigimus. Hieron. Praef. in IV. Evang. ad Dam.
that it was absolutely necessary to have recourse to the Original Greek, to
correct the great number of faults that were in that Version, because there
were so many different Latin Copies as there were different Books, and that
every one did presume to change this ancient Latin Edition according to the
Greek taken in his own sense; besides the Errors of the Transcribers which were
also very numerous. That labor was by so much the more difficult, as the Greek
Copies were not more correct than the Latin; and so it seems that the Rule to
be followed was very uncertain: for the undertaking was to amend the Faults of
the Latin by the Greek, which likewise had Faults. St. Jerome observes, in
speaking of the Copies of that Time, Magnus siquidem hic in nostris codicibus
error inolevit, dum quod in eadem re alius Evangelista plus dixit, in alio,
quia minus putaverint, addiderunt, vel dum eumdem sensum alius aliter
expressit, ille qui unum e quatuor primum legerat, ad ejus exemplum caeteros
quoque existimaverit emendandos. Vnde accidit, ut apud nos mixta sint omnia,
and in Marco plura Lucae atque Matthaei, rursus in Matthaeo plura Joannis and
Marci and in caeteris reliquorum quae aliis propria inveniantur. Hier. ibid.
that the Amanuenses had altered them in a strange manner, by the mixture they
had made of several Gospels together, taking from one that which seemed to be
wanting in another. If it also happened that one Gospel had expressed a thing
in a different manner from another, the Transcribers reformed the rest
according to what they had first read: so that there was nothing but confusion
in those ancient Copies. We see many things in St. Mark which belonged to St.
Luke and St. Matthew; and in St. Matthew, which was St. John's and St. Mark's;
and in short, every Gospel had something borrowed from the rest. It is true,
that this Observation seems to reach the Latin Copies only; but in the sequel
of this Discourse I shall make it appear, that it does likewise agree to
several Greek Copies of that Time. If we had still, at this day, any of those
ancient Books of which St. Jerome speaks, it would be easily believed, that he
exaggerates the Faults thereof, the better to show the necessity that was
incumbent on him, to amend the Latin Version that was agreeable to some Greek
Copies, which were no less defective than the Latin. Beza's Greek and Latin
Copy which is now kept at Cambridge is of this number, having been writ out by
Latin Amanuenses by such like Copies as were extant before St. Jerome reformed
them. That Calvinist never knew the nature of that Book Quatuor Evangeliorum
and Actorum Apostolicorum Graeco-Latinum exemplar ex S. Irenaei Caenobio
Lugdunensi ante aliquos annos nactus, mutilum quidem illud, and neque satis
emendate ab initio ubique descriptum, neque ita, ut oportuit, habitum, sicut ex
paginis quibusdam diverso charactere insertis, and indocti cujuspiam Graeci
Calogeri barbaris adscriptis alicubi notis apparet. Bez. Epist. ad Acad. Cantab.
which was found in the Monastery of Lions: he believed, that it had been
corrected in some places by an ignorant Scholiast, who had added some Notes or
Amendments to it. But those Corrections or Notes were not made by a Greek
Caloiz, seeing Books of that sort that were written in Greek with the ancient
Latin Version, were never in use amongst the Greeks but the Latins only, as
shall be made manifest in the following part of this Discourse. He is in a
notorious mistake when he assures us, Est hoc exemplar venerandae vetustatis,
ex Graecia, ut apparet ex barbaris quibusdam notis ad marginem adscriptis,
adportatum. Bez. ibid.
that that Manuscript was brought from Greece, because he observed Remarks to
be written in Greek therein. He knew not that the Latins who had some skill in
the Greek Tongue, joined the Greek to the Latin Version in their Copies of the
New Testament, and also of the Psalms.

They were not so zealous at that time for the Latin Tongue, but that they
believed that the Original Greek was sometimes necessary, not only to regulate,
but also to understand it. Upon this ground St. Jerome and St. Augustine judged,
that it was fit to correct the Latin in many places by the Greek, when the
former happens to be defective. That the Original might be the more easily
consulted, those who were curious did join it in the same Copy to the ancient
Latin Edition. Neither did Beza observe, that the Greek and the Latin of
Manuscripts of that sort are written with the same hand, and that the Greek has
a greater resemblance of the ancient Capital Letters of the Latins than of
those of the Greeks. The former are more square, the great Letters of the
Greeks are longer and finer. This I observed in reading the second part of that
Cambridge Copy which is in the King's Library, and another the like Copy which
is in the Library of the Religious Benedictines of St. Germain. These two
Copies, which contain the Epistles of St. Paul, do so little differ from one
another, as well in the Greek as in the Latin, that it would seem the one had
been copied from the other, but that the Characters of that of the Benedictines
are greater and more majestical, and that it is less disfigured by Corrections.
It may be easily known by the fashion of the Characters of those two Copies,
and by the ancient Latin Version which is joined to the Greek Text, that they
were copied by the Latins for the use of that Church. The Greek and the Latin
are written with the same Hand, and with a Letter altogether alike; so that
there are Letters that are purely Greek in the Latin.

Moreover, there is one thing that is very singular in those two Manuscripts,
and that can only agree to the Latins. It is certain, that the Greeks did
reckon amongst the number of the Epistles of S. Paul, that which is directed to
the Hebrews; whereas many Latin Churches did not receive it. And this Epistle
is not put with the others in those two Copies. It is placed separately at the
end of the Book. Which cannot be accounted a Transposition, or any other thing
of the like nature, chargeable on those who joined the Leaves of those two
Copies together. For the end and the beginning of every one of the Apostle
Paul's Epistles are there very exactly marked, and in the same order as we read
them at this day. Yet there is no mention made of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
because the Churches of those who made use of the Copies did not believe that
it belonged to S. Paul, nor that it was so much as Canonical. And for this
reason they added, immediately after the Epistle to Philemon, a Catalogue of
all the Books which were read in those Churches; and this Epistle is not marked
with others in the Catalogue. It is only found at the end of those Books as
foreign to the Work, and as a Piece that does not carry the same Authority with
the others.

All this does evidently prove, that those two Manuscript Copies of S. Paul's
Epistles, which are of the same nature with that of Cambridge, which contains
the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles, were not written by the Greeks,
seeing all the Churches of the Greeks, that of the Arians only excepted, did
always acknowledge the Epistle to the Hebrews for Divine and Canonical, and
which they never separated from the rest of that Apostle's Epistles. Nor can we
believe, that the Greeks would join to their Greek Copies a Latin Version which
they did not understand, and which was altogether unprofitable to them. In
short, the numerous Faults that are in the Greek of those Copies is a new proof
that they were written by Latin Amanuenses, who had no knowledge of the Greek
Language. I speak not of the small Orthographical Faults, which are observed in
the ancient Books that were copied by the Greeks, as well as in those that were
copied by the Latins; but of certain Faults in the Words which can only be
applied to the latter, and of which I would produce several Examples, if I did
not believe that it has been evidently proved, that the Manuscripts of that
nature, which were used in the Western Churches, before S. Jerome amended his
ancient Latin Version, were written by Latin Transcribers.

If Beza had made all these Observations, and if he had compared with those
Manuscripts that which S. Jerome hinted in his Letter to Pope Damasus, he would
have perceived the reasons of that great difference that is betwixt those
Copies and others, from which were taken such as have been Printed in these
latter times. That Father observed, that the former were altered by the mixture
of several Gospels together, and that one Gospel had been corrected by another.
We need only apply this Observation to the Cambridge Copy, which contains the
Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles, and the same Faults will be acknowledged
to be therein. We shall find in S. Matthew, for example, some Additions which
are taken out of other Gospels, and the Genealogy in S. Luke amended by that
which is in S. Matthew. The Critical Reflections that he made in that Letter on
the Copies of his Time, has so great a relation to the Cambridge Copy, that
they would seem to have been made for no other purpose, but to give us an exact
knowledge of that Copy Vos admonendos duxi tantum a me, in Lucae praesertim
Evangelio, repertam esse dissonantiam, ut vitandae quorundam offensioni
asservandam potius quam publicandam existimem. Bez. ibid.
which differs so much from others, that Beza does testify, that he durst not
furnish us with all the variations thereof, lest he should give offense to some
sort of Men.

But S. Jerome, who informs us that the Copies of the ancient Latin Version that
was agreeable to the Greek Copies of this kind were very defective, he does
also acquaint us with other Greek Copies that were more exact, by which he had
amended it. And by that he does entirely remove that pretended scandal. This
Learned Critic, to effect his Amendments, had recourse Codicum Graecorum
emendata collatione sed veterum.
to the ancient and the most exact Greek Copies, by the means of which he
removed that Confusion which was in the Latin Edition of that time, and in some
Greek Copies which were in nothing different from that Edition. Canones quoque
quos Eusebius Caesariensis Episcopus Alexandrinum secutus Ammonium in december
numeros ordinavit, sicut in Graeco habentur expressimus. Hieron. praef. in IV.
Evang. ad Dam.
He made use of the Greek Copy of the Gospels to which Eusebius had added
certain Canons, which we find at this day at the beginning of the Manuscript
Copies, (as well Greek as Latin) and also before some Editions. We know by the
means of these Canons, what the Evangelists have that is common or alike, and
what they have peculiar to each of them. By this Method he applied a remedy in
some sort, for removing the Disorder that was in the vulgar Copies.

He does nevertheless add, that to the end he might not leave the ancient Latin
Copy too much, which was then in use, Quae ne multum a lectionis Latinae
consuetudine discreparent, ita calamo temperavimus, ut his tantum quae sensum
videbantur mutare correctis, reliqua manner pateremur ut fuerant. Hier. ibid.
he had observed this moderation, to amend nothing but what changed the sense,
retaining, as to the rest, that ancient Version. This Reformation is judicious,
and it does withal discover to us, the reasons of the great difference that is
betwixt the Cambridge Copy and those at this day. By this we further know, why
those ancient Greek Manuscripts (which were extant before S. Jerome amended the
vulgar) do better agree with our vulgar, than the Printed Greek, which was
taken from the Copies that were used in the Greek Churches. Seeing he himself
testifies, that he did not altogether follow the Greek Copies by which he
amended the ancient Latin Version, a part of which he kept, he has left many
places in his Edition which were agreeable to the Greek, by which it was made,
or at least revised. But it is the same Greek that is in the Cambridge Copy, in
that of Clermont which is in the Royal Library, and in the Copy of the
Religious Benedictins of the Abbey of S. Germain.

Erasmus and some other Critics after him, who knew not the difference that
was betwixt those two sorts of Greek Copies, believed that those which were
more agreeable than the rest to the ancient Latin Interpreter, were amended by
our vulgar. And thus he makes answer to Stunica, who had found these words in
our vulgar, Super tristitiam (Epistle II. to the Corinthians, chap. 2. verse.
3.) in an ancient Greek Copy which had been brought from Rhodes, Ego illi
Rhodiensi oppono tot vetusta exemplaria quae nos vidimus partim in Anglia,
partim in Brabantia, partim Basileae -- ac deprehendi quosdam Graecos codices
ad nostros esse castigatos. Quo de numero suspicor esse Rhodiensem illum -- Ego
magis fiderem Graeco exemplari quod non usquequaque consentir et cum nostris.
Erasm. Resp. ad Stun.
To this Copy of Rhodes (says Erasmus) I oppose the many ancient Manuscripts
that I saw in England, in Brabant, and at Basle -- And I found some Greek
Copies which were corrected by our Latin, and I conjecture that that of Rhodes
is of this number -- I would give more credit to a Greek Copy which does not
altogether agree with our Latin Edition.

It is possible that some Latins had corrected in several places those Greek
Copies which Erasmus does assure us he had seen. I have also read the like
Amendments in the most ancient Manuscripts that ate in our Hands; but they were
all done by other Greek Copies, and not by the Latin Edition only. I need no
other Example, to show the Falsehood of Erasmus his Conjecture, but that which
did afford him an occasion to make this Critical Observation, and to believe,
that the Manuscript of Rhodes was corrected by the Latin. For we read these
Words, (...), Epist. II. to the Corinthians, chap. 2. verse. 3. not only in the
Copy of Rhodes, which was followed in that place by the Cardinal Ximenes in his
Alcala Edition, but also in the ancient Copy of Clermont, which is the second
part of that of Cambridge, and in that of the Benedictins of the Abbey of S.
German. Those two Manuscripts, as it has been already observed, are of the
number of those ancient Greek Copies, to which the ancient Latin Version is
agreeable, and whereof S. Jerome does witness, that he preserved one part in his
New Edition, that he might not too much neglect the ancient Vulgar, which was
in the Hands of every one.

I found indeed these Words, Super tristitiam, in that ancient Vulgar, which is
joined to the Greek Text, in the Copy of the Royal Library, and in that of the
Abbey of S. Germain. S. Jerome has kept them in his new Edition, according to
the Method which he proposed to follow, designing to amend that only which did
change the sense. If Erasmus had contented himself to say, that they had been
taken from another place of S. Paul, Ex alio loco Pauli adjecta, he would have
had more reason; being certain that there are the like Additions in the ancient
Copies, and also sometimes in their synonymous terms. For there we find in some
places two Readings which the Transcribers have joined together, that nothing
might be forgotten by them. If there had been cause to believe that the Greek
had been amended by the Latin, that could be only true of the ancient Greek
Copies which were in use amongst the Latins before S. Jerome's time, and not of
those of the latter Ages. But it is more probable that the Latin was amended by
the Greek. I here speak of the ancient Latin which was taken from the Greek
Copies that were altered in so many places, that that Father was obliged to
revise the Latin by other Greek Copies that were more correct.

Yet I can hardly believe, that the ancient Vulgar had all those Faults at the
beginning, the Greek Copies possibly not being as yet so corrupted, as they
were afterward. Seeing this Principle was generally received amongst the
Latins, that the Version was to be corrected by the Original, it happened
apparently, that the Greek being altered by Glosses and by Additions, they
assumed the liberty to insert the same Glosses and Additions in the Latin
Copies; and they were so numerous, that S. Jerome durst only take a part of
them, because he would have been otherwise obliged to make too great a Change.
He also prevented what might have been objected about the thing. Quis enim
doctus pariter vel indoctus, cum in manus volumen assumpserit, and a saliva
quam semel imbibit viderit discrepare quod lectitat, non statim erumpat in
vocem, me falsarium, me clamitans esse sacrilegum, qui audeam aliquid in
veteribus libris addere, mutare, corrigere? Hieron. praef. in IV. Evang. ad Dam.
There is no body (says he) who sees that the ancient Vulgar does so much
differ from my new Edition, but will presently cry out that I am false and
impious, who durst presume to change and reform the ancient Edition of the
Church in so many places.

According to the Principle that we have established, Stunica, who by the order
of Cardinal Ximenes, had compared many ancient Greek Copies with the Latin
Edition, could say Annotavimus Latina cum Graecis optime convenire. Graeca
autem dico, non qualiacunque exemplaria significare volo, sed ea tantum quae
apud Graecos antiquissima reputantur, qualia videlicet illa fuerunt ad quorum
collationem D. Hicronymus nostra olim emendavit; non exim quae passim
ferebantur exemplaria in recognitione illa Hieronymum secutum, sed vetera
ipsemet asserit. Stun. in antapol. adv. Fab. Stap.
that the Latin Copies are very agreeable to the Greek, if we pass the Greek
Copies at this day, and only consider the Copies that S. Jerome used for making
his new Edition, and which he assures us to have been ancient. Nevertheless it
cannot be inferred from thence, that the Reading of those ancient Copies is
always to be preferred to these which are at present called new. For the latter
may be agreeable to those of S. Jerome, seeing he assures us, that he did not
resolve to follow those Copies exactly, that he might not be thought to
introduce too many Innovations into the Latin Bible. Stunica likewise adds Quod
si alicubi praeter librariorum mendas Latini codices a Graeca origin variare
videntur, in verbis id tantum erit, non in sensu. Vbi enim idem sensus erat,
noluit D. Hieronymus quicquam immutare. Stun. ib.
that if there be any difference betwixt the Latin and that ancient Greek, it
does consist only in some words, and not at all in the sense, because that
Father did not intend to make any change in those places where the sense was
the same.

It is not then true, as some others have alleged, that our Latin Edition does
represent the first Edition of the Apostles, in all those places where it
agrees with those ancient Greek Copies formerly mentioned. For besides that
they had great Imperfections, as I have proved, S. Jerome, who consulted the
most correct Copies for making his new Edition, has left on purpose some of
those Imperfections therein. I do not examine if that Learned Critic revised
the Epistles of S. Paul, and the rest of the New Testament as well as the
Gospels. This belongs to the Second Book of this Work, where we shall treat of
the Versions. It Is sufficient to suppose here, as certain de facto, that the
Latin Version of S. Paul's Epistles was amended as well as the Gospels, whether
that Correction was performed by S. Jerome or another, and that it was revised
in such a manner, that that ancient Edition is preserved as far as it was
possible. Beza whowas ignorant of the original of that great number of various
Readings in his own ancient Copy, which by it self contains more of those
various Readings, than all other Greek Copies put together, does avow, In hac
tamen non sententiarum, sed vocum diversitate nihil profecto comperi, unde
suspicari potuerim a veteribus illis haereticis fuisse depravatum. Imo multa
mihi videor deprehendisse observatione digna, quaedam etiam sic a recepta
Scriptura discrepantia, ut tamen cum veterum quorundam and Graecorum and
Latinorum Patrum scriptis consentiant. Non pauca denique quibus vetusta Latina
editio corroboratur. Bez. Epist. ad Acad. Cantab.
that he had observed nothing in all those Variations that might raise a
suspicion, that it was corrupted by the ancient Heretics. On the contrary,
(says he) I have found many things worthy of Observation, and tho in some
places it was in some sort different from the ordinary Reading, that yet in
these places it agreed with the Greek and Latin Fathers. He does also assure
us, that he observed some Readings therein that confirm the ancient Latin
Edition. Indeed those Diversities are owing principally to the Greeks, who to
render the Writings of the Gospels, and of the Apostles more intelligible, have
illustrated one Gospel by another, and they have likewise explained by more
clear Terms that which appeared to them obscure and intricate.

This custom of making the Apostles speak better Greek than they did in their
Writings is very ancient. Eusebius gives us a considerable Example thereof in
his Ecclesiastical History, where he observed, after some other Writers, that
Tatian the Disciple of Justin Martyr did not only compose a Body of Gospels of
the four which he put in one, but (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 29.
that he had also taken the liberty to correct S. Paul's Diction, to give him
more proper and clearer Expressions. There were some Greek Churches which made
no scruple to read those Greek Copies that had been revised in that manner, and
which possibly did acknowledge no other. There is nothing more surprising than
that which Theodoret (...). Theod. Haeret. Fabul. lib. 1. tit. de Tat. n. 20.
writes of some Churches of his Diocese, which read publicly the Collection of
the Gospels which Tatian had abridged of his own Head. Seeing they were
ignorant of the mischief the Author had done, they used his Work because it was
compendious. That Learned Bishop does assure us, that he found more than two
hundred Copies of this Gospel of Tatian, which were very much esteemed in those
Churches, from whom he took them, and restoredt he four Gospels to them.

We do not observe the like in the Cambridge Copy, which has been altered by
some Orthodox Remarks, according to the custom of those first Ages, where they
have taken the liberty to insert, by way of supplement, that which they
believed to be wanting in one Gospel, taking it from another Gospel. Thus for
example, after the word (...), chap. 20. of S. Matthew, verse. 28. they have
added these Words, (...). It is found in the same sense in the ancient Latin
Version which is joined to that Greek Copy: Vos autem quaeritis de minimo
crescere, and de magno minui. Introeuntes autem and rogati coenare, ne
discubueritis in eminentioribus locis, ne forte dignior te superveniat, and
accedens coenae invitator dicat tibi, Adhuc, deorsum accede, and confundaris.
Si autem discubueris in minimum locum, and superveniat minor te, dicet tibi
invitator coenae, Collige adhuc superius, and erit tibi hoc utile. That is, But
you seek to rise from a low condition, and from being great to become servants.
When thou art bidden of any man to supper, sit not down in the highest room,
lest a more honorable man than thou be bidden of him, and he that bade thee
and him come and say unto thee, Give this man place, and thou begin with shame
to take the lowest room: But if thou do sit down in the lowest room, and
another poorer man than thou do come, he will say unto thee, Friend, go up
higher, and this shall be profitable for thee.

Several Learned Critics have observed this Addition after Beza: I have marked
it with the same faults, as it is in the Greek Manuscript, where it is written
in Capital Letters, without accents and without any distinction of words. St.
Jerome took this Addition from the Ancient Latin Edition, when he revised it,
by the Order of Pope Damasus. He was easily satisfied, according to the Method
which he had proposed in his correction, that those words were taken from St.
Luke's Gospel, Chap. 14. v. 8. and 9. but that there is some difference in the
words: Which is an ordinary thing to that Copy, where the words are sometimes
changed to others that are Synonymous. That Father who consulted the Ancient
Greek Copies, especially those where the Canons of Eusebius were marked,
presently perceived in reading the Tenth Canon, that that was only found in
that 178 Section of St. Luke, and that so he must take it away from the 204
Section of St. Matthew, where it had been inserted in the Ancient Greek. And
therefore, he adds the same Canons of Eusebius to the Latin Edition, which he
had amended by good Greek Copies, that he might remove that mixture and
confusion that was in the Latin Copies. By this way there is a distinction
observed betwixt what was common to the several Gospels, and what was peculiar
to every one of them. Cum itaque (says St. Jerome) canones legeris qui
subjecti sunt, confusionis errore sublato, and similia omnia scies, and
singulis sua quaeque restitues.

There are several other the like Editions in that Cambridge Copy, Hieron.
praef. in IV. Evan. ad Dam.
which it is needless to mention, because they may be seen in Beza's Notes upon
the New Testament, in the Sixteenth Volume of the Polyglott Bible of England,
and in the Greek Edition of the New Testament Printed at Oxford. We will only
observe, that Beza, and likewise some other Critics, who knew not the original
cause of those changes, delivered nothing concerning them but what was only
Founded on wide conjectures; whereas if they had compared that Ancient Copy
with St. Jerome's Observations, in his Letter to Pope Damasus, they would have
acknowledged, that a Part of the Greek and Latin Copies, were at that time
agreeable to that of Cambridge. That Learned Father amended them by the best
Greek Copies: If we had any other Greek Copies of that time, besides that of
Cambridge, that contained the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles, we should
find the same Additions in them. The Copy of the Benedictines of the Abbey of
St. Germain, which has St. Paul's Epistles, does perfectly agree, (as well in
the Greek as in the Latin) with that of the Royal Library, which is the Second
Part of that of Cambridge.

It is only (for example) in the latter Copy, that we read Chap. 6. of St.
John, v. 56. these Words added, (...). As my Father is in me, I am also in my
Father: Verily, verily, I say unto you, if ye receive not the body of the Son
of Man as the Bread of life, you have no life in you. Beza is surprised with
this Addition, in uno codice vetusto (says he) mirum hic quiddam
deprehendimus: It seems that he meant another Copy than that of Cambridge, and
he likewise does place this Addition, immediately after the 53 verse, whereas in
that of Cambridge it is in the 68. after the word (...), that is to say, after
the 56 verse; where it is also read in one of Robert Stephen's Copies, whence
that Calvinist might have taken it, without speaking of his Ancient Cambridge
Copy. If he had consulted it, he would not have said in his Note upon that
place, that Haec ego sicut temere non expunxerim, ac prasertim priorem partem,
quae totidem verbis alibi reperitur, ita non facile admiserim, cum in uno illo
exemplari sint a nobis reperta. Certe alteram partem suppositam esse suspicor,
quia simile nihil alibi invenio: neque enim usquam fit mentio sumendi corporis
praeterito sanguine; and exemplar illud unde haec desumpsimus fuerat in Italia
collatum, ubi facile fuit aliquid in Bohemorum, id est Evangelii odium, addere.
Bez. Annot. in c. 6. Joann. v. 53.
he durst not wholly reject that Addition, especially the first Part, which is
found in another place; but that he durst not also admit it, because he read it
only in one Copy. He does add afterward, agreeably to his own prejudices
rather than to the truth, I suspect that the other Part is supposititious,
because I find nothing like it elsewhere: For he makes no mention in any other
place, of taking the Body without the Blood; and the Copy whence that reading
was taken, was compared in Italy, where it was easy to add something in hatred
of the Bohemians, that is to say, of the Gospel.

That Man was so extremely zealous for his Calvinism, that he took no notice,
that the same Addition is in the Cambridge Copy, which he often calls
vetustissimum, and admirandae Vetustatis codicem. The Bohemians had not come on
the Stage in those Ancient times: Stephen's Greek Copy which was compared with
many others in Italy, is very sincere in that place. That Addition was in all
probability taken from a Copy like to that of Cambridge; and there was no talk
then of taking away the Cup, nor of those who are called Evangelical or
Protestants: But as it has been already observed, there were always several
Glosses added to those ancient Manuscripts, which were for the most part taken
from some other places of those same Books; besides some Illustrations that
were inserted therein. This is not the place for bringing other Proofs of
Beza's disingenuity in his Notes upon the New Testament; it will be more proper
to do that elsewhere. I designed only in this place, to make use of some
Examples, in which I might give some account of that Ancient Cambridge
Manuscript, which to this day has been admired for the manifold diversity of
its Readings, whilst true reasons thereof have not been observed.

F. Morin, to whom was given the Collection that Junius the Library Keeper of
Cambridge, had made of all the places where that Ancient Greek Copy differed
from others; did content himself with publishing those which agreed with our
vulgar. Nevertheless he could not but admire, Evangelium Lucae in isto
antiquissimo manuscripto a vulgato Graeco textu, atque etiam a Vulgata Latina
Versione adeo distat, tam multae periodi vel truncatae sunt, vel superadditae,
vel mutilatae, vel aliis verbis enunciatae, ut legenti non sine causa sint
admirationi -- Si transpositiones excipias, quae sensum non laedunt, nullibi
Septuaginta Interpretes a Masorethico textu tam saepe and enormiter variant,
quam hic Lucae codex a trito and vulgato textu sive Graeco sive Latino.
Sequitur tamen (...) textus Lucae ordinem and historiam: ita ut appareat ex
alio Lucae manuscripto, haec olim exscripta fuisse, hancque varietatem lapsu
temporis irrepsisse. Jo. Mor. Exerc. Bibl. lib. 1. Exerc. 2. c. 3.
that enormous difference, which appeared chiefly in the Gospel of St. Luke,
where he is very far from, not only the ordinary Greek, but from the vulgar.
Those varieties, (says that Father,) consist in entire Periods, which were
retrenched or added, strained or explained in other terms. He is confident,
that the Version of the Septuagint does not so much differ from the Hebrew
Masoretick Text, (the transpositions excepted, which alter not the Text) as the
Cambridge Copy does differ from all others: But because it does agree with them
in every thing that relates to the scope of the Text, he thinks that it was
taken from another Copy of St. Luke, into which those variations in process of
time had slipped: Yet he dares not be positive, because he knows not the
reasons of that great diversity. And therefore he adds Fieri potuit ut
antiquitus in quaedam exemplaria Lucae nonnulla ex iis Evangeliis quae (...)
existimata sunt, irrepserint, quae postea Sanctorum Patrum diligentia resecta
fuerint. Mor. ibid.
that possibly they might have inserted in some Copies of St. Luke, that which
was found in other supposed Gospels, and that the Fathers had afterward been
at the pains to retrench those Additions. If that Critic had narrowly weighed
St. Jerome's Preface, dedicated to Pope Damasus, he would there have found all
his doubts cleared.

Seeing the Cambridge Copy observes the same Order, with all the other Greek
Copies of the New Testament, as to the thread of the History, it does
manifestly prove, that it has not been on purpose altered by the Heretics.
Moreover, seeing the alterations that are therein, do not introduce any Paradox
Opinion, but consist for the most part, in some words which have been placed
instead of others, and in some Additions that have been taken from other
Evangelists, or in bare Illustrations, we may infer from thence, that all the
change proceeded from the liberty that was taken by some at that time, for
rendering the Books of the New Testament the more intelligible, without putting
themselves to the trouble of adhering to the words of the Original, so long as
nothing of the sense was altered. The Critics, especially St. Jerome, in
reforming the ancient Vulgar, did at the same time amend those ancient Greek
Copies, with which he agreed entirely. He used for that purpose, other Greek
Copies, which were more exact, and especially those to which he had added the
Ten Canons of Eusebius. These latter Copies which were amongst the Greeks,
before St. Jerome's time always remained with them, which is easily proved by
the same Canons of Eusebius.

One of the most surprising varieties of that Copy, is that which is found in
the Genealogy of Jesus Christ, Chap. 3. of St. Luke, for this Genealogy is the
same with that in St. Matthew, unless it be, that it goes up to Solomon in this
manner. (...). It is manifest that this Genealogy has been designedly amended
by that of St. Matthew, yet with an Addition of those Persons which he had
omitted. Beza, who has also made mention of this diversity, in his Notes upon
this Chapter of St. Luke, declares Quinam autem id sit factum nescio, cum
recepta lectio tum Syri ipsius interpretis auctoritate tum Scriptorum omnium
Sacrorum, propterea de Matthaeo cum Luca conciliando laborantium, consensu
plane confirmetur: cui sane praejudicium ullum afferre nec velim nec ausim.
Tantum dico. fieri potuisse, ut ipsis Evangelistarum temporibus Judaei
genealogiam istam quantum in ipsis fuit depravarint, quasi fidem caeteris de
Christo narrationibus abrogaturi, quae fraus a plerisque non animadversa facile
obtinuerit. Bez. Annot. in c. 3. Luc. v. 23.
that he cannot imagine how that can be, because the Syriack Interpreter, and
all the Ancient Ecclesiastical Writers are altogether against that Copy, from
whom he neither intends, nay nor dares to recede. That might, as he
conjectures, have happened from the very time of the Evangelists, the Jews
having corrupted that Genealogy that they might not believe the other
Histories, which are recorded in the Gospels.

There is nothing more ridiculous than this conjecture of Beza, who does charge
the Jews with a crime which they never thought of; besides that it was of no
advantage to them, because they could not corrupt all the Copies which they
kept by them. There are none to be blamed for that alteration of the Ancient
Copies of the New Testament, but the Christians and even the Orthodox, as it
has been frequently observed after St. Jerome, who, in his Letter to Pope
Damasus, has taken notice of the change of which we now speak. He says, that in
those days they took the liberty to amend the Gospels by that Gospel, which
they had read first. Ille qui unum e quatuor primum legerat, ad ejus exemplum
caeteros quoque existimaverat emendandos. It is evident, that the Genealogy in
St. Luke was reformed in the Cambridge Copy, according to this Method, and that
what was supposed to be wanting therein, was supplied from the Old Testament.
And the accusation supposed to have been brought against the Jews, was so far
from admitting a sufficient ground of reason, that there was nothing at that
time so common, as Copies, as well Greek as Latin of that kind, especially in
the Churches of the West, before St. Jerome had revised the Ancient Latin
Edition: It would be easy to prove, that the Gospel of St. Mark has been
likewise amended in some places, by that of St. Matthew; and further, that
there have been some words changed for others that were synonymous, which
appeared to be more intelligible; but that labor would be to no purpose,
because every one may consult the diverse Readings of that ancient Copy in the
sixth Tome of the Polyglott Bible of England, and in the Greek Edition of the
New Testament Printed at Oxford. It is enough that I have observed the true
reason of those numerous variations, concerning which the Critics have given
us very wide, and even false conjectures.

Those who revised those ancient Copies, intending nothing but to make them
clear, without being at the pains to confine themselves to the true Reading of
the Evangelists and the Apostles, have given Paraphrases on them, whenever
they believed that they were not sufficiently understood. They have also
abridged them in those places that they thought intricate, by reason of
superfluous words, which they have also transposed in innumerable places for
the same reason: Which is enough to be observed once for all, in general,
without a particular rehearsal of the Passages, which have been altered in the
Cambridge Copy, as well in the Gospels, as in the Acts of the Apostles. This
does appear yet more in the Acts, because there was a very great liberty taken
of reforming that History in the first Ages of the Church. Nevertheless
whatever change those Books have undergone in the ancient time, and that the
very words of the Evangelists and the Apostles were not observed, yet it will
not be found that the sense has suffered any alteration. They only endeavored
to make them the more intelligible to the People, and for that end, it was
necessary to refine them, seeing they were full of Hebraisms and very concise
Phrases, which they were obliged to illustrate according to that Method.

Nevertheless, in the Cambridge Copy there are certain Additions whereof the
same thing cannot be said, because they are plain Matters of Fact that have
been added. For example, Chapter 6. of St. Luke, verse 5. after the word (...),
we read in that Copy, (...). That is to say, On the same day, seeing a Man
travel on the Sabbath day, he said unto him, my friend, if thou know what
thou art doing, thou art happy, but if thou do not know it, thou art cursed
and a transgressour of the Law. This History might possibly have been taken
from some Ancient Apocryphal Book, where it was common in the first Ages of
Christianity; and it may be, it was then believed, that it came from the
Apostles or their Disciples. And therefore those who presumed to reform the
first Copies of the New Testament, in so many places, upon the bare prospect of
rendering them intelligible to all the World, would not scruple to add thereto
Histories of that sort, which they believed to be true. We have formerly taken
notice of examples of the like nature in the Gospel of the Nazarens: If we had
at this day a sufficient number of Copies of this nature, that were before St.
Jerome's time, especially in the Western Churches, we might discover some other
Additions in them, which are not known to us at present, because we have little
or nothing remaining of the Books of those first Ages.

Although it does not appear to us, that the Christians have had Massorets or
Critics like to those of the Jews, who have given to the Books of the New
Testament that uniformity which is found to have been from many Ages in the
Greek Copies, and also in the Latin, since St. Jerome: it is probable that the
Greeks followed certain Copies which they judged to be more exact than others,
and that they were Corrected by learned Critics. These Copies were used
afterward as a Massore or Rule. By these St. Jerome Corrected the ancient Latin
Edition, by the Order of Pope Damasus. Let us now examine the second Part of the
ancient Cambridge Copy, which does contain the Epistles of St. Paul.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the second part of the Cambridge Copy, which contains St.
Paul's Epistles. Examples of the various Readings that are in that second Part.
Critical Reflections upon the whole matter.
THere is nothing can more contribute to the knowledge of the state of the
Greek Copies of the New Testament, in the most ancient times of the Church,
than those Books that were so common before St. Jerome, and which are not
extant, but in very few places at this day. It will be in vain to look for them
in the Churches of the East; because they having been written in Greek and in
Latin, and with the same Hand, it is easy to judge that they could be only
extant in the West. We are indebted to the Monks for having preserved some of
those Copies for us. That of Cambridge, as has been said, was found in a
Monastery of Lions. The Benedictine Monks of the Abbey of St. Germain, have in
their Library the second part of the like Copy, in which the Epistles of St.
Paul are contained. Peter Pithou, Vidimus and nos aliquando vetustissimum
exemplar Evangeliorum literis illis majoribus exaratum, adjectis e regione
Graecis, quod olim fuisse dicebatur Ecclesiae Lugdunensis. Vidimus and aliud
Epistolarum exemplar ejusdem formae and aetatis ex Corbejae majoris Galliae
Monasterio, quae tanquam sanctioris antiquitatis (...) non sine religione
suspicimus and veneramur. Petr. Pith. de SS. Bibl. Interpr.
had seen those two ancient Copies, which he esteemed for their great
antiquity. He does testify, that it was believed, that the former was brought
from the Church of Lions, and the latter from the famous Abbey of Corby in
France. Christian Druthmar, an ancient Benedictine Monk, who had been for some
time in that Abbey, has pointed to us the first part of this latter Copy, when
he makes mention of a Greek Copy, which he believed to have belonged to St.
Hilary, where the Gospel of St. John did immediately follow that of St.
Matthew. Christ. Druthm. Expos. in Matthew. c. 1.
Vidi (says that Monk) Librum Evangelii Graece scriptum, qui dicebatur Sancti
Hilarii fuisse, in quo primi erant Matthaeus and Joannes. In the Royal Library,
there is another Greek and Latin Copy of St. Paul's Epistles, which differs
almost in nothing from that of the Benedictines, unless it be that the Letters
are not so great, nor so majestic, although they be the same as to their
figure and duration. The King's Copy is also more disfigured by reason of
innumerable corrections, than that of the Abbey of St. Germain. For although
this latter has likewise been amended in many places, the corrections thereof
are not so gross.

Further, we may call those two Copies the second part of that of Cambridge,
because they contain that ancient Greek, and that ancient Latin Version, which
was used in the Churches of the West, before St. Jerome had reformed it. It is
true that that Father in his Letter to Damasus, does only make mention of four
Gospels which he had revised, and we are not clearly informed by another Hand,
that he had corrected the rest of the N. T. after the same manner. But however
it be, the thing is, it is certain that the whole ancient Latin Version was
amended, and that the same method was observed in that Reformation, which St.
Jerome does testify to have been followed in his own practice, when in
compliance to the Order of Pope Damasus, he reformed the ancient Latin
Translation.

Beza, in his Notes upon St. Paul, does frequently cite that ancient Copy of
the King's Library, under the name of Codex Claromontanus.
The Copy of Clermont. He also believed that it was the second Part of that
which belongs to Cambridge. In which he is not mistaken. For it is the Greek
and the Latin of those ancient Greek and Latin Copies that were commonly read
before St. Jerome's time. It is not necessary for all that, that both of them
should have been written with the same Hand. It is sufficient that they are of
the same Age. And so it may be said, that that of the Benedictines, as well as
the King's, is the second Part of the Cambridge Copy, because both the one and
the other do represent the ancient Vulgar to us, to which they have added the
Greek, with which it did agree.

F. Morin, who had borrowed that ancient Manuscript of the Du Puis, that he
might extract the various Readings that confirmed our Vulgar, does in his
Exercitations, insist at some length on the Bible. Existimo versionem
vetustissimi illius codicis Graeco textui adversam eam esse, qua Ecclesia
Latina ut plurimum ante Sanctum Hieronymum utebatur, quam sanctus ille vir,
jubente Damaso Pontifice, ad fidem Graecorum exemplarium postmodum recensuit
and emendavit. Jo. Mor. Exercit. Bibl. Exerc. 2. c. 4.
He is persuaded that the Latin Version, that is joined to the Greek, is the
ancient Translation, which was read in the West before St. Jerome had reformed
it by the Command of Pope Damasus, according to the ancient Greek Copies. He
Consideratis figura, magnitudine and splendore characteris tam Graeci quam
Latini, illius ob vetustatem per seipsum multis in locis dimidiata
obliteratione, passimque subobs^ura delineatione, versionis insuper cum Vulgata
textuque Patrum comparatione, S. Hieronymi aetatem istius codicis scripto
videtur omnino praecedere. Mor. ibid.
does also judge by the figure and bulk of the Greek and Latin Characters,
which are almost worn out in some places, by reason of their antiquity, and by
the Latin Version which he compared with our Vulgar, and with the Citations of
the ancient Fathers, that that Copy was written before St. Jerome. He further
adds, to prove the antiquity of the same Manuscript, a Catalogue of the Books
of the Scripture, which had been inserted at the end, in which the twelve small
Prophets are noted with the four great Prophets, and the Gospel of St. John
before that of St. Mark and St. Luke. Moreover, the Book of the Pastor, the
Epistle of Barnabas, and some others, are there placed in the number of the
Books of Scripture. It is hard (says F. Morin,) that all this should be since
St. Jerome. Quae omnia Sancti Hieronymi aevum vix subsequi possunt, multa minus
ipsa codicis scriptio.

It is true, that the Greek and Latin Copies of that kind are more ancient than
St. Jerome, if we consider the ancient Latin Version which was used in the West,
before it was Revised by that Father. But F. Morin's Reasons do not prove that
they were written from that time. For it is possible that the Monks, who Copied
the ancient Books, writ out those Copies by those that were more ancient: and I
believe that this did happen on that occasion. As for the Character, it cannot
be denied but that it is most ancient; but those who have skill to judge of
them, do not allow them to be above a thousand years standing; at least it is
certain, that there are Books of the same Character which do not exceed that
time. Neither do I see what can be concluded from Letters that are almost
defaced, for the antiquity of a Manuscript. This only does prove that the Ink
is not good. The truth is, the Copy of the Benedictines which is of the same
antiquity, and has likewise a greater Letter, is still so fair, that one would
believe by looking upon some of its Pages, (if judgment were to be given by the
Ink and Parchment) that it had been but just now written. Those who have a
desire to preserve those ancient Manuscripts, ought to put leaves of Paper
betwixt the leaves of the Parchment upon which the Writing is, to the end that
the Ink may not wear off. They might at last have added to the end of those
Copies, a very ancient Catalogue of the Books of the Bible.

The strongest proof in my Opinion for evincing the great antiquity of that
Copy, is, that the Epistle to the Hebrews is not reckoned with the rest, in the
number of St. Paul's Epistles, as I have formerly observed, but by it self, and
out of the Body of those Letters that were read in the Church. F. Morin did not
sufficiently consider that Manuscript, when he says, (speaking of the
Catalogue, which is put at the end) Catalogus ille insertus est codici ante
Epistolam ad Hebraeos in paginis quibusdam fortuito vacuis. Mor. ibid.
that they placed it before the Epistle to the Hebrews, in some Pages where
there was nothing written as it happened. For that was done on purpose, the
Epistle to Philemon being the last of the Copies of that sort, which the Latins
had writ out for their use. Seeing they did not believe, that the Epistle to
the Hebrews had been written by that Apostle, nor that it was Canonical, they
did not join it to the other Epistles. And therefore they inserted that
Catalogue of the Books of Scripture immediately after the Epistle of St. Paul
to Philemon.

If Beza had considered the corrections that had been made in that Copy which
he named of Clermont, he would easily have acknowledged, that Books of that
sort were never in use amongst the Greeks, and that so it was not brought out
of Greece, as he alleged. There are so many faults therein, especially in the
Greek, that it is manifestly seen, that it could not have been written but by a
person who was altogether ignorant of that Language. A good part of those
faults were amended, and these were not only faults of the Orthography, but
sometimes of Words. They further reformed that ancient Version in many places,
by other Greek Copies, which came nearer to these at this day. Which without
doubt was done by some Latins, who corrected at the same time the ancient
Vulgar, by St. Jerome's new Edition.

We will not then, with Beza, charge the Observations that are placed in the
Margins of that sort of Copies, on the Greek Priests, but on those of the
Western Church, who had some knowledge of the Greek Language. As those Books
passed through several Hands, so they have received amendments, some of which
are more ancient than others. But after all, we still see the ancient Readings,
as well in the Greek as in the Latin, especially in the Copy of the Library of
St. Germain, which has been revised in so curious a manner, that the amendment
does often consist in nothing else but in small strokes of the Pen in the
Letters. Seeing those two Copies do differ in very few things, I shall in the
following part of my Discourse, make use rather of the latter, than that of the
King's Library, which is more disfigured.

F. Morin has observed in general, Variarum istarum lectionum nulla adeo
enormis est, atque ut ita dicam varia, ut cum iis quas ex priori volumine
observavimus comparari possit. Paulinarum Epistolarum codex ille vulgato textui
priore long conformior est, licet illi antiquitate non cedat. Mor. ibid.
that the Clermont Copy upon St. Paul's Epistles, does not so much vary from
the ordinary Copies of the New Testament, as that of Cambridge does, and that
it is also more agreeable to our Vulgar, though it is no less ancient than the
other. The same thing is to be said of that of the Benedictines of the Abbey of
St. Germain, because they are so much alike, that one would believe, that the
one had been copied from the other. The reason of this great conformity of St.
Paul's Epistles, in the Clermont Copy with the ordinary Greek, and the Latin of
the Vulgar is evident, because he had no occasion to amend those Epistles by
one another, as the Gospels; and they were not so much neglected in the first
Ages of the Church, as the Acts of the Apostles, which had been revised with a
great deal of liberty in many places. Yet if we carefully examine the places
where those ancient Copies of St. Paul's Epistles, that were before St. Jerome,
do differ from the Ordinary, we shall find that they were not reformed in the
same manner, and according to the same method as the Gospels and the Acts. We
shall there observe the like Additions of Words, Synonymous Terms, several
Readings joined together, with Glosses annexed. Moreover, Transpositions are
frequently found there: which would seem to have been done on purpose, to
render the Sense more clear, and also to avoid sometimes the Hyperbates with
which St. Paul's Epistles are filled. There are also some places more abridged,
than what are in the ordinary Copies. Whether it was that they intended to
remove what was of no use, or that that is in truth the ancient Reading. For
although those Copies have been revised, they were amended throughout; and then
they might represent the ancient Reading. To the end that they may be the
better known, I shall here give some examples taken from the Epistle to the
Romans, and there may be a great many more observed in the second Book of this
Work, with respect to the Vulgar.

In the Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 2. ver. 7. It is not in the Copy of the
Abbey of St. Germain, (...), Beloved of God, neither is it expressed in the
ancient Latin Version which is joined to it. Indeed these Words make nothing
for the Sense, which is sufficiently expressed by the others which follow,
(...), called Saints.

In the 13. v. of the same Chapter, instead of these Words, (...), I will not,
we read (...) I think not. But they have placed in the Margin of the Clermont
Copy (...), which is the ordinary Reading, and this happens frequently. In the
16. v. we do not read in that ancient Copy, (...), of Christ, after the Word
(...), Gospel, neither is it expressed in the two Vulgars. It is probable that
(...) was added. Likewise, it is not found in some other ancient Greek Copies.
In v. 29. there is not the Word (...), but immediately after (...), it is in
that ancient Copy (...), and it is read in the same manner in the ancient
Vulgar, so that (...) seems to be superfluous. The Vulgar at this day does also
represent that ancient Reading, if the word nequitia be left out, which has
been added for no use to the Greek at this day.

Verse 31. of the same Chapter, the word (...) is not in that ancient Copy, but
it has been added, neither is sine foedere, in the ancient Vulgar, as it is in
that which is used at this day, in conformity to the ordinary Greek. We shall
observe that in the Copy of the Abbey of St. Germain, there are many the like
Additions written of the same Hand with the body of the Book, and they are for
the most part placed at the bottom of the Page with a mark of Reference, as if
they had been true omissions. But these are ordinarily amendments according to
some other Greek Copies. Additions of this sort are also common in the Latin.
Nevertheless there are some places in which the Latin does not altogether
answer to the Greek Addition. We see the same thing in the Copy that belongs to
the Royal Library. They who copied those Manuscripts, by the ancient Copies,
did at the same time correct them by others, and in process of time there were
other amendments added thereto.

Verse 32. of the same Chapter, after the Word (...), we read in the same Copy
(...), and in the ancient Vulgar, as well as in that we have at this day, it is
non intellexerunt. Erasmus has observed, in his Remark upon this place, that he
does not know why it is in the Latin Copies non intellexerunt, which is not in
the Greek, unless it be, that it has been added in the Latin. F. Morin does
assure us of the contrary, Non de suo haec addidit Hieronymus, sed qui cum
praecesserat interpres haec and similia verterat, and textui inseruerat,
antiquorum codicum fidem sequens; vel ipse Hieronymus eadem fide fretus ista
restituit. Muratio postea facta est in Graeco textu, non in Vulgata nostra, ut
tot exemplis jam demonstravimus, atque iterum demonstrabimus. Mor. ibid.
that the Reading that is in our Vulgar was not St. Jerome's, but that it is in
the ancient Latin Interpreter, who was before him, and who in this place
followed the Greek of his time; or that that Father, having relied on Greek
Manuscripts of the like nature, had inserted that sort of Additions: whence he
does conclude, that that Change was afterward made in the ordinary Greek, and
not in our Vulgar. He does likewise make a general Rule of it.

It is true, that St. Jerome, or he who revised the ancient Vulgar, is not the
Author of this Addition, non intellexerunt, seeing it is found in the Greek and
Latin of St. Germain Copy, and in that of the Royal Library. But it cannot be
concluded, with F. Morin, that we are obliged to prefer those ancient Copies to
the ordinary Greek in all those places where there are the like Additions, it
being certain that they were revised that they might be the more plain. It is
convenient on such occasions to compare them with other Copies; and if it
happen that not so much as one does agree with them, it is a sign that in those
Places there have been Amendments made in those old Copies to which the ancient
Vulgar was agreeable. St. Jerome does testify, that in his new Edition, which
is the Vulgar at this day, he left some of those Additions, because they did
not change the sense.

Si plura exemplaria, quale hoc est, ante mill ducentos and aliquot annos
descripta aliquis nancisceretur, nihil in Vulgata nostra discrepans
deprehenderetur, quod illis antiquis codicibus non confirmetur. Ibid.
If we had ( F. Morin continues) many of those Copies which were written above
twelve hundred years ago, we would acknowledge that our Vulgar does perfectly
agree with those ancient Copies, in those places where it does differ from the
ordinary Greek. But suppose it were so, could it be alleged that our Vulgar
does in all those places represent the first Original of the Apostles, as F.
Amelote did likewise think? I desire no other but St. Jerome to be Judge in this
Dispute, which has so mightily divided Men's minds in this latter Age. Hieron.
Praef. in IV. Evan. ad Dam.
That learned Critic does give us a very strange draught of those ancient
Copies which have been written above these twelve hundred Years. He was obliged
to reform the ancient Latin Edition, that was so defective, by other Greek
Copies that were more correct; which he nevertheless performed in such a manner
as to retain somewhat of the ancient Edition in those places where he might
have corrected them by his Greek Copies. Can it be said that our Vulgar does
represent the first and true Original of the Apostles in those places that have
been left on purpose with their faults, because they had no mind to meddle with
them? This is to show that F. Morin, and after him F. Amelote, had not a
sufficient knowledge of those venerable and august Manuscripts that were
written above twelve hundred years ago. Antiquity is not a good proof of the
Goodness and Faithfulness of a Record, when it is otherwise proved that that
Record has been vitiated within that time.

Chap. 3. v. 12. of the same Epistle, we do not read in the Copy of the Abbey
of St. Germain, (...), nor in the ancient Latin Version that is joined
thereunto, non est qui faciat bonum. These words were only added, as well in
the Greek as in the Latin, at the bottom of the Page, with a mark of Reference,
as a Supplement which was taken from the ordinary Greek Copies, and from the
Vulgar that had been revised. Although those Words which are taken out of the
xiii. Psalm (the xiv. in the Hebrew) are extant in all the Greek Copies, in
conformity to the Hebrew Text, St. Justin does not read them in his Dialogue
against the Jew Tryphon. It is possible, that those who revised the Greek of
the New Testament in the ancient times left them out, as thinking them
needless, seeing they were of the number of those Repetitions which are so
frequent in the Psalms. We shall nevertheless observe, that S. Justin did
instead of them read these other Words, (...), which are in the same Epistle to
the Romans, v. 7. But we cannot depend on the Citations of the Fathers, which
are not very exact when they quote Scripture Passages. It would be dangerous to
reform the Greek Copies of the New Testament by them, which might be easily
justified by innumerable Examples.

Chap. 4. v. 9. after the Word (...), the Word (...) is read in that Copy,
which yet is not expressed in the ancient Vulgar that is joined thereunto,
although it is in that which is used at this day. The sense does require that
Supplement. V. 16. of the same Chapter, the Word (...), that is in the ancient
Copy as well as in the ordinary Greek, is not expressed in the ancient Vulgar,
where we barely read, non ei qui ex lege est, and the Verb (...) is also in the
Greek. Verse. 23. there is a Repetition made of (...) after the Word (...), and
in the ancient Vulgar ad justitiam, which is also retained in the Vulgar now
used.

Chap. 5. verse. 1. instead of (...), there is in that ancient Copy (...), and
in the two Vulgars habeamus. Verse. 2. we do not read in the same Copy (...),
nor in the ancient Version annexed to it per fidem; but it is in our Vulgar
agreeable to the ordinary Greek. Verse. 5. We read not in the Greek of that Copy
(...), nor is it expressed in the ancient Vulgar; but it is marked at the
bottom of the Page, as well in the Greek as in the Latin, which must have been
taken from another Copy. Verse. 12. we do not read (...) after the Word (...).
Verse. 16. instead of (...), we read (...), and in the two Vulgars peccatum.
Verse. 18. instead of (...) there is (...), and in the two Vulgars justitiam.

Chap. 6. v. 11. we read not in the ancient Greek Copy (...), nor in the
ancient Vulgar Domino nostro. Verse. 12. these Words (...), are not in the same
Copy, nor in the Latin Version annexed to it, in concupiscentiis ejus. Verse.
16. we read not likewise in that Copy, (...), nor in the ancient Vulgar ad
mortem.

Chap. 7. v. 6. instead of (...) we read in the ancient Copy of St. Germain
(...), and in the two Vulgars mortis; which reading is conformable to Origin.
Beza observes in his Remark upon that place, that he only found it in his
ancient Clermont Copy. Nullius (says he) Graeci codicis authoritate
confirmatur haec lectio, excepto illo Claromontano, quem alioqui plurimi facio.
Verse. 14. instead of (...) we read (...). These two Particles are often put for
one another, as well in the Greek Copies as in the ancient Versions. Verse. 15.
(...) is not in the ancient Copy, nor hoc in the ancient Vulgar; where also we
have not bonum, which is in the Vulgar at this day. Verse. 25. instead of (...),
there is in the ancient Version, (...), and in the two Vulgars gratia Dei.

Chap. 8. v. 38. This Verse is expressed in the ancient Copy after this manner,
(...), and in the ancient Vulgar, agreeable to that Reading, neque Angelus,
neque Potestas, neque initia, neque instantia, neque futura, neque virtus.

Chap. 9. v. 31. We do not read in that ancient Copy the first (...), nor the
Word justitiae in the same place in the ancient Vulgar.

Chap. 10. v. 1. instead of these Words (...), we read in that ancient Copy
(...), and in the ancient Vulgar pro illis, which is also in our Vulgar, but
thesein there is fit added. Verse. 8. after (...) we read (...), and in the two
Vulgars Scriptura. Verse. 17. instead of (...) there is in the ancient Copy
(...), and in the two Vulgars Christi. Beza, Invenimus quidem in tribus
exemplaribus; sed tamen vix possim probare. Bez. Annot. in Epist. ad Romans c. 9.
v. 17.
who also did read (...) in his three Copies, does testify, that he does not
approve of this reading. There is nothing more ordinary in those ancient Greek
Copies than the enterchanging of these three Words, (...), because they are
there written by way of Contraction thus, (...), which gave occasion to the
Transcribers to put one frequently for another. V. 20. we read not (...), nor
in the Latin Version audet and; besides, this makes nothing for the sense.

Chap. 11. v. 6. we do not read in the ancient Copies these words, (...). But
if it be by Works then it is no more Grace, otherwise work is no work. Neither
are they expressed in the two Vulgars. Beza Hanc partem non legunt vetus
Interpres, nec Origenes, nec Chrysostomus, nec Ambrosius, quam tamen summo
consensu in Graecis codicibus inveni, Claromontano excepto -- and mihi quidem
plane videtur necessaria explendae operum and fidei antithesi. Bez. ibid. c.
11. v. 6.
observes that they were not in Origin, St. Chrysostom, nor St. Ambrose, but
that he read them in all the Greek Copies except that of Clermont. He is of the
Judgment that we ought to read them to complete the Antithesis that is in that
place betwixt Works and Faith: nevertheless Erasmus is for the ancient Reading,
which he had more strongly confirmed if he had read the two ancient Copies to
which the ancient Latin Version is annexed. Grot. Annot. in Epist. ad Romans c.
11. v. 6.
Grotius followed the Opinion of Erasmus, Haec recte (says this Critic)
desunt in manuscripto, nec legit Latinus Interpres, sed nec Origines, nec
Ambrosius, nec Chrysostomus. Estius durst not be so positive in this matter; he
does only say, Vt satis probabile sit additamentum esse Graeci cujuspiam ad
textum -- Quocirca Cajetano non assentior affirmanti integram hanc sententiam
deesse in Latino textu, cum verius existimem simpliciter came redundare. Est
Comm. in Epist. ad Romans c. 11. v. 6.
that it is probable enough that those Words were added to the Text:
nevertheless he does reject the Opinion of Cajetan, who believed that they were
wanting in the Vulgar. Verse. 13. we read not in the ancient Copy (...), nor in
the annexed Latin Version gentium Apostolus, but it is only written in the
bottom of the Page by the same hand with the Book, with the ordinary mark of
reference.

Chap. 12. v. 11. This Contraction (...), which is in the ancient Copy gave
occasion to a different Reading in the Greek Copies; for some did read it
(...), Lord, and others (...), Time: but we ought to read it (...); and it is
in the two Vulgars Domino, agreeable to that Reading. Verse. 14. these Words
(...)... are also transposed in that ancient Copy, (...). It is also in the
ancient Latin Version according to this Transposition, and nolite maledicere,
benedicite persequentes vos. Verse. 17. These words which we read in the Vulgar
at this day, non tantum coram Deo, sed etiam, are not in the ancient Vulgar,
nor in the ancient Greek any more than in the new.

Chap. 13. v. 5. We do not read in the ancient Copy (...), nor in the ancient
Vulgar necessitate, but only subditi estote, (...). Nevertheless they have
added in the Margin of the Latin necessitate, and at the bottom of the Page in
the Greek (...). Verse. 9. we do not read in that Copy (...), nor in the ancient
Vulgar non falsum testimonium dices. Verse. 12. instead of (...), we read in the
same Copy (...), which does not change the sense. In the same Verse, instead of
(...), arms, there is (...), and in the ancient Vulgar opera, works.

Chap. 14. v. 9 these Words (...)... are thus transposed, (...), and it is in
the ancient Latin Version which is annexed to it, and vixit and mortuus est and
resurrexit. We read not in our Vulgar vixit. He who revised it did in all
probability believe that the Word (...) or (...) as it is in the ancient Copy,
had the same signification with (...), and that these were Readings of the same
Word. Verse. 10. after the latter (...) there is an Addition of these Words,
(...), and in conformity to this Reading it is in the ancient Vulgar in non
manducando. In the same Verse, instead of (...) we read (...), and in the
ancient Vulgar Dei. Ver. 19. after (...) is added; and according to this
Reading, we find in the two Vulgars custodiamus.

Chap. 15. v. 11. after the Word (...) we read (...). Verse. 13. we do not read
(...), nor in the ancient Vulgar in credendo. Verse. 19. instead of (...) there
is (...), and in the two Vulgars sancti, and we find that the following Words
are transposed and somewhat changed, in this manner, (...), and in the ancient
Vulgar, ita ut compleretur ab Jerusalem usque in Illyricum and in circuitu.
There are some other Transpositions in the same Chapter which I omit, because
they are of no importance. We have reason to believe that those Words were
transposed to make the sense the clearer. Verse. 24. we do not read (...), which
is not expressed in the two Vulgars. Ver. 27. we do not read (...), nor in the
ancient Vulgar placuit enim eis. Verse. 29. we cannot find (...), nor in the
ancient Version Evangelii. Verse. 30. after the Word (...) we read (...), and in
the two Vulgars vestris. Verse. 32. instead of (...) there is (...), and in the
ancient Vulgar Christi Jesu: in the same place, instead of these Words (...),
we read in the ancient Copy (...), and in the ancient Vulgar refrigerem
vobiscum. V. 33. after (...) there is (...) added, and sit in the Vulgar.

Chap. 16. v. 2. after the word (...), we read the following words transposed
(and somewhat changed) after this manner, (...), and it is also in the ancient
Vulgar mihi and multis aliis. Ver. 3. instead of (...) we read (...), and in
the two Vulgars priscam. In the same Verse there is a Transposition, which
seems to have been made on purpose to avoid an Hyperbate; for after the word
(...) we read (...), and in the Vulgar, and domesticam eorum Ecclesiam. After
which we read these other words, (...), etc. Verse. 5. instead of (...), we read
in the ancient Copy (...). There is nothing more ordinary amongst the Greek
Manuscripts than this various Reading; and therefore we ought not, upon such
occasions to take so much notice of the reading of the Copies as of the Sense,
whether we read (...) or (...). So in the following Verse, instead of (...) we
read (...), and in the two Vulgars in vobis, there being a double difference in
these words: and it does also happen often enough, that the Transcribers do put
these two Pronouns (...) and (...), the one for the other. Verse. 15. instead of
(...) there is in the ancient Copy (...), and in the two Vulgars Olympiadem.
Verse. 16. we do not read these words (...), nor these in the ancient Latin
Version, salutant vos omnes Ecclesiae Christi. Verse. 17. instead of (...) there
is (...), and in the two Vulgar rogo. In the same place, after (...) there is
an Addition of (...), and in the ancient Vulgar of diligenter: moreover, after
(...) we read (...), and in the ancient Latin Version dicentes vel facientes.
Verse. 18. we do not read (...), nor in the ancient Vulgar benedictiones. Verse.
21. after the latter (...) there is added (...), and in the ancient Vulgar, and
Ecclesiae universae Christi. In the last place, Verse. 24. after (...), we read
in the ancient Copy (...), and in the two Vulgar seculorum.

It may appear by the different Readings which we have now mentioned in the two
preceding Chapters, how we are to judge of the ancient Greek Copies that were
before St. Jerome, especially in the Western Churches, and to which the ancient
Latin Version which was used in those Churches was agreeable.

It is true that the Vulgar at this day does frequently agree with those
ancient Greek Copies; but it does also differ from them very often: and
therefore it cannot be thought (according to the Opinion of F. Morin and F.
Amelote) that we must always prefer the reading of the Vulgar in those places
where it does agree with those ancient Copies, seeing there are so many other
places where it differs from them. If that Greek be the true Original of the
Apostles, as those two Authors seem to have insinuated, it ought to be the
Original throughout, and we must consequently entirely adhere to the ancient
Vulgar which is exactly agreeable to it. Yet St. Jerome believed that it was
absolutely necessary to correct it, seeing it was very defective. If I were not
afraid of being too tedious, I would here produce the various Readings of that
ancient Greek Copy upon St. Paul's Epistles, but I shall observe them more
conveniently in the second part of this Critical History, when we shall examine
the Version of the ancient Latin Interpreter, and shall take particular notice
of such Places as agree with the ancient Greek Copies that were extant before
St. Jerome.

CHAP. XXXII. Of other Greek Manuscript Copies of the New Testament. Examples
of the various Readings of those Manuscripts; with Critical Reflections on
those Differences.
WE find in our Libraries several Greek Copies of the New Testament which were
written out by the Greeks, and were in use amongst them. Although they differ
in sundry places from one another, the most of those differences are but of
small importance. They agree together in this, that they are very little like
those which we have last observed, that were copied by the Latins. This I
observed in reading many of those Copies which are in the King's and in Mr.
Colbert's Library. It is true that I found none in those two Libraries that
were so ancient as those other Greek Copies to which they joined the ancient
Latin Version which was before St. Jerome: yet this does not hinder but that
there were some of the like Antiquity; but they are very rare. I believe that
we ought to reckon the Copy of the Vatican in the number, of which some
Critics have made mention, and whereof they have also observed some different
Readings in their Works.

The Copy which is commonly called the Alexandrine, because it came from
Alexandria in Egypt, is likewise very ancient. Some of the English Nation,
after Cyrillus Lucar, have observed that that Book which contains the Old and
the New Testament in Greek was written, more than thirteen hundred Years ago by
an Egyptian Lady called Thecle. But they produce no certain proofs of this
Antiquity. It was the Interest of the Patriarch Cyrillus, who made a Present of
that Bible to the King of England, to make it as ancient as he could. There
have been many Thecle's, and they also gave that Name to some Roman Ladies, who
retired into solitude in the East, where their great Piety was admired by the
whole World: These Ladies understood the Greek Language, and were curious to
read the Holy Scripture in that Tongue. There were also Monasteries consecrated
to St. Thecle; and it might very well be, that that Copy belonged to some
Monastery of that name: However it be, it cannot be denied, but that it is very
ancient. Yet it differs from those other Greek Copies, which were writ out by
the Latins, as it is easy to judge by the various Readings, which the English
have Printed in their Polyglott Bible: Grotius has also made mention of a good
part of those various Readings upon the New Testament: We shall nevertheless
observe, that this Critic is not always exact in his citations. In short, I
cannot give full assurance, that that Manuscript called the Alexandrine, and
that of the Vatican, cannot be reckoned in the number of those, which were writ
out by Latin Amanuenses in those Ancient times.

I make no question, but that Cardinal Ximenes consulted the most Ancient
Copies of the New Testament, when he published his Edition. But it is to be
feared, that some of the readings of those Ancient Copies were inserted
therein, under a pretext, that he found them more agreeable to our Vulgar. It
is also possible, that Stephen's Copy, which was compared in Italy, with many
Greek Manuscripts, does likewise contain some readings of those same Copies
which were revised, and to which they annexed the Ancient Latin Version. The
same judgment ought to be made of the Sixteen Copies, which the Marquess of
Veles had consulted, and whereof some do in many places, agree with our Vulgar:
It is fit to make all these Observations in general, to supply in some sort the
negligence of those Learned Men, who were not at the pains to give us
particular marks of distinction, to know what were good and what were bad
amongst their Manuscripts. Erasmus and Beza, who had perused several of those
Greek Copies, and who signalized their diligence in this matter, were
frequently mistaken, when they spoke of their Manuscripts. They were ignorant
of the distinction, that we formerly mentioned, betwixt two sorts of Greek
Copies of the New Testament. For what remains, seeing I have given several
examples of the various readings that were writ out by the Latins, it will be
very fit, to produce in this place, some instances of the various readings of
other Greek Copies. And because there have been several collections already
made, whereby it may be known wherein those variations do consist; I shall
confine my self to such as are the principal of them, and upon which it will be
needful to make some Critical reflections.

Chap. 1. of St. Matthew, v. 11. we read in the Ordinary Greek Copies, (...),
Josiah begat Jechoniah. The Ancient Latin Interpreter, the Syriack Version and
other Translations of the Eastern Church, do confirm this Reading: But Robert
Stephen did read it in one of his Copies, (...), which reading is found in many
other Greek Manuscripts, cited in the sixth Tome of the Polyglott Bible of
England, with this difference, that instead of (...), it is in those
Manuscripts (...). Flaccius Illyricus has inserted it in his Greek Edition of
the New Testament, and it is also put in the Version of Erasmus, which was
joined thereto upon its being revised according to the Greek, Josias autem
genuit Jakin, Jakin autem genuit Jechoniam. Simon de Coline has likewise
followed this reading in his Greek New Testament, according to which Castalio
has put in his Latin Version Josias Joacimum, Nov. Test. Sebast. Cast. edit.
ann. 1556.
Joacimus Jechoniam.

Beza did also once approve of the reading of Stephen's Manuscript, as it
appeared by the first Editions of his Version of the New Testament, where it
is, Josias autem genuit Jakim, Jakim autem genuit Jechoniam. Nov. Test. Bez.
Gr. and Lat. in 8. ann. 1565.
Nevertheless he leaves the ordinary Reading in the Greek Text: But he changed
his Opinion afterward, as appeared by his great Notes, in which he does assure
us, Quam lectionem aliquando secutus sum, sed his obstat historiae veritas.
Bez. Annot. in c. 1. Matthew. v. 11.
that this Reading which he had once followed, was against the truth of the
History, although he had found it owned in one of Stephen's Manuscripts, and
approved by the testimony of James le Fevre, and of Martin Bucer, who had seen
(as he believes) that Manuscript, into which In hac quoque lectione illius
manuscripti codicis, alioqui vera and germana lectione, error inolevit, sed
levis, and sic emendandus est, ut nunc transtuli, (...). -- Bez. ibid.
an error had slipped, as he thought. He is of the mind, that we ought to reform
the place in this manner, (...). He adds, that he had amended his Version by
this Standard. Yet he does follow, in his own latter Editions, as well in the
Greek as in the Latin, the ordinary Greek Edition.

Maldonat the Jesuit, in his Commentary upon this place of St. Matthew, did
prefer Stephen's Manuscript or rather that of James le Fevre, to the ordinary
Greek and to the Vulgar. He chiefly depends on the Authority of St. Epiphanius,
who alleged, that in that place, there was an error in the Vulgar Greek
Copies; because the Transcribers, who perceived, that the name of Jechonias was
marked four times, did imagine with themselves, that that repetition was
superfluous. I do agree (says Maldonat) with St. Epiphanius, in his Opinion,
that there was an omission of the Transcriber in that place: Yet I do not
reckon with him, that it does consist in these words, Jechonias begat
Jechonias, but in these, Joachim begat Jechonias. -- And therefore, I think
that this place ought to be amended thus; Josias begat Joachim and his
Brethren, about the time they were carried away to Babylon, and Joachim begat
Jechonias.

But notwithstanding the Authority of some Greek Manuscripts, which confirm
this Reading, I am persuaded that we ought to keep the ordinary Reading in the
Text and in the Versions, because it is the most ancient and the most plain.
That other reading was brought in by the Scholiasts, who noted in the Margin of
their Copies, that one generation was wanting in that place; and at the same
time they marked it in their Scholium or Marginal Note, which was afterward
put in the Text. Indeed St. Epiphanius does cite no ancient Copy, to give
authority to his amendment: On the contrary, he does suppose, that it was
extant in the Copies of his Time, as it is in the ordinary Greek Copies at this
day: He only says, that they who have a mind to consult exact Copies, (...),
will approve his correction. But besides that he makes mention of none in
particular, he falls into manifest errors, and such as contradict the History
of the Old Testament: He seemed to correct his Vulgar reading for no other
reason, but because, St. Matthew having divided the Genealogy of Jesus Christ
into three Classes, every one whereof ought to contain fourteen Persons (...).
Epiph. lib. 1. adv. Haer. tit. de Epic. n. 8.
he only found thirteen in the third Class. Which he imputes to the
Transcribers, who perceiving the name of Jechonias repeated, believed that the
second Jechonias ought not to be reckoned in the number of those Epiphanio in
hoc assentior, ut existimem scriptorum vitio aliqua verba intercidisse, quibus
significetur Joacim filium Josiae genuisse Jechoniam. In eo non assentior, quod
non existimo deesse haec, Jechonias autem genuit Jechoniam; sed haec, Joacim
autem genuit Jechoniam. -- Itaque totum locum sic restituendum puto, Josias
autem genuit Joacim and fratres ejus in transmigratione Babylonis, (quemadmodum
Stapulensis affirmat se in antiquo quodam Graeco codice legisse) Joacim autem
genuit Jechoniam. Mald. Comm. in c. 1. Matthew. v. 11.
Persons, that belonged to the Genealogy of Jesus Christ; whereas in truth, it
did appertain thereto.

St. Jerome observed something of the like nature, at the beginning of his
Commentaries upon Daniel, where he says, In Evangelio secundum Matthaeum una
videtur deesse generatio, quia secunda (...) in Joakim desinit filio Josiae,
and tertia incipit a Joachin filio Joakim. Quod ignorans Porphyrius, calumniam
struit Ecclesiae; suam ostendens imperitiam, dum Evangelistae Matthaei arguere
nititur falsitatem. Hieron. init. Comm. in Dan.
that it seems that there is one generation wanting in St. Matthew, because the
second Class or Order begins at Joakim the Son of Josias, and the third begins
at Joachin the Son of Joakim, and thus he answers Porphyrius, who had accused
St. Matthew of falsehood in that place: But his does not establish this reading
by the Authority of any Greek Copy. The only thing he aimed at, was to make an
Answer to Porphyrius, whose objection does suppose, that the ancient Copies do
perfectly agree with the ordinary Greek at this day. They might very well
illustrate that Passage of St. Matthew by some Note, but it is not at all
allowable to insert that Note in the Text. And therefore St. Jerome has not
inserted it in his Latin Edition, when he corrected it by good Manuscripts,
according to the order he had received from Pope Damasus: Which is a new Proof,
that we ought to keep to the reading of the ordinary Greek which is the most
ancient. That Father did content himself to make, in his Commentaries upon St.
Matthew, such an observation as we have already mentioned, without changing the
Text of that Evangelist in any Thing. Si voluerimus, (says he) Jechoniam in
fine primae tessaredecadis ponere, in sequente non erunt quatuordecim, sed
tredecim. Sciamus igitur Jechoniam priorem ipsum esse, quem and Joakim;
secundum autem filium, non patrem, quorum prior per k. and m. sequens per chapter
and n. scribitur, quod scriptorum vitio and longitudine temporum apud Graecos
Latinosque confusum est. He does suppose in this observation, that some did
read with Epiphanius, two several Jechonias whom he does distinguish by writing
them differently according to the reading of the Hebrew Text of the Old
Testament. But this amendment is Founded upon no Copy of St. Matthew, unless it
be such as has been reformed: For what remains, I do not know how the reading
was in those Greek and Latin Copies of the New Testament, that were before St.
Jerome. For the nineteen first Verses of St. Matthew are wanting in the
Cambridge Copy, which does only begin at the word (...) v. 20. of the first
Chapter.

The Author of the imperfect Work upon St. Matthew, who likewise did read as we
do, in the ordinary Greek, has observed, that it is otherwise in the Book of
the Kings, Ergo talis est ordo: Josias genuit Eliachim, postea vocatum Joachim.
Joachim autem genuit Jechoniam. Auct. Oper. imperf. in Matthew. cap. 1. v. 11.
and the order of the Genealogy ought to be expressed thus, Josias begat
Eliachim, who was afterward called Joachim, and Joachim begat Jechonias. He
only takes notice of the order that that Genealogy ought to have, according to
the History of the New Testament. He does not, for all that, reform the
ordinary Text of St. Matthew: For he adds, Nec obest quod filius Josiae dictus
est, cum sit nepos, quoniam and nepotes recte filii dicuntur. Id. ibid.
that that does not hinder, but that Jechonias who was the Grandson of Josias,
might have been called his Son, because it was very ordinary to give the name
of Sons to Grandsons.

Chap. 2. of St. Matthew, v. 17. where we read in the ordinary Greek, (...),
Robert Stephen did read in one of his Manuscripts, (...), which reading is
confirmed by another ancient Manuscript, cited by Mr. Salbert, and in the
Cambridge Copy: Although Beza Probatur haec lectio quam secutus sum manuscripti
exemplaris auctoritate, and ita solere loqui Matthaeum superiora ostendunt.
Certe magna vis est horum verborum, ex quibus intelligimus non ipsos Prophetas,
sed Dominum ore Prophetarum loqui. Bez. ad cap. 2. Matthew. v. 17.
found that reading only in one Manuscript; yet he does prefer it to the other,
because it appeared to him to be St. Matthew's Style, and he believed, that
there is a great force in that expression, which declares to us, that the Lord
does speak by the mouth of his Prophets. But it is much more probable, that
these words (...) were added in the Cambridge Copy, there being very few other
Copies where it is extant. It cannot be therefore any longer thought with any
assurance, that they are of St. Matthew's Style, seeing that Evangelist does
not express them in many places, where that same manner of speech does occur.
In short, he would disparage his own judgment, who would leave the ordinary
reading of the Greek Copies, and embrace one reading, which is only founded on
a very small number of Copies, under a pretext that they contain an expression,
which seems to have more force. For according to the Laws of Critics, the
reading which is most plain, and is withal confirmed by the plurality of
Copies, ought to be accounted the best: And therefore, St. Jerome did rather
choose to follow those Greek Copies than the ancient Vulgar.

In the same Chapter, 2. v. 18. although we read in all the Greek Copies of the
New Testament, (...), in Rama, as the proper name of a Place, Origin has
observed (...). Orig. Cat. Gr. in Matthew. 2. 18.
that that Word does signify an high place, and that it is in some Copies,
(...), i. e. on high. But this reading is only extant in the ancient
Alexandrine Copy of the Septuagint Version, where the signification of the
Hebrew word Rama is put: St. Jerome also, who has in excelso, in his new
Translation from the Hebrew, has left the word, (in Rama) in his ancient Latin
Edition which he had taken from the Septuagint; and he has kept the same
reading in his Edition of the Gospels. He only observed in his Commentary, Quod
autem dicitur in Rama, non putemus loci nomen esse juxta Gabaa, sed rama
excelsum interpretatur, ut sit sensus, Vox in excelso audita est, id est, long
e lateque dispersa. Hieron. Comm. in c. 2. Matthew. v. 18.
that Rama is not the proper name of a place which was near to Gabaa, but that
this word does signify high, so that the sense of the Passage according to his
mind, will run thus, A voice was heard on high, that is to say, that that voice
was spread far and wide. Cod. MSS. Bibl. Colb. n. 2467.
Further, in the same verse, we do not read (...) in a Manuscript of Mr.
Colbert's Library, nor in Justin Martyr, who made mention of that Passage in
his Dialogue against Tryphon the Jew: Neither is it found in the Vulgar,
although it is in the Ancient Vulgar, and in the Greek of the Cambridge Copy.

Chap. 3. v. 11. These words (...), are not found in a great number of Greek
Manuscript Copies, Robert Stephen did not read them in seven of his, and there
are also seven others marked in the Polyglott of England which have them not.
Besides, I have not found them in two Copies that belong to Mr. Colbert: But
they are in the Cambridge Copy and the two Vulgars, St. Jerome having kept them
in his new Edition. He has likewise explained them in his Commentary, without
observing that there was any variety of reading upon that Passage. The truth
is, the most Ancient Greek and Latin Fathers had no other reading; which made
Erasmus conjecture that some had taken them away from their Copies, because
there were some Heretics who Baptized with fire. But this conjecture has no
color, for we read the same words, Chap. 3. v. 16. of St. Luke, in all the
Greek Copies: Luke of Bruges does think that they were possibly taken from this
Evangelist, and that the Transcribers did insert them in St. Matthew. Maldonat
has very well observed, that the particle (...) and, is not a conjunctive
particle, but explicative; and that the explication of the preceding words was
added, to show that in that place there was no mention made of the Spirit in
general, but of the descent of the same Spirit in the form of Fire, the day of
the Pentecost. And that which may give us cause to suspect, that these words
(...) have been added, as well in S. Luke, as in S. Matthew by way of
Explication, is, that we only read in S. Mark, Chap. 1. verse. 8. (...).
Nevertheless there are two Manuscripts quoted in the sixth Tome of the
Polyglott of England, where there is also found (...), in this Evangelist. But
in what manner soever the Reading be in this Evangelist, the reading of the
Gospel according to S. Matthew cannot be regulated by it, seeing the latter is
oftentimes only abridged by the former.

Chap. 5. v. 22. We read in all the Greek Copies, (...), without a cause; and
it was also in the ancient Vulgar agreeable to the Greek Cambridge Copy. Yet S.
Augustine, Aug. lib. 1. Retr. c. 19.
who had read it in the Latin Copies of his time, retracted his Opinion
concerning it, because he found it not in the Greek Copies. Codices enim Graeci
(says that Father) non habent sine causa, sicut hic positum est. It is
apparent, that he passed by the ancient Vulgar, to embrace the Opinion of S.
Jerome, who in his new Edition has left out the words, without cause, and who
has also observed in his Commentary upon that place, In quibusdam codicibus
additur sine causa. Caeterum in veris definita sententia est, and ita penitus
tollitur... Radendum est ergo sine causa. Hieron. Comm. in cap. 5. Matthew.
that they are truly in some Copies, but that they are not in the true Copies.
And therefore he is of the mind, that they ought to be left out of all the
Greek Copies that have been cited hitherto, there is only that of the Vatican,
mentioned by Luke of Bruges, where (...) is not found. The ancient Author of
the Syriack Version did also read it in the Greek Copy which he made use of for
making his Translation. For he has kept the Greek word which he has only
written in Syriack Characters. The most ancient Fathers as well Greek as Latin
did also read the same word in their Copies. There were only some Latins, since
S. Jerome's Correction, who believed that it did not belong to the Text. It
would possibly be more proper to re-establish it in the Vulgar, which in that
Passage is contrary to Antiquity and to many Copies.

In the same Chapter, v. 27. Robert Stephen did not read in seven of his
Manuscripts (...), to the Ancients. Neither is it found in some other Copies
that are marked in the Polyglott Bible of England. I also observed that it is
not in three Manuscripts of Monsieur Colbert's Library. Cod. MSS. Bibl. Colb.
n. 2467. 4112.
Nevertheless S. Jerome has put it in his new Edition.

The thirtieth Verse of the same Chapter is not in the ancient Cambridge Copy,
nor in another quoted in the sixth Tome of the Polyglott of England. Cod. MSS.
ex Bibl. Colb. n. 2259.
Neither did I read it in one of M. Colbert's Manuscripts. It Is probable that
it is a mere omission of the Transcribers, in those Copies which was occasioned
by this, that the twenty nine and thirty Verses do both end with the word
(...). Omissions of that sort are very ordinary.

In one of M. Colbert's Manuscripts we do not read in the forty fourth Verse of
the same Chapter, Cod. MSS. Colb. n. 2467.
these words, (...). Bless them who curse you, do good to them who hate you.
Neither do we read in the same Copy these other words which are in the same
place, (...), For them that despitefully use you and; as if they did signify
the same with those words that immediately follow. Nevertheless all this is
found in the ancient Cambridge Copy. But S. Jerome has not expressed in his new
Edition these first words, Nic. Zeg. Epanorth. in cap. 5. Matthew. v. 44.
(...). Zegerus believes that they were taken out of the sixth Chapter of S.
Luke, and inserted in S. Matthew, A studioso quopiam ex Lucae cap. 6. huc
translata sunt.

Chap. 6. v. 4. These words (...), which S. Jerome has not expressed in his
Edition, are not in the ancient Cambridge Copy. And Luke of Bruges has informed
us, that he does not find them in the Vatican Copy. Besides, I have not read
them in two of M. Colbert's Manuscripts: nevertheless S. Augustine does assure
us, Multa Latina exemplaria sic habent, Et pater tuus qui videt in abscondo,
reddet tibi palam. Sed quia in Graecis quae priora sunt non invenimus palam,
non putamus hinc aliquid disserendum esse. Aug. de Sermon. Dom. in mont. lib. 2.
cap. 2.
that they did read the word palam in several Copies of his time, but that it
was not expressed in the original Greek, which he prefers to all the Latin
Copies. (Maldonat) Tempore Augustini Latini codices legebant, Graeci non
legebant, ut ille scribit. Itaque suspicio mihi est primos illos codices
Graecos, ex quibus translatio Latina, qua Ecclesia ante Hieroaymum utebatur,
facta fuerat, haec verba legisse post scripterum vitio in Graecis abolita, in
Latinis conservata. Hieronymus vero cum jam ipsius tempore in Graecis non
legerentur, quia ad Graecorum, ut ipse ait, codicum veritatem Latinam editionem
corrigebat, expunxisse de Latina quod non invenit in Graeca. Nam legenda quidem
esse ipsa indicat antithesis in abscondito, and in propatulo. Mald. Comm. in c.
6. Matthew. v. 4.
on the contrary does make use of those words of S. Augustine, as being of
sufficient authority, for re-establishing that word in our Vulgar, alleging,
that they did read it in the ancient Vulgar, before S. Jerome reformed it by the
Copies of his time, from which these words (...) were taken away, as that
Jesuit does think. He adds, that the opposition that is betwixt these two, in
secret and openly, does prove, that we ought to read in the Greek, (...), and
consequently palam in the Latin Version. But S. Augustine does only say, that he
found the word palam in many Copies, and not in all. S. Jerome has kept in his
Edition, the ancient reading of some Greek and Latin Copies. And thus Maldonat
is mistaken, when he would persuade us, that that Father did correct the
ancient Vulgar by the Greek Copies of his time, from which he had taken away
(...). For the ancient Cambridge Copy does prove the contrary; besides that the
Observation of S. Augustine does manifestly suppose, that they did not read
palam in some Latin Copies of the ancient Vulgar. In short, the reason which
that Jesuit brings from the opposition that is betwixt the words in secret and
openly, is not at all conclusive. For whether we read the word openly, or no,
the sense will be always perfect.

Moreover, the same words, (...), which are in the ordinary Greek, ver. 18. of
the same sixth Chapter are not in any of Robert Stephen's Copies, nor in the
ancient one of Cambridge, Cod. MSS. Colb. n. 2464. 3947. 2259.
nor in that of the Vatican, nor in another ancient Copy cited by Salbert.
Neither have I read them in three Manuscripts of Monsieur Colbert's Library.

In the same Chapter, verse. 13. these words, (...), For thine is the Kingdom,
the Power and the Glory for ever, are not in one of Robert Stephen's
Manuscripts, nor in the Cambridge Copy, nor in another ancient one quoted by
Salbert. Yet they are extant in the most part of the Greek Copies, and also in
some ancient Fathers of the Greek Church. But we ought here to prefer a few
Greek Copies to a great number, because those few Copies are agreeable to the
most ancient Latin Fathers. We further see evidently enough, that that which we
read in the Greek, is an Addition that was taken from the Greek Liturgy, and
inserted in the Copies which they did read in their Churches. The Church Bibles
which are used in the same Churches have also occasioned many changes in the
Greek Copies, as I have observed when I examined those Lectionaries.

In the twenty fifth verse of the same Chapter we do not read (...), and what
ye shall drink. Cod. MSS. Colb. n. 2467.
Neither are these words expressed in our Vulgar.

Chap. 8. verse. 13. Robert Stephen did read in three of his Manuscripts, after
the word (...) these words, (...). And the Centurion having returned to his
house at the same hour, found his servant whole. This Addition is likewise
extant in some other Manuscripts marked in the sixth Tome of the Polyglott of
England. And I found it in one of Monsieur Colbert's Manuscripts. Cod. MSS.
Colb. n. 2467.
But I could not know if it was also in the ancient Cambridge Copy, because
some Leaves are wanting in that place.

Chap. 9. v. 13. we do not read (...), to repentance in two of Robert Stephen's
Manuscripts, nor in another belonging to M. Colbert's Library, Cod. MSS. Colb.
n. 2467.
nor in the ancient Cambridge Copy. S. Jerome, who did not find it in the
ancient Latin Edition, did therefore omit it in his New Edition.

Chap. 10. v. 8. Robert Stephen did not read these words, (...), raise the
dead, in nine of his Copies; neither are they extant in some others that are
quoted by Salbert, nor in three of Monsieur Colbert's. They are in the ancient
Cambridge Copy, but transposed. S. Jerome has kept that Transposition in his New
Edition, in the same manner as it was in the Ancient Vulgar. Nevertheless that
Father, who, in his Commentary rehearses the words of this verse does not read
mortuos suscitate. They were not in all appearance in the Greek Manuscripts
which he believed to be the most exact. Yet he kept them in his Latin Edition,
because he did not propose to himself an entire amendment of the Ancient Vulgar.

In the twelfth verse of the same Chapter we read after the word (...) in five
of Robert Stephen's Manuscripts (...), saying, Peace be to this house. The same
words are in the Cambridge Copy, and in some other Manuscripts quoted by
Salbert. I found them also in one of Monsieur Colbert's. Cod. MSS. Colb. n.
3947.
S. Jerome has left them out of his Edition, tho they are extant in our Vulgar
at this day. Nevertheless, there are some Latin Manuscripts in which they are
not found.

In the twenty third verse of the same Chapter. I found, after the word (...),
Cod. MSS. Colb. n. 2467. 3947.
this Addition in two of Colbert's, (...), But if they chase you from this
city, flee ye to another. There is also something like this in two of Rob.
Stephen's Manuscripts, and in the ancient Cambridge Copy. But S. Jerome put
nothing of it in his New Edition, because he believed it to be an unprofitable
Addition.

The fortieth verse of the same Chapter is wholly wanting in one of Monsieur
Colber's Manuscripts, Col. MSS. Colb. n. 2467.
which appeared to be an omission of the Transcriber, by reason of the verses
40, and 41. which begin with the same word, (...). Neither do we find in the
Cambridge Copy these other words, verse. 41. (...), And he that receives a
righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man's
reward. It seems they have left them out on purpose, because they appeared to
have the same signification with the preceding words, S. Jerome restored them in
his New Edition in conformity to other Greek Copies which were more correct.

Chap. 11. v. 1. We do not read in one of Monsieur Colbert's the word (...),
Twelve. MS. Colb. n. 2467.
In the same Chap. v. 2. instead of (...), there is in the Cambridge (...), and
we read in the ancient Latin Version annexed to it, per discipulos, which
Reading is agreeable to the Author of the Syriack Version, who has likewise in
his Copy, (...). But S. Jerome has put in his new Edition, duos de discipulis,
as it is in other Greek Manuscripts.

Chap. 12. v. 26. We do not read in one of Colbert's these words, Cod. MSS.
Colb. n. 2259.
(...); How then shall his Kingdom stand? In the thirty first verse of the same
Chapter we do not read in another of Colbert's, (...) to Men. Cod. MS. Colb. n.
2467.
Nor do we find there in another of his verse. 32. (...) In the same Chapter.
verse. 35. we do not read in two of Colbert's, (...), nor in several other
Manuscripts quoted in the sixth Tome of the Polyglott of England. Colb. MS.
Colb. n. 3941.
Robert Stephen has also observed, that this word was only in one of his. S.
Jerome has not expressed it in his new Edition. Cod. MS. Colb. n. 2259. 3947.
Neither did he find it in the ancient Vulgar. In the thirty sixth verse of the
same Chapter, we do not read in one of Colbert's, (...), idle. Beza observed in
his Note on that place, that this word was not in one of his Manuscripts. Cod.
MS. Colb. n. 4112.


Chap. 13. verse. 11. instead of (...), of Heaven, we read in two of Colbert's,
(...), of God. Cod. MS. Colb. n. 4112.
S. Jerome observed upon the thirty fifth verse of the same Chapter, a different
Reading which is not found in any Greek Copy, nor likewise in any of the
ancient Versions. That Learned Critic observes Legi in nonnullis codicibus,
and studiosus lector forte reperiet, id ipsum in eo loco ubi nos posuimus, and
vulgata habet Editio, ut impleretur quod dictum est per Prophetam dicentem, ibi
scriptum, per Esaiam Prophetam dicentem. Quod quia mimme inveniebatur in Esaia,
arbitror postea a prudentibus viris esse sublatum: sed mihi videtur in
principio ita editum, quod scriptum est per Asaph Prophetam. Hieron. lib. 2.
Comm. in Matthew. c. 13.
that instead of the word Prophetam, that was in the Ancient Vulgar, and which
he kept in his New Edition, he read in some Copies Esaiam Prophetam. And this
made him think, that the ancient Reading of that Passage was Asaph Prophetam,
because, in truth, the testimony of that Prophet who is there spoken of, is
taken out of Psalm 77, which bears (...).
the Name Asaph. He believed, that seeing it was not found in Esaias, that the
name of this Prophet was taken away. But it is more probable in my Opinion,
that the Reading that is in all the Greek Copies, and in all the Versions at
this day, is the ancient and the true Reading. The Evangelist who cited this
Psalm under the name of the Prophet in general, did mean David, to whom the
Psalms were ordinarily ascribed, without noticing the particular Titles of the
Psalms. They might afterward put the name of Asaph, by way of Note in the
Margin of this Place of St. Matthew, and others might change it to that of
Esaias; and this latter Note would pass, as it often happens, into the Copies
which St. Jerome assures us he did read.

In the same Chapter. Cod. MS. Colb. n. 4112.
v. 41. we do not read in one of Colbert's, these words, (...), the Son of Man,
nor these others, (...), out of his Kingdom. Ver. 55. Instead of (...), there
is in two of Colbert's, Cod. MSS. Colb. n. 5149.
(...), John, as in the Cambridge Copy, and in another of Colbert, (...). In
the ancient Vatican Copy (...), which Reading was followed by the Vulgar.

Chap. 14. v. 24. Cod. MS. Colb. n. 4112.
We do not read, in one of Colbert's (...), for the wind was contrary. Further,
ver. 33. We do not read in another of Colbert's (...), Cod. MS. Colb. n. 3947.
being come.

Chap. 15. v. 8. These words, (...), which are cited out of the Prophet Esaias,
Cod. MS. Colb. n. 2467.
and are extant as well in the Hebrew, as in the Greek of the Septuagint, are
not in the Cambridge Copy, from which they have taken them away as being
useless. St. Jerome, who did not read them in the ancient Vulgar, did likewise
omit them in his new Edition. Ver. 31. of the same Chapter, the Marquess of
Veles did not read in one of his Copies (...), the maimed to be whol^, neither
are they expressed in St. Jerome's Edition, though they are in the Cambridge
Copy, and in the ancient Vulgar. Ver. 36. We do not read in one of Colbert's,
Cod. MS. Colb. n. 4112.
(...), seven, which might easily have been omitted, especially in the most
ancient Copies, where they marked the Numbers by single Letters, as in this
place in the Cambridge Copy, where there is only the Letter Z'. In the same
verse Beza observed that these words, (...), and the fishes, are not in one of
his Manuscripts.

Chap. 16. v. 2. Cod. MS. Colb. n. 5149.
We read after the word (...), in one of Colbert's, this Addition (...), and so
it is. Ver. 3. of the same Chapter, the word (...), is not in two of Colbert's,
nor in the Cambridge Copy. Cod. MSS. Colb. n. 2467. 3497.
St. Jerome, who found it not in the ancient Vulgar, has not expressed it in his
new Edition. In the same verse, we read in one of Colbert's, after the word
(...), this Addition, (...), and he answered and said. Cod. Colb. n. 2259.
Ver. 11. of the same Chapter, we read after the word (...), in one of
Colbert's, and in three of Rob. Stephen's Manuscripts, Cod. Colb. MS. n. 4112.
(...), but beware.

In the same Chap. v. 13. Beza did not read in one of his Copies, (...).
Neither has St. Jerome expressed this Pronoun in his new Edition. It also
appeared by his Commentary on the place, that he did not believe that we ought
to read it. For this is his observation, Non dixit, quem me dicunt esse
homines, sed filium hominis. i. e. He did not say, whom do men say that I am,
but -- that the Son of Man is. Nevertheless it was in the ancient Vulgar
agreeable to the Cambridge Greek Copy. Ver. 17. where we read (...), St. Jerome
does observe, Volunt scriptorum vitio depravatum, ut pro bar Iohanna, heo est,
filius Joannis, bar Jona scriptum sit, una detracta syllaba. Hieron l. 3. Comm.
in Matthew. c. 16.
that some believed that it was an error of the Transcribers, and that instead
of bar Jona, it ought to be bar Johanna, the Son of John. Junius has also put
(...) in the Greek Edition of Wekel. But the former Reading is founded on all
the ancient and true Copies. The Jews of those times had abridged many of their
Names. And therefore bar Jona was the same thing with bar Johanna, and it does
not in St. Matthew signify the Son of a Dove, as St. Jerome did Expound it, but
the Son of John.

Chap. 17. v. 20. Instead of (...), unbelief, Cod. MS. Colb. n. 5149.
we read in one of Colbert's (...) in the same Sense. Which yet seems to be a
Gloss of some Scholiast, who had a mind to moderate the (...) by that of (...),
little faith. Ver. 23. of the same Chapter, we do not read in one of Colbert's,
(...), Cod. MS. Colb. n. 5149.
and they were exceeding sorry.

Chap. 18. v. 10. We do not read in one of Colbert's, (...), in Heaven. The 11.
ver. of the same Chapter, is not (as Beza thinks) in some Greek Copies. But the
ancient Greek Fathers did read it, and it is also found in all the ancient
Versions. St. Jerome has not in his new Edition expressed those words of the 29.
v. (...), at his feet, not having read them in the ancient Vulgar. Neither are
they in the Cambridge Greek Copy, out of which they were in all likelihood
left, as being of no use. Beza does assure us, that he found them in all his
Manuscripts. In the same verse, Rob. Stephen did not read the word (...), all,
in six of his Manuscripts. I found it Transposed after this manner in a
Colbert, (...). Ver. 35. these words (...), their offenses, Cod. Colb. n. 5149.
are not in one of Colbert's, nor in the Cambridge Copy. Yet they were added to
the Margin of that of Colbert, but the Addition is of a more late Writing, Cod.
MS. Colb. n. 2259.
than that of the Text. St. Jerome has likewise omitted them, having in that
followed the ancient Vulgar. Yet Beza does assure us, Bez. Annot. in Matthew.
18.35.
that he found them in all his Manuscripts. In omnibus Graecis codicibus haec
scripta inveni.

Chap. 19. v. 9. Instead of these words, (...), not for fornication, we read in
the Cambridge Copy, according to the same Sense, (...), except it be for
fornication. These two Readings are found joined together in one of Colbert's.
Cod. MS. Colb. n. 2259.
But the second Reading is defaced. Ver. 17. of the same Chapter, where we read
in the ordinary Greek, (...). call me good, there is none good but one, that
is God, we read in one of Mr. Colbert's, (...) which Reading is confirmed by
the Cambridge Copy, Cod. MS. Colb. n. 2464.
by that of the Vatican, and by two of Robert Stephen's. St. Jerome has also
kept in his Edition the same Reading, which he had found in the ancient Vulgar,
but only that he has added the word Deus, that had not been there before. In
the same Chap. v. 20. these words (...), from my youth are not in one of
Colbert's. Cod. MS. Colb. n. 2467.
Neither are they expressed in many ancient Latin Manuscripts. Yet Romani
Patres censuerunt non esse omittendum illud a juventute mea, tametsi vetusta
manuscripta omittant. Luc. Brug. in loc. insign. Romans Corr. c. 19. Matthew. v. 20.
those who were employed at Rome, in the correction of the Vulgar, thought fit
to keep them, as Luke of Bruges has observed. Indeed they are in the ancient
Vulgar, and in St. Jerome's new Edition.

Chap. 20. v. 7. These words, (...), and whatsoever is right, that shall ye
receive, are not in the Cambridge Copy, nor in the Marquess of Veles's; but
they are found in all other Manuscripts, and in the ancient Oriental Versions.
St. Jerome, having not seen them in the ancient Vulgar, did omit them in his
new. Edition. There are in the same Chapter several other words omitted in the
Cambridge Copy, and in the Marquess of Veles's, as well as in the Vulgar, which
are yet found in all the other Greek Copies. It is probable, that that Marquess
consulted some Copy like to that of Cambridge, with which he agrees pretty
often, whilst he differs from all other Copies. It is not strange that St.
Jerome's new Edition, and our Vulgar, do in those places agree with the
Cambridge Copy, and that of the Marquess of Veles, seeing that Father does
himself testify, that when he revised the Vulgar Edition of his time, he did
not correct it thoroughly by the Greek Copies, because he was afraid he should
offend the Weak, by departing too much from the ancient Edition of the Western
Churches.

In the same Chap. 20. v. 22. instead of these words, (...), there is in three
of Rob. Stephen's Copies, (...), and in another of Colberts it is also (...),
or, instead of (...), and. This change of the Particle (...), and, into the
disjunctive, (...), or, is common enough in the Greek Manuscripts. In the same
verse, these words (...), and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized
with, are not in the Cambridge Copy, in two of Rob. Stephen's, in the Marquess
of Veles's, nor in one of Mr. Colbert's Manuscripts. Cod. MSS. Colb. n. 2467.
Nor has St. Jerome expressed them in his Edition. It is very likely that they
were taken out of St. Mark, and inserted in this place of St. Matthew. And
therefore we do not read in the same Copies, these other words of the following
verse. (...), and ye shall be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with.

Chap. 21. v. 31. Instead of the word (...), first, we read in that of
Cambridge, (...), last, and in the ancient Latin Version annexed to it,
novissimus: which Reading is also found in some ancient Latin Fathers. St.
Jerome, who did likewise read novissimus in the Vulgar Edition of his time,
rejects this Reading, Sciendum est in veris exemplaribus non haberi novissimum,
sed primum. Hieron. lib. 3. Comm. in Matthew. c. 21.
assuring us, that it was primus in the true Copies. Verse. 45. of the same
Chapter, instead of (...), Pharisees, there is in a Colbert, and some other
Manuscripts, (...), Scribes.

Chap. 23. The 14. v. of this Chapter is not in the Cambridge Copy, nor in the
ancient Latin Version which is joined to it. The Critics of Louvain have also
in the Margin of their Edition, marked ten Latin Manuscripts, where they do not
read it. And it seems, that St. Jerome did not put it in his new Edition. For
although it be extant in the Text of St. Matthew, which was Printed with his
Commentary upon this Evangelist, he does not in that Commentary explain it,
where he does nevertheless explain the other verses which concern the
Pharisees, no less than the other. Some Commentators on the New Testament have
observed, that Origin, and Eusebius did not read it in their Copies. Yet I have
found it in a sufficient number of Greek Copies which I have read. But it is
Transposed in the most part of these Copies. We read in five of Colbert's, the
14. verse before the 13. Rob. Stephen, has not in his Manuscripts observed upon
it any difference of Reading.

Chap. 24. v. 2. (...). Rob. Stephen did not read the Negative Particle (...),
not, in six of his Manuscripts, Cod. MS. Colb. n. 4112.
and there is one of Colbert's where it is not. Neither is it extant in the
Cambridge Copy, nor has St. Jerome expressed it in his new Edition, because it
was not in the ancient Vulgar. Verse 9. of the same Chapter, Cod. MSS. Colb. n.
4112.
we do not read in one of Colbert's, (...), Nations. Beza, In uno codice non
additur hoc vocabulum, quo etiam sublato, videtur planior esse sententia. Bez.
Annot. in Matthew. c. 24. v. 9.
who did not read it in one of his Manuscripts, says that the Sense is more
entire when it is left out.

In the same Chapter v. 36. after the word (...), there is added in the
Cambridge Copy, (...), nor the Son. Seeing this Addition is found in no other
Copy, it is very probable, that it was taken out of St. Luke, where those very
words are extant, without any variaation. St. Jerome did not think it convenient
to put them In quibusdam Latinis codicibus additum est neque filius, cum in
Graecis, and maxim Adamantii and Pierii exemplaribus, hoc non habeatur
adscriptum. Sed quia in nonnullis legi, etc. Hieron. lib. 4. Comm. in Matthew. c.
24.
in his new Edition, although they were in some Latin Copies of the Vulgar
Edition at his time. He further observed, that Origin and Pierius did not read
them in their Greek Copies, there having been very few, in which they were
extant.

Chap. 25. v. 13. Cod. MSS. Colb. n. 2467.
These words (...), wherein the Son of Man comes are not in one of Colbert's,
nor in the Cambridge Copy, the Alexandrine, Rob. Stephen's three Manuscripts,
and the Marquess of Veles's. Nor has S. Jerome expressed them in his new Edition.

Chap. 26. v. 3. We do not read, (...), and the Scribes, in the Cambridge Copy,
in the Alexandrine, and in two of Robert Stephen's, nor in some others that are
marked in the VI. Tome of the Polyglott of England. St. Jerome has not inserted
those words in his Edition. In the same Verse, instead of (...), we read in one
of Colbert, Cod. MS. Colb. n. 4078.
(...) which appears to be an error of the Transcribers.

In the same Chapter, verse. 11. we do not read in two Colberts, (...) for --
always. Cod. MSS. Colb. n. 4112. 4078.
These same words are transposed in two other Colberts, where we read (...).
verse. 24. instead of, (...), is betrayed, the Marquess of Veles has, (...),
shall be betrayed; which reading is agreeable to St. Jerome's Edition, and to
our Vulgar: Cod. MSS. Colb. n. 2467. 2259.
Yet we read in the Ancient Cambridge Copy, (...).

In the 26 verse of the same Chapter, instead of (...), having blessed it, Cod.
MSS. Colb. n. 2259. 2467. 4078. 4149.
we read in five Colberts, (...), having giving thanks; which reading is
likewise in seven of Robert Stephen's Manuscripts, in the Alexandrine, and in
some Editions of the New Testament. Further, these two words, do not differ in
that place, as to the sense, verse. 28. instead of (...), which is shed, we read
only in the Marquess of Veles, (...), which shall be shed, agreeable to St.
Jerome's Edition. Nevertheless Maldonat the Jesuit, did rather choose to read it
with the ordinary Greek, effunditur, is shed, in the present, than with the
Vulgar effundetur, shall be shed, in the future.

Chap. 27. v. 9. We read in all the Greek Copies, which have been known until
this day, (...), Jeremy. Yet the Passage which St. Matthew does quote in that
place, is not found in the Prophet Jeremy, but in Zachary: Which gave an
occasion to some Commentators on the New Testament, to believe, that that
Evangelist, who had forgot the name of the Prophet whose testimony he brings,
had put the one for the other. But others with more likelihood, have imputed
this error to the Transcribers, who having found this word contracted after
this manner ZPIOY', in some Copies, did write IPIOY' in its stead. I did read
in one Manuscript of Mr. Colbert's Library, (...) at length: Yet this error is
very ancient, Cod. MSS. Colb. n. 2467.
seeing it has been observed by Origin and by St. Jerome. The latter Legi nuper
in quodam Hebraico volumine, quod Nazarenae sectae mihi Hebraeus obtulit,
Hieremiae apocryphum, in quo haec ad verbum scripta reperi. Hieron. lib. 4.
Comm. in Matthew. c. 27.
makes mention of an Apocryphal Book attributed to Jeremy, that one of the
Nazarene Sect had lent to him, where the same Passage was extant word for word.
And therefore it is possible, that the Ancient Nazarens had put the name of the
Prophet Jeremy, in their Hebrew Copy of St. Matthew: The Cambridge Copy being
torn in that place, it cannot be known, if the ordinary reading was there.

In the same Chap. ver. 34. instead of (...), vinegar, we read, in the
Cambridge Copy, in the Marquess of Veles's, Cod. MSS. Colb. n. 5149.
in one of Robert Stephen's manuscripts; and in one Colbert, (...), wine; which
reading was kept in our Vulgar, although acetum is extant in St. Jerome's
Edition. Beza, Hanc lectionem, quam^is dissentiente Syro interpret, verissimam
arbitror, auctore ipso Spiritu Sancto, Marc. 15.23. Bez. Annot. in Matthew. c.
27. v. 34.
did also believe, that we are to read in the Greek (...), wine, as it is in
St. Mark. It is not always the surest way to regulate one Evangelist by
another: It seems also, that St. Jerome was of the Judgment, that the Greek
Copies, which he believed to be the most correct, ought in that place, to be
preferred to the reading of the Ancient Vulgar.

Ver. 35. of the same Chapter, Cod. MSS. Colb. n. 5149. 4078. 4112.
we do not read in three of Mr. Colbert's Manuscripts; these words, (...). That
it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet, they parted my raiment,
and for my vesture they did cast lots. Nor are they found in the Cambridge
Copy, in the Alexandrine, in all Robert Stephen's, in an Ancient Manuscript
quoted by Salbert, nor in some others that are marked in the sixth Tome of the
Polyglott of England. Beza, who found them not in any Ancient Copy, nor in the
Syriack Version, Bez. Ann. in Matthew.
believed that they were taken out of St. John, and inserted in this place of
St. Matthew: Nevertheless we read these words in our Vulgar; and they are
likewise put in the Text of St. Matthew, which was Printed with St. Jerome's
Commentary. But if we examine the manner how he does express himself in that
Commentary, we shall easily judge, that he has not added them, in his Edition.
Indeed the Divines of Louvain have marked 15 Latin Manuscripts in the Margin of
their Edition of the New Testament, where they did not read them.

In the same Chapter, v. 49. this verse is not in a Manuscript cited in the
sixth Tome of the Polyglott of England: At the end of the same verse, after the
word (...), Rob. Stephen, did, in two of his Manuscripts, read this Addition,
(...). But another taking a Spear pierced his Side, and there came forth blood
and water. Luke of Bruges does observe, that these words are not St. Matthew's,
but that they were taken out of St. John, Chap. 19. v. 34. In the 64 verse of
the same Chapter, we do not read, (...), by night, in three of Colbert's, in
the Cambridge Copy, in the Alexandrine, in two of Rob. Stephen's Manuscripts,
nor in the Marquess of Veles's. Neither has St. Jerome expressed these words in
his new Edition.

Chap. 28. v. 2. we do not read these words (...), from the door, in the
Cambridge Copy, nor in the Marquess of Veles's. St. Jerome, seeing he found them
not in the Ancient Vulgar, has not put them in his new Edition; but they are
extant in all the other Manuscripts. We do likewise read, (after the word
(...), in two Colbert's and many other Manuscripts, Cod. MS. Colb. n. 2467.
4078.
which are marked in the sixth Tome of the Polyglott of England) (...), the
Sepulcher, ver. 7. of the same Chap. we do not read in the Cambridge Copy, nor
in the Marquess of Veles, these words (...), from the dead, whence they were in
all probability taken away as superfluous. Neither has St. Jerome expressed
them in his Edition: But they are extant in all other Greek Copies.

It would be to no purpose to run through the other Books of the New Testament,
for marking the various readings thereof, or at least the Principal amongst
them. Those we have already produced are sufficient to show, that they were not
exempted from such changes as length of time, and the errors of Transcribers do
bring Totum hoc membrum cum Prophetae testimonio in nullis vetustis codicibus
reperimus, neque legitur in Syra interpretatione. Adjectum proculdubio ex
Joann. 19.24. Bez. ibid. v. 35.
into Books. I have in this Collection rather kept to the Manuscripts of
Monsieur Colbert's Library, than to the King's, because, as I suppose, there
have been none of the former as yet published. I shall handle more at large
those different Readings of the Copies of the New Testament, in the Second Part
of this Work, where I shall particularly examine our Latin Edition, and the
ancient Versions of the Oriental Churches, by comparing them with the Greek
Copies, whence they were taken. I have likewise beforehand, spoken somewhat of
the Method which S. Jerome took in reforming the Ancient Vulgar by the best
Greek Copies of his time.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Order of the Greek Manuscript Copies of the New
Testament. The Verses, Chapters and other Marks of Distinction of those Copies.
The Canons which Eusebius added to the Gospels, and the Use of those Canons.
THE most ancient Greek Copies of the New Testament are written without any
distinction, not only of Chapters and Verses, but also of Words; so that we may
apply to those Copies that which was said elsewhere of the Books of the Old
Testament, that they only make one Pasuk or Verse from their several
beginnings. They did not then know what it was to mark with Points, Comma's and
other Distinctions, which have been afterward inserted in Books to make the
reading more easy and distinct. We shall further observe, that even since
Distinctions of this nature have been in use, the most part of Transcribers did
neglect them, as well as the Accents in the ancient Greek Manuscripts. And
therefore it is very rare to find such Marks of Distinction in the Greek Copies
for above these thousand years past. The Copy of S. Paul's Epistles which is in
the Royal Library, and that of the Benedictins of the Abbey of S. Germain are
also written without any distinction of Points and other Stops; and although the
Words are accented there, it seems, that the Accents were added in the King's
Copy, seeing they are not of the same Hand with the Body of the Book. This does
not hinder but that Accents and Points or Marks of Distinction are much more
ancient than these two Manuscripts. But the Transcribers did commonly neglect
them. There were none but very curious and very exact persons who took care to
add them to their Copies.

Georgius Syncellus (...), etc. Georg. Syncel. Chronol. p. 203.
makes mention of a Greek Copy of the Bible that was written before this great
Accuracy, where the Accents and Points were placed. He says, that that Copy was
brought to him from the Library of Cesarea in Cappadocia, and that he perceived
by the Inscription of the Book, that it had been transcribed from an ancient
Copy which had been corrected by the great S. Basil. There are also Manuscript
Hebrew Copies which have been copied by the Jews. It is very rare to find the
Points, Vowels and the Accents to have been noted therein for sive or six
hundred years past. This only happens in the most exact Books: yet there are
some Works extant above four hundred years, where there is mention made of
those Points and Accents which were in use at that time in their Copies.

The most ancient Church Writers do likewise in their Works speak of all those
Marks of Dictinction which are at present in the Greek Copies of the New
Testament. We read there of the word (...), Section, and (...), Chapter. They
sometimes observe the places where the Points ought to be marked to remove the
ambiguity of a Discourse, especially when the Heretics do observe a different
Punctation. But after all, it must be avowed, that there has been nothing
determined to the purpose upon this matter. Every one did most commonly,
according to his prejudices, mark that sort of Distinctions, which depended on
the Transcribers and the Expositors of the Scripture. And therefore Petavius
after having observed what S. Epiphanius and some other ancient Doctors of the
Church have brought against some Heretics about the manner of pointing the
third Verse of the first Chapter of the Gospel according to S. John, does add,
Existimo varietatem illam interpretationis ex librariorum aut interpretum
diversa sententia profectam esse, non ex fraud ulla Pneumatomachorum, vel
aliorum haereticorum. Petav. Theol. Dog. lib. 2. c. 6. n. 6.
that that diversity of pointing those words of S. John, ought not to be
attributed to the ill design of those who denied the Divinity of the Holy
Ghost, or to other Heretics, but only to the different Opinions of the
Transcribers and Interpreters.

The truth is, the Orthodox Authors do not always agree amongst themselves
about it. It happens sometimes, that the same Writer does differently point the
same Passage in different places of his Works. And so there is nothing else but
good Sense and the Rules of Criticism that can direct us in our choice, in
preferring one Punctation to another. I know we ought to follow the plurality
of good Manuscript Copies, and the consent of Interpreters. For example,
without taking notice of all that S. Augustine has observed upon the manner of
pointing the third Verse of the first Chapter of the Gospel according to S.
John, we may read that Verse after this manner (...), without him was not any
thing made that was made. This reading, which is almost in all Manuscripts, has
been approved by the most Ancient Greek Fathers. The other, which does place a
point after the word (...), is somewhat forced, and according to this
punctation, it ought to be translated, Without him nothing was made, that which
was made had life in him. It is worth the while to observe, that many Greek
Manuscript Copies, have a point after the word (...), but that point answers to
our comma, in those Manuscripts, which have two sorts of points, the one truly
answering to our point, and the other to that we call a comma.

Yet St. Augustine does frequently maintain the distinction, that places the
point after the word nihil: He further maintains, that this Passage is pointed
after this manner in the most correct Copies. Quod factum est, in illo vita
erat, that which was made, in him was life; so that there is not only a point
to be placed after nihil, but also a comma after these other words, quod factum
est. Sic ergo, (says this Father) distinguendum est, ut cum dixerimus, quod
factum est, deinde inferamus, in illo vita est, non in se scilicet, hoc est in
sua natura. Non ergo pronunciari oportet, quod factum est in illo, vita est, ut
subdistinguamus, quod factum est in illo, and deinde inferamus, vita est. Quid
enim non in illo factum est? Aug. ibid. c. 13.
He condemns those who placed a comma after the Pronoun illo, and who favored
their own prejudices by this punctation. But there appears commonly more
subtilty than solidity, in Reasonings of this sort. For seeing every one does
reason from certain Principles, which he supposes to be true, he points the
Copies of the Scripture after his own fashion. Those disputes had so divided
the Minds of the Ancients of that time, that there were four different ways of
pointing this Passage of St. John, whereas, at this day there is no dispute
about it.

This does inform us, that although the most part of Transcribers, did then
neglect the points and the other marks of distinction; yet they were put for
all that in some Copies. The Commentators on the Scripture observed them
likewise in their Commentaries, when they judged it fit: But seeing they had
not the first Original of the Evangelists and the Apostles, where those marks
of distinction were extant, there is nothing certain in this matter: We ought
also to use precaution in reading the Writings of the Fathers, especially when
they dispute against the Heretics of their time; from whom they removed in
their Opinions, as far as it was possible for them. Now, it is not necessary to
insist too nicely on this sort of distinctions, and stops; there commonly needs
but a little of good sense, to make a due estimate of them. There is none for
example, but will condemn some of the Moderns, for the innovations they have
made in our Age; who in favor of their own prejudicate Opinions, read, Chap.
23. of St. Luke, v. 43. (...). I say unto thee, to day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. They palce a comma after the word (...), day, whereas, according to
the ordinary Reading of the Greek Copies, whether Manuscript or Printed, it
ought to be placed after the Pronoun (...), thee: Which gives a very different
sense, viz. I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Besides those marks of distinction of which we have been speaking, there is
another which is common to all the ancient Books, and which is made by the
means of Verses. The Bulk of a Work did once appear, if the number of Verses
contained therein were summed up at the end: A Verse was nothing else, but a
Line that the Greeks called (...), so that, by numbering the Verses, they
discovered how many Lines were contained in any Volume. Yet some Critics could
not comprehend how they could, by those Lines or Verses, reckon the just
content of a Book, because the Parchments, upon which they writ, having been
unequal, the Lines must needs have been so too; and so the number of those
Lines could not adjust the Bulk of a Work. This was that which Crojus brought
against Causabon; and withal he confirmed his Opinion by the testimony of some
Ancient Writers, by whom he pretended to prove, that the word (...) does
signify an entire Period, or the several parts of Periods.

But this Objection does fall by it self, if we make a just reflection on those
Ancient Parchments, which composed Volumes or Rolls. Every Roll contained many
Pages that were all equal, and in every Page there was a certain number of
Lines; and lastly, in every Line, there was a fixed number of Letters. And this
is observed by the Jews at this day, in their Rolls, which must have a certain
proportion, as well in length as in breadth: Moreover every Line ought to
consist of thirty Letters; and they called these Letters sitta, which is the
same thing with the (...) of the Greeks, and the versus of the Latins. We are
not to imagine, that the manner in which the Rabbis have divided the Bible, is
of their own invention: They followed in that the practice of other Nations, as
I have proved elsewhere. And seeing they have retained their ancient use of
Rolls, we must learn of them, whatever belongs to the division of the Rolls or
Ancient Volumes.

Further, it is not hard to show, how the measure of the Lines or Verses might
have been retained in the form of those ordinary Books, in which the Parchments
or Papers were unequal. For when the breadth of the paper could not contain a
whole Line, they placed the rest of the Letters or Words above the Line. It
seems they designed in this manner, to write by way of Verses, the Ancient
Greek and Latin Copy of St. Paul's Epistles, which is in the Royal Library, and
that of the Benedictine Monks of the Abbey of St. Germain. Or rather, they who
copied these two Manuscripts by others that were more Ancient, did not at all
understand the nature of the ancient Lines or Verses; and therefore they did
not altogether imitate the same. However it be, it is certain that there is
nothing more ordinary amongst the ancient Writers, than to mark at the end of
their Books, the number of Verses which they contained.

I do not deny, but that there is another sort of Verses which were regulated
according to the sense, or the sentences, in the same manner as they are
represented in our Books. In this we have imitated the Jews, who divided their
Bible into this kind of Verses. This latter sort has an original quite
different from that of the former: For seeing they did read the Scripture in
their Synagogues and in their Schools, they made this new division of Verses
for the convenience of their Lessons. We also see something of the like nature
in some Greek Manuscript Copies of the New Testament, and in some Manuscript
Church Bibles: I have not only observed the beginning and the ending of the
Lessons, which they called (...), which are as so many different Chapters, but
also certain marks in form of a cross in all the places where the sentences do
end, and where the Reader makes a little stop, according to the custom of the
Greek Churches. This we may call a Verse or Sentence, and which the Greeks do
signify by the word (...).

Crojus is mistaken, Jo. Croj. ibid.
when he would persuade us, that the Greeks did at the end of their Gospels,
mark the number of the words, as well as that of the Verses that were contained
therein. For the examples which he does produce after Salmasius, ought to be
understood of Sentences and not of Words, as may be proved by those very words
which he brings, as taken out of a Manuscript Copy, that assigns to St.
Matthew, (...) (2522) (...) (2560) to St. Mark, (...) (1675) (...) (1616) If
the Greek word (...) is taken in this place for the words, as Crojus expounds
it, what proportion can there be betwixt the Words and the Verses, seeing they
reckoned almost the same number of Words as Verses in those two Gospels, viz.
in St. Matthew, 2522 words, and 2560 Verses; in St. Mark, 1675 words, and 1616
Verses? We must therefore understand the number of Sentences to be signified by
the word (...), and the ancient Verses which were measured according to the
Lines, or some other sort of Verses to be meant by the word (...).

We find the Number of the Verses of each Book, at the end of several Greek
Manuscript Copies of the New Testament. Robert Stephen does sometimes mark them
in his fair Greek Edition, and it would be easy to note them all. But this in
my Opinion would be of little use; besides that the Manuscripts wherein I have
observed them, are not very ancient, and they do not agree amongst themselves
about the matter. Scaliger caused to be Printed, at the end of the Chronology
of the Patriarch Nicephorus, a Stichometrie or the number of the Verses of all
the Books of the Bible, under that Patriarch's Name: Mr. Pithou before him, had
published that Stichometrie under the same Name. But it is more ancient, and we
find that it is inserted in the Works of some other Greek Historians: They were
also placed, as has been already observed, at the end of two Greek and Latin
Copies of St. Paul's Epistles, of which we have already spoken. I shall here
take notice of what belongs to the Verses of the New Testament, and seeing that
there is somewhat singular in that Catalogue, I shall change nothing, either as
to the order of the Books, or the manner.

Matthaeus ver. IIDC. Joannes ver. II. Marcus ver. IDC. Lucas IIDCCCC.
Epistolae Pauli ad Romanos ver. IXL. ad Corinthios 1. ver. ILX. ad Corinthios
2. LXX. ad Galatas ver. CCCL. ad Ephesios ver. CCCLXXV. ad Timotheum 1. ver.
CCVIII. ad Timotheum 2. ver. CCLXXXVIII. ad Titum ver. CXL. ad Colossenses ver.
CCLI. ad Filemonem ver. L. ad Petrum 1. ver. CC. ad Petrum 2. ver. CXL. Jacobi
ver. CCXX. prima Joannis Epistola. ver. CCXX. Joannis Epistola 2. ver. XX.
Joannis Epistola 3. ver. XX. Judae Epistola ver. LX. Barnabae Epistola ver.
DCCCL. Joannis Revelatio ver. ICC. Actus Apostolorum ver. IIDC. Pastoris ver.
IIII. Actus Pauli IIIIDLX. Revelatio Petri CCLXX. Codd. MSS. Bibl. Reg. and
Bened. S. Germ.
St. Matthew, according to that Ancient Catalogue that is written in Latin,
does contain 2600 Verses. St. John, 2000. St. Mark, 1600. St. Luke, 2900. The
Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the Romans, 1040. The first to the Corinthians,
1060. the second to the Corinthians, 70. (there is an error in this place) The
Epistle to the Galatians, 350. the Epistle to the Ephesians, 375. the first to
Timothy, 208. the second to Timothy, 288. the Epistle to Titus, 140. to the
Colossians, 251. to Philemon, 50. the first of St. Peter, 200. the second of
the same Apostle, 140. that of St. James, 220. the first of St. John, 220. the
second, 20. and also the third, 20. the Epistle of St. Jude, 60. that of St.
Barnabas, 850. the Revelation of St. John, 1200. the Acts of the Apostles,
2600. the Book of the pastor, 4000. the Acts of St. Paul, 4560. the Revelation
of Peter, 270.

Casaubon, who was well versed in Greek Authors, Casaub. Not. in Nov. Test.
preferred the ancient division that is found in the Manuscripts, to that which
has been invented in these latter times, and which appears in our Printed
Bibles. He does also wish that some able Critic would restore it: He speaks of
that which is made by way of Titles and Chapters. They called, (as he affirms)
the great Sections, (...), titles, and the small, (...), chapters: He might
have added, that the word (...) Chapter, is also sometimes taken for the great
Sections, and that then, it does not differ from that which the Greeks call
(...) Title.

There is nothing more ordinary amongst the Ancient Ecclesiastical Writers,
than the word (...), Chapter, for the Greeks, and that of Capitulum for the
Latins, when they quote the Sacred Books. It would not be hard to re-establish
that ancient division by the help of Manuscripts; but I shall content my self
to mention here what belongs to the New Testament. We read in one of the
Manuscripts of the Royal Library, that St. Matthew contains 68 Titles, and 355
Chapters. St. Mark, 48 Titles, and 234 Chapters; St. Luke 83 Titles, and 342
Chapters; St. John 18 Titles, and 231 Chapters. Suidas.
Which agrees with the Observation of Suidas, upon the word (...), unless we
must in that Author, instead of (...). 36. read (...). 236. as it is in some
Manuscripts, and in the Greek Edition in folio of Robert Stephen's New
Testament. (...). Cod. MS. Biblioth. Reg. n. 2861.


Moreover we read at the beginning of the same Manuscript of the Royal Library,
that there is in St. Matthew, (...). 68 Chapters; so as they call that a
Chapter in that place, which is called a Title in the end of the Book; and
there is the same thing observable in the other three Gospels. By which we may
know, that the word Chapter is taken two ways, and that it is applied as well
to the great as to the small Sections. When they prefix the numbers of the
(...) or Chapters to the Books, this words does then signify great Sections;
and in this manner they are marked at the beginning of the most part of the
Greek Manuscript Copies of the New Testament, in the first Editions of Erasmus,
in that of Robert Stephen in folio, and in some others. This is instead of a
Table or Index of the Contents, which at once, does represent the Principal
things in a Work. In this manner the most exact Greek Transcribers, do mark the
Summaries, (under the title of (...), Chapters) at the beginning of their
Copies: And seeing they have likewise noted them, in the Margin of their
Copies, or at the top or the bottom of the Pages, in all the places where those
Chapters begin, they have for this reason given them the name of (...), titles.
There is then no difference betwixt Title and Chapter, according to this sense;
unless it be, that the Chapters are marked at the beginning of the Books, and
the Titles in the Margin. This I observed, in comparing several Manuscript
Greek Copies of the New Testament, one with the other.

The word (...) does, on the contrary, signify the small Sections that are
marked in the Margins of the Greek Manuscript Copies of the New Testament by
Letters instead of Numbers. Erasmus did also put them in his first Editions of
the New Testament, in which he was followed by Robert Stephen, in his Edition
in Folio, who has likewise subjoyned them separately at the end of S. Mark,
where he reckons (...) 236 (...) Chapters, and at the end of S. Luke, where he
computes (...) 342. whereas in the King's Manuscript, which I quoted; S. Mark
does only contain (...) 234 Chapters. The truth is, the Greek Copies do not
agree amongst themselves about the thing, especially in the Gospel of S. Mark.
We have already shown, that several Greek Churches did not once read the twelve
last Verses of this Gospel, which begin with these words, (...), etc. and so
they might have had fewer small Sections in their Copies, than what are
ordinarily reckoned. Nevertheless, there are some Manuscripts where the Section
234. is last marked, over against these words, (...), etc. there being no other
that answers to the rest of the Text. Moreover, it is certain, that the
Churches, where these Copies were in use, did read those twelve Verses, for
they have inserted in that place, the word (...), end, and (...), beginning, to
note, that they began another Lesson there: Yet we have no sure foundation
here, to build any certainty upon, because the Observations of that sort have
been taken from the Synaxarion or the Church Bibles of the Greeks. And so they
regulated these distinctions by the Lectionaries which were then read in the
Churches, to accommodate the Copies of the New Testament to the custom that
obtained amongst them.

The Churches which did not read the twelve last Verses of S. Mark, Cod. MS.
Bibl. Reg. n. 2861.
do only reckon in that Gospel (...). 233. small Sections, as it appears by an
ancient Manuscript of the Royal Library. There is another Copy less ancient
than that in the same Library, Cod. MS. Bibl. Reg. n. 2856.
which does likewise only represent 233. and the last small Section answers to
these Words, (...), etc. to which Rob. Stephen, in his Edition, made the
Section 233. to answer. The Churches which did read those twelve Verses reckon
more than 233. Sections; but they agree not amongst themselves: for some have
comprehended all those Verses under one Section, and in their Copies there are
only 234 Sections extant: others, on the contrary, Cod. MS. Bibl. Reg. n. 2859.
have divided them into many small Sections: and therefore Rob. Stephen has
marked after some Manuscripts (...) 236. I have also seen a Manuscript Copy
where there were (...) 241.

Further, this division of the Sacred Books is very ancient; Cod. MS. Bibl.
Reg. n. 1879.
for Justin Martyr makes mention of these small Sections under the name of
(...). Eusebius (in his Letter to Carpianus, which was printed with the ten
Canons which he so ingeniously invented, (for showing at once that wherein the
Evangelists did agree, and that which is peculiar to each of them) does use
indifferently these Words, (...) Section, and (...) Chapter. Denis of
Alexandria speaking of certain Authors who rejected the Revelation of S. John,
says, that they had examined all the Chapters, Dionys. Alex. apud Eus. Hist.
Eccl. l. 7. c. 25.
(...). In a word, There are few of the ancient Greek Writers where the word
(...) Chapter, is not found in the sense that we have observed.

Eusebius is not then the Author of those small Sections, but he made a very
profitable use of them in the ten Canons that he invented, and which St. Jerome
applied to the Latin Copies of the four Gospels, in the same manner as he had
seen them applied to the Greek Copies. Those who cannot consult the Manuscript
Copies for this, ought to read the first Greek Editions of the New Testament
that were published by Erasmus, or that were done by Rob. Stephen, which is in
folio. Those ten Canons are ranked before the Gospel under ten separte Titles,
and the Application thereof is marked in the Margin of every Gospel. The small
Sections are there noted by Letters instead of Numbers, according to the custom
of the Greeks.

The Canons to which those Sections do answer are marked by other Letters which
do not exceed the number of Ten, which is the number of those Canons, The
Letters last mentioned ought to be read according to the method used by
Eusebius, for distinguishing them the more easily from the others: but Rob.
Stephen has distinguished them by a small Stroke which is set over those which
mark the small Sections. All this was also observed in the Latin Editions of
the New Testament with great exactness. It is not necessary that I should here
produce Manuscript Copies; it is enough to consult the first Impressions of our
Latin Bibles. Those ten Canons of Eusebius, with the small Sections, are found
as well at the beginning of the Gospels as in the Margins of every Gospel in
particular, in the same manner as in the Greek Copies. The Sections are marked
by our common Figures 1, 2, 3, etc. and the Canons by the Roman Figures I. II.
III. etc.

It was hard for the Greek Transcribers who writ the Canons of Eusebius to
commit no fault, by putting some Letters for others. Indeed in comparing
several Manuscript Copies of those Canons, I found some difference amongst
them; which nevertheless is easily helped, unless it be in the places where the
Copies do not agree about the number of Sections. If we consult, for Example,
the ten Canons, as they are in Rob. Stephen's Edition, and the most part of the
Manuscripts, it is manifest that the twelve last Verses of St. Mark were in the
Greek Copies in the time of Eusebius. For he marks, in the tenth Canon, the
Section (...) 234. of that Evangelist, and in the eighth the Section (...) 235.
which are included in those twelve Verses.

Nevertheless, it might have been so, that those two Sections were afterward
added to the Canons of Eusebius by those who read those twelve Verses of St.
Mark in their Churches: and so those Canons could not be a certain Rule in that
place, if it were not known, upon some other ground, that those Verses were
extant in S. Mark before Eusebius. Marianus Victorius, who caused to be printed
with St. Jerome's Works those ten Canons of Eusebius at the beginning of that
Father's Commentaries upon St. Matthew, does, in the English Canon, mark the
234 Section of St. Mark, and in the tenth, the 235 Section; yet he does only
mark 233 Sections in the Margin of that Evangelist: and it is worth the
Observation, that the 233 Section, which is the last, does answer to these
words, at illae exeuntes, etc. chap. 16. v. 8. as if all the rest that followed
of that Gospel did not truly belong to St. Mark. This was insinuated by S.
Jerome in his Letter to Hedibia, where he says, that the most part of the Greek
Copies had not this last Chapter, Hieron. Epist. ad Hedib. qu. 3.
Omnibus Graeciae libris pene hoc capitulum in fine non habentibus. By this
Word Capitulum he understood the twelve last verses; whether it be that that
Chapter does only contain a small Section, as in truth there is but one marked
in some Manuscripts, or that according to other Manuscripts it does include
many. However it be, it does not appear that Marianus did observe an Uniformity
in this matter: for he does produce a greater number of Sections of St. Mark in
the eighth and in the ninth Canon of Eusebius, than he has noted in the Margin
of that Apostle. Basle's Edition of St. Jerome's Works is more exact upon this
matter; for there is an equal number of Sections, Apud Frob. ann. 1526.
viz. 235. marked in both those places therein.

It would be to no purpose to speak of the Chapters and Sections of the Acts of
the Apostles, and of the Epistles of St. Paul, because they may be seen in the
Commentaries that have been printed under the Name of Oecumenius. I will only
in this place add another sort of Division, called (...), Lessons. This
distinction of the whole New Testament into several Lessons is very ancient,
and they are also marked in the Cambridge Copy. Although these Lessons are not
much different from Chapters, if the Word Chapter be taken for Title, or a
great Section, yet we are not to confound these two, as some Authors have done.
There are fewer Lessons than Titles or great Sections, as I observed in the
reading some Copies where these Lessons are marked exactly; and there are also
some in which the Word (...) the end, and (...) the beginning, are inserted, to
denote the end of one Lesson and the beginning of another, which was taken from
the Greek Church Bibles: and therefore we find in the Margins of those
Manuscript Copies, not only the Summaries of Sections, called Titles or
Chapters, but also the days on which those (...) Lessons were to be read in the
Churches. The Greek Amanuenses have drawn Observations of this nature from
their Church Bibles, and of them they composed a Table called Synaxarion, which
they placed at the Beginning or the End of their Books. Seeing this does rather
belong to the usage of the Greek Churches than to the cognizance of a Critic
who treats of the Greek Copies of the New Testament, I shall insist on it no
longer: nevertheless, it is worthy of our Observation, that that distinction of
different Lessons, relating to the reading in the Church, has occasioned some
small Alterations in some Greek Copies. They have taken away, for example, in
certain places, (...) but, (...) for, (...) therefore, and some other the like
Particles, whenever they happened to be at the beginning of a Lesson. They have
also changed some Relative Pronouns into proper Names. It was also sometimes
necessary, not to leave the Sense imperfect, to put proper Names at the
beginning of their Lessons, and the Transcribers have inserted them in their
Copies. And therefore caution is necessary; otherwise we shall multiply various
Readings of the New Testament without any necessity. When that happens, we need
only consult the Greek Church Bibles that are used in the Greek Churches, to
observe in what places they begin their new Lessons.

FINIS.
The TRANSLATOR'S POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
THE former Works of the Learned Author have been well accepted by the public,
and it is hoped this may be no less.

The Art of Critic, tho by common mistake, subjected to the slavish Drudgery of
words under the tyranny of the Pedants, is notwithstanding of great use throu
the universal course of good Learning, and an excellent Assistant to the Arts
and Sciences, even those of the highest Rank, as Theology, Laws, and Medicine.

This Art the admirable Industry of our Author has so applied to Theology, as
to render the most hard, dry, and unpleasant Subjects, no less delightful than
profitable, he having conversed with so many Books and Languages, as seems
almost impossible for one Man.

It Is not to be wondered that he has committed Mistakes, having had the
Misfortune to be brought up in the Church of Rome, which uses the Holy
Scriptures chiefly in order to corrupt them; equalling, if not preferring
Traditions to them, founding its Infallibility on its self, being supported by
the intricate Juggles of the Canonists, and the Gibberish of the Schoolmen.

However, if his Alloy be disliked, this Advantage may be expected, That the
Learned of our Church, which pays a due respect to the Scriptures and
uncorrupted Antiquity, and is accomplished with all kinds of Learning
requisite, will be hereby excited to refine on the Subject.

CONTENTS
Of the First Part.
Chap. I. THE Verity of the New Testament defended in general against the
ancient Heretics. Reflections upon the Principle made use of by the Fathers to
establish the Authority of these Books. Page 1. Chap. II. Concerning the Titles
that are at the Head of the Gospels and other Books of the New Testament:
whether these Titles were made by the Authors of these Books, or whether they
were since added? page 12. Chap. III. Concerning Books that have been published
under the Name of Jesus Christ and the Apostles. Of several other Acts forged
by the ancient Heretics. Reflections on the whole matter. page 19. Chap. IV.
The ancient Fathers have not produced the Originals of the New Testament in
their Disputes against the Heretics. An Examination of Proofs that are brought
to show that these Originals have been kept in some Churches. page 30. Chap. V.
Of the Books of the New Testament in particular; and first of the Gospel of St.
Matthew. The Original of this Gospel has been written in the Hebrew Tongue
which the Jews of Jerusalem spoke at that time. An Answer to the Reasons that
are contray to this Opinion. page 39. Chap. VI. The Jews of the Territory of
Jerusalem at the time of Jesus Christ and the Apostles spoke in the Chaldaick
or Syriack Tongue. An Answer to the Reasons that Mr. Vossius has published
against this Opinion. At the same time several Difficulties are cleared
appertaining to this matter. page 46. Chap. VII. Of the Sect of the Nazarenes,
and of their Hebrew or Chaldaick Copy of the Gospel of St. Matthew. page 51.
Chap. VIII. Of the Ebionites. Of their Copy of the Gospel of St. Matthew. Of
some other ancient Heretics who have made use of this same Gospel. page 72.
Chap. IX. Of the Greek Copy of St. Matthew, and its Authority. A Comparison of
this Copy with the Hebrew or Chaldaick. An Answer to the Objections of some
Heretics against this Gospel. page 98. Chap. X. Of the Time and Order of every
Gospel. Some Greek Manuscript Copies are produced thereupon. Of S. Mark and his
Gospel, which is commonly believed to be the second. Of his Office of
Interpreter to S. Peter. page 83. Chap. XI. In what Language S. Mark has
written his Gospel. Of the twelve last Verses of this Gospel, which are not
found in several Greek Manuscript Copies. page 91. Chap. XII. Of the Gospel of
S. Luke; what has obliged him to publish it, since there were two others that
had been written before his. Of Marcion, and his Copy of S. Luke's Gospel. The
Catholics have also altered this Gospel in some places. page 101. Chap. XIII.
Of the Gospel of S. John; and of Heretics that have rejected this Gospel.
Their Reasons with an Answer to them. An Inquiry concerning the twelve Verses
of this Gospel which are not found in some ancient Copies. Several Greek
Manuscript Copies are cited to clear this Difficulty. Some Critics have
imagined without any grounds that the last Chapter of this Gospel did not
belong to S. John. page 113. Chap. XIV. Of the Acts of the Apostles that have
been received in the Church. Other Acts of the Apostles that have been forged.
page 126. Chap. XV. Of the Epistles of S. Paul in general. Of Marcion, and his
Copy of these Epistles. False Letters attributed to S. Paul. page 131. Chap.
XVI. Of the Epistle to the Hebrews in particular. Whether it be S. Paul's, and
Canonical. What Antiquity has believed thereupon, as well in the Eastern as in
the Western Countries. The Opinions of these later Ages concerning this
Epistle. page 142. Chap. XVII. Of the Catholic or Canonical Epistles in
general, and in particular. page 154.
The Contents of the Second Part.
Chap. XVIII. A Critical Observation on a Passage in S. John's First Epistle,
Chap. v. ver. 7. which is wanting in the most Greek Copies, Eastern Editions,
and the most ancient Latin Copies. The Preface to the Canonical Epistles in
some Latin Bibles, under the name of S. Jerome, was not penned by that Father.
It cannot be proved that S. Cyprian had the Passage of S. John's Epistle in his
Copy. Page. 1. Chap. XIX. Of the Book of the Revelation. What was the Belief of
the Ancients concerning it. The Heretics that did reject it. Their Reasons;
which are Examined. There have been also Learned Catholics of ancient time,
who have ascribed it to Cerinthus. The Opinion of these latter times about the
same Book. page 14. Chap. XX. The Objections of the Jews, and other Enemies of
the Christian Religion, against the Books of the New Testament. Inquiry is made
if the Evangelists and Apostles made use of the Greek Version of the
Septuagint, in the Passages which they quote out of the Old Testament. St.
Jerome's Opinion upon the matter. That Father declared himself for the Hebrew
Text of the Jews, in opposition to that of the Septuagint. page 25. Chap. XXI.
A Discussion of some other Objections against the Books of the New Testament.
The Evangelists and Apostles (in the manner of their explaining the Passages of
the Old Testament, and applying them to the Messiah) followed the Custom which
then obtained amongst the Jews. There are many Words in the New Testament which
have a larger signification than they have in the Old; and that can be
attributed to nothing but to that usage, and to a Tradition received amongst
the Jews. page 36. Chap. XXII. A particular Examination of many Passages of the
Old Testament, cited by the Apostles in a sense that seems to be altogether
foreign. Some difficulties formed against their Writings are cleared: some
Principles are established which may answer the Objections of the Jews and the
Emperor Julian. page 46. Chap. XXIII. Of the Inspiration of the Books of the
New Testament. A Refutation of the Opinion of Grotius and Spinosa. The Cardinal
of Perron has given a very bad Exposition of the Words of the second Epistle of
St. Paul to Timothy, Chap. 3. v. 16. which makes mention of this Inspiration.
The Disputes betwixt the Jesuits of Louvain and the Divines of the same place,
upon this matter. Three Propositions of the Jesuits censured by the Doctors of
Louvain and Douay. A Defense of those Propositions against the Censure of those
Divines. page 59. Chap. XXIV. An Examination of the Reasons that the Doctors of
Louvain and Douay made use of in their Censure of the Propositions of the
Jesuits of Louvain, touching the Inspiration of the Sacred Writings. A very
free Opinion of a Learned Divine of Paris about the same thing. page 71. Chap.
XXV. Spinosa's Objections against the Inspiration of the Books of the New
Testam. are examined. page 80. Chap. XXVI. Of the Style of the Evangelists and
the Apostles. The Opinion of modern Writers, and of the ancient Doctors of the
Church upon this matter; with many Critical Reflections. page 84. Chap. XXVII.
Of the Language of the Hellenists or Grecians; if that which bears that name be
in effect a Language: The Reasons of Salmasius against that Language, do rather
establish than destroy it. The Greek of the New Testament may be called the
Greek of the Synagogue: the Jews Hellenists read in their Synagogues the Hebrew
Text of the Bible, as well as the Jews. page 94. Chap. XXVIII. A more
particular Discussion of the Reasons alleged by Salmasius against the Language
that is called Hellenistick. Several Difficulties also relating to this matter
are cleared. page 103. Chap. XXIX. Of the Manuscript Greek Copies in general,
and of those who have spoken of them. Collections which have been made of
diverse Readings drawn from those Manuscripts. Observations upon the whole
matter. The Heretics have been accused sometimes, but without any ground, for
corrupting the Books of the New Testament. page 110. Chap. XXX. Of the Greek
Copies of the New Testament in particular. The most ancient that we have at
this day were written by the Latins, and were used by them. Those which were
printed came from the Greek Churches. The ancient Latin Version which was in
the Churches of the West before St. Jerome, were made by those first Copies
which were not very correct. Of the ancient Cambridge Copy; why it does differ
so much from other Greek Copies. page 128. Chap. XXXI. Of the second part of
the Cambridge Copy; which contains St. Paul's Epistles. Examples of the various
Readings that are in that second Part. Critical Reflections upon the whole
matter. page 144. Chap. XXXII. Of other Greek Manuscript Copies of the New
Testament. Examples of the various Readings of those Manuscripts; with Critical
Reflections on those Differences. page 156. Chap. XXXIII. Of the Order of the
Greek Manuscript Copies of the New Testament. The Verses, Chapters, and other
marks of distinction of those Copies. The Canons which Eusebius added to the
Gospels; and the Use of those Canons. page 175.
FINIS.

