THE PRINCIPLES OF Astronomy and Navigation:

OR,

A Clear, Short, yet Full Explanation, of all Circles of the Celestial, and
Terrestrial Globes, and of their Uses, being the whole Doctrine of the Sphere,
and Hypotheses to the Phenomena of the Primum Mobile.

To which is Added

A Discovery of the Secrets of Nature, which are found in the
Mercurial-Weather-Glass, etc.

AS ALSO

A New Proposal for Buoying up a Ship of any Burden from the Bottom of the Sea.

By GEORGE SINCLAR, sometime Professor of Philosophy in the College of GLASGOW.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sccred
Majesty, Anno d(...)

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.


To the Right Honorable MAGNUS PRINCE, Lord Provost;
Alexander Brand, Alexander Simpson, John Morray, and William Montgomery,
Baillies; James Nicolson Dean of Gild, Edward Marjorebanks Thesaurer; and
remanent Members of the Honorable Senate, of the Ancient City of Edinburgh.
May it please your Lordship, and the Honorable Senate,
IT is neither Ambition, nor Ignorance of your Worth and Merit, which have
inclined me, to prefix your Names to the Frontispiece of this mean Pamphlet,
but the sure experience I have of your encouraging all virtuous Actions and
Learning. What I have now in Equity and Reason presented, I humbly desire the
Honorable Senate, may accept favorably. I owe all I have, and my Self too, to
your Devotion and Service. I choose rather to be doing somewhat Amiss, than
doing Nothing. It Is the Widows Mite, which I have sheltered under the Wings of
your Protection. If I should endeavor, but to recapitulat, what Sentiments of
your Kindness I have found, both Time, and my Memory would fail me. None can
think, that there is any Deserving in me, which can be proportionable to those
unvaluable Acts of your Bounty. If there be any, I am confident, it is too too
scanty to Oblige. When I was able to do more, none were found more willing. I
endeavored indeed, according to my Capacity, to contribute my Assistance for
promoving that great and noble Design, which was accomplished; for which the
Generations to come, shall call you Happy, whom you have Enriched, with
Refreshing-Streams of Cooling-Waters, more Advantageous and Useful to the City,
than the Fruit of the Vine. I cannot satisfy all the Obligations to Duty,
which ly upon me. The more I was inclined to offer this Trifle, the more I was
overcome with Reasons persuading to the contrary. But the uprightness of my
Intention, to beautify this trivial Subject, with the Splendour, and Glory of
your Names, will excuse the faillings of my Understanding. I cannot remunerat
the Kindness of the Honorable Senate, better, than by Hearty Prayer, that the
LORD may give you, the Spirit of Wisdom, and Government, to Manage the Weighty
Affairs of the City, and His Conduct, not only to Guide each one of you, in his
particular Calling, but all of you, to the endless Fruition of Immortal Life.
This I fervently wish, while I am

Your Lordships and the Councils, much Obliged Servant, GEORGE SINCLAR.

TO THE READER.
I Judge it altogether needless to Preface any thing by way of Commendation to
the following Tracts. They will (I hope) commend themselves, to the intelligent
Reader. There is first, The Doctrine of the Sphere, so compendiously set down,
that nothing can either be Added, or Subtracted. It is the very Rudiments of
Astronomy and Navigation, and of many other Mathematical Sciences. By the use
of the Globes, the whole Doctrine of the Sphere may be easily comprehended,
even by the meanest Capacity. The second Tract, is not so evident, because more
Physical, and less Mathematical, but perhaps as sure. I have set down my own
Thoughts only, If any Man shall offer to salve the Phenomena better, I shall be
glad. The third Tract is, a new Invention for Buoying up of Ships from the
Ground of the Sea. This Proposal was made some few Years ago, to try the
Invention and Wit of some Notional Men, but though they have plowed with my
Heifer, yet were they not able, to find out my Riddle: Nay some of them were so
confident to aver, that when this Proposal was made to them, How to make a
Vessel Sail below the Water; they Replied, it might be easily resolved by their
Analyticks.

ERRATA.
IN the second Tract, Page 28. line 13. for earthly read earthy. page 33. lin.
ult. for Idaea read Idea.

THE PRINCIPLES OF Astronomy and Navigation.
CHAP. I. Of the Circles of the Sphere in general.
THE material Sphere, is an Instrument, whereby all the Phenomena of the Primum
Mobile, are most easily known.

It is composed of Ten Circles chiefly, which are, the Equinoctial, the
Zodiac, the two Colures, the Horizon, the Meridian, the two Tropicks, and the
two Polars.

Those Circles, are three manner of ways distinguished among themselves. First,
Some of them are called Circuli Maximi, the Greatest Circles; others are called
Circuli Minores, the lesser Circles. The Greatest are, the Equinoctial, the
Zodiak, the two Colures, the Horizon, and the Meridian; because there cannot be
greater Circles in the Sphere, than they are.

The lesser Circles are, the two Tropicks, and the two Polars. They are so
called, because there are found in the Sphere greater ones.

Secondly, The Circles of the Material Sphere, while the Primum Mobile is
turning about, are either Parallel one to another, Right, or Oblique, that is,
to ly crosly. The Parallel Circles, are the two Polars, the two Tropicks, and
the Equinoctial, which ly middle between them, together with their Equinoctial,
who live under the Poles. The Oblique Circles are, the Zodiac, and the Oblique
Horizon. For this cutteth the Equinoctial, at Oblique Angles; the other by
reason of its Situation does the same to the rest of the Circles. The Circles
called Right Circles, are the two Colures, the Meridian, and the Right Horizon,
because they cut the Equinoctial at Right Angles.

Thirdly, The Circles of the Sphere, are either Moveable, or Immovable. The
Moveable Circles, are these which are turned about with the Sphere, being eight
in number, to wit, the Equinoctial, the Zodiac, the Equinoctial Colure, the
Solstice Colure, the Tropic of Cancer, the Tropic of Capricorn, the Polar
Artick, and the Polar Antartick. The Circles Immovable, are the Meridian, and
the Horizon; so called, because while the Sphere is carried about, they stand
steadfast, and unmovable.

CHAP. II. Of the Equinoctial.
THe Equinoctial, is one of the greatest Circles, of the Sphere Moveable, and
equally distant from the Poles of the World. It is called one of the greatest,
that it may be distinguished from the lesser, as well from those, which are
fixed in the Sphere, as from others, which we must imagine to be in it. It is
called Movable, that it may be distinguished, from the Horizon of those, who
live under the Poles, which coinciding with the Equinoctial, must differ from
it in this, that the one is Movable, the other Immovable. Lastly, by reason of
the third difference (equally distant from the Poles of the Sphere) it is
distinguished from the Oblique, and Right Circles of the Sphere.

It is called by diverse Names. For sometimes it is called the Equator,
sometimes the Equinoctial, and sometimes the Middle, and greatest of the
Parallels.

The Uses and Offices of the Equinoctial are these. 1. It measures the first
Motion. For this Circle, of all the Circles of the Sphere, under any Position
whatsoever, moves equally; and therefore, it ought to be also the Measure of
Time, it being most fit for determining the quantity of the Artificial, and
Natural Days. For this cause, it is, that the Degrees of the Equinoctial, are
called by some, Tempora, Times. 2. It points forth to us in the Ecliptic,
the two Equinoctial Points; those Points, in which the Equinoctial, and
Ecliptic cut one another, in the beginning of Aries and Libra. For when the
Sun comes to these Points, the Day and the Night are of equal length over all
the Earth, which falls out on the 10 or 11 of March, and on the 13 or 14 of
September. 3. That which is Anomolous, and Irregular in the Oblique Motion of
the Zodiac, is reduced to a sure Rule, by the help of the Equinoctial. 4. It
divides the Sphere into two equal parts; the one called the North part, in
which is the Pole, named Polus Septentrionalis, Boreus, or Articus: the other
called the South part, in which is the Pole, named Polus Australis,
Meridionalis, or Antarticus. 5. By this means, it divides the Zodiac into six
Signs, called Northern Signs, and into other six called Southern Signs. 6. From
the Equinoctial are numbered the Declinations of all, and whatsoever Points in
Heaven, as well South as North. The Declination of any Point, or Star, is an
Arch of a Circle of Declination, measured between the Equinoctial, and the said
Point, or Center of the said Star. Circles of Declinations, are of the Greatest
Circles in the Sphere Movable, passing through the Poles of the World, and any
point given. 7. Upon the Equinoctial, we reckon the Right Ascension of any, or
whatsoever Point in Heaven. Right Ascension, is nothing else, but an Arch of
the Equinoctial, measured between the first Point of Aries, and that Circle of
Declination, which passes through the point given. 8. Upon the same Equinoctial,
we measure the Oblique Ascension, and Descension of any point in Heaven
whatsoever. Oblique Ascension, is an Arch of the Equinoctial, measured between
the first Point of Aries, and that Point of the Equinoctial, which rises in
the same Moment of Time, with the Point given. Oblique Descension, is an Arch
of the Equinoctial measured between the Point foresaid, and that Point of the
Equinoctial, which sets in the same Moment of Time, with the Point given. 9.
Upon the Equinoctial, we count and reckon the Ascensional Difference, which is
nothing else, but an Arch of the Equinoctial, by which Right Ascension differs
from Oblique. 10. Upon the Equinoctial, we measure the Rising and Setting
Amplitude. This Rising and Setting Amplitude, is nothing else, but an Arch of
the Horizon, measured between the Rising, or Setting of the Equinoctial, and
the Rising or Setting of any Star, or Point given. 11. Upon the Equinoctial, we
number the Longitudes of Places, and upon the same, we reckon the Latitudes of
Places. The Longitude of a place, is an Arch of the Equinoctial, measured
between the first Meridian, and the Meridian of the Place. The Latitude of a
Place, is an Arch of the Meridian measured between the Equinoctial, and Zenith
of the Place. 12. The Equinoctial is most useful for making of Sun-Dials: for
there must be as many Hours upon the Plain, as there are 15 Degrees in the
Equinoctial, four and twenty times numbered.

CHAP. III. Of the Zodiac.
THe Zodiac, is one of the Greatest Circles of the Sphere, Movable, under
which the Planets perpetually haunt.

The first and second Difference are added, as in the Definition of the
Equinoctial. The third, which is in these words (under which the Planets
perpetually haunt) do distinguish the Zodiac from all other Circles. For it
may come to pass, that, this or that Planet, by his proper motion, may be under
the Meridian, may be under some Horary Circle, may touch lightly the Horizon,
but that is not always, nor do they always abide in the same Situation: but
their stay is perpetual under the Zodiac. And because the Planets wander in
the Heavens, via obliqua, therefore this Circle is made oblique, and seeing in
this obliquity, they make digression, from this side, to that side, and from
that to this, therefore Astronomers have granted to this Circle Latitude,
whereby also it may be differenced from all other Circles, none of which ever
claimed Latitude.

The Zodiac is divided, first in relation to its Latitude, into North
Latitude, and South Latitude. North Latitude, is that half part of the Zodiac,
which from the Ecliptic (the middle Line of it) declines toward the North.
South Latitude is opposite to this. Each one of them contains Eight Degrees,
whereof the Equinoctial contains 360.

The Ecliptic, or middle Line of the Zodiac, is one of the Greatest Circles
of the Sphere, Moveable, under which, the Sun from West to East moves
perpetually. This Line, as likewise the Zodiac, is divided according to
Longitude into twelve Parts, which are called in Greek (...). Every one of
these twelve, are subdivided into 30 parts, so that the whole Zodiac contains
360 Degrees. These twelve Divisions are called Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer,
Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpius, Sagittarius, Cap^s, Aquarius, Pisces. But seeing
there are four Cardinal Points, two of the Equinoctial, and two Solstice
Points, it has pleased Astronome^, to make the beginning of their reckoning,
from the Vernal Equinoctial Point; because the Sun being there, he not only
begins the Spring, but opens the Earth, and gives life to all Vegetables,
and things which grow; which cannot be done, either in any of the Solstices, or
when he is in the Autumnal Equinoctial Point. Next, the distinction of the
Signs is manifold. For some of them are called Northern Signs, and others are
called Southern. The Northern, decline from the Equinoctial toward the North,
which are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo. The Southern decline from
the Equinoctial toward the South, which are Libra, Scorpius, Sagittarius,
Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces.

Secondly, Some of them are called, Signs Ascending, others are called Signs
Descending. The first sort, are these, wherein the Sun, and the rest of the
Planets do ascend from the South toward our Zenith, which are Capricornus,
Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, Taurus, Gemini. The Descending are these, wherein the
Sun, and the rest of the Planets, do move from our Zenith toward the South,
which are Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpius, Sagittarius.

Thirdly, The Signs of the Zodiac, are either Vernal, Estival, Autumnal, or
Hybernal. The Vernal, are Aries, Taurus, Gemini. The Estival, are Cancer, Leo,
Virgo. Autumnal, are Libra, Scorpius, Sagittarius. And the Hibernal, are
Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces.

Fourthly, The Signs are either Cardinal, Middle, or Fixed, or Common, or
Two-bodied. The Cardinal Signs, are Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricornus: so
called, because their beginnings are the very Cardinal Points. The Middle or
Fixed Signs, are Taurus, Leo, Scorpius, Aquarius. They are called Middle or
Fixed, because they keep the Middle place between the Cardinal and Common
Signs. They are Fixed, because when the Sun is in them, we have a perfect
temperament of the Air, agreeing to the given Quadrant of the Heavens. As when
the Sun is in Taurus, we have a perfect Spring; in Leo, a perfect Summer; in
Scorpius, a perfect Harvest; and in Aquarius, we have a perfect Winter. They
are called Common, or Two* bodied, as Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces;
because each one of them, has two Bodies indeed. For Gemini are two Twins.
Virgo has an Ear of Corn in her Hand. Sagittarius is made up of a Man, and a
Horse. And lastly, The Fishes are double. They are called Common, because
Astrologers find, that they participate of the Nature, both of the Fixed Signs,
and the Cardinal which follow.

Fifthly, The Signs are divided into four Triplicities, which are called by
Astrologers Trigons. The first is called the Fiery Trigon, which contains
Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius. The second is the Earthy, which contains, Taurus,
Virgo, and Capricorn. The third is the Aerial, which contains, Gemini, Libra,
and Aquarius. The fourth is the Watery, which contains, Cancer, Scorpius, and
Pisces.

If it happen, that Saturn, and Jupiter be in Conjunction this year in Leo,
their next Conjunction will happen 20 years after, or truly 19 years, 315 days,
and 19 hours, after in Sagittarius. From Sagittarius to Aries, from Aries to
Leo, and so in round till 198 years and 236 days passing, they make a Transit
into a new Trigon; so that the Revolution of one Trigon, consumes almost 200
year.

The uses of the Zodiac and Ecliptic are these. 1. As the Equinoctial, is the
Measure of the Pri^ Mobile, so is the Zodiac and Ecliptic, the Square and
Rule of the second Movables. For as the Sun is always, in or under the
Ecliptic; so are the rest of the Planets always, in or under the Zodiac.
Therefore as in the Celestial Globe, the Zodiac has the chief place, so in
the Terrestrial Globe the Equinoctial. 2. Upon the Ecliptic we reckon the
Longitude of Stars, and from the same Ecliptic, we count their Latitude. The
Longitude of a Star, is an Arch of the Ecliptic, measured between ^^e true
Equinoctial Point, or begin^ing of Aries, and the Circle of Lati^^de passing
through the Center of that ^tar. Circles of Latitude, are great Movable Circles,
passing through the Poles of the Ecliptic, and the Center ^f the Star given.
They are of that ^umber of Circles, which cannot be ^^aced Artificially in the
Sphere. Ne^ertheless, of that same Number, is the ^olurus Solstitiorum fixed in
the Sphere. The Latitude of a Star, is an Arch of a Circle of Latitude,
measured between ^he Ecliptic, and the Center of the ^tar. 3. According to the
Degrees, and ^arts of the Zodiac and Ecliptic, the whole Heavens, and the
whole Universe (...) divided into twelve Signs; nay every Point contained in
the Sphere of the Fixed Stars, is said to be in this or that Sign; tho, to be
in a Sign, is said many ways. For first, To be in a Sign, is nothing else, but
to be under any ^welfth part of the Zodiac. In this ^ense, the Sun is said to
^e in a Sign, because he is always under the Ecliptic. Then the Stars are said
to be in a Sign, which are indeed out of the Ecliptic, nevertheless are under
the Zodiac. In this sense, the Planets, which wander from the Ecliptic, are
said to be in the Sign of Aries, and Taurus, etc. Thirdly, Any thing is said to
be in a Sign, which is included, in any of the twelve parts, which arise from
the division of the whole Heavens, passing through the beginnings of the
Dodekatemoria, or the Poles of the Ecliptic; they being six great Circles,
which mutually cut one another, in the same Poles. In this sense, any Star, as
well fixed, as wandering, or new appearing, as a Comet, are said to be in the
Sign of Aries, Taurus, etc. 4. The obliquity of the Ecliptic, is the cause of
the inequality of days: for seeing it moves unequally, and not evenly, the Sun,
which is the true Parent of Time, must of necessity make the days unequal. 5.
The Year, the Month, and the four Seasons of the Year, are determined by the
Ecliptic. 6. When the Sun and Moon, are both of them in the Ecliptic, of
necessity there must be Eclipses; and for this cause, it is called the
Ecliptic. 7. How much is the obliquity of the Ecliptic, so much is the
distance, between the Poles of the World, and the Poles of the Ecliptic: so
much also is the distance, between the Equinoctial, and either of the Tropicks.

CHAP. IV. Of the Colures.
THe Colures are nothing else, but Circles of Declination, defined above, in
the second Chapter of the Equinoctial. They are called Colures from two Greek
words, Kolos, or Kolobos, Mancus, maimed or defective, and Oura, Cauda, a Tail,
because in an oblique Sphere, they have some part unseen, as if they were
maimed, or wantting. But all the rest of the Circles of the Sphere, while it is
going about, may be seen: but the Colures, have always some of their parts
toward either of the two Poles, lying hid, and unseen. There are only two of
them, which use to be placed in the Sphere, one whereof is called the Solstice
Colure, the other the Equinoctial Colure. The Equinoctial Colure, is one of the
greatest Circles of the Sphere, Movable, passing through the Poles of the
Sphere, and the Equinoctial Points, the first of Aries, and the first of Libra,
which are called Cardinal. By the word movable, the Colures are differenced;
First, From the Meridian; Secondly, From the Right Horizon; And thirdly, From
the Horary Circles, with all which, by one turning about of the Sphere, they
are twice united. But in this they differ, that those do not move, but these
follow the motion of the Primum Mobile. The Solstice Colure, is one of the
greatest Circles of the Sphere, movable, drawn through the Poles of the Sphere,
and the two Solstice Points, by which difference, they are distinguished from
other Colures.

The uses of all the Colures in common are these. First, We reckon upon them,
the Declinations of all the Points of the Heavens whatsoever. 2. They terminate
and bound the Right Ascensions. 3. They are like unto a Right Horizon, and a
Meridian in any Sphere, whether Right, Oblique, or Parallel.

The Uses of the Colures, which are set down in the Sphere, are these in
common, 1. Without them, the Parallel Circles in the Material Sphere cannot
stand, 2. By their mutual cutting one another, they show the Poles of the
Sphere. 3. They divide the Ecliptic into four Quadrants.

The peculiar Uses of the Equinoctial Colure are these. 1. It demonstrats to us
the Equinoctial Points, by its mutual Section, with the Ecliptic; in which
Points when the Sun is existing, there is an Universal Equinox over the whole
Earth. 2. It is divides the Ecliptic into two halfs, the one called the North
part, the other the South part. 3. It distinguishes the Signs, in which when
the Sun is existing, the Days are longer than the Nights, from those Signs, in
which when the Sun is existing, the Nights are longer than the Days.

The proper Uses of the Solstice Colure are, 1. It demonstrats to us the two
Solstice Points, in which when the Sun is existing, he is either nearest to our
Zenith, or furthest removed from it. 2. Upon this Colure, we reckon the Suns
greatest Declination, or the greatest Obliquity of the Ecliptic, which is
found to be this day twenty three Degrees, and thirty Minutes. 3. It divides the
Zodiac into two halfs; the one called Ascending, the other Descending. 4. It
distinguishes the Signs, in which when the Sun is existing, the Days become
longer, and the Nights become shorter, from those Signs, in which when the Sun
is existing, the Nights become longer, and the Days become shorter. 5. In this
Circle, are the two Poles of the Ecliptic, as many Degrees, distant from the
Poles of the World, as the greatest obliquity of the Ecliptic contains. 6.
Upon this Colure, the Latitudes of the Zones are determined. For between the
Tropicks, is contained the breadth of the Torrid Zone, between the Tropicks,
and the nearest Polar Circles, are contained the two Temperate Zones, and the
other two remaining Arches of this Circle, contain the breadth of the two
Frigid, or Cold Zones.

CHAP. V. Of the Horizon.
THe Horizon, is one of the greatest Circles of the Sphere, Immovable, and
equally distant from the Vertical Point. It is called Immovable, that it may be
differenced from the rest of the Movable Circles; but especially, First, From
their Equinoctial, who live under the Poles. Secondly, From their Ecliptic,
whose Zenith is placed in the Polar Circles: for their Ecliptic every day is
twice united with their Horizon, but without delay. Thirdly, From their Circles
of Declination, or their Colures, who live under the Line: for there, the
forementioned Circles, and the Horizon, are twice, by every Revolution of the
Sphere, united: but the Circles of Declination follow the Motion of the Primum
Mobile, but the Horizon stands Immovable. The Horizon is said indeed to be
Immovable, but not Unchangable, for there are as many Horizons, as there are
Vertical Points; and while we change our Vertical Point, of necessity we change
our Horizon also.

Two ways is the Horizon divided. First, In relation to the Equinoctial, which
is called a Right Horizon, an Oblique Horizon, and a Parallel Horizon. The
Right Horizon, is so called, because it cuts the Equinoctial at Right Angles.
It is called Oblique, because it cuts the Equinoctial at Oblique Angles. And it
is called a Parallel Horizon, when it lies Parallel to the Plain of the
Equinoctial, or rather when it is united, with the Equinoctial. And according
to this Relation, it has to the Equinoctial, the Sphere it self, has obtained
the same Division.

Secondly, The Horizon is either Rational, or Sensible. The Rational Horizon,
is defi^ed above, and is understood to divide the whole World, or Sphere of the
World into two equal parts, the first whereof is called the uppermost
Hemisphere, the second the nethermost Hemisphere. It is called Rational,
because tho we cannot see the whole World, or the exact half of it, yet Reason
tell us, by the Rising and Setting of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, that the
inferior part of the World, is equal to the superior part. The Sensible
Horizon, is nothing else, but so much of the Earth, as a man, by turning his
eye once, does behold round about him.

The Uses of the Horizon are these. First, it divides that part of the Heavens,
which is seen, from the other which is not seen, the Superior part from the
Inferior part. 2. Through the Poles of the Horizon the Meridian ought to pass:
therefore the Description of the Meridians depend from the Horizon. 3. By the
Situation of the Horizon, we know whether it be a Right Sphere* Oblique Sphere,
or a Parallel Sphere. 4. In the Horizon, the Rising or Setting of the Stars are
observed 5. The Horizon shows, what Degree of the Ecliptic, what part also
of the Equinoctial, or what Degree, with any given point of the Heaven rises
or sets. 6. It boundeth and terminats the Ascensional Difference. 7. Upon
the Horizon is numbered, the Rising or Setting Amplitude, of any point in the
Heaven. 8. It demonstrats, and shows the Cause and Reason of the equality of
Days and Nights in a Right Sphere, and of the unequality of the same in an
Oblique Sphere. For the Horizon in a Right Sphere cutteth all the Circles of
the Natural Day equally, but unequally in an Oblique Sphere. 9. From the
Horizon we number the Morning-Twilight: for when the Sun ^s distant, in some
Vertical Circle 18 or 19 Degreees from the Horizon, so that from that Moment,
he approach nearer and nearer unto it, then begins the Morning-Twilight. But
the Evening-Twilight ends, when the Sun after his Set^ing comes to that 18 or
19 Degree ^oresaid; for then does the Light turn unto Darkness. 10. From the
Horizon, we number the Elevation of the Pole, and Equinoctial. 11. From the
Hori^on are numbered various and diverse ^inds of Hours, as the Italick, and
Jewish Nocturnal Hours from the West part of the Horizon: but the Babylonish
Hours, and the Jewish unequal Diurnal Hours, from the East part.

CHAP. VI. Of the Meridian.
THe Meridian is one of the greatest Circles in the Sphere, passing through the
Poles of the World, and the Poles of the Horizon. By the words, through the
Poles of the Horizon, it is distinguished from the Horary Circles, of which
none but it self, passes through the Poles of the Horizon. It has acquired
diverse and sundry Names, by reason of its manifold uses, by Astrologers, which
are not fit to repeat now. What was said above concerning the Colures, and
Circles of Declination, to wit, that they are in number equal to the Vertical
Points, the same may be said of the Meridian, for as many of them may be
imagined, as there are Vertical Points, which are infinite, providing a man
travel from East to West: for if a man go from North to South, or from South to
North, he travels round about the World, without variation of his Meridian. The
Brazen Meridian in the Celestial, or Terrestrial Globe, supplies the office of
them all, which are innumerable. But in Geographical Tables, and Mapps,
Geographers use to extend one Meridian, through two, and two opposite Degrees of
the Equinoctial, for finding out, the more easily the Latitudes of Places. Of
all these Meridians there is a common beginning se^led in the Fortunate, or
Canary Islands, because the Ancient Geographers deemed those Islands to be the
Westmost part of the World, and therefore they fixed their first March-stone
there, whence they begin to reckon. But the later Geographers, have removed
this Marchstone 10 Degrees more Westerly, and have made the common beginning of
the Meridian to pass through one of the Islands called Osores, whence they begin
to reckon from West to East, imita^ing the order of the 12 Signs.

The uses of the Meridian are these, 1. It distinguishes the Eastern part, of
the World, from the Western part, the Anterior part, from the Posterior part.
2. It lets us know the South part of the World, and the North part. For when
the Sun is in the Meridian, ^en is Midday, and when the Sun is in the Northern
part, of the Meridian, then is Midnight. 3. It divides the Nocturnal and
Diurnal Time into two halfs: that is, when the Sun is come to the Meridian in
our Hemisphere, as much of the day is past, as what is to come: and when the
Sun is come to the Northern part of the Meridian, as much of the Night is past,
as what is to come. 4. The Meridian supplies in every Oblique Sphere the place
of the Right Horizon: therefore, as the Stars do ascend above the Right
Horizon, so they pass over the Meridian, and those ^ransitions are called the
Right Ascensions of the Middle Heaven. 5. From the Meridian, Astronomers begin
their Time. 6. In the Meridian, we find out the Zenith; therefore when the
Stars come to it, they are either highest above the Horizon, and are said by
Astrologers to culminate, or they are in the lowest, and opposite part of it,
which is the Nadir. 7. In the Meridian, we find out the distances between the
Tropicks, and the whole Obliquity of the Ecliptic. 8. Upon the Meridian, we
number the Latitude of Places upon the Earth, and likewise the Elevation of the
Pole, and Equinoctial. The Elevation of the Pole, is defined, an Arch of the
Meridian, measured between the Horizon, and the apparent Pole of the World,
which may be found out, after the following manner. Observe the greatest and
least Altitude of any of the Stars, which do not set. Subtract the least
Altitude from the greatest, and divide the difference. This difference being
subtracted from the greatest Elevation, or added to the least, gives the true
height of the Pole. December 17. 1669, I observed with a large Quadrant, half 9
a Clock at night, the foremost Guard-star, when it was in the Meridian, and
lowest, to have 41 Degrees, 22 Minutes of Altitude. And on January 7. 1670, at 7
a Clock in the Morning, I found it, when it was in the Meridian, and heighest,
to have 70 Degrees, 27 Minutes. I subtract 41 Degrees, 22 Minutes, from 70
Degrees, 27 Minutes, and the difference is 29 Degrees, 5 Minutes. Divide this,
and you have 14 Degrees, 32 Minutes, and 30 Seconds. This being added to 41
Degrees, 22 Minutes, gives you 55 Degrees, 54 Minutes, 30 Seconds. Or subtract 14
Degrees, 32 Minutes, and 30 Seconds, from 70 Degrees, 27 Minutes, and there
remains 55 Degrees, 54 Minutes, and 30 Seconds, for our height of the Pole at
Edinburgh. 9. The Meridians do terminate, and bound the Longitudes of Places,
as well in the Terrestrial Globe, as in the Mapps, and Cards projected in
Plano. 10. The Meridians do terminate, and bound the Breadths and Latitudes of
the Zones, and also of the Climats. 11. We find out in the Meridian, the
Antipodes, the Anteci, and Perieci.

CHAP. VII. Of the Tropicks.
THe Tropicks are lesser Movable Circles of the Sphere, described from the
Solsticial Points, by the mo^ion of the Primum Mobile. They are called Lesser,
because there are in the Sphere Greater Circles, than they are. They are called
Movable, that they may be distinguished chiefly, from the Paral^els of their
Horizon (called Almican^ars), who live under the Poles; and from the ancient
Polars of those, who ^ive under the Polars, with whom the Tropicks are equal to
those Circles, which comprehend the Stars, which never come above the Horizon,
nor ever go under it.

They are two in number, to wit, the Tropic of Cancer, and the Tropic of
Capricorn. The Tropic of Cancer, is a lesser movable Circle, described from
the Summer-Solstitial-Point of the Ecliptic, by the motion of the Primum
Mobile. The Tropic of Capricorn, is lesser movable Circle, described from the
Winter-Solstitial-Point of the Ecliptic, by the motion of the Primum Mobile.

The uses of the Tropicks are these 1. They demonstrate to us, in the
Ecliptic, the two Tropical or Solstic Points, to wit, the beginning of Cancer,
and the beginning of Capricorn 2. They terminate and bound, the Sun greatest
Declination, and consequently the greatest Obliquity of the Ecliptic 3. When
the Sun comes to either of the two Tropicks, he is either nearest t^ our
Vertical-Point, or furthest removed from it. 4. In an Oblique Sphere, they ly
Parallel to the longest, and shortes^ Day. 5. Between the Tropicks, i^
comprehended the Torrid Zone, as well in the Heavens, as in the Earth: and by
the same Tropicks, the Torrid Zone is divided from the Temperate Zones.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Polars.
THe Polars are lesser Circles of the Sphere, movable, described from the Poles
of the Ecliptic, by the motion of the Primum Mobile. For this cause, they are
called the Polar Circles. They are two in number, the Polar Artick, and the
Polar Antartick. The Polar Artick is a lesser Circle of the Sphere, movable,
described from the North Pole of the Ecliptic, by the Motion of the Primum
Mobile. The Polar Antartick, is a lesser Circle of the Sphere, movable,
described from the South Pole of the Ecliptic, by the motion of the Primum
Mobile.

They let us see first, the Poles of the Zodiac, and they measure their
distance from the Poles of the World. 2. They bound the Temperat Zones, and
separats them from the Cold Zones, which are bounded and enclosed by their
circumferences. It is to be observed, that the ancient Astronomers, Proclus,
Cleomedes, and the rest, had not the same description of the Polars, which we
have. For the Ancients, did not describe them, as passing through the Poles of
the Ecliptic, but through the common Sections of the Meridian, and Horizon,
equidistant to the Equinoctial* and therefore, so much was their distance from
the Poles of the World, a^ the height of the Pole was above the Horizon. And by
this means, where there is no Elevation of the Pole, as in a Right Sphere,
there are no Polars. But from thence, they are more, and more gradually
augmented, and enlarged, according to the increment of the Poles Elevation.

The uses of the Polars, according to the Ancients, are these, 1. They
comprehend the Arch of the Elevation of the Pole. 2. Of all the Parallels of
the Equinoctial, which are always seen above the Horizon, they are the greatest
and of all the Parallels of the Equinoctial, which ly hid under the Horizon,
they are the greatest also. But contra^iwise, of all the Parallels of the
Equinoctial, which arise and set in twenty four Hours, they are the least.
Therefore (3.) the foresaid Polars, comprehend within their Compass, and
Circle, ^he whole Stars and Points of Heaven, which are always in sight, and do
not ^et. Hence, there arises a threefold ^istinction of the Stars. 1. There
are ^ome, which have a perpetual Day, and ^ever set, or fall under the Horizon,
to ^it, those which are comprehended within the Circle of the Polar Artick. 2.
There are others, which have a perpetual Night, which never rise, or come ^p
above the Horizon, to wit all those, which are included within the Circle of
^he Polar Antartick. There are (3.) others which both rise and set in four and
twenty Hours, to wit those, which ^ither on this side, or that side of the
Equinoctial, tend toward and come nearest to the foresaid Polars.

CHAP. IX. Concerning other Circles of the Sphere, both greater and lesser,
which cannot be conveniently drawn upon it.
BEside the Circles of the Sphere hitherto explained, there are yet innumerable
more, both of the greatest and lesser sort, which Astronomers have excogitated
for attaining a more perfec^ knowledge of the Heavenly Motions* 1. There are of
the greatest sort Verticals, which pass through every point o^ the Horizon,
cutting one another there which by the Arabians are called Azimuths. 2. There
are the Horary Circles, which divide the Heavens, into four and twenty parts,
which are o^ three sorts. For either they have the beginning in the Meridian,
and pa^^ through the Poles of the World, or the have their beginning in the
East, o^ West-part of the Horizon, by which means they touch lightly, the two
Circles lying parallel to the Equinoctial, of which one is the greatest of all,
which are always seen above the Horizon, the other the greatest of all, which
are not seen above the Horizon: or lastly, they have their beginning in the
Horizon, but neither go through the Poles, of the World, nor go near to the
foresaid Parallels, but divide all the Segments of the Parallels, which are
above or below the Horizon, into twelve equal parts. 3. There are Circles of
Declination, which pass through the Poles of the World, and every point of the
Equinoctial. There are 4. Circles of Latitude, which pass through the Poles of
the Ecliptic, and every one of his Degrees.

The lesser Circles are infinite also; for there is no great Circle, which has
not his own Parallels. As first the Horizon, which has Circles of Altitude,
called by the Arabians Almicanthars. The Equinoctial, has its own Parallels,
to wit, described by the Primum Mobile, from all, and whatsoever Points are in
the Heavens. So has the Zodiac his Parallels, described about the Poles of
the Ecliptic, which Parallels every Star, or point of the Heavens, according
to the proper motion of the eight Sphere, do describe, and many more are there
invented by Astronomers for Astronomical uses.

CHAP. X. Of the Zones.
TO the Doctrine of the Sphere, is commonly annexed the Geographical Tractat of
the Zones. The Zones therefore are nothing else, but as much bounds, of the
Heaven, or of the Earth, as is comprehended between both the Tropicks, or
between either of the two Tropicks, and the next Polar, or between either of
the two Polars, and the neighboring Pole. Therefore the Zones, are either
Celestial, or Terrestrial. The Celestial Zones, are bounded by themselves, and
their own Circles in the Heavens. The Terrestrial Zones, ly directly under the
same places of the Heavens. They are five in number, one Torrid, two Temperate,
and two Frigid. The Torrid Zone, is that space of the Heavens, or the Earth,
comprehended between the two Tropicks. This is divided into two parts, of which
one is called the Northern, the other the Southern part. It is called Torrid,
because here, the Rays of the Sun are more perpendicular, and so hotter, that
the Inhabitants are in a manner scorched, and burnt up with Heat. The Temperate
Zones, are that space of the Heavens, or of the Earth, comprehended between
either of the two Tropicks, and the neighboring Polars: and that which is
included, between the Tropic of Cancer, and the Polar Artick, is called the
Temperate Northern Zone, wherein are contained, all Europe almost, and a great
part of Asia, and also a part of America. But that which is included between
the Tropic of Capricorn, and the Antartick Polar, is called the Southern
Temperate Zone. This contains more Sea, and less Land. They are called
Temperate, because the Rays of the Sun, being more oblique, there is not such a
reflection of Heat, but offer a most commodious Dwelling to the Inhabitants.
The Frigid Zones, are that space of the Heavens, and of the Earth, comprehended
between either of the Polars, and the neighboring Pole of the World. And that
bounds, which is included between the Polar Artick, and the North Pole, is
called the Northern Frigid Zone: and that bounds which is included, between the
Polar Antartick, and the South Pole, is called, the Southern Frigid Zone. They
are called Frigid, because the Rays of the Sun are most Oblique, and are absent
almost half a Year; so that all things become rigid and stiff, with Frost, Ice,
and Snow. In this Zone, lies Island and Greenland, but in the Southern cold
Zone, the parts are unknown to us.

The Inhabitants of the five Zones, have obtained diverse names. For those, who
inhabit the Torrid Zone, are called Amphiscii, as having a shadow on both
sides. I say on both sides, in respect of the Vertical Point. For the Sun with
them, is sometimes on this side, and sometimes on that side of their Vertical
Point: sometimes the shadow of their Dials is projected from South to North,
and sometimes from North to South, when he is in the Meridian. The Inhabitants
of the Temperate Zones, are called Heteroscii, as having but one shadow. For at
12 a Clock in the Day, the shadow is either casten toward the North, as with
us, or toward the South, as with those, who dwell in the Southern Temperate
Zone. But those, who live in the Frigid Zones, are called Periscii, as having a
shadow, which goes round about them; because they have the Sun for several
Months of the Year, above their Horizon, and the Heavens there, like a
Millstone, is whirled about, so that the Sun and Stars describe Parallels to the
Horizon, and therefore in four and twenty Hours, he runs about without rising
and setting, and projects his shadow into an Orb, or Circle.

There are likewise, the Antipodes, Anteci, and Perieci. Antipodes, are those,
who have the same Meridian, but dwell in points of it, diametraliter opposite,
and are under opposite Parallels, (to wit in an oblique Sphere,) of which the
one is Southern, the other Northern. These following Phenomena, are proper to
them. 1. Though they have the same Rational Horizon, yet beholding the opposite
Faces, all things fall out to them contrariwise. For when we have Day and
Midday, our Antipodes have Night and Midnight. When we have Summer, they have
Winter. When the Sun rises to us, he sets to them. We have North Latitude, they
have South Latitude.

The Anteci are those, who dwell under opposite Parallels, equally distant from
the Equator, toward both the Poles, under the same Meridian, but not in Points
diametraliter opposed, but in a Semi circle of the Meridian intercepted between
the Poles. They have these Phenomena proper to them. First, They agree in the
same Longitude, and Latitude; for how much is the South Pole elevated to those,
so much is the North Pole elevated to these. 2. In the same Moment of Time,
both of them have the Sun in their Meridian. But in this they differ; while the
Sun is coming to the Tropic of Cancer, those have Summer and longer Days, but
these have Winter, and shorter Days. Again, when the Sun is returning, those
have Harvest, the Days Decreasing, but these have the Spring, the Days
Increasing. Hence it is, that the Sun does not rise, and set to both, at the
same time.

The Perieci are those, who dwell under the same Parallel and Meridian, but in
Points of the same Parallel diametraliter opposite; so that both of them behold
the same Pole, with equal height above the Horizon. First, They dwell in the
same Zone. Secondly, They have the same Elevation of the same Pole. They have
the same Winter, the same Summer, the same longest Day, and the same increment,
and decrement of the Natural Days. But here they differ; those having the Sun
rising, these have it setting; those having the Sun in the Meridian, these have
it at our Midnight: and contrariwise, when to those the Sun is setting, to
these he is rising, when to those it is Midnight, to these it is the Meridian.

CHAP. XI. Of the Rising and Setting of the Stars according to the Poets.
HItherto we have treated of the Hypotheses, to wit, the Circles of the Sphere,
which so much conduce for explaining the Phenomena of the Primum Mobile. It now
remains, that we speak and treat of the thing it self, to wit, the Phenomena
themselves. And in the entry, we ought to have spoken of the rising and setting
of the Stars, called Ortus and occasus stellarum Astronomicus; but the
knowledge of those things, cannot be taught here compendiously, nor without the
Science of Spherical Trigonometry; therefore passing this, we come to explain
the rising and setting of the Stars, called Ortus and occasus Poeticus, which
is the second Phenomenon of the Primum Mobile.

This rising and setting of the Stars according to the Poets, is nothing else,
but the rising of a Star above the Horizon, and the setting of a Star under it,
in relation to the various Position of it, with the Sun. It is called Poetical,
not because it does not belong to Astronomers; for it is a part of their
Science to determine those Risings and Settings, but because the Poets in
describing certain Seasons of the Year, use this method, as will be seen
afterward.

Of this Poetical Rising and Setting, there are three forms. First, That which
is called the Rising and Setting of a Star Cosmice. Secondly, That which is
called the Rising and Setting of a Star, Acronyce. Thirdly, That which is
called the Rising and Setting of a Star Heliace. Each one of those has a
double signification; one general, the other special. The Rising of a Star
Cosmice generally taken, is the Rising of a Star above the Horizon, falling out
from the Rising of the Sun to his Setting. The Setting of a Star Cosmice,
generally taken, is the Setting of a Star, falling out from his Rising to his
Setting. The Rising of a Star Acronyce, generally taken, is the Rising of a
Star above the Horizon, falling out the whole time, the Sun is under the
Horizon. The Setting of a Star Acronyce generally taken, is the Setting of a
Star under the Horizon, falling out all the time the Sun is under the Horizon.
The Rising of a Star Heliace generally taken, is the appearing of a Star after
the Sun is Risen. The Setting of a Star Heliace generally taken, is the
disappearing of a Star, after the Sun is set. But their special signification
denotes, and determines, a certain, and definite time. Therefore, the Rising of
a Star Cosmice, is the ascending of a Star above the Horizon, in the same
moment, wherein the Sun Rises. The Setting of a Star Cosmice, is when a Star
goes down, while the Sun is Rising. The Rising of a Star Acronyce, is when a
Star comes above the Horizon, the Sun going down under the Horizon that same
moment. The Setting of a Star Acronyce, is when a Star Sets with the Sun, that
same moment. The Rising of a Star Heliace, is when a Star, which could not be
seen, by reason of its nearness to the Sun, is now seen in the night time. The
Setting of a Star Heliace, is when a Star, by reason of the Suns great distance
from it, might have been seen in the night time, but the Sun coming nearer to
it, it disappears out of our sight.

We have an Example of the Rising of a Star Cosmice, in the first Book of the
Georgicks.

Vere fabis satio: tunc te quoque Medica putres
Accipiunt sulci, and Milio venit annua cura
Candidus auratis aperit, cum Cornibus annum
Taurus, and adverso cedens Canis occidit Astro.
When Taurus with his gilded Horns,
Begins the Year, then Sow your Corns
Sow Millet-seed, an yearly toil,
Sow Claver-grass, in putrid soil,
Sow yearly Pulse, and what you please
Sow in the Spring, both Beans and Pease.
Virgil does express here the Spring time, when the Millet-seed is to be sown^
which is in the beginning of April: An^ seeing the Sun at that time, is about
the end of Aries, it must be understood of the Rising of Taurus, which at that
time rises with the Sun Cosmice. At this time the Romans used to sow their
Beans, their Claver-grass, and their Millet, which every year must be renewed;
whereas the Claver-grass is to be sown but once in ten years.

We have likewise an Example of the Setting of a Star Cosmice, from that same
place in Virgil.

Ante tibi Eoae Atlantides abseondantur
Gnosiaque ardentis decedat stella Coronae
Debita quam sulcis committas semina.
When Pleiades, the Maidens seven,
Are set into the Western-Heaven,
When Ariadnes Crown full bright
Before the Sun comes in our sight,
Then sow your Ground with Wheat and Rye
It Is of October eighteen day.
Before you sow your Ground (says he) let the Pleiades, or Seven-stars be set,
which about October 18, go down in the West, in the same Moment of Time, while
the Sun is Rising in the East, which is called Occasus Cosmicus.

We have an Example of the Rising of a Star Acronyce, from Ovid, in his first
Book de Ponto.

Quatuor autumnos Pleias orta facit. Four Harvests surely there have been,
For Pleias four times have been seen.
Ovid is here speaking of the Harvest time, when the Sun is in Scorpio,
therefore when the Sun is Setting, Taurus or the Bull, and the Pleiades are
Rising Acronyce.

We have also an Example of the Setting of a Star Acronyce, from the same Ovid,
in his second Book of his Fasts.

Illa nocte aliquis tollens ad sidera vultus
Dicet ubi est hodie, quae Lyra fulsit heri.
Last Night when I surveyed the Sky,
saw the Harp, it is gone away
This Night.
This time, is the second day of Fe^uary, at which time the Constellation ^lled
the Harp, sets Acronyce, with the ^u.

We have likewise an Example of the Rising of a Star Heliace, from the first
Book of the Georgicks.

Gnosiaque ardentis decedat stella Coronae. When Ariadnes Crown full bright
Before the Sun comes in our sight.
It Is eviden^ that Virgil speaks here of the Rising of this Constellation
Heliace, called Aridnes Crown, when the Sun is in the beginning of Scorpio. For
seeing this Constellation rises at Rome, where Virgil lived, with the 27 Degree
of Virgo, it is needful to conceive this Crown to be seen in the Morning, the
Sun being yet under the Horizon.

Note, That there is a Figure called Hypallage in the word Decedat: for the
Crown does not recede from the Sun, but the Sun from it.

And lastly, We have an Example of the Setting of a Star Heliace, from the same
place of Virgil.

Taurus, and adverso cedens Canis occidit Astro. And when the Dog shall
disappear,
By Phoebus Beams him coming near.
The Poet is here speaking of the Suns ingress into Taurus, which fell out in
Virgils time on the 1^ of April. But seeing the Dog Star sets at Rome with the
22 Degree of Taurus, therefore, the Sun setting in the Evening, the Dogstar
sets Heliace, or disappears out of our sight, by reason of the Suns Rays,
which now are nearer him.

Observe, That what Stars do arise Cosmice, which is also called Ortus
Matutinus, they set Acronyce, which is called Occasus Vespertinus: and what
Stars do arise Acronyce, which is called Ortus Vespertinus, they set Cosmice,
which is called Occasus Matutinus, according to the following Rhyme.

Cosmice descendit signum, quod Chronice surgit,
Chronice descendit signum, quod Cosmice surgit.
Aliter.

Mane vehit supra terram tibi Cosmicus ortus
Sidera, sed Phoebi lumine tecta latent.
Mane dat Heliacus quaedam subvecta videre
Astra, sed Achronycus nocte videnda trahit.
Note secondly, That the word Cosmicus, comes from Kosmos, the World. That the
word Chronicus, comes from the Greek word Chronos, Time. But Acronycus comes
from Acra and Nux, which is the first part of the Night, or the
Evening*Twilight. That Heliacus comes from Helios, the Sun. Lastly, That
Chronice, and Acronyce have the same signification.

CHAP. XII. Concerning the Natural, and Artificial Days.
NOw follows another Phenomenon of the Primum Mobile, to wit, the Doctrine of
Days Natural and Artificial. Days are twofold, Astronomical, and Civil.
Astronomical Days, are such as are measured, by the Revolutions of the
Equinoctial, and determined by a certain quantity. Days Civil, are such as
every Nation, according to their own Custom make use of. The Astronomical Day,
is either Natural, or Artificial. The Natural Astronomical Day, is a space of
time, wherein the Sun, by the Motion of the Primum Mobile, being carried about,
from whatsoever immovable point of the Heavens, returns to that same point
again. These Astronomical Days have their beginning in the Meridian, as was
insinuate before. The Artificial Astronomical Day, is a Space of Time, wherein
the Center of the Sun remains above the Horizon. And the Artificial Night, is
as much Time, as the Center of the Sun remains under the Horizon.

The Doctrine of the Artificial Days and Nights, is contained in the following
Theorems. 1. The Artificial Days and Nights, with the Amphiscii, Heteroscii,
and partly with the Periscii, are parts of the Natural Day: but with the
Periscii, in those parts of the Earth, wherein the Sun, by the going about of
the Primum Mobile, perfects some Circumgyrations, either above the Horizon,
without setting, or under the Horizon, without rising, one Artificial Day, or
one Artificial Night, does excresce into many Natural Days; so that indeed
under the Poles, the Artificial Day contains half a Year, and the Artificial
Night as much; and so to speak properly, the whole Year consists but of one
Day, men looking to the Analogy of the Natural Day. 2. Under a Right Sphere,
the Artificial Day, is equal to the Night: for the Horizon, in this Position of
the Sphere, cuts the Circuli Dierum, the Day-Circles, into two equal parts. The
Day-Circles, are called those Parallels of the Equator which the Sun does daily
describe, by the Motion of the Primum Mobile. 3. In an Oblique Sphere, there
are only twice a Year, two Equinoxes, when the Sun is in the beginning of Aries
and Libra. The Reason of this appears, from the mutual Section of the Horizon,
with the Circuli Dierum, or Day-Circles, which is indeed unequal, except when
the Sun is in the Equinoctial. 4. In an Oblique Sphere, which has the
vicissitude of the Artificial, and Natural Day, by one Revolution of the
Equator, the Sun being in the. Tropic of Cancer (we are now speaking of this
uppermost part of the Sphere) we have the longest Day in all the Year, and the
shortest Night: but the Sun being in the Winter Solstice, the Day is shortest,
and the Night longest. 5. In the same Position of the Sphere, through the whole
half of the Ecliptic descending, the Sun makes the following Days shorter,
than the Days going before, but the Nights longer. But in the half of the
Ecliptic ascending, the Sun makes the Days following longer, than the Days
going before, but the Nights shorter. 6. When the Sun is existing, in places of
the Ecliptic, equally distant, from the same Solstitial Point, Days are equal
to Days, and Nights to Nights. 7. When the Sun is existing in places of the
Ecliptic equally distant, from the same Equinoctial Point, the Day of one
Place, is equal to the Night of another. 8. In an Oblique Position of the
Sphere, the greater the Elevation of the Pole is, the greater are the
increments of the longest Day, and shortest Night, until coming under the
Polars, the longest Day contains twenty and four Hours. 9. In an Oblique
Sphere, of such as dwell between the Polar, and next Pole, the longest Day
excresceth into many Natural Days, as also the longest Night. But there are
certain intermediat Horary Circles, a part of which is above the Horizon, and a
part under, in which, when the Sun is existing, the Artificial Days, as also
the Nights, are* parts of the Natural Day. 10. In a Parallel Sphere, such as
they have, who live under the Poles, the whole Year, is divided into one
Artificial Day, and one Artificial Night.

The length of every Artificial Day, is known by the Diurnal, and Nocturnal
Arch. First, find the Oblique Ascension or Point of the Equinoctial, which
rises with the Sun, and Oblique Descension, or Point of the Equinoctial, which
sets with the Sun. Subtract the lesser from the greater, and half the
difference, is the Ascensional difference, which added to six Hours in the
Summer half Year, but subtracted therefrom in the Winter half Year, gives half
the Diurnal Arch, whose double is the whole Diurnal Arch, and the Complement of
the Diurnal Arch to 24 Hours, is the Nocturnal Arch. For Example, The tenth day
of April 1687, the Oblique Ascension of the Sun (being in the first Degree of
Taurus) is 10 degrees. 21. m. the Oblique Descension is 45 degrees. 27 m. whose
difference is 35 degrees. 6. m. whose half is 17 degrees. 33 m. the Ascensional
difference, which being added to 90 degrees. or 6 Hours, is 107 degrees. 33 m. which
make 7 hours, 10 m. fere, for the time of the Suns setting, which is always
half the Diurnal Arch. Therefore the Diurnal Arch is 14 hours, 20 m. Which
taken from 24 hours, there remains 9 hours, 40 m. for the Nocturnal Arch
required. Note, That the Ascensional difference added to the Oblique Ascension
in the Summer half Year, but subtracted from it, in the Winter half Year, gives
the right Ascension of the Sun, or any of the Stars.

What is said of the Day in respect of the Sun, may be most commodiously
applied to the Stars. For the Day of a Star, is rightly called the space of
Time, wherein it is above the Horizon: and the Night of a Star, the space of
Time, wherein it is below the Horizon. Concerning the days of the fixed Stars,
let the following Theorems be observed. 1. In a Right Sphere, the Stars have a
perpetual Equinox. 2. But in an Oblique Sphere, the fixed Stars, whose North
Declination, is greater than the Complement of the Altitude of the Pole, are
said to have an Eternal Day: but those Stars, whose South Declination, exceeds
the Complement of the Altitude of the Pole, are said to have an Eternal Night.
The intermediate Stars, have the course of rising and setting. 3. In a Parallel
Sphere, the fixed Stars are said to have Eternal Days, and Eternal Nights.

Days Civil, are called the space of Time, of one Revolution of the
Equinoctial, which according to every Nation, or Country, is diverse ways
begun, and made use of. For as there are various and diverse Nations in the
World, so each one has a different way of beginning their Hours. For the Jews,
by Divine Institution, began their Day, from the setting of the Sun, which
custom the Italians do observe. The Babylonians began their Day from Sun
rising, whose practice, the Norinbergers, the People called the Umbri, and the
Egyptians do imitate. The Arabians as the Astronomers, begin their Day from the
Meridian. The Romans from Midnight. The Germans, the Frenches, and Spainards
begin their Day from the Meridian, and Midnight. For their Clocks, and Watches
are so contrived, that they return from one a Clock in the Nightime, to
twelve a Clock in the Daytime, and from one a Clock in the Daytime, to twelve
a Clock at Nightime. Their Days are divided, as the Astronomical Days, into
one Artificial Day, and likewise into Forenoon, and Afternoon.

And because Hours are parts of the Days, therefore we must speak a little of
them. The Hour is the twentieth and fourth part of the Natural Day, or the
space of Time, wherein the twentieth and fourth part of the Equinoctial, or 15
Degrees thereof, rises above the Horizon. But this Definition is not
sufficient, because it does not agree to all Hours: for every twelfth part of
every Day, and every Night whatsoever, was called by the Jews, and the Ancients
an Hour. But 15 Degrees of the Equinoctial, do not always ascend above the
Horizon, every one of these Hours; but sometimes more, and sometimes fewer, as
will appear afterward. Therefore, an Hour may rather be defined thus, a certain
part of the Artificial Day, and Night, made use of by diverse Nations, after a
diverse manner, that it may be known generally, what the Hour is. For in effect,
that definition agrees only to to those Hours, which are called Hor^ Aequales,
equal Hours. The Hours then, which are called unequal, ought to be defined
thus. The twelfth part of every Artificial Day and Night: therefore according
to the diverse Seasons of the Year, the Hours are sometimes shorter, and
sometimes longer: in Summer longer, and in Winter shorter, as are the Jewish
Hours: for they divide both the Day, and the Night into twelve parts, both in
Summer and in Winter, calling the rising of the Sun, the beginning of the first
Hour, and consequently nine their third Hour; twelve their sixth Hour, three a
Clock in the Afternoon their ninth Hour, and the setting of the Sun, the end of
their twelfth Hour, by which means, their Hours must be far longer in Summer,
than in Winter.

The equal Hours are of three sorts: for some take their beginning from the
setting of the Sun, as the Italian Hours. Others take their beginning from the
rising of the Sun, as are the Babylonish Hours, and the Hours of the City of
Norimberg, who from the rising of the Sun begin the number of the Hours of the
Day; the Circles of which Hours do lightly touch the greatest Parallels, of
all, which do appear above the Horizon, and of all which do not appear. Lastly,
Others do take their beginning from the Meridian, which Astronomers make use
of, and these Nations, which either take their beginning of Hours from the
superior part of the same Circle, or from the inferior part.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning Years.
AS Hours make up Days, so Days make up Years, therefore we must speak somewhat
of Years. The Year then is twofold, Astronomical, and Political. The
Astronomical Year, is the space of Time, wherein the Sun returns, either to the
same Point of the Ecliptic, or to the same fixed Star. And this is twofold,
the Tropical Year, called Annus Vertens, or the Syderial Year. Annus Vertens,
is a space of Time, wherein the Sun leaving some Point of the Ecliptic,
returns again to the same Point. The quantity of this Year is changeable; for
sometimes it is more, and sometimes it is less. Between these two extremes, the
middle Year contains 365 days, hours 5, m. 49, sec. 15. thirds 46. But the true
or apparent Year is sometimes 365 days* hours 5, min. 56. sec. 53, thirds 1.
Sometime it is 365 days, hours 5, min. 42, sec. 28, thirds 27. The Syderial
Year, is a space of Time, wherein the Sun under the Starry Sky, returns to the
same fixed Star. The quantity of this Year is 365 days, hours 6, min. 6, sec.
39. It is always equal to it self, and therefore the measure of the Year called
Annus Vertens. The beginning of this Annus Vertens, is taken from the Vernal
Equinox, but the beginning of the Syderial Year, from the first Star of Aries.

The Political Year, is an Annual space of Time, which is either accommodated
to the course of the Sun, or the Moon, or to both, according to the common
reckoning of several Countries and Nations. This Political Year is manifold;
for it is either Julian, which contains 365 days, hours 6, which six Hours, if
they were reckoned every Year, would make confusion: therefore the Masters of
Astronomy have appointed, they should be omitted, till the fourth Year, and
then four times six, make 24, which make up a full and complete Day, which
being inter caled, that is, interlaced, or put between, as in Leap Year there
is a Day put between the 28 of February, and the first of March, the Year is
called Annus Intercalaris, or Bissextile Year. It is to be adverted, that the
cause of correcting the Julian Calendar, by Pope Gregory the 13, in the year
1582, was the unjust quantity of it. For by this, it came to pass, that after
some Ages, the four Cardinal Points did anticipate and prevent their Seats; and
so at length the four Seasons of the Year, might be interchanged. From this it
is evident this Day, that according to these times, the Equinoctial, and the
Ingress of the Sun into the 12 Signs have anticipated almost 13 Degrees. That
is, the entering of the Sun, into Aries, Taurus, etc. falls out sooner by 13
Degrees, than to the Romans: which comes to pass, because more, than what is
just, is given to the space of the Year. For there were given to the Year, by
the correction of Julius Caesar, 365 days, and six hours: for which hours, every
fourth year, one day is added, and so the common Julian year contains 365 days,
but the Bissextile 366. But seeing the Solar year, in which the Sun runs through
the whole Ecliptic, is less than this space, by almost eleven Minutes of Time
every Year; it comes to pass, that in 50 year, and a half, one hour remains,
and in the space of 130 years, a whole day remains.

I said the Political Year, was manifold, either Julian, of which hitherto, or
Egyptian, or Iudaical. The Egyptian year contains always 365 days. This Year
was esteemed most useful by the ancient Astronomers, for the Art of reckoning
the Celestial Motions. The Iudaical Year is accommodated and fitted to the
Motion of the Moon, and contains, for the greatest part, twelve, and sometimes
thirteen Lunations. This Year did the Astronomers use, before the reformation
of the Calendar, instituted by Julius Caesar, by the help of one Sosigenes, a
famous and learned Mathematician. The beginning of these Years is diverse also.
For the ancient Romans, began their Year from March: the later Romans from the
midst of Winter, called Bruma. The Jews, by Divine Institution, began their
Year from the New Moon, which was next after to the Vernal Equinox. That we
this day begin our Year from the first of January, it is for this, because we
following the custom of the late Romans, beginning their Year from the midst of
Winter, which was nearest to the first of January, by little and little the
Winter Solstice did prevent, and anticipat its Seat, and Place. The Egyptian
year, has not a sure beginning, by reason that six hours are omitted. Hence is
it, that every fourth Year it anticipats one Day: and therefore within 365
Years, four times numbered, or 1460 Julian Years, the beginning of the Egyptian
Year, wanders over all the Days of the Julian Year.

CHAP. XIV. Concerning the diverse Phenomena, which are to be seen in the
various Positions of the Sphere.
THe last part of this little Tractat, shall be in examining the Phenomena,
which are proper to the various Situations, and Positions of the Sphere. The
Sphere may have seven different Positions, 1. When both the Poles of the World
do rest in the Horizon, which is called a Right Sphere. The second Position is
Oblique, when our Vertical Point, is terminated between the Equinoctial, and
either of the Tropicks. The third Position is, when our Zenith is under either
of the Tropicks. The fourth is, when our Zenith is between either of the
Tropicks, and the neighboring Polar. The fifth is, when our Zenith is in the
very Polar itself. The sixth is, when our Zenith is between either of the
Polars, and the neighboring Pole of the World. And lastly, when the Poles of
the World, do fall in with the Poles of the Horizon, which is called a Parallel
Sphere.

CHAP. XV. Concerning the Phenomena of the first Position.
1. EVery Star in the Heavens rises and sets, neither is there one of them,
without this property: and therefore in this Position, there is neither Polar
Artick, nor Antartick, according to the Ancients. 2. There is here a perpetual
Equinox. 3. The Sun every Year passing twice over their Heads, is to them twice
Vertical, to wit, when he is in the Equinoctial Points. 4. As much, as the Sun
declines from their Vertical Point, toward the North, as much also does he
decline from their Vertical Point, toward the South. 5. They have four
Solstices, two when the Sun is highest in their Vertical Point, and two, when
he is lowest, in Cancer, and Capricorn. 6. They have two Summers and two
Winters, but only Analogically: for even in Winter, their Bodies are scorched
with heat. 7. There are here in this Position, five different Shadows, the
Meridional, or South Shadow, the North Shadow, a Shadow from the East, a Shadow
from the West, and a perpendicular Shadow, which falls out only, when the Sun
is in the Equinoctial Points. 8. The end or extremity of their Gnomons, upon
their Horizontal Dialls, which are our Polar Dialls, describe the whole Year,
the Figure called Hyperbole, except when the Sun, is in the beginning of Aries
and Libra, where he describes a straight and right Line.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Phenomena of the second Position*
1. SOme Northern Stars tarrying always above our Horizon, have Eternal Days;
and contrariwise, there are some about the South Pole, which never come above
the Horizon, but have Eternal Nights. 2. The Artick, and Antartick Circles,
according to the Ancients, are not as yet equal to our Polars. 3. The
Artificial Day is not equal to its own Night, two Days only excepted, when the
Sun is in the Equinoctial Points, at which time, there is through the whole
World an Equinox. 4. The longest Day there, does not exceed thirteen Hours and
a half. 5. The Sun is to them, twice Vertical every Year, to wit, when he comes
to those Degrees of the Ecliptic, whose Declination, is equal to the Latitude
of the Place; for he describes then, a Parallel through the Zenith. 6. The Sun
in the Meridian, goes further toward the South, than toward the North. Note,
That we are now speaking, and in the following Discourse, of those seven
Positions, which are in the Northern Sphere. 7. There are here, four Solstices,
two high, and two low. The two highest fall out, when the Sun is in that
Parallel, which passes through the Zenith. The two lowest are, when the Sun is
in the Tropicks. Yet that which falls out in the Tropic of Capricorn, is
lower, than that which falls out in the Tropic of Cancer. 8. They have two
Summers, and two Winters, but unequal, as appears from the various Situation of
the Parallels. 9. The longest Day is not, when the Sun is in the highest
Solstices, but in the Tropic of Cancer. 10. There are five different Shadows,
as we observed in the first Position. 11. The end or extremity of the Gnomon,
by its Shadow, when the Sun is out of the Equinoctial, describes (as in the
first Position) the Figure called Hyperbole, but the opposite sides are not
equal as there, but unequal. 12. In any part of this Position, where the
Elevation of the Pole, is less, than the Declination of the Sun, the Shadow of
a Style perpendicularly erected upon a Plain, may have a natural, visible,
Retrocession. In the matter of Ahaz his Dial, the Retrogradation of the Shadow
was miraculous, because it was done without, and not within the Tropicks,
neither is it possible in nature, it can happen, but where the Elevation of the
Pole, is less than the Suns Declination, which is only within the Tropicks. But
the foresaid Dial was placed far without, to wit, under the Latitude of 35
Degrees.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Phenomena of the third Position.
1. ALL the Stars, which are comprehended within the North Polar, remain always
above the Horizon, neither do they ever set, unless it be, by a general setting
Heliace: and contrariwise, all the Stars, which are comprehended within the
South Polar, have a perpetual Night* therefore the Polars, according to the
Ancients, are now equal to our Polars. 2. The longest Artificial Day is, when
the Sun passes over our Zenith; the shortest, when the Sun is farthest in the
Meridian removed from it. 3. Once a Year only is the Sun Vertical, to wit, when
he is in the beginning of Cancer. 4. The Sun in the Meridian, never descends
from the Zenith toward the North, but returning from the Tropic of Cancer, he
is always in the South. 5. There are here, but two Solstices, one high, another
low. The highest, when the Sun is in the Tropic of Cancer; the lowest when the
Sun is in the Tropic of Capricorn. 6. The Day is longest, when the Sun is in
the Tropic of Cancer, it is shortest when the Sun is in the Tropic of
Capricorn. 7. There is one Summer, when the Sun is in the Zenith, and one
Winter, when he is in the Winter Solstice. 8. They have four different Shadows,
one Perpendicular, one Oriental, one Occidental, and one Meridional. Here begin
the Heteroscii, for the Meridional Shadows begin there to decay, that is, the
Shadows projected toward the South. 9. The extremity or end of their Gnomon,
upon their Dials, describe also the Figure called Hyperbole, the sides opposite
being unequal.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Phenomena of the fourth Position.
AS the Artick and Antartick of the Ancients, are greater than our Polars, so
there are more Stars in this Position of the Sphere, seen perpetually, and more
perpetually lurking under the Horizon, than in the last Position. 2. The
unequality of Days and Nights, are also augmented. The Artificial Day is at the
longest, when the Sun comes nearest to our Zenith, and at the shortest, when he
is furthest removed from it: and as the shortest Artificial Day cannot be less,
than 13 Hours and a half, so the longest Day cannot be 24 Hours. This least
Artificial Day, is truly the longest Day, our Vertical Point coming nearest to
the Tropic. It is called the least Artificial Day, because it is the shortest
of all the longest Days, which can arise from the variation of the Vertical
Point, between the Tropic and the Polar: and therefore, itis not called Minima
the least, in respect of the rest of the days of the same Elevation of the
Pole, but in respect of the rest of the longest Days, which may be found
between the Tropic and Polar. The longest Day in this fourth Position of the
Sphere, the Zenith coming nearest to our Tropic, cannot be less, than 13 Hours
and a half, as the longest Day cannot contain 24 Hours. For this comes to pass,
when the Zenith is in the Polar: therefore we must read, as the shortest
Artificial longest Day, cannot be less, than 13 Hours and a half, etc. 3. The
Sun can never come to their Zenith, neither can he ever touch lightly (
stringere) their Horizon, when he is in the Meridian. 4. There are two
Solstices, one when the Sun is in Cancer, and highest, another lowest, when he
is in the Tropic of Capricorn. 5. There is one Summer, and one Winter. 6.
There are only three different Shadows, one Oriental, the second Occidental,
and the third Northern. 7. The extremity or end of their Gnomons, fixed upon
the Ground perpendicularly, describe as yet Hyperboles.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Phenomena of the fifth Position.
ALL the Stars, whose distance from the Equinoctial, is greater than the
Obliquity of the Ecliptic, either do not set under the Horizon, if they be
Northern Stars, and do not rise above the Horizon, if they be Southern Stars:
Therefore the Artick, and Antartick of the Ancients are equal to the Tropicks.
2. The longest Day contains 24 Hours, and then there is no Night: and
contrariwise, the longest Night consists of twenty and four Hours, and the
Artificial shortest Day is nothing. 3. The Sun every year touches lightly the
border of the Horizon twice, without rising and setting, namely when he is in
the Tropicks. 4. The Sun at twelve a Clock in the Day, is always South,
nevertheless, when he is in the Tropic of Cancer, the half of his Body may be
seen in the North, at 12 a Clock at Night. 5. There are here two Solstices, one
high in Cancer, the other low in Capricorn. But according to the similitude of
Solstices, which are in other Zones, we may say there are three Solstices
there, one high in Cancer, when the Sun is high in the Meridian, to wit, 47
Degrees above the Horizon, which is the distance of the Tropicks; there are two
lower, of which one is in the same Tropic of Cancer toward the North, when he
touches lightly the border of the Horizon, the other in the Tropic of
Capricorn, where he also lightly touches the border of the Horizon. 6. There
is one Summer, and one Winter. 7. There are four different Shadows; one
Eastern, one Western, one Northern, and one Southern; tho this happens but once
a Year, the Sun shineing with the half only of his Rays, which makes the light
more obscure and dark, than when he shines with his full Rays. Here begin the
Heteroscii. 8. The extremity or ends of the Gnomons, describe the Figure called
Parabola, upon the Horizontal Dials, but an Hyperbole, so soon, as the Sun is
gone from the Equinoctial, whereas on all other Plains, he describes always
straight and right Lines.

CHAP. XX. Of the Phenomena of the sixth Position.
THere are very few Stars, which can rise or set, to wit, those only, whose
Declination is less than the distance of the Tropicks; because the Artick, and
Antartick Circles, comprehending within them, the Stars which do set, and do
not set, are greater than the Tropicks. 2. They have an Equinoctial, as other
parts of the Earth. But when the Sun is in that Parallel whose Declination from
the Equinoctial, is equal to the distance of the Poles of the World from the
Zenith, the Day is twenty and four Hours, and the Artificial Day excresceth,
and shoots out, into many Natural Days. 3. The Sun being in the same Parallel,
he lightly touches, the border of the Horizon, and coming to it, she shines
only with an half Orb. 4. They have but only one Solstice, in the Tropic of
Cancer; for the other in the Tropic of Capricorn cannot be seen. But
Analogically, and ^n similitude there are six Solstices. Two high, when the Sun
is in the Tropic of Cancer: for there, as well to the ^outh, as to the North,
the hight of ^he Sun in the Meridian is highest, al^eit the Northern be greater
than the ^outhern: and four lowest, when the ^he Sun touches lightly the
Horizon. ^. They have one Summer, and one ^inter, but their Summer may be so
^alled only Analogically: for these ^laces of the Earth, are perpetually stiff
^ith Snow and Ice. 6. They have four different Shadows, one from the East, one
from the West, one from the South, and one from the North. Here are the
Periscii. 7. The Gnomons, and styles of their Dials, describes with their
Points, Elliptical Figures.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Phenomena of the seventh and last Position.
1. THere are here no Stars, which either rise or set, but all of them are
whirled about, equally distant from the Horizon. The Artick and Antartick
Circles, are one and the same with the Horizon, and Equinoctial, which are now
united. Understand this of the fixed Stars only; for the Planets absolving
their course, rise and set, in their appointed times. 2. The Artificial Day is
extended to half a Year; so is the Artificial Night, and therefore the quantity
of the Natural Day, and the whole Year is one and the same. 3. When the Sun is
in the Equinoctial, he shines only with half his Orb, and touches lightly the
Horizon, and there he rises and sets only at those times. 4. No point of
the Heavens, can be called, either West, East, South or North, seeing the Pole
of the World does not incline to any part of the Horizon, by which Inclination
the four Points of the Universe, have their distinction. 5. They have only one
Solstice, to wit, in Cancer, but Analogically two other may be added, to wit,
when the Sun is in the beginning of Aries, and Libra. 6. There is one Summer
and one Winter: but their Summer is rather to be called a slender slaking of
the Cold. They have one Winter, because the Sun is under their Horizon a whole
half Year together. 7. The Gnomons of their Dials, describe with the extremity
of the Shadow, upon an Horizontal Plain, perfect Circles.

FINIS.
Proteus Bound with Chains:

OR,

A Discovery of the Secrets of Nature, which are found in the
Mercurial-Weather-Glass, unfolding the Reasons, and Causes, why before Fair
Weather the Quicksilver Ascends, and before Foul Weather, it falls down, and
Descends.

A Subject not hitherto Treated of.

TOGETHER

With some brief Observes upon the Parisian Weather-Glass, and an Explanation
of the Sealed Weather-Glass, and common Weather-Glass.

To all which is Added

The Theory of the Weather, according to the Perpendicular Weather-Glass.

By GEORGE SINCLAR, sometime Professor of Philosophy in the College of GLASGOW.

Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of
Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1688.

Proteus bound with Chains: OR, A Discovery of the Secrets of Nature, which are
found in the Mercurial Weather-Glass, etc.
THere are many excellent Questions to be Refolved, and Causes of the various
Phenomena of Nature to be rendered, before a man can have knowledge to mount the
Mercurial-Weather-Glass. Yet there are many, who rashly adventure, and bring
upon that unerring and infallible Masterpiece of Nature, the scandalous and
odious Character of Falibility, either by raising the Mercury too high, or
fixing it too low in the Cylindrical-Glass, both which Extremes must be
cautiously shunned. For if it be not ordered according to the Authentic
Observations of the Weather for many Years past, it cannot but err. And herein
its infallibility and perfection consists, to give the Theory of the Weather a
just and determinate hight, according to long Observation, and by consequence
the top of the Cylinder the same hight, none of which no ignorant person can
do. The Questions to be resolved, are such as follow, 1. What sustains the
Mercury in the Glass-Tube, whilst the Orifice is always downward, and open? 2.
Why the Glass must exceed in length, one and thirty Inch? 3. Why the Mercury
falls not down, if it be shorter than twenty and eight? 4. Why the Mercury is
carried up with violence to the top of the Glass-Tube, whilst the Orifice is
raised above the surface of the stagnant Mercury? 5. Why as much Mercury in
hight, is sustained in the wide Glass, as in the narrow? 6. Why, tho the Glass
were in hight many Foot, yet the whole Mercury falls down to twenty and nine,
or thirty Inch above the Cistern? 7. What fills up the space left empty behind?
8. Why the Mercury subsides by degrees, as the Weather-Glass is carried up some
high Mountain, and why it rises again, as it is carried down? 9. Why a Glass of
thirty six Foot high is required to make a Weather Glass with Water in it? 10.
What Is the reason, I do not find the weight of the Mercury within the Glass,
whilst I poise it between my Fingers, and yet I find another weight exactly the
weight of it? 11. What that other weight is? All these and many more are fully
and clearly resolved in my Philosophical Experiments twenty years ago.

But there is a late Question, which troubles all the Learned to resolve,
which now I intend shortly to explain, viz. What Is the reason, why the
Quicksilver in the Weather-Glass creeps up before Fair Weather, and falls down
before Foul Weather? For an answer to this considerable Question, it is to be
observed, that in the foulest Weather, I have found the Quicksilver fall down
to twenty and eight, and in the dryest, and fairest Weather, I have found it up
at thirty and one Inch. From this excellent Phenomenon only, it is called the
Weather-Glass, Kat'exohen, by way of excellency: because before this alteration
was found in it, it was called by the most part of Philosophers, the
Torricellian Experiment.

For clearing the Question in hand, I suppose that in the Beginning, there went
up a Damp from the Earth to water the whole face of the Ground. Moses ( Genesis
2.) relates now the ordinary means appointed by God in Nature, for bringing
forth of Herbs, Bushes, and Trees out of the Ground, viz. the Damp, which
causes the Rain, and moistneth the Earth, which Damp being by the heat of the
Sun rarefied, ascends to the middle Region of the Air, where by means of the
coldness thereof, these Vapors are condensat, and thickened, and tur^d into a
Cloud, and afterward are turned into Rain, and so fall down.

That there are such Damps and Vapors, which ascend from the Earth, and Waters,
cannot rationally be denied; nay many Thousands and Millions of them ascend,
which we do not see nor observe. I have seen in Frosty Mornings the mouths of
Coal-sinks, and empty passages from waste Ground, where Coals have been dug
out, Fumes and Vapors coming out so plentifully, as Fumes from a Salt-pan. Some
do fitly compare this Earth to a Bag-pudding, taken out of a Boiling-pot, which
sends forth Vapors in abundance. Likewise from the surfaces of standing and
running Water, what numbers may be seen in a warm Summers Evening. Nay from the
Bodies of Men and Beasts, there is a perpetual Perspiration. But the finest and
purest of all, are those which are exhaled from the Earth, and Waters. We see,
that when the Sun is hot in Summer, the whole face of the Ground after Rain,
covered over with Unduls, or little curled Waves, a small Gale of Wind being
stirring, like unto the curled Waves of the Sea, Analogically. And so slender
and pure are they, that whilst a man is among them, he cannot see them, but at
a distance he may, looking alongs the face of the Ground. Likewise what
multitudes of them may be seen alongs the surface of the Sea, a man standing at
a considerable distance from the Coast. And so thick are they, that they have
wonderfully lifted up, and magnified, much of the Land, and have made it
appear, far otherwise than it was; nay, eclipsed whole Villages and Towns, and
metamorphosed them into various shapes and forms, all which have come to pass,
by reason of their multiplicity and thickness. Now these Vapors, flowing from
the Earth and Waters, are carried up to the middle Region of the Air, where by
process of time, they are condensat, and thickened, by the coldness thereof, and
fall down in Rain.

But here it may be inquired, By what cause, ^r power, are these Vapors carried
up, seeing they are Material things, and endued with weight? For answer, I must
premit some few things, which do not ordinarily occur. First, That in all heavy
Bodies, there is a twofold weight, one Specifical, the other Individual. The
Specifical weight is found in Bodies, which differ by Nature, as Wood, and
Stone, balanced one with another, equal quantity with equal quantity. ^
Individual weight, is likewise found in the same Bodies, but after a different
way and manner. For example, Stone is naturally, or specifically heavier than
Wood, putting equal quantity against equal quantity; for a Cubical-foot of
Stone, is heavier, than a Cubical-foot of Water. Bodies of the same Individual
weight, or such as are weighed in a pair of Scales, as a Pound of Lead, and a
Pound of Wool, are individually of the same weight, but of different weight
Specifically. Secondly, There are two sorts of Balances, the one Natural, the
other Artificial. The Natural Balance, is the Mercurial Weather-Glass, wherein
the Mercury counterpoiseth the Air, and the Air the Mercury, both of them
observing an equal Altitude, according to their natural weights: for since the
Mercury is reckoned 14000 times heavier than the Air, the pillar of the one
must be 14000 times lower than the other; and so both are of the same hight,
according to their Specifical weights. The Artificial Balance, is that
Mechanical Power, called the Libra. Thirdly, That one Body naturally lighter
than another, may become of equal weight, or heavier, than that other. For
example, the Vapors, which ascend are far lighter specifically, than the Air,
yet they become heavier specifically, when contracted, and reduced by a Cold,
to a thicker habit, or consistency, and most of all when they are converted to
Rain. But how shall it be known, that the Vapors are naturally lighter, than
the Air? I answer, If it were possible to take an equal quantity of Vapors,
with an equal quantity of Air, and weigh them in a Balance, the Air would be
heavier. We know that Oil is lighter than Water, for being put under Water, it
rises to the Surface: so the Vapors go up through the Air, as Oil goes up
through the Water. Now I come to the Question in hand, and I affirm, that the
Vapors are carried upward, not by the heat of the Sun, which is an vulgar
error, but they being specifically, and naturally lighter, than the Air, are
pressed up by it, as Smoke, till they come so far up, as the pressure of the Air,
is able to carry them. I shall make this evident, by the following Experiment.
Let a Diver go down to the bottom of the Sea, with a Bottle of Oil in his Hand,
and pour it out there, he shall find, that such is the pressure of the Water,
it shall drive it all up to the Surface above. For as the Oil is naturally
lighter than the Water, so these Vapors are naturally lighter than the Air. Now
these Vapors, which are infinite in number, ascending from all the parts of the
Earth, to the Atmosphere many Miles above the Clouds, causes the Air here
below press with greater weight, upon the stagnant Mercury, and so raises the
Quicksilver in the Weather Glass, one Inch or two, and sometimes three: for it
is not possible, that the Air above, can be pressed down, and burdened, with that
new weight, and addition of Vapors ascending, but the stagnant Mercury below
must find the said pressure.

But how are these Vapors condensat and thickened together, and fall down in
Rain* I shall do this, by a most evident, and clear example. We cannot more
fitly compare these Vapors, ascending and descending again in Rain, than to an
Alembick, or Distillater. For these Fumes being carried upward within the Pot,
and meeting with a cold Receptacle (for the Pipe descending goes ordinarily
through a Vessel full of cold Water) they are presently reduced, to their first
condition, and fall down in Liquor. So are the Vapors, which ascend from the
Stomach to the cold Brain received and distilled.

But why should the falling down of the Rain cause the Quicksilver fall down,
and why should the rising of the Vapors, cause the Quicksilver to rise? For
clearing of this, it is to be adverted, that whilst the Mercury is up at one
and thirty Inch, there is an equal balance or weight between the weight of the
Atmosphere and the weight of the Quicksilver, so that there cannot be the least
weight subtracted from the pressure of the Atmosphere, but as much must be
subtracted, from the hight of the Quicksilver: as by taking away one Ounce from
this Scale of a Balance, the other presently goes down, or by adding one
Ounce to this Scale of a Balance, the other Scale presently goes up. Hence is
it, that the pressure of the Atmosphere becomes less, by the falling down of
the Vapors, and consequently the hight of the Quicksilver, must decresce also.
And contrariwise (which clears the second part of the Question) whilst the
Vapors are ascending, and going up, the Atmosphere is more burdened, and by
consequence the Quicksilver rises, sometimes less, and sometimes more,
sometimes one Inch, sometimes two or three.

But how comes it to pass, that the whole Air, or that great and vast bulk of
it, can be in equal weight, with so small a portion of Quicksilver, granting
the Air to be so heavy, as is commonly reported? I answer, It is not the Air
according to its thickness, or bulk, which makes any counterballance with the
Quicksilver, but it is the Air reckoned according to hight, because Fluid
Bodies do not counterpoise one another, according to all their dimensions, but
only according to Altitude; this is only proper to Solid Bodies. For let never
so much weight be added to the Air in thickness, itshall never make the least
alteration in the Mercury. But if there be but the least addition made in
hight, the Quicksilver presently knows it, by rising and falling accordingly.
For by how many thousand times the Air is specifically lighter than
Quicksilver, by so many thousand times is the pillar of Air, higher than the
pillar of Quicksilver. And contrariwise, by how many thousand times the
Quicksilver is naturally heavier than the Air, by so many thousand times must
the Cylinder of Quicksilver, be shorter than the Cylinder of Air, which
sustains it. The proportion is ordinarily reckoned as 1 to 14000. That is to
say, one Cubick-Inch of Quicksilver counterpoiseth 14000 Cubick-Inches of Air,
both being put into a Balance.

It is evident from this, and many other things, that there is a proportion
observed in all the Works of Nature, as here between the hight of the
Atmospere, and the hight of the Quicksilver: for all the Lords Works, are made
in Weight, Measure, and Number. This truth is so evident in the Mathematical
part of Learning, that there is no need of proof. And if this proportion be not
observed in things Artificial, viz. by Architects and Builders of Houses, the
whole Fabric looks pitifully, and wants that face, and delicate aspect, it
ought to have. And as the most wise Artist of the World, has created all
things in proportion one to another, so all the parts of his Holy Word, are in
such a proportion one to another. For this we have Scripture, and Divine
Authority: for it is said, Whether we prophecy, let us prophecy according to
the proportion of Faith. The Original word is, Analogia Pisteos, well rendered
in our Vulgar Language, the proportion of Faith, or Analogy of Faith, not as
some, the Measure of Faith.

GOD is not tied to Numbers, yet nevertheless, he does and disposes his Works,
by Number, Weight, and Measure. It is observed, that after the going up out of
Egypt, GOD caused to be numbered all the Israelites, from the Age of twenty
years and upward, ( Exodus 38. 26.) and there were found six hundred three
thousand five hundred and fifty men. The year following, GOD commanded to make
a second Review of the People, ( Numb. 1. 46.) but without comprising the
Levites, which had been numbered the first time with the other Tribes.
Notwithstanding this Subtraction, and the Casualities, which might have changed
the number of the People, since the year foregoing, it is found that their
number was yet justly and precisely six hundred three thousand five hundred and
fifty men. In which is seen a proportion which GOD held in the multiplication
of that People. There is also observed a Mystery in the exact number of the two
and twenty thousand Levites, which were then reckoned ( Numb. 3. 39.) For the
rest, I contend not against the common opinion, touching the hundred forty and
four thousand of the seventh of the Revelation, that they ought to be taken for
an indefinite number, as well as the seven thousand which had not bowed the
Knee to Baal. But it ought to be considered, why the Holy Ghost, who speaks
nothing superfluous, is not contented to have named the total sum of them, that
were sealed in Israel, but also divides it, in twelve times twelve thousand,
distributed by equal portions among the twelve Tribes, every one of which is
mentioned, the one after the other, with the expression of its particular
number: for this shows, that the number of the Elect, and the multitude of
Believers, are measured by certain proportions, which are known to him, who is
the Author. Certainly, the resemblance of the seventy Disciples of Christ, to
the seventy Judges, which were substituted to Moses, and to the seventy
Children, which Jacob had when he went down into Egypt, is a line of this
admirable Symmetry, with the which God has limited, and proportioned the Body
of the Church.

Now this fortifieth that Maxim, that the number of the Elect cannot suffer
addition, nor diminution: and that Election proceeds not, from the Will of
the Elect, but that of God, which prevented them. For it cannot be said, that
all the Elect, from the beginning of the World to the end, have agreed together
to make a Company composed precisely of a number certain and regular.

But I return. It may be here inquired, Whether those Vapors, and Exhalations
go perpetually up from the Earth, or not? It Is probable, that they are always
ascending, tho insensibly to us, and as many of them in the Night, as in the
Daytime. Nay, more (it seems) in extreme Frost and Cold Weather, than at any
other time; as we see in Greenland, where the greatest extremity of Cold is,
there are infinite Treasures of Snow, which Snow could not fall down so
plentifully, if there were not Vapors perpetually ascending. Next, after Rain,
and the falling down of the Mercury to 28, or 29 Inch, I have found the ascent
of it, in that same Night eight or ten Degrees, which could not happen, unless
there had been an addition of new weight to the Atmosphere. And this is
observed, to be rather in the Winter, than in the Summer Season, especially in
calm Nights. I have observed, that the next Morning after Frost all the Night,
the standing Waters in Furrows, which have remained many Days entire, dry up,
and nothing remaining, but emptiness below a surface of thin white Y^e. This
Water could not sink into the Ground, more that Night, than many others before;
but the Frost coming on, and the Air becoming dry have turned all the Waters
into Vapors, and so have been exhaled.

I would have it made more evident, how the greater pressure of the Atmospere
by the weight of these Vapors make the Quicksilver rise in the Weather-Glass? I
answer, Take the Weather-Glass, and place it within a dry Harbor, before the
Water begin to flow. Then suppose the hight of the Mercury to be eight and
twenty Inch. I say, when once the Water has flowed, but three Foot and a half
in hight, above the stagnant Mercury in the Cistern you will find the Mercury
in the Weather-Glass three Inch higher. For as the growing of the Tide above
the stagnant Mercury raises it higher, and higher in the Glass, so the
ascending of the Vapors loadneth the Atmosphere, more and more, and
consequently it presses with more weight upon the Mercury in the Cistern. And
as the Vapors are turned into Rain, and the Mercury falls down; so by the
ebbing of the Water, the three Inch of Mercury, falls down within the
Weather-Glass.

It may be inquired, How far do these Vapors ascend? I answer, That Philosphers
distinguish the Air into three Regions, the first, second, and third. But both
Philosphers and Astronomers do vary exceedingly in determining the hight of any
of them. I shall not curiously inquire, but shall speak a little to what
concerns the present purpose. It Is probable, that these thin and light Vapors,
which flow out of the Earth and Waters, go many Miles above the Clouds, where
there is neither Wind nor Rain: for the pressure of the Air being powerful many
Miles up, must carry the Vapors, so far up. But to determine particularly, it
is not possible, only in general they ascend very far. Now it is evident, that
the Atmosphere, is composed, and consists of such Vapors being called Sphaera
halituum, which no doubt, is of a considerable thickness, and hight. These
Vapors, when they are once past the inferior Region of the Air, which will not
exceed an English Mile, and a half, go up quickly, and are received by the
Atmosphere, where they accresce to a considerable hight, perhaps 40 or 50 Mile
above the Clouds, where by some extrinsick cause, as extremity of Cold, they
fall down from the Atmosphere, first as Mist or Dew, till they come to the
lowest Region, where in a very short time, they cover the whole Heavens, tho
never so clear before. How many times before Rain, will this be seen.

Besides, there is above the Atmosphere, that which Astronomers call the
Diluculum and the Crepusculum, that is, both the Dawning of the Day, and the
Twilight in the Evening, the one beginning about two Hours before the Sun rise,
and the other ending about two Hours after the Sun is gone down. For if that
Crepusculum were not there, we should have no Light, until the Body of the Sun
were above the Horizon, and should have no Light after the Body of the Sun is
set. This Sphere is unalterable, and without accresce or decrease, but the
Atmosphere is not so, by reason of the Vapors coming to it, and decreasing
again. Next, the Refraction, which makes the Sun or Star to appear above the
Horizon higher, than really it is, is caused by the Atmosphere. It Is observed
by Shepherds, that if the Sun appear sooner above the Horizon, than ordinary,
the Day following shall be Rainy. They see indeed the Image of the Sun, a
little before he rise, which is caused by the Refraction, or thick Medium of
the Vapors, which ly about the Horizon. For example, Let a man so fix his Eye,
upon a wide Vessel, with an open mouth, with a piece of Money in the bottom, he
shall not see it, till the Vessel be filled with Water. For Water being a thick
Medium raises the Image of the Money, and brings it to the Eye by a broken and
crooked Line, which is Radium refrangere, or rather refringere.

It may be further inquired, Why the Clouds are sustained, or what keeps them
up from falling down? This is a considerable Question, and well worthy of a
Divine Answer. The Lord says to Job, Do thou know the ballancing of the
Clouds, the wondrous works of him who is perfect in Knowledge? The Clouds then
are suspended, not miraculously, yet wonderfully by Natural Causes; for as a
Ship is sustained from sinking by an even Balance with the Water, so are the
Clouds kept up, by an even and equal Balance with the pressure of the Air,
which really sustains them. If they be light and thin, they go further up, but
if they be heavy and black, they come nearer to the Earth, but are still in an
equal Balance, with the pressure of the Air. And as the Loadned Ship goes
further down in the Water, than the Ship, that is not burdened; so do the black
and heavy Clouds swim lower, than the light and white Clouds. But when there is
a great convocation of Clouds together in one place, each one presses upon
another, and so like Honey-Combs they distill their Drops upon the Earth. Note,
That the greatest Ship in Europe, with all her Furniture for War, is but the
just and exact weight of the Water, thrust out of its place by the Ships
Water-draught.

It may be yet inquired, How far are these Clouds from the Earth, which send
down the Rain? I answer, The surest way to know, is by the Thunder. Observe
then, how many Seconds of Time, do pass, between the first seeing of the
Glance, and the hearing of the Crack. If the Noise be straight up, five or six
will pass, which make an English Mile. In Mountainous Ground, which lies
higher, three at the most will interveen, about five hundred pass. To know
exactly a Second of Time, whereof 3600 make an Hour, follow this method. Take a
small Chord of thirty and seven Inch and a half exactly. To which append a
Lead-bullet of seven or eight Ounce. Hang it so, that it may swing to and fro
of its own accord. Each one of these Swings are a Second of Time.

But may it not be affirmed, that the greater pressure of the Air, which
raises the Quicksilver, is caused by the weight of the Clouds, which swim
above us: and that the falling down of the Quicksilver is caused by the
dissolution of these Clouds into Rain? I answer, This cannot be: for when the
Heavens are most serene and clear, the Mercury is furthest up; and when the
Heavens, are nubilous, and covered with Clouds, the Mercury many a time is
furthest down.

It may be inquired, Whether the cracking of Thunder, makes any alteration
upon the Weather-Glass? I answer, There are three things to be considered in
Thunder, First, The Lightning. Secondly, The Crack. Thirdly, The Thunderbolt:
which three are lively represented to us by the shooting of a Cannon; for the
Fire coming out of the Muzzle, represents the Lightning; the Report, represents
the Crack; and the Bullet, the Thunderbolt. But there is a more lively
representation of Thunder, in Aurum fulminans, which like the Thunderbolt
carries its stroke downward, three Grains of which, tho never so little made
hot, takes Fire, and gives a greater Report, than two Ounces of Gunpowder, so
stupendous is it. But there is nothing here, which can make any alteration
upon the Weather*Glass.

It may be inquired, If the Winds make any alteration upon it? I answer, Winds
are nothing but Air agitated; nor Tempests, but Air-floods, or violent
Agitations of the Air. These do really influence the Weather-Glass, not only in
causing the Quicksilver subside, and fall down, but in causing the top of the
Mercury tremble, and make some visible reciprocations up and down, especially,
when the Wind blows very high. Next, Winds which come from the South and
South-west, by reason of much moistness, which they bring alongs with them,
influenceth the Quicksilver much indeed. But Northerly Winds, which are more
drying, have less influence. Nay Easterly and North*east Winds even with Rain,
keep up the Mercury, and suffers it not to fall down so far, as other Winds.
Because such Winds come from the Great Continent, bringing with them many
Earthly Particles, and Atoms, which being dry, have not that influence upon it,
as moist Winds from the South and West.

It may be inquired, If the Weather-Glass does foretell Winds, as it does Rain?
I answer, It does not so much foretell Winds, as it is actually influenced by
them. Yet, if a man were a diligent Observer of the Winds, before they blow,
and took narrow inspection of the Weather-Glass, he would surely foresee them
approaching, by some alteration or other in it.

It may be inquired, Whether Mist or Fog, does affect the Weather-Glass? I
Answer, Yes, for I have observed, when the Mercury has been up at Fair, the
falling down of a Fog, has brought it down three or four Degrees.

It may be inquired, When the Mercury i^ at the highest Station, in the fairest
Weather, as above Long Fair, how many Days does it prognostic Rain, before it
come* I Answer, When it first begins to alter, it must fall down to Long Fair,
half an Inch; next to Fair, another half Inch. Thirdly, To Changeable, as much:
And lastly, To Rain. This Motion is slow, and therefore it foretells, sometimes
three Days, sometimes four, sometimes less* But this is sure, it cannot fall
down in one Day so much bounds, nor in two, neither in three. I have seen it
fall down from Long Fair to Fair, and then halt, by reason of some stirring
Winds, or by reason, of some small change of Weather, in some County near hand.
When it is far up, as at Long Fair, or above it, it is next to impossible, that
either Wind or Rain can be.

Some, who are not acquaint with the Weather-Glass judge it erring, when they
see the Mercury at Rain, and yet no Rain. I confess it may be so, if it be not
rightly adjusted, at the first setting up; but if it be set, according to Art,
the Mercury cannot be at Rain, but there must be Rain, either here, or some
place near hand.

It may be inquired, If Snow and Hail have the same effects upon the
Weather-Glass, which Rain have? I answer, Yes; for they are both from the same
cause, namely moist Vapors. I have (...)s the next adjacent Hills covered with
Snow, when there was neither Rain nor Snow in the Valley Country, and the
Mercury down at Rain, tho it had been always up before the Snow fell. And many
times it is found, that Rain falling in the next Shires, or Counties, tho none
here, have made the Quicksilver fall down to Rain. The last year 1687, in
November, I have seen the Quicksilver, below Much Rain, and yet the Days going
before, or following, have been pretty fair. But the Weather, was under a
strong disposition, and inclination to be Tempestuous and Stormy, which soon
followed. It Is observable, that the Quicksilver, is never so high in the
Weather-Glass, as about the hinder end of the Month of October, or rather in
the Winter Season. In Rainy Years, I have not seen the Mercury further up than
Fair, and that seldom.

Might the Weather-Glass be useful in Ships? I answer, Yes; but the commotion
of the Ship, (you say) renders it useless. I answer, it might be so suspended,
that it might hang always perpendicular. And tho this were not, yet the Nature
of it is such, that it can recline without hurt, as much as the Ship can^ly,
either to Starboord, or Larboord, and fall right again, when the Helm is
righted. In a word, whatever advantage a man might have by it, in his Chamber,
he may have as much, by having it in his Cabin.

There is a person of Honor, and great Learning, who has written lately in
Natural Philosophy, and among other things, has not omitted to show the reason
of this mavelous Phenomenon, whereof I have been Treating. He touches it
briefly in 9 or 10 Lines, and says, Id autem mirum satis videtur, etc. It Is a
strange thing (says he) that in Rainy and Windy Weather, when the Air seems to
be heaviest, yet the Mercury is furthest down. The reason (says he) is taken
from the temperament of the Air, where the Clouds are; for when the Clouds are
grosser, tho much elevated, they intercept the Rays of the Sun, and are thereby
melted, and turned into Rain. And the Air being eased of the burden of these
Clouds, and being rarefied above, by the Sunbeams, is becomes lighter, and so
bears less down the surface of the stagnant Mercury in the Cistern. But when
the Air is nubilous and Cloudy, the weight of the Air, is augmented, by the
weight of the Clouds, which make it press with greater weight upon the stagnant
Mercury in the Cistern.

I dare not oppose any thing to the Opinion, of such an eminent man, tho I
might, he being a hundred Stages beyond many. Yet there are not some wanting,
who male-apartly set at naught his Philosophical System, as insufficient both
for Matter, and Form; whereas among all the Learned Abroad, his Writings are
held in great Estimation.

There is one of the Professors of Philosophy at Aberdeen, whose public Theses
the last Year, came to my view: yet I shall adventure to say something anent
them. The Author, (whom I have not the favor to know) seems to be well
acquaint with the new Philosophy, and a good Scholar. He confutes rationally
Malebranch, and Spinosa, two wild Philosophers. He seems to be a Cartesian in
his Philosophy, yet affirms that the Demonstration (as he calls it) of God's
Existence, by the Idaea, being abstract and Metaphysical, goes far beyond the
capacity of the Vulgar, and therefore being compelled by Reason, he averreth,
that the Apostle Paul reasons far better in the first to the Romans.

He speaks honorably of the late Lord President in confuting some of his
Doctrine, for which he deserves more thanks for his good Estimation of him,
than for the strength of his Reasonings against him. He hopes the Lord Stair,
will hold him excused, if he do not acquiesce to his Decisions. This seems to
be jeastingly spoken. Casting my Eye further through, I found somewhat anent the
Causes of Winds, Tempests, and Rain, and the reason why the Atmosphere, is
sometimes lighter, and sometimes heavier. But he has not touched the Nail upon
the Head.

Some Notes upon the Parisian Weather-Glass.
THere is a New Invention of a Weather-Glass, which comes from Paris (facile
est inventis addere,) set in a curious gilded Frame, more specious to behold,
than profitable and useful. It is liable to several Abatements. The first makes
it a dumb Weather-Glass, wanting the whole Theory of the Weather, so that when
a man looks to it, he knows not whether it shall be Fair or Foul. A man sees
indeed the sides of the Frame, divided by French Measure into Inches and half
Inches; but these Measures have no signification of the Weather. When a man
looks upon it in the Morning, he sees the Tinctured Liquor at such a hight; and
in the Afternoon, he observes again, and finds it higher or lower. This is all
it signifies. And if perhaps he be informed that in Fair Weather, the Liquor
descends, and in Foul Weather it ascends, then he may conclude, observing it
further down than it was, that it is probable to be Fair.

The second Abatement is, that there are two Oval-Glasses, which rather ought
to be Cylindrical. Now unless there be a just and exact measure in hight,
between the top of the one Oval-Glass, and the bottom of the other, it cannot
be un-erring, or between the middle of the one, and the middle of the other.
Because the Mercury cannot raise the Liquor in the right side, by equal
portions, since the rising of it depends essentially upon the falling down of
the Mercury from the left Oval-Glass. For the Glass being in form of a Pullets
Egg, more Mercury falls down, whilst it is terminate about the middle, being
there wider, than whilst the Mercury, is near either of the extremes, which are
narrower. And I believe the Contriver has foreseen this.

The third Abatement is, that the Tinctured Liquor is subject to Corruption,
the Orifice of the Glass being open, suffering Evaporation, by which means, the
whole Contrivance is rendered useless.

The fourth Abatement is, that the Orifice of the Glass, upon the left Hand,
must be Hermetically Sealed, which few or none can do.

The fifth Abatement is, if it be once Mounted, and set a going, it cannot be
well Dismounted, for the end which is Hermetically Sealed, must be opened, and
cannot be well Sealed again.

Lastly, The Glass is brought Home from Abroad, not without hazard of breaking,
the Glasses being very small and slender.

But there are none of these Difficulties found in the Perpendicular Glass. For
it may be set up, and dismounted, as often as you please, and transported from
one place to another. And the excellency of it is, that it sets it self; for
whatever weight of Mercury it once takes, the same will suffice it for ever.
And which is mavelous, the Mercury falls down always according to the Nature
of the Weather, and there halts, whether it be Fair, or Foul.

There is a second sort of Weather-Glass much in use, called the Sealed
Weather-Glass, whose use is only to show the Heat and Coldness of the Air. It
has a round Glass below, about two Inch in Diameter, and a Stem going up from
it, about a Foot and a half in length, but slender and narrow within. This
Glass is filled with the finest Spirit of Wine, three or four times distilled,
so in effect, being full of fiery Spirits, the least Heat or Warmness in the
Air, rarifieth it, and the least Coldness contracteth it. When the Ball is once
full, and the Stem too, the open Orifice above is Hermetically Sealed, and
coming to the cold Air, from the warm place it was in, the Liquor creeps down
toward the Ball, and by this means, it demonstrats by its creeping up, the
warmness of the Air, and by creeping down it shows the Degrees of Cold. It is
Hermetically Sealed, that the outward* Air, may have no influence upon it. It
is set in a curious gilded Frame, with the several Degrees of Heat and Cold
affixed to it. They come from Paris, and London, not without hazard of breaking
by the way.

There is a third sort, specially different from the rest, called the Water
Weather-Glass. It has a round Head above, with a long Stem going down from it,
and the Mouth below remaining open, is drowned among Tinctured Water. To set it
a going, they use to warm the Head, and Body of it, at the Fire, and then to
thrust the open end among the Liquor in the Cistern. When the heat begins to
abate in the top, the Air within, begins to contra^ it self, and so the Water
follows up, and hangs about the middle of the Stem. This in cold Weather creeps
up, and in warm Weather creeps down. It creeps up for fear of Vacuity, as was
maintained long since, before the pressure of the Air was known by the
Torricellian Experiment. This Weather-Glass was esteemed infallible; but now it
is known to be most fallacious, and uncertain. The reason is, because it is
acted and moved, not only with Heat and Cold, but with the greater and lesser
pressure of the Air. If it be demanded, how shall I know, whether it be the
coldness of the Air, or the greater pressure of the Air, which causes the
Water to ascend: and whether it be, the warmness of the Air, or the Iesser
pressure of the Air which causes the Water to descend? I answer, It is
difficult to know; for both do sometime concur, that is, the weight and greater
pressure of the Air, and the coldness too. And sometime the lesser pressure of
the Air with warmness, make the Water fall down. And sometime the greater
pressure of the Air raises the Water, without any addition of Cold: And
sometimes the addition of Cold, without any alteration in the Air, as to more
weight, will raise it. And tho by this means it be fallacious, yet many notable
Phenomena do appear from it. By the help of this, and the
Mercurial-Weather-Glass, and the Sealed one, and by the help of the Hygroscope,
which marvellously shows the least alteration in the Air, as to Moisture and
Dryness, and by contemplating the Heavens, the Sky and the Clouds, and
considering the Winds, how they blow, and the various Aspects of the Planets
one to another, (as Star-gazers do affirm) men might come to foretell the
Weather particularly.

The Theory of the Weather, according to the Mercurial-Weather-Glass.
THE Theory of the Weather, is either Engraven upon Brass-Plates tichtly
polished, or upon a piece of Lombard-paper, wrought in the Taliduse-press. The
Brass, or the Paper, is divided into Six half Inches; and every half Inch into
Five Degrees; or every whole Inch into Ten equal parts. I call the upmost
Station, Long Fair; the second half an Inch under it, Fair: the third,
Changeable: the fourth, Rain: the fifth, Much Rain: the sixth, Storm^; and if
you please to add the seventh, call it Tempests. These six or seven, contain
the whole Alterations, which use to be in the Weather. When the top of the
Quicksilver is at Long Fair, it touches exactly the Line under it. If it fall
down, it is said to be one Degree under Long Fair, or two or three, accordingly
as it falls down, till the top be at the Line under Fair, and then it is Fair
Weather, and so of the rest of the Stations. It may be asked, At what hight,
must Long Fair be affixed? I answer, The Situation of the place must be
considered, and the Climat under which we live: for a Glass appropriated to
this Parallel, will not serve in the Braes of Athol, or Annandale. And if there
be not a just, and exact hight, to a Hairs breadth, of all the Stations from
below, it cannot be un-erring. The several Stations are found out, not by
Algebra, or any Mathematical Demonstration, but by many years Observations.
Whosoever takes upon him to mount a Weather-Glass, without the knowledge of
these Praecognita, he plays but the Fool.

There are many other things necessary to be known, which every Fallow, which
has no more in his Scull, but a Bag-pudding in stead of Brains, is not capable
to understand.

I shall briefly run through the several Stations, with some Observes upon each
one of them. In the first and upmost, is Long Fair, or most pleasant Weather. I
have seen the Quicksilver sometimes above it, yet seldom does this fall out,
but in extraordinary Seasons. The Mercury being at this hight, it is next to
impossible, either to be Wind or Rain. Nothing for several Days, but settled
calm Weather. Sometime the Heavens are covered with dry and gray Clouds, but
not the least appearance of Rain.

The second ^tation, half an Inch lower, is Fair. The Mercury being here, I
have observed a small Shower of Rain to fall, from the lowest Region of the
Air, as a th^ck Dew or Mist, but immediately after, the Day became Clear and
Fair. The whole year 1686 almost, it was a rare thing to see the Mercury up at
Fair, but frequently below Rain, and Changeable, because of the frequent Rains,
which fell out that year. And which is observable, all that Summer, the
Hygroscope went not once about, whereas in dry Summers, it goes twice about,
sometimes more and sometimes less.

The third Station half an Inch lower, is Changeable. That is, sometimes Fair,
sometimes Foul, sometimes Frost, sometimes Thaw, sometimes Sleet, and sometimes
Snow, sometimes Wind, and sometimes Calm.

The fourth Station is Rain, not actually Rain, but a stormy inclination in the
Air to be Rain, and sometimes Rain. Nay, sometimes the whole Day will be Fair.
But still the Rain is approaching, or has been Rain, either here, or some
place about.

The fifth Station is Much Rain, the worst of Weather almost, as in the Summer,
or Winter Season, when Rain is accompanied with stormy South-west Winds, or
westerly Winds. This last October, or November, I have seen the Mercury below
this Station, and yet no Rain in the mean time, nor all the Day, but the Sky
black, and tempestuous, thick Clouds lying about the Horizon. Above Fife, great
Heaps of them: some like Castles and Towers, others like ragged Rocks, hanging
over each one another. All of them forerunners of Rain.

The sixth Station, Stormy, extraordinary Foul Weather.

In the last place, I have subjoyned Tempests, or Hirricano's, which do not
fall out in this Country. If it be asked, Why does not the Mercury fall down
to Tempests? And why does it not go half an Inch above Long Fair? I answer,
There are here two Tropicks, namely Storms, the nethermost, and Long Fair the
upmost. Above this, the Air is not able to press, except some few Degrees. And
at Storms the pressure is least. The length of the Tropicks then, are about
three Inch.

General Rules. The further the Mercury goes up, the Weather inclines to be
the Fairer, and the further it falls down, it inclines to be the Fouler.
Secondly, When the Mercury is highest, Fair Weather seems to be universal; when
it is lowest, Foul Weather seems to be universal. Thirdly, It is not so much
Foul Weather actually, which influenceth the Mercury, as it is the Disposition
and Inclination of the Weather to be Foul: so that the Mercury will be many
times at Rain, when it is not actually Raining, which is wanting when the
Quicksilver, is at Fair, or Long Fair. Fourthly, Not only Foul Weather in this
County or Shire, makes the Mercury fall down, but Foul Weather, in the next
adjacent County, tho there be none here: as the Weather-Glass at Edinburgh,
will be altered, with Rain in Tweeddale, or in Lammer-moor. And as it shows the
Nature of the Weather, so it predicts and foretells, sometimes a Day, sometimes
two or three, if so be the Mercury has been far up. But if it has been only
at Changeable, or below Fair, it predicts some few Hours, before it be Rain, by
falling down a Degree, two or three, or four. When it is a falling down, the
top of the Mercury is flat and level, but when it is a rising, it is somewhat
round.

It Is said, that the Ladies, and Gentlewomen at London do Apparel themselves in
the Morning by the Weather-Glass. Whatever be in this, it is certain, that when
a man rises in the Morning, he may know infallibly, what sort of Weather will
fall out ere Night.

It is most useful for the Husbandman, both in Seed-time, and Harvest, and for
winning of Hay. It is useful for taking a Journey, for when I see the Mercury
up at Fair, or Long Fair, I may be confident, there shall be no Rain for eight
or ten Days, chiefly when it is up at Long Fair.

There are many other uses, for which it is profitable, which are needless here
to repeat. It is always infallible, because guided by God in Nature, tho to our
apprehension it seems to err. There are so many Changes, and Alterations in the
Air, that a particular Rule cannot be assigned for each one of them. But the
general Observations which are affixed, are sure. If any man would find out all
these Intricacies, he must diligently observe, the Changes, and Quarters of the
Moon, and the several Aspects of the Planets, and the Winds how they blow,
comparing them with the Changes and Alterations of the Weather-Glass. Neither
can it be subject to Corruption, tho it stand an hundred year. The Glass cannot
fail, neither the Quicksilver, which are incorruptible by Nature. Neither can
the Frame decay, for many years, being made of Oak.

FINIS.
Postscript.
To Buoy up a Ship, of any Burden, from the Ground of the Sea.
THE Art of Diving has not been much known, but of late; for it depends
essentially upon the knowledge of the pressure of Fluid Bodies, which knowledge
has not been further known to the generality of Learned Men, than by name: tho
some ignorantly have averred, that the Hydrostaticks, is a Science long ago
perfected. Among the first, who have essayed in this Nation, was the late
Marquess of Argile, who having obtained a Patent from the King, of one of the
Spanish Armado, which was sunk in the Isle of Mull, anno 1588, employed James
Colquhoun of Glasgow, a man of singular knowledge, and skill, in all Mechanical
Arts and Sciences. This man, not knowing the Diving Bell, went down several
times, the Air from above, being communicated to his Lungs, by a long Pipe of
Leather. He only viewed, and surveyed the Ship, but I suppose buoyed nothing
up. About the year 1664, when this Art became more perfected, and was advanced,
by the Practice, and Invention, of Learned Men. The late Lord Argile did employ
a most ingenious Gentleman, the Lord of Melgim, who went down with a Diving
Bell, and made a further inquiry. After some pains, and labor, he buoyed up
three Guns, one of Iron, judging it to be of some other Metal, one of Copper,
and one of Brass, about eight Foot long apeice, and eight Inches of Diameter.
The third Essay was made by the late Earl of Argile himself, several years
after, who did more. There was one Captain Smith, who undertook after that, yet
more, who thought himself so sure of the Spanish Gold, that he would not suffer
a Carpenter with himself: but this Interprize turned to naught. To effectuate
the Proposal, I shall offer these six Propositions, which with small pains may
be made evident, from Hydrostatical Principles; and next infer some
Conclusions, needful for the design in hand.

First, The whole Ship, with all its Loadning, is the just and precise weight,
of as much Water, as the lower part of the Hull expells, or is expelled by the
Ships Water-draught.

Secondly, When the Ship becomes heavier than the said quantity of Water, it
sinks.

Thirdly, Water does not weigh in Water. This is evident, for when a man pulls
a Bucket full of Water from the bottom of a Well, he finds no weight thereof,
till it come to the Surface.

Fourthly, Nothing lighter in specie than Water, or of the same weight with
Water, can sink. Hence, neither Timber, Wine, Bear, nor Oil, can tarry at the
Sea Ground, but must be buoyed up of necessity.

Fifthly, By how much, the whole Timber of the Ship, is lighter in specie, than
as much Water equal to it in bulk, by so much is it the more able to buoy up.
Imagine, the whole Timber of the Ship, reduced to a Cube of so many Foot, and a
Cube of Water given of the same quantity. Now I say, as many Pounds, as this
Cube of Water, is heavier, than that of Timber, so many Pounds of Iron, Lead or
Stone, will the Ship buoy up, or support, even tho full of Water.

Sixthly, A heavy Body, as Iron, Lead or Stone, weighs as much less in Water,
than in Air, as the quantity of Water it expells. A Square Foot of Lead, which
I suppose weighs in the Air 728 Pound, weighs but 672 Pound in the Water, less
by 56, the weight of a Square Foot of Water.

From these Propositions, I infer, that when a Ship is to be buoyed up from the
Ground of the Sea, nothing of her weighs, save her Ballast. By Ballast, I
understand, taking the word largely, every thing in the Ship, heavier in
specie, than Water, as Guns, Ankers, Bullets of Iron, and Lead, Iron-bolts,
Nails, and all manner of Iron-work. Next, That the whole weight of the Ballast,
does not preponderate or weigh down. Lastly, That the Timber of the Ship, and
all things in it, lighter in specie, than Water, concur for buoying up the
Ballast.

The best expedient for raising of Ships entirely, are Arks of Wood, applied
either to the sides of the Ship without, or just above the Orlop. These Arks
must be so close, on all sides, that neither Air, nor Water, can pass. The Ark,
to describe it more particularly, must have four Sides, and a Cover above, but
open completely below. At every Corner, next to the Mouth, must be fixed, a
strong Iron-Ring. Four likewise above, that is, one in each Corner, answering
to the four below, which are for fixing a second Ark above the first, if need
be. If the Ship, which is to be raised, be twenty Foot over, make your Ark
twenty Foot wide, and as much in hight. Bring it just over the place, where the
Ship lies, and filling it with Water, that it may sink without difficulty,
thrust it down, till it come just above the Orlop, and fasten it within five or
six Foot of the same, with Ropes passing through the four Rings, and the Beams
or Balks of the Ship. The Arks being thus fastened to the Ship, by a Diver, the
next work is to beget a power, or force within it, which shall be able to buoy
up the Ship from the Ground of the Sea. This may be done, either by sending
down Buckets full of Air, with their Mouth foremost, one after another, from
the Surface of the Water, and then cause a Diver receive them, and thrusting
them somewhat within the Mouth of the Ark, turn up the Orifice, by which means,
the whole Air in it, shall ascend up through the Water of the Ark, and rest
above, next to the top. This Device being often repeated, will at last expel,
the whole Water of the Ark, and fill it completely with Air. This is so sure
an Experiment, that none needs to call it in question. Or by communicating Air
to the Ark from above, by the help of a pair of large Bellows, and long Pipes
of Leather, going down within the Mouth of the Ark. Or thirdly, By the
multiplication of Bladders full of VVind, filling the Ark within, which may be
done more easily. The Ark being oncefull of Air, will have a considerable pull
with it, which is more, and less, according to the dimensions thereof. For
knowing this, you must consider, that whatever the dimensions of the Ark are,
it will buoy up, as much weight as the Water weighs, which fills it. I^ then,
the Ark be twenty Foot wide, and as much in hight, it must contain eight
thousand Square Foot of Water; and since every Square Foot of Water thereof
weighs fifty six pound Trois, the whole must be 448000. An Ark then of twenty
Foot Square, will buoy up, four hundred and forty eight thousand pound weight,
the weight of 58 Cannons Royal, each one whereof, I suppose weighs 8000 pound.
Or the weight of 74 Demi-cannons, or the weight of 97 Culverings: or of 149
Demi-culverings: or of 298 Sakers, each one of this sort weighing 1500 pound.
Or lastly, the weight of 250 Tun of Wine, reckoning four Hogsheads to a Tun,
and each one of these weighing 448 pound.

If you fasten a second Ark above the first, by the help of the Rings upon the
top, which I mentioned, both will buoy up together 896000 pound, the weight of
112 Cannons Royal. But if your Ark be 30 Foot in all its dimensions, it must
contain twenty and seven thousand Square Foot of Water, which will weigh, one
million, five hundred and twelve thousand pound weight of the weight of 189
Cannons Royal, or the burden of 252 Demi-cannons, which is the weight of 844
Tun of Wine. But supposing the Ark to be more in quantity, the one way than the
other, that is 40 Footlong, it shall be able to buoy up, two million and
sixteen thousand pound, the weight of 252 Cannons Royal, or the weight of 1125
Tun of Wine, or Water.

If the Arks be applied to the sides of the Ship, you must fix, as many upon
the one side, as upon the other, which need not be so large, as those which are
fastened upon the Orlop. I shall suppose, that upon each side, there are four
Arks, each one 10 Foot Square. If this be, every single Ark, must contain 1000
Square Foot of Water, which will weigh fifty six thousand pound. All of them
together, therefore must buoy up 448000 pound weight, the burden of 56 Cannons
Royal.

To know, how to proportion the quantity of your Ark, to the burden of the
Ship, which is the great secret, follow this Method. Consider first, that
neither the Timber of the Ship, nor the Water which is in her, nor any other
thing, which is lighter in specie than Water, (that is, any thing which floats
upon the Surface) or of the same weight, with it, preponderats, or weighs down,
but only what is heavier in specie, than Water, as Guns, Ankers, Iron-bolts,
Iron-nails, and such like, the just quantity, or very near, may be found.
Calculate then, as near as you can, and supposing the weight of all this
Ballast, to be about 448000 pound; you must next consider, what the dimensions
of the Ark, must be, which is able to buoy up so much weight, which may be
found out thus. Divide the just account of your Ballast by 56, and the Cubique
Root of the Product, gives you the just dimensions of the Ark. For example,
Divide 448000 by 56, and you will find 8000, the Cubique Root whereof is 20,
the quantity of your Ark within.

If you judge* it more convenient to apply lesser Arks, namely to the sides of
the Ship, ye may have eight, by dividing this into so many parts, four for each
side, and every single Ark 10 Foot Square, which are equivalent. Remember, that
tho the whole Ballast, weigh 448000 pound, yet this whole weight is not to be
buoyed up by the Ark, seeing heavy Bodies weigh less in Water, than in Air,
according to the sixth Proposition.

As for fastening the Arks, either to the sides of the Ship, or just above the
Orlop, several ways may be thought upon, which I leave to the Invention of
others, who are skilful in building of Ships. Let it suffice, that I have made
it probable, if not evident with Reason, that the greatest Ship may be buoyed
entirely up from the ground of the Sea, which was the thing to be demonstrated.

If it be Objected, That the strong pressure of the Water, will put the Ark in
hazard of bursting, when its full of Air. I answer, There is here not so much
hazard, as every one may believe. The Reason is, because the pressure within
the Ark, is very near equal, to the pressure from without. This I add, because
the top of the Ark within, is more pressed up by the Air within, than it is pressed
down with the Water without. The pressure upon the sides, is more uniform, and
so there is the less hazard there. In a word, if the Ark be able to support, as
much Water, as fills it, without bursting, it shall go down through the deepest
Water imaginable without trouble. That is, hang it by Ropes in the Air, full
of Water. If the bottom be able to support this weight, there shall be no
hazard of bursting, when it is full of Air within the deepest Water.

From this unequal pressure, which the top of the Ark suffers, it follows of
necessity, that if there be any Rift, or Leck in it, the whole Air will go out
by degrees, and so render the Ark useless. I answer, this endeavor, which the
Air within, has to be out, is just the same, with that, which the Water
within, has to be out, when the Ark is full, and hung in the Air with Ropes.
If Art can cure the one, it may find a remedy for the other also. But I leave
this to such as are skilful in Calking of Ships.

Tho I seem to insinuate, that the Arks must be Cubical or Foursquare in their
form, yet there is no necessity for that; for they may be made under what
fashion or form you please, provided they contain, as much Air as will be
sufficient to raise the Vessel. And though I mention Arks of 20 or 30 Foot
Square, which will go near to buoy up the greatest Ships, as Men of War; yet
for ordinary Vessels, Arks of far less size will suffice.

Some may imagine, that a Ship sunk (for example) with Coal, is as difficult to
buoy up, as to raise her out of a dry Harbor. But this cannot be, since a pound
of Coal, will not weigh three or four Ounce in the Water. A Ship loadned with
Wine or Oil, weighs nothing at all in the Water, but may be very easily
buoyed up, if the Ballast be considered, as I said. Many Ships have been buoyed
up entirely, by thrusting down empty Hogsheads, and putting them below the
Deck. But here occurs a difficulty, if the Water exceed eight or nine Fathom,
the strong pressure of it crusheth the sides of the Hogshead together. But here
is a sovereign cure against that trouble. Bore a small Hole in any part of the
Vessel, where you please: for the Water entering, brings the Air within, to
press equally with the Water without.

Tho this Invention, may seem difficult to some, to be made practicable, yet to
such who are intelligent, and know well the Principles of the Hydrostaticks, it
appears plain and easy. But the very Speculation of it wants not its own
pleasure, being founded upon infallible and sure Conclusions, drawn from the
surest grounds in Nature.

Labor improbus omnia vincit.

