To the KING's Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of ALGERNOON SIDNEY,
Esquire
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner, after a long and close Imprisonment, was on the ^7th day
of this month, brought by a Guard of Soldiers to the Pallace-yard, upon a
Habeas Corpus, directed to the Lieutenant of the Tower, before any Indictment
had been exhibited against him.

That whilst he was there detained, a Bill was exhibited and found against him;
whereupon he was immediately carried to the Kings Bench, and there arraigned in
this surprise: He desired a Copy of the Indictment, Leave to make his
Exceptions, or to put in a Special Plea, and Council to fr^me it, but all was
denied: He then offered a Special Plea, ready engrost, which was then also
rejected, without reading, being threatened, That if he did not immediately
plead Not Guilty, a Judgment of High Treason should be entered: He was forced,
contrary to Law (as he supposes) to come to a general Issue, in pleading, Not
Guilty.

November the 21th he was brought to his Trial, and the Indictment being
perplexed and confused, so that neither he, nor any of his Friends* that heard
it, could fully comprehend the scope of it, he was utterly unprovided of all
the Helps that the Law allows unto every man for his Defense, whereupon he
again desired a Copy, and produced an Authentic Copy of the Statute Eaw. 3.
whereby it is enacted, That every man shall have a Copy of any Record that
touches him in any manner, as well that which falls against the Kings, as any
other Person; but could have neither a Copy of his Indictment, nor that the
Statute should be read.

The Jury by which he was to be tried, was not (as he is informed summoned by
the Bailiffs of the several Hundreds, in the usual and legal manner* but Names
were agreed upon by Mr. Graham, Mr. Burton, and the under Sher^ff, and
directions given to the Baliffs to summon them, and being all so chosen, the
Copy of the Panel was of no use to him.

When they came to be called, he excepted against some for being your Majesty's
Servants, which he did hope should not have been returned, when he was
prosecuted at your Majesty's Suit.

Many others for not being Fre^holders (which Exceptions he thinks are good in
Law) and others more lewd and infamou^ persons, not fit to be of any jury; ^ut
all was overruled by the L. C. J. and your Petitioner forced to challenge them
peremptorily whom he found to be picked out as m^st suitable to their
In^entions who sought his Ruin, whereby he lost the Benefit allowed by the Law,
of making his Exceptions, and was forced to admit of mechanic persons, utterly
unable to judge of such a matter, as was to be brought before them.

This Jury being sworn, no Witness was produced who fixed any thing beyond
Hearsay upon your Petitioner, except the Ld. Howard, and some that swore the
Papers, said to be found in his House aforesaid, a second Witness, were written
in a Hand like unto your Petitioner's.

Your Petitioner produced Ten Witnesses, the most of them men of eminen^
quality, the others of unblemisht fame, to show the Ld. Hd's. Testimony was
inconsistent with what he had, as in the Presence of God, affirmed to many of
them, an as he swore at the Trial of the Ld. Russel, under the same Religious
Obligations of an Oath as if it had been legally administered.

Your P^titioner did endeavovr further to show, that besides the Absurdity and
Incongruity of his Testimony, being guilty of many Crimes which he did not
pretend your Petitioner had any knowledge of; and having no other hope of a
Pardon, but by the Drudgery of swearing against him, he deserved not to be
believed: And that similitude of Hands could not be Evidence, as was delivered
by the Lord Chief Justice Keeling, and the whole Court, in the Lady Carr's
Case; so as no Evidence at Law remained against him.

That whosoever wrote those Papers, they were but a small part of a polemical
Discourse, in Answer to a Book written above thirty years ago, upon general
Propositions, applied to no Time, or any particular ^ase* that it was
impossible to judge of any Part of it, unless the Whole did appear, which did
not* that the Sense of such as were produced could not be comprehended, unless
the whole were read, which was denied; that the Ink and Paper showed it to be
written many years ago, and the Ld. Howard knowing nothing of them, they could
have no concurrence with what your Petitioner was said to have designed with
him and others.

That the Confusion and Errors in writing it, should the same had nevet been so
much as revived, and wtitten in a hand that no man co^ld read over, neither fit
for the Press, nor could be in some yea^s, though the Writer of it did intend
it, which did not appear.

That they being only the present Crude and private Thoughts of a man, for the
exercise of his own ^nderstanding, in his S^udy, never showed to any, nor
applied to any particular Case, could not fall under the Sta^u^e ^5 Edw. 3.
which takes cognizance of no such matters, and could not by construction be
brought under it, such matters being thereby reserved to the Parliament, as is
declared in the Proviso, which I desired might be read, but was refus^d.

Eight or Nine importent Points of Law did hereupon arise* upon which your
Petitioner, knowing his Weakness, did desire his Coun^i^ mi^ht be heard, or
reserved to be sound specially, but all was over-r^led by the Violence of the
L. C. J. and your Petitioner so frequently interrupted, that the whole method
of his Defense was broken, and he not suffered to s^y the tenth part of what he
could have alleged in his own defense; the Jury was hurried into a Verdict
which they did not understand.

Now forasmuch as no man that is Oppressed in England can have any Relief, unless
it be by ^our Majesty;


