THE SIEGE OF MENTZ. OR, THE German Heroin, A NOVEL

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Briscoe, over against Will's Coffee-House, in
Russel Street, Covent Garden, 1697.

To the ever Honored, Adam Felton, Knight Barronet.
SIR,
I Had no sooner dressed this German Heroine, in an English Habit, and taught
her our Dialect, but that my high Obligations to you, brought you fresh into my
Memory, with all the requisite Accomplishments, for the Protection of so brave
a Stranger, against the most severe Insults, that Malice, and Envy, could
produce; in which choice, Sir, I have been further encouraged by that singular
Affability and Bounty, which renders you the Delights (of the most ingenious)
of both Sexes. And tho I was somewhat ashamed to prefix your Name to so mean a
Subject, as these Results of some hours of my leisure; yet, I thought it much
better, to take this opportunity, to write your Panegyric, having so large a
Field, as your Merits to exercise in, then to appear wholly insensible of your
generous Favors, till something more suitable to your noble Genius should offer
it self. But then, reflecting on your Avertion, to all Encomiums (tho never so
justly due) obliges me to lay aside all other thoughts, than of craving your
favorable Acceptance of this trifle, and of subscribing my self,

Sir, Your most Humble Servant, P. B.

THE SIEGE OF MENTZ. A NOVEL
THERE is so great a disparity betwixt Mars and the God of Love, that one would
imagine where the first did appear, the last should not presume to show his
head: The one is all Fierceness Valor, and Undauntedness, which scorns all
Advantages* but what are gained by Bravery and Courage: And the other is of so
soft and delicate a F^ame, that it uses nothing but Policy and Stratagems to
bring about its Amorous Intrigues and Designs. Yet, notwithstanding this vast
difference, Mars is seldom seen to take the Field, but that Love is perceived
to follow in the Rear, not without hopes of obtaining as considerable Conquests
there, as the other can hope for in the first ranks of Honor. We are not
without diverse examples of this kind; but this which I here present to the
public, is of so modern a date, and so remarkable in our days, that I thought
I should not a little oblige the World in giving it this Piece of Gallantry, in
which one of our own Nation, was one of the principal Heroes, both as to War
and Love.

We will disguise him under the Name of Peregrine, of a considerable Family in
the North of England, though a younger Brother, who being come to London, (that
famous place for framing of Youth to Virtue, as well as to Vice,) there he sell
in Company with some Officers of the Consederates, who had left their German
Winter Quarters, to spend some days in seeing the English-Court.

His natural tendency to Arms put him on the design of seeing a Campaigne, or
two; and though he had some thoughts at first, to make his first Essay in
Flanders, yet the Friendship which he contracted with these German-Officers,
made him to proffer to accompany them back, to serve with them in quality of
Voluntier in the Army of the Allies, in hopes they would continue their
Friendship toward him. They readily embraced his offers, with assurances of
not only their Services out of their Friendship; also, especially Count
Zinzendorf, who had a considerable Post, took him into particular Protection,
assuring him, That he would write to him, and send him word where he should
find him at the opening of the Campaigne.

Peregrine having laid so good a Foundation, to build his warlike Resolution
upon, thinks of no more but getting, against the Season, such an Equipage as
might suit with his Designs, and the quality of those that honored him with
their Friendship; wherefore so soon as these German Gentlemen had satisfied
their Curiosities, in all that was remarkable in this great City, and the
adjacent places to it, (in which Peregrine did assist them, not only with all
his Interest, but that of his Friends also,) they took leave of him, and
embarked for Holland, in order to their return in their own Country.

Now is Peregrine busied to the utmost, to get himself provided with Horses,
Servants, Moneys, and other necessaries, to appear like a Gentleman, being
resolved to signalize himself by some brave action to render himself worthy of
the honor of these brave Strangers, who had so freely taken him into their
Friendship.

Peregrine had left in the Country, a young Gentlewoman, who was deeply in love
with him; but his Mind having been for a considerable time, before he could
perceive her affections, possessed with the desires of Traveling, he had
avoided, as much as he could, her Company, for fear of being diverted by her
from his beloved design. This Gentlewoman hearing of Peregrine's sudden
leaving of England, writ to him a Letter, which was extraordinary full of
Passion, which he received the day before his departure; the contents of which
I shall have occasion to deliver, in the Thread of this following Discourse.

There is nothing like a willing mind to dispatch Business; his desires were so
great, that in a short time he had got ready an Equipage suitable to his worth;
with which, after having taken leave of his particular Friends, in the Month of
March he set forward for Harwich, where having found the Pacquet-Boat ready for
sail, he went in it for Holland; where he safely arrived the third day after
(...) Netherlands, (...) where nothing happened to him* (...) able, 'till he
was got within a day (...)ncy of the City of Mentz, which was then in the
possession of the French, who put all the Country thereabouts under
Contribution, and took up such considerable Hostages as they could find, for
security, which they carried with them into that place, threatening them with
Death if the Contributions were not duly brought in.

There had fallen such a vast quantity of Rain, during a whole day and night,
that all the Roads were covered with Waters, and the small Rivers swollen into
Torrents: He was to pass on through a Ford that was at a small distance from an
ancient Castle, by whose Walls the River run, taring up, and hurrying along
with its Streams, Trees, and pieces of Rocks.

There was a Lady on the other side of the River, who leaning over some Rails
on the Banks, beholding the strange consusion which this medly of things made;
Peregrine having made an halt, while he had sent one of his Men for a Guide,
he, mean time, had leisure to consider that Person, who with her sumptuous
Dress, and delicate Beauty, had fixed his Eyes in admiration of her; when on
the sudden, the Earth she stood upon, gave way, and she, with the Rails, fell
headlong into the Torrent; she gave a most vehement outcry, which was seconded
by Peregrine, and his Servants. He Presently set Spurs to his Horse, and having
gone beyond where she was floting on the Current, being buoyed up by her Cloths,
and the rapidness of the Stream, he plunged into the River, and with much ado,
got hold of her; but finding his Horse might hurt her, while he dragged her
along, he quitted him, not without receiving a hurt in the Leg, which made it
the more difficult for him to reach the shore, with his drowning Prize: At last
he got hold of some Roots of Trees, by which he hung, 'till he had recovered
Breath, holding the Lady's Head, as much as possible he could, above Water,
'till his Man reaching some Branches to him, which they had hastily lopped off
of Trees; he got hold of them, and was pulled to shore, with the Lady: She laid
for dead, on the Grass; and he with small signs of life.

By this time, the out-crys that had been made at the Lady's fall in the Water,
had brought some of the Servants of the Castle to the Rivers side, where having
beheld the sad Spectacle, they renewed the out-crys; but above all, Mariana,
Clarinda's Kinswoman, transported beyond her self, at the sight of her dead
Friend, did fling her self violently upon her Body, making the greatest
Lamentations imaginable; at the shock of these two Bodies, Clarinda coming a
little to her self, opened her Eyes, and fetching a short sigh, gave visible
signs that there was some Life in her. Peregrine, who was come to himself a
little before, began to give advice, (in French, for he could not speak one
word of German, though his Groom could) That the Lady should instantly be
carried into her Chamber, and there laid with her head downwards, to let out of
her Stomach as much. Water as they could: This Language being understood by her
who was come to them, it was presently done, with the assistance of two of
Peregrine's Servants* who told them all the circum^^^ces of that sad accident.

Clarinda* by these* and other means ^ fallen into the River* but was wholly
ignorant of all that had happened to he^ after? Mariana took upon her to
satisfy her dear Friend in that point, as well as ^he could, with the relation
she had received from Peregrine's Groom. And what is become of my Deliverer?
said Clarinda. Is he alive? We left him, replied Mariana* sitting on the Bank
over the River. An ill place, answered Clarinda, for a Person that has taken
so much pains to lave my Life, with so great an hazard of his own: Go, continued
she, let him be invited in, and provide a Chamber, and all things necessary for
his reception: Let me not appear ungrateful to a Person so deserving my care,
the rather to, because he is a Stranger, who has done these great ^^^^^gs for
me. This said, was soon obeyed, she being absolute Mistress in that Castle, by
her Father's detention, her Brother's absence in the Wars of Hungary, and the
Death of her Mother; it is true, there was an old Aunt lived with her, but so
antiquated, that she was rather a burden, than an aid. Peregrine was presently
laid in a good warm Bed, in a decent Apartment; great excuses made for having
defered so long the performance of those things, so justly due to his Merits,
laying the whole fault on the care they had taken of their young Mistress's
recovery. Then inquiry was made how he felt his Leg: He told them, that he
found he should want the use of some expert Chyrurgeon, because he felt the
pain to increase, and to spread it self upwards: there was presently a
Chyrurgeon sent for; as also a Physician to look to Clarinda's, as well as to
Peregrine's Health; they were both blooded* to (...)reyent Fevers; and with the
(...) some slight Remedies, Clarinda was in a short time perfectly recovered;
but it was not so with Peregrine; for what with having his Contusion so long
bathed in cold Water, at a Season when the Air was something sharp, there was
some apprehension of a Gangrene, which showed it self by the lividity, and
insensibility of the part. So soon as Clarinda understood the danger, she
doubled her diligence in attending him: She was no longer contented to let him
have all that the Castle and Neighborhood could afford of comfort and
refreshment, but she thought her self obliged to administer them her self:
while Peregrine died for Love of Clarinda, and slighted his own illness.

It is an old saying, That Love will creep where it cannot go; and it is as
true as ancient. At first Clarinda did all these pieces of service to her
Deliverer, as incumbent Duties on those Obligations she was engaged to him for
her Life. But little, by little, she found that there was some other motive,
though she knew nor what, that led her on; she was more concerned, and more
inquisitive after Peregrine's welfare, every day, though he daily increased
in health: She would frequently find her self in his Room, yet forget how she
came there, and for what purpose; which would sometimes so discompose her, that
Peregrine could not but observe it, and she perceiving his taking notice of it,
that would put her in the greater disorder. Once, amongst the rest, Clarinda
having entered his Chamber, with a preserving Pan, with young Chickens in it,
did not know that she had mistaken his Room for hers, 'till Peregrine asked her
aloud, Whether she had brought him a Pan full of Caudle for his Brakefast? That
indeed put her into such a confusion, that not having a ready excuse, she
speedily went* out of the Chamber again, without replying one word: whereupon
Peregrine offered to rise, and run after her, but found he had attempted beyond
the power of his Leg: I cannot follow you Madam, cried he, but it shall be for
the next time. When she was got to her own Chamber, she began to consider her
condition, and how insensibly Love had drawn her into his Net, was very much
troubled at it, but much more, that she had given Peregrine so great an insight
into the affairs* of her Heart: She endeavored to frame some excuses a
thousand ways, but all to no purpose; she could not find any thing in the whole
Magazine of her Wit, that could atone for that Error* because she knew that
Peregrine had taken particular notice of it, and that her sudden, and silent
retreat, had confirmed him but too much of her mistake. In this great
perplexity she abstained from visiting him all that day* and when it began to
grow duskish, in hopes to conceal the disorders she should be in, at the sight
of him, she adventured into his Chamber, not being able to abstain any longer
from the sight of a Person who had made a greater progress in her Heart, than
she expected. I come, Sir, said she, not to make an Applogy for entering your
Chamber this Morning, but for my obrupt return, without showing you those
pretty little Creatures I had in my Pan, and not so much as making any excuse
for my rudeness. I had forgot to say something of moment to that Person who had
presented me with them. Madam, replied Peregrine* who had a mind to reclaim
her; It would be a great (...) in me to control your Actions; all that I have
to say, (...) ^^^^y that you had any occasion obliged you to so sudden a
return, to deprive me of your most charming Conversation; I have passed this
redious long day like an Hermit in my self, or rather like a condemned Person,
after the hopes of a Reprieve. Upon the fear, I have been in all this day, of
having given you some distaste. Sir, you might, or you might nor, she replied,
according as you may censure my Actions. I am all respect, Madam, said he, and
if I had any thought in me otherwise, I should soon destroy them, as Rebels to
my Heart. There she interrupted him, saying; Take heed, Sir, what you advance,
for should it at any time, be contradicted, by Words or Actions, that would be
sufficient to debase you in my good Opinion. These Words check the brisk
thoughts which Clarinda's late Action, had raised in his mind, fearing that it
was his offer to go after her in the morning, that had deprived him of her
presence all that day; so that he presently turned the design he had made to
rally her, into a profound respect. And silence, which gave opportunity to
Clarinda, thus to continue, I know that you Men, are but too apt to flatter
your selves* and to construe the least of our inconsiderate Actions, to your
best Advantages, though they were intended quite contrary. There he interrupted
her, saying, when I look on all these Accomplishments of body and mind, which
spoke you the most admirable Creature in the World, or that I turn back my Eyes
on my own Unworthiness: How is it possible for me, Madam, to do more, than
admire; and with trembling, frame answers to your demands, for fear of breaking
that respect that is due to you from the whole World? Nay, Sir, she said, then
I can take notice of what I owe you, which I must acknowledge to be great,
being obliged to you for no less than my Life, with the addition of the great
hazard you put yours in, in that worthy Action; and I am not so destitute of
Gratitude, as not to own that I have nothing to present you with,
proportionable to so signal a piece of Service; but when all is done, I can but
offer you those small means that I have at present at my own disposal, being
yet under the Tuition of a Father, and a Brother, both unfortunately absent now
that I want them here, to add their Acknowledgments, where mine are deficient
Oh! Madam, What have you named? Or rather, what have you endeavored to
conceal? Answered he, Are not you Mistress of the richest Jewel upon Earth? And
can all the Fathers, Mothers, or brothers, in the World, dispose of the
Treasure of your Heart? That, Madam, is certainly at your own disposal. That,
Sir, replied Clarinda, what price so ever you are pleased to set upon it, is
not of so much value in my esteem; though, I must confess, I should be
unwilling, on the other hand, to cast it away; especially, -- she was going on,
when she was interrupted with the entering of a Gentleman of the Neighborhood,
who had the consent of her Father to Court her for a Wife, whom I shall call
Count Mansfielt. Madam, said he, at the first news of your late disaster, I
come to offer you my most humble Service, even with the hazard of my Life. Sir,
answered Clarinda, I have no Enemy to fight, to take you for my Second, except
you would call the two Elements of Earth and Water to an account, for having
together conspired against my Life. But here is a Gentleman, continued she,
presenting him to Peregrine, who has done that already, and rescued me from
both their furies, to the hazard of his Life; at this the Count and Peregrine
saluting one another, the first said, I envy your Happiness, Sir, in having
been thought, by Fate, a worthy Instrument in the Preservation of this Lady; I
might have challenged a Prerogative in that, even by the consent of those that
may claim an Authority over her; but Fortune is blind* Sir, you know, and -- I
can not call her blind, Sir, upon these fortunate Occasions, said Clarinda,
seeing that when I was destitute of all other helps, from Friends, she called
this worthy Stranger (...) my rescue. Madam, then, said Peri^^^ne, if there is
any thing, in this late ^^tion, that is worthy your Record, I (...) attribute
it, but to my good Fortune, (...) guided me hither; where the same ^^^^g, might
have been performed by (...) wortheir Person, as this Gentleman, (...)e like:
Yes, Sir, replied the young (...), as being doubly engaged for my (...)
Interest as well as that Ladies. I hope, ^^^^ered Clarinda, in a little heat)
that (...) will not say, I ever gave you any In^^^^ me? And I am of Opinion,
that ^^^ever my Parents may have done* without my consent, of this nature, may
be, by me altered as I shall* think (...) not so fast, Sir, she continued, lest
you leave me behind; after which; she ^^^^ed a side, which being observed by
Peregrine, it* put a new Life; into his d(...)ing Spirits, which he ha^ almost
lost ^^ this young Count's confident* App(...) (...) which made him venture to
say* that (...) Lady was ^^ the right, and th^^ (...) ^^eved most Persons would
be of her (...) adding* There (...) a force* (...) ^ (...) to (...) Count, and
(...)wed to give their Advices a(...) Right Sir, answered Clarinda, and* (...)
that we ought to receive them with Respect, as coming from them. You say well,
Madam, said the young Count, and that was the Motive that induced me to proceed
after the manner I have done, toward the honor of pleasing you. My Father and
Mother, you mean, Sir, who from me are distinct Persons, so that you might
apply your self to them, and pour your whole Soul into their Bosoms* make them
wholly yours, with your great Eloquence; and yet I might still be the same
indifferent Person in all respects: Yet, Madam, replied the Count, I have had
the Happiness of finding a favorable Reception at your Hands, which there
Clarinda interrupted him, saying, In Obedience to my Mothers Advices; but she
is no more, and what power soever she might have, as a Parent, yet she could
not, nor never did offer, to have a Jurisdiction over my Mind, and
Inclinations. You have a Father still, Madam, who was pleased to encourage my
Adresses to your fair self; I Will plead his Authority, and Favor. Here
Peregrine could not forbear, saying, With this Ladies leave, I Will venture to
say, That durst I raise my Thoughts, toward so much Happiness, I should trust
rather on Fortune, though blind, and my own Merits, though never so mean and
unworthy, than on any other Cause whatsoever; Assidious Services, and a most
Submissive Obedience, are great Advocates in matters of this weight. Pardon me,
Sir, if I must tell you, added Clarinda, adressing to the Count, that this
Gentleman has named, two of the chiefest means, to which I may add Fidelity and
Perseverance: In opposition to all Trials* Madam, whatever you say, must be
assented to, replied the Count, you are a Party concerned; but for this
Gentleman to give his un-ask'd for Advice, I think it very unnecessary. With
that the Count looked very frowningly toward Perigrine; which Action, and
Words, having the more netled Clarinda, she in some kind of Emotion, returned,
Sir, This Gentleman I look upon as the Preserver of my Life, which may have
entitled him to some share* in the Care of me, as well as he may be in my
Esteem. Though blind Fortune, said the Count, has brought this Gentleman to do
you a piece of Service, of that Nature; yet I, with Justice, claim such a
considerable Interest in you, as I must not suffer any Stranger to equal, or
come near, without declaring him my Enemy. I am not an Enemy to any one,
replied Peregrine; but I will die in maintaining, that all the World, ought to
admire this Ladies Perfections, and not without vehement Desires. Clarinda
finding, that the heat increased, betwixt those two Rivals, as she felt Love to
glow more fiercely in her Breast, toward the worthy Stranger; she broke off
the Discourse, or Dispute rather, by saying, the Count would oblige her much
more, in letting fall that Discourse, which was very unpleasing to her, and to
exercise his Talient on any other Subject; and turning toward Peregrine, she
added, I fear, Sir, that my too long visit, may have caused some Disorder,
which may retard your Health, toward which I ought rather to contribute. Then,
turning again toward the Count, If you please, Sir, continued she, you and I
will retire into (...) his Hand.

What various and different Motions did animate those three Persons Breasts:
Peregrine was all Respect and Love; the Count Interest and Revenge, mixed with
some grounds of Affection; and Clarinda, full of Gratitude, which was almost
all turned into Passion. Peregrine, who before had had diverse opportunities to
observe a worthy Gratitude in Clarinda's Breast, was ravished to find that by
degrees it grow up into an Affection: That Noble Vigor, with which she had
maintained his Interest against the Count, had almost wholly convinced his
Modesty, that he was perfectly happy in her Bo^ome? but still he feared he had
reason to: apprehend the Opposition of a powerful Rival, but then he hoped that
the Count's own Rashness would work him out a shorter way to his Happiness,
than he might expect, by the due Methods in Love. He therefore contributed all
he could toward his Recovery, and in that Resolution, his Spirits being raised
above their ordinary pitch, by the thoughts of Conquest, he forced himself out
of his Seat, by the aid of a Staff, and getting into the Room, where he
expected to have found Clarinda and the Count together. He was strangely,
surprised to find Clarinda alone, imerg'd in Tears* under a gale of Sighs,
which she was not able to suppress so suddenly, but that Peregrine overheard;
he found of some of them, she had covered her Face all over with her
Handkerchief, so that Peregrine came up close to her, and stood some time
before her, ere she could perceive him; besides, she little expected his
coming, and knew no Body but her dear Mariana was permitted* to enter where she
was; if she heard any noise, she believed it to proceed from her: Wherefore, as
soon as her Sighs would permit her to make use of her Speech, remaining still
in the same posture, Let us, dear Mariana, said she, Let us prevent, if we can
possible, the dangerous effects of the Count's fury and power, over a Stranger,
to whom I owe so much, and whom thou know I love. With that uncovering her
Face, and perceiving Peregrine standing before her, she gave a shriek, and
presently clouding her Countenance with some marks of Displeasure, in another
Accent, she said; It was not fair, Sir, thus to intrude upon my Retirement, and
become a spy to my most secret Actions; it must needs lessen you in my
thoughts, and that which mere Gratitude had made me to express to your
Advantage, may by such proceedings tu^n to your Prejudice. Peregrine,
perceiving his Error, flung himself on his Knees before her, saying, I own my
fault, Madam, and thus so I beg your pardon, but be so just as to hear my
excuse; I have accused my self of a Crime, which I have committed without
design, therefore I hope the easier to be pardoned; but if I must incur your
Displeasure, doom me to Death, command my Rival to chastise that Presumption,
which lead me to inquire after his Behavior toward so much worth; 'twas the
Apprehensions of his want of respect toward you, that forced me out of my
Chamber, to be a bridle to his ruggid Temper, which I fear, Madam, has been the
Cause of these Disorders, I unhappily find you in. The Count, who Peregrine had
thought to be gone, was returning again upon his steps, but was met by Mariana
at the Chamber Door, who having seen the posture of these two Lovers, judged it
convenient to prevent the Count from the same Spectacle; but yet not so well
but that he had time to perceive, as she was shutting the Door, how Courteously
Clarinda was raising Peregrine from the Floor. Hell and Confusion, cried the
Count, Can I see this tamely? It must not, it shall not be, one of us two must
yield to the other, by a sudden Death; with that he went hastily out again,
grumbling to himself. Mariana did attempt to appease him, and called to him,
but he had no Ears left but for revenge, which pressed him forward to some
fatal Enterprise.

The noise the Count had made, had reached the Lovers ^^^s; and Peregrine was
earnestly persuading Clarinda, to permit him to go and correct his Insolence;
but she retained him by the Hand, telling him she knew better how to allay his
passion, as being better acquainted with it* I Will take my (...) to do it,
continued she, mean time, I must dissuade you, from so much Presumption as to
believe that if ^ mentioned Love, as you have intimated, I thought then of you;
I must confess you have a great share in my Gratitude, and some Progress you
may have made in my Esteem, by your obliging Behavior; yet not so firmly
establish, but that, the least, Presumption in your very* Thoughts, would beat
down all the Fabric, your modesty had raised, should it come to my Knowledge*
Madam, replied Pere^^^ne, I am nothing ^^^ what you would have me to b^, and I
will never presume to think* to speak, or to act, but what shall ^^
correspondent to your Will and (...) replied Clarinda, I will (...) believe
that I ha^^ some (...) you, but let that be the (...) of your Ambition. I am
all Obedience, Madam, replied Peregrine; and in order to bring my self to this
frame of Temper, I will have the vilest Thoughts of my self, and the most
honorable of the Count, that I can conceive in my Imagination: as for your
Excellencies, I am already satisfied, that they put you above the aspiring of
the most accomplished Monarchs on Earth. Mariana's coming in to acquaint them
with what the Count had seen, and said, made them to change their Discourse;
and some time after, Peregrine seeing it grow late, took his leave of Clarinda,
in order to go to his Bed; at which Clarinda thought fit (to sweeten his relish
after the bitter Potion she had given him,) with some kindnesses, to say, that
she had a great desire to see his Leg, which she feared was not so well as she
could wish, by his favoring it so much. I have attained, added she, to some
skill in Wounds and Bruises, from some observations which I have made in my
Mother's, and my Aunt's charitable practice amongst the Poor of the
Neighborhood. Peregrine would have excused himself from giving her that
trouble.

But Clarinda, who designed to sweeten him again, ordered Mariana to send for
those things with which he dressed his Leg, that she might see it opened her
self.

Peregrine must have been more than blind, not to discern that all Clarinda's
pretended actions of gratitude, were the mere effects of Love. But
notwithstanding all his knowledge, he was to seem ignorant: He therefore
consented to all her desires, and permitted his Leg to be dressed by his two
new Chyrurgeons. Clarinda perceiving some blackness still remaining on the
bruised part, appeared much concerned at it, and said, she feared very much
that he was not yet past all danger. Peregrine protested all was well; that he
felt no other inconveniency at that present, but a little weakness which
attended his Ankle, which he attributed to the want of using his Leg, and the
fall of some humors upon that part. Mariana, who knew it would please
Clarinda, did second her in what she said, and added, it was fit to send for
the Chyrurgeon very early in the Morning, before he should be gone forth: so
that Peregrine, for fear of offending, had not a word to reply. This being
concluded on, and Peregrine's Leg swadled up again, he took his leave once more
of his two Doctresses, and by the aid of one of his Servants, retired to his
own Chamber.

Peregrine was no sooner got thither, but Clarinda went into hers, attended by
her Faithful Mariana; where, while Clarinda was undressing, they had a large
discant upon that Evenings Transactions; wherein Mariana endeavored to
convince Clarinda, That seeing she her self was grown to that pass, as not to
be capable of concealing her Passion toward Peregrine, she ought to take other
methods with him, and not deny so absolutely, that which she could not conceal
from him in the day, and from her at night, in her Dreams and passionate
Transports, at her awaking. Clarinda confessed, that she could not well
palliate her Passion much longer, it was grown to such a height, but that she
was resolved not wholly to declare in favor of Peregrine neither, 'till she
had got her Father's consent to disingage herself from the Count; and that she
would lose no time, nor leave no means unattempted to accomplish her designs;
wherefore she had designed the next Morning to send an Express to her Father
about it. These Resolutions being taken, they went to their repose,

The young Count, who had but very little rest all that Night, and that found
himself the next Morning very indisposed, designed to prevent a Fever, by a
bleeding in the Arm; he thereunto employed the same Chyrurgeon that had been
sent for that very Morning by Clarinda to Peregrine, because he lived near him,
and was constantly made use of on any occasion by the whole Family, as those
kind of Persons affect to make themselves busy in their employ: he told the
Count, that he was presently to go to the Lady Clarinda's, to look on a strange
Gentleman's Leg, who he had in hand before, and had left, as believing him
quite out of danger. The Count hearing of this, caused the Chyrurgeon to bleed
him in the left Arm; after which he took the opportunity of this Messenger to
convey a Challenge into Peregrine's hand, and to receive an answer by the same
way, unknown, and unsuspected by any Person of the Castle. He then writ as
follows.

SIR,
MY Right to fair Clarinda is so substantial and solid, that you must resolve
to quit all your imaginary Claims to her, under your hand, or be ready to
maintain your weak pretensions, with your Sword in hand, to Morrow, at Five in
the Morning, in the Gravel Pits, about the midway, betwixt the Castle and the
Habitation of

Your Humble Servant Count Man^fi^^^*
The least Child will show you the place.

He delivered this Paper, sealed up, to the Chyrurgeon, giving him strict
charge to convey into that Gentleman's own hands, unperceived of any Person
whatsoever, and to require an answer, and bring it as secretly back to him
again. The Chyrurgeon promised to perform his commands to a tittle, and upon
that went his way to the Castle. He was presently admitted into Peregrine's
Chamber, where, not long after, Clarinda and Mariana appeared also; they
inquired after his Health, which he owned to be perfect, and that it was merely
to condescend to others desires, that he admitted of this unnecessary visit
from the Chyrurgeon. The Chyrurgeon did not think fit to deliver the Letter,
while they were in the Room, wherefore he employed himself in pulling out his
Pocket, all the Instruments he had, which were not a few, though he had no
occasion for any; and with searching all his Pockets, he at last let drop the
Letter by accident, which being perceived by Mariana, she took it up, and
conveyed it into Clarinda's hands, who went out to read. Mean time, the Leg was
taken into Examination, and after all adjudg'd by the Leech-Oracle, to be as
the owner of it had certified. Now he had no more to do, but to deliver the
Letter, but still is very uneasy at the Women's presence; he tumbles all over
himself, to have it in readiness to deliver, with the first opportunity; frets
within himself that he cannot find it, at last perceives it on the Table, where
Clarinda had laid it, after she had read, and sealed it up again: He greedily
snatches it up; and Clarinda perceiving he had found it, retires with Mariana,
to give him the opportunity of delivery: He presently conveys it into
Peregrine's hands, and waits for an answer: Peregrine reads it, and instantly
sends him back with these following Lines.

SIR,
HAD you said, That neither you, nor I, nor none else, had any right in that
Lady, more than she is pleased herself to dispose of to any Person she judges
worthy of that Honor, I had joined with you* in opposition to all
Contradictions. But because I am of Opinion, you ground your right on a false
bottom, I am willing to inform you, I shall not fail to meet you, at the time
and place appointed* with my Sword in hand, to let you know ^^ what right I
ground my pretensions in that fair person; 'till then, I am

Your Humble Servant Peregrine.


Now are all parties very well pleased with their cunning contrivances, though
every one in a distinct respect; Peregrine appeared all that day more gay and
pleasant than ever, walking up and down, and would willingly have taken the Air
out of Doors, but that he could not obtain of his courteous Guardian; when he
found that by no means he could not get out, to see himself where was the place
of Rendezvous, being so narrowly watched by all the Family, he sent one of his
Servants to inquire the way to the Count's, and then to follow that Road, 'till
he found some Gravel Pits about the midway; after that, he gave order to
another of his, to keep all the Horses, and all things else, in a readiness, as
if to depart the next Morning; but that they should do it very privately, and
not go about it 'till all the Servants were in Bed. After this, he applied
himself to the composing of this following Letter.

I Fly, Madam, to inform the Count, with the point of my Sword, that you are a
fuel I can yield to no Man, but accompanied with my Life; not Madam, that I
dare presume to think any thing in me, worthy so rich a prize. But I am so vain
as to assert, That none can love you better, and that none dare do for you
more, then I am ready to perform at all times, and yet attribute to my self no
Merits in the least, on that account. I go with that confidence, that I repose
on the advantage of your Esteem and Friendship, that makes me sure of the
Victory. If I live, it will be but to continue your Slave all the days of my
Life. If I fall, and you afford but one kind thought to accompany me to my
Grave, I shall rest in peace; but either in Life or Death, I am, and shall ever
be

Your most humble Servant Peregrine.


This Letter was to be left, sealed up, on his Pillow, that it might not so
readily be sound, and that he might first have time to dispose of himself,
according to the Event of the Combat; he still, by intervals, mixed himself with
Clarinda and Mariana, who had other Thoughts in their Heads, and Peregrine
perceiving them to be something more pensive than ordinarily, did all he could
to divert them; all this did but still more, and more ensnare Clarinda, who
could not but be highly pleased at her Lover's great Passion and Bravery, which
very much ficted her Masculine Spirit; but she had designed to prevent all
mischief, for this time, with a resolution to give her self to him, so soon as
the Messenger she had sent to her Father, were returned, what answer soever he
brought, in order to prevent all future quarrels, in the opinion, that being
once his, all other pretensions would be at an end, and fall of themselves,

The Day drawing to an end, Clarinda pretended her self somewhat indisposed,
that she might the sooner retire to perfect the design, which she, and Mariana
had laid, to disappoint Peregrine of his Intentions: Peregrine also, to take
time to pack up all things, without noise, was glad of that opportunity to
retire.

He had not been long alone in his Chamber, but he thought he heard the sound
of some Instrument, at a distance, which made him give an Attention to it; he
shifted to all sides of the Room, to find from whence it came; at last, having
opened a Closet Door, he was sensible that it proceeded from behind that Wall:
He laid his Ear as close as he could to it, and discerned 'twas a Lute; after
which he heard some body say, Here, take this Instrument, it suits not now my
too distracted Thoughts, come lets to rest: I think 'twill be convenient,
answered another, that we may not fail of encountering the Count early enough,
to defeat his Designs. 'Twill be a strange Surprisal, answered the other, to
him, and to our Guests, who little think how fast he is secure. After this,
there was a silence which made him give over harkening, to break their
Measures, not doubting but 'twas Clarinda and Mariana, who had had some
Intelligence of the Duel: He was alone in his Chamber, having ordered his
Servants to their rest; he went to open his Chamber Door, to call one of them,
but found he was double locked in. This made him to distrust the more, but knew
not how to remedy it; in this perplexity walking up and down, he at last
thought of getting out at the Window; he takes what he thought fit with him,
looks every where for his Sword, but finds it not; so gets out of the Window
without it, and finds himself near to the Stable-Yard, he makes toward the
Stables, where he finds his Man getting the Horses in a readiness, according to
order, inquires after his Sword, but no News of it, so was forced to take one
of his Servants Weapons, and that he might not be followed by Clarinda, causes
his Servants, to turn all the Horses loose, out of the Stable, except his own,
believing it too far a Journey for her to walk. Now, he grows very impatient,
thinks the time long, returns not to his Chamber, but waits for the tedious
hour by his Horses; and so soon as day began to peep, he gets his Horses sadled
our, without noise, and he follows himself, without being discovered. That
Servant who had been sent to find where the Gravel pits were, leads the Van,
Peregrine followed; after Five or Six Miles riding, the Guide told his Master,
that they were within half a Mile of the Pits; there Peregrine makes a halt,
and perceicing a thick Wood, on the right, commands his Men to go wait for him
there; after which, he rides on with his Guide, who leads him to the Pits;
there he orders his Man, that so soon as he should see a Gentleman appear, he
should retire homewards, in the Road, at some convenient distance, a little out
of the way, not to be seen, and there wait his coming.

Clarinda, full of Thoughts and Fears, could not Sleep, nor suffer Mariana to
take rest; but so soon as Day began to appear, they did arise, and calling up
some Servants, gave Orders to have three Horses sadled, her own, and Marianas,
and another for a Groom, and they went about to get themselves ready. The
Messenger presently returned, saying, That there was not an Horse in the
Stable; this did alarm Clarinda: What, said she, are not our Guest's Horses
there neither? The Person answered, that there was not one; this put Clarinda
in a great plunge, and Mariana was sent immediately down, with the Key of
Peregrine's Chamber Door, to see after him; she passing by that Window, out of
which Peregrine had got, perceiving it open, and something white lying on the
ground, she took it up, and feared he had got out that way, she hastily run to
his Chamber Door, and having opened it, found that the Bird was flown; she
immediately run back to acquaint Clarinda of it, and both in great surprise,
run to the Stables, half dressed, and half undressed; there Clarinda met a
Groom, leading her own Pad, who said, He, nor his Fellows, could find no more
Horses, as yet, she caused him immediately to be saddled, mean time, sends
Mariana for Peregrine's Sword, which she had laid out of the way; and so soon
as her Horse was ready, gets up, orders Mariana to follow her, so soon as
possible she could, and rides toward the Pits, as fast as her Horse could
carry her.

By this the Count was come, Peregrine had left him for dead, and at his fall,
having perceived a blue Ribbon hang out of his Pocket, he had the Curiosity to
pluck it out, at the end of which, he found a Picture, which perceiving to be
Clarindas, he put it in his own Pocket, and run back to find his Man and Horse,
to make his escape. He had not gone far, before he met with an Horse, on which
hung Clarinda, by the Foot in the Stirrup, and her Head dragging on the ground,
crying out for help. He presently knew her by her voice, and perceiving that
the Horse was frighted, he gently drew near him till he got hold of the Bridle;
and by that means was a second time the Preserver of his dear Mistresses Life.
He disingaged her, and knowing he could not be far from his Servant, he
whistled, at which he presently came: Clarinda had been cruelly bruised, all
about the Head and Shoulders, and received a dangerous Wound, on her Arm, with
a tread of the Horse, which caused her to swound, so soon as she had been laid
in Peregrine's Lap, who with both his Hands, hill'd her Head, and endeavored
to stop the Blood which ran very fast. He was in this posture, when Mariana
came full speed, who perceiving the Disaster, leapt off of her Horse, and ran
to Clarinda, who she found coming to her self; and who began to return thanks
to Peregrine for his timely Assistance. He presently inquired how she found her
self, which was seconded by Mariana. Clarinda, not sensible then of her pain,
told them, She hoped it would be nothing, and that the fright was the most: But
Peregrine, who knew better than her self, in what a Condition she was, desired
that she should immediately be carried back to her Bed, and Surgeons sent
for to take Care of her Wounds, and Bruises; she would not consent to be
removed, till she had inquired whether Peregrine had any hurt? And what was
become of the Count? He answered, He was perfectly well, except the grief that
he conceived at her disaster; she asked him again earnestly, What is become of
the Count? You have not killed him, I hope? Added she, I know not what he is,
Madam, replied Peregrine, I left him unable to pursue my retreat. If he is in
danger, replied Clarinda, there is no staying here; he has powerful Friends,
that will revenge his Death: Fly Peregrine, added she, and preserve that Life,
which twice has saved mine: This is no place for us to stay in any longer; Let
us, at least, retire from the Road: And are you sure, you are not hurt?
Continued she, looking on Peragrine with a passionate air. With that, not
staying for his Answer, she made offer to rise, which with the aid of
Peregrine, and Mariana, she performed: They led her into a thick Wood, which
was close by, where they set her down; and she having once more inquired
whether Peregrine was not hurt, and he assured her no; she related, how
galloping down a Hill, her Horse had stumbl'd, flung her over his Head, and
dragged her all along, and had undoubtedly killed her, had not the Heavens sent
him to her Relief. Peregrine knew well in what danger he stayed there, but
could not leave his dear Clarinda, all wounded as she was, which made him very
Restless; she soon perceived it, and dreading the worst; I fear, said she, you
have more cause to fly, than to stay here; 'twas my Misfortune, and your too
great Rashness, has brought you into danger: Fly, Sir, to save that Life,
which I must prize above my own Content. Where ever you go, think of Clarinda,
Sir; She Is yours by Acquisition, The Heavens will have it so; but when you're
safe, fail not to let me know where ever you are; my Prayers to Heaven shall be
to keep you safe, as safe as I shall keep you in my Thoughts. Peregrine was
going to reply, but hearing a great noise of Horse passing by; and Mariana
having perceived some of the Count's Liveries, they guest it was in pursuit of
Peregrine; he therefore had no longer time, then to kneel, take her Hand, and
kiss it; Adieu sweet Angel, said he to Clarinda, Death only shall drive thee
out of my Thoughts; I am, forever thine: Adieu, kind Mariana, added he, supply
my place in the Preservation of this fair one, I may live to return to see you
both. This Farewell drew Tears from all their Eyes; he got on Horseback, and
with his Man, went to seek after the rest of his Equipage, still looking behind
him, going with a slow pace, and heavy Heart, till he had lost the sight of
them. He met with his other Servants, with whom he got into a cross Road, with
all the speed he could.

Those who had passed by in such haste, were pursuers of Peregrine, who having
found the Count, as they thought, expiring, followed him, while the rest were
conveying the poor Count home, in whom, they had found some signs of Life. They
were running with all speed toward the Castle, where not being contented to
inquire after the Stranger (whom they believed had done the Deed, by what they
had gathered from the Surgeon, who had began to suspect the Contents of
those Letters he had carried,) they also search all over the Castle, but
finding nothing, were returning home; (not knowing which way to go,) when they
were met by Clarinda, on her Horse, supported by Mariana, on one side, and by
the Groom, on the other, who had followed as fast as he could get a Horse, and
make him go; they knew her, though muffl'd up, and all in Blood; but the
Business they had been about, and their rude Behavior in the Castle, made them
unwilling to take notice of her, so they posted by, without any further notice.

Poor Clarinda was thus brought home, laid in her Bed, her Heart more full of
Grief for Peregrine's Absence, though necessary for the safety of his Life,
than her Body was of pain, by the Wounds she had received; they were soon made
whole again, by the Care and Diligence of her Physicians, and Surgeons; but
it was not so with that of her Heart, no Physician was capable of curing those
Wounds which Peregrine's Dangers and Absence had made there; nothing but time,
and his dear Presence, could be a fit Salve for those great Evils. As she lay
pensive in her Bed, after she had been dressed, a Servant brought in the Letter
which she had found upon Peregrine's Pillow; she bid Mariana open it, and read
it to her, which drew Tears from her Eyes; and this having put Mariana in mind
of the Papers she had found in the morning, she pulled them out of her Pocket,
told Clarinda how she had found them, and then read as follows,

Verses for a Song.
WHile Beauteous Cloris, on the Waters lay,
Panting for Life, Damon wandered that way;
He 'spi'd, plunged, seized, and to the desired Shore,
His expiring fair Prize, in triumph bore;
But when his Purchase, he had laid,
And saw no signs of Life, he said,
Why made I not more hash, to set thee free?
Or, being too late, Why died I not with thee?
The charming Nymph, after some moments rest,
Gave signs, some Life still harbored in her Breast;
She sighed, she groaned, she opened both her Eyes,
She struggled hard, but yet, she could not rise,
Till Damon giving her some ease,
Her helpless Hand did gently cease;
Which having warmed with Kisses, down he laid,
And cried, Heaven pity this poor dying Maid.
At this her Eyes, which she again had closed,
Were lifted up; on his Breast she reposed
Her wearied Head, looked gashly on the Youth,
Not knowing whither 'twas a Dream, or Truth;
'Till he be sought her to declare,
How she, within her self did fare;
To which, with languid Looks, she did reply,
It Is too late Shepherd, Cloris, now must die.
These Words did so transpierce the poor Youth's Heart,
(Who first had wounded been with Cupid's Dart,)
That to cold Death he was resigning all,
When the fair Nymph, from Death thus did him call,
Do not die, said she, and I Will live,
And straight her gentle hand did give;
So were they heard no longer to complain;
But lived to Love, and loved to live again.
These things did but add fuel to that amorous Fire, which flamed in the
afflicted Clarinda's Breast. Why were the Heavens so kind, said she, to provide
so worthy a Preserver of my Life, and so cruel again, as to snatch him from me,
before I could let him know the gratitude of my Heart! His first brave action
had sufficiently engaged me to him, without being twice made beholden for my
Life; but, as if that was not yet enough, to make me his Debtor beyond hopes of
redemption, he also cruel proves in his passionate Expressions, and brave
Performances. Mariana, who did all she could to divert her from those
Reflections, told her, that she had a great fancy to give the Verses to set, to
her Master of the Lute, the next time he should come, that she might sing and
play them both together. Clarinda said, that would but increase her sorrow for
the absence of the Composer; yet do, continued she, since I cannot have his
sweet presence, let me enjoy what I can, of the Fruits of his Love; my greatest
comfort, in all my afflictions is, to find he loves me. No, said she again,
that is rather grief upon affliction; as circumstances are, it had been better
had he prove unkind. Thus was poor Clarinda afflicting her self, and her dear
Mariana comforting of her, when news were brought, her Musick-Master waited in
the Parlor. Clarinda would have him sent back, saying, she was not in condition
to hear Music; but Mariana did so strongly plead, in hopes it would aid to
compose her Spirits, that he was sent for up, and part of the accident that had
befallen her, related to him, as it had been to the rest of the Household, to
put a stop to their overcurious Inquisitions. He took up her Lute, which having
tuned, he played on it such Lessons as used to delight her most; but she seemed
not to hearken to them. Ask of Mariana the Verses which she began to read; then
returning them to her again, there, said she, do what you will with them.
Mariana taking this as a tacit consent, to what she had proposed, showed them
to the Musick-Master, and desired him to set them to a Tune, so as that they
might be sung, and played upon the Lute; he promised so to do, and to bring
them with him the next day; and having played two or three Tunes more, he took
his leave, and retired.

Then had Mariana leisure, and not before, to unfold the other Paper which she
had taken up; but she found it written in a Language she did not understand.
Here is, I know not what, said she to Clarinda, giving her the Paper; (which
was that Letter which Peregrine received from that Lady I mentioned before, the
day before he left England:) Clarinda was as far to seek, as Mariana; she
fancied it to be a Woman's hand, and was confirmed in that Opinion, so soon as
she had read at the bottom of it, the word Isabella; her Heart started at it,
as a presage of the sorrows which it would cause her; she dreaded the contents,
yet was impatient to know them; she doubted not but this was a Letter to him
from some English Woman, writ in that Language, and therefore was the less in
hopes of having it decyphered: they both beat their Heads very much about it,
but to no purpose; 'till at last it came into Clarinda's mind, that she had
heard her old Aunt say, That presently upon the death of her Husband, who had
died at London, she had been forced to go thither, to recover some considerable
Sums of Money, that were due to her Husband, which she could not recover but by
long and costly Suits at Law, which had caused her to remain in that Kingdom,
near two years, in which time, she had got some imperfect knowledge of that
Language. Clarinda sent Mariana immediately with the Letter to her Aunt, to
desire her that she would Translate it for her, as well as she could possible.
The old Gentlewoman was very unwilling to undertake such a Task, pleading her
long discontinuance in that Tongue; but being overpersuaded by her Neice's, and
Mariana's Importunities, she writ out of it that which follows, picked out here
and there, as well as she could gather it, without any coherence.

The despair of ever seen you more, has -- my Passion was too great, not to be
-- to bestow on others, that which by my -- so Cruel to one, who never -- but
in loving you -- my Death a salve to all -- Peregrine hear -- of the unfortunate

Isabella.


The old Lady had required time, 'till Night, for the unravelling of those
Mysteries, which Mariana was forced to allow her, but through Clarinda's
Impatience she was frequently interrupted by Mariana, which caused the old Lady
to lock her self up, 'till she had done, to avoid any further Disturbance; at
last, the Business was Accomplished, as well as could be done by her, and
Mariana called up, to whom it was delivered, not without being asked by the old
Gentlewoman, how she had come by that Letter, adding that that was all she
could make of it* Mariana, told her she had found it by chance, so run down
immediately to show it to the impatient Clarinda.

Heavens, What do I see? Said Clarinda, after she had read a little. How Is
this? Cried she again, reading on; What read I more? Continued she, here is his
Name, and that also of that unfortunate Woman, whom he has rendered Miserable;
See, see Mariana, continued she, Peregrine is false; Oh Heavens! What will
become of me? Mariana, having read (...), said, I perceive a complaint made by
one Isabella; at Peregrine's depart, she ^eems to tax him with cruelty, and
owns ^he loves him, but in all this, I do not find that she calls him
Unconstant, Infidel, Perjured, Deceitful, or the like: No, ^eplied Clarinda,
but all that, and a great deal more does follow. Those Inferences may easily be
drawn from what I have seen; Oh! Unfortunate Clarinda, and False Peregrine;
with that she gave her ^elf over to Unconsolable Grief. Mariana did all she
could to comfort her, but ^ll in vain, she represented to her, that though all
was true which she but surmi^ed at most; yet, this was before he had ^een her,
and that she believed the very Heavens had contributed by strange Accidents to
make him constant to her. A ^alse Man minds not Heaven, answered Clarinda, Oh!
that I had seen but this before he had gone, I had commanded him never more to
see my Face. In ^hort, Clarinda was in such a fury, that Mariana thought it
Prudence, not to insist any longer on Peregrine's Justification, ^t that
present, but rather to divert her from the Thoughts of him, by raising of some
other Discourse, not questioning but that in time Peregrine would be able to
justify himself; for Mariana had entertained so good an Opinion of him, that
she would believe all things else, rather than that he should be false. The
Messenger, which Clarinda had sent to her Father at Mentz, being just at that
time returned, he brought her the sad News of her Father's desperate Illness.
This Addition of Grief, made her resolve to leave the Castle, that place which
had lately proved so fatal to her, and to go and tend her Father in the Town of
Mentz, without any further Desires to hear of Peregrine's safe Retreat. She
began from that time, to gather all that she thought convenient to carry with
her, as Money, Plate, and Jewels, the rather to, because the Servant had told
her that there was great Apprehensions in Mentz, of the Confederate Troops
speedy Approaches, and that no doubt they would ravage the Country: Wherefore,
partly her own safety, and partly in a despair, she took that Resolution,
designing to put in Execution, with the earliest haste, and to leave Mariana,
in the Castle, to attend ^er old Aunt, who kept continually Cloi^ter'd up in
her Chamber, and to send ^er News, by some means or other, of that Perfidious
Man, in Case she had any to send, that she might inform him, she now knew him:
This was a hard Pill for Mariana to swallow, but finding she might ^o Peregrine
a great piece of Service, in ^ending Clarinda News of him, from whom she did
not question but to hear, so soon as he was got in a place of security; she
consented to Clarindas request.

The earnest Desires Clarinda had to be gone, hastened in some measure her
Cure; so that the third day, after her Disaster, she was fit to get on Horse
back; but having been further informed that all the Roads were full of the
Confederate's Forces, she thought it would be dangerous for her to adventure in
her own Aparel, for fear of being met by some rude party* she therefore put on
one of her Brother's Suits, assuming his Name, and being fitted with all things
else, to make her a complete Cavalier; she set forward in the close of the
Evening, with three of her Men Servants, designing to be so near Mentz by
Morning, that the Confederates should not prevent her getting in*

Fortune did so favor her Enterprise, that by the next Morning, she got safe
into Montz, but it was not without riding very hard, having been pursued for
two Miles, even to the very Gates of the Town; there (for Addition to her
Grief) she learnt the Death of her Father, and that he had been buried the day
before her coming: Those who had seen the Servant that had been sent before,
returning with her, who now went under the Notion of Frederick, (which was her
Brother's Name,) and Son and Air to the Deceased, did not in the least question
the truth thereof; wherefore, they delivered to Frederick, all that his Father
had left; but he disliking his Lodgings, he took one up in a more convenient
place, and presently sent back all three of his Servants, giving them charge to
put his dear Mariana in mind, of what she had promised to do.

Peregrine, mean time, as he was making his escape, fell into a Party of the
Consederates, who took him Prisoner, and brought him where he was most desirous
to be, in the Absence of his charming Clarinda. He presently made inquiry after
his worthy Friend, Count Zinzerdorf, and was not long after brought to his
Quarters, where he was received with all the Caresses imaginable. He came into
the Camp, about the beginning of July, having been taken by a Party of Foot,
the Evening before, who were Convey to the Baggage and Artillary. The Camp
being on one Line, and the Regiments of Horse and Foot being intermixed, it was
late the next Morning, before he was surrendered into the Count's Hands. He
being thus safe, his next Care was to give notice to Clarinda of his safety,
which he conceived in these Terms.

If there was any perfect felicity to be had, where the charming Clarinda is
not, I might think my self not far from attaining it. I am with my Friends, in
an Army that fronts, and threatens the Enemy's Destruction; and I have that
particular and vast Advantage over the rest, of having you, Madam, for my
Guardian Angel; but when I reflect on the Condition, in which my hard Fate,
forced me to leave you; especially, considering that I am to place all your
Misfortunes on the account of my perverse Stars, all my great prospect of
Contentedness is reduced into a black Cloud of Despair; I earnestly entreat the
most obliging Mariana to let me know whether I stand for Life or Death, for
both depend so absolutely upon Clarindas State, that according to my
Information, I am prepared to live, or die an eternal Votary to that fair Saint.


With this Letter he dispatched one of his Servants, who spoke German, to
convey it to the Castle, and got a Pass that he might not be hindered in his
going or coming back. This Messenger, who was his Groom, made a shift to loose
himself, in the dark of the Evening, betwixt the Camp and the Town, in a Vale,
near a Mill, where some of the Army of Loraine had orders to post themselves.
This made the Groom to avoid them (not knowing who they were) to get betwixt
them and the Town, with a Design, so soon as any light did appear, never so
little, to get from amongst them as fast as ever he could, and so inquire out
the way to the Castle: But he failed in his Measures, for the French sallied
out, which gave an alarm to the Germans, who soon drove back the Salliers, who
took but one Man Prisoner, that proved to be Peregrine's Groom. He was brought
into the Town, and some would have made him pass for a Spy, but that the
Fellow had so much wit as to call himself a Deserter, who being sent with a
Letter, from a Gentleman, came but the day before into the Camp, of the
Confederates, to a Lady that lived in a Castle, about a days Journey from
thence, he had taken that opportunity of escaping into the Town, and that he
was waiting for some opportunity of doing so, when he was luckily brought in;
this and the Fellow's Readiness to produce the Letter, soon gained Credit, so
that he was released, and the Letter, after read, returned to him.

Amongst those who were present at the Fellow's Examination; a person who lived
in the same House where Frederick ^ay, had been a Spectator, and being asked,
at his return, what news from the Party that had sallied out that Night, he
said, they had lost three or four Men, but had got but one Prisoner, who it
seems was a Deserter, then he told them the whole Story; this having been
related just by Frederick's Chamber Door, so that he had over heard all; he
began to fancy, that he might be something concerned in this Business more than
ordinary; he therefore inquired, where he might see this Deserter, and what
Livery he had on? But could learn neither, he only was offered by the Fellow to
go seek after him, and bring him to him, if he would consider him for his
pains; Frederick having promised the Fellow a good reward, and given him a
small advance, he went his ways to seek after Peregrine's Groom, who he found
about some two Hours after drinking with some Soldiers; but he scarce knew him
again, because the Soldiers had taken the pains to ease him of his upward
Garment, which was Peregrine's Livery. But hearing him say that the Lady must
excuse him, if he made bold to light his Pipe, with some of these Compliments
which his Master sent to her; that made the Fellow confident it was the same
Person, he stopped his Hand, and told him there was a young Gentleman, in the
Town, that had something to say to him: The Groom presently put up the Letter
again, with his Pipe, and said, he was ready to follow him, desiring his
Comrades to forbear drinking the rest of his Coat, 'till he returned to have
his share of it; with that he followed his Guide, who soon brought him to
Frederick.

The Groom having never seen Frederick before, no not in his former Aparel, nor
Frederick him; he was obliged to interogate him the more strictly, and the
Groom gave Frederick such satisfactory Answers, that when he was presented with
the open Letter, all rompl'd, he soon knew the Character, and remained well
satisfied of the truth of all the rest; he gratified both the Fellows, and bid
the Groom come to him the next day, then he retired to his own Chamber, to read
with the greater leisure, and privacy, that which he thought most concerned him
in this World; he could not but reflect at Fortune's figaries, who had mis-lead
this Fellow, by which means he had come the sooner to hear of that false Man,
to whom he was resolved to send a severe Epistle. Frederick read, but did not;
kissed those Lines which Peregrine had writ, an Hundred times over, as he had
done before, when he was still Clarinda, and finding so much Passion in them,
he thought he could not dispute them too much. He was impatient of the Groom's
return, that he might further examine him, and find whither he might entrust
him with his Designs; in the mean time, he busied himself in reading all
Peregrine's Writings; after which, he took his Lute, Played and Song to it
those Verses, which his Musick-Master had given him, that same day he had set
forth for Mentz, which he had got very perfect, with repeating them
continually, as he daily did, but not with that pleasure he had formerly done.
Of Truth, this had been the greatest of his Diversion ever since his coming to
that place, where he had lived retire, without any Communication even at his
Meals, so that he passed under the Notion of the Woman hater, because there
were diverse Gentlewomen in the same House, Boarders, whose Company Frederick
did avoid, as if they had had the Plague; and when any one came to make his
Bed, or clean his Chamber, he would all that time retire into a Closet, at the
further end of his Chamber, which contained all his Trunks, Boxes and Chests,
and where he would frequently retire to play on the Lute, or to meditate on
those Writings once so precious to him, that he might still be the less heard,
and thought on. There he began to think in what perplexities Peregrine would
have been in, had he been true, at his not hearing any News from him, which
made him think the time very long before the Groom's return, who at last came.
Frederick brought him into his Closet; after he had shut the Chamber Door,
where he examined so closly the Groom, that he confessed to him, he had pretended
to be a Deserter, when he had been taken by the Enemy, only that he might have
the better opportunity to get to that Castle, where they had been made so much
on by the good Lady of that place, on his Masters Account, he was sure; for he
had heard his Fellow Servants, who were oftener within Door, than he, whose
whole Business was in the Stable, talk strange things of them: And do they
believe, said Frederick, that your Master does really Love that Gentlewoman?
Love her, answered the Groom, doats upon her, ay, and will even run
statk-staring Mad for her, to, it is believed; for a does neither eat, drink,
nor sleep; but all Night he is a sighing and sobbing, as if his own Hearts Blood
and Guts, would burst asunder: By'r Lady, I could not live so, for my part,
continued he. Well, honest Friend, replied Frederick, since thou have been so
faithful to thy Master, and do design to continue so, here is to encourage
thee to go on, in serving him truly; and now I will tell thee that I am nearly
related to that Lady, to whom thou were going with the Letter, and that if thou will venture to carry back a Letter to thy Master, I shall reward thee well for
thy pains: Odds-buds, Master, answered the honest blunt Groom, I did fancy so
much so soon as I saw you, though I never saw her, and might my Girdle never
hold, if I do not venture my Whizle, at any time for any of you Three; try me
else, continued he, do ye but contrive, and drive me forwards, and try if I
don't go. This hearty proffer from so blunt a Fellow, could not but highly
please Frederick, who resolved to take this opportunity to make a Trial of
Peregrine's Constancy, beginning to hearken to his Love, who very much inclined
him to clear Peregrine in his Thoughts, ever since he had, without passion or
prejudice read over and over, those broken Fragments which did pretend a
passionate Love, from the Woman, but no Perfidiousness in the Man, who after
all might never have loved her. However, he was resolved to put Peregrine on
very severe Trials, that should thoroughly confirm him of his constancy toward
him, before he would admit him again, to the same place, he before that
discovery possessed in his Heart; to that purpose, Frederick resolved to
conceal himself, under the Character of a Friend of the Counts, and in that
Humor, writ the following Lines.

If all the Men in your Armies were as expert as you are, at killing of both
Sexes, we should have reason not to fear for our selves only, but for our Wives
and Daughters also; you are not contented with those Murders which you have
committed at home, but wearied there, with Blood, you are come to exercise your
Talient amongst us, also; we have had but too woeful Examples of it, in the late
unfortunate Count Mansfielt, and since that, in the much to be lamented
Clarinda, whose knowledge of your Domestic Perfidiousness, has untimely
snatched away from us. As a Friend to both these, I declare my self your Mortal
Enemy, who will never have quiet till I have washed, with your Blood, those
stains which must render you odious to all Mankind.


This short but smart Epistle being sealed up, he gave it without
Superscription to the Groom, with some Gold, and bid him to get himself in a
Readiness, to Sally out the next Night with a Party that was appointed to that
purpose, and gave him one of the Soldier's Coats to conceal himself under,
which he might well enough do in the dark; then giving him an handful of
Silver, he thus dismissed him.

The following Night, the Garrison made four false Sallies, in one of which,
the trusty Groom made a shift to get out of the Town, and return to his Master,
to whom, having given the Letter, he related all that had happened to him since
his Absence. You may imagine into what surprising terror, a Letter so filled
with horror, did put him; he was for a long time mute, and as stiff as a
Stake, without the least Motion, out of which he suddenly starred, asking the
Groom if he had brought him e're a Letter? There it is in your hand, said the
Fellow, Thou lie, Villain, replied distracted Peregrine; then looking on the
Letter, See, added he, Is this directed to me? Holding it to the poor trembling
Fellow; Alack, Sir, I cannot read, not I, said the Groom, but I am sure that he
who gave it me, bid me to deliver it into your own hands. Why, who am I, Dog?
Said poor Peregrine; my Master, Sir, I think, answered the Fellow, but I think
strangely changed. I Will go ask what is the matter, added he, with that he slipped
out of the Chamber, and left Peregrine alone, to descant upon that severe
Letter, where we will leave him for some small space, to inform you of what was
become of the Count, and of Mariana.

As for the Count he had been so carefully looked after, that he was perfectly
recovered of his Wound, but not of that extreme Weakness, which that vast
quantity of Blood he had lost, had brought upon him; he, and his Friends, were
resolved not to give over that Business so, but to have a full revenge, so soon
as they could but hear where Peregrine was retired; to that purpose, they had
made all the inquiries they could possible, from the Servants at the Castle; as
also, of the Surgeon. They had learnt, that he was an English Man, Peregrine
by Name, that he designed to pass the Campaign, in the Confederates Army, and
they believed, that without doubt, he was retired there; but they would not
attempt any thing against him, to the prejudice of the Count's Honor;
wherefore, they but staid till the Count was in Condition to call Peregrine to
an Account himself.

As for Mariana, she had been so afrighted, and the old Lady also, by a Party
from the Confederates, who had committed a world of Rudeness, that they were
retired, Servants and all, to a place Twenty Miles off of the Castle; Mariana
having concluded that it would be as impossible to send any News to Clarinda,
as she feared Peregrine had found it difficult to send to her, at the Castle;
she still continuing in that Confidence, she had of Peregrine's Virtues;
wherefore, was willing to attribute his silence, to any other Cause than his
Inconstancy.

Things were at that pass, amongst the Lovers Conserns, when that the
Confederate's Army had made their Approaches, very near to the Town, at 450
Paces from the Counterscarp, where the Saxons, (amongst which, Peregrine was a
Voluntiere) had taken their Post, on which the Enemy did Fire continually all
that day; and one of their Shot, out of a Falcon, unfortunately killed, the
Prince Palatine, Frederick William, who was come, as a Voluntiere, in the Camp;
and was, that day, with Peregrine, at the head of the French; where, also, were
the Prince Elector, his Brother, and the Grand Master of the Tutonick Order.
The Body of that unfortunate Prince was carried to Francfort, there to be
embalmed.

Peregrine, who notwithstanding all his Afflictions and Grief, would not let
pass any opportunity of showing that he was not come so far only to see, and to
be seen, did not omit this occasion of waiting on the Prince, at the head of
the French, but did wish, a thousand times, that the Bullet had met with his
Head, in liew of the Princes; since he had received that fatal Letter, there
had not been any dangerous Enterprise, but he had been in it, with a purpose
Design of not out-living his dear Clarinda, whom he concluded Dead, of which,
he counted himself the Cause; but still he did come off with Honor, his better
Fortune reserving him to enjoy his Hearts Desires: How often did he call
himself negligent Fool, for not having burnt that fatal English Letter, to
which he attributed all his Misfortunes, as was intimated, in that which he had
received, from an unknown Hand? He was resolved, with the first opportunity, to
get into the Town, to inform himself, more at large, and to find out that
unknown Person, who had been so severe in his Censure of him. That, of Truth,
had been the Occasion of his going on all Parties; but, as yet, he had not met
with any opportunity, of accomplishing his Design, which still did distract him
more, and more, in so much, that his Friends, and especially, the Count
Zinzendorf, had diverse times inquired what was the matter with him? What Cause
of Discontent he had had, which appeared so visibly in his Countenance? And
that made him so desperately throw himself into all kind of Dangers? Desiring
him to manage himself a little better? But to all these Interrogatories, and
Advices, he would make no Answer, nor give his Friends (who were really highly
concerned for him) any Satisfaction, so that they were forced to let him take
his own Course, giving him over for a lost Man. He still continued deaf, to all
their Advices; and he, most impatiently, watched for an opportunity of
deserting, with a Resolution, in case he found Clarinda gone, to throw himself
head long, amongst the Enemies, and there be sacrificed, a Victim to her Memory.

Clarinda, or Frederick, rather, on the other hand, had a thousand times wished
he had not sent so severe a Letter, which he feared would produce Peregrine's
death, his Innocence daily getting ground over Frederick's Indignation; at
last, not hearing from him, it brought Frederick into such an impatiency, that
he could no longer rest, without learning something of his once so dearly
beloved Preserver; he had been brought into that violent desire by the frequent
Reflections he had made, on Peregrine's Bravery; concluding with himself, that
it was impossible so gallant a Person, who had done so much for him, could be
guilty of so horrid a Crime, as he had taxed him with, in his Passion: He had
tried all means imaginable to send some body to him, but had found it
impossible, which had made him take up the brave Resolution to join in the next
Party that should go out, and to get over to the Army, or perish in the
attempt. To accomplish this, he went a Voluntiere, and joined himself to the
Horse-Guard, that the Town had sent forth to front that of the Confederates;
and there being no other Action, on that time, on the Confederates side;
Peregrine, rather then do nothing at all, was got amongst their Horse Guard.
Toward Night, there were some Pickeerings, in which diverse were killed, on
both side, amongst which was one D' Andlau, Captain in Palfe's Regiment, and
diverse made Prisoners, on both sides, amongst which, Frederick was the best
pleased.

It proved luckily for Frederick, that he was the Prisoner of one of
Peregrine's intimate Friends. For this Gentleman, having not heard what was
become of Peregrine, had sent to inquire after him; News was brought that he
was supposed to be killed, for his Horse was found dead, which was known again
by his own Groom, but his Body was not yet to be found; so it was concluded,
that he had quitted his Horse, and having fought on Foot, and that he might be
dropped amongst the Enemies. This having been told in the presence of Frederick,
it caused such a sudden change in him, that notice was taken of it; and
presently after, he retired into that Room which had been allotted for him (for
his Ransom had already been set to an hundred Pistols, to which he had readily
agreed,) where having flung himself upon a Couch, he gave way to all that
passion could move in a sensible Breast. He called himself, a thousand times, a
Murderer, in having writ that cruel Letter, which doubtless, was the cause of
his becoming so Careless of his Life, as he was reported to be; some Servants
having taken notice of this great passion, in the young Prisoner, they went and
acquainted the Officer with it, who, coming near to the Tent Door, heard
Frederick say, unfortunate Woman. The Officer entered hastily, and going to the
Bed, What Woman do you mean? Said he, And what is the cause of that great
Passion you have fallen into, since the News of my worthy Friend's Death?

Frederick thought himself now absolutely ruined, and remained silent for a
considerable time, not knowing what to say. This made the Officer to add, were
you acquainted with him? If so, let me know it? If he was a Friend of yours, I
assure you, you shall fare the better for it? Frederick, that desired no longer
to live, now he thought Peregrine was dead; with a design to urge the Officer
to do him some Mischief, thus answered, If you was Peregrine's Friend, you can
not do his Memory a greater piece of Service, than to Sacrifice me to it? For,
I declare, I was his mortal Enemy, that I writ to him a Letter, which put him
into that Despair, which made him so little to manage his Life, to which I add,
that I let my self be taken Prisoner, (as the posture I was found in, might
easily show), being alighted, and amongst your own Party, that I might have his
Blood, for having been the Death of a Gentlewoman to whom I am related. Now,
Sir, continued he, If you have any respect for your Friend's memory, do what he
himself would have done to me, or I had been his Executioner? And seeing the
Officer stand as amazed, he added, If it is the loss of my Ransom, detains you
from doing that piece of Justice, to your Friend, here is that which will be
worth better than an 100 Pistols to you? And with that drew a Jewel out of his
Bosom, which he presented to the Officer, but he refused it; and being still
more and more surprised, at these strange things, knew not what to think, and
after he had remained a little silent, he thus said, I know not, Young Man,
what to think of you; I find you are in a kind of Despair, which makes you seek
for relief, in Death, but I am not a Person to take Advantage of any-one's
Misfortunes. I do not know but that my Friend may have been taken Prisoner,
seeing, that though his Horse has been found slain, his body has not been yet
discovered; wherefore, I would have you manage your self, till we have a
certainty of the matter; not doubting, but that if my Friend lives, he will
give you all the Satisfaction that you can receive from a gallant Person:
forbear but speaking ill of my worthy Friend, and enjoy here all the
conveniences that my Quarters will afford; I will leave you to your self, a
dieu, with that the Officer went out of the Tent.

Thus was the poor afflicted Frederick left, a Prev to all his Sorrows, with
the only small glimpse, which Peregrine's Friend had left him, by saying, he
might be made a Prisoner; Frederick, resolved to know the truth of it, out of
hand, by escaping into the City, though with the hazard of his Life; with a
firm Resolution, to die, if he found not Peregrine there a live; he began to be
extraordinary sensible of the evil Effects of his Rashness, in sending that
fatal Letter, which had been the certain cause of all the Evils that followed
upon it, so accounted himself the Murderer of him, who had twice preserved his
Life, and whom he now verily believed to be true, and constant, by the strange
effects which those cursed Lines had wrought in him, which made him so
carelessly to prostitute his Life, in the greatest dangers, as believing it not
worth preserving, after the loss of his Clarinda; thus did Frederick's Bosom
declare in favor of the unfortunate Peregrine, which made him to conclude to
kill himself, if he found him not in Mentz, designing to get thither the next
Night, or to die in the attempt; but the Heavens had ordained otherwise of him,
as I am going to relate.

The Confederates did throw abundance of Bombs, every Night, into the City,
which fired many Houses; that in which poor wounded Prisoners lay, having been
set on Fire, they were forced to be removed, as fast as they could, and they
put a wounded Gentleman into a Chamber, at the very next House, which pro^ed to
be in Frederick's own Chamber, ^ill they had found some other conveni^ncy for
him. Frederick having given ^ut, when he left his Lodgings, that he should not
return in three or four days, because he was to go to the other end of ^he
Town, about earnest business; he ^ad taken the Key of his large Closet ^ith
him, but had left his Chamber ^oor open; and this Fire happening in ^he Night,
they had carried the wounded Gentleman in there, as being nearest at ^and, with
a design to remove him a^ain, so soon as the owner of the Cham^er should
return. That Night diverse ^eserters got into the Town, and Frede^ick heard that
two or three French Offi^rs had gotten in at noon day, that ^ave him hopes of
having as good a suc^ess in his attempt; in these hopes he ^alks out to take a
little Air, as he pre^ended, but it was to observe which way ^e should attempt
to put in Execution his ^esign.

As he was thus walking pensive alone, ^^ perceived a small Party, riding up
to^ards him; he, who had no mind to be ^en, stepped a little out of the way, that
they might pass him unregarded; but, as the company* was got close to him, he
thought he knew one of their Voices, he looked suddenly up, and perceiving
that it was Count Mansfeilt, he presently turned his Head another way, and
observed which way they were marching, and saw them go into that Tent which
belonged to the Officer that had taken him. The Count being now perfectly
recovered of his Wounds, and Weakness, and having learnt where Peregrine was
entertained, had been with his Kinsman, Count Zinzendorf, to demand Justice of
him, against a Stranger, who had wronged him, and taken something from him,
whom he protected. The Count, who was related to Mansfeilt, received him very
Courteously, and assured him of all the Services that lay in his power; but
told him, withal, that he had had so many Proofs of that Gentleman's bravery,
and generous Temper, whom he accused, that none but his Kinsman could suspect,
without offending him; that he hoped he was mistaken in the Person, and that to
be satisfied in that, he himself would conduct his Kinsman, to his Friends
Quarters, having not heard of him in two days: They were going to seek after
Peregrine, when Frederick did take notice of them. It entered into Frederick's
Head, that the Count came not there for any good to Peregrine, which made him
(though Peregrine was far from thence, if he was at all) to have a Desire of
knowing the nature of the Count's Business. He therefore walks back, ^o^^ly
after, and getting in by the back way of the Tent, waited to hear what would be
said.

He had looked on the young Count, as the first Cause of all his, and of
Peregrine's Misfortunes, and even of his Death, if he was slain: This had bred
such an hatred in his Breast, rowards the Count, that he wished he could be the
Death of him; wherefore, very far from ever receiving him into Favor again.
Being thus prepossest, he heard the Officer relate how Peregrine had been lost,
and that he had a young Prisoner, who he had taken that Night, that had
declared he had permitted himself to be taken, but to be brought where
Peregrine was, that he might kill him, for being the Death of a Kinswoman of
his. He is very desperate, added the Officer, and Careless of his Life,
expresses much Courage, though very young. Upon this, the Count said, That it
was not he alone who complained of Peregrine's Unworthiness; and that besides
that Gentlewoman, for whose Death he was accused, he believed, that the Death
of another Lady might be laid to his Charge also, of whom no News was to be
had, and who doubtless he had made away, it may be, after he had had his
Pleasure of her. Here, Frederick could not any longer forbear, but rushing into
the Tent, adressed himself to the Count, with a stern Countenance, and his Hand
upon his Sword. Thou lie Count, cried he, aloud, in the Relation thou give
of Peregrine, and because he is not here to justify himself of those base and
false Accusations, I come to vindicate him in the presence of all these;
therefore draw, added he, and with that, drew his Sword, and run at the Count:
The Count had but time to draw, and making a pass, gave a slight Wound to
Frederick's Hand, and disarmed him, before any could come into them. They were
parted, and Frederick put out of the Tent, and every Body remained in a maze,
at the rash, and desperate Actions, of so young a Youth; but, above all, the
Officer was strangely surprised to see one who had declared was come to kill
Peregrine, espouse, with so much fierceness, his Interest, in so rashly
exposing his Life to maintain Peregrine's Reputation.

Mean time, Frederick was glad he had been put out, before he had been
discovered by any there; and for fear of being called to an account, for this
Action, before the Count, who might, at last, know him, he went his way,
telling some Servants, he met, that he was going to seek some Surgeon to
dress his Hand. Of Truth, the Count began to entertain some Ideas of that Face,
which persuaded him he had seen it somewhere before; and upon that he had
desired that Person should be brought in again, that he might have a more full
view of him; but he was gone, and was not found by any at that time. All this
did still breed more Suspicion in the Count, and Wonders in the Beholders; he,
at last, with pondring much upon the knowledge of that Face, did really
conclude, that this was none but Clarinda, in a Disguise; but, on what account,
could not imagine; he had but too well found that Peregrine had rendered
himself absolute Master of Clarindas Heart, he feared, beyond all the Art he
had to reclaim it again; yet, he was loath to absolutely give over the pursuit;
he found he still had the same Love and Affection for her, but had great reason
to believe she hated him, witness her late Action; in this Agitation of Spirit,
he knew not what to resolve, nor indeed, what to say to his Friends: He thought
that if he could but once more set his Eye upon her, he would haunt her Day and
Night, rather than not receive some favorable answer from her: In this
Resolution, he takes his leave of Count Zinzendorf, and of the other Officer,
and with those Friends that he had brought along with him, returns, with a
design to separate, and all go in search after her, several ways, and in case
Peregrine was dead (as it was believed) never to abandon her, till he had
gained her good Will; but in case he should still be living, either to kill, or
be killed, by him, finding it impossible for him to live, without the
Possession of Clarinda. He thus sent his Friends several ways to seek her,
amongst her own Relations, and at the Castle, but reserves to himself, to
search the whole Camp after her.

Frederick having got as far as the Lorrain Attack, he perceived a French
Party, of about 400 Foot, that appeared within a mile of the Trenches, he
designed, at first, to have run amongst them, but they presently disappeared
again, so remained frustrated of that design; some time after, it rained very
hard, which made Frederisk to seek for some shelter; as he was so doing, he
perceived a Woman, at some distance, that crept on all four, whom he concluded
to be some Spy, or some Carrier of Intelligence; he, after the same manner,
got to her, before she had espied him; when, finding it was too late for her to
endeavor her escape, she turned toward him, fell on her Knees, and besought
him to spare her Life, promising that she would never more stir out of the
Town; this she did, believing verily that she was discovered to be a Spy, and
that Frederick had come that way, and had ventured so near the Shot of the
Town, but to seize on her. Some few Shots, indeed, were made at them, while
Frederick bid her not to fear, that he would do her no hurt. So soon as she had
his promise, she called to a black Dog of hers, that was not far from thence,
which being perceived by those on the Ramparts, that had Shot at them before,
they presently ceased firing. Frederick asked the Woman how he might get into
the Town, she judging, by that, that he was some Deserter, plucked up a good
Heart, and told him, that if he pleased to have patience a while, he should see
her get in, and-that he might after do the like, if he pleased; all this time
they being got into a little hollow, that covered them from the Camp, though
not from the Town; she told him that she had used this Trade daily, ever since
the Town had been Besieged, and that she had never been surprised; that in case
she should be at any time taken, that nothing might be found about her, that
could prejudice her, she rolled up her Intelligence, in a piece of Parchment,
and put that Parchment in a piece of Gut, which she gave to her Dog to carry,
and that he had been used to follow her, at a great distance; that when she
came near the Gate, she would slip her self into her little H^t, that was close
by the Centry, by the back Door, and open the fore Door, in which her Dog would
come; that so soon as he was got in, she would lock him up, feed him well, and
then would go, and deliver her Intelligence to the Governor; and that, by so
doing, she had got the Character of being a Witch, that used to go in, and out
of the Town, in the shape of a black Dog; that she had a Pistol every time, and
that all that mounted the Guard, had Orders not to Shoot any Dog. Not long
after this, at a sign that was given, she went sidling toward the Town, her
Dog still remaining in the same place; she bid Frederick to follow the Dog, who
would not go fast, so soon as he should see him move. It proved as the Woman
had said, when she was got about an hundred yards, from the Dog, the Dog took
up the piece of Gut, which lay by him, and followed the Woman, still keeping
the same distance behind her. Frederick, perceiving this, began to follow the
Dog, thereby, exposing himself wholly to the Towns Shot, but there was not one
made at him; thus little by little, taking a small compass, still tending
toward the Gate Gaw; where, at last, being come, they were both let in; at the
Foot of the Rampart, she had made a halt, at which the Dog had done the like;
but Frederick advanced, after she had given him a sign. Thus did Frederick get
into the Town again, without any great hazard; he gave the Woman a Pistol, and
then went toward his old Lodgings, which were almost at the other end of the
Town: They had seen six or seven French Officers, well mounted, who had
endeavored to get into the Town, at a considerable distance from them;
Frederick, at first, though on Foot, wished himself amongst them, but seeing
two of them drop, he took the Woman's Advice, and did not follow the rest, who
got safe in.

Frederick, after his wonted Custom, so soon as he got into that House, where
he lodged, was going into his Chamber, without speaking to any body; but his
Landlady called, and told him, that his Chamber was taken up, by such an
Accident, which she related to him, but that the Party should presently be
removed; mean time, a Servant was gone to bid the wounded Gentleman prepare to
be removed, which News he received with much disgust, fearing the prejudice
which another disturbance would produce to his Wound; he desired therefore,
that he might first speak with the Gentleman that owned the Chamber; Frederick,
hearing that, went in* Sir, said the Sick Man, to him, You see, a poor wounded
Prisoner; I am a Gentleman, continued he, and if, besides the Ransom I am to
pay, I can purchase my stay here, till I am in a better Condition to remove,
spoke but your demands, and I will procure it you. Frederick, pitying the poor
Gentleman's Condition, whom he guest to be very ill, by the faintness of his
Voice, made answer, that he knew how to be civil even to his Enemies, that he
should remain there so long as he pleased, and trouble himself no further; with
that, Frederick, shutting the Bed-Curtains close, bid him take his rest, and
went immediately out of the House again, in the design of employing some
Persons, to go in every part of the Town, and inquire after a Gentleman
Prisoner, taken such a day, and supposed to be brought in wounded, his Horse
having been shot under him. Frederick having resolved to remain in the Closet,
all that day, and the next, where there was a little Couch; he got a Bottle of
Wine, another of Water, and some Biscuit, with which he retired into the Closet,
without having been perceived of any Body, no not so much as by the Sick Man,
who knew of no Closet, and when he heard any noise, supposed it to be some
Servant, who was going in and out; thus did Frederick lock himself into his
Closet, for that time, having told the Persons whom he had employed, on the
search after Peregrine, that he would meet them, at such a certain place, two
days after.

In the Night time, as Frederick lay on his Couch, he heard great complaints,
and having hearkened to them, he found it was the Sick Man, who was lamenting
his hard Fate. What vast difference, said he, do I find, betwixt the Wounds of
the Body, and those of the Mind! How insensible I am of the first, when, my
Miseries present themselves to my thoughts! And, what Balm have I to allay the
smart of the last, but this poor Relick of that fair Saint, which my Soul did
Adore! How dare I look on it? What Advantage can I expect from it? After what I
have made the Original to suffer; Thou sweet representer of all my past Joys, I
would not part with thee for less than the Original; the whole World is of less
value to me, than this dead Idea of that which with me was all in all. Why do I
live still, so long as she is no more? Well, a short time shall put an end to
all my Miseries; I will follow in death, she who I have sent before, by my
inconsiderateness; and seeing I am deprived of her dear Conversation in this
Life, I will endeavor to enjoy it in the next, so soon as my slight Wound will
but permit me to sacrifice my life to those dear Ashes; mean time I must
continue miserable. Oh Heavens! After this there was a great silence, which
continuing, Frederick opened the Closet Door, without the least noise, and
approaching little by little, toward the Bed, and finding that the Gentleman
was fallen fast asleep, he ventured to search upon it for the Picture that had
lately been mentioned; but hearing some noise at the Chamber Door, that made
him to retire again, to lock himself up, and to defer his curiosity, till some
other convenient time.

It was that Officer who had taken Peregrine Prisoner, who having learnt that
day, by a Deserter, that the Besiegers designed very suddenly to give a
general Assault, was come to bid his Prisoner provide the 100 Pistoles for his
Ransom: To which the Chyrurgeon that was with him, added, That now he was
almost well, he desired he should also send for Money to pay his Charges. This
was something surprising to Peregrine, who made no answer; which made the
Quartermaster say, That he did not know how Fortune might order the day; and
that he was loath to lose so much Money, which might serve for a Ransom for
himself, should he have the Fortune to be made a Prisoner; and bidding
Peregrine employ some body about it, the next day at the farthest, he went
huffing out of the Chamber. Peregrine, who had not spoke one Word all the
while, but answered with Sighs, then said, Here is some comfort yet, this want
of a Ransom may invite this greedy man to send me to my dear Clarinda. Oh!
that Name has still such Charms in it, that it puts life in me when I hear it
sound: She was too forward, too credulous, too -- Ah! Fatal Isabella; Thou have
carried home thy Revenge against me, for slighting of thy Love; my time to Love
was not yet come; Clarinda was ^^^^g^^^ to gather the first Fruits of my
Affections; but how dear she has paid for it, is the subject of my eternal
Grief. After these, and diverse others regrets, he remained silent.

Frederick, who had heard all, being now entirely convinced, that this Person
was her dear Peregrine, and that he was blameless, and never loved any other
but him, he resolved to put an end to both their Afflictions in a short time,
but would do it with the greatest surprise that could be imagined, having so
fair an opportunity to do it; and to begin, he rolled up two several Papers,
containing each an hundred Pistoles, then writ what follows.

Your good Angel, to preserve your Life, and compose your Spirits, has provided
what Gold you have occasion for; and in requital of it, has deprived you of the
renewer of your grief. Still live in hope it is Clarinda's Ghost will have it
so.


After this, having watched till he was asleep, he came softly to the Bedside,
and having laid the two Papers of Gold close to his Pillow, was groping for the
^^^tu^e, he selt him to move, then heard him sigh, which had put him by from
seeking any farther, for fear of being discovered; but as he was taking up his
hand, he found his Fingers entangled, which proved to be the Ribbon belonging
to the Picture; he presently took it up, and retired softly, unperceived, and
just as he was getting into the Closet, he heard Peregrine say, Divine
Clarinda; at which he could not forbear answering, in a low voice, Constant
Peregrine. Ha! What Is that I hear? cried out Peregrine, in a strange surprise,
having he knew not how got sitting in the Bed, which he had not done ever since
his Wound before; the^ he hearkened very attentively for a time; after which he
laid himself down again, saying, with a great sigh, 'twas but a Dream, but very
pleasing to me; after which, he again remained silent. So soon as Day began to
permit him to see, he was again at his exercise of sighing, and going to order
his Pillow, he felt something heavy, lie close to his Head; he laid his hand
upon it, took it up, and found it to be the rolls of Gold, lapt up in a sheet
of Paper, in which Frederick had writ those few Lines. Peregrine, in great
surprise, opened the sheet of Paper, and there read what had been writ: This
did wonderfully amaze him; he could not imagine how this relief should come so
unexpected to him; he busied his Thoughts a thousand ways to find out the right
cause; and all he could imagine that came nearest to it was, that Count
Zinzendorf, having sound out that he was a Prisoner in Mentz, had (he knew not
how) conveyed that Relief to him: But then, how should he come to the knowledge
of his concerns with Clarinda, and that he had her Picture, he having never
discovered to any Person one title of the whole Transaction, that he could not
dive into; he only conjectured that Mariana might have sent a Letter to him,
which mentioned all those particulars; and that in his absence his Friends
might have opened it, to learn how far it concerned him: then feeling for the
Picture, and finding it gone, he was in as great a concern at all these
surprising things unknown to him, admiring how it was possible he should be
seized with so profound a Sleep, as not to be awakened; then sure, said he,
these People will come again when I am not asleep, and give me some Information
of the whole Event: He was thus canvassing the business in his Mind, when he
heard the tuning of an Instrument, as it were in some other Room of the House;
he listened, and was surprised more than ever, to hear those Verses he had made
on his accidental saving of Clarinda, sung to a Theorbo-Lute. These were all
Enchantments to him; and the most probable conjecture he could make of it, was
that certainly it was Mariana who had done all this; but how she should come
there, find him out, learn his particular wants, and all the rest, was a
Miracle to him. So soon as the Song was ended, he strove so much that he
reached a Shoe, with which he made a shift to knock so loud, that some of the
Servants came to him. He asked them who had been there? They answered him, they
were certain no body had been in the Chamber since the Quartermaster and the
Chyrurgeon had been there; because the last going out had double-lock'd the
Door, and given the Key to his Mistress, from whom he had just now received it,
to come into him.

This could not but strangely disorder Peregrine, who asked the Fellow whether
there was not some other way into his Chamber. The Fellow, who was but newly in
that service, answered, he knew not, that he did not believe there was, and
that he would see: with that he walked round the Chamber, then told him he
could see no other Door: with which answer poor Peregrine was forced to rest
satisfied; and the Servant having asked him what he wanted; Peregrine told him,
He wanted now the Quartermaster to pay him his Ransom, and the Chyrurgeon
also, to discharge him, and all the rest of his Engagements; for I have been
sufficiently supplied this Night, continued he, but by what means. Then he
pursued, Has no Gentleman been lately entertained in this House? No, answered
the Servant; but there were two went yesterday away. So Peregrine finding
himself, after all these Interrogations, as much in the dark as ever, he sent
the Servant away.

Frederick was once giving himself to be plainly discovered, and was in great
fears when the Fellow walked about the Chamber, but when he found he was gone,
he resolved to pursue his design to the last: he, upon that, concluded to
continue one Night longer in his concealment, though he began to be very weary
of living on Biscuit and Sweet*Meats, which was all the Food he had had since
his retirement, with the addition of a Glass of Wine, with which he sometimes
refreshed himself.

Some time after, the Quarter Master returned with the Chyrurgeon, and were
encountered by the Mistress of the House, who giving them the Key of Peregrine's
Chamber, told them, That now they needed not to fear the Prisoner, for he had
Gold enough to satisfy all demands, as the Servant had informed her, but that
no body knew how it came to him, seeing he had been locked up ever since they
had last been there. The Quartermaster began to prick up his Ears, and said,
all that is mine; for when I took him, all he had was mine, and he must needs
have concealed all that Gold about him: He must provide for another Ransom
besides this, continued he, for this I will seize on as my due. Hold there,
replied the Chyrurgeon, I will not lose my share of it, be he ten times your
Prisoner; while he has Money I will be satisfied for my Pains, Cares, and all
the Charges I have been at. And why should I lose any thing, said the Landlady,
he has had attendance, and all the House could afford, I am sure, ever since he
was removed here; and it is but reasonable I should be paid. The
Quartermaster, to avoid those broils, being greedy of the Money, went into
Peregrine's Chamber, but was followed close at the Heels by the Chyrurgeon, and
the Land-lady. I am glad, cried Peregrine, (seeing them come in,) that you are
here, for now I have wherewith to satisfy you all. Hold a little, pray not so
fast, said the Quartermaster, all you have is mine, continued he, as being
concealed about you, when I made you Prisoner. If you could prove that, said
Peregrine, it were something, though not quite as you would have it neither;
for there has an agreement past since betwixt us, that I should have my full
liberty in paying you an hundred Pistoles, which I am now ready to do; but
beside, I can assure you, that I have received it of late. You could not, since
I was here, said the Quartermaster; you did not mention yesterday that you had
any such thing in readiness: How came you by this Money? To which Peregrine
made Answer, that he had parted with a Rich Picture, for that Money, that he
might be set at Liberty; which Picture, you have several times seen me sigh
over, added he, addressing to the Chyrurgeon, and which I prised much more than
all this Gold. I remember, said the Chyrurgeon, that I have often chid you, for
putting your self into passions, with gazing too much on it; and really, in my
opinion, seeing it was left you so long after you had been here, I think you
may in Justice make the best Advantage you can of it. The Quartermaster,
perceiving that they were all against him, yielded, for the present, and was
contented to receive the hundred Pistols, but not without giving a Discharge to
his Prisoner, which he did at last, with great difficulty; that being done,
Peregrine paid off his Chyrurgeon, upon Condition, that he should, from time to
time, visit him, and furnish him with such Plasters and Salves, as he should
want, till he was able to return to the Camp; this was freely assented to:
Next, the Landlady was sattisfied, in all she demanded, and Peregrine inquiring
after the Gentleman, who had so generously quitted his Chamber to him. The
Woman told him, she had not heard from him since, but that she knew he would
return again, because he had a great many Goods still in the House. Peregrine
said, he longed to return him Thanks; and asked the Chyrurgeon how long it
would be before he might rise, and set His Foot to the Ground. I was going to
tell you Sir, replied he, That if you find your self without great pain when
you move it in Bed, or when you feel it with your hand, you may venture to
rise, and for some time keep it upon a Stool, sometimes resting it on the
Floor. Very well, replied Peregrine; upon which they all took leave of him, and
left him to himself.

I told you how the young Count Mansfeilt had separated himself from all the
rest of his Friends, in order to search the whole Camp after Clarinda; for he
concluded that she must needs be there; he thought she could not be far
neither, because he had unfortunately wounded her. He therefore designed to act
as a Voluntier, and to engage in some warm Action. He was in some despair also,
since he had seen with what fierceness Clarinda had taken Peregrine's Interest;
he was vexed for having spoken ill of him before her. The hurt he had given her
was not much to his advantage neither; he had no other hopes therefore, but in
what the Officer had related; That his young Prisoner confessed he hated
Peregrine, and was come into the Camp, on purpose to kill him: He built his
hopes barely upon that weak bottom, which in time he hoped might again reclaim
her.

The whole Army was getting in a readiness for a general Assault, which they
designed to begin at the covered way; the signal being given by the discharge
of three Canons, and one Bomb that broke in the Air. The young Count took this
opportunity to do some Action worthy himself, and the fair Clarinda; so he put
himself amongst the Volunteers: They all March to the Assault, with that
undauntedness end courage, that the Enemy not being able to endure the onset,
immediately gave way, at the Imperial, the Saxon, and the Bavarian Attacks. The
Enemy, a while after, having rallied, and taken new Posts on both sides, as
well as in Front, their Firing was so great and continual, during some Hours,
that it is impossible to apprehend the least Idea of it. The Confederate Army
was near two Hours exposed to all their Enemies Shot, without any covering on
the Glacis, joining to the Pallisadoes, not being able to shelter it self, by
reason of the Enemies continual Firing upon them, which they endured with a
world of bravery; till at last, the Besieged being broken, and pressed upon on
all sides, they were forced to give way, but not till they had sprung a Mine,
which involved a great number of Men, and four Colors in its Mines; whereupon
the Besiegers took their Post on the very brink of the Ditch.

All the following Night was taken up in continual Skirmishes; the Count had
behaved himself so bravely, that particular notice had been taken of him, but
he was not to be found neither amongst the living nor the dead: He was changing
Ground to come where the warmest Skirmishes was, he over-took two Horsemen
that were running from him toward the Gate Altmunster; he dismounted the one,
and took the other Prisoner, who readily yielded upon Quarters for Life. The
Count was going to deliver his Prisoner into Custody, that he might have some
more Skirmishes, when he was surrounded with a small party of Horse, that were
getting into the Town, who took him along with them, and his Prisoner also, and
bestowed them both safe for the rest of that Night.

The Count had not been much troubled, had he had the charming Clarinda with
him: But the other Prisoner seemed very much concerned, and did all he could
not to be seen; they had a Room allotted them, with a Bed in it, and a Centry
sat over them. The Count threw himself on the Bed, and asked his Fellow
Prisoner, whither he would do the same, adding, that if he had not been retaken
from him, he had found him a Generous Enemy; the other returned him thanks,
saying, he had more a mind to sit up, still turning his Face, that the Count
might not see it. The Count, a while after, cried out, ha! dear Clarinda, that
you were but here safe and well. Those Words confirmed the other Prisoner, in
the opinion, that he knew the Count, so that afterward he was more shie than
ever of showing his Face; there we will leave them for a short time, to return
to the amazed Peregrine, that could not yet reconcile himself to those
surprising Accidents, that so lately had happened to him; still did his mind
run on Marianas being there, concealed, unwilling he should know of her,
concluding, that none but she, or his dear Clarinda, returned from the dead,
could act as had been done. Clarinda, dear Clarinda * then cried he out, If it
is thy Spirit that is still so Officious to me after Death, bless me but with
one short sight of thee, I am sure thou can not assume any shape can affright
thy distracted Peregrine; but if I could behold thee with all those real Charms
about thee, which thou once wore, though they were now but mere Delusions, I
should die with Excess of Joy! Thus was he continuing in his Transports, when
News was brought him that diverse Prisoners had been taken in the last Assault,
but that the Enemy had posted themselves very Advantageous, and had repulsed
the besieged very far. Peregrine, who had given those Orders, that when they
heard of any Prisoners, they should give him notice; sent the Servant to make
inquiry of their Names, as well as he could, and that to oblige them to declare
their Names, they should say it was one Peregrine desired it.

Amongst the other places, that this Messenger was at, he came to that, where
the Count was, with his Fellow Prisoner, where he found them both very
unwilling to tell their Names, till after he had named Peregrine, he observed
the Count to rise off of the Bed, and say, how, Peregrine? Where is that
Person? Who answered, not far in the Town, and then began to tell the Count all
that he knew of him, adding, that certainly he was a Devil, or some Conjurer,
for, said he, when he was locked up in his Chamber, without one farthing
toward his Ransom of an hundred Pistols. The next Morning, when the Door was
opened, he had two hundred Pistols, with which he discharged all he owed, and
now remains full of Gold, which it is thought the Devil brings to him, by the
Window, or down the Chimney. This did not a little trouble the Count, but the
other Prisoner, was not less concerned at this Narrative, yet would not
discover his Surprisal before the Count, but taking the opportunity, when the
Messenger was going out, he desired him to tell the Gentleman, that there was a
Prisoner, who belonged to a Lady, named Clarinda, that would be glad to see
him, if he could contrive it. The Messenger, well satisfied with what he had
done, returned home, and gave Peregrine an Account of his discovery: Peregrine,
had no sooner heard the charming word Clarinda, but he immediately sent back
the Messenger, rewarding him well, and charged him to know what Ransom was set
upon that Prisoner; he went, and returned not long after, to tell Peregrine,
that fifty Pistols, paid presently, would set him free; they were immediately
sent, and the Prisoner set at Liberty, to go where he pleased, who went along
with the Messenger, to Peregrine's Lodging; and the Count having lost his
Companion, was left Disconsolate, all alone. The fear of having the Town taken
by Storm, was the Cause of this Prisoner's going off with ready Money; for it
was verily believed that such another Assault would certainly carry it.

The late Prisoner being brought into Peregrine's Chamber, he got to his
Bedside, and began to return him thanks, for the Ransom he had been so kind to
pay for him; assuring him, that so soon as Clarinda should come to the knowledge
of it, she would return it him with hearty thanks, because he was a Servant,
for whom Clarinda had always a particular Kindness. At this, Peregrine,
fetching a deep sigh from the bottom of his Heart, answered, Then do your
Office, repay me of your Ransom, in sending me immediately to wait on that
fair Saint, you just now named; and to invite you the more to do that piece of
singular Service, to the Memory of your dear Mistress, know, I have murdered
her, at that the Person started, and cried, Heavens forbid! Yes, replied
Peregrine, I am an expert Murderer, I need no Weapons, nor Poisons, to act
with all, I can do it with a bare Letter, nay, even when I have no such
Thoughts, Mischief is so natural to me. Pray recollect your self, replied
Clarindas Servant, you speak as if you were not well, in your Mind; Whence do
you derive that fancy of Clarindas Death? Is it because you have not heard from
her lately? Or, do you believe that you are dead in her Heart, and that
consequently she may be counted dead as to you? If any such thing were, I yet
might live and hope; Peregrine answered, but she is really: dead; Oh,
unspeakable Grief! I have it from good Hands, a Friend of the unfortunate
Count; therefore, an Enemy to me, has certified it to me; and, upon that, has
vowed my Death, but is not so kind as to come and give it me; but now, you are
here, do that which Justice, Revenge, and Duty, ought to prompt you to, Kill,
kill, that miserable Wretch, that has had the Confidence to survive her so
long. Clarindas Servant, at these Words, let himself fall upon the Bed, saying,
in a low voice, unfortunate Clarinda, and miserable Mariana; Die Mariana, why
should thou live to hear such doleful News, with that, he sounded quite away;
at those last Words, Peregrine, who was set up, in his Bed, looking steadfast on
the Person's Face, Mariana, said he, take a little of this to stay thee, till
thou take me along with thee, giving her a little Cordial, out of a Bottle,
which he had by him; after which, he did all he could besides, to recover her,
without the Assistance of any body else, because of her Sex. Frederick had
overheard all, and was so moved at his dear Marianas Trouble, that he was
coming out to discover himself, when he heard her fetch a great sigh; after
which, she came to her self again, saying, Pray Heavens you may have been
abused; that Happiness cannot be hoped for, replied Peregrine, I should
certainly have heard of her, I that have sought her in all places. At this,
Mariana did shed a flood of Tears, and Peregrine sent forth whole gales of
Sighs; after which, Peregrine gave Mariana an Account of all his Actions, since
his Absence; and how often he had sought Death, but was not so happy as to meet
with it: Heavens forbid, said Mariana, poor Clarindas Death, added she, is more
to be attributed to her Passion, and Rashness, than to your Cruelty; and I must
confess, that my Imprudence, has been Instrumental also; with that, she gave
him an Account of all that had happened to Clarinda, and to her self, since
Clarindas departure. Thus, after a long Discourse, what with Grief, and
Weariness, poor Mariana, fell a sleep, at Peregrine's Beds Feet, which obliged
him to do the like, not long after.

This silence did somewhat appease Frederick's disturbed Mind, at both those
dear Friends Afflictions: He was very desirous to Accomplish what he had begun,
and did hope that they would continue their Sleep, till Night, at which time,
he intended to perform the last act of his Tragicomedy; and from that time, he
began to prepare himself for it, and it luckily happened that they both did
sleep, till there was Candles brought into the Chamber, that did awake
Peregrine, who gave order that no noise should be made, and that a Fowl should
be got ready for Supper; as for Mariana, she slept on till Supper was brought
up, she having had no sleep, in two Nights before; and Peregrine would by no
means disturb her, but let her awake of her self. He invited her to cat, but
she excused her self, telling him, that she never more should enjoy her self;
he could not so much as make her drink a Glass of Wine; thus they both sat,
Peregrine, in the Bed, and Mariana, on the side of it, looking dolefully, on
each other, not knowing what to say; Ah! That my dear Clarinda was here at
last, said Mariana, then you would have no cause to invite me to eat, or drink;
that is a bit she used to love, added she, pointing at some part of the Fowl;
her Ghost, would suffice me, said Peregrine, or, at least, that sweet Picture,
which is vanished from me. Frederick, hearing this, came softly, and laid the
Picture upon the Bed; a little while after, Peregrine, having leaned toward
Mariana, till his Arm ak'd, turned, to sit up, and saw the Picture lie before
him; he takes it up, kisses it, and cried, see Mariana, the Heavens grow kind,
and have sent me my Desires: Heavens! How comes this to pass? Replied, poor
Mariana, as affrighted, sure, you had not looked for it well! It Is like, it has
never been off of the Bed, but engaged in some of the foldings of the
Bed-Cloths; none of all that, dear Mariana, replied Peregrine, this Paper left
in the room of it, with the Gold, expresses otherwise, read it; he gave her the
Paper, in which she read, as he had done before; then, she added, sure, this is
her own hand, or I am the most mistaken in the World! Why may not her Hand be
imitated, added Peregrine, as well as Bodies be assumed by kind obliging
Spirits, and appear? The one is as feasible, as the other; those are strange
things, Mariana, continued he: they much surprise me, said Mariana, who stood
in a kind of Amazement; How would you be then, said Peregrine, if her sweet
Ghost, should instantly appear? Ah! would it would; yet, no, added he, it would
affright you too much: No, I believe not, answered Mariana, I know not what it
might do, if I was alone, but you being here: -- Drink to me, Mariana, drink
her Health, I Will pledge it, though 'twas Poison, said Peregrine, -- He was going
to proceed, when Clarinda, appeared, coming up close to the little Table, by
the Bedside, on which the Supper was laid.

She had put a Linen Cloth, over her Head, which hung over her Face, down to
her upper Lip; and she had put over that, a large white Sheet, which she had
tied of a bunch, at the top of her Head, which covered her all over, but the
Face; she had, besides, a Glass of Wine, in each Hand; she stood a while,
without moving, before them, at which, Mariana, wrapped her self round, in the
Curtain, making a great shriek; but Peregrine sat gazing, with a Countenance
that expressed a great disorder; after that, Clarinda, who had stood without
motion, stooped toward Peregrine, offering one of the Glasses of Wine, which
he refused to take, pulling himself back; with that, she sat one of the Glasses
on the Table, then standing up straight, Is this the Man, said she, would drink
my Health, in Poison? Why have I disturbed my sweet rest, in hopes to see such
constancy, after Death, in one I loved, and be thus disappointed? I must return
again, with this certain Truth, there is no Faith in Man; Adieu, fond Morrals,
adieu, for ever more; at these last Words, as she was turning, Hold, cried
Peregrine, Though thou can not be Clarindas Ghost, for that would know me
better, I will drink the Poison, give me the Glass; Ghost, stay, added he, and
take me with you, or go tell Divine Clarinda, how thou see me take that Pass
which is to convey me to her; with saying this, he took the Glass from
Clarinda, and raising his voice, Here Is to Clarinda, whom I still Adore, said
he, and drank up the Wine. I should not have pronounced that Name, continued
he, after drinking, it may prove an Antidote, beyond the power of the most
virulent Poison, and prevent my flight to her; it has, for certain, much
bettered the Taste. Clarinda, -- added he, at which, she lifting off the Sheet,
and Cloth, which covered her Face, she appeared, in a Dress, which Peregrine
had formerly seen. Constant, and Faithful, Peregrine, here is thy Clarinda, she
is wholly thine, said Clarinda; with that, inclining on the Bed, she took him
by the Hand, pressing it hard, and kissed his frighted Cheeks; feel, said she,
I am thy warm Clarinda, living still, to die in thy sweet Bosom: But where is
dear Mariana? Alas, poor Soul, frighted, I fear, too much; Come, my dear
Mariana, and enjoy, once again, thy poor Clarinda. Fear not, I am really she,
with that, she unfolded the Curtains, which Mariana, held no longer so hard:
Mariana; it is she, cried out Peregrine, the living Clarinda; What Wonders do I
see! What Joys possess my Heart! They crowd in here too fast, with that, he
sunk down in a swoon: Clarinda having embraced her dear Mariana, and assured
her of her life, with a thousand warm Kisses, which the still discomposed Girl,
returned again, so well as her late fears would permit her: Clarinda, casting
an Eye, on Peregrine, and perceiving him fallen backwards, with his Eyes
closed, help, Mariana, cried she, assist me to preserve my second Life,
Peregrine is not well; they both busied themselves, to raise him up again, at
which, he came to himself: That Men should die, with too much Joy, said he.

I beg your Pardon my dear Peregrine, said Clarinda, for that great share I
have had in producing all your Sorrows and Griefs, when you will please to
consider 'twas the effects of my Passions toward you, which plunged me into a
severe Jealousy, and deep Despair, at the sight of that fatal English Letter:
You will, I know, be so good as to pardon the results of that Rage, which had
so entirely possessed me. Peregrine made answer, That his imprudence in keeping
that Letter, (which he ought to have burnt, since he valued it not,) being the
first cause of all those Miseries he had suffered since, he ought to pass by
other lesser Errors. But, added he, How came you to the understanding of it?
Who was your Interpreter? I fear he did not do me Justice. Clarinda answered,
When I have eat and drank with you, to confirm you further I am no Ghost,
(though I have almost lived like one these two Days,) then I shall give my
Peregrine that satisfaction, with a full account of all has happened to me
since you went from us: With that they sat themselves to eat, which Clarinda
did very heartily. They had several little pickeerings of Wit with one another,
which diverted them during Supper; after which, Peregrine, contriving within
himself how Clarinda and Mariana should be disposed on that Night, Clarinda
took notice of his musing; What possesses your Thoughts now? said she; To know
where you and Mariana shall lie this Night; or rather where I shall retire,
answered Peregrine, for i will quit you my Bed, I find it now grows late. It
does, said Clarinda; wherefore I shall leave my Narrative till Morning. Mariana
and I, will leave you to your Repose, which I hope will now be sweet and long
to you; and we will retire to that Elysium, where I kept, while thought dead;
there is a little Couch will hold us both. Not so, replied Mariana; do you go
into Bed, and i will sit up: But where is this Enchanted place, so near, yet so
invisible? Here, said Clarinda, (stepping toward the Closet, and taking up the
Hanging,) within the reach of all you said: Come Mariana, added she, and see
the Grave in which I was buried alive: They both went into the Closet, where
after they had remained a while, Peregrine having slipped on his Gown, and
leaning on a Stick, came halting in, saying, He was resolved that Night to lie
in Clarinda's Grave: with that he laid himself down on the Couch, and by no
entreats nor persuasions could be got off again; telling them, That he would
pass the rest of that Night in that place. Clarinda finding him obstinate, took
out of the Closet all that was convenient for her and Mariana, that Night, with
a Nightgown for Mariana, and one of her Mantua's for her to put on the next
Morning.

No Servants had come near them all that Evening and Night, because Peregrine
had frequently given strict Orders that no body should come to him, except they
heard him knock; so that they had no disturbance on that side; and having took
leave of one another, they all composed themselves to sleep.

The next Morning, Clarinda and Mariana being up, and in their Night-Dresses,
went to see how Peregrine had past the Night; they found by his cheerful looks,
and hearty answer, that he was much improved as to his Health and Strength. How
could I do amiss, said he, having my Titular Angel so near me; and lying in my
Clarinda's sweet Monument? After a while, as they were returning into the
Chamber, Mariana making a false step, fell down, but did not hurt her self; one
of the Servants hearing the noise, and believing Peregrine knocked, came into
the Chamber, where espying no Man in Bed, and two Gentlewomen dressing
themselves, he presently run down again; telling the Mistress, that certainly
the Devil haunted that Chamber; for in lieu of finding a Lame*Man in Bed, there
was two fine Gentlewomen dressing themselves at their Glasses; let who will go
there for me hereafter, added he, i will not go to the Devil so often. A while
after, the Ladies wanting Water, knock in good earnest, but no body came to
them; they repeated the knocking, and finding it was to no purpose, Mariana
stepped to the Stair-head, and aloud asked, Whether there was no body in the
House? At which the People below Stairs were all mute, but one Maid bolder than
the rest, said, she would see these Hobgoblings, at what rate soever, so went
up Stairs, and Mariana returning into the Chamber, where the Maid following
her, she was told they wanted Water, and desired they should be a little better
attended, assuring her, the Servants should not lose their labor. The Maid
made her excuses, and laid the fault upon the impertinency of a silly Fellow in
the House, who ever since the Gentleman that lay there before, had the Gold
brought to him so strangely, did take all that was done in that Room for
Enchantments; that he had run down Stayrs, so soon as he had peeped into the
Chamber, and said, he had seen there, he knew not how many Devils in Women's
Apparel, dressing themselves: which made Clarinda smile to her self: Then did
the Maid tell them, that at the least Call she would run up to wait on them, or
the Gentleman either, if he was there still, as she supposed he was not, there
being but one Bed. Clarinda, to undeceive her, and to take away all suspicions,
brought her to the Closet, where she showed her Peregrine in Bed: This is the
place, said she, out of which came the Gold, and all the other Enchantments, I
being in it all that while, who came here at first, in the habit of a
Gentleman, to pass with more safety through the Army, that then was gathering
about this place: Pray satisfy your Mistress, and all other Persons of this
Truth. The Maid, making a Courtesy, went away well satisfied, and did
according as Clarinda had commanded her; so that the next time they knocked for
any thing, they were waited upon by the Mistress of the House, who made a great
many Apologies, and gave great Assurances of her future attendance. Clarinda
informed her of all she thought fit she should know, and so dismissed her.

The Confederates great advantage which they had got over the Besieged, in the
late Assault, caused the Governor, who was the Marquess of Vxelles, to call a
grand Council of War; in which it was concluded, That considering the great
loss which they had sustained in this last Attack, the great Advantages with
which the Enemies had posted themselves, which was very difficult to regain,
and the great want of Ammunition they were in, having not above 4 C* weight of
Powder left, together with the great number of Sick and Wounded, and the small
hopes of Relief, that the white Flag should be hung out, which was done that
very Morning, about eight of the Clock, and a Parley was beaten, in order to
Capitulate. Prince Albert of Saxe-Cornbourg, who Commanded that Day in the
Trenches, on the side of the Imperial Attack, sent a Trumpet to the Besieged,
to know their meaning. To which was answered, That the Governor was inclined
to give up the Garrison; that if the Duke of Loraine would be pleased to send
the Governor a Lieutenant-Collonel, with an other Officer; to discourse with
them about Conditions, he would send into their Camp Hostages of the same
quality. Whereupon the Prince sent his aid Major to consult with the Duke of
Loraine, and they agreed to the Governor's desires, upon condition, that he
should first send his two Officers. Whereupon the Duke of Loraine sent into the
City the Prince de Commercy, and Lieutenant Colonel Princj; after which there
was a Cessation of Arms betwixt both-Parties, and the Treaty fully concluded
before Night.

Count Mansfeilt all this while had not remained Idle, by the aid of diverse
Messengers he had found out Peregrine's Lodgings, and had got the Servant, who
was with him before, to come to him again: He inquired of him how Peregrine
did? What Company he had with him? And whether he stirred abroad yet? The
Fellow, who was the same that had been so frighted, told him, That now all the
Devils which haunted him before, were all turned into Gentlewomen, that were
very tame and gentle indeed, wondrous fine and handsome; and that, that very
Prisoner, whose Ransom he had paid, by the wounded Gentleman's Orders, was
turned to a Gentlewoman also. This account gave the Count cause to consider, he
apprehended that this was Clarinda, who he had taken, which he had not known in
the dark; he began to think how shye that Person was of showing his Face, how
he refused lying down with him, with abundance more; from all which he fully
concluded it was Clarinda, that he had so tamely parted with, to his Mortal
Enemy; this put him into such a rage, that he was almost distracted; he lay
continually sighing and groaning on the Bed, and would neither eat nor drink.
While the Fellow was still with him, the Person who had took him, came to tell
him, He must find out a sudden way to pay his Ransom, which he resolved not
to lose. To which the Count made no answer, but that he was his Prisoner, he
might do what he pleased with him. That gave but little satisfaction to the
Officer, who was grumbling very hard; which made the Fellow run home as fast as
he could; he told his Mistress, that the other Prisoner that had been taken
with the Man-Gentlewoman, that was above Stairs, was like to be killed by him
who had taken him, for want of his Ransom. The Mistress of the House, fancying
that he might be known by the Gentlewoman, went up Stairs to give notice of it:
At which Mariana cried out, alas! this is the Count, who I told you was taken
with me. How, a Count, said the Landlady, that will bring a good lump of Money.
No, no, replied Clarinda, it is a Voluntier, whose Name is le Count: so it was
turned off, and the Land-lady was desired to know what Ransom was demanded for
him. Mean time Clarinda and Mariana went into the Closet to consult about it
with Peregrine, saying, now you have a fair opportunity to rid your self of
your Rival, the Count; so told him to what a sad condition he was reduced. Why
sends he not to his Friends in the Camp, to let them know his condition, said
Peregrine. There Is the mischief of it, said Mariana, with what this Fellow has
put in his Head, that the Person he had taken was a Woman in man's Apparel, and
believing it was you doubtless, (speaking to Clarinda) he is in a Despair, for
having parted so tamely with you. Heavens forbid, that we should not assist
him, if we can, said Peregrine; though he will not help himself, the more need
has he of our aid. Still spoken like generous Peregrine. He shall be releaved,
and presently too, said Clarinda, since my dear Friend has said it. Some time
after the Fellow returned, saying, he refused all aid, assistance, or comfort,
except he knew from whom it came. This made Peregrine say, unfortunate
Gentleman! There is nothing but this rich Jewel, but I would part with, added
he, taking Clarinda by the hand, to serve him with: But what is his Ransom?
The Fellow said, The Office^ had told him something was better than nothing;
and that seeing the Article^ would be signed that Night for the delivery of the
Town, in which might be comprised the releasing of all Prisoners o^ both sides,
he would be contented with what he could get. Then said Clarinda I must get you
Mariana to go with Forty Pistoles, which I will give you; and give twenty for
his Ransom, and give him the rest to defray his present Necessities, as if all
this came from your self, taking no notice in the least of us two* otherwise,
peradventure he would refuse it. Mariana readily accepted the Commission, and
prepared to go with the Fellow, after Clarinda had given her the Gold. Mean
time did Clarinda give Peregrine an account of all her misfortunes, since they
had been separated, not forgetting his Friend's Civility toward her, and her
Rancounter with the Count.

While she was thus relating her Story to him, News was brought that there was
one below, who would spoke with Peregrine; he ordered him to be brought up, and
it proved to be his honest Groom. So soon as the Articles had been signed,
inquiry had been made about the Prisoners of Note, and Count Zinzendorf, having
notice thereof, had sent this Fellow to learn News of his Master: The Fellow
being come, and perceiving his Master smile; It Is well you're found, at last,
Master, said he, there has been a foul stir about you, no body knew what was
become of you; and after I told your Friends how I had found poor Crop, meat
for Crows, they all concluded you dead; dead, said I, he has other Fish to
fry, I warrant you; Do You think that a Man has nothing else to do, that has a
Sweetheart? He Is gone to Ferret her out, I Will warrant you; and now I find I
guest well, faith Master, or she has serrited you out. Well, I Am glad to see
thee again, old Boy, answered Peregrine; How does all things whence you come?
With that, he gave him this Account; Your three Horses, and three Servants, are
all well, as you see, at this present, and all present their Service to you;
and Count Zinzendorf send me to tell you, that you should send him word,
whither you were dead or alive; is so, that he would order all your Trinckoms
to be sent to you; for now the Rogues are weary of fighting, Honest Folks may
go about their Business again: Well, continued he, I am woundely mistaken, if
this Gentlewoman-Gentleman, was not the same body that gave me that plaguey
Letter (a Pox on it) that made you run out of your Wits; if the truth was known,
has played more tricks than are good, I Will warrant you, and I fear it is for no
good he is here; pray let us search him, Master: Clarinda, and Peregrine, could
not but laugh, at the Fellows Bluntness: Come, come, let us see your Hand, added
he, I Will tell you your Fortune, she pulled off her Glove, and showed the Palm
of her Hand, thinking he would tell her Fortune; but the Fellow presently said,
I Will a none of your tricks put upon me; let see the backside of it? She having
turned it, and he having espied the Plaster; there is the mark of the Beast,
cried he, that is he (though now turned to a Woman) that let himself be taken,
on purpose, as he declared, to cut your Throat, as I have been well informed,
by the Officer's Man; and for rage, he could not find you, had like to have
made a Scieve, of a Count's Belly, but that a was a little too nimble for him,
and gave him that Remembrance, which he carries yet; Pray Master, let us search
him, I say? No, no, replied Peregrine, I Will engage this Lady is no Man, but
thou have guest pretty right, as to the rest: Nay, nay, if you have searched
her, you know better than I, I am sattisfied: Well then, added he, What shall I
say to the Count, and the rest of your Friends: Tell them, answered Peregrine,
that I am well; and that the desperate young Gentleman is well also, added
Clarinda; at Clarindas speaking, let your betters be first served, said the
Fellow, my Master began first; this was very pleasant to them: Well, go thy
ways, added Peregrine, tell all my Friends, I hope to see them here* in good
Health; and do you, and your Comrades, return to me again, presently, with my
Equipage, if it will be permitted. You Will give me leave to drink a Pot of Wine
first, said the Fellow; two and thou will, answered Peregrine, but be not
drunk* There honest Fellow, said Clarinda, giving him Money, go drink thy
Master's Health, and mine, I love thee for being honest and true to thy Master,
with that, the Fellow made a Leg, and went his way, telling his Master, he would go
dispatch his Business.

Mariana, mean time, was come to the Count, who was much surprised at the sight
of her; he forced himself to be civil to her; she told him, she had heard of
his Misfortune, and was come to offer him all the aid, and assistance, that lay
in her Power; he thanked her, coldly, and told her, he should not be long
there; for either, in the Capitulations, the Prisoners would be exchanged, or
released, on both sides, or a Ransom paid for him; mean time, that he was
resolved to suffer, for he did not care what became of him; this he concluded,
with a deep sigh, which drew Tears from Marianas Eves. But, Sir, said she, I
come with a Ransom, from the Person you had taken, who thinks it due to you,
though he was after that retaken with you also: I know, I had Clarinda in my
Possession, but not so fortunate as to keep her; the Crossness of my Stars, do
still pursue me, and interpose their fatal Influences, 'twixt me, and my
Happiness. In that particular, you are mistaken, Sir, you never had her in your
Power, 'twas I, Sir, you pursued, took, and then lost again: How! said the
Count, and was it not Clarinda? No Count, answered Mariana, I can give you such
an exact account of every particular of the Business (besides the killing of
her Servant) as would convince you: And is she not in Mentz? Answered the
Count: Sir, I say not so: -- There he interrupted her, saying, and in my happy
Rivals Possession: No, I assure you Count, answered Mariana, she is absolute
Mistress of her self still: If I was sure of that, -- he there was interrupted,
by the insolent Officer, who had taken him, who came to insult over-him* with
two or three more, like himself: I come for Money, Sir, said he, going up to
the Count: Prithy Friend, take my Life, thou would do me a Kindness, for it is
a Burden to me, so heavy, as I am not able any longer to bear: Mariana, seeing
the (...)ere going to apply themselves to the Count, she pulled the Officer by
the Sleeve; and having told him, it did not become him, nor those others, to
insult so, over a Person in Affliction: What will content you? Here, said she,
take this, and deliver me your Prisoner: The Officer (having felt in his Hand
the weight and bulk of twenty Pistols) made no answer, but coming up to the
Count, Sir, you are free, said he, and I am your humble Servant: Come, added
he, to his Friends, I have no longer any concern with him; let us depart, and
let him go where he pleases, with that they went their way. You, Mariana, are
kind, said the Count, but much more you would be, in letting me have a sight of
fair Clarinda. Sir, all that is in my Power, you may command, answered Mariana;
Clarinda is Mistress of her own Actions, and of so good a temper, that I Will
engage, she will do you all the Justice she can possible, so soon as things are
settled; mean time, Sir, I earnestly entreat you to take Care of your self;
and, in order to that, be pleased to make use of those few Pistols; with that,
for fear of farther Interrogations* she went her ways, giving the Count*
Compassionate Look, and left the Pistols on the Table, and the Count to do what
he pleased with them.

The Count, so soon as Mariana was gone, took the Gold, and with it went to an
Inn, where he got a Messenger to go to Count Zinzendorf in the Camp. He after
that, began to reflect with a more composed mind, than ever he had done before,
on all his Concerns; he dwelt much on Mariana's kindness to him; he believed
that she had all along been his Friend; he fancied he could make that out from
her Actions, and something in her looks: Of truth, Mariana was of a very
compassionate Temper, apt to side with any Person in Affliction; she had looked
on the Count, when she left him, with a Countenance full of tenderness, in the
Opinion that the Count had no hopes left now of ever possessing Clarinda; for
though she had said true, that she was still at her own disposal, yet she knew
her thoughts so well, that she was certain none but Peregrine would carry her.
Clarinda and she were near related, had been brought up, and Educated together;
and her Portion, which had been left in Clarinda's Father's hands, at the Death
of her Father and Mother, while she was yet very young, had increased to very
near the Sum of Clarinda's, and her Beauty not much inferior; so that she was
as Clarinda's Companion, and they loved one another intimately. All these
things running in the Count's mind, he thought himself obliged to Mariana's
Bounty, and that he ought to requite all her Favors in an handsome manner, and
in that resolution he remained, till the Town was Surrendered.

The Articles were; That the next day the Confederates should have possession
given them of St. Jacob's Tower, and of the Gau-Gate; that they should send
five thousand Men to possess themselves of it; that the next Day after, early
in the Morning, the French Garrison should march out of the place, with six
pieces of Cannon, two Mortars, with the Arms of France, and as many Carts and
Wagons as were necessary to carry their Baggage, with their Colors flying,
Drums beating, lighted Matches, and to be guarded to Landau, with a Convoy of
ten Thousand Men of the Imperialists.

These Articles did very much displease the Soldiers, who had all along been
very desirous to take the City by Storm, to be revenged of those perfidious
Incendiaries the French, as they termed them.

Peregrine's Men were got into the Town, and had given an account of these
things to him from Count Zinzendorf, who had sent him word also, that he should
be with him the next day: whereupon Peregrine fearing some Disorders might
happen, as there is usually in such Affairs, so soon as Mariana was returned,
he caused the Chamber Door to be continually locked, and his Three Men to be in
constant waiting at it. He after that endeavored all he could to stand upon
his Leg, and he found that he gathered much strength by it, so that by the next
day he was able to walk, with the aid of a Staff. Both he and Clarinda inquired
of Mariana, how the Count did, and how he had received their Civilities, or
yours rather, said Clarinda: very indifferently, answered Mariana; I was forced
to leave the Gold on the Table before him, and to go abruptly from him, for
fear he should have returned it me: How does he look? Said Peregrine; very
dismayed, answered Mariana, full of trouble, so that I could not but pity him
very much: I wish, said Clarinda, you had the Power, dear Mariana, to change
all his Sorrows into Love, of thee I mean: I fear, said Peregrine, that who
ever has once loved Clarinda, can never be capable of any other Love: I am of
your mind, replied Mariana: I am not, said Clarinda; he never loved to an
excess; and I believe there has been more of Obstinacy and Revenge, in his
Conduct toward me, than o^ sincere Affection, so that he will easily be
diverted by some other Object, when he is once passed all hopes: Pray wave this
Discourse, replied Mariana, and let us speak of other things: Agreed, said
Peregrine; but first give me leave to say, that next to seeing my dear Clarinda
entirely mine, past all Disputes, I heartily could wish, the Count so happy as
to be in full Possession of the obliging Mariana; from this they fell into
various Discourses, with which they passed the rest of that Morning: After
Dinner, they desired Mariana to give them, in a continued Story, the Course of
her Life, since they had been separated, which they had not heard yet, but by
pieces; Mariana, having assented to their Request, thus began.

After you had been two days gone, and that the Servants you had sent back, had
assured me of your safe getting into the Town, and of your Father's Death, and
Burial; I every moment expected, with great impatiency, to hear from Peregrine,
in what place of safety he was retired, that I might send you word, if
possible, which I much dispaired to do, when I heard how difficult it was for
any one to get into the Town, since the Confederates had laid a formal Siege
before it. I was out of all hopes of hearing from him also, and was very
willing to lay the fault on any thing else, than on his neglect, though I
believed it more easily to have heard from him, than to have sent to you; this
made me apprehend that he might have fallen into some Disaster. I was in those
fears, when a Party of the Imperialists, came to the Castle, where they acted a
great deal of Rudeness, not only toward my old Aunt, and my self, but every
one of the Servants were made sensible of their Insolences; and the worst was,
that when I had made my Complaints to the Officer, under pretense of taking me
into his Protection; he offered things to me, beyond what I could tamely
endure, so that I was forced to Repulse him with fury: mean time: the Soldiers
did ransack all the Castle, taking what they thought convenient to carry along
with them, not sparing my poor Aunts Chamber, which put her into such a fright,
that I verily believe much contributed to her Death presently after. They were
not contented with that, but went to the Stables, where they exchanged their
worse Horses for ours, and took away the rest. When they had done all the
mischief they could, except firing, they left us to condole our Misfortunes; I
found my poor Aunt in so lamentable a Condition, that she looked then as if she
had been dead; so soon as she was recovered from her fright, so much as would
permit her to speak, she said, Let us begone, good Niece, as far as we can from
these merciless Devils, before another Party of them come to make an end of us;
Where shall we go, dear Aunt? I answered her; to my Farm, said she, which is
Twenty miles further from Mentz; I told her she would scarce be able to endure
the fatigue of so long a Journey, especially on Horseback, and there was then
no other convenience to be had; but she said, she had rather chose to die by
the way, than be again frighted, as she had been before, which would certainly
procure her Death: We therefore, the very next morning, very early, set
forwards, with all they had left us, that was carriable; but though we went but
slowly, considering we fled, my poor Aunt was so much fatigated, that she fell
sick of a Fever, of which she died, the day after we came to the Farm; she by
her Will, parted all she had betwixt us two; she left to my Cousin, your
Brother, a Legacy, in case he were alive, which, if he was not, was to return
to us. I took Care to have her decently buried, according to her Quality, as
well as I could; after which, I gave my self up to lament her loss, and your
Absence. I remained so, till hearing no News of either of you, and being in
Despair of having any, I inquired of all the Men Servants, which would be so
Courageous, as to attempt the getting into Mentz, with me, to learn what was
become of their young Mistress; your own Groom was the readiest to answer, but
your Brother's Faulkner was the most forward to attend me; he only asked, When
I would set forward? I told him, the next day; he said no more, but got all
things in Readiness, both for me, and himself, and coming to me the next
morning: Are you ready, Madam? Said he: Why? Answered I, Have you got every
thing, as it should be? Every thing, answered he, even to one, of my young
Master's Suits, which he was pleased to bestow on me, when he went into
Hungary; for I believe it impossible for a Woman to get through so many rude
Men, without receiving some Affronts: I readily accepted his Kindness, assuring
him I should gratify, him for that, and all his other Troubles and Civilities;
and in Conclusion, I goton Horseback, accoutred like an absolute Cadett, and
he like my Servant, both well provided with Arms.

Our Design was to get into the Camp, where we were to inquire after Peregrine,
and so to have conversed with him, how to have proceeded; but when, after a
long search, we had no other News of him, but that it was believed he was
killed, because his Horse had been found dead, with a Shot; we then resolved to
attempt the getting into the Town, as Deserters, so soon as possible we could;
to that purpose, we were in the Night time, getting as close as we could to the
Wall, when we were espied by a single Horseman, who making after us, shot at
us, and killed the poor Faulkner; I perceiving him fall, fearing that my turn
would be next, slack'd my pace, and turning my Horse, cried, I yield, save my
Life, and you shall have a Ransom; my pursuer seemed satisfied with that, and
was going to secure me, from an escape, when we were presently surrounded with
a Party of Horse, that was retiring into the Town, which took us along with
them. You have heard since, how it proved to be the Count, that had taken me
Prisoner, but how he happened on me, or what he was doing there, I am still to
learn.

Thus did Mariana put an end to her Narrative; they spent the rest of the day,
in contriving how Peregrine should meet with his Friends, and how they shall
dispose of themselves, after things were setiled again in the Town; Mariana
said, That she longed to see them all safe returned to their own homes: What
say you to it, Madam, said Peregrine, Must I return to my own home also? That
would be too far a Journey for you to perform at once, replied Clarinda; you
shall rest your self some time, at the Castle; and then I must begone, added
Peregrine: Goodness, cried Clarinda, you are such a troublesome Man, you shall
stay there till you are sent away: That may be the next day after, Madam,
answered Peregrine, or so soon as your Brother returns, if you do not
anticipate him in that employ: Shall I propose an expedient, said Mariana, that
will salve all? Let Us hear it, answered Clarinda: Nay, will you stand to it,
added Mariana, I assure you, before hand, it shall be to both your Likings, and
Advantages? I will stand to it, cried Peregrine, irrevocably: What say you,
Madam? added he, to Clarinda: Upon Marianas assurance, I care not if I do: Give
me your Hands to the Bargain, said Mariana; with that she took both their
Hands, and joined them together, saying, Marry, without delay: Spoken like an
Angel, cried out Peregrine, with Joy; and finding Clarinda to pull back her
Hand, and to look surprised: Nay, Madam, added he, it is too late to draw back,
we have your consent: I did not think, said Clarinda, that Mariana would have
served me so; I believed her more firm to my Interests: Can I be more firm to
Clarindas Interest, answered Mariana, than to promote them to the outmost of my
Power? What can be more your Interest, than to be inseparably united to what
you Love; What is there more Advantageous for you, than to once be fixed in
Peregrine's Arms? So fixed, as not to be removed but by Death: All this is
true, Madam, added Peregrine, If your Heart does not gainsay your Mouth, add
the last of your Blessings, in assenting to what our dear Mariana has so justly
proposed? Nay, she cannot deny me for shame, said Mariana; of she should, I
should for ever dis-own her for my Friend; but I know she will not, she has too
much of Justice, of Sense, and of Love for me, besides what she has for you,
Sir, to act against her own Satisfaction, and Quiet; Come, I must have it so,
added she, bringing Clarinda, near to Peregrine, and giving her Hand to him
once more; Tell him, you are his, and that you will confirm it, by Marriage,
with the first opportunity: Well, replied Clarinda, on Condition that you shall
not refuse to do that which I shall propose to you, Mariana, I will: Then spoke
Clarinda, answered Mariana; spoke to Peregrine, then next to me: Well then,
said Clarinda, with a soft sigh, since it must be so, Clarinda is yours, Sir,
here is my Hand to it, and so soon as opportunity shall offer it self, I will
be Married to you: I leave you to guess at Peregrine's Transports, for I cannot
express them: Now, added Clarinda; let me speak to you, Mariana, Love the
Count, and endeavor to make him yours: Very well repartied, I Will swear, said
Peregrine; and I add, may you by that means be the cause of our perfect
Reconciliation: Amen, said Clarinda; nay, if you will all have it so, I say
Amen too. After this, Supper was served in; they cat and drank, and were merry;
Peregrine walked about the Chamber; and after they had tired themselves, with
Mirth, Clarinda, at Peregrine's request, took her Lute, and Sung those Lines,
which Peregrine had made; and when it came to the two last, they all in Consort
Sang,

So were they heard, no longer to complain;
But lived to Love, and loved to Live again.
Thus they concluded the Evening, after which, they went to their Repose.

The next Morning, was the Day appointed for the Garrison to March out, and the
Confederates to March in, according to the Capitulation that had been made: The
Imperiallists drew up their Army, in two Ranks, by Six in the Morning, to
receive their Enemies; diverse of the Imperial Cavalry, posted themselves, on
the Right of the Gaw-Gate; on the Left side, were chiefly to be seen, the
Guards du Corpse, of the Duke of Bavaria; and next to them, those of the Duke of
Saxony, with some other Troops of the Imperial Cavalry, and Dragoons; after
which, the French began to March out of the City, to the number of 6690 Men,
with 572 loaded Horses, 334 Carts, 31 Mules, 43 Light Horsemen, 6 Chaires, 2
Coaches, 1 Litter, 36 Colors, and 10 Standards.

Besides, there were put into Boats, which had been sent from Strasbourg, with
Ammunition for the French, 6 Pieces of Cannon, 2 Mortars, 2 Hawbitz, and 1500
Sick, whereof, some died continually, which they threw over into the Rhine. As
the Marquess D'Vxelles marched out of the Garrison, he took his leave of the
Duke of Lorrain, of the Elector of Saxony, and of that of Bavaria; as also, of
all the rest of the Princes, and Generals; The French declared, that before the
Siege, the Garrison consisted of 11000 Men. The time of their March out of the
Garrison, was from Seven in the Morning, till Three in the Afternoon; after
which, the Allies took Possession of the City. Upon the French marching out,
Peregrine, and the two Ladies, got at the top of the House, whence they could
very distinctly see the whole Garrison March.

The Count, on the other hand, upon mature Considerations, had taken now
Measures; he was resolved to slight those who slighed him, and to esteem those
who vallued him; so that now his whole designs were altered, which put him upon
writing this Letter to Mariana.

It has always been counted an ill thing to strive against a too rapid stream;
I have too long done so, while I might have swom down easily, with the current;
I have at last found out my obstinacy, in endeavoring to compel Love, not
considering that it is as tameless as it is blind; henceforwards, I will
endeavor to Love, where I have hopes to be beloved again. I humbly require the
beauteous Marianas Advice, on this point, she being a Person, to whom I
acknowledge my self infinitely obliged, and of so sweet a Disposition, as not
to refuse her Counsel, to the Unfortunate

Count Mansfeilt.


This Letter was, by his Direction, privately conveyed into Marianas own Hands,
by a Maid Servant of the House, who promised to return an Answer safe, if she
pleased to give her one: Mariana was strangely surprised, at the reading of
this Letter, she did not know well what to make of it, she was loath to flatter
her self too much, and as unwilling to take advice of her best Friends, for
fear they should think her too conceited of her self, and apt to receive
Amorous Impressions; she therefore concluded to consider very maturely on the
Business, and then send an Answer as suitable, as she could, to her Modesty,
and her Desires; she fancied that her Kindness toward the Count, when
abandoned of all, and the commiserating Looks, she cast on him, when she left
him last, might have had some kind Influence over his Mind, that seeing he had
resolved to take off his Affections from Clarinda, as he seemed to intimate, he
might as well have some Thoughts of her, as he had had of Clarinda, to whom,
she thought not her self Inferior in Birth, nor not much in Estate, except her
Brother should chance to die: These, and many more Thoughts, of the like nature
running in her Mind, she resolved to send the Count an Answer, as Modest as she
could, which she conceived in these Terms.

I have always professed my self, a Friend to the afflicted, and so long as I
have thought you so, I have been made sensible of your Troubles; but now I find
you are in the right way of getting out of your Adversities, I withdraw my
pity, you having no further occasion for it; What need a Man ask the way that
is in the right road? You have a sufficient Esiate, not to confine you to Match
for Riches only, and you want not Sense, to prefer Discretion, good Nature, and
Comeliness, to the bare shadow of Beauty. I can therefore contribute no more,
than my Wishes for your Happiness, which I desire, as I do that of your humble
Servant,

Mariana.


When the Count received this, he was in a great perplexity, as to the Nature
of Marianas Answer, till he had read it; he opened it, and read, with that
Satisfaction, that made him repeat it over again, though he saw a world of good
Nature in it; and he resolved by one Letter more to know the bottom of Marianas
Heart; he was in haste, because he believed that his late Mistress, and his
Rival, was so to; and he designed to be before hand with them, that his new
choice might appear as a contempt; not doubting of Marianas Discretion, in
keeping the Business Secret, at the least notice, that he desired it should be
so; he therefore, gratifying well the Messenger for what he had already done,
and promising him a farther Bounty, he sent him immediately back, with this
Answer.

If the obliging Mariana would but nominate any Person, whom she thought would
be a proper Subject for my Love, I should think my self extremely obliged to
her; but how surprised should I be, with a transport of joy, should she
vouchsafe to name her self. My Design is to anticipate Clarindas, and my late
Rivals haste, and to be fixed in my choice, before they have concluded theirs:
Let my dear Mariana, be so kind, as not to delay sending me word, whether she
will accept of my Person and Fortune, that I may thereby be in hopes of
possessing her; this requires such haste, and secrecy, as beggs for a sudden
definitive Answer, to the most impatient

Count Mansfeilt.


This was sufficient to inform Mariana, in every particular Circumstance, of
the Count's Design; she could not but see that this fit, was the effects of a
Contempt and Revenge; she had no time to loose, knowing how forward Clarinda
and Peregrine were in their Concerns; she was pleased with the Surprisal, and
knew beforehand, that her dear Clarinda, would be exceedingly pleased with it;
she verily believed the Count to be Worthy and Just, wherefore, she thought she
had no more to do, but to throw her self on his Honor, and to readily embrace
the offer; she therefore sent him presently back, this short Answer.

I put such Confidence in your Word and Honor, that though I might think my
self, unworthy your choice, I wholly rely on them both; I therefore resign my
self to be your Wife, when e're you shall think fit to bestow that Honor on,

Your Humble Servant, Mariana.


The Count was so fully satisfied, with this short, but full Answer, from
Mariana, that he now went about to contrive how he should make this Secret
March break out to his greater Credit and Advantage, as well as to his
Antagonists Surprisal; so soon as his Kinsman* Count Zinzendorf, was marched
into the Town, he repaired to him, and the better to disguise his Intentions,
he began to harp again on the Picture, which he believed Peregrine had taken
from him; Zinzendorf told him, that he had found out where Peregrine lay, that
he would go and acquaint Peregrine with what he had said, and he would bring
him back his Answer, being very desirous to make a thorough Reconciliation bet
wixt them, as being Friend to both, telling him besides, he thought that the
best expedient to appease all disputes, between them, concerning Clarinda,
would be to have them both stand to her Decision, in making choice of whom she
liked best: The Count seemed to give his consent, by saying, Do what you
please: So Count Zinzendorf went immediately to find out Peregrine, and to
discourse the business with him; he found his Friend in company with Clarinda
and Mariana: After the first Embraces and Compliments to the Ladies, as well as
to his Friend, who had acquainted him with their Qualities, he took Peregrine
aside, to let him understand what Count Mansfeilt had said to him. As for the
Picture, said Peregrine, I own I took it from him, and shall restore it him
again, when ever he requires it; but I know of no wrong I ever did him; I had
engaged my Affections to this Lady, added he, before I knew any thing of his
pretensions, and had had obliging returns from her; and therefore I find not in
what I have incurred his displeasure; but if he is pleased to let the Lady
decide our difference, I shall readily submit to it: If you please to press the
Business to him, that our differences may be ended forthwith, I shall be
infinitely obliged to you. Count Zinzendorf, whose business in settling his
Quarters, called him another way, made what have he could back to Count
Mansfeilt, and acquainted him with Peregrine's Answer, and did further bring
the Count to pitch on a certain Hour the next Day, to meet all together, and
there make up all Discords. The Count, who thought himself sure of Mariana,
agreed to all; whereupon Count Zinzendorf left him, to send an account to
Peregrine of the Hour and Place the Count had named for the Rendezvous.

The next Day, at the Hour appointed, all Parties met at Count Zinzendorf's
Quarters, where Mariana was sure to make one. Count Zinzendorf broke the Ice,
saying, That seeing both Parties were agreed to stand to the Lady's Decision,
he humbly entreated her to determine, which of those Gentlemen she would please
to make choice of for her Husband. At this Count Mansfeilt cried out, Which
Lady do you mean? And stepping up to Mariana, taking her by the Hand, This is
the only Lady I desire should speak that Decree. What say you Madam, will you
make me so happy, as to make choice of me for your Husband? This he said,
looking fixedly on Mariana, and expecting her answer. Yes Sir, answered
Mariana, if you please to consent to my choice. With that, the Count kissed
her, and said, Bear Witness all, that I take this Gentlewoman, my dear Mariana,
to be my Wife; and that I will Marry her so soon as I can get any one to do
that Office for us: And now Madam, said he, addressing himself to Clarinda, I
have been beforehand with you, you may now make choice of whom you please.
Count Zinzendorf, after this, said, All things go very well hitherto; I should
be glad to see the rest prosper so well also: My Friend Peregrine, you are now
to expect what that Lady will declare. He need not, Sir, answered Clarinda, I
have already given my self to him; and now I ratify it before all this
Company. At which Peregrine returned her his most humble Thanks.

There are but two things more to be done, said Count Zinzendorf; you Sir, are
to make Restitution of that Picture, which once ^ell to your Lot: Let him keep
it, with the Original, now, if he pleases, said Count Mansfeilt, interupting
him; I am entirely satisfied, with this Jewel, added he, pressing Mariana by
the Hand: Now, for the last, said Count Zinzendorf, I would gladly see a
through Reconciliation betwixt you, both my worthy Friends, such as may be as
durable as your Lives: It shall not be my fault, I assure you, said Peregrine,
offering forwards, toward the Count: Count Mansfeilt, who would not be behind
him, in point of good Nature, as the Cause of our Differences is now taken
away; I am desirous, that what has past between us, of Jars, and Animosities,
should be forgotten; with that, they both embraced; and, after felicitating one
another Happiness, they all retired to Peregrine's Lodgings, till they had
time to get some more convenient for them all.

FINIS.
Books newly Printed for Sam. Briscoe, over against Will's Coffee House, in
Russel* Street, in Covent Garden.
1. WIves Excuse, or Cuckolds make themselves, a Comedy, by Mr. Southern; with
a Copy of Verses on the Play, by Mr. Driden. 2. The Marriage-Hater matched; a
Comedy, by Mr. Durfey. 3. Traitor, a Tragedy; newly revived; Written by Mr.
Rivers. 4. The true Widow, a Comedy; Written by Thomaes Shandwell. Lauri. -- 5.
The Lives of the 12 Caesar's, the first Emperors of Rome: Written in Latin, by
C. Suetonius Tranquillius, and done into English by several Gentlemen of the
University of Oxford. 6. Advice to a young Lord; written by his Father, under
these following Heads; Religion, Study and Exercise, Travel, Marriage,
Housekeeping and Hospitality, of the Court, of Friendship, of Pleasure, and
Idleness, of Conversation. 7. Sir William Temple's Essays. 8. Ovid's Epistles,
Translated by several Hands, adorned with Cuts. 9. The Works of Horace,
Translated by Mr. Creech, of Oxford. 10. The London-Jilt; or the Female
Cuckolds a new Novel.

