THE Slaughterhouse, Or a Brief DESCRIPTION OF THE Spanish Inquisition, IN A
Method never before used; In which is laid open The Tyranny, Insolence,
Perfidiousness, and Barbarous Cruelty of that TRIBUNAL; Detected by several
Examples and Observations.

Gathered together by the Pains and Study of JAMES SALGADO a Converted Spanish
Priest; who bears in his Body the Prints of their Inhuman rigors.

HEB. 11.33. Obturaverunt Or a Leonum.

LONDON Printed by T.B. for the Author

To the most Serene and Mighty CHARLES the II. By the Grace of God of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
May it please your most Excellent Majesty.
I Should condemn my self as an Offender, if I carried this short Description
of the most Unjust Court, viz. the Spanish Inquisition to any other Sanctuary
than your Sacred Feet. What I have here drawn, is the Portraict of those
Inquisitors who denied me, and others, the Liberty of our Conscience, and
choice of our Religion, and threatened my Life for being true to my Savior, my
Conscience, and the hopes of Heaven: To you, Great Sir, I dedicate them, who
are the Defender of my Life, and of the Liberty of my undissembled Conscience.
I have found, what Multitudes have heard, the Royal Clemency and Favor you
bear toward afflicted Protestants; France and other Nations are your
Witnesses; and I a Spaniard, rescued first from the Errors of Popery, next
from the Cruelties of the Inquisition, and flying to your Royal Clemency as to
the Tutelar of Distressed Converts and Protestants, implore your acceptance of
this Piece, a Witness of that Divine Zeal which you always express toward True
Religion, and the Professors of it, among whom God has mercifully made me one,
and your Sacred Majesty has preserved me under your Government and Protection;
for which, and for the many Royal Favors done to Protestants, continual
Prayers are and will be made for your Majesty's Long Life, Prosperous Reign,
and Eternal Happiness, by all the Churches of God; and more particularly, as by
duty more especially thereunto bound, by

Your Majesty's most Devoted Suppliant, James Salgado.

To the Reader.
Kind Reader,
I Judge it not very needful to stop thee with a long Preface, which is but the
first part of it is following Dsicourse; what I have written here, I have
written with an upright heart, I neither design an injury to the Inquisition,
nor a praise to my seuf: Thou may peruse and employ it to thine own profit,
and in thy Christian Candor think favorably toward

Thine, James Salgado.

THE Slaughterhouse.
LEST any one should surmise I am writing this short Story out of any private
respects, I do in the entrance thereof solemnly protest before God, and before
men, That I will not say ought contrary to truth or sincerity. No^ has my
passion moved me to write in remembrance of the cruelties, though great, which I
suffered in the Inquisition. The sol^ cause of this my purpose, is to discover
that devilish Policy, that my Reader may more clearly know it, and the more
cautiously avoid it. As for my Person, I am a Spaniard by Birth; and with my
Mothers Milk I suck'p in the Romish Religion; and at length was Ordained
Priest. Discerning at last the vanities and multitude of the Superstitions of
the Roman Faction, through the healing influence of the heavenly Illumination, I
was cured, and came over to the Reformed. The Account of my Conversion, I have
given in a small Book, Entitled The Romish Priest Converted to the Reformed
Religion. I will not therefore cloy my Reader with this; The Reformed need not
my Arguments to confirm them, and the Papists will not give them a reading to
convert them: moreover, since men's Sentiments are various, I will not much
intermeddle with Doctrinals, but rather leave each one his liberty. I purpose
now to draw in lively Colors the Slaughterhouse of the Spanish Inquisition;
and so to hang it out that the well-meaning Reader may be gained by it.

For though all should know that there is a Spanish Inquisition, and that it is
merciless; yet these very persons may possibly not know the particulars which I
have known, from Authors most worthy of Credit, and from my own experience;
these I will briefly expose to view.

The first occasion of my Conversion, was the Disagreement I saw among so many,
and so great Divines of the Popish Party, in a Point whose certainty is judged
to be that, on which the whole of our Faith does depend. Some do much doubt the
Infallibility of a General Council; for so much as they suppose it does not
rely on a Divine Revelation, but (as Occam reports it) they proceed by a common
influence assisting them, Occam 9. Lib. 3. Tract. 3. C. 8.
and according to their own Sentiment.s

He farther does peremptorily determine, Idem. Tract 2. p. 2. C. 10.
That Pope and Cardinals are not the Rule of Faith; but if they should presume
to determine any thing against the Rule of Faith contained in the Scripture,
they must not be followed herein, but ought to be reprehended for it by
Catholics. Yet Lib. 3. and 24.9.5.
Durandus, L. 1. dis. 1.9.1. art. 4.
Gregory of Ariminum and some others say, That our Faith is ultimately resolved
into this, That that the Church is governed [They mean infallibly governed] by
the holy Ghost.

On the other side Valendensis prefers the Scriptures before the Catholic
Doctors, Doct. fid. C. 2. Ar. 2. L. 37.
Catholic Bishops, the Church of Rome, and a General Council it self; and he
affirms, Our Faith rests on the Scriptures alone; so while I turned over their
Books, I found them Combating each other; and saw (as Lucan words it) The Roman
Eagles equal matched contend,
And stubborn Arms each other still offend.


This irreconciled War caused me to entertain the doubts of the truth of Papal
Religion. I saw the greatest part of them did resolve their Faith into human
Opinion, while the Learned, whom I read, did agree with the Reformed, as I
well perceived. Thus as the more deep search into every truth ordinarily
arises from some previous suspicion; so my doubting was occasion of my
Conversion: To the utmost of my power then I studied, suspending my assent from
either Part; and compared each Matter, Cause and Argument with its Opposite,
until at length, by this means the part which the Reformed held, appeared unto
me more plain and clear.

This notwithstanding, I was so possessed with the Praedetermination of the
Church, that I retained a secret doubt, whether I, who am much inferior to
many, might lawfully search into these Controversies. This Doubt stuck with me
till I had certainly discovered the Schoolmen, allowing to every Christian that
judgment, which they call a Judgment of certain Knowledge, which can declare the
Truth. The Reformed call it a Judgment of Discerning; when I had found this, I
came to a calm temper, and the wavering of my mind ceased.

I did thereupon firmly resolve with my self (since the Lord had enlightened my
mind) to take my Journey into France, that there I might be more fully
instructed in the Truth, and that I might renounce the Papal superstition.
According to this resolution I proceeded; and having left Spain, I traveled
directly to Paris, and addressed my self to the Pastor of the Church at
Charenton, declared my purpose to him, and was very kindly entertained; and in
this Affair I found the Reverend Monsieur D'relincourt, my singular Patron, who
advised me, since Religion did there run some hazard, I might be safer in
Holland, whither he did (after I had, for fear of the common people, privately
made my Recantation) send me with Commendatory Letters. So soon as I was come
thither I went to the Hague, Saluted the Reverend and Learned Dr. Maresius (the
Son of that Eminent Professor of Divinity Samuel Maresius) who then was
Minister in that Place, and afforded to me as much kindness, as could be
expected from a private Person; and with singular diligence endeavored to set
forward my Affairs; but seeing they succeeded neither as He or I had hoped, he
advised my Return into France, where I might teach the Spanish Tongue, that
which I would, but could not do in Holland through want of skill in the Dutch
Tongue; my skill lay only in the Spanish, Latin, Italian and French Tongues.
To Paris therefore I did betake my self once more, and lay private among the
Reformed; fearing to be taken notice of by either the Seculars, or the
Ecclesiastics in the Queens Court, where I was too well known to some of those
many Spaniards, whom the Queen (Daughter of the House of Austria) did
entertain. And what I feared long I felt too soon; for some of the Queens
Domestics seized, and kept me close, and after a while sent me (whether by the
Queens command, or by her consent, I cannot affirm) back into Spain, where I
was delivered over to the Inquisition, in the Province of Estremadura, in the
City Lerina, where after one whole years Imprisonment, weary of it, and
earnestly desirous of liberty, I attempted to get loose by flight; but after I
was gotten near one hundred Leagues from Lerina, and had reached the City
Origneleno, the Officers of the Inquisition seized me again, and sent me into
the Inquisition at Murcia. Here for a new Crime, which was my Escape from the
holy Inquisition, I was five years imprisoned, where I had neither Books, nor
any Light, nor company of any man, but the bloody Inquisitors, and their
Slaughter-men.

At last in an Act (as they speak ( of the Faith, before the Inquisitors, the
whole multitude asembled (of whom moer hereafter) I was presented to the sight
of men, and to their scorn.

The Account of my Life and fault was read before all the People; and I was
condemned, and sent away to the Galleys. The Dress they put me in [beside those
Ornaments of it, Flames, and Pictures of Devils] I shall anon describe. Thus
immediately was I sent to the Galleys, where they placed me, shaved both Head
and Beard, with one foot chained, among the rest of the Rowers. This how hard
soever it proved, was to be my Penance. Nor do I think the Wit of Busiris, or
Rhadamanthus could find out a punishment more grievous, than these Toils are to
any man unaccustomed to them. In the effect appeared the cruelty of their
usage, for it soon made me a Leper, and unfit for labor. I was extremely
pined, and consumed away, and (which I blush to speak) so great a multitude of
Lice swarmed about me, that I might be excused, if I thought I felt one of
Egypts Plagues. And though I was kept in greatest scarcity of meat and drink,
which ordinarily cause sweat, yet a perpetual sweat fell from my whole Body,
which [if it offend not your Ears] turned into most stinking worms, insomuch,
that oftentimes I began to think [through Satan's suggestion] That, seeing the
many miseries, wherewith I was visited by the hand of God, were in manner far
different from other men's, the Inquisitors had but dealt righteously with me.
But that buffeting Messenger soon withdrew, and gave place to the divine Grace,
which forthwith brought me to my remembrance, That Job a holy man had been
tried with no less suffering; and this settled me in the belief, that these
trials were not penal, but Paternal Chastisements, and so I committed my self
and cause wholly to the Divine Providence, knowing that God would work for me,
since that he has said, all things work together for good to them that love
the Lord, Romans 8. who has at length also blessed me according to mine own
desire. For all the Rowers, and others that were with me in the Galleys,
earnestly petitioned the Inquisitor-General that he would take me out of the
Galleys, were I was not only very useless, but very hurtful, infecting others
more than one way. Hereupon the Inquisitor-General freed me from the Galleys,
and confined me to the House of Penance in the City Murcia, where I was handled
severely enough for ten months time; nevertheles, there at last I recovered,
and God giving me opportunity, I once more betook my self to France, and there
with my Brethren in Christ I renewed my Joy; yet that I might be more safe in
praising God, and declaring my conscience before men, I passed over Sea into
England. This is the Summary of my Life, and the Calamities that befell me. And
now I will give you a brief Description of that Inquisition where I was so
handled, and expose it to the view of all.

This then is the Face of the Inquisition when it proceeds to a definitive
Sentence, which is past, as they speak, in the Act of Faith. A Theater is
Erected in some large Marketplace, or some such like place; where above other
Seats the Tribunal of the Inquisitors is eminent, and they attended with a
Crowd of Servants. Next, the Bishop of the Place and his Chapter: Next the
Magistrates encompassed with the Nobles; after all, the common People follow,
which flock together from all places within twenty or thirty Leagues to see
this Solemn Act, where some Priest takes the Pulpit set up for the purpose, and
in a Sermon extolls the holiness of the Inquisition, with flatteries enough; as
did that Priest at the Act wherein I was.

This Priest, that he might at once flatter the Inquisition, and set forth his
own Eloquence, forged a multitude of absurdities, and ventured to affirm;

That the first Act of the holy Inquisition was, that God solemnly instituted
for Adam our first Father; thus making God the Inquisitor, that according to
the custom of these men under this pretense their Tyranny might be covered. And
he further prosecuted his Discourse, giving to Adam and Eve the Name of
Apostates, and what in him lay, making our first Parents Heretics,
Impenitents, and Deserters (or Renegadoes, as we usually call such) of the
Faith. Now let us observe how this Declamation is worthy to be laughed at. This
Priest ought to have considered, That Adam and Eve did not totally lose the
faith and knowledge of the Lord their Creator; nor did they sin directly
against all the Commandments of God; but in so much as they transgressed the
Commandment of not eating the forbidden Fruit, they did implicitly break all.
Moreover they were Elect, in whom the Act of Faith (whether general or special)
might be intermitted; but the Habit could not be lost.

If Adam indeed had become wholly an Idolater, if he had wholly departed from
the Faith, and Profession of the most high God, This declaiming Priest might
have had smoe color for what he said: But since Adam was not such, the
reasoning of the Priest ended in a falsehood; and his Allegory could be nothing
better than hellish, whilst he condemns the Sin as Heresy, and the Person as
Apostate, without any respect to the honor, God in Creating, had put upon him,
making him the King and Lord of the whole World. Yet the Allegory is more
ridiculous, in which the Priest brings in God Supreme Lord of all us, as
Inquisitor, and so advances their Inquisitor to an absolute Supremacy; whereas
all know, that the Inquisitor General is subject to the Pope.

Further, Paradise is made the Theater of Heresies, on which God is supposed to
have the information brought in by the Accusers, and to pronounce Sentence when
all Circumstances had been considered; but here who shall be the Officers? Good
Angels were not made for this. And such honor was too great for Devils who
might indeed be the Executioners, but not Assistants in the course of Judgment.
He might as well have added, that our Protoplasts thus condemned, were
delivered over to that Angel, who had the flaming Sword put into his hand, that
he might be Armed as well to Execute them, as to keep the entrance into
Paradise. So one absurdity naturally arises out of another; and who chooses
to utter one, may canly isivent an hundred fond Conceits. With such a store as
this furnished, he did the best he could in finishing his Allegory; and that he
might neatly flatter the Fathers, Commissioners of that Inquisition; he tells
them, that God clothed our first Parents with the ignominious Vest, the
San-benita just like theirs, which by their command the condemned Heretics
were clad with.

And in doing this, the Priest was very pleasantly ridiculous; He like an
excellent Brother turns the skins, with which God covered the nakedness of our
first Parents, into San-benita's. An ungrounded and Insolent Allegory, without
any resemblance! for the San-benita is an open exposing of the Person to shame;
the skins were to cover the shame of the persons that wore them. So the skins
lessened the shame, and were given out of mercy; the San-benita aggravated the
shame, and were imposed by severe revenge.

Certainly Adam and Eve owe little to this Priest, who when he ought to treat
them with all Veneration, as became the Head and Foundation of Mankind, when he
should have owned a good hope of their Salvation, in as much as they were the
first fruits of both Church and State; he recounts them Heretics, and as such
treats them; he brands them as final Apostates; makes Paradise a Theater for
Renegado's, and brings our first Fathers on it as spreaders of Heretical
Infection, clothes them with the Sanbenita, pronounces final Sentence against
them; and whether God will or no, this bold Priest will make him Inquisitor
General; but in very deed we have cause to doubt whether this Priest were a
Descendent from them in right Line; or whether of the Brood of the Serpent,
that he durst spit out that venom against Paradise, by this most unjust
Allegory, of which the Devil himself would nigh be ashamed. But these and such
like disagreeing Parallels and unshapen Similitudes, are invented and published
in the Kingdom of Spain, which would be happy enough, were it well rid of such
venomous Beasts.

Yet in the abundance of this Priests Eloquence and vanity, he declares that
Kingdom Holy, and proves it, because it retains the Holy Tribunal of the
Inquisition, and defends it, as if indeed the Inquisition did with moderation
manage the Government; as if it gave freedom of defense, and did no injury to
the Innocent; as if its rigor did not exceed what wholesome care did diect
toward the accused; when as quite contrary that Tribneal is most justly had in
abomination by all people.

It calls it self Holy, but is pure Tyranny, and a very great scandal to
Christian Kingdoms, and Commonwealths; while they pretend to be the Pillar of
the Faith, they are the Wrack of the Faithful. So that considering the
Tyrannical Effects of, it we may well wonder, that it is continued to this day
in that Kingdom.

I wish they would tell me, what kind of Judgment Seat that is, which admits
not a Prisoner, sometimes for ten or twelve years together to appear before
them, and to plead his Cause, which mean time will not allow any person to
converse with the Prisoner, beside the Inquisitors and the Keeper of the
Prison? What Justice does that Tribunal minister, which refuses to let the
Accused know the Names of those that witness against him?

What Righteousness in that Government, where Christian Piety cast off, they
are deprived of all their Goods and Possessions, the labor of many years, who
cannot be proved guilty of any fault, but of error of mind? when by the divine
allowance, as Solomon witnesses, is, Eccl. 3. That man should see the good of
his labor all his days.

What Justice or honor does that Regimen retain, which denies natural right to
women and children; that puts the shameful San-benita on those of most Noble
Families, and overthrows whole Families at once? I will take leave to divert,
for proof of what I have said, to the Inquisition of Portugal, where, with
cruelties greater than which Antiochus, and Dioclesian first used, they condemn
to death, never acquainting the Condemned with either number, or names of
Witnesses; Thus they manage it; First they apprehend a man as a Jew, or
Mahumetan, or Reformed, thrust him into Prison, without telling him who, or how
many accuse him: Next he suffers the miseries of this Imprisonment six or
eight, or ten years; if at last the man, to get out of their hands, confesses
all deposed against him to be true; and implores (what they never show) their
mercy; then the Inquisitors proceed to enquire whether he knew his Accusers.
The poor man [as is truth] answers he knows them not; hereupon [though he
confess, and sue for mercy] yet he is burnt, because he knows neither persons,
nor names of his Accusers. Here oftentimes it happens, that the man, because
cause he will not die unrevenged, and without company, accuses a whole Village
or Town, that amongst them he may hit the Persons that accused; O degenerate
Age! O barbarous Customs. Can Christians find such Inquisitors, when the
Heathens never would allow such? Where was such irregular cruelty ever acted
elsewhere, since God Created Adam in the Field of Mesopotamia? Let us turn over
divine and human Histories, we shall find none sorcruel. Pharaoh ruled with
rigor, but 'twas to finish his Buildings. Ahasuerus promoted Haman; for want
of respect from a single person, a cruel revenge was designed against the Life
of all the Jews; yet this Decree past openly, not in private. Balthazar
profanely abused the holy Vessels, but did not cruelly murder the people of
God. Antiochus persecuted the Jews; yet heard their Cause in a public
Assembly. Sennacherib, and other Tyrants vexed the people by Arms. Nero and
other Roman Emperors appointed public Prisons, and invented diverse kinds of
death for Christians: yet these all exercised their Tyranny with an open
process in the sight of the world.

But no where is there found a Tribunal like to the Spanish Inquisition: every
wise man cannot but condemn this as most directly destructive to human nature,
and to all equity, which requires a fair and public Trial; and where the Cause
is punishable proportions the punishment to the Crime, with some respect to the
frailty of the Offenders punished. Furthermore I would desire leave to ask,

What honor the Roman Profession gains by these Acts of Faith, which are
solemnized in Spain? wherein is the righteousness of that Religion they call
Catholic? Do the Accused see, or so much as know their Accusers? Nay, do they
know their Crime which they should clear themselves of? Have they leave to
consult an Advocate in the Prison? or to ask Counsel of any prudent men, and
zealous in faith; who might on examination instruct them that err, and comfort
them that are innocent? May, the Prisoner though for eight or ten years
together enjoy the light of the Sun; or ever knew how the Affairs of his Family
are managed? Nothing of all this! so that it is no injury to conclude against
these unexemplified Tyrants, That they break and violate all the Laws of
kindness, truth and humanity. They do pretend an absolute power granted to
them; though this be against all Law divine and human; Genesis 18.25. It is God
only has right to such a Power; He only can exercise it without putting us
into tormenting fear, that any future injustice shall ever be done against us,
or any of the Creatures. The Righteousness of this Government is owned in the
Book of Job, where you have an excellent Theological Discourse on the exact
Righteousness of the Creator; and the narrow conceptions of the Creature Man. In
the bitterness of his Soul Job speaks, when he says to God, Job 10.2. Donot
contemn me; show me the reason why thou contendest with me? As if with David he
would say, why do thou enter into judgment with me? what need God to
justify his way before man? His ways are the absolute Idea of Justice. He may
work as he will; we must reverence the Workman: Thy Judgments, O God, are very
just; we must believe it, and not pry into them; They exceed man's reach, and
are clothed with most deep Mysteries, yet it is corrective, not destructive of
us. This Absolute Authority impudent Inquisitors would usurp, and relying on
this erroneous Opinion, Nimrod-like, they hunt for the Goods, Bodies, and Lives
of Men.

Now that the absoluteness of their proceedings may more evidently appear,
(kind Reader) I will prove by diverse instances, that without ever looking into,
or debating of the Cause, they have most tyrannically condemned the Person.
Though the thing itself prove this enough, for the Inquisition-Court is subject
to no direction of any other Laws, but arbitrarily wracks Souls, and murders
Bodies, of which there are Clouds of Witnesses, men Condemned, because the
Inquisition would be cruel. Good God! that ever this Tribunal should pretend to
a Divine Impulse, where every Brick seems a Conjuring Spell, and every Officer
a tormenting Fiend; for suppose we a Jew, a Mahumetan, or Christian in their
Paws, what do they pretend to do with such a one? Would they chastise him? what
need they then so many Officers? why such Methods extremely scandalous, as a
secret Chamber, an unseen Tribunal* invisible Witnesses, a perfidious
Secretary, and merciless Servants, Confiscation of Goods through fraud and
guile, Keepers as hard-hearted as the relentless Walls, the Fiscal Mutes, the
shameful Sambenites, a deaf Audient, unrighteous Wracks, a Theater filled with
horror to astonish the Prisoner, a sentence with Hypocrisy, a disguized
Executioner, and finally a peremptory Judgment. In all the times of Paganism no
such Roman Tribunal was ever erected. In their Amphitheaters men had not quite
put off Humanity, the guilty and condemned to die were exposed to wild Beasts
to be torn in pieces; they knew their Executioner, but here the Condemned are
tormented by disguised ones: Men they should be by their shape, but Devils by
their fierceness and cruelty.

These General Acts of the Faith are no where acted, but in the greater Cities
of the Kingdom; and the ordering of them presents thee Reader with a sight of
both the foolish madness, and hellish fury of a barbarous Generation of men.
For observe,

First, The Keepers of the Prison drag their Prisoners ignominiously attired
with the Sambenito, and a Mitre (called Coroza by the Vulgar;) Next flock
together (besides the abovenamed) the University men; those they call
Familiars, or Sergeants of the Inquisition, follow next; then the Consultors,
Qualificators, Notaries of the Inquisition, the Secretaries, and the Fiscals,
with the whole crowd of common people, come together (as I said before) from
twenty or thirty Leagues about; to these must be added a Legion, completely
armed, with their Standard, the Green Cross, carried before them, and there
with a Canopy of an hundred Else of Linen to cast a shade over the
Inquisitors, and the Nobles; in the midst of the Theater an Altar is set up,
and about that all the Parish Priests, the Officials, and the Hangman: I do
scarce think that any of those four Monarchies (the Assyrian, the Persian,
Grecian, and Roman) which once ruled the World, ever appointed such great
attendance of so many Officers to execute a Sentence on twenty or thirty poor
men. Who that knows this, can restrain his wonder, grief and pity, to see this
Calamity befallen the Age, Tyranny holding the place of Justice? Who would not
sue to the Author of Life, that he would show that Mercy and Grace to the Age,
that the darkness being dispelled, this barbarous cruelty might cease, which
hitherto has not been satisfied with depriving innocent men of their whole
Estates, with forcing them to own what they never did, but has proceeded to an
infamous Execution, applauded by that Scum of the people which follow it. Oh
inhumane Age! old in Cruelty, but very raw and ungrown in Virtue! But I come
(as I promised) to give you an Historical Relation of some Cases brought under
the Examen of this Judgment Seat, by which you may see the Equity of that they
call Most Holy, which on a Moral probability condemn and execute, nay on a mere
suspicion they will do it.

In the City of Toledo, 1644. they dragged upon this infamous Theater,
Dominicus de Montesines, Franciscus de Cacetes, Francisous Vasquez, Lewis de
Valencia, Emmanuel Gonzales, each bearing a Green Wax Candle in their hand, and
fined each of ehem four thousand Crowns; and if you would know the cause, it
was merely through suspicion, forasmuch as they were of a Jewish Race: for this
they were forced under this dishonor to pay the debts they never owed. Should
we enquire, we could not find a Law tempered with any sound reason, that
adjudgeth men to torments on such slight suspicion; God himself, Supreme Judge,
in the case of that Theft by Achan committed at Jericho, directs Joshua to sind
out and determine the person by lot, when God Omniscient could have told who
was the Offender: But by such ordinary course, in sight of all the people, God
will have the businefs decided, to remove all suspicion.

In the same year and City aforesaid Antonius de Vega was brought forth, his
case is ridiculous enough, and as will appear, deserves not our pity, because
of his own folly in it: But let us tell the injustice of the Inquisition. This
foolish man, when at liberty, went on his own accord, accused himself, that he
once was of the Opinion that a man might be saved by the Law of Moses; and that
for some time he had observed it, but through the Grace of God enlightened, he
acknowledged his error, was come to confess his sins at the footstool of their
Tribunal, and to sue for Absolution by the Judges of the Holy Inquisition. Now
though this action was voluntary, and deserved forgiveness; yet, as in the
English Proverb, it is confess and be hanged. So was Fernandes first cast into
secret Prison, and after three years detainure in Prison, to bewail his sin,
the Judgment past against him to the Confiscation of all his Goods, the
attiring him with the Sambenito, putting the Green Candle into his hand, and so
to be brought into the Theater: unutterable inhumanity! What words can express
this Tyranny? Exclamations are too little to raise our wonder and indignation.

In the City Lerino, there were two Women, the Mother Major de Luna, the
Daughter Antonia, who after they had confessed (whether truly or falsely is
uncertain) forced thereto by the torments those Executioners put them to, were
drawn into the Theater with Green Candles (as condemned) in their hands, their
Goods Consiscated, the Daughter whipped with one hundred stripes, the Mother with
two hundred through the Streets; [This was done after they had been kept six
years in Prison] and now 1652 both after these extreme rigours condemned to a
perpetual imprisonment.

In the year 1639. in the Town, Alcazar de Consuegra, among other rich
Families, one there was, whose Chief Head above the rest was a certain man, by
name de Villa Escusa, a Jew by descent from those which had escaped the cruelty
of the Spanish Inquisition. Now so it happened, that near to the Palace of the
said de Villa Escusa, lived a certain Maid, an Orphan, by the death of both her
Parents, with three Brethren, the Eldest of which was not full six years old;
this Maid was of Christian Patents, and overmuch desired Marriage with that
Noble Rich Man, Lord of the place, but he refused to Marry her that was Poor,
neither would he burden himself with her three Brothers, and answered those
that courted him to the Match, that had she not three Brothers, he would have
Married her. When the Virgin perceived her self refused, and disappointed of a
great Match, because she had Brothers, she (mad with Love) resolved to kill the
Children, and to throw them into the Well, out of which the Family of de Villa
Escusa drew water for their household uses. This devilish resolution she did
put into practice one night, and cut off the Heads of her own three Brethren,
and threw them into that Well: After a while, the Neighbors missing the
Children, with great outcry resolved to search for them through the whole Town
and Neighborhood: While this was doing, a Smith (who lived over-right de Villa
Escusa's House) with three Rogues more, entered discourse among themselves, and
confidently affirmed the Children killed by the Jews for Sacrifices, [such are
the reasonings of the ignorant Vulgar] forthwith they go to the Justicer of the
place, who took their Information, but perceiving it proceeded of malice would
meddle no more in it. The Accusers perceiving this, addressed themselves to the
Inquisition, and declared their most wicked thoughts; and affirmed on Oath,
that De Villa Escusa had murdered the Children, was also a Jew, that at twelve
at Night they heard the Children crying in De Villa Escusa's house. [but the
Cry was in the house of the Sister of the Children] They swear also that the
Boys were seen to go into Villa Escusa's house late at Night, but none ever saw
them come out. As for proof, that Villa Escusa was a Jew, they knew it they
said, because they had seen him put on his shirt on Saturday; a mad proof, but
sufficient for the madder, and more unreasonable Spanish Inquisition, which
could take this that had the least suspicion possible, and make it the Ground
of tormenting the Innocent; like the Wolf that quartelled with the Lamb for
fouling the water. The innocent De Villa Escusa is seized, his Well searched,
where at last they found the murdered Children. He is put to the Wrack, where
not able to bear the pain, he confessed all true of which he was accused; that
he had murdered the Children, that he was a Jew, a Mahumetan, a Lutheran, or
whatever they would have him to be; after this Confession, his Goods are
confiscated, and attired with the Sambenito, he is carried and delivered to the
Secular Power, which took care that he should that very day be hanged and
quartered. At the Gallows this poor man protested, that being unable to bear
the pains of the Wrack, he had owned as done by him what he never had done; and
this he avowed upon his Death

The Inhabitants of the Place do now jovially feast and rejoice at the death of
this poor man, and load his Kindred with greatest disgrace; but after two years
the Sister Murtheress, disappointed of her hoped Match, went to Toledo to
Confession, and there confessed the Fact, from which the Confessor would not
absolve her till she had underwent great penance; which when she had endured
for one whole month, one Morning clothed with Sackcloth, and her Head covered
with Ashes, and girded about with many Cords, she comes abroad, and publicly,
with a loud voice, before the people, cries out that she had killed her
Brother, to the end she might marry that Noble Personage: That De Villa Escusa
was inocent, and suffered wrongfully; that she declared this to appease and
quiet her Conscience. Now a certain Kinsman, of the Dead Villa Escusa, was
present, who brought her before the Judge of that Place; by whom after she had
confessed the Fact she was adjudged to be hanged; and the four Witnesses being
well whipped, were condemned to the Galleys. Thus poor Villa Escufa died by the
Judgment of that Court; which notwithstanding their pretense to a guidance by
an infallible spirit, are by this very Fact convinced that this is but a
pretense; That the Spirit which acts them, is that Spirit which is a Murderer,
and was so from the Beginning.

In the year 1658, there came abroad in Portugal another Nero, one Simon de
Meneses, Inquisitor at Coimbra, whose mischiefs were as many as a whole Legion
of Fiends could have wrought. This man invented unusual ways, to make Prisoners
confess, and by a Graft, brought from Hell, he got the the Names of all: and
made many Christians (whether they would or no) to be accounted Jews; many of
these were such Christians in heart, not only in word, that they were
condemned, and executed only because they would not own themselves to be Jews.
So great was the barbarbus cruelty of this bloody man, that having apprehended
one Vaz, born at Porta, and married to Anna de Lujan, (both persons of mean
abilities) he compelled them both to confess by the threats he used against
them; who des^^ous of liberty, and to withdraw themselves from this Monster,
they accused all they new, not sparing the Abbeys and Nunneries, for they
accused two Religious of noble Quallty: Now, because he might not apprehend any
of such noble Family, unless two Witnesses in one place, at one time, did
witness in the Case: This Officer of Beelzebub brought Vaz and his Wife into one
Chamber, and there taught them the meth^d how they should proceed in accusing
and pr^^ing the Accused to be guilty; and in one day these persons brought into
Prisons seventy persons, all of them Inhabitants of that City. And whereas the
Inquifition never gives the Names of the Accusers but leaves the Prisoners to
conjecture at them: This cursed Inquisitor, with a subtlety (that became so
great an Impostor) would place four or six persons in the Entry of that House,
through which the Prisoner was to go, that thereby the Prisoner might be
allured to speak with them, of whom when the Prisoner (thinking they were in
like Case with himself, though they were Trepanners) did ask where the
Inquisitor was, and who with him? One or other of those infamous Fellows would
name the Chamber, and say such or such (that the Inquisitor would have them
name, though 'twere Father or Mother of the Accused) were with the Inquisitor,
by whom the Accused was betrayed, and spoiled of all his Goods: if this did not
succeed, This Atheistical Inquisitor would come with Alas! Brother I pray you
own your self guilty, though you know you are not; for unless you do thus,
there is no remedy, you will be burnt; and if this prevailed not, he presently
made use of Tortures, to force the confession he could not persuade; and thus
he ruined many innocent Ones. Once he apprehended one Emanuel de Costa, a man
of good Note, who was Husband to Catelina Doza, Kinswoman to this Inquisitor,
who calling Emanuel to him one day, tells him he is sorry he has married his
Kinswoman, who will (saih he) bring your Soul to the Devil; and withal
advises him to confess, and trust him with his credit which should be
preserved, and he should not be brought on the Theater, nor his Goods seized:
The poor Acosta answers, I have been, and still am a Christian, and what can I
confess? says the Inquisitor, though thou art not, yet seem in confession to
be guilty, and trust me with your honor. Bewitched with the words of the
Inquisitor; This miserable man confesses so as to condemn persons that were
strangers to him, whose Names this Simon (Magus) had given to Acosta, and by
this wile very many were apprehended.

In the end Acosta perceiving the Inquisitor's promises were without effect, he
petitioned to be heard, and recants all that he had before confessed,
protesting he was seduced by the Inquisitor, to give false Testimony, under
promise of a restitution to his honor and liberty: But here Meneses so managed
the matter, That Acosta must either recant his Recantation, or burn without
mercy, Acosta not daring the latter, chose the former, and so by loss of fame
and Goods saved his Life. Meneses had another mischievous method which he often
used; when a Prisoner had been eight years, sometimes more than ten, he would
bring him before their Tribunal; (though 'twere evident the person was
innocent) and thus bespeak the Secretary, (with greatest wariness, and with
equal hypocrisy) Mr. Secretary, appoint an Act, in which you may declare the
person before to be one that entreats not the mercy of this our holy Court, who
as often as invited to confess his fault, so often, (notwithstanding mercy
offered him) repeats his denial, and seems to design dying in his own Error:
To this the Secretary (with great Hypocrisy) answers, Sir, will you that this
miserable man should thus die? have you shut the door against all mercy toward
him? I pray you give him three days space to acknowledge his own fault, and the
justice of this Court: By this Contrivance, between the Inquisitor and the
Secretary, they take the Person for confessed and convicted; so they have
ruined innumerable men, and spoiled them of Life and Estate.

In the year 1650. The Secretary of the Inquisition, his Name Paroda, came from
Quensa to Pastrana; bringing with him a cheating Knave for apprehending some
they call Heretics, but indeed innocent persons, by Authority from the
Inquisition of Quensa; empowring them to seize as many as that Cheat should
name. Now, on a certain Night the Officers (called Familiars) with the
Secretary went out in Quest for their Prey, and entered a Street which led to
the Marketplace, accompanied with the Trepanner, whose face was covered; Thus
the Secretary came to a Shop of a certain Portuguese, (for at that time there
was a Mart at Pastrana, to which the Inhabitants of diverse Towns did come) and
commanded him to open his doors; whom by an Arrest, in the Name of their (most
holy) Inquisition he seized, which was done by the Officers, the Signal being
given by bowing down the Head, when they should seize; and lifting up the Head
when they were to forbear seizing; that very Night forty two Persons were
seized; and whilst they were kept close in the Houses of those Familiars; the
Secretary, false Witness, with the rest of the Robbers at Midnight, return to
the Shops, and take away as much as they could carry; which in money and Wares
amounted to twenty thousand Crowns and upward.

Now, when they should have carried thest Prisoners to Quensa they dismissed
them all but one, whom they carried to Quensa, where they gave him an
admonition, and set him at liberty; but the money, being the Heretic they
sought after they never let go out of their hands. And though this Robbery was
known, and sufficiently proved, yet the righteous Inquisitors, neither punished
Secretary nor Witness, giving this reason for their lenity, That without
Accusers there would be no Prisoners; and without these no Inquisition.

Anno 1660. At Lisbone an English Protestant boldly went into the Temple, and
took the Host from the place, where it was kept, and departed forthwith for
England, the next day the Curate of the Church missing the Host, published
abroad the mishap; the Inquisition bestirs it self: and its Officers affirm,
that without doubt the Jews had taken it away; therefore they diligently
enquire who of the Jews were that Night absent from their own house, at last
they came to the house of a young man of six and twenty years of Age, and
Master of an hunderd thousand Crowns; his Name Solis; They examine the Servants
whether their Master were at home at that Night, who told the truth he was not;
(for indeed that Night taken up with the criminal delights of his youth, he
spent with a certain Lady of good Quality, that was Espoused [at least
betrothed] to a Gentleman of no mean Rank) When Solis heard their charge
against him, he confessed he was absent that Night from home, but that he spent
it with a Lady, whose name he would not tell, though he died for it; yet under
the Tortures of the Wrack he told the House where he was, though not the person
with whom he was; Thither the Inquisitors haste, but either could not, or else
would not stir farther in the Affair, because the Lady was above the common
size; or because they had the man, by whom they were sure to find, what they
hunted, the hundred thousand Caowns. They return therefore to the torturing of
the young man, who is forced to own he took away the Host, and had eaten it;
This done, his Goods are confiscated; he is condemned to be burnt, but first
his hands must be cut off. When the hour of Execution was come, the Haugman
desired him to put forth his right hand, which he with an undaunted mind did,
saying, I give up this for my Lord Christ Jesus, who knows I never committed
any such fault, but forced by the severity of the Wrack, and allured by the
promises of the Inquisitors, who said they would save my Life, I did
unwilling^y confess what I never did act: Then they lout off his other hand,
and burned him in the sight of the people, who made a great Feast, in token
that they approved what was none by those incarnate Devils. After this was done
the Englishman wrote into Portugal to them, letting them know he had taken away
their Breaden God, on purpose to expose both it and the Papal Religion to that
scorn they deserved. But Solis fell by the most pious Inquisition!

Anno 1656, in the City Lerina, a certain French Man that got his Living by
selling up and down the Streets Knives, Cissars, Needles, and Girdles, etc.
like small Wares, was seized by the Inquisition; The occasion of which was
this, An Image of the Virgin Mary was one morning found torn in the Corner of a
certain Street, where 'twas set that people might do it honor; now on the
overnight, this Frenchman passing by, at that place met some of his
Acquaintance, who were Castilians, who saluted him, and he them, and so went on
to his Lodging, as they did to theirs: next day the Magistrate seeing the Image
broken, made a diligent search, and these Castilians Friends (or rather
Enemies) of the French Man, affirmed that he had broken the Image, for they saw
him the Night before near unto it. This one of the Familiars (as Setter for the
Inquisitors) heard of, accused him before their Tribunal, and swears to what he
affirmed. The poor French Man is clapped up into Prison, pleads for himself that
he went to his Friends house, where he played at Cards all the while, which
appeared to be true upon enquiry; yet was he detained, for so much as his
Acquaintance swore he was an Heretic; (which is the common name they give the
Reformed) And so cruelly handled that the pain he suffered, forced him to say
he was reformed, and had given several blows to the Image, and that for this he
did beg pardon, which was granted to him as he was Protestant; but because he
did offer an Indignity to the Image, he is condemned to the fire, and suffered
the extremity of that Judgment. Now about two months after, a certain Fool,
who had lived at Lerina, but was removed to an Habgation two miles distant, was
sound in the night thrusting down another Image which was newly set up in the
room of the former; him they examined, whether he had broken the former, and he
owned it, saying, He intended to carry it to his Farm where he had built a
small Chapel; to this he added some other ^^tle m^d tricks, by which the
Inquisition was assured of the French-mans Innocence, yet acquitted the
Witnesses as if they had spoken the truill, and as if the French man had died
for his own Crime.

At Madril, An. 1663. fell out an extraordinary Case, which was as follows, The
Son of a certain Woman, named Marquesa, was Debtor to a certain new Christian
(as they call newly converted Jews) in a considerable sum of Money, which
either he could not, or would not pay. Like a Fury of Holl he sets his malice
on work, and wiltes in great Letters this following sentence; It is meet they
should live, who love according to the Law of Moses, it is fit they should die,
who live after the Laws of Christ, and affixeth it to the doors of a place
called Quadralactura, where a great concourse of people usually meet; and to
increase the number, the next day he caused a great tumult, which did justly
offend the Court of Justice; which issued out an Order for the Justice to make
extraordinary search into the thing: The Inquisition did their part, yet for
three Months the secret lay hid, but then some found this Villain with such
Scrowls, both for their tenure, and for the hand the very same, and having
seized him, he ^onfest that out of preconceiv'd hatred against the Jews he had
done it, to inflame the people against them to their ruin. Now though he
deserved to suffer what he would have brought on others, yet this Just
Inquisition adjudgeth him but to one hundred stripes; the reason of which was,
he was a Papist against whom he had devised it, whereas had the accused been of
other Religion, he who was Accuser, right or wrong, should have been Credited,
and the Accused should have died for it. More Cases I shall forbear to recount,
because I would not be tedious; yet, let me add this passage of an Inquisitor
in the City Quenca, his name Ludovic, de le Torre, who was used to bespeak the
Prisoners thus; Friends, you were as good corfess as not, for if once you come
into the hands of the Inquisition, you shall never get out: There are Tortures,
an Executioner, and Graves for all that will not confess, and there is Wood
enough to burn all that do confess. Hence it is clear to every one what Spirit
does act the Spanish Inquisition, which by Examples Historically we have
reproved hitherto: now set me demonstrate dogmatically their injustice: Though
the thing require a greater and more prudent judgment, yet I will endeavor to
demonstrate what I have undertaken.

There is not one Law in the World which ought not be built upon Reason, which
as it adorns the Law, so allures men both to the study of it, and to the
Veneration of it, for the Reason of the Law is as the Londstone, an Attractive
to our enquity, our esteem, and our observance, so far the Judge, the Court,
and Witnesses, etc. are sacred, as the Law which directs them is rational; so
would the Tribunal of the Inquisition be what they call it, were Reason the
foundation of their Laws; and proceedings which they manage by those Laws, but
all with them is far from this; yet three things they pretend in the very Title
they assume, which is the Holy Office of Inquisition, the first part is, it is
Holy, (say these unholy Murderers;) it is then Divine, and their work must be
Divine, which whether it be or no, let us now enquire; what is Divine does
primarily consist in what is spiritual, in things revealed, which are great
mysteries, and which cannot be known Scientifically, nor comprehended by
Natural Reason: Were this Tribunal thus Divine, it would omit nothing of what
it could do to inform men in the way of Salvation, and to open to them the
secret mysteries of Gods Grace and Mercy: But all their business really is to
discover men's secrets, for ruining their Estates, and disseising the owner,
that [ Ahab-like] they may seize all. Farther, were this Tribunal holy, it
would approve, choose, and promote holiness, as God does; he communicates
holiness to the righteous, he approves it in them, and exercises them
thereunto. Now where is ought of this to be found, either in the cruel
disposition, or injurious proceedings of this Court, and its Officers? Where
you find the greatest inhumanity, and most of the Devils malice, there is
nothing Divine, or of God; there holiness is condemned, and the holy are burnt,
though sometimes they condemn a vile Offender, yet they never absolve a known
Saint, a Lover of Christ and Truth; and were it holy, it would resemble the
holiness of him in his Created State under the Law of Nature. But here is
nothing of that where all the Laws of natural equity and compassion are
violated, by Forgery against the innocent, by forcing them to shorten their
present torments by owning faults they never committed; in short, using all, so
as none of them would be used by other. Here is nothing divine, natural; nor is
(...) in this Tribunal any conformity to the honness which shines forth in
Moses's Law, which directed to the best methods of Government, and best
provided for safety of Innocents. This Inquisition is the most pernicious to
Innocents, wearing out with long imprisonment, those that retain their
Innocence, and burning those that forego it to please the Inquisitors. Moses's
Law was holy, which commanded, to love mercy, do justice, and walk humbly with
God. The Inquisitors, for pride, like Lucifer, for injustice unparallelled, and
notorious abhorrers of mercy: Say Reader whether their Tribunal can be holy and
divine? There is one more holy Tribunal, which is that of Grace, which to save
life, not to destroy it, And well does the Tribunal of Inquisition correspond
to this, does it not? which is set up to destroy life, not to save it. On
Christ's Throne is written Life and Salvation, but on the Inquisitor's Death
and Destruction; but yet it is a Judgment Seat, and has a great authority, and
therefore divine. Indeed, were it of God, it were divine, but it is of the
Pope, an Usurper, a Tyrant, a bloody cruel one; and these Inquisitors
commissioned by him, are to execute his bloody designs on all innocent ones
accused, and brought within their snare; God permits, and abhors it now; and as
he has punished many, so he will punish all the rest of this bloody Crew which
profane the venerable names of faith, justice and holiness, with their
Robberies, Murders and Perjuries, etc.

Now let us view how justly they claim to be an Office. This is an authority
exercised for directing, protecting, and encouraging, without partiality, every
one in the duty he owes to others, and to the public, in those things which
fall under the Rule of that Office: It superviseth the work of every one who
owes any duty to it: and it is founded in one of those three Laws we before
mentioned; and so is either natural, political, or spiritual.

The Natural is governed by that Maxim, whatsoever thou would not should be
done to thee, do not thou to others. The Political is regulated by what is
conductive to the tranquillity and safety of life: The Spiritual employs it
self in a care for welfare of immortal souls. These Offices have been by
Learned Men cleared and commended in their proper places, of which I shall not
now speak. The Inquisitors pretend not that their Court and Rules of it are
Mosaic; possibly they may conjecture they are deputed to this Office by Law of
Nature; herein they are deceived, for this Office is not every where; nor do
they as they would be done to; nor is it spiritual or Evangelical; for it takes
not care of the salvation of souls, and to acquaint them with the Doctrine of
the Gospel; For let it be considered,

1. Who so is appointed to this Office ought to hear the Offender, and to treat
him according to the Talent entrusted to him in Spirituals; and if the
understanding be darkened, he should as a spiritual Physician apply gentle
Medicines that may gradually cure the mind, and so heal the Soul; The Judge
should be an Instructor.

2. If the Judge cannot by such means recover the faulty, then should he pray
for him, beseeching the Author of Life to enligehen the mind that the man fall
not under the rigors of the Law.

3. Such Officers should see that Witnesses be examined, and if any of them be
found false Witness, the Officers should punish them.

4. They in duty ought to speak kindly to the Prisoner, treat him, though an
Offender, as a Son of the Church; offer him mercy before he asks for it, to let
him know his fault, and his Accusers what they are, that he may clear himself;
by these gentle ways it is possible he may be induced and persuaded to repent
publicly if need be, and not stand upon his credit, which were it lost by such
act, is abundantly recompensed by the salvation of the Soul.

5. Such Office ought to leave the possession of the temporal Goods entire to
the penitent; for they are his right, and without injury to his spiritual Lord
may be retained.

6. Lastly, such office should take the penitent under its wing, cover the
fault as much as discretion will allow, receive him into the Church again;
forgive, love and honor him as a Neighbor or Brother, and the rather, as one
whom their care has recovered from great sin, and advanced to a new hope of
glory.

Now let us see whether these things be found in this Office, the Inquisition,
and so,

(1.) First, They are so so far from expressing love to their Prisoner, that
they pursue him with extreme hatred, keep him a Prisoner for ten or twelve
years in some dark place, where he may neither see the Sun, nor speak with any
other than the Jailer.

(2.) So far from praying for him, that they curse him, and openly in the very
Court use him like a Dog, devising new crimes against him that they may destroy
him; for it is the way of their dealing never to let go a Captive.

(3.) Instead of punishing, they reword, false witnesses, and bestow Salleries
upon them.

(4.) They never deal with a Prisoner with any respect to his temper and
nature, or heartily offer him his pardon; nay, as if the Prisoner were a Beast
to be starved, they withold his food from him.

(5.) They conceal the Names and Persons of Accusers; or deny them if they be
guessed at by the Prisoner.

(6.) They are so far from restoring goods, that they spoil Wife and Children
of the Goods, which of right pertained unto them.

(7.) So far from preserving your good name, that they divulge the faults in
the Theater, expose them to the disgrace of a Sambenito, whip them openly,
condemn them to the Galleys, until at last they have spoiled them of life,
honor and Estates: on the whole matter we might enquire of these Judges, and
appeal to all that live in the Learned World, whether the love, faith, prayers,
christianity, tenderness for their honor, the truth, justice, mercy of this
Court may be found: whether ought of these are in this Office, where barbarous
cruelty and Tyranny are the whole of its constitution, so apparently none can
deny it?

The third Title, is Inquisition, that is, a scrutiny or search into secrets,
that they may be manifested for truths sake; and this method as a part of the
holy Government God did prescribe, when by Moses he commanded, Deuteronomy. 13.1. That
the Prophet who endeavored to draw away the people to strange Gods, should be
punished with death because he had spoken to turn them from the Lord their God.
Such a kind of Inquisition Christ commends to us in that Caution, Take heed to
your selves, and beware of those that come to you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening Wolves. Here the very Essence of the search lies in
an impartial enquiry for the Truth in a matter that was hidden: Now let us
enquire whether this Tribunal may in this sense be said to be an Inquisition,
which in very deed wants both name and thing, according to this notion, of an
Inquisition: They enquire not diligently after Crimes to amend the Criminal,
but earnestly hunt after Temporal Estates, to seize them. Of Old the Estates of
Anathematized ones were not adjudged to the Exchequer, but to the Fires; now
the Goods of such are adjudged neither to the Exchequer, nor to the Fires, but
to Robbing Inquisitors. Instead of producing the truth before men, this
Tribunal brings Lies openly to open view, and by false Witness and Cheats
condemns Innocents; they transubstantiate falsehoods, and then proclaim them
truths; they contrive greatest injustices with greatest secrecy; they condemn
Innocents by wiles, and smother their righteous Cause, which they never suffer
to be pleaded; this their Inquisition it suppresseth truth, and murders
Innocents, and enquires what gain from the Execution, never what righteousness
in the Judgment. By all this it appears the Tribunal is neither Holy, nor an
Office, nor an Inquisition. Now let us enquire whether it proceed by any Moral
Doctrines of Virtue; whether Justice, or Fortitude, or Temperance, or Prudence
steer their proceedings; they are; by what is written already convicted to act
no whit like Christians; let us now see whether they act like Moral, Heathen
Philosophers.

And here I shall begin first with Justice, a Virtue which teaches a man to
lay his own and another man's Cause in an equal Balance, and makes the Judge to
remember that he who now judges another man's Cause, must have his own judged
e're long; that he must not wrest judgment in favor of persons, nor subvert
judgment; that it concerns him most to exercise judgment perfectly, neither by
too much lenity acquit, nor with a cruel mind, and thirsty of revenge, torment
the guilty: He must not look to any reward, nor do what may be condemned and
punished by his Superior who made him Judge. Justice will make a Judge diligent
in examining Causes, and weighing them again and again, and consulting with
wise and skilful men e're Sentence be passed. When the justness of a Cause
appears, a Judge should have such a brave resolution and fortitude, that none
should be able to fright him into an unjust, or from a just Sentence; he should
without Cowardice protect and acquit the Innocent, and without Cowardice punish
the guilty Offenders: He should dare to pass an impartial Sentence, upon a
mature enquiry into the Cause of every one, that is brought before him into
judgment. Farther, the Judge should be of a very temperate and of a
well-composed frame, able with patience to hear all Parties and Causes, and
without prejudices toward the Cause, with passions subdued to Reason, Justice
and Equity toward the persons, to distinguish and determine the right from the
wrong, the good from the bad, which no man in the uproar of passions can ever
be able to do. Now on view it will appear, how naked and destitute of these
Virtues this Court is, how little the Inquisition is ruled by these qualities.
What Justice is there, where all Parties concerned are not openly produced, and
where the Plea and Judgment is made secretly, partially, and designing to take
the Prey? What greater injustice, then first to devise Crimes, and charge them
on Innocents, to the taking away their life, and next to seize their Estates,
and rob the Possessor and his Heirs? If Murders and Robberies may commend the
Justice of a Pretended Court, here is Justice enough! their Prudence has no
more of that Virtue, than hellish, perfidious, and perjurious contrivances have
of it; and very often their imprudence proclaims it self, and their Intrigues
are brought to light, to the reproach and just condemnation of their
proceedings. In a word, they are not prudent enough to act justly, nor prudent
enough to conceal their injustice; their courage to own an Innocent, to save
his life, restore him to liberty, and preserve his Estate out of the hands of
their bloody Crew, has not one instance that I do know of; if one or two in an
age could be found, that would willingly favor a righteous Cause, and right a
rich wealthy person accused, such dare not thwart the covetous, griping, and
spoiling designs of their Partners; afraid they are of one another, and of
their cheating Instruments they use, every way they are inslaved to a base
cruelty, that has no more of Fortitude in it, than it has of Mercy or
Justice. Now such can never be of a calm and even temper; they envy, prejudge,
and hate, which are Counselors that ever hurry men, and precipitate their
proceedings: an immoderate thirst after the rich Estates of Condemned Persons
prevails with them to say they were guilty, nay to condemn them as guilty, who
had no greater fault but they were too rich, and held their Estates gotten by
the Right that Industry and Success do give, from the hands of that Inquisition
which is like it self in covetousness and injustice, two very unequal
distributers of what they can lay hold of. But we'll dismiss them with their
Theology and Morality, neither of which attends this Tribunal, or the Judges
thereof; and now let us consider, whether the Statesmen and Politicians may
allow this Tribunal any room in well ordered Governments, whether Kingdoms or
Commonwealths. And here, since Reason of State is the Helm by which they
administer the Government, which is a certain mysterious Frame or Body that is
subject to the changes that time does produce, which for the most part are
changes for the worse, like the changes of the Natural body by predominant
humors needing a Physician, who may by proper and gentle applications purge out
peccant humors, and preserve the body: So the prudent Statist, the Sovereign
Authority is concerned to use those means which may carry off the redundant and
threatening humors, from which arises danger to the Public; but it were a very
pernicious course to apply such means as would destroy the whole, or cut off an
useful member of the Community. How greatly has the Kingdom of Spain been
endamaged by the over-violent Physic the Inquisitors give to that Kingdom?
This cut off the United Netherlands from the Kingdom of Spain, and in the
cutting them off, Spain bled almost to death: should a Statesman have
permitted this? and yet sorer and more grievous calamities must be expected,
unless this rigorous Inquisition be removed. Would not reason of State persuade
to correct with tenderness, to the honor of the Families which are allied to
the Criminals? but ^ere a Sambenito disparageth whole Families, which are
disgracefully used, when once their name is published in the Writing which is
sixth on the Sambenito, containing the names of the Condemned: It is of ill
tendency, to cast reproach on many for the offense of one; beside, reason of
State should incouarge industry, and preserve the goods and riches of the
Subject: But behold the Inquisition, a Court that does by all ill Arts contrive
the confiscating and seizing of Estates, whereby whole Families, all at once
utterly ruined, cry out against man's injustice, and appeal to the Justice of
God! Would any well-governed State allow an absolute and unaccountable Office
to oppress and ruin the Subject? Is he a wise Statesman that advances
Officers to a Power of imprisoning, robnidg, and murdering their
fellow subjects, with an assurance they shall never be called to account for
it? yet so is the Inquisition empowered, if the King of Spain himself be (as
frequently it happens that he is) present in a solemn Act: The first thing
these Inquisitors do is this, they require him to swear he will not contravene
their Sentence. Thus by Oath they secure their Process, and advance their
Clerical Cap above the Kings Crown in their Processes; the pride of these
Inquisitors is like all the rest of their excesses, it is grown to a Proverb in
Spain, Con el Reg. eon Inquisition chiton.
Be silent before the King, and the Inquisition. It is intolerable tyranny the
Inquisition uses, in condemning men to most severe usages; that Friends may be
forced to pay down Money for the mitigating the rigorous execution; in
disabling the Condemned for any Office or Honor, that his Friends may be drawn
to purchase the privilege by great sums of Money. Thus, like Excrescencies,
they starve the body to feed themselves.

Three things they are notoriously busy about.

1. They murder fellow subjects, and damn their Souls.

2. They rob Families, and leave them to poverty and shame.

3. They scatter the people, and drive them out of the Kingdom; whereas they
seize one, many run away from their cruelty, and leave their own Country
desolate.

In three things they are more unjust than Heathens.

1. Concealing of Accusers.

2. Present spoiling of Goods.

3. Secret Prisons.

In three things they act like. Idolaters.

1. Expecting a Veneration becoming Saints, while they are Devils Incarnate.

2. Consecrating the ignominious Sambenito, and making it a sacred Vestment.

3. Placing them with the Images of their Saints in their Churches.

In three things they act like the Devil.

1. They have a Prison like Hell it self.

2. Familiars like Fiends.

3. Torments that exceed the power of any to bear them, and live.

They are worst of Tyrants in three things.

1. Forbidding all converse with any, though their Wives desire it; nay,
stripping their Wives of their Bracelets and Earrings.

2. They are both Enemies to their Persons, and Judges of the Cause, from whom
no Appeal is permitted.

3. All they do against Innocents is justified with this, The Inquisition has
done it, and since it pleased them, it must not be complained of. They are
salvage as the most Barbarous, without respect to their Sex; Women are badly
treated by them, Virgins shamefully beaten, Prisoners starved, and their Debts
not paid out of their Estates confiscated. This is the true temper of these
Inquisitors, they are made up of what is worst in Barbarous, Tyrannical,
Idolatrous, Heathenish and Diabolical tempers. The particular view of this
Court of Blood casts me into an amazement, that a King, with such Councillors
as assist the Spanish King, should suffer so tyrannical and cruel a Power,
which without much noise, and without any Justice, has eaten out the Glory,
Strength, and Unity of that Monarchy, and like a fretting Moth has marred all
that was the beauty of it.

Awake ye Philosophers, Lawyers, Divines, ye Statesmen of Spain, shake off
that Lethargick sleepiness which has for two hundred and fifty years, more or
less, kept you deaf to the Cries of Murdered Innocents! Awake and see how much
Glory you have lost by this Inquisitions unrighteousness! Look into their
stately Structures, there you will find the spoils of your Families, and your
Butchered Friends! Awake and hearken what your Neighbor Nations say of this
Tribunal, English, French, Dutch, German, Turks, and all with detestation
abhorring that which is made up of Blood, Rapine, Cruelty, and Hypocrisy: Let
it no longer alienate your Neighbors esteem, suppress your own Honor, nor
provoke the Wrath and Justice of Heaven against you; the Innocent Blood, shed
in great abundance by them, cries to the Throne of Heaven; the ashes of burnt
Bones, the depredations of rich Families, the undeserved ignominy that has
been cast on Noble Families: In a word, their Iniquity, well nigh grown to its
fullness, cries out for Vengeance on them who acted, and on you who suffered
such Villainies. He that sits at the right hand of the Father, will e're long
destroy those Murderers: A Fire shall arise out of the North that shall burn
you up, and judge you, as you have judged others; when there shall be Blessings
from God on those Monarchies, whose Kings and Councils have ruled their
Subjects by Justice, and abhorred such cruel Tribunals, such Wolves in Sheep
skins; from whose rage and insatiable blood-thirstiness, let the good Lord
deliver thee, kind Reader, and all the Lovers of Truth and Peace. So prays
James Salgado.

FINIS.
THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
REader, the Author speaks but what these Learned Authors added here have
spoken, and thou may believe, and make good use of.

-- Quae quoniam severissime in capita and fortunas hominum, prave de Religione
sentientium inquirit, Inquisitionis nomen sortita est. Thuan. lib. 3. ad. An.
1547. Augebat horrorem perversa and praepostera Judiciorum forma, quae contra
Na^uralem Equitatem and omnem legitimum rdinem in jurisdictione illa explicanda
observatur; tum etiam Immanitas Tormentorum quibus plerunque contra veritatem,
quicquid delegatis Judicibus libebat, a miseris and innocentibus reis ut se
cruciatibus eximerent, per vim extorquebatur. Thuan. Hist. sui. Temp. lib. 3.
ad. an. 1547. This Inquisition -- defective of no Virtue, but Justice and
Mercy, Sir Edwin Sands Speculum Europae, p. 112. -- Pressing men's Consciences,
whom they charge under an high degree of Mortal Sin and Damnation -- to
approach their nearest and dearest Friends, if they know or but suspest them to
be culpable thereof, idem. Converted in some places to an Instrument, no less
of Civil than Ecclesiastical Tyranny -- And Spain would with the dearest things
it has redeem it -- idem. p. 113. The Rack of men's Souls -- An invention
fitter for the Religion of Antiochus, Domitian, or Mahomet, idem, p. 114. Ed.
Quart. 1629.


