PHILOSOPHICAL DIALOGUES Concerning the Principles OF NATURAL BODIES: WHEREIN
The Principles of the Old and New Philosophy are stated, and the New
demonstrated, more agreeable to Reason, from Mechanical Experiments and its
usefulness to the benefit of Mankind.

By W. Simpson. M. D.

LONDON: Printed by T. Hodgkin, for Dorman Newman at the Kings-Arms in the
Poultrey. 1677.

TO The most noble Prince, GEORGE, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM, etc.
My LORD,
WHen I had writ this small Philosophical Treatise, I was casting about in my
thoughts, whether this Infant needed a Patron, it was not (as I judged) so
much) an Embryo-Anchorite or of such tender Age, but it might go abroad without
hold; nor so much stricken in years, as it had need of a Staff, in as much as
ipsa veritas suimet patrona est maxima; nor yet that it was arrived to that
full strength as to need no support: Amidst which considerations my Lord, your
Grace fraught with experimental Philosophy came in view; but I stopped a while,
pausing upon it, not daring at the first glance, to be so confident, till I had
taken a better prospect of your personal candor to Ingenuity; (which was not
the least of those resplendent Gems that adorn the breast of Nobility) your
encouragement to the improvements of Philosophy, grounded upon Mechanical
Experiments; your favoring that for of Physic founded upon, and illustrated
by the Noble Chymia, the Basis of a genuine Philosophical Hypothesis; and in
particular your great condescension in familiar discourse concerning matters of
this nature: All which, My Lord, duly weighed, has given me the boldness to
take liberty of dedicating these my Labors (the first of their kind, I know
off, yet extant) to your Grace: If worth the perusal, it is well: with what
curiosities they will entertain you, let them speak for themselves. May these
Philosophical Speculations shade themselves under your Tutelage, and take
shelter under your suffrage, shall doubtless give them better luster abroad,
rendering them more acceptable to others, and give him an encouragement to a
further concern, who is

My Lord, Your Grace's Most humble Servant W. Simpson.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Candid Reader,
SEveral Sheets of which this ensuing small tract is composed, had laid by me
near seven years, whose Nativity might be Calculated from that time I was so
deeply engaged with my quondam Antagonist, Dr. Witty, about Mineral Waters,
and particularly about the Mineral or Spaw-waters of Yorkshire: For after I had
writ my Hydrolog. Chym. ere I had concluded the second part (being intitutled
Hydrolog. Essays, or a Vindication of the first) I fell upon some Philosophical
Speculations, which when I had scattered in loose Papers, let them lie dormant,
waiting a seasonable oppurtunity for the publishing thereof: And taking an
occasiion lately to review them, I corrected, altered, and added as I thought
necessary, putting them into a dress, how suitable to the genius of this
Critical Age, and how worthy to see Light, as it is not meet for me to say, so
must refer to thy more serious consideration, and deep judgment to determine.

Perhaps thou may without much streining guess whom I mean by Hydrophilus
personating the old Philosophy: if thou through any Analogy to the Peripatetick
Philosophy, he in his Book vindicates, or through any likeness to his morose
Sentiments and dogmatical Placets, or by any other similar Motives, shall be
drawn to conclude him to be the Person, I shall not gainsay; then may thou
fix thy eye upon him, (no less like than a well drawn Copy, to the Original)
as the grand Champion of that Old Cause or if thou approve not thereof, may by
that name imagine any other person indifferently, speaking for, and arguing on
the behalf of that lean and therefore hectically inclined, and well nigh
expiring Philosophy, which will certainly dye of a Consumption, in Tract of
time (as the other comes on, and grows vigorous,) wearing insensibly away.

In this Treatise, as in a Landscape, may view such a draught (although in
Epitome) of the Principles of natural Philosophy, as if drawn to the Life, may
generally and genuinely (without any force) represent and solve (we think)
natures Phenomenon in the apparances of most Bodies we meet with: In it may
find such a set of the Elements of natural Bodies, as (if wound up to the
height) may conspire the procuring a Philosophic harmony: Not to say here, how
teeming a womb our Principles have, nor how they do quadrate (and that perhaps
more universally) with Nature in her abstruce causes, nor how consistent with
themselves, nor lastly how adapted to the regular motions of Nature, and
accommodated to the rendering intelligible Natures model in the Fabric,
Metastasis, and taking in pieces of Bodies, viz. in making Philosophic
apparances more conspicuous to our understanding, but refer all our
speculations to stand at the Bar of thy more mature (not I hope severe)
judgment.

We have in this ensuing discourse, but slightly touched upon our Principles,
especially that seaven-fold complication of Fire, whose Principles are under
one or other of the seven modifications, twisted or interwoven amongst most
Bodies (especially Animals, Vegetables, and many Minerals) we converse with:
yet may ex ungue leonem, measure the whole by the scantling: the further and
ample discourse thereof, we refer to its proper place (viz.) to our Tentamen
Physiologic. to which this is chiefly introductory: As to our Halologia Chymica
being our discourse of Salts, and our Lithologia Physica concerning
petrification, to both which we sometimes refer the Reader: our labors therein
are at present only in Embrio, yet pretty forward toward the Birth, if at
their full time shall be thought worthy to be borne, may ere long see light.

Seeing the field of Nature is very large, and many may be taking measures
thereof by their several ways of Physico-metrical commensuration, and that
every one has his liberty to survey her with the best instruments Mechanism
will afford; and yet the Artists and all the Tools they can procure or invent,
the former too short sighted, and the latter too few, to reach her profundity,
to sind out the quadrature of her Circle, or to take the exact dimention of her
Solids.

So that there is work enough for as many Geomitricians (I had almost said
Pioneers) to Nature, as are adapted by long observation, and study for that
work: And in my opinion all the late Physico-Metricians (if I may so call them)
have in one sort or other done well; Thus Tachenius, Vander Bect, Beckerus,
etc. have every one in their several capacities performed some service toward
on improvement of Philosophy; not that I could, or would justify each of these
in their several Hypotheses, but I think they have done this great piece of
service, in that they have furnished us with many mechanical experiments, which
although each in their way makes use of for building their particular
Hypothesis, yet we may well admit them as materials (viz.) Wood, Stone, etc. in
order to a further and more rational Fabric: but above all these, the noble
and worthy Boil has laid in so many materials, by his curious and manifold
mechanical experiments and observations, as has thereby furnished the Checker
of learning with a vast stock.

Hence its reasonable (I say) every one should have liberty not only in laying
in materials, but also of venturing (if he have skill in building) to put them
together, what freedom I have taken herein, is no more than what is in common
to any other: And in short, whether I have used any skill in cementing together
those notions I had grounded upon mechanical experiments, and what uniformity
there is in the Fabric I have ventured on in this ensuing, and in other tracts
already published, or yet to publish, (being room enough in the vast shop of
Nature for as many as please to set up for themselves) is referred (gentle
Reader) to thee to determine.

And wherein I fall short in this tract, (as being only an abstract of the
Principles of Philosophy) I have endeavored to make up in my Zymologia
Physica, or Philosophical discourse of Fermentation, (a noble subject and
worthy the best of Pens,) to which occasionally I sometimes refer: also in my
aforesaid pieces. If this find acceptance, I have thoughts also (favente numine
Divino) to collect and digest some scattered notions, and at present immature
speculations, I have about the abstruse Phenomenon of Hypochondraisme and
occult qualities; where the the true seat is of that grassant and afflicting
malady; whence issues such varieties of sypmtoms, and what the Organs by which
it is managed, with some considerations offered about the cure thereof, by other
remedies than are through the ignorance of its causes) usually prescribed.
Meanwhile, if thou look favorably upon these present (although small)
endeavors, may encourage him to a further task, who bids thee farewell,

W. S.
LONDON, April. the 10th. 1677.
PHILOSOPHICAL DIALOGUES.
SECT. I.
Pyrophilus. WEll met, Hydrophilus, what is the matter that your Countenance is
so discompo'd? what is it that troubles you?


Hydrophilus. Troubles me, Pyrophilus? you know well enough, you need not ask
the Question.


Pyroph. I may perhaps guess; but pray tell me what it is that sticks so on
your stomach, as to cause such a cloudiness to over-cast the brightness of your
natural features?


Hydroph. It is in plain terms, a company of your new Philosophers forsooth,
that a man cannot sit quietly down with our old imbibed Principles of
peripatetick Philosophy, nor safely ruminate upon them, but must be disturbed
by your conceited fancies indeed; we that have some of us spent so much time in
the Colleges, and have taken a great deal of pains to be skilled in the old
Philosophy of Aristotle, and his followers, and you (a company of Punies) to
amuse us, and (which is worse) the world, with your new Crotchets, like so many
new-nothings; it was never a good world since such a young fry of Novel
Philosophers peeped up.


Pyroph. But why (Hydroph.) so wrath with the new Philosophers?


Hydroph. Would it not (Pyroph.) raise the spleen of any, even the calmest
Dogmatists, to see you appear upon the Stage of the World, like so many
Americans, presenting new and unheard of things, yea like so many innovators in
Philosophy, every one bringing his Beads, Rattles, etc. I mean his new Notions,
filling the ears of the people with your so much noised Mechanical Experiments
forsooth.


Pyroph. Stay, why so passionate (Hydroph?) pray curb your choler, and
discourse more calmly; there is no cause of such heat, if you weigh the matter
well.


Hydroph. That Is strange! how can a man restrain from passion, while he
observes a company of you innovators endeavor (if it were possible) to bereave
a man of his beloved Notions, to rob him of his first conceived Opinons, to
tumble the Phiosophical Orb up-side down, yea by ransacking and demolishing
ours to establish your new Crincums.


Pyroph. But stay (good Hydroph.) be not so hasty, go not on so fast; let not
the zeal for the old Philosophy hurry you too fast, nor drive you out of good
nature.


Hydroph. I tell you (Pyroph.) I have much ado to bear it, I can scarce contain
my self within bounds when I think on it: That we who have spent the most, yea
the prime and flower of our years in sucking in the old Principles, should now
of a sudden, through the introduction of your Whims, be looked upon as
triflers, yea be brought to this unhappy dilemma, either to reclaim our
formerly taken-in Principles, or to run the hazard of the repute of old
Peripateticks, which now begins to sound as badly in the ears of the World, as
it does in the ears of a woman to be called Old.


Pyroph. Pray (Hydroph.) compose your self a little, and be more calm; let not
the headiness of passion overruled you, but discourse the matter fairly and
mildly.


Hydroph? Mildly, (Pyroph.) how can that be? when we are so affronted and
abused, that our esteem in the world seems past its crisis, and got upon the
wrong side of the vertical point, deeply declining, and all through your so
much admired Philosophical Stratagems: For I know not better how to denominate
your mechanical Experiments than so many Stratagems, by which you seek
cunningly to overturn and lay wast the walls of our good old Philosophy.


Pyroph. The affront (Hydroph.) is not so great, if you consider that from the
aforesaid mechanical Experiments a new Hypothesis is, or may be raised, whereby
you may approach nearer the knowledge of the truth (the great work of
Philosophers.)


Hydroph. Truth? I tell you we were sufficiently satisfied before of the truth
of our already established Hypothesis: and therein (although an inch broke no
square with us) could solve the Phenomenon well enough, at at least as much as
we thought needful for us, who do not affect too much nicety in our
speculations, nor to be too critical in our deductions.


Pyroph. Well (Hydroph.) but will not truth be more acceptable to you when the
reasons of things shall be deduced from more natural and genuine Principles,
illustrated by mechanical Observations.


Hydroph. Mechanical Observations (said you Pyroph?) yea that is your Diana, you
and the world of late so much admire: your Bacon, and your Boil, or your Bacon
well boiled is so much in fashion with you, that scarce any other Dish
(although never so good) prepared after an old fashion, will go down with you.


Pyroph. But withal (Hydroph.) you forgot to add a Calves head, which together
make a savory Dish (usually going hand in hand) much in use in the Colleges,
especially amongst the Seniors, those old sit-fasts.


Hydroph. Droll not (Pyroph.) for I am in good sad earnest, and cannot but tell
you (even with a heavy heart) it is a hard case, that we must be compelled to
turn Schoolboys again, and go with Satchels on our backs, to learn at your
Pyrotechnical and Mechanical Schools, or else lie under the censure of every
pitiful smatterer, that is lately crept out of the shell, and no sooner looks
about him, but falls to Mechanism and Mechanical Philosophy forsooth, a thing
never known, nor scarce thought of by our ancient Predecessors.


Pyroph. It Is, I confess, a great trial of your ingenuity, and demonstrates how
much (Hydroph.) you favor truth, although attainable after former
disappointments, to quit the first Principles (although strongly impressed) and
to turn Volunteers to another more plausible cause, which yet is no more than
the badge of an ingenuous temper.


Hydroph. What for us that are gray headed in the ancient sort of Philosophy,
understanding every tittle of the materia prima, forma substantialis, privatio,
all the affections of natural Bodies, internal and external, (...), and
quiddities of a thousand things more, familiar to us in our Philosophy, which
we have all ad unguem; For us, I say (Pyroph.) to be constrained, to have all
these impressions wiped off, and so become so many rasa tabula's susceptible of
new impressions of another new (we know not what) sort of Phiysiology, would it
not, think you, gaul any man to the inwards?


Pyroph. But if all those Notions by the induction of another, and more
plausible Hypothesis be demonstrated (Hydroph.) to be no more than figments and
Vtopian Conjectures, shall not that (what ever it be) which is grounded upon an
experimental Basis, be more satisfactory, and of more validity, than the other
(you quote) which is founded upon airy Chimaera's and fanciful Dreams?


Hydroph. I shall not dispute that (Pyroph.) only what you insinuate, That ours
is built (like Castles in the Air) upon mere Chimaera's, remains for you to
prove.


Pyroph. Which I shall endeavor to do (Hydroph.) for your satisfaction in the
sequel of our Discourse.


Hydroph. Well, but if I must be the judge to determine the controversy
betwixt us, I should (Pyroph.) (once for all) for Antiquities sake, and indeed
for our own too, (who have toiled in that sort of Philosophy) give it clearly
against you: for I must declare, I highly approve (and that for some reasons
aforesaid) of the old sort of Philosophising.


Pyroph. You are it seems then (Hydroph.) a Philosopher of the old fashion, and
therefore, no doubt, can readily give your suffrage on your own side: But if
you bring not better, or more recent Arguments for the upholding thereof, that
are yet more cogent than any we see hitherto, your old manner of Philosophising
will be out of date, and you, ere long, will want Proselytes.


Hydroph. Why? if we can (Pyroph.) by an Hypothesis already erected satisfy
our selves, in the general, in the explicating of the causes of things, it is
enough, we have what we aim at: For we would not (we declare) be guilty of too
much prying into the nature of things, left we confound our thoughts, and at
length lose our selves by too deep speculations into the reasons of things,
contained in the vast Volume and intricate Labyrinth of the World.


Pyroph. True, (Hydroph.) the circuit of nature is of a large extent, many (not
to say infinite) are the Meanders of that intricate Maze of things we converse
with; one Century is not enough, nor a great many Philosophers sufficient to
pry narrowly and well to search into, so as thoroughly to find out the vast
depth of all the secrets of nature, or to investigate every Phoenomenon of the
Mundan Susteme, or rightly to know every Encheiresis, and the Motion of every
Wheel of the vast Machin of the World.


Hydroph. Why therefore, (Pyroph.) seeing nature is so intricate in all her
works, and so curious in every texture of bodies (as you seem to insinuate) why,
I say, should we be too solicitous about any one Hypothesis, so as out of an
affected humor (some are more guilty of than others) to prefer that before
another.


Pyroph. Because to me (Hydroph.) it seems rational that that Hypothesis (what
ever it be) by which the Phenomenon can more clearly and genuinly be solved,
ought of right to be preferred before the rest; for if I mistake not, to render
any Hypothesis such, it is indispensably requisite that the principles
concluded on, be of a competent number, teeming nature, perspicuous, and the
most universal, well grounded upon Mechanical Experiments, and such whose
deductions in the solution of the apparences of Nature, are to be (not racked
but) natural and genuine.


Hydro. We are apt to think (Pyroph!) (if we may be judges in our own cause)
ours to be such: it has moreover served the world so many ages, being kept a
foot by the Sages of every generation, till of late that some of you Upstarts
have by your phanatick whims, grounded upon the canting mechanical experiments,
won so much upon the world, as to give great jealousy ours is upon the verge
of oblivion: and were it not that others (from whose judgment were are apt to
measure our own demerits) were amuz'd with the new fancies, we could be content
(for our own parts) to be bystanders to laugh at you, and to wait till we saw
you weary of your own conceits.


Pyroph. But if I tell you (Hydroph.) that you are allowed, (no more than
others,) to be competent judges in your own concerns; and therefore the
controversy is fairly to be scanned and determined by indifferent persons. And
as to the continuation of your Hypothesis for many centuries and its
flourishing in the days of many learned men, that makes no more for the
evincing the truth thereof, than because for many centuries of the world, the
Antipodes was disbelieved, yea by learned men, for instance Saint Austin,
Lactantius, and others, that opinion of the Antipodes was deemed to be a direct
heresy; that therefore, I say, it was really so: Or, if any, though never so
learned man, before Columbus his time, should have concluded that no such vast
part of the world was really discoverable, as America, that vast, large and
rich part of the habitable Orb, because from the same reason not then found
out, which after so many centuries and so many famed Navigations was not known
till the late discovery made by (the thereby famed) Columbus, that therefore
such a conclusion, I say, should have been genuine: whereas indeed it would
have savored so much of Antiquity, as to have proved very fatal to further
invention, and contrary to what matter of fact might, yea did afterward
produce. And as to your being concerned that others now of late should be taken
with our new Philosophy; we well know it touches you to the quick, to be
lessened in your repute in the world.


Hydroph. Well, (Pyroph.) suppose I should with you conclude, that such an
Hypothesis as you speak off were chiefly to be desired, and that ours was not
such; yet we find you are not well agreed amongst your selves in order to the
establishing thereof.


Pyroph. That Is not material (Hydroph.) For although several judicious and
worthy men erect Hypotheses different from each other, and all cannot be
thought to square with the genuine principles of nature, yea perhaps not one of
them do coincide with the tenure and just method of nature, all (even the best)
being reputed no other then Hypotheses; yet in as much as any Hypothesis is but
a compendious System of Principles so laid or granted, as from whence genuine
deductions and rational conclusions are to be made for the better and more
clear understanding of the reason of things: Therefore what Hypothesis soever
it be, whose principles are such and so laid as to approach nearest the
character aforesaid; that without all doubt is by all ingenious persons to be
preferred, till a better, (I mean such as comes nearer the mark and approaches
nearer the intent of nature) be found out, whereby the Phenomenon may yet more
clearly genuinely and universally be solved.


Hydroph. Why, what jangle is this (Pyroph.) you make about your new
Hypotheses? are you displeased with the Philosophy of the Ancients, do you
despise their inventions?


Pyroph. No, far be it from me (Hydroph.) to have too low thoughts of the
learning and sagacity of the Ancients; surely we are very much beholden to them
in many things; and were they now living in this our age would many of them be
most accomplished in the improvements of the new discoveries in Philosophy and
Physic, and therefore in their time are to be looked upon with a favorable
aspect. But to set up our staff with a ne plus ultra amongst the Ancients,
notwithstanding the late great improvements of ingenuity and advancement of
learning in all sorts of Philosophical enquiries, is (if I mistake not) too
much to indulge Antiquity, savours too much of affecting that which is old, and
dints the appetite to a more plentiful Banquet of more recent rarities.


Hydrop. I tell you (Pyroph.) I am resolved (for ought I yet know) to stick to
the Ancients back and edge, its their learning with which I have been trained
up.


Pyroph. True, Hydroph. you and I are both beholden to them, you for their
Precepts as the rule of your Philosophy and Physic, I for the same, as they
are foyls to set off the beauty, and shades to give a luster to the new
experimental Philosophy, or as contraries to illustrate each other.


Hydroph. I must tell you (Pyroph.) that I look upon Aristotle and his
followers or Commentators to be the chief, if not the only Dictators of the
good old Philosophy.


Pyroph. And I must take leave to tell you (Hydroph.) that so much as Aristotle
had of real solid knowledge, witness his History of Animals, which doubtless was
acquired by a diligent and industrious Autopsie, so much the Modern
Philosophers put a value upon him: But as to the whole Body of his Physics,
when I view his Theory of the Principles of natural Bodies, I cannot otherwise
look upon them than as mere entia rationis, and in good earnest are merely
figmental, viz. that which is not in rerum natura.


SECT. II.
Hydroph. WHy? are not (that we may speak to the purpose) his three intrinsic
principles sufficient for the production of all natural Bodies (viz.) his
Materia, forma, ac privatio? Is not his Materia prima, the first subject matter
of all Bodies, as that out of which all natural bodies are not only made, but
ultimately reducible into; and that which it self is without shape, yet capable
of receiving all form, of which it is always greedy.


Pyroph. Truly (Hydroph.) I know not what to make of his materia prima, yea
think neither he, his Commentators, or you to boot, could ever ten how to
render it intelligible: For the Peripateticks say, that it does not subsist per
se, but is only in potentia, and yet it is an ens non actu tamen potentia: Now
(Hydroph.) that a constituent primary principle of all bodies should not be it
self a body, is I confess a mystery to me indemonstrable.


Hydroph. What think you (Pyroph.) of his forma substantialis, which he defines
(...), (viz.) that which determines the materia prima in hoc aliquid, as that
by which the essence of the thing is introduced into matter, and from which
every thing is denominated.


Pyroph. I have the same thoughts of it (Hydroph.) as I have of his materia
prima (viz.) that they are both unintelligible, and, like an image, are nothing
in the world.


Hydroph. But what think you (Pyroph.) of his third Principle, Privation, which
is the absence of the form in the subject matter, with an aptness of the matter
to receive form.


Pyroph. I think (Hydroph.) (and see no solid grounds to the contrary) that it
is as imaginary as the former: and that his whole ternary of Principles of
natural bodies are to be reckoned at the best but amongst entia rationis, and
therefore not at all to be reputed essential Principles of natural bodies, but
in a true sense are merely precarious: Therefore the famed Verulam in his Tract
de sapientia veterum, to this purpose hints, where he says, Opinio Peripatet.
de stimulo materiae per privationem fere non ultra verba tendit, and rem potius
sonat quam signat.


Hydroph. How do you (Pyroph.) look upon his external Principles of bodies, viz.
the efficient and final.


Pyroph. Only (as I said before) entia rationis, mere reflections of an
intellectual being, and therefore have no concurring influence upon Bodies as
Principles.


Hydroph. But are there not (Pyroph.) (according to our Peripatetick
Philosophy) certain affections of natural bodies, and those as the Philosopher
distinguishes either internal or external; viz. motion and rest, finite and
infinite, which are internal: place and time, external: are not these, I say,
proper affections inherent and consequent to natural bodies as such?


Pyroph. Before I give my thoughts thereof, I would know (Hydroph.) what he or
you mean by those affections of matter, and first what is meant by that
affection called Motion?


Hydroph. It is, (Pyroph.) if I may speak in our own Language) an (...), or the
action of that which is in potentia, as such.


Pyroph. Surely that is a definition (Hydroph.) as difficultly to be understood,
as to know what the Egyptian Osyris was: or to unfold their Mystical
Hieroglyphics; yea, and for ought I know, more dark than to unvail the
Enigmatical Emblems of the Hermetick Philosophers: however more difficult (I
think) than to know the natural causes of the flux and reflux of the Sea, and
less obvious than to know the causes of the Inundation of the River Nilus.


Hydroph. But do not you think (Pyroph.) that motion is a proper affection of
natural bodies, and that there are various species thereof, which are either
conversant about a substance, or an accident: that of substance to be pertinent
to motion, in order to generation and corruption?


Pyroph. Yes, as to the first (Hydroph.) I do look upon motion as the most
proper and compatible affection of matter, in order to the fabric of all
natural bodies: but as to the division of the species thereof, I confess I do
not understand; for I judge motion to be a simple affection of matter, not
divisible into species: and that amongst bodies, as such, there are to be found,
no other motion than that we call local motion, which is the chief mechanical
affection of matter.


Hydroph. That Is strange (Pyroph.) how can that you call local Motion be of so
large extent, as to comprise all the various species of motion to be found in
our System of Philosophy, while it self is but reckoned amongst the
sub-divisions of motion, taken in our general sense?


Pyroph. Its true (Hydroph.) it compriseth all the various species of motion,
although in your Philosophy it be but found amongst those sub-divisions
pertinent to accidents; where it comes lagging in the fagg end of the discourse
of motion, by Aristotle and his Commentators.


Hydroph. But does not every loco-motion suppose a terminus a quo, and ad quem?
Imagine then in the motion of bodies some to move only upon their own Axis (as
no doubt some do) where then (Pyroph.) is your loco-motion, your terminus a
quo, and ad quem?


Pyroph. I answer (Hydroph.) It Is easily solvable by imagining any one point of
that body moving upon its Axis, and the respect it has to any adjacent body,
visible, or coucht in the Atmosphere, it no sooner can be thought to move or
wheel about, but it loses the former respect, and applies to another, whereby
is really demonstrated a loco-motion, (viz.) a terminus a quo, and ad quem, the
thing sought for.


Hydroph. But pray (Pyroph.) is not generation and corruption a motion
incompatible to loco-motion? Is not generation a motion or mutation, a non esse
ad esse, by which a new substantial form is acquired, and corruption a motion
or mutation ab esse ad non esse, whereby the same substantial form is lost, and
that generatio unius est corruption alterius, ac vice versa? Are not these
performed by motion in a large sense, and yet I hope they are not reducible to
that slight sub-division of motion, we call local motion?


Pyroph. I answer (Hydroph.) that I see nothing in that mutation of bodies one
into another, which you call generation and corruption, but what is compatible
only to loco-motion, guided by seminal or spermatic Principles in the Fabric of
Vegetable and Animal Bodies, and by somewhat analogous thereto, even in the
composition of all other mixts: and that those various changes amongst bodies
one into another, ascribable to generation and corruption, are no other than
the different Metastasis of the constituent Particles of bodies, or the various
interweavings and complications of their intestine Principles; which whether
shifting places in the same concretes give the different Phenomenon incident to
the same body, while its constituent parts and genuine ferments keep their
natural tenure, method, and order, proper thereto, or else separating a portion
of the most defecate parts, which contain an efflorescence of the whole, become
by further and more gradual elaboration, spermatic Principles (being the whole
reduced to an Epitome) congenial to what at first was set on work by the
Primitive Fiat, for the upholding the creation by propagation, or similar
productions.

In all which the main affection of matter is local-motion, where the parts in
such size, shape and figure, by motion, guided by seminal Principles, with
their congenit and peculiar collisions make up the texture, suppose of one
body: The same parts being differently acted by fire, ferments, salts, or
solvents, separate themselves from their first texture that with the seminal
beginnings composed the fabric of one body, now being guided by the other
aforesaid active Principles or extrinsic Agents convene in another form which
thereby give the appearance of another mixed body.

Only with this difference, that in bodies that are propagated by seminals or
seedlings, the motion is guided by the seminal Principles and fermental
Collisions connatural thereto. But in bodies that undergo a mutation one into
another by the aforesaid active Principles of fire, ferments, salts and
solvents, the motion is thereby guided according to the activity and engagement
thereof in bodies, whereby they are disposed differently, taken in pieces
variously, and complicated in different forms from what they were before,
whence they affect our senses with different qualifications of color, shape,
heat, cold, fluidness, permanency, etc. from what they did before.


Hydroph. Well, (Pyroph.) but methinks you should give us an instance whereby
we might better understand your Theory by some practical example; for I can
give you an instance, how we apprehend generation and corruption to be a
motion, which yet we are not convinced is attributable to locomotion, and that
thus:

We see that the flesh of an Ox corrupting in the Air begets Bees, and that of
a Horse, Crabrones, Flies, where the corruption of one thing ( viz. the Ox his
flesh) is the generation of another ( viz. Bees) which certainly is a motion
from that which was not before to a new thing, and yet we know not how you will
solve this by local-motion.


Pyroph. Very well (Hydroph.) I was indeed about to have confirmed what I said
by an instance, which is in promptu, but that I was anticipated by yours, which
I shall endeavor first to take off, and then shall propound mine: As to what
you say therefore concerning generation and corruption in your example of Bees
generated from the corruption of flesh of Oxen; Crabornes, Flies, from
Horseflesh, etc. which you look upon as a motion from a non esse to an esse,
and from an esse to a non esse: As to which terms first I must tell you,
Hydroph. that these are only entia rationis, and therefore as such have no
influence at all upon matter in the production of natural bodies, nor may be
reckoned as any species of motion.

But as to a true solution of the instance which you propound (Hydroph.) viz.
how this change of bodies happens whereby they are ( Proteus-like) transformed
out of one shape into another, may, I judge, be thus explicated (viz.) when the
natural fermentations of the juyces of the body of the Ox, etc. (which while
uniform and in their progressive and edifying motion, upheld by its natural
balsam the flesh and other parts entire,) had ceased by the death of the
animal, then the same ferments by a retrograde motion unravel their formerly
wound-up clew, and for want of some imbalming saline particles, which chiefly
consisted in the progressive motion of the ferments, a putrid fermentation
begins, which by an analysis of the body takes it in pieces, and in its
reduction ad minima, some acid and sulphurous parts combine with some seminal
effluvia, and by a transposition of parts become animated into such or such a
form, where, by the different Metastasis of the sulphurous and some fluid
saline particles, directed in their loco-motion by some seminal emanations
(lurking in the inward recesses of the body) they become together determined
into such a peculiar shape of an other texture and form from what it was before.

That the shape, figure, and form of these new products are determined either
by seminal effluvia, or by new ferments which conspiring with the fluid, saline
and sulphurous parts in the analytical solution of the compage of the former
body, make them combine into such a shape different from what it was before,
might, I say, be demonstrated by many instances: the first is confirmed by the
body of a Duck buried, from which (as Kircher observes) Toads may be
ingendered, and that from some seminal parts of a Toad which lurk in the
humors or flesh of a Duck nourished thereby, which by putrefaction are set a
work and draw into consent some fluid saline and sulphurous parts resolved by
the putredinous ferment and jointly are determined into the form of a Toad.

Thus Worms are engendered by a putred ferment in the blood and other
constituent humors and flesh of animals, as also of the humane body: in so
much as Shenkins observes that Worms have been found even in the very heart:
And Pareus tells us, they have been seen in the Liver, Lungs, Reins, and
Bladder; yea the mass of blood undergoing any putrid resolution proves
verminous. Paracelsus says to the same purpose, Regiones membrorum suos vermes
noverunt, ita enim per anatomiam in cerebro repertus est vermiculus qui piam
and duram matrem pertuderat, unde phrenesis solicitabat, tales per anatomian
etiam in cord reperti fuerunt, similiter in regione splenis fellisque vermes
gigni possint: neither is there any putrid ulcer, impetigo, or elephantiasis
which has not his worms from a putridinous ferment: also in Cheese, Milk,
Vinegar, and Horns exposed to the Moon, in which by a Microscope Worms are
discoverable: So that these spermatick effluvia joining issue with some saline
and sulphurous parts set at liberty by a putrid ferment in the analytical
resolution (called corruption) or rather mutation or migration of bodies out of
one form into another, produce variety of new products daily in the mundane
System.

And what if I should tell you (Hydroph.) and make it good too that there is no
Plant which in its putrefaction gives not some peculiar sort of Insect from an
oviparous original: nor any perfect Animal (perfect I mean in sua specie) which
does not either immediately from the putridness of its body, or at least by
putrefaction of its excrements, give some sort of animal Insect or other,
witness that of Lucretius, -- Obnoxia cuncta putrori

Corpora, putrores insecta animata sequuntur. which also is very evident even
in the humane body, in which scarce any member inward or outward which is not
subject to produce Worms.

And as the new Productions are most-what shaped by the Motion and Manuduction
of the Spermatic Principles with other parts set at liberty from the former
Texture, which by new shuffling of parts constitute new Bodies, so also some
alteration amongst Bodies are made (I mean in order to new Shapes) by the
mediation of new Ferments, as for instance, that from brown Bread and Honey
Ants should be produced; where from a mixture of those two a new Ferment should
proceed, which becoming animated is determined into the form of an Ant: so from
Honey and Dew that Eels should be engendered, and so the rest of the like
Productions.

Lastly, Other Mutations there are (Hydroph.) of Bodies out of one shape into
another, which owe their original to either, or both of the aforesaid causes
(viz.) to seminal Effluvia's, or new Ferments: of which sort are the production
of Scorpions in the Brain of a Man, by frequent smelling at the Herb Basil, or
from the fracedinous ferment of the same Herb betwixt two Stones, the same
Animal may be produced, as both Helmont and Kircher observe: it is very probable
this Plant may take its original from some putredinous resolution of a
Scorpion, as the Satyrions of diverse sorts do from the Sperm of several
Animals, which fermenting in the leffas terrae, produce those Plants with those
Signatures of the Genitals.

For (I must tell you Hydroph.) as there is scarce any Plant in whose putrid
Analysis it gives not an Animal of one sort or other; so there are many Animals
out of the putridness of whose spermatic parts fermenting with the nutritive
Juice of the Earth, Plants may be produced, of which sort are Basil, all the
kinds of Orchis, Satyrions, Mushrooms, Androsemum, etc. yea, and from the like
causes may many poisonous Plants take their original: For as the industrious
Kircher observes, many or most of these Plants are found to grow in morticinis
cadaverum, viz. where dead Carcases have been corrupted upon the Ground, or
been buried in the Earth, in which places Hemlock, Wolfsbane, Monkshead,
Henbane, Assafaetida, wild Camomel, etc. are most frequently found: where from
the spermatic parts of putrid cadaverous Bodies, fermenting with the succulent
parts of the Earth, or other Excrements, new shapes are assumed, either of
other Animals, or Plants, according to the direction of seminal Effluvia, or
specifical Ferments.

So that the Metastasis of those Bodies out of one shape into another, whereby
they are very differently represented to our sensitive Organs (as that which
was lately an Animal, may become a Plant, and that which was a Plant, may
presently be changed into an Animal) may very well proceed (as I said) partly
from the loco-motion, or transposition of seminal Principles, and partly from
the awakening of new Ferments.

Thus you see (Hydroph.) how I have interwoven mine with your instances, and
that the better to illustrate the manner of mutation of Bodies out of one form
into another, whereby we may be able to solve the urgent Phenomenon incident to
Bodies in their Metastasis, or Transfiguration (if I may so call it) by the
various extension of the parts of matter differently guided by seminal
Principles, and specifiic Ferments, without having recourse at all to
Aristotle's Materia Prima, his Quaternary of Elements, substantial Forms, or
other general affections ascribable to natural Bodies according to the Theory of
the Vulgar Peripatetick Philosophy.

Where I cannot but wonder why Aristotle's Commentators, should, where they
treat of the general Affections of natural Bodies, omit the Discourse of the
four Elements, seeing they are, as they say, simple homogenial Bodies, from
which all Concretes are compounded, into which they are ultimately resolved,
and themselves irreducible into any thing before them, which therefore they
esteem as the true Principles of all Bodies, and yet they are not according to
their own account the materia prima: so that their materia prima is but at the
best a thing in potentia, and that is only as much as to say, a nothing:
Therefore it is left to the four Elements, to be according to your Doctrine, the
true Principles of Bodies depending upon the (...) of Qualities, and yet, I say,
they treat not of these till after they have done with the most general
affections of Matter, which to me argues a large and indispensible chink in the
junctures of that old Philosophy you so much value.


SECT. III.
HYdroph. But seeing (Pyroph.) we are engaged in a Discourse about the
Principles of natural Bodies, and the general Affections thereto belonging, and
that you deny our materia prima, substantial forms, and privation to be real
Principles of natural Bodies, as also oppose Motion and its Species, with other
general Affections of Matter, as they are laid down by our Philosophy, pray
tell us how you apprehend the composition of Bodies to be, enlarge your self,
and render what you have already said somewhat more intelligible.


Pyroph. I have already (though in short) given you hints by several instances,
how I apprehend the Mutation of Bodies out of one shape into another do happen.
Now (Hydro.) I shall give you an abbreviate Account of my thoughts, how these
(thus liable to mutation) are composed.

And that first by showing you, that the Matter, Bodies (I mean such as are
determined by one specifical shape or other) are made up of, is the same (as to
the material and constitutive part of Concretes) with that which is in common
to them, as considered in their Metastasis out of one form into another: and
therein to show, how it lies under a threefold consideration, of so many
general Affections: Next to show what are those hidden Agents and mechanical
Principles shut up in the seminaries of all such sort of Bodies, by which those
general Affections, and essential qualifications of Matter, are exerted, and
manuducted, in order not only to the Fabric, but pulling down, construction,
but reduction of all such Bodies. Lastly: Instances to show how all this is done
by illustrating upon several remarkable Phenomenon amongst Vegetables and
Animals.

As to the first, How Matter as Matter is the common subject the materia
substrata of all natural Bodies, which we else where show to be Water, or such a
texture of the parts of Matter, as sooner or later fall into that fluid body,
we call Water, the parts whereof however rarifyed, or subtilized, as really
water, I mean when condensed, or collected, and seminal Masks taken off, as
every spark of Fire, is Fire, concerning which we take occasion to enlarge in
our Tentamen Physiolog. to which we refer you.

As to the general and essential affections of matter, in order to the
structure of Bodies, the first is Motion, and that no other than loco-motion, or
an intestine collision of the constituent parts: For without such motion
neither would the parts of matter be inclinable to convene in any form for the
texture of Bodies, nor would the texture of those Bodies already supposed to be
in rerum natura, ever be changed out of one into another, which yet must
necessarily be granted as long as things appear upon the wheel of vicissitudes
on the stage of the World: all things, I say, would be at rest, and in a calm
stilness, all the Springs, Wheels, Cords, and Pullies (to speak like a
Corpuscularian) of automatous Productions, would be let down, disordered,
broke, and out of joint, if motion should cease, which therefore makes it an
affection both general and essential to matter.

The next essential qualification of matter is divisibility: For if matter
should be indivisible into minute parts, there could be no difference of Bodies,
all would have the same shape, and the varieties we see of Bodies in the nursery
of the World would not be: therefore matter must fall under our consideration
as divisible into minute parts, yea, and of those many may be so small and
indiscernable as may escape any perception by our senses, though never so acute
or fortifyed by the best of artificial contrivances.

The third essential affection of matter is Extension: which is that whereby
the concentred parts of one parcel of matter, may be so enlarged as to fill a
greater space, or to measure a larger Tract (by manifold) than it did before:
For matter being set on work by motion, which in the fabric of bodies consists
in an intestine collision, and being divided thereby into minute parts, which
combining in such or such a texture make up such a shape as is represented by
one body or other: This again being sub-divided, or taken in pieces by some
such active principles of matter, which we call Fire, Ferments, Salts or
Solvents is thereby made capable of extending a larger space than it did before.

Thus matter (or water the original matrix of all concrete bodies) being moved,
divided, and in a sort extended one part upon another by the manuduction of
Seeds or Ferments toward the production, suppose of an Animal, Vegetable, or
Mineral Concrete, which being determined into some peculiar shape (not jumping
by an accidental and blind concourse of the mustring Atoms into spontaneous
textures of bodies, according to the wild Epicurean Doctrine but) by the seminal
Principles (called by the Hermetic Philosophers the innate Plastic Spirit.)
This, I say, being further examined either by Fire, Ferments, Salts, or
Solvents, becomes capable of being extended over a much larger space than
before: so that extension of matter has relation both in order to the fabric of
bodies as bodies, as also in order to the Metastasis thereof out of one shape
into another.

Now, I say, as matter in order to the texture of bodies has the essential
affections of Motion, Divisibility and Extension; so we are to conceive of
these parts divided under some shape, size, or figure, whereby they may the
better convene in such postures as may by the manuduction of Seeds and Ferments
make up the generality of mixed bodies in the World: with what figure so ever
they be in their minutest parts physically divisible into, yet till they arrive
at others by close combinations they fall not under our cognizance as
principles of bodies, as we further declare in our Tentamen Physiolog.


Hydroph. But pray (Pyroph.) what are those Seminal Principles and Ferments
(the next thing you proposed to discourse of) which you call hidden Agents and
mechanical Instruments shut up in the seminaries of all such bodies, to which
you refer much of your Doctrine of Natural Bodies, chiefly in order to the
Fabric of Vegetables and Animals, and by which you seem to differ from the
Philosophy of the Corpuscularians?


Pyroph. Yes (Hydroph.) that I confess, for the better understanding the Basis
of Natures works, in the establishing a well-grounded Hypothesis, we are
rightly to consider, what is understood by seminal Principles, and Ferments.

By seminal Principles, therefore I mean the same with what I elsewhere (in my
Tentamen Physiolog.) call semina foecunda, or Seeds, which I suppose (for none
dare positively aver) are Minute Portions of the two Principles Acid and
Sulphur, concentred and wound upon a very small bottom, implanted and wrapped up
by the parent of Nature in small raiments of matter, ubi prima cuduntur rerum
stamina, which Principles in one are specifically differenced from what they
are an another, whence the great variety in the textures of bodies of all
Vegetables and Animals: which Principles are, I say, the organical Instruments
and mechanical Agents included in all those bodies vulgarly called Seeds: wrapped
up, I said, in small raiments of matter, not but that these Principles
themselves are also material, and are at the long run reducible into Water, the
material Principle of all Concretes, but with this difference, that they are
pure subtle parts, (entangled in more gross) adapted for motion, or that
collision we suppose indispensibly necessary in the Fabric of all such Bodies.

By Ferments here, we mean the foresaid Principles (being seminal sparks
hidden in matter) which are (other requisites duly concurring) actually put
into motion, or set into a natural and genuine collision.

These Principles in the progressive motion of their collision, yea, and in the
whole round of their operation, (becoming thereby actual Ferments) give
according to their various stades, the different Phenomenon of the same body:
so that all the apperances are measured forth according to the progress or
regress of the aforesaid Principles. Thus Vegetation (as to Plants) is nothing
else (as we elsewhere in our Zymolog. Physic. and Tentamen further say) but a
slow paced motion or gentle collision of the aforesaid Principles, consisting
in an intestin struggling thereof.

Thus for instance in the production of a Vegetable Seed-bearing Plant, as
suppose of Rosemary, Marjoram, Time, etc. where we have nothing but the minute
Seed with the intrinsic Principles, which are the connate plastic Faber seated
in the Center thereof, and what it can determine matter into: Now when this
Seed, being put into a due capacitated Matrix or Earth, begins, by the
fructifying nitrous Salt in the Earth, or Air, or both, together with the
concurrance of an aetherial matter, etc. (requisite to the setting all
Vegitable Springs into motion) to open it self, the Principles or hidden
mechanical Agents (or that seminal embryonative spark, locked up in the visible
Grain, or Seed) become an actual Ferment, whereby Matter, which is always moved
at the beck of those implanted Principles, and is thereby sub-divided into
minute parts, enters the Pores, and Streiners thereof, with such adaptation of
Particles proportionable thereto, which becomes thereby extended, and is by the
foresaid actual Ferment proper to that Seed, wrought into such a texture of
parts, or specifical form singly peculiar to that Plant: where the shape,
color, sapour, odor, and other specifical indowments are determined by the
seminal Principles, set into a fermental motion, and are the results of Matter
formally extended thereby: For that a Plant should constantly (and more
forcibly, during the time of the vigor of its natural Ferment) breath forth so
strong an apporrhoea, or odor, as to be able to smite our senses therewith, as
if 20, yea 100 could (as sometimes they may) stand within the Orb of its
activity, might all be sensible thereof, is, I say, a demonstrable Argument of
the extensibility of Matter and subtle Emanation of subtiliz'd or volatiz'd
Parts, even in the Fabric of that Plant, carried off by the quick actions of
the aforesaid Ferment; which is yet further discoverable, either by the reverse
motion of the foresaid Principles of the Plant, whereby the same ferment in its
Retrograde motion becomes putredinous, causing (in some Plants but especially
in Animals) a fetidness, whereby also happens a Metastasis into an Insect (from
causes aforesaid) or by force of fire into a fume of 100 yea 1000 fold larger
compass than the body it self was, which fume although extending so large a
space, is yet so gross as to make it self the object of our senses.

Thus you see (Hydroph.) how the same Principles, which lay dormant in the
seed, (while in the Garner) where they are poised in equilibrio, and remain
alone, so long incapable of fructifying or multiplying; how? I say, in order to
the awakening these Principles and putting them into a fermental motion, there
are some concurring requisites duly to be considered, viz. that it should be
cast into a peculiar Soil or Ground, as its proper Matrix, which is the Matrix
of the Husk, as the Husk is of the true Seed, where the Leffas Terrae (or juice
of the Earth) being imbued with so much nitrous Salt as is sufficient, softens
the Husk and makes it swell, whose compage being loosed, the Air with its other
(necessarily concurring to the exciting the Principles in every vegetable
Production) getting entrance, awakes or puts the implanted Embrio-Principles
into motion, thereby rendering them fermental; whence the noble Seed shut up in
an obscure point, arises, whose mechanical Principles (necessary to the
building all Bodies) are I say, called forth to act, break the Prison-doors,
and in their mutual wrestlings, cause that grand Phenomenon of Nature, we call
Vegetation, where Water by the manuduction of Seeds or seminal Principles
becomes determined into fibrous off-shoots, and those being hollow, carry along
more of the succulent juyces, which as it flows in those Pipes, upon its
access, more Fibers, Sapvessels, and others, (whether as Veins, Arteries, etc.
analogous to Animals, we refer to the particular disquisitions of the worthy
Malpighius, and our Countryman Dr. Grew) are produced; while the formerly made
Vessels by access of Air (or being long exposed thereto) become condensed or
hardened into stalks, wood, etc. and so is wrought on, by the weavings of the
foresaid seminal Principles, till the whole Plant or Tree put on its entire
form of Root, Stalk, Bole, Bark, Branch, Fruit, or Flower.

Besides which weavings, coagulations, and condensations of water into
vegetable concretions from causes aforesaid, its moreover if I mistake not
(Hydroph.) as easy (and as daily performed) for Nature from the power of
seminal ferments set a work in Vegetation, and after continued by allowing due
requisites or ferments congenial, to turn I say, Water into Wine, as it is for
the same, by the winding off of those ferments in a natural circulation to
reduce Wine into Water, both equally and daily performed by the same seminal
Principles differently and in their circular motion considered; yea, and to
turn also Water into all manner of potable or fermentable liquors by the
mediation of the foresaid Principles, once broke off from Vegetation, and kept
afoot by the melting of the Grain, then dissolved in Water, and after by a
ferment connatural set into a fermentative motion, as it is for the same
potable Liquors at the long run of their ferments (insensibly winding off) to
be reduced into Water again, and so on in a constant round of action and
circulation of motion in the upholding the great vicissitude and interchange of
things.

So that these Principles in their gentle collisions are not only the cause of
Vegetation in all manner of Plants and Trees, and the various apparences
thereto belonging, both of generation and corruption, weavings and unweavings
of Bodies by the winding on and off, of the Principles; but also put into new
and different collisions or higher fermentations become the Patrons of all
potable Liquors, and yet higher become the efficients of heat, and that either
remiss or intense, yea so intense as to break forth into actual Flames, and so
by such rapid fermentations exhibit the Phenomenon of fire and light not only
compatible to Vegetables, but also to Animals, and all sulphurous Minerals, as
we farther discourse in our Zymologia Physica and Tentamen Physiologic.

And further, how from the twistings and evolutions of the same Principles, how
I say the most obvious Phenomenon, are thence solved; for instance, how
colors, those ludicra sulphuris, the sportings of vegetable Sulphurs, from
whose intertexture and coagulations upon their genuine Acids are produced such
different textures in Vegetables, as from thence are struck those amiable
colors our Optics are so pleasantly accosted with: How sapours of Plants are
the results of vegetable fermentations in order to an equal temperature, to and
from which as they approach or recede, they become pleasant or ungrateful,
whose gratefulness (especially of fruits) depend upon their approximation to
maturity, where their Acids are sweetened by the maturity of their Sulphurs
upon the wheel of Vegetation: How odours of Vegetables are but the
efflorescence of their Sulphurs or subtle emanations emerging from intestine
vegetative fermentation, where from the continual hits and unwearied touches of
the native Acid upon its Sulphur, the Sulphur becomes so subtilized as to wheel
off in a sensible Apporrhea: How also the medicinal virtues thereof do thence
depend; and how lastly, their propagation is from natures skilful management of
the same Principles performed; You may, I say, see further in our late
Philosophical Treatise of Fermentation.


SECT. IV.
Hydroph. BUt before you pass from the discourse of your Principles as
concerned in Vegetation, and having touched somewhat relating to the
Propagation of Plants in your piece of Fermentation: pray (Pyroph.) how are
they (I mean your Principles) concerned in that manner of Propagation of Trees,
and perhaps some Plants by ingrafting and inoculation, and what improvements
may thereby be made?


Pyroph. Well reminded (Hydroph.) For that we may nor busy out selves with
empty and fruitless Speculations (the usual product of your old Philosophy,) it
will be necessary in order to the establishing and confirming our Hypothesis,
to acquaint you in answer to your desire, that the ingrafting or inoculation of
a Cion or Bud into the bole of a Stock in order to the propagation of
Fruit Trees for the improvement of Nurseries, seems to me, Hydroph. to be
nothing else but an artificial planting of those trees, as if they were indeed
put into a good proper soil, by putting their seeds into suitable beds of Earth;
whereby the seminal Principles concentred in the Seed, or contracted into those
prolifique Buds, are put into their proper Matrix, which with other requisites
concurring, are set into their vegetative spring, or fermental motion: And that
the adaptness of stocks answers the peculiarity of soyls, in as much as all
sorts of Cions are no more properly or with expected success, to be grafted or
inoculated in any sort of Stock, than any sort of soil is naturally fitted and
qualified for every kind of Seed, only with this difference, that in the one (
viz. the Earth) the juice prepared lies more crude, and scattered, yea, is more
liable to casualties, especially to injuries by cold, while the other (in the
sap in stocks) is more digested (if I may so say) and better collected into
Vessels, and peculiar strainers, and lastly, is not so exposed to casualties,
nor so open to injuries by access of cold: Now that the bole of one Tree is as
a peculiar soil to the proper ingrafted or inoculated prolifique Gem (for both
grafting and inoculation are but the planting or insertion of the same seminal
Bud or Cion) is hence evident, because if Earth be so much cast up as to reach
above the place of inoculation (or graft too, if I mistake not) after they have
taken good hold and that it has sent forth Branches, the prolifique bud casts
forth fibrous Roots, just as if it (or the Seed) was originally put into so
much well prepared soil: so that the Root and Bole of a Tree do no other, (I
mean as to ingrafting and inoculation) than prepare a juice fit for the
nourishment, growth and increase of any other suitable Graft or Gem inserted
thereinto; which the aforesaid Gem imbibes and transmutes by its own fermental
Principles, into its own nature, admitting not of the least tincture of the
native disposition or seminal inclination from the assumed Sap, but dashing all
those preconceiv'd seminal tinctures, make use of it to no other purpose
(according to the intent of Nature in her great work of propagation, where she
is so so exact and curious as in nothing more) than thereby to strike up the
new vegetative implanted spark, whose Principles being thereby set awork,
become fermental, and so imploys that juice in the fabric of its own peculiar
Body, guided and shaped by its own plastic faber, I mean its foresaid seminal,
and now (being exerted into motion) fermental Principles, carrying on the
building by its intestine slow-paced collision (vulgarly called Vegetation.)

Thus for instance, we commonly inoculate a fruitful Bud or Cion of an Aprecock
or Peach into a Plum-stock, whose thriving, budding, putting forth Branches,
etc. are no other than the evident indexes of the action of the seminal
Principles of those inoculated Gems, which being set into motion (by requisites
duly concurring) admit of the juice or Sap of the bole (they are inoculated
into) becomes fermental, dashing the preconceiv'd seminal tincture of the Stock
(whereby it was disposed to the putting on the form of a Plum-tree) transmutes
that juice into its own nature, and so from the intestine struglings of the
said seminal Principles of the instanced inoculated Bud, proceeds the
vegetation and growth of the whole, clothing it self with all those natural
Liveries peculiar to the texture of such seminal prolifique Principles.

Now that this sap of the Stock is as a prepared soil, or a peculiar Earth for
the Seed to be sown in, and wherein it thrives as well (if not better) than in
a natural soil, is evident (Hydroph.) because if you throw up Earth (after it
has begun to thrive and put forth Branches) above the place where it was
inoculated, it takes Root by putting forth fibrous Shoots, which you may then
transplant, (cutting off the former Root and Bole) and so it becomes an entire
Tree of it self: and from the same causes it is, that you may by splicing (as
the Gardiners call it) propagate as many Trees as you please: also by layers
(as they are called) you may propagate as many Trees almost as there are
prolifique Buds if they couid all be conveniently laid, whereby every Bud (or
as many as you please) gets a Root to it self, by taking in that Sap from the
Earth, which they do from Stocks they are otherwise planted into: In all which,
the seminal Principles are set a work and become fermentative, hurling forth
bodies or clothings according to the form of the plastic faber seated in the
Center: whence it appears, I say, that the Sap of the Stock is to a Cion or or
prolifique Bud, as the Earth to a Seed, or as the Earth to a laid Cion.

Now the improvements, Hydroph. that hence may be drawn, are various, and that
in order to the accelleration, melioration, and fructification of some Trees in
other Climates or Countries than where they naturally grow; Thus we daily see
the Imps of an Aprecock hastened as to its fructifying, by being inserted into
Plum-stocks, Peaches, by being put into Aprecock, Flanders, Heart, Duke, etc.
Cherries, put into wild or black Cherry-Stocks, etc. which thereby in two or
three years become Fruit-bearing-Trees, which would not in many more, if set
from a Stone or Seed, or propagated from a slipped Cions: which are not thereby
only hastened as to their growth and maturity, but also are bettered thereby,
both as to bulk of Fruit as also pleasantness and gratefulness of taste.

Thus probably the prolifique Imp or Bud of Quinces, skilfully put into early
Apple-stocks, might hasten them as to maturity; later Grapes of a more delicate
taste, artificially inoculated into more early, might do the same: yea very
likely if acurate trials were made of this nature, probably not only Melons (as
to Plants) inserted into Pompions might make them both more early and more
large, especially if the Seeds of Pompion should be brought up in hot-beds to
be ready early in the Spring, while the other are also fostered in the same,
till they were fit for inserting: But also many other rare observations might
be made concerning other maturations and meliorations of Plants and Fruits, not
yet taken notice of.

As to the third improvement, viz. the assistance of Nature by Art, in the
fructification of some Trees in other Climates or Countries than where they
naturally grow; Thus probably if the prolific Bud of Oranges (trained up from
their seedlings in hot-beds, or other suitable soil) were inserted into some
sort of Trees that grow well with us, and seem somewhat to resemble them, as
for instance in some choice Apples (as Pippins or Pearmains) or in Quinces,
thence we might very probably have Oranges to grow frequently with us in
England: for the reason, why such tender Trees (more accustomed to hotter
Climates) do not fructisy with us, is chiefly through the defect of concurring
causes, (which I above call by the name of Requisites duly concurring) amongst
which are most considerable the want of a competent heat, or the presence of
our intense cold or frost in the Winter time, which reaching the Roots of such
tender Trees, prevents their Fruit-bearing by suspending the fermental action
of the Principles, if not totally kills them.

Now (Hydroph.) according to our already proved supposition, that Stocks answer
Soils, and are really as such to prolific Buds: therefore if instead of
training up Orange Trees from hot Nurseries, we take their prolific Imps, which
we can by hot Beds easily procure, and insert them by Inoculation into the
Stocks or Branches of any, or the most likely of those Trees aforesaid, we
thereby secure them from intense Frosts we usually have in Winters, the chief
defect amongst requisites concurring, and which hinders otherwise the
Fruit-bearing of some Trees in other Climates than naturally they spring up in:
which, I say, being removed by the aforesaid artificial Expedient, gives great
likelihood of having upon such trial, plenty of Oranges growing with us in
England.

Thus also if the fruitful Buds of Figgs (which rarely in England come to
maturity for want of heat, and chiefly by being late) were inoculated into some
sort of good Pears (for instance Bergamots, or some other early Pear) or
Branches thereof, might probably procure their maturity: and thereby to sit
peaceably under the improvements of our Vines and our Figg-Trees.

Amongst the aforesaid due requisites necessarily concurring, I chiefly mean
Climates, and thence different Soils (although there are also great variety of
Soils under the same Climate) where, according to the difference of natural
heats from the Sun, the Principles are put into a slower or quicker Motion,
from whose more flat or sharp and agil collisions, some Bodies or Fruits are
wrought with a courser or finer spun texture; or by longer weavings become more
elaborate, and arrive at higher maturities, whence proceed Fruits of more
delicate taste, affecting the Palate more gratefully.

What improvements (Hydroph.) might hence be made, nothing but matter of
experiment will satisfy, concerning the meliorating, at least enlarging of
Collyflowers, by taking the superannuated stem or bole of a choice sort of
Cabbage (which the year before has been prevented of bearing Fruit, by cutting
it off while young) and early thereinto the next Spring to insert a Collyflower
(brought up in a hot or other prepared Bed, or preserved over Winter from its
seed put down in Autumn.) And so many more choice Observations might be made,
the truth of which only matter of trial will evince and satisfy the curious
searcher.

Lastly, What improvements might hence also be made (Hydroph.) is only here
proposed to further trial, in order to the having of Roses (and perhaps other
Flowers) all the Winter long, by inoculating their prolific Buds at a due
season into some Sempervives, or Wintergreens, I mean for instance in Yew, Fir,
or Pine, especially if those Trees were assisted by some Artificial heat, as
being planted near some Stoves or Furnaces (if found that that would accord
with their constitution) where heat was kept and conveyed to them all Winter
long: For the Principles in any prolific Bud being set into motion, by being
planted in any proper Stock, the Juice of that Stock being warmed by any
adventitious heat, or what way so ever kept in action, becomes like a Soil
fitted for them, whereby the aforesaid Principles become fermental, and by a
slow paced intestin collision becomes the essential cause, yea, is the very
ratio formalis of vegetation and growth, by which the Seed, like a seminal
Faber, works until it have hewed forth its own body, and be clothed with all
the shape, lineaments and proportions answerable to the Antitype or latent-Idea
couched in the central point, and exert all the powers capable of emerging
therefrom, by putting on the entire form of the whole Plant or Tree.


SECT. V.
Hydroph. AS you have expeditiously enough illustrated what you mean (Pyroph.)
by your Principles as seminal and fermental in order to the generation and
production of Vegetables, and toward the solving many remarkable Phenomenon
thereof; concerning which what you fall short in here, it seems you make up in
your Treatise of Fermentation already extant, and in your Tentamen Physiolog.
you have ready for the Press: So pray (Pyroph.) give us some touches concerning
your Notions, how according to your Hypothesis, you apprehend the generation of
Animals, and their most noted apparences, are performed from your aforesaid
Principles.


Pyroph. In the generation of Animals from their seminaries, the aforesaid
Principles (if I mistake not, Hydroph.) are no less (suo modo) conspicuous,
than what I have illustrated them to be in the production of Vegetables; and
that both as they are Principles locked up in some minute portions of
epitomized matter, and likewise as they, being by requisites duly concurring,
put into motion, become fermental.

For we account of Generation of Animals no other than an evolution or natural
expansion of the implanted seminal Principles contained in the minute Embrio,
and rendered prolific by the fermental odor (if I may so say) of a masculine
Ferment; we cannot otherwise reckon, but that the noblest of fermental animal
Juyces (in order to propagation) and where the spirits are most vigorous, and
fecund, is the masculine sperm of Animals; which is a digested spermatic
Elixir, capable of tinging those more crude feminine Juyces, or a natural, but
highly prepared liquid Magistery, circulated and brought on to maturity in its
peculiar vessels: yea, the very efflorescence, (if I may further add) of Animal
Juyces, impregnated at due seasons with such a stock of spirits, emerging from
a fermentation proper to it self, as renders it capable of inspiring those
feminine ovaria, or uterine Vesicles, with a subtle, but very active Ferment,
which awakens those minute dormant, and otherwise steril Embryo's, sets them by
its own vigorous action into a sort of (if I may say) vegetative, or expansive
motion.

It Is not the gross body of the prepared masculine or seminal Sperm, or any
visible juice, or sensible part thereof (however by circulation maturated)
which is admitted into the female Matrix, as the worthy Harvey excellently
shows in his Tract, de generatione Animalium, Nihil in utero (says he) post
coitum invenias, generatura enim maris, brevi vel elabitur, vel evanescit: and
tamen adsit aliquid, quod foeminam foecundam reddat; But it is a spirituous
Ferment, indolis contagiosae (of which the seminal Liquor is but the Vehicle)
at seasons so heightened, as it (if meeting with an aptness of Reception in the
Female) breaths upon the oviformal Embryo, invigorates it into activity,
putting those implanted and close shut up Principles into Motion.

For the aforesaid industrious Harvey tells us, speaking of what is contained
in the Female Matrix, in order to Conception,

De generat, Animal. 278. Quod ad procreatio nem foetus spectat, omnia animalia
eodem modo ab oviformi primordio generantur: siquidem in eorum generatione, hoc
solenne est, ut primordium vegetale (ovi naturam referens) praeexistat, ex quo
foetus producatur: est hoc in omnibus vel ovum vel oviforme quid; And as he
farther adds, Inest igitur in utero omnium animalium conceptus primus sive
primordium; quod test Aristotele, est veluti ovum membrana oblectum, cui
putamen detractum est.

So that in the propagation of all Animals (the noblest, and for whose sake the
rest were made, not excepted) the Embryo anchorite, or epitomized Animal, shut
up within the walls of each of the uterine Vesicles, or oviformal Membranes,
retains its just and proportionable form and shape, how minute soever in that
seminary oviformal original, enclosed in the Female Matrix: and only waits for
an inspiration from the active masculine, spirituous, and fecundating Ferment,
which is to strike up those dormant Principles, into an actual Fermentation or
animal fire, whereby the little Embryo (the seminal Principles being once put
into motion) begins (from a supply of maternal Juyces) by a fermental expansion
and evolution of its parts, to vegetate and grow bigger, till from those
rudiments, by a continual and successive gradation, the vital fire be struck
up: whereby the womb after conception by the inspiring of the pregnant male
Ferment is forthwith close shut up; nature being so solicitous in this great
affair of propagation, and so wonderfully curious (both to prevent monstrous
Productions, as also multiplicity of contemporary Births from frequent and
inordinate Coitions) as that she does, after Conception, seal up the Matrix (as
I may say) hermetically, that not the least of Air, nor what is much more
subtle ( viz. the Masculine Ferment) can have the least ingress; The Animal
and Mineral Ferments herein conspiring, that after impregnation of either (
viz. of the Animal Embryo Juice, or Mercurial Liquor) by their peculiar Seeds,
the Matrix both Animal and Philosophical are (I say) both, the one Hermetically
to be closed up, the other naturally sealed up, and kept from all heterogeneous
assaults, whether in the Air or elsewhere, till in the one, it be brought on
to the maturity of an Animal Life, and in the other, be elaborated to the
perfection of the Philosophic Elixir. Concerning the progress of which, in
order to the Exit or Birth of the Embryo, we have somewhat enlarged in our
Hydrolog. Chymica, and probably may do more elsewhere.

But how the same Principles in their fermentative Collisions in the Animal
Juyces, are the cause (other requisites concurring) of the circulation of the
Blood, the source of all Animal heat and warmth, the efficients of nourishment
and growth: The cause of the generation of Spirits, and thence of Vital and
Animal Functions ( viz. Sense and Motion) of the Body, how the Fountain of all
the several Ferments in the peculiar Vessels and Conduits of the Body.


Hydroph. But pray (Pyroph.) be not too concise in these great Matters: How in
particular (according to your Principles) do you understand concerning the
faculty of the Stomach, you call the Ferment thereof, which does perform such
wonderful effects? does it by its innate heat according to our Philosophy) or
by its acid Ferment, as of late several Neoterics have thought, or by some
latent quality unknown to us: For it seems to be of a strange penetrating
nature, as to be able to turn all the several sorts of Food into a Cremor, and
thence fit it for further preparation in order to blood and nourishment?


Pyroph. True (Hydroph.) the work of the Stomach (let it be done by what Agent
it will) is wonderful, and in that very thing Nature's path is very mysterious.
That it consists not in an innate heat, is evident, first, because no degree of
heat of what pitch soever imagined can perform the like Mutations or Reductions
of Bodies. And secondly, because all heat is (according to our Hypothesis) the
result of Fermentation, and there fore wherever the heat of the body was which
is the constant effect of the intestin struglings of the Principles contained
in the Animal Juyces, there would it necessarily follow that it should perform
the like operation in every part where it is found, but constant observation
contradicts the consequent, therefore heat is not the cause of that dissolving
action of the Stomach: And that it consists not in an acid Ferment (the more
plausible of the two) will be evident from the deposition of what we conclude
it to be. Lastly, that it is not from an occult quality will be clear from what
we shall afterward discourse of the inexistency (and therefore futility) of
qualities.

But how, I say, a pure subtiliz'd Ferment is continually elaborated into a
most depurate and refined Elixir, containing the most defecate Principles of
the blood and aliment, whence blood is prepared, is by circulation conveyed
from the blood into the Stomach, by the Gastric, and perhaps other Arteries,
inserted into the Ventricle, where through the congenealness to our every day
received alimental Juice, can (by reason of its subtilty of parts) penetrate,
dissolve, and unlock the compage of such alimentary bodies, and at length put
them into a similar motion, by striking up their essential Principles into an
intestin Collision, which is that very thing we call a Ferment, and is
therefore here (according to our Hypothesis) the true cause of the stomachical
Ferment, that great and almost universal Alkahest of nature, that can dissolve
bodies, though of many different sorts of Textures, where the same Principles
are to be found which essentially more or less constitute all alimentary
Concretes and Liquids too.

For I must tell you (Hydroph.) that the congenealness of Principles of bodies
under very different Textures and various Compages, give the cause of their
more universal solution by Menstruums prepared analogically thereto, yea and
give the reason why the Principles of one are brought into motion by the action
of the other; that is, by the congruousness of the Principles of the solvent to
those of the solvend.

So that how the Ferment of the Stomach consists not in an implanted acid, nor
any other native Ferment, peculiarly inherent in that part: But how it chiefly
(if not solely) owes its original to the circulation of the aforesaid highly
prepared, and much elaborated Elixir of the blood, which communicated by the
foresaid ducts, by its great penetrability and agility easily mixeth with the
assumed aliment, and by the assimilation of Principles sets the whole mass into
a fermentative motion, and thereby takes in pieces its Compage by a genuine
solution: For the universal constitution of all alimentary bodies, and by which
they all agree in somewhat that is common amongst them, consists in some
texture or other of the two grand Principles, Acid and Sulphur: which
fermentative Motion, I say, of the Principles by further solution, percolation,
separation, and afterward by yet more intimate commixtion is carried on to the
preparing the blood and spirits, and thence to the elaborating the aforesaid
volatile Elixir, which conveyed into the Stomach, compleats the whole round of
digegestions, and performs the whole circulation compatible to Animals in their
great work of nourishment and preparation of spirits in order to Sense and
Motion, and other functions peculiar to animal bodies: how, I say, all this is
performed by the various collisions and elaborations of the aforesaid
Principles, what we only hint here, we discourse more at large in our Tentamen
Physiolog. to which we refer you.


SECT. VI.
Hydroph. WHat mean you (Pyroph.) by those active Principles you spoke of
before, viz. Fire, Ferments, Salts, and Solvents, by some of which all concrete
bodies are taken in pieces, and new textures or neutral Productions are thence
made, and by which great changes as you say happen amongst Bodies.


Pyroph. I bring those mentioned (Hydroph.) at present under the notion of
extrinsic Agents, which have a powerful efficacy in order to the effecting
great changes amongst Bodies they are applicable to.


Hydroph. What mean you (Pyroph.) by fire according to your Hypothesis: for we
suppose it to be the most hot, dry, and lightest Element, placed sub concavo
Lunae.


Pyroph. Your opinion (Hydroph.) of fire will not be worth the while to refute,
and indeed I think will easily disappear of it self, upon the displaying of
ours: By Fire therefore in this place, I mean the vulgar (viz.) the fourth (and
sometimes the first) complication of our Principles of Acid and Sulphur, which
consists in the highest collision, and intestine rapid motion, those
Principles, sown or implanted in all combustible Bodies, are capable of; which
although here we put amongst extrinsic, yet may also truly be reckoned as the
greatest intrinsic Agent, in order to the great changes of the same Bodies from
their own highly agitated Principles.


Hydroph. Are there not many opinions concerning the nature and essence of Fire?


Pyroph. Yes (Hydroph.) Yours with the rest of your Hypothesis we reduce to six
Classes, as you may see in our Tentamen Physiologic. where we undertake to show
the great extent of Fire enlarged to all its Dimensions, not barely confining
Fire within the ordinary limits of that which is vulgar and culinary,
concerning the illustrating of which, as considered in it self, and as
applicable to other Bodies, from our Hypothesis we are not sparing; But also de
industria do propose the consideration of Fire as extended to the solving the
more general and universal apparences of Nature in the production of Bodies.


Hydroph. Why, how (Pyroph?)


Pyroph. By supposing the Genesis of all specific concretes comprised in the
threefold kingdom of Nature, to be nothing else but a certain Evolution and
Expansion of seminal Principles, carried on by a gentle and mutual Collision of
the mechanical Agents, which are the very ground work of all natural Fire in
Bodies: or rather, (if you please) to be nothing else (which yet amounts to the
same thing) but certain igniculi or little Fires deposited and hid in so many
minute portions, or Urns of matter, as there are variety of things, giving
motion and vigor to every Body wherewith its clothed, to the completing
thereof in all its numbers: so that every thing we converse with in its
existency from Creation or Generation, represents somewhat miraculous to us viz.
an igniculus or little Fire, burning after its manner, as made up from the very
Principles of Fire mutually acting by a soft Collision, and yet the thing it
self (wonderful! and like the Bush which miraculously burned with Fire and was
not consumed, Exodus c. 3. v. 7. as the Divine Philosopher in his Pentateuch,
tells us, so this) is not consumed.


Hydroph. But why (Pyroph.) so lofty in your discourse, and so curious in your
so high speculations of Fire? these are strange notions, such as we read not of
in our, nor other sort of Philosophy I have yet met with;


Pyroph. Because I find, Hydroph. by considering Bodies in their Generation or
Production, and in their reductions or unweavings, and the various Metastases
and changes amongst themselves, I say by laying things well together, and by
putting them into their due Balance, reducing them to their several Classes,
that there are seven complications, or so many modes of Aggressions of the
aforesaid Principles, Acids and Sulphurs: So that by searching into the depth
of Bodies and into the various complications of their seminal Principles, we
cannot but suppose in Nature, so many sorts of Fires, hid in the bosom of
things, as there are modifications of the Principles, by which they variously
combine to the building of Bodies from their Rudiments, and to the raising them
up from their seminaries or radical beginnings, also to the taking them in
pieces or reductions thereof: and from which many and those the chief (yea
perhaps all) Phenomenon of natural Bodies or Concretes we converse with, may
with a great deal of facility and perspicuity be genuinely solved; concerning
which we designedly enlarge in our Tentamen Physiologicum.


SECT. VII.
Hydroph. PRay, Pyroph. What are those seven Complications of your Principles,
which you say are found in the great series and chain of the causes of things,
and from whence you conclude so many Fires contained in the orb and shut up in
the Centers of those Bodies we are concerned with? How do you reckon them?


Pyroph. The first is when the Principles combine in such a peculiar Collision
as that the ethereal matter is interwoven therewith, and is fomented by a
continual supply from the perpetual circulation of the aforesaid Ether: of
which sort, are those we call Solar Fires, because made from the same
Principles as the Solar rays are: which I say consist of an Eradiation of Solar
beams, springing from an incessant but peculiar fermentation in the Body of the
Sun, and fostered by an unwearied circulation of Ethereal matter, (as we show
in our discourse of Fermentation:)

This Solar-Fire has a twofold consideration, First, per se, and Secondly; as
it is transmissive or communicable to other Bodies.


Hydroph. How do you understand that first consideration, per se?


Pyroph. That from whose direct or reflexive motion, swimming through the vast
depth of the Ether (called by the Epicureans, Inane) are produced by an
eradiation the grand Phenomenon of Light and Heat in the great Orb of the
Macrocosm.


Hydroph. What I pray (Pyroph.) is light, as communicable to us from the great
Fountain thereof the Sun, and as that grand Phenomenon by which all others are
made to appear?


Pyroph. Light we suppose (Hydroph.) to consist in an illumination of Air, by a
perpetual Emanation of Solar beams, issuing (as I said before) from an
incessant, but peculiar fermentation in the Body of the Sun. That Light is not
a quality of a lucid Body, as you define it, but a corporeal substance; and how
it is necessary to the exhibiting variety of colors, and answers the rule of
Dioptricks, we shall afterward in its place discourse.


Hydroph. What is that we call Heat, as issuing from the Body of the Sun?


Pyroph. It is nothing else ( Hydroph. If I rightly understand) but the
reflexive motion of those Solar-Rays which in their Emanation from their
Fountain, cause Light.


Hydroph. How are Light and Heat distinguished in their Causes?


Pyroph. They differ in this only: (viz.) That Light is the bare illumination
of the medium, Air, by a direct Progressive motion of the Solar Rays from the
aforesaid fermentation, as the proper object of the Eye, and by which all other
things are made to appear, while heat is the reflection or Reverberatory motion
(as we say in our tract of Fermentation) p. 106.) of the same Luminous Beams
(issuing from the said Fermentation) from the Earth or other solid Bodies,
affecting (by that Fermentative motion) our Sensative Organs of feeling.


Hydroph. You have told us Pyroph. how you understand Light and Heat to proceed
from the same Fermentative motion of Solar Rays, the one in a direct, the other
in a reverse or reflected line: But how are those you call Solar Fires made?


Pyroph. I answer, (Hydroph.) that (besides what we have already said) by
Concentration of the aforesaid Rays those Fires are made (viz.) from which
Rays, (by Glasses contrived for the purpose) artificially concentred, are
produced actual Fires, which will give Flame to, and Burn any Combustible. So
that Heat is Fire in a remiss degree, or the same Rays thinly dispersed in
their vehicle the Air, while Fire is Heat in an intense Degree artificially
concentred, and both are Essentially the same, that is, are really from the
same causes.

And as to the second consideration of Solar Fires, viz. as transmissive, or
communicable to other bodies, we mean such as hitting upon some peculiarly
adapted Textures of Bodies, do by their congruousness fix themselves, and
thereby are the causes whence several Phenomenon (mentioned in our Tentamen
Physiologic.) are easily solvable.


Hydroph. What is the second complication of your Principles, and what
Phenomenon in the main are thence solvable?


Pyroph. The second is, when the foresaid Principles do mutually accost each
other by a gentle Collision; which is twofold, the one progressive from the
Center: The other Retrogressive from the Superficies. The former respects the
Generation and Productiof things, as is manifest in every genuine Fermentation,
both of Vegetables and Animals, whence the Vegetation of Plants, and the
natural Fermentation of Animal Juices, conducing to their Generation, increase,
and perfection or maturity; The latter eyes Putrefaction; whose Ratio formalis
is taken from the reversed motion of the same Principles mutually acting, where
by a different modification, the Acidum sets upon the Sulphur and thence
produces that putredness and fetidness the frequent effects thereof:
concerning which Principles as considered in their Progressive and Regressive
motion in order to the Production and Reduction of things, more elsewhere.


Hydroph. What is the third modification of your Principles, and the apparences
in general referrable thereto?


Pyroph. The third is when the Principles by a stronger and more sensible
Collision hit upon each other: and that is twofold: viz. Natural and Artificial;
1. Natural, as amongst Vegetables is manifest in their ripened Juices, whose
Principles struggle with stronger Collisions; also in Hay, Lime, Straw, Corn,
etc. which have got moisture, being laid up wet: amongst Animals it is manifest
in every spurious and exorbitant morbid Ferment, and lastly amongst Minerals,
as is evident in every strong Collision of the Principles; and that either in
their Embryonative Juices or in concrete Minerals, from whose Principles
mutually struggling do all Natural Baths, yea all heats which arise from Metals
or Minerals Naturally or Artificially performed, take their Original. 2. The
artificial is manifest in every effervescence made between factitious Alcalies
(fixed or volatile) and Acids; concerning which you may see more at large in our
Philosophical discourse of Fermentation and in our Tentamen Physiologic.


Hydroph. The fourth you have mentioned before, which is the most high and
rapid motion the Principles are capable of, whence you compute the Ratio
formalis of vulgar or Culinary Fire, and thence also (it seems) solve the
Phenomenon thereto appertaining: But pray go on, Pyroph. to tell what your
fifth is, and what thence results.


Pyroph. The fifth, is when the Principles after they are by the most rapid
Collision brought to an ignition, are transmitted from their own into other
Bodies, where penetrating are by a kind of a fixation locked up, thereby
becomeing the Authors of diverse Phoenomena, as is evident in the Calces of
Metals made sicco modo, for instance of Lead, (in the preparation of Minium)
Iron, and Mercury, in calx vive, in fixed Alcalies lately made, etc.


Hydroph. Now proceed on to acquaint us what the sixth complication of your
Principles is, and what Phenomenon in short are thereto referrable.


Pyroph. The sixth is when the Principles are complicated by a certain
Colliquation: whence the Fires thence resulting may (properly enough we think)
be called Colliquativi ignes, which are threefold, 1. Caustical. 2. Corrosive.
3. Putrefactive. 1. Caustical, are either Lixivial or Vesicatory. Lixivial, are
fixed Alcalies of Plants, fixed Nitre, Calx vive; Vesicatory, are Chemical Oils,
Cantharides, and some Plants, as ranunculus, cicuta, urtica, inward bark of
Walnut, etc. 2. Corrosive, take their original from Mineral Principles
colliquated by force of Fire; whence all Corrosive Menstrua are produced, there
being as many Corrosive Fires as Menstrua; Some more Corrosive than others,
according to degrees of the Colliquation of the Principles. 3. Putrefactive,
whence also a threefold Colliquative Putrefactive Fire, (viz.) 1. Pestilential.
2. Venenous. 3. Properly Putrefactive. Concerning all which, and the apparences
thence genuinely solvable, besides what is obiter delivered in our discourse of
Fermentation we have at large treated in our Tentamen Physilogic.


Hydroph. Now Pyroph. have to tell us of the last complication of your
Principles.


Pyroph. The seventh and last, is when the Principles are fixed by an intimate
and radical union, whence arise Fires of their kind, which by reason of the
fixity and inseparable connection of the Principles, they (as in an Orb above
the rest of the Apparences of Nature) suffer no flagration of parts, nor admit
of any injury by the strongest tortures of Vulcan or vulgar Fire (which
consists in the fourth Complication of our Principles,) or any other below it
self, as is evident in the Metals, especially the fixed, and in the
Philosophic Elixir. Nor do they undergo any separation of parts, as appears in
the Liquor Alkahest, and Mercury of Philosophers, which by reason of the
intimate and radical union of their constituent Principles, are liable to no
sequestration of Heterogeneities, the common fate to most Bodies: from which
Modification of the Principles of Fire it truly (if such there be in rerum
natura) becomes the Ignis Philosophicus, otherwise called the Philosophers
Sulphur, that hidden Tincture, so much disbeliev'd by many, and those also
learned men: which secret Fires applied to their proper Bodies, burn only away
their Dross, separating their impurities without the destruction or Consumption
of their intrinsic Seeds originally implanted therein, whence is solvable the
very Ratio formalis of the transmutation of Metals. Yea, and from this seventh
complication of the Principles it is, whence probably those abstruse Maxims of
the Hermetick Philosophers may genuinely be solved, where they tell us of their
Water which burns Bodies, and their Fire, which moistens them; aqua
Philosophica corpora urens (viz. eorum hetereogenea) eademque madefaciens, they
burn with Water, and moisten with Fire, a great Paradox in Nature! through our
ignorance in the abstruse causes of things, of which more interspers'dly in our
Lithologia, and Tentamen Physiologic. but especially in our Chrysologia
Hermetica.

From which Principles differently according to the aforesaid sevenfold
Modifications complicated, the Phenomenon of Nature in her works, are according
to our Hypothesis easily solvable: concerning which you may see many
considerable instances illustrated in our Tentamen Physiologie.


Hydroph. It seems then (Pyroph.) that Fire in its genuine and Physical sense,
is of a larger extent, than ever we dreamed of: For you make Fire or the
Principles thereof, to be Seminal and Mechanical Agents, in all Bodies,
especially in those from Seminal Productions: and these to be reckoned amongst
the intrinsic, but pray how are they as extrinsic Agents, so much concerned in
the great Metastasis and Catastrophe of Bodies?


Pyroph. When I accounted Fire amongst the extrinsic Agents, it was only as
Culinary, viz. the vulgar (I mean such as our fourth complication of the
Principles exhibits) and as considered applicable to Bodies already
constituted, and to the changes thence issuing; that is, as the Principles of
any combustible Body was by a rapid Collision brought into that highest motion
we call Fire, as these I say were applicable to other Bodies (whose Principles
in some Modification or other had woven the Texture thereof, and so lay
dormant,) and did as adventitious Agents, excite the latent Principles into
action, so they thereby become extrinsic Agents: thus the Fiery or combustible
Principles being put into action in one Body, as suppose Wood or the like, this
as an extrinsic Agent, is able to excite the same combustible Principles in any
other combustible Body.

But it is applicable to other Bodies, as an extrinsick Agent, upon no other
account than this, (viz.) from the congenealness of its Principles, to those in
Bodies it is applicable to: for as Ferments (to take them in the usual
acceptance) work upon no Bodies, but such as have Principles Analogical to
themselves, which is the very Ratio formalis of such Ferments acting upon other
Bodies, (viz.) their congenealness: so Fire, no otherwise burns Bodies, than as
its Principles being brought into a rapid Collision, awakens the same sort of
Principles in Bodies it is applied to, exciting those Principles into the same
motion which lay dormant before.


SECT. VIII.
Hydroph. HOw do you reckon Ferments amongst extrinsick Agents?


Pyroph. Much what as I have said concerning vulgar Fire. For although most
Bodies, (especially Vegetable and Animal) lodge within themselves, their own
Ferments; by which they undergo that intestin motion of their constitutive
parts, they are natually inclined to, as appears in the Vegetation of Plants,
from the Fermentation of their genuine Principles; and in the Motion,
Circulation, Generation of Spirits, etc. in the Fermentative Juices of Animals,
yet these are also liable to Mutations from extrinsick Ferments, being
adventitious Agents, which according to the Degrees of their Energie, either
excite or highten the native, or pervert them into that which is spurious: But
in all alterations that are made by those extrinsick Ferments, either by
stirring up the supine (native) Ferments, or by graduating and advancing them
in their vigor and strength, do it I say always by a consimilarnes of Nature;
that is, by a congenealness of the extrinsick to the intrinsic Ferments,
concerning which we discourse more largely in our Tentamen Physiologic.


Hydroph. What mean you (Pyroph.) by Salts, which you reckon also amongst
extrinsick Agents, and concerned in the Changes of Bodies?


Pyroph. I look upon them (Hydroph.) as other sorts of extrinsick Agents, which
applied to, and interweaving with other Bodies beget great alterations in their
apparences: Thus for instance, Quicksilver, which is a fluid Body, does by the
interposition of Salts (as of Vitriol, Nitre, or Fossil Salt) arise together by
the help of Fire in the form of a white Crystalline Sublimate, when from the
apparences of a fluid Body, and Argent-Colour, it becomes determined by the
aforesaid interweaving of Salts into a consistent, solid, and white Body; as
may be seen in the preparation of Mercury Sublimate both Corrosive and Dulcis:
which solid Body shall become fluid again as Water, by the help of Fire, if
thereto be added Sal-Armoniack, and filings of Copper, or the Calx of
Verdigreece, remaining after the distillation of that Spiritus Veneris, so
called by Snelfer.

Thus also two Saline fluid Liquors, (the one made by putrefaction and
Distillation, either from Animals or Vegetables, the other by distillation
prepared from Fermentative Liquors) put together, shall lose their fluidity,
and become a dry Osta; as is conspicuous, not only in the well known mixtures
of Spirit of Wine, and Spirit of Urin, Blood, Sal-Armoniac, Plants, etc. but
also two Mineral Liquors (mentioned in our Halolog. Chym.) mixed, a dry Osta
may be made: likewise Oil of Vitriol poured upon a peculiarly prepared
Vitriolin Liquor (to be mentioned in the aforesaid Treatise of Salts) turns to
a blue Clay: And as some fluid Bodies, by Salts, as extrinsick Agents, become
Solid; so some Solid Bodies by Salts, become fluid, as for instance Butyrum
Antimonii ( viz. Butter of Antimony) in a gentle heat, is as fluid, as an Oil
of a strong Body, and yet consists of the Flowers of Antimony brought into that
form, by the additional Salts, before contained in sublimate: so Antimony by
Salts loses its color: Thus from black, with the addition of Salts, it
becomes brown, or yellow, as in the Hepar of Antimony, and from thence by
further addition of Salts, and Calcinations, it becomes a lighter yellow, at
length white, with a slight yellow reflection, as is evident in Diaphoretic
Antimony, in Mercurius Vitae, and Bezoardicum Minerale, concerning which
Mutations amongst Bodies you may see more in our aforesaid Discourse of Salts.


Hydroph. What mean you (Pyroph.) by Solvents, the last you reckon upon the
score of extrinsic Agents, in order to the changes which happen amongst Bodies?


Pyroph. By Solvents I understand all or most sorts of Menstrua, whether
preparable amongst Animals, Vegetables, or Minerals; amongst Animals, such
whose energetical Crasis depends chiefly upon volatile Alcalies, and those as
more or less complicated, or colliquated with their connate Sulphurs: amongst
Vegetables, such, where first either the Sulphur is deprest, and the Acidum
prevalent, as in all Acids or Vinegars distillable from the fermented Juyces of
Plants, once depraved, viz. in Vinegars, Alegars, etc. or their Spirits: or
Secondly, where the Acidum and Sulphur are in aequilibrio, as in all vinous or
other fermentative Liquors; Or Thirdly, where the Acidum is deprest, and the
Sulphur exalted, as in all vinous Spirits, distillable from fermentative
Liquors: Lastly, amongst Minerals, such where first the Acids prevail and are
thin, or lean, as in Spirit of Vitriol: Secondly, where the Acids imbibe and
colliquate more of their Sulphurs, as in Spirit of Salt: Thirdly, where the
Sulphurs prevail, and yet are bound down by a strong Colliquation with their
Acids, as in the Oil of Vitriol, Sulphur per Campane, Aquae Stygiae: or lastly,
where the Sulphur is most prevalent, as in Oil of Antimony: In all which there
are real (although gradual) Colliquations of the Mineral Principles, with what
alterations they make upon other bodies, they are applicable to, and that as
they are extrinsic Agents, not only the Chemical Dispensatory's, but also our
Halolog. or Discourse of Salts do abundantly illustrate.


Hydroph. How do these extrinsic Agents you have mentioned, accord amongst
themselves, and how thereby reconcilable to your Hypothesis?


Pyroph. Because, as I said, Fire ( viz. the vulgar) made from the fourth
Complication of our Principles, was applicable to other bodies (whose Principles
otherwise lay dormant) as an extrinsic Agent: so if we take Fire in the largest
sense, as extended through all the seven Complications of the Principles,
whereby (according to our Hypothesis) it is concerned in the Fabric of most (if
not all) bodies; then we shall find that even the other three (viz.) Ferments,
Salts, and Solvents, are in one sense or other most-what reducible thereto.

Thus Ferments are comprised chiefly in the second and third Complications of
the Principles; and Solvents in as much as they depend (for the most part) upon
the Colliquation of the Principles, do most-what result from the sixth.

The greatest difficulty I find, is in Salts as Agents, and in petrific
Concretes, viz. how Salts in their concretions, and Stones in their nativity,
are comprisable within the sphere of our Principles, and reconcilable to our
Hypothesis; concerning Salts, how they all in their several concretions
comprehend a Sulphur, in one degree, mode, or other, locked up in their Compage;
And how a ten-fold complication of the Principles of Salts are necessarily to
be considered in order to all the various Concretions, they are in Nature or by
Art (in imitation of Nature) reducible to, and concerning the manifold
Phenomenon thence solvable: For (for instance) one saline Liquor by the
addition of another Salt or Body, does assume the form of an Oil, Butter,
Jelly, Clay, Osta, etc. is demonstrated by particular Examples and
Illustrations: Also how Salts do preserve bodies they are applied to from
putrefaction, by preventing the access of somewhat in the Air, which is
concerned in the setting those retrograde Springs in motion, I mean in putting
the Principles into their reverse and analytical Fermentations, showed in the
taking bodies in pieces by putrefaction: And lastly, how these Principles may be
arrested from their Motion and suspended from their putrefactive Fermentations,
by additions not only of Salts, Frost, Air, Fume of Brimstone, and additionals
of other Condiments, but also by bare but artificial Extrusions of Air,
concerning all which at large you may further see in our Halolog. Chym. (almost
finished upon that Subject) when extant: and as to the Nativity of petrific
bodies, from their intimate and essential causes, both as relating to the Macro,
as well as to the Micro-cosme, you may consult, when extant, our Lithologia
Physica, being a Discourse of Petrification.


Hydroph. Wherein (pray Pyroph.) do your Principles differ from the
Corpuscularian? For you seem in some things to strike in with their Hypothesis.


Pyroph. If you will observe (Hydroph.) you will find, as in many things it
accords, so it differs much; for theirs supposes in the main matter moved,
which also includes in it the figure, shape, and size of the parts moved,
reducing them into certain minute figured parts, irreducible into less, which
convening in such and such numbers, with others of different figure, combine
together under the mask of some other figure than before, and so constitute
this or the other body, shaped according to the texture of those parts so
collected and united together; whereas ours, although it include much of this
Doctrine, especially that of matter moved, and under the consideration of
variety of figure, shape, and size of the constituent parts: yet herein it
differs, first that it does not consider the parts as reduced or reducible
into indivisible, and yet figured points; But supposes all the however minute
parts of matter which do accost our senses, or make any alterations in our
Juyces (by which we usually make an estimate of their Figures or take their
Dimensions) to be yet divisible into less parts, whose figure as not necessary
to the constituting, so not needful to be reckoned upon in our Calculation of
the Nativity of Bodies.

And Secondly: We suppose the natural or physical division of parts, to
transcend by many degrees that of Mechanism how acutely and artificially soever
performed: which physical sub-division we (in our Discourse of Fermentation,
and in our Tentamen Physiolog.) ascribe wholly to the Energie of Ferments, viz.
to the subtle Collisions of our Principles mutually acting, which is able to
knock off every Angle, to perforate every Solid, and to split in pieces every
Globula of Matter, that upon such Figures fall under our cognizance.


Hydroph. But pray (Pyroph.) first, Why are your Principles called Mechanical?
Secondly, Why do not your Principles, as reducible at the long run into Water,
forfeit their Natures or Essences of Principles?


Pyroph. I answer (Hydroph.) as to the first, they are called Mechanical,
because material; and next, because being as such and set into their peculiar
motions are sufficient for the physical Mechanism and structure of all bodies,
or such as Nature imploys (as we suppose) in the Mechanism of all specific
Concretes throughout its threefold Kingdom: so that to the building of all
bodies from intrinsic Agents, these are (according to our Hypothesis)
necessarily and essentially requisite.

And as to the second, I answer (Hydroph.) that although these Principles be
the proximate Agents, and primarily to be considered in order to the hewing
forth of Bodies from their material original water, determining water into this
or the other specifical Concrete: yet we do not esteem of these active
Principles to be otherwise than material, only spiritualized or subtiliz'd
Matter, for Spirit, in our Physical sense, we only look upon as subtiliz'd
matter: and therefore as such at the long winding off, are reducible into
water, or convene in such a fluid texture of parts ascribable to water.


SECT. IX.
Hydroph. BUt do not the Atomical Philosophers and you agree in the main, in
the Principles and general affections of bodies aforementioned?


Pyroph. Yes, But besides what I have already said wherein ours chiefly differ
from theirs, we must also crave leave to tell you (Hydroph.) that we dissent
from them in those extravagancies, which renders it justly to be reputed
heathenish or vain Philosophy, especially as they sprang from the old Fountain,
witness the roving fancies of the first starters of the Corpuscularian
Doctrine; I mean of Epicurus, Democritus, Leucippus, Lucretius and the rest of
that Classis; whose opinion was, that matter and motion was Eternal; and that
innumerable worlds were generated by the fortuitous Coalition of Atoms, as
Magnenus tells us out of Diogenes Laert. Seneca, etc. Witness, what Claudianus
Pau. elegantly describes in these lines, speaking of Democritus, Ille ferox,
unoque tegi haud passus Olympo
Immensum per inane volat, finemque perosus,
Parturit innumeros angusto pectore mundos.
So that according to their opinion, the World and all the mixed Bodies therein
were huddled together by the Justlings, Counter Scuffles, and Duellings of
Atoms, which by accidental jumpings into such and such postures and figures,
produced such and such figurative sensible Bodies as make up the whole pompage
thereof: whence Virgil in his Eclogues gives a hint of that Doctrine.

Namque canebat uti magnum per inane coacla
Semina terrarum, animaeque marisque fuissent,
Et liquidi simul ignis, ut his exordia primis
Omnia, and ipse tener mundi concreverit orbis.
For they suppose matter out of which the World is made Eternal, and by their
inane an infinite space, wherein infinite small Particles or Atoms of that
matter are contained, which Atoms (we might think) being gamesome and frolic,
might make infinite congresses, running a tilt upon each other, and that
without any designation or appointment of any Divine, Supreme, intelligent
power, twist upon each other, and by a blind (I know not what) impetus, by
chance strike the figure of so many Worlds and amongst the rest, form the
beautiful regular compage of that World we see: and that the Earth, while in
its vigor and fertility, brought forth Men and other Animals, as now it does
Plants: So that they suppose the generation of mixed Bodies, to be nothing else,
but a congregation, and corruption to be a segregation of Atoms; and all this
sine numine divine, without any Divine Fiat, and therefore may well be called
heathenish or vain Philosophy.


Hydroph. But pray (Pyroph.) is not that Philosophy or knowledge of natural
things the best, whose Principles does best agree with and come nearest to the
Mosaic and consequently Christian Philosophy?


Pyroph. Yes (Hydroph.) without doubt.


Hydroph. Well then surely ours, I mean the Aristotelic Doctrine of natural
Bodies must be the best: for we own a Divine power, that has not only created,
but by the same upholds all things in the World.


Pyroph. So far (Hydroph.) is very well, and that which every solid Hypothesis
should suppose: But to lay such a foundation of fruitful Principles, as to make
the Doctrine of natural Bodies the most intelligible, and thereby to solve the
various Phenomenon most demonstrably, is the main matter.


Hydroph. Why? is not our Doctrine of the four Elements, Principles large
enough, to erect a true Hypothesis thereby of natural Bodies? Are not all mixts
produced therefrom and ultimately resolved thereinto?


Pyroph. To which I answer, that the four Elements as they are by Aristotle and
his Commentators laid down, as the materia proxima of all Bodies, are both too
strait and narrow to raise up a Structure of Bodies therefrom: as also too many
to enter the composition of natural Concretes.


Hydroph. Why? How are they too strait? Are not all Bodies made up with Fire
and Air, Water and Earth? Are not these (Pyroph) the beginnings of all Bodies?


Pyroph. These four Elements (Hydroph) are too strait, because all natural
Bodies in their genuine Analysis are not resoluble thereinto: and such are
demonstrably Principles or Elements into which mixts are ultimately reducible.


Hydroph. Are not our Quaternary of Elements such? In as much as they are
(according to our Hypothesis) simple Homogenial Bodies, from which all
Concretes are primarily compounded, and into which they are ultimately
resolved; which for instance enter the composition of the Body of Man, as well
as other mixts: For we read Genesis 3. That upon the Curse, Man was to return to
the ground out of which he was taken: So that Earth must be one main ingredient
of the Body of Man; which Earth unless it be bound up with a Watery moisture,
as with Glue, would fall from together; and therefore must needs suppose Water
another Element in the Fabric of the humane Body; So that there is Earth and
Water, and because as we suppose all Generation is made up of contraries,
therefore Air and Fire as contraries to Earth and Water must also be of
necessity there: That the immoderate dryness and coldness of Earth and Water
may be tempered with the moisture and heat of Air and Fire; and so all be
brought to a kind of equality. Besides, Ex iis constamus ex quibus nutrimur,
but we are nourished by the four Elements and Bodies thence made, Ergo.


Pyroph. Here indeed you seem to come pretty close to the point Hydroph. by an
experimental Induction (as you suppose) of the humane Body, in the Fabric
whereof you conjecture the four Elements to become the principia materiata, and
that not only of man's but also of all other mixed Bodies in the World, and this
you do, by first taking in the Element of Earth, as the Basis of the rest, and
that you ground from Adam's return to Earth from whence he was taken; which was
part of the sentence God pronounced against Man for his disobedience at the
fall: I must tell you (Hydroph.) that this is no Argument for Earth as a simple
Homogenial Element to enter the composition of the Body of Man: for that
sentence, Thou shall return to the ground, for out of it wast thou taken: For
dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return, seems to me to intimate no more
than thus (viz.) that seeing Man by his transgression had forfeited his right
to an Eternal and Immutable Inheritance (which upon his obedience had then been
confirmed upon him) he had now upon his disobedience a Sentence of the
Mortality of Body passed upon him; and that after the revolution of some years,
his Body should undergo the same vicissitude and Law of Mutability with other
temporary transient mixed Bodies in the World: Dust thou art, and unto Dust thou
shall return, intimates a Reduction of the Body into its primitive minute parts
whether in a liquid or dry form, whether reduced into a Juice or Leffas of the
Earth by the fracedo of the Grave, or that Juice further coagulated into some
Species of Earth:

For the word in the Original is not (...) by which Earth is signified as being
the Sublunary part of the World distinguished from the Heavens or Celestial
Bodies, but is (...) which intimates a red elixerated Earth, where an
efflorescence of the Panspermion of the Macrocosme becomes concentred; in as
much as (...) which takes its original from (...) is the Microcosme or little
World, which is the Epitome of the great World. And although (Hydroph.) we
should admit Earth as a constituent Principle or Element of Bodies, which yet
in our Hydrologia Chymic. by several Mechanical Experiments have demonstrated
Water (not Earth) to be the material Principle of all Concrete Bodies) and so
to take in Water and Earth as two Elements of Bodies, I say notwithstanding
that Adoption of Earth to be an Element, we see no reason for a necessity of
taking in the other two of Air and Fire as Principles of Bodies: which you
ground upon this Supposition that all Generation is made up of contraries,
(which yet in some sense is true, as elsewhere in our Doctrine of Fermentation
we show) and therefore having Earth and Water granted as two Elements, you
conclude a necessity of Air and Fire to temper the other, and bring them into
an equality by their contrary qualities.

For if we can, Hydroph. (as we may elsewhere) solve those primary qualities of
heat and cold, dryness and moisture, without having recourse to their subjects
of inhesion, as the Elements are reputed to be: then those Elements (at least
as to the quaternary of them) must of necessity cease to be primary constituent
Principles of Bodies, seeing the Elements in order to the Fabric thereof are to
do it by their supposed (...) or combination of qualities.

And although that of Aristotle be true (viz.) Ex iis constamus ex quibus
nutrimur, yet the Assumption or minor which commonly is annexed annexed thereto
(viz.) but we are nourished by the four Elements, and their Concrete Bodies, is
as false: which although they further endeavor to prove by the instance of
Plants, of which we feed, these are (they say) nourished by Earth and Water,
are cherished by Heat, which proceeds from Fire, and are preserved by Air, and
therefore we feeding upon them, feed upon the four Elements, of which they are
made.

Whereas (Hydroph.) we elsewhere acquaint you, how Plants have not their
original from the Quaternary of Elements, but from Seeds and specifical
Ferments, which determine the motion of matter, into such variety of shapes,
which we usually see them distinguished into, and that chiefly upon matter,
whose parts are so wrought as to become fluid, I mean Water, which is the
proximate material Subject of most (if not all) Concretes, whether in their
Genesis or Metastasis.


Hydroph. But I will give you another instance, how we understand the four
Elements, to be the Principles of mixed Bodies, and that is by the destruction
or reduction of things into those Principles from whence they take their
Original; as suppose in burning a piece of Wood; you may (Pyroph.) view a
separation of the four Elements, for the fumes go into Air, the expressed
moisture of the Wood is of the nature of Water, the Ashes is of the nature of
Earth: and lastly the Fire or Flame is obvious enough to the Eye.


Pyroph. This experiment of the burning of Wood, evinceth nothing, Hydroph. of
the pre-existency of the Quaternary of Elements, by its reduction into Fume,
Moisture, Ashes and Flame: For that by which (according to the Peripatetie
Doctrine) you would have Air to be demonstrated to be a constitutive Principle
of Wood, is the fume: which if so, then must this Fume be like the Air a simple
Homogenial Body, which yet how simple so ever you may repute, we know Hydroph.
how to separate by the Pyrotechnic Art, five or six several distinguishable
things: as if done in close Vessels, a four Spirit; if openly, it separates a
soot to the sides of the Chimney, as of a great receiver: from which we have
separated a Phlegm, Spirit, Volatile-Salt, Oil, and Caput Mort. enough to make
it justly be denied the being a simple Elementary Principle: and therefore some
do two things at once, (viz.) both char their Wood, and at the same condense
the Fumes in large receivers or pipes, whereby they get the four Spirit: For
the charing of the Wood, is nothing. but a fixation of the Sulphur, with the
Salt: which Sulphur before would flame forth, but now being smothered, it only
glows in the Coal.

So that that whereby you would demonstrate a reduction of Wood into the
Element of Air, by the Fumes thereof, you see (Hydro.) how we find it to be a
mixed Body it self, consisting of Heterogeneous parts, many of which are further
reducible into more primary Principles; yea even the very acid Spirit, made by
distillation of Woods, as of Guaiacum, Box, etc. Which one would deem (if any)
to be a simple Liquor, is yet by addition of Alkalizate Bodies, such as are
Coral, Crab's-eyes, Pearl, fixed Salts of Herbs, etc. is reducible into a
piercing Liquor quite of another sort than before, which I have also observed
from the acid Spirit of Verdigrease dinted or mortified by a fixed Alcali, to
have by further distillation, been reducible into a quick penetrating Spirit,
not acid at all, but very much emulating the Spirit of crude Tartar; which will
not (as Acids usually do) change the Syrup of Violets into a red Color;

And as to what you say (Hydroph.) that the expressed moisture in burning the
Wood, is of the nature of Water: this very thing I say has an Empyreumatic
odor, which is further reducible, and therefore forfeits its badge of a
primary or Elementary Principle: As for the remaining Ashes, which you suppose
to be of the nature of Earth, you are mistaken, for they are a great part of
them separable in the form of a fixed Salt, which is quite another thing than
that you call Earth.

And further, that this very Earth separable after the Calcination of the
Vegetable and Elixiviation of the Salt, is not Elementary, will be evident from
the following experimental Observation: for from about 200 weight of Oak-wood,
first char'd, and then burnt to Ashes, I had but 3 pound of Ashes, which by
Lixiviating gave me 5 ounces of fixed Salt and about 2 pound 8 ounces of insipid
Earth: which very Earth I say was no more to be accounted an Elementary
Principle of the aforesaid Wood, than fixed Salt thence produced by Calcination,
because the like quantity of Wood being otherwise handled by Fire (besides what
different products would result from other Agents) viz. by a naked firing
(without any previous charing) gives a larger proportion by much of fixed Salt,
than the former; which very fixed Salt, may also by frequent Calcination,
Solution, Filtration, Evaporation or Distillation, may I say, be all converted
into an Earth (the same the Wood char'd was reducible to) and Phlegm: and no
Philosopher ever admitted fixed Alcalies (such as are produced by Fire from a
Plant) amongst Elementary Principles, or if any did, yet was easily refutable
by the aforesaid experiment: so that its hence clear (beyond Ambiguity) that
Earth in the composition of Bodies is not an Element, but a Product of the
Fire, as we further illustrate by other parallel experiments in our Tentamen
Physiologic.

And lastly, that the flaming of the Wood should indicate an Elementary Fire,
is somewhat strange: For this Fire in the Wood (which we reckon to be made by
our fourth Complication of the Principles as aforesaid,) consumes, or rather
reduces it into more simple Bodies; which yet are most what new Products of
the Fire, and other twistings of the same Principles: whereas an Elementary
Principle, should rather constitute, than destroy Bodies: So that none of those
are at all demonstrative of the Quaternary of Elements.


SECT. X.
Hydroph. WEll (Pyroph.) but we do not suppose that all mixts are immediately
reducible into the four Elements; but many bodies first change into other forms,
by a kind of vicissitude, and yet at the last are resolvable into the four
Elements, of which they consist: Thus Herbs, and other Food, we take for our
nourishment, undergo various changes, in our Bodies, into Chyle, Blood, Flesh,
Bones, etc. and after Excretion, is converted into a Stercus, which at length
is resolved into Earth.


Pyroph. It Is true, (Hydroph.) let us imagine what Hypothesis we please, yet are
not concrete bodies always immediately reducible into their first constituent
Principles, but sometimes undergo a transposition of parts, whereby they
acquire a new form, and so a second, third, and so on in a round of
vicissitudes, before there happen a total Analysis into its primitive
Principles or through-resolution of a Concrete into its Minima.

But that this ultimate reduction of Concretes, should always at the long run,
prove the four Elements, is not methinks (Hydroph.) demonstrable by your
propounded instance of Herbs, or other Aliment, taken into our bodies, for
nourishment: For that they admit of various Mutations, according to the
different digestions they pass through, is that we cannot deny; but that these
should be intermediate changes of our Food, before it be ultimately reduced,
into the Quaternary of Elements; is that we are not to let slip unexamined.

And first we are to consider, that toward the making of changes amongst
bodies, out of one form into another; where there is the same material
Principles substituted, and only a Metastasis happens; there must, I say, of
necessity concur the super-induction of new Ferments (or other sorts of
extrinsic Agents, as aforesaid) which by macerating, subjugating, and altering
the parts, may raise up a new Structure of a different form, than was before,
and yet that body no whit the nearer to a reduction into its Elements now than
before.

So that what changes, or alterations our Food undergoes in the several
digestions of our bodies, are to be ascribed to no other than the different
Ferments it passes through; which altering the texture of the parts, subverts
the first, and brings on a new form; so from the form of Beef, Mutton, Bread,
Beer, etc. (though different amongst themselves) yet by the uniform operation
of the Spirituous, elixerated Ferment of the Blood, thither in its circulation
transmitted as aforesaid, become altered, or transmuted into a similar Chyle,
or Cremor, which being refined through the strait Colanders of the Venae
lacteae, by which it is percolated from the dreggy Feces along the Duodenum,
Colon, and Ilion, and further purified in the Glandules, is sent up by the
Thoracical Vessels, into the Jugulars, where it is let into the ascending Branch
of the Vena Cava, becomes dashed with blood, and by coming to the Heart, where,
by the Air in its circuit through the Lungs, it is volatiz'd, and assumes the
form of vital blood; which being carried along the Aorta, and other thence
branching Arteries, sublimes or distills into pure volatile Spirits, for the
supply of the genus Nervosum; part of which mean while being carried into the
whole habit of the body, becomes coagulated in the fibrous parts, into Sinews,
Flesh, Bones, etc. according as it is determined, and arrested by the
particular assimilative Ferments of the several parts.

Next to which (Hydroph.) we are to consider, the humane as well as other mixed
bodies, during the revolution of their specifical Ferments, are in a constant
perspirability; always (I mean during the season of the vigor of their genuine
Ferments) a making up, and as often resolving, or taking in pieces, (viz.) in a
perpetual flux of constituent Elements; otherwise what means the continual
supply we have from daily nourishment, by fresh Food? For if there were not a
constant flux, and wasting by perspiration, we need not so constant a supply by
Food.

In as much as when we come to a full maturity of years, as to the Vegetation,
or growth of our bodies; which is from 18 or 20 till toward 30 years (some
sooner, others later) Then what ever of Food we take in (deducting what is
separated, as Urin, Excrements, and the like) as much, I say, of real
nourishment, as is by the digestive Ferments daily made thereof, so much do we
transpire, and loose: so that supposing by compute, that in most bodies, every
day (I mean while in health, and Ferments strong) 7, 8, or 10 ounces of fresh
blood may be produced: and yet notwithstanding suppose most men to be weighed
at 24, 26, or at furthest 30 years of age (excepting some few that may by the
more than ordinary coagulation of that which should transpire, after those
years, grow fat, and gross) and again at 40, 50, or 60 years, it will be found,
that generally there is no increase of weight at all during that time; and yet,
I say, so much blood is spent every day in nourishment, and so much of the
ultimate assimilated aliment is daily transpired, and all this without any
residence, or caput mort. of the blood, being constantly (whilst the Ferments,
Spirits, and Organs are sound and regular) volatiz'd by a Ferment from the Air.

And yet this Blood is made from various kinds of Flesh, Fowl, Fish, Bread,
Drink, etc. all which lose their pristine form by the power of the specifical
Ferments, through which they pass: so that if I should tell you (Hydroph.) that
when we come to 20, or 30 years of age, and so on, we have not the same
numerical bodies as we had in our infancy; nay, perhaps not the same we had 5
year ago, you will think it a Paradox (if not Heterodox) and yet if fairly
scanned, what, I say, will not be found improbable.

For if we duly consider, how that which yesterday appeared in the form of
part of a Sheep, Calf, Ox, Deer, Pidgeon, Goose, Turkey, Corn, Herbs, Beer,
etc. shall to day be transmuted into Chyle, Blood, Flesh, Bones, etc. of a
humane Body; yea, this to transpire within a few days, and assume other forms,
and all this, by the power of Ferments, which are as the noble Helmont says,
the parents of Transmutation.

If the nutritive parts of our body was not in a constant flux, and always
winding off, we should in time become Anakites, grow to be mighty Giants: But
from the vigor of the Ferments of the body, together with a perspirability
communicated from the Air, the succulent, yea the solid parts themselves, are
always upon the wing.

Thus as new parts are daily by a rotation of Ferments added, so the old as
constantly march off, or wear away: or rather as the former texture of parts by
a perspirability wind off, so new parts by fresh supply of Food (passing the
circle of Ferments) are woven on: to confirm which, viz. that the Ferments wind
off the old, and wind on the new coming parts of added Nutriment; appears by
this Observation, that old Cows or Oxen, after they have done their expected
service, being put to feed at fresh Grass, do by the power of the aforesaid
Ferments, lay on new flesh, which eats as tenderly, as if the Goods had been
killed young: so that that which solely determines matter, in this grand
circulation of bodies, out of one shape into another, are the seminal and
specifical Ferments, and during the vigor of these the form of the body is
kept entire in its specifical difference from other concrete bodies.

Wherefore the same specifical Body, after the revolution of some years, is no
more the same numerical Body, than the Ship which went from Athens, and by
frequent repairs returned at last without one foot of old Timber, that it was
at first built with, may be said to be the same.


Hydroph. But if so (Pyroph.) why do not we live always? Seeing as you say our
Bodies are in a constant fluor, and as the old parts wear off, new ones come
on; what should hinder, but they should always do so, and we live longer than
Mathusalem?


Pyroph. To which I return (Hydroph.) that although our Bodies consist in a
constant flux of Parts; and that nutrition is an apposition of new, in the
place of the old, or transpiring Particles; yet as the form of this circulating
matter is determined by the seminal, and therefore specifical Ferments; so the
decaying of our Bodies, both by sickness and old Age, depend Essentially upon
the intenseness and remisness of the vigor of those Ferments: so that when
these grow languid by diseases, the Body wastes by a Marasmus; or when they at
the long run of old Age, become infeebled, and draw toward their limit,
according to the great and irrevocable decree of the Almighty, Statutum est
omnibus semel mori; then do they come to their period, as to their Progressive
motion, (I mean in order to nourishment, and support of the Body thereby) and
leaves the Body to be taken in pieces, either by a Putredinous Ferment,
promoted by access of Air; or by the Fracedinous odor of the Grave: whereby
it is either transmitted into other Animals, (by the power of their Ferments) or
reduced into its primitive Juice, or Leffas of the Earth; For the strength,
floridness, activity, and that which is commonly called the constitution of the
Body, depends mostwhat if not solely upon the vigor of the Ferments, as you
may see further in our Hydrologia Chymica, and Zymologia Physica.


Hydroph. Well (Pyroph.) I have this yet to add against what you say, and that
is to query; why we should be troubled at any time with those sorts of
diseases, we call Chronical? For it should seem to me (if what you say
concerning our bodies being in a perpetual flux of parts be true) that few
diseases would be of any continuance, so as to acquire the name of Chronical,
because as the Body, so they also would wear off in time.


Pyroph. To which I answer, (Hydroph.) that as the Ferments are the primary
active and transmutative Principles, to which the most incident Phenomenon of
diseases are chiefly reducible: so what alterations are made in the Body, by
the Ataxy of Diseases are mostwhat referrable thereto: so that Diseases happen
not to the Body, as it falls under our consideration, in the notion of a
constant flux, and vicissitude of parts; but as it is composed of a round of
Ferments, whose exorbitances, prevarications, and frequent errors, become
Essential to the begetting Diseases: And therefore although the Body as to its
material constitutive Principles, may admit of a constant alteration of parts
in an Agil fluor, yet does it not follow that Diseases are also as constantly
worn off; because they belong to the Body as considered under its Classis of
Ferments: so that as the Ferments in their vigor are the Authors of the Eutaxy
or due temperament of humors, and consequently of Health; in like manner their
spurious exorbitances, are the essential causes of those disorders, and
discomposures in the Body we call Diseases.


SECT. XI.
Hydroph. BUt pray (Pyroph.) why did you in your discourse about the four
Elements, being our supposed Original of all concrete Bodies, say, that they
were too many to enter the composition of natural Bodies?


Pyroph. Because (Hydroph.) some of them, as for instance, the Air and Fire
(the latter of which, as considered in its supposed Elementary Sphere sub
concavo lunae, or as culinary) concur not as constitutive Principles, to the
making up of mixed Bodies.


Hydroph. Why is not Air in all, or most Bodies?


Pyroph. Yes, Hydroph. But not as a material Principle of Bodies, but with the
Ether to fill up vacancies, and to do other Offices, in part below, but more
fully illustrated in our Tentamen Physiologic.


Hydroph. Can either Animals live, or Vegetables grow without Air? Must it not
therefore be an Essential Constitutive Element of Bodies?


Pyroph. I grant (Hydroph.) that neither Animals can live, nor Vegetables grow,
without the confluence of Air, impregnate with its Nitro-Hermetick Salt: and
yet see no necessity, why it should thence follow, that Air should be an
ingressive Principle of Bodies: For it may help to promote the vigor of the
Ferments in Animals, by helping to Volatize the succulent parts, and make the
blood circulate the better without Stagnation or spurious Coagulations in the
Vessels; and yet may not at all be an Elemental Principle of Bodies.

Also it may concur to the promoting Vegetation of Plants, partly by
impregnating the Nursery of Vegetables, the Earth, with a Volatile nitrous
Salt, and partly (with its Ether) by setting the seminal Principles of Plants
at work: for Earth (as we further enlarge in the Appendix to our Hydrologia
Chymica) is not fertilized, nor brings forth Plants, without a concurrence of
the foresaid Salt, nor are the seminal Ferments of Vegetables awakened, without
the benevolence of the Air and its congeneal Ether, saturated therewith, which
constantly floats in the Air, as in its proper Sea.


Hydroph. But is not Air one parcel of which the Universe is made?


Pyroph. Yes.


Hydroph. And is not that matter a part of that whereof Concretes are made?


Pyroph. No, For although it be matter, yet is it such a Texture thereof, as is
only pliable, but not convertible into other Bodies, that is, never loses the
form of Air: for notwithstanding its Universal concurrence in the constitution
of most Bodies as aforesaid, yet does it never quit its genuine form, as we
further show in our Tentamen Physiologic.


Hydroph. But we define Air to be an Element moderately hot and most moist,
filling every place that is not already repleat with another Body.


Pyroph. It is (Hydroph.) if I mistake not, neither hot nor moist of it self,
and therefore can be no Element: for that which according to the Peripatetick
Sense, makes it an Element, is the supposed combination of the qualities of
Heat, and Moisture: by which it should seem, that moisture according to your
Philosophy, was the Essential quality of Air, and by which Moisture, with a
moderate heat, it should enter the composition of Bodies: Now if I make it
good, that there is no moisture, but what is Essential to Water; then will your
Element of Air cease to be such. You must know therefore (Hydroph.) that
wherever you can find moisture, the Pyrotechnick Art will demonstrate it to be
actually Water, and that either in a fluid Texture of parts, whereby it appears
even to the Sense, to be Water, or at least in an extended form, floating
vapore tenus in the tenuious and easily recessible Body of Air.

Whence it is evident, moisture is no quality at all; from the aforesaid reason
of its being really and essentially Water, either in a fluid or extended form;
as you may further see in our Hydrologia Chymica. So that moisture is only and
primarily competible to the thin woven Texture of the parts of Water
circulating in the Air, and to the Air but secundary, as the Vehicle of the
extended Body of Water.


Hydroph. But is not the moisture which we see wets stone-walls, before Rain
falls, that which properly belongs to the Air, yea, and the very Air transmuted
into Water?


Pyroph. I answer, no, for that is nothing but simple rarefied Water, or the
Body of Water extended in the perforations of the Air, which while interspersed
in the tenuious and pliable Body thereof, by the smalness of its rarefied
parts, escapes our Sense, and so remains till the parts thereof come nearer
together, which gliding along the surface of Stones in Buildings (while the
lower Region of the Air is ponderous therewith) becomes gathered into a visible
Body of moisture or Water, and therefore is not Air transmuted into Water, as
you may see more at large in our Hydrologia Chymica.


Hydroph. But pray (Pyroph.) seeing you neither admit of Air as the subjectum
inhaesionis of moisture, nor moisture to be a primary or essential quality of
Air, and consequently deny Air to be an Element of Bodies, and that there is no
transmutability of Air into Water: I say pray what do you suppose Air to be?


Pyroph. I look upon Air (Hydroph.) to be such a parcel of matter, whose parts
consist in a tenuious, diaphanous, pliable and fluid Texture, of easy recess,
susceptible of the impressions of the minutest of Bodies, and capable of
permitting rarefied Waters, Vapors and all sorts of Apporrhoea from the
terraqueous. Globe to pass and repass: of all which, and many other minute
Bodies that fall not under the perception of our senses, it is the proper
Vehicle, also subservient to the motion of all Bodies that tack to and fro
within its Orb, is the Vehicle of Species, the medium of all influences and
transactions betwixt the Celestial and Terrestrial Bodies: And as Trismegistus
in Asclepio, says, Aer est organum vel machina omnium, per quam omnia fiunt,
not as an Element, but as a Machine for the motion of all Bodies.

Its parts I say are tenuious, that it may the better give way to the motion of
Bodies, within its orbit; of easy recess, that it may the better admit of
other rarefied Bodies, which are in a continual circulation, and those
perforations to be of no prefixed figure, but either round, or angular,
according to the pressure of its parts by the motion of other Bodies;
Diaphanous, that it may the better transmit the Rays of luminous Bodies;
pliable, I said, that it may be the more subservient to the justlings of
Bodies, and may the better recede upon the access of other movables; and
lastly, fluid, that it may thereby prevent any large vacuum, and may the better
press into the Porosities of Bodies; Thus a stone being cast at a distance,
which by the impulse it has got, draws, suppose, a straigt line in the Air,
forceing some parts of the Air, and those press upon the next adjacent, and
those the next, till by a circulating motion they fall constantly into the rear
of the deserted space, made by the motion of the stone, and so immediately
supplies the vacancy thereof, and thereby contributes to the perpetuating the
first impulse from a hand, Sling, or Engine; For if the Air did not constantly
succeed by a circular motion, close in the rear of the moveable, the impulse
would immediately flag, and the motion of the Body cease.

And although Democritus his two grand ingredients of the world were Atoms, and
that which he calls vacuum or inane, which was nothing else but what we in the
verge of our Atmosphere call Air, and above is Ether; yet certainly, although
the parts of Air, are so tenuious, and diaphanous, as never to become visible
to our eyes, yet I say, may no less be reputed matter, (in how different a
Texture soever) than that which enters the composition of natural Bodies, as
genuine Elements thereof.


Hydroph. These are general considerations of Air, as it falls in a large sense
under our apprehension: But pray (Pyroph.) how do you apprehend of it in a more
strict and particular sense, in order to the intimate concerns of Animals and
Vegetables, which seem to have some near dependence thereon, both as to their
Generation, Conservation in their Species, and Metastasis too.


Pyroph. Not so general considerations (Hydroph.) as you may perhaps take them
to be, but may many of them very well serve to some Phenomenon of both Animals,
Vegetables and other Bodies, as they fall under a Philosophic inquiry; for
that it should by its tenuious, pliable, fluid Texture, be subservient to the
motion of Bodies, is thereby no less serviceable, as for the general so the
particular concerns of Animals and Vegetables, both by concurring to the
Motion, Sensation, Secretion, and Perspiration of Animals; as also by promoting
the motion and Vegetation of Vegetables; and that too as it is perforable and
diaphanous admitting both of luminous as well as other Bodies which circulate
in its Orb, for the helping forward Animation, and Vegetation, and all this by
invigorating the Essential Ferments of both, which its congenial associate the
Volatile nitrous Salt, and Aetherial matter hid therein.

Without which, the functions of Vitality could not be performed, for without
those jointly concurring, neither would the Ferments be actuated, the parts
perspirable the Taper of Life set a flaming, nor in fine the Body moveable
without the help of that Organum, as Trismegistus calls it: which is further
evident by what improvements, the great Naturalist, Esquire; Boil, has made in
the lately invented Pneumatick Engine, into which if Animals be put, and the
Air pumpt forth, they fall into Palpitations and in a very little time, for
want of the help of this Essential Organum, the Ferments are damped, the
Spirits run counter, flag, and the Taper of Life is quickly extinct, so that
they speedily die of Spasms and Convulsions.

And as the Air with its Volatile Salt, is an Essential Machine (not as an
Element) necessary to promote (if not also to excite) the Functions of Vitality
in Animals; so it is no less effectual, in the invigorating the seminal
Ferments of Vegetables: For neither are these brought on to maturity, nor do
they grow without the concurrence thereof; Inasmuch as the superficies of the
Earth, which is the Matrix or Nursery of Vegetable Seeds, is porous and spongy,
whereby the Air has access to Seeds, even in their first openings, and
beginnings to motion; concurring to the first workings, of the seminal
Principles, by putting the Springs and Ferments into Action; and when they by
the Vegetative Collision of their Principles put forth, or spring out of the
Earth, still require the assisting influence of this fluid Aereal matter, of
which if they be denied, their Ferments cease to act, and the Body withers.

And as to what you ask (Hydrop.) how the Air is concerned in the Metastasis of
Bodies, out of one shape into another; I answer, that new Ferments are
super-induc'd upon Bodies, for the mutation thereof, by the mediation of Air,
whereby the seminal Principles, which by their intestine and Progressive
Collisions have been the Mechanical Agents in the Production and Genesis of
Bodies, do now, by the superinduction of new Ferments, from the Air, fall into
other sorts (I mean Retrogressive) Collisions, thereby takes the same Body
(they built before) now in pieces by a putredinous Ferment;

For if some Bodies can but be secured from the Air (or from what is contained
in the Air) before a putrid Ferment be introduced, (that is, before the
Principles be put into their reverse motion,) they may be preserved entire in
their form: the truth of which, may be confirmed by several Mechanical
instances: For besides the Additaments of Salts, Sugars, and Vinegars,
wherewith many sorts of things, as food and all Confections may be preserved a
considerable time for use: and besides the Occlusions of the Pores of some
Bodies, especially Pullen and the like, killed and hung up in the Feathers,
whereby those Bodies may be kept entire from putrefaction by the Frost Air, as
they preserve their killed Pullen for several Months sweet and good, in
New England; I say, besides all these, I know a peculiar Artifice of preserving
Aprecocks, Damsens, Gooseberries, Cherries, etc. without the addition of any
thing, save a skilful contrivance of excluding the Air: of which more in our
Zymolog. Physic. and Tentamen Physiologic.

Thus also Quinces by taking forth the Core which boiled with some other
Quinces to a Mucilage, with which they are to be filled, and put into a close
Vessel, filled round with the same Mucilage, will preserve them entire in their
form for a whole year; so flesh kept in a constant current of Water, or in
Spirit of Wine, will be preserved a long time in its entire form, as sometimes
a Puppy has been kept entire, and Embrio's are preserved from any putrid
Ferment in Spirit of Wine. Also Beef seasoned and well baked, and put in a Cask
filled with despum'd Butter, has thereby been kept good in long Voyages: Thus
by imbalming, Fumes, and Searcloths, Cadaverous Bodies are kept a great while
from putrefaction: also by a constant heat the same Bodies may be Mummiz'd,
witness the Bodies both of Men and Beasts in sandy Deserts (as those of Arabia)
being covered over with Sands by whirl-winds or Hurricanes, are by the heat of
the Sun (constantly beating upon them) and by being separated from the Air,
turned into Mummy, found unbar'd by other contrary Winds.

So that you see hence (Hydroph.) how Bodies are prevented of their otherwise
sudden Metastasis into other shapes, either by additional Saline or other sorts
of Condiments Liquors, Steams, etc. or other more solitary Exclusions of Air;
all which do anticipate the sudden Analysis of Bodies, (which frequently happen
from new putredinous Ferments) by arresting and suspending the Principles of
Bodies in their Fermentative Collisions: wherefore you see that the Air is not
only of general but particular concern, as in the production and conservation
of Animals, and Vegetables, so also in the production or putredinous Analysis
of them into other forms.

Besides all which (Hydroph.) we are to consider the Air as the common Vehicle
of Heat, Cold, and Moisture, not as Qualities which are Essential to Air, as
their subjectum inhaesionis, but as actual Bodies, how minute soever, are
capable enough to smite our subtle Organs, and affect our Senses, set on work
by Winds from different quarters, which are the Clavigeri tempestatum in order
to the mutation of weather.

For although these float in the Air and are not seen, (excepting that of
Moisture gathered together in a Mist, Fog, or Cloud) yet that they are
perceptible enough to our Senses, is evident amongst the rest, from the minute
Particles of Cold, which float in the Air from Northern Winds, and are of such
Shape, or Size, as they not only pierce our Skins, and moderately shut the
Pores thereof, thereby invigorate the Ferments, whence our Appetites to Food
are stronger, and the Digestions the better performed in Frost than in warm
Weather. And in colder Countries and Climates, than in hot, but in cold raw
Weather the Pores (those small Portals of the Body) stand a char (if I may so
say) whereby the alterations in the Air have the easier access into our Juices,
to procure the like in them; whence we observe, in such Weather people
generally take more cold, and are more prone to Diseases, as well Acute as
Chronical, than at other Seasons.

Which Frost Air, if it be very sharp, congeals the fluid humors of our
Bodies, forceing the Spirits to a retreat unless opposed by a warmth from
exercise or Spirits of good Liquor, yea the same cold Particles meeting with
Water, does so fill the Pores thereof, that from a fluid, they (by their
interposition) make it become for a time a kind of solid Body: which when the
winds change, and are carried in different Percledi of the Air, as breathing,
suppose from the South, or West, South-East, or South-West points, the
Particles of Heat and Moisture muster in the Air, and mortify, dint or resolve
the cold Particles.

For it is very probable that the congealing of Water into Ice by Cold, is
nothing else but the congelation of the Atoms (which in one Sense we admit) of
Cold, rivetting themselves fast in the Pores of the Body of Water, in as much
as these floating in the Air, either brought to us by those Winds which blow
over the Northern Frozen Seas, which in their resolution may extricate
themselves from their former combinations, being carried by the fanning of the
Wind from that quarter, or from what other causes soever, meeting with liquid
Bodies, by their piercing nature insinuate themselves into the Texture thereof,
and as they weave themselves in, they put a stop to the motion or fluidity of
those liquids, unless preserved by some active, nimble, spirituous parts, and
from a fluid make them become (as we said) a sort of solid Bodies; which as
they fill some Pores of Water, so they cause some other parts of Water to
constringe or concenter themselves; whence is one reason, why in Frosty
Seasons, Rivers (that are otherwise high by late falls of Rain) are upon Frosty
Winds shrunk up, and Water in Vessels exposed to the Air, are sensibly
contracted or lessened.

Wherefore all Bodies whose Texture consists most what of liquid parts, if they
contain so many of those aforesaid nimble, spirituous, fermentative Particles,
by the briskness of whose motion, the liquids are kept fluid, then are they
secured (so long as kept either circulating in their own, or defended by close
Vessels) from the injury of the cold, undergo no coagulation therefrom, nor are
altered thereby; Thus the Blood, and liquid Juices in the Body of Man or other
Animals, as long as they are invigorated with Spirituous, Saline and
Sulphurous parts, which keep them constantly in a circulating Motion, so long
are safe from the injury of cold: so all Fermented Liquors, whether Wines,
Sider, Perry, Ale, Beer, etc. while the Ferments are active, with Spirituous
parts interwoven in the whole Texture thereof, and kept in close Vessels, so
long are not apt to be surpised by cold, or to be congealed thereby into Ice:
unless through the excessiveness of Cold, and perhaps carelessness in stopping
up Vessels, Wines or other Fermented Liquors become Frozen, as sometimes
happens upon very long Voiages into cold Climates, witness that of Fishing for
Whales, by some Hollanders in the Northern-Seas, their Wines (otherwise
generous enough) were by extremity of cold Frozen, the Hoops being taken off,
and the VVines uncask'd, they were found congealed into Ice, and stood in the
form of the Vessels they were put in: which Ice they perforated with Augers,
and found about the Center of the Ice, a little Liquor of an Amethyst Color,
which was the pure Balsamic Spirits of Wine concentred, and therefore
incapable of being congealed by cold: all the rest of the Body of Ice, being
dissolved by Heat, was an insipid Phlegm or mere Water of Wine, into which if
a little of the true Fiery Spirits was poured, made it like Wine, after which
manner they drank it.

And in our late intense Frost, December last, the Particles of Cold were so
copious, and piercing, as it froze Beer and Ale in Cakes, Sherry Sack in
Bottles, and a Lixivium of Vegetable Salts I had by me; yea a pretty smart
Spirit of Vitriol standing in a Bottle in a VVindow, was as far as I could
discern totally Frozen up: and in Yorkshire in some places, it froze the
moisture in peoples Nostrils, into Icicles, that with their finger (as an
Eyewitness told me) they pulled out pieces of Ice.

So all Volatile Spirits, whether Vinous, Vrinous, or Oleaginous are (being
kept in close Vessels) capable of defending themselves from being congealed by
cold. For neither Spirits of Wine, or Volatile Spirits of Blood, Vrin, Soot,
Hartshorn, etc. nor distilled (therefore called) Chymical-Oyls, as of
Turpentine, Cinnamon, Cloves, Rosemary, Sage, Wormwood, etc. are I say none of
them apt to be Frozen by Cold, but can defend themselves, by their nimble,
active, spirituous parts, from the injury thereof: in like manner all Mineral
acid Spirits, as of Vitriol (except, as aforesaid) Alom, Nitre, Salt, etc. can
(if kept in close Vessels) preserve themselves from damage by cold: so also
Lixiviums made of the fixed Salts of Tartar, or other Vegetables.

But those Liquids, that are destitute of saline, sulphurous, or other
fermenting Particles, are of themselves capable of admitting the ingress of
cold Atoms, so as to suffer some Vacuolums to be filled, and other parts to be
constring'd into a solid form of the congealed body of Ice, and all this by the
medium of Air: which is the vehicle of these cold Atoms.


SECT. XII.
Hydroph. BUt we say (Pyroph.) that cold is an active Quality, which does
congregare homogenea and heterogenea, and as such does condense and congeal
Water into Ice.


Pyroph. Those qualities (Hydroph.) together with the quaternary of Elements,
which you look upon as Principles of mixed bodies, and from whose combinations,
you would solve the different apparences thereof, I have told you, and I think
partly demonstrated as such, not to be in rerum natura.


Hydroph. But what different impressions (Pyroph.) are made in the Air from
cold Particles, and from Ferments of a contrary disposition, and what
alterations thence happen to Animal Juyces, and how performed?


Pyroph. I answer, That as the Air by reason of some congeneal Ferments
(tacking to and fro therein) does conspire not only to the awakening the
Ferments of Animals and Vegetables, and to the keeping them a foot, and that
both in order to building of bodies, as well as to the pulling them down: so
does the Air at other seasons contain other Particles of cold, which are able
to suspend the motion and action of the former, that is, if very intense, are
able to destroy the Ferments of Men and other Animals, as is evident by the
killing of many Men and Beasts in cold Countries, as in Russia, Greenland, and
Norway, the Frosts are sometimes so strong as that Men are sometimes brought to
Inns or Markets frozen on Horseback, are found rigid, and starved to death,
sitting straight up like Statues; And in Vegetables it is very discernable to
have them mortified by strong Frosts.

And as the cold Particles arrest the vital and vegetative Ferments of Animals
and Vegetables, so it likewise suspends the putrefactive Ferments in the
resolution, or taking bodies in pieces, locking up those resolving Ferments:
hence the Carcases of any sort of Animals exposed to the Air, having a
putrefaction already begun, and thereby grown faetid, have, I say, upon strong
Frosts, those putrid Ferments shut up, and send forth no foetor, or bad smell;
and that by reason of the cold Atoms, which fix themselves in the Pores of such
bodies, and thereby arrest the motion of the Principles: which cold Particles
are no sooner extricated by change of weather, but the Ferments, I mean the
putrefactive, are let loose again, and then goes on as strongly as ever.

Yea, in thawing Winds, all putrefactive Ferments grow vigorous, and are
carried in great and numerous swarms through the common Vehicle, the Air, which
either smite our Nostrils very sensibly, or affect our Juyces indiscernably to
the producing great alterations therein: How much the frost Particles penetrate
any Fruits, so much do they when the Frost breaks, undergo a putrefaction, as
is obvious in Apples, and other Fruits, which the more they are exposed to
frost Air, so much the sooner they rot, and that because the active Principles
are so far mortified (through the openness of their Pores) as to their natural
and intestine Fermentation, and so easily (upon the unhinging and unrivetting
the cold Atoms,) fall into regressive and putrefactive Fermentation.


Hydroph. Have you (Pyroph.) any artificial way of representing cold to us?


Pyroph. Yes, how cold may be produced, we had an Experiment above 7 years ago,
which was thus: Having mixed Sal Ammoniac, and Saturn Ore upon a Marble, or in
a Mortar, and put them into a subliming Urinal (for a peculiar purpose we then
proposed) to which adding Water, and shaking them together, while the solution
was making produced an intense coldness to the hand holding the Glass, and
washing the outside of the Glass with water, found as it was poured on,
immediately it became long fleaks of Ice, which as we took off and poured more
water on, did the same again and again: the same will Sal Armon. dissolved per
se in water do, also its caput mort. remaining after the sublimation thereof
with Pot-ash or Salt of Tartar, dissolved in Water.

And to make two cold Liquors (cold to touch) to heat each other (to evince the
reason of the contrary quality, viz. heat) we have put Oil of Vitriol to water,
which being mixed by shaking, immediately contracts a greater heat than can be
suffered by the hand that holds the Glass; and from the same cause, one may
easily cause Ice it self to cause heat to another cold Liquor, by proceeding,
as before, with Ice put in Oil of Vitriol, as the worthy Experimentator, Mr.
Boil, tells us in his last Tract.


Hydroph. How do you (Pyroph.) suppose the freezing of Water to be resolved, or
thawed? what becomes of those Atoms of cold, when a Frost is over? and what
further Observations do you make of those Ferments in the Air upon thawing
seasons, and sometimes in other weather?


Pyroph. To which I answer (Hydroph.) That as the Atoms of cold are brought to
us through the Air by certain peculiar winds, which in their motion meeting
with capable ( viz. liquid watery) bodies, becomes coagulated therewith into
that rigid body we call Ice; so there are other Atoms of heat which are brought
at other seasons, through the same Vehicle of Air, by different (although to
that purpose peculiar) winds, which in their motion, meeting with those of
cold, either in the Air, or coagulated in watery bodies, resolve, mortify (I
mean alter their texture) and dint them so, as either altering their texture,
whereby they for a while swell, and flow together with the water (whence upon
thaws, Rivers for a time grow bigger) till they can extricate themselves from
the moist, and warm Particles, they are involved in; and by other winds are
carried into other places, to perform the same offices: or else do as some
sorts of Salts do to others of a different texture, viz. one to mortify (to
use a Chemical term) dint, and change another, until there result a neutrum, or
third thing different from either of the two.


Besides which, we are to consider (Hydroph.) that these mutually acting and
working upon each other, beget new shapes amongst themselves, and many times
prove subtle penetrating Ferments, which being carried in the belly of the
wind, insinuate into fermentative Liquors, and set them freshly a working,
which we see frequently happen in thawing winds, that both Ale and Beer often
ferment anew, yea Wines too, especially about the time of Vintage, when those
fermentative Particles are arrested, and determined by vinous Atoms, which at
that season take wing, and float in the Air.

The same also may cause strange, and different fermentations in the blood, and
other Juyces of our bodies, the efficient sometimes of Fevers, and other
Endemical, yea Epidemical Diseases: and that these winds and changes of Air
thereby have an odd influence upon the fluid Juyces of our bodies, is apparent,
in that vulgar, yet true Proverb, that some carry Almanacks in their bones, can
discern the changes of weather before hand, which as we apprehend can be from
no other cause, than that the minute Particles of heat, cold or moisture, or
combinations thereof (carried by different winds in the Vehicle of the Air,
from whence all varieties of weather do certainly follow, which, I say, at
first, or aforehand, mustring in an invisible manner in the Air) become
Ferments, which rouse up old Aches, Pains, Asthma's, Heaviness, weakness of the
Joints, and other Symptoms vulgarly ascribable to the Scurvey, and and that
many times before the weather be discernably changed, because these otherwise
indiscernable alterations of weather, are prefigured, and transacted before
hand in the Air.

Whence many times (as may be obvious to a curious eye) proceed the sudden and
unexpected alterations of Symptoms in diseased and crasie bodies, which so much
puzzle Physicians to know whence such sudden changes, contrary to their
expectation should happen; how well do things succeed, even according to their
desire, and sometimes beyond their expectation at some peculiar juncture of
time (attributed by Astrologers to I know not what configuration of the
Planets) and on the other hand, how cross and thwarting to their hopes, things
happen at other seasons; and all this many times from various excited Ferments
in the Air, which work differently upon bodies, according to variety of
constitutions, disposition of the Ferments, and modification of other parts.

So also from other alterations in the Air, by some winds, a verminous ferment
is excited, as we see in the Spring time, when the winds breath long from the
East, that many Caterpillars, and other Insects, are produced upon Trees, and
Plants; and many times putredinous animated Ferments are brought with winds
from cadaverous bodies, which floating in the Air, prove seminaries to
contagious and verminous Diseases; whence the great Plague at Milan, at which
time, as Cardan reports, the Air was filled, yea the very dust of the Earth
animated with those contagious Vermicles; so that in the Air often lurk secret
Ferments, which may both produce different symptoms in the same disease, as
also be the cause of many Epidemical Diseases, whose Character (I mean of
Exotic Ferments) may for some time be in the Air, before they settle upon
Bodies, so as to cause a general discomposure.

And from the same cause, very probably it is, that Animals which are
frequently abroad in the Air, have a foresight or presensation of the
alterations of Weather; (whence the ground of Auguration amongst the Ancients)
for their Bodies, being always exposed to change of Air, in the variety of
weather, become thereby in their Texture of parts, more capable of being
affected, with the least changes of Air, in which are always the forerunners of
certain alterations of weather, by the foresaid congress of the minute
Particles of Heat, Cold, Moisture, and what else which give being (by different
Winds from diverse quarters) to changes of weather.

Thus Cranes are observed by some Naturalists, that when they fly softly, and
silently, do presage fair weather; but when they hasten, make a great noise,
and fly in a disturbed order, do predict Storms; so likewise Storks and
Wild-Geese, as Wolfangius tells us in his Historia animalium Sacra; and
therefore Storks and Cranes, before the coming of Winter, take wing and fly in
Troops in a triangular form into hotter Countries, witness from Thracia into
Egypt; and from Cilicia, into Persia: [not to say what is reported, that when
they fly near Mount Taurus, where store of Eagles are, they each take a stone
in their Bill to prevent any noise, lest the Eagles should seize upon them.]

Not unlike to which the learned Wormius in his Museum, relates somewhat
wonderful concerning a sort of Bird frequent in Norway, upon which change of
weather has aforehand strange influence; his words are as follows, Museum.
Norm. p. 304. Aliud genus (says he) Norvegiae and Islandis frequens, est e
Mergorum vel potius Colymborum genere, Nidum prope aquas it a struit, ut cum
necessitas flagitat, in eas se celeriter praecipitare potest: sed nidum
repetitura, infixo terrae rostro se suspendit, donec corpus sublevaverit, ac
petitum obtinuerit nidum; ubi imbres largiores imminere peculiari naturae
instinctu persentiscit, pullis ac nido suo ab inundatione metuens, querulo sono
aerem verberat; e contra cum coeli serenitatem and clementiam praesagierit,
laetis acclamationibus, and alio gratiori sono pullisapplaudit, unde de futura
tempestate certi accolae, vocem Hui audientes exclamare solent Norvegi.

SECT. XIII.
Hydroph. WHat think you (Pyroph.) of the drying quality, which we define,
qualitas patibilis, quae suo facile, alieno autem termino difficulter
clauditur: Is not this competible to the Earth primarily, and to the Air
secundarily, and to other Bodies as they admit of the combination of this with
other qualities, in the composition thereof.


Pyroph. I think (Hydroph.) and perhaps may make good, that what you call a
drying quality, is no more a quality than its opposite moisture; and that as
moisture is no quality primarily of the Air, nor secondarily of other Bodies in
their Composition: so neither is dryness, as a quality, either peculiar to the
Earth, or to Compound Bodies: For in that a Body is said to be dry, is in as
much as the parts which constitute it, are of another Texture than liquid, and
are so woven together, as to have few (at least as discernable) fluid parts.

And those dry Bodies, are either naturally such, as for instance, some sorts
of Stones, and some Calces of calcined Bodies, which by no force of Fire are
ever reducible into any liquid form: or else such Bodies, as while kept from
force of Fire, are accounted dry, of which are all Metals, Minerals, Metalline,
and Mineral Ore, so me Stones, as Peables, Flints, Sand, Ashes of burnt or
calcined Bodies, all which by stress of Fire may be made to melt and become
fluid, some per se, as the Metals and some Minerals, others by addition of
Salts, as some Minerals, also Mineral and Metalline Ore, Pebbles, Flint, Sand,
etc. by the addition of Salt of Kelp, Tartar, or other calcined Vegetables melt
into transparent Glass.

Thus the Calx of Metals fretted by Acids, and thereby reduced after
Evaporation in minima (viz.) into their impapable Alcolizate pouders, are
seemingly dry, yet these very subtle Crocus's of Metals; witness that of
Copper, dissolved into, and incorporated in that Body we call Verdigreece, by
the help of the sour Juice of Grapes, or in that which remains after the
Vintage, if that be dried and beat to a most subtle powder, (which by the
motion of a Pestle or the like, presently by the minuteness of its parts, fly
up, and does ferire nares as also that of natural Vitriol) do I say both by
stress of Fire arise in a considerable white fume, and condense into a plenty
of liquid Spirits, as is evident in the Spirit of Verdigreeee, of Vitriol; and
so most of other Bodies, which being divided into their Minima, so as to appear
in a dry Sapless form, may yet by distillation be turned mostwhat into liquids,
or by reduction into their Sulphurs or Mercuries (if Metalline Bodies) be
furtherconvertible into the fluid Texture of parts.

Wherefore seeing dryness is no other than such a Texture of parts in the
construction of Bodies, as renders the Concrete not easily fluid, nor apt to
flow together, when the constitutive parts are rather continuous than
contiguous: therefore must this dry quality, as well as the rest of the same
fraternity, ipso facto, forfeit its supposed Essence of a quality, and lose its
repute of a nothing, for so I esteem it, or little better, while under the
notion of a quality.

Hence those degrees of qualities, which (Hydroph.) you in your Philosophy) and
Medicks are apt to ascribe Concretes to, are no more to be taken notice of,
than the qualities themselves: so that all your Solutions of apparences by your
supposed degrees of the Primary qualities, will (what is said being premised)
of their own accord fall to nothing. Hence for instance, Iron, which you in
your Scarb. Spaw, repute to be of the third degree of dryness, is no more to be
taken notice of, as to a Philosophical Solution of the Essence of that
Concrete) than if you had said it had been in the third degree of nothing, for
both are alike unintelligible; of which more particularly in our Hydrological
Essays.


Hydroph. Well (Pyroph.) I might justly reply to you, as formerly, we in the
Disputations of the Schools used to accost the Cartesians, viz. Contra
principia negantem non est disputandum: These are new conceits, which we that
are grown old in the Philosophy of Aristotle and his followers, are not at
leisure to take notice of: But what will you make (Pyroph.) of the second
qualities, viz. those we call Density, Rarity, Gravity, Levity, Hardness,
Softness, Thickness, Thinness, Aridity, Lubricity, Clamminess, Friableness,
Asperity, and Smoothness? Are not these necessarily to be reputed Qualities, by
which we arrive to some knowledge of the nature of the Bodies they are found in?


Pyroph. As to which query (Hydroph.) concerning the second qualities, I
answer, that as the first qualities, are not in rerum natura, as such, so
neither are the second, for sublata causa tollitur effectus: But the first are
the supposed cause of the second, which being (by reasons aforesaid) deducted
out of the Catalogue of Entities, nothing of the second qualities, as such can
remain.

For that that Texture of parts which makes Bodies appear to our Senses, dense
or rare, heavy or light, hard or soft, rugged or smooth, etc. should be reputed
Secondary, depending upon the quaternary of the first qualities, Heat, Cold,
Dryness, and Moisture, is I say, as indemonstrable as unintelligible; for all
these (as far as I apprehend) depend merely upon the different Texture of the
constitutive parts of Bodies, whereby they variously affect our Senses, yea and
many of them competible to the same Body, as its parts are variously agitated
by fire, Ferments, Sal s or Solvents, whereby the same Body so differently
acted, and its parts transposed, may very changeably affect our Senses, after
so many different manners, as may make up all or most of those you call second
qualities.


Hydroph. Is not rarity a second quality, arising chiefly from Heat, having its
parts extenuated, as Herbs, Pruinae, Clouds? And is not Density another from
Cold, having its parts bound up, and solidly adhering to each other, as Glass,
Stone, Iron, and the rest of the Metals? And further is not Levity a quality
arising from Heat, making things capable of moving upwards; and Gravity a
quality from Cold, which makes things move downwards toward a Center?


Pyroph. I answer (Hydroph.) that in what you term Rarity, I see no necessity
of giving the name of a second quality arising from the Primary Heat; but that
it is only such a Texture of parts in the composition of some Bodies, as makes
them appear thin, and as it were finely woven; being a rare Texture of parts,
with many Streiners, Porosities, or vacuolums interspersed, according to whose
Fabric of parts, our Senses are generally affected, so as they fall under such
and such distinct perception thereof.


Thus Air is a rare Body, in as much as its parts are of a fine, thin, tenuious
pliable Texture as aforesaid: And as Rarity, so Density is no quality, being no
other than such a Body, whose parts are closely set together, with few
Porosities, thus Stone, Glass, Mealline, and Mineral-Bodies, are such whose
constitutive parts are closely bound up, and fast rivetted together; and
therefore no need of ascribing its original to cold.

As for Levity, it is peculiar to such Bodies whose Texture is rare and finely
woven, and so the sequel of that we call Rarity. Also Gravity is the contrary,
being the necessary product of such Bodies, whose parts are closely put
together, I mean of those which are compact and dense Bodies.

And as to the rest, of second qualities, as Hardness, Softness, Thickness,
Thinness, etc. all which I say, are but different Modifications of the parts of
Bodies, whereby they variously affect our Senses, having the same way of
solution as those I have already spoken of, therefore shall forbear.

Now that these (Hydroph.) are neither the Indexes nor the Products of the
Quaternary of first qualities, and consequently not to be reckoned (as such) in
the Category of qualities, is evident, in that one and the same Body, by a
Metastasis of its parts by Fire, Salts, or Solvents, may undergo all or most of
those you call second and perhaps first qualities too: so that to which of
these, the Essence of that Body should be attributed, would prove a query too
difficult for most of your Philosophy grounded upon these qualities, to resolve.

Thus for instance, suppose we take Antimony into our consideration, which in
its Min^ra, is a stony, dense, heavy, hard, friable Body; this being melted by
Fire, and thereby separated from its petrifique, gritty, and sabulous parts,
gives us that Body of Antimony usually fold in the Shops; which still retains
all the aforesaid properties, which are the natural sequels of its present
Texture of parts; But suppose this by fire be forced in Fumes into Flowers,
adhering to the sides of Pots, Ovens, or other large receivers, give a rare,
light, soft and impalpable Body, with a white color; which fluxed by further
addition of Fire, becomes a dense, heavy, hard, friable but diaphanous Body
called the Vitrum or Glass of Antimony, where by the Vitrification of its
parts, it emulates that other product of the Fire made from Ashes and Sand
flux'd together: [Concerning the reasons and causes of Vitrification in general
and particular, we discourse in our Tentamen Physiologic. and Litholog.
Physica.]

This glass prepared as aforesaid, will by further addition of Fire and Salts,
become Metalline, melt and run into a Regulus, which melts and flows like Lead
or Quicksilver, (called by Chemists the coagulated Mercury of Antimony) is
dense, hard, heavy, and opacous, which again may be sublimed into Flowers, out
of which Flowers may a current Mercury begot by boiling with Salt of Tartar,
etc. as is mentioned in Volum. 4. Theat. Chym. Nova disquisit. de Helia Artista.

Also Antimony by addition of Salts with the help of Fire, produces that Mass
we call hepar Antimonii, (which makes the frequently used Emetick Wine) upon
which dissolved in Water, if distilled Vinegar be poured, it makes a speedy
separation of a Red and Yellow Sulphur, with a Fetid Sulphurous smell very
like the Water of the Sulphur-Well at Knarsborough in Yorkshire: But if in
lieu of Vinegar, more Salts be added, and it be further calcined, it turns from
a yellow to a Carnation, then to a white Color, which when edulcorated by
washing the Salts therefrom, becomes that Body we call Diaphoretick Antimony,
being a white (with yellow reflection) soft, impalpable powder.

In like manner, Antimony calcined with Aquafortis, either becomes white, or
by another addition thereto, with a slight Artifice is turned into a green
Sulphur which flames, and has all the properties of common Brimstone: So
Antimony with the addition of Mercury sublimate, is by the help of the Salts
therein contained, brought into a glacial Oil, which as it becomes a fluid Body
by the least Heat, so it is congealed into Crystals frequently by Cold: if upon
this Oil, warm Water, or Oil of Tartar be poured, precipitates into a soft
powder, called Mercurius Vitae: if Spirit of Nitre or Aquafortis be distilled
therefrom, it becomes (after the passing away of a stifling Sulphurous
Arsenical Fume) another soft, white, impalpable powder, called Bezoadicum
Minerale.

Thus you see (Hydroph.) how the same Body of Antimony, is by the various
application of Fire, and Salts, so altered in the Texture of its parts, as to
give that variety of apparences under which it arrives differently disguised to
our Senses, viz. as that which appears dense, heavy, hard, of one color, etc.
shall presently discover it self to be rare, light, soft, of another color,
etc. and which even now appeared solid, and permanent, shall forthwith become
soft, and fluid; where it will be difficult to judge truly of the nature of
this Mineral Concrete by the present prevalency of any of these secondary
qualities.

Yea and further to acquaint you, what great alterations and changes may be
made in the same Body, by the transposition and sometimes volatization of the
parts, through the mediation of Fire and Solvents, I know by a certain method,
how to make Antimony (the Body we urge for instance) as solid a Concrete as it
is, arise over the Helm in an easy Heat, and in the form of a Liquor, and by
which sometimes I have known it come into the Helm, even in the gentle heat of
Balneum Mariae, in the form not only of a limpid liquor, but also sometimes of
a Salt dissolvable per deliquium into an Oil, easily discernable by its
lactescence and precipitation by the bare addition of simple water.

I might (Hydroph.) confirm this by further instances of the like nature, viz.
by urging the various Phaenomena's of Vitriol, Copper and other Metals, whose
different transposition of parts by Fire, Salts, and Solvents, make up the
great variety of those necessary sequels of Bodies, which you term Qualities,
whether primary or secondary; and yet are really no other, than the different
mutation of the constitutive parts of Bodies, out of one Posture, and Figure
into another: whereby the same Body differently smites our senses with those
mechanical Affections of matter, which (Hydroph.) you ascribe to the first and
second qualities: For the further illustrating of which, you may consult the
works of that worthy and incomparable Philosopher and industrious searcher of
Nature, the Honorable Boil, especially his Treatise of the Origin of Forms.

But before we conclude this Section, give me leave (Hydroph.) to acquaint you,
that amongst other Instances, we have and might urge, how that from Metals by
the mediation of Salts, and help of Fire, may result other sorts of concretions
than usually appear, by different modifications masked with various
qualifications: So that Mineral-gums (if I may so call them) may hence be made,
which are much different both in color, capacity of taking flame, fusibility
like water, etc. from any of the ingredients that enter the composition
thereof: Thus for instance, from Sal Armoniack, Mercury sublimate, and cap.
Mort. of Verdegreece (left after the distillation of its Spirit) mixed and put
in a subliming Urinal, after it fluxed together (for it boyls like water) for
five or six hours, when cool, I found in the bottom a Cake of a kind of Rosin,
very hard, somewhat red, almost like Gum guttae; the sublimate which arose, was
but very thin and inconsiderable, which Rosin would take Fire, and burn with a
blue Flame, and that chiefly from the Sulphur of the Copper, which is opened by
the Salts. And not only Art, but Nature her self exhibits us the various
Phenomenon of Water, under the disguise of Frost, Snow, Hail, etc. where for
instance, in Snow the otherwise liquid, fluid, ponderous and transparent Body
of Water, by the interposition of Frost or cold Atoms blowing from the North,
becomes (by having the Texture of its parts so altered) as so many Flats or
Planes, laid with layers of cold Particles stratum super stratum (as I may not
improperly say) a white, soft, light, opake, continuous and (unless it meet
with heat) dry body so that you plainly see (Hydroph.) how humidity, siccity,
fluidity, continuity, ponderousness, levity, transparency and opacity, and in
particular whiteness is competible to the same Body, whose parts are variously
altered and transposed per se, or with additionals.

SECT. XIV.
Hydroph. BUt are there not (Pyroph.) other qualities of Bodies whereby they
become the Objects of the Senses, as Colors, Sapours, Odours, etc. To begin
with the first, do not we rightly define color to be extremitas perspicui in
corpore terminato?


Pyroph. Those you reckon (Hydroph.) are no more to be accounted Qualities,
than the rest beforenamed: But are to be looked upon as different affections of
Concrete Bodies, as they stand in a relation to a perception by our senses; and
first as to the definition of color, whose genus is extremitas, methinks
Aristotle began at the wrong end; For it is not the extremity of a Diaphanous
Body which gives Essence to color, being only necessary thereto a Posteriori:
For if I mistake not, light should be the genus of the definition of color
which admitting of various refractions and reflections, in, and from the
extremities or surfaces of Bodies, make those different apparences thereof we
call colors.

Besides, it should seem to me, that what you call extremitas perspicui, is not
of that extent as to comprise the generality of colors, although we should
admit of it as the genus; and that because we see colors as frequently made,
by simple reflections of light from the surfaces of bodies, witness from all
Vegetables, Animals, stained or died Garments and the rest, as well (I say) as
by refractions of the same light (the efficient of all colors) in perspicuous
bodies: For that color should be confined to the only extremity of a
diaphanous body, is methinks too strait every way, both as to the genus, as
also to the specifical difference of the true definition of color; in as much
as where a diaphanous body proves opake, the luminous Rays which before were
refracted, do now become terminated and reflected, and yet does no less produce
variety of colors than before.

As for instance, Suppose a Solution of Vitriol made in distilled Water, which
is a perspicuous body, giving a green color, and that as well by refraction as
transmssiion of Rays from a luminous body, gliding side-ways, and smiting
through the Liquor, which renders it diaphanous; whose texture of parts with
the interstices in the fluid Menstruum, causes (I say) such a refraction of
light, as thereby represents it under the form of a green color. If into this
green diaphanous Liquor (Hydroph.) you pour a clear solution of Galls, the
texture of the vitriolin parts in the water will become so altered, as that in
lieu of a diaphanous, it will become an opake Liquor; so that the luminous Rays
which before were refracted and transmitted, will now become either reflected
or so entangled in the texture of the parts, as neither to make a transmission,
refraction, or any considerable reflection of light therefrom, and therefore
becomes opacous or black.

For by the addition of Galls to the aforesaid Liquor, the first body, whose
parts were uniform and regularly transmitted and refracted, the Rays of light,
does now by this commixture with the Particles of Galls, muster in so confused
a posture, make an extraversion of large flats, some of which always fall in
the rear of the Angles, and junctures of others; so as the transmission of
light is quite intercepted, and therefore what reflection is made, is only so
much as to be sufficient to make that representation of bodies by that color
we call black.

Which that it is so, appears further by pouring Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of
Nitre, Aquafortis, or the like corrosive Acid Spirits upon those vitriolin
opacous Liquors, or other bodies made black by vitriolin astringent Steins;
where you will presently view those Particles of the Gall, which before filled
the Pores of the Liquor, and by extraverting many flats made the Liquor
opacous, dark, and inky, will now become fretted, dissolved, and the flats
lessened, so as the parts will again return into their former uniform posture,
and suffer the light (by becoming clear) to be transmitted as before, so to
become a diaphanous Liquor, as at first: as you may further see in our
Experiments about the change of Colors in Spaw Water, in our Hydrolog. Chymica.

And that colors are nothing else but different refractions and repercussions
of light from bodies, according to various Angles of incidence and reflection
from the different texture of the depth or superficies thereof, carried through
the transparent Tunicles and Humors of the Eyes, as through so many Glasses
(for from the natural Fabric of the Eye are artificial optical or microscopical
Glasses contrived) vibrating after a various manner the Optic Nerves, so as to
make that kind of sensation we call Vision: That colors are, I say, nothing
else but such I might confirm by many more instances (viz.) by the frequent
Manuals of Dyers, Tanners, Painters, etc. in their coloring Garments, Leather,
Wood, etc. by actual bodies (not qualities) of Vitriol, Alum, Argol, Indico,
Madder, Lime, Oak Bark, Minium, Ceruss, Verdigreece, Spanish-white, Gum,
Vernice, ultra-Marine, etc. all which produce different colors, not from
inherent qualities in those bodies, arising from a legitimate contemperature of
the four Elements, but represent themselves as being actual bodies; I mean,
show that great variety of colors by the different texture of their
constitutive parts, whereby light becomes so differently refracted or
reflected, as to be sufficient to cause that great variety of colors, we see
amongst bodies: where we might from the aforesaid different reflections and
refractions of light show amongst the causes of those apparences we call
colors, what for instance white is, and how made, which we suppose to be no
other than that texture of parts which results from many superficies, flat, or
spherical born up at some little distances from each other, by one or more of
these following causes: viz. 1. By Air; 2. Atoms of Cold; 3. Other similiar
inter-woven bodies; 4. Or lastly, are wrought into such a texture of parts by
the preparatory Vessels. First by Air, as is evident in Torrents, great falls,
and other agitations of Waters, in the white froth of Ale, Beer, or other
fermenting Liquors, also in the warming of Ale or Beer, etc. where the
Particles of Water and fermentative Liquors are huft up with those of Air,
being thereby reduced into globular Bubbles, the aggregation of which give us
that Phenomenon of white observable therein: the like may be reckoned upon in
production of white Ointments from the concussion of Oils, etc. Secondly, or by
Atoms of cold, as is evident in the obvious Phenomenon of Snow: where, from
the cold Atoms woven in, with, and between the flats (for such are the figure
of its parts under this disguise) of watery Particles, results that color of
white, as also other apparences compitible to water under the Masque of Snow.
Thirdly, Or by other inter-weaving bodies, as is evident where the texture of
bodies are such as are made up of many superficies each upon other, by a
natural stratum super stratum, born up by some other interposing parts, as is
evident in natural Concretions, viz. Talk, Alabaster, Bones, Horns, Plumes,
etc. In factitious, viz. Luna Cornea, Venice-glass pulverized Ceruss, Paper,
etc. In all which the light from the aforesaid texture of parts is so refracted
and reflected as to exhibit us that appearance of white in all such bodies. Or
lastly, are wrought into such a texture of parts by preparatory Vessels, by
which in Animals, I mean the Lacteals, and Glandules, whence the whiteness of
Milk, and by other Analogous in Vegetables, whence the milky Juyces of all
sorts of Spurges, Carduus Marie, etc.

But to demonstrate further, that Color (and in particular White) is no other
than the result of such a peculiar texture of bodies, as reflects the light
after such a mode competible to that appearance: and that the same body
undergoing no other change of any additional, but barely a transposition of the
parts of the active Principles therein contained, was spontaneously reducible
to its pristine clarity and transparency, I had this following Phenomenon
represented to me in an Experiment I was then trying; In which Experiment, I
shall forbear to name one of the constituent Liquors, in as much as in the main
it relates not to this place, and only reckon upon the (to our purpose)
pertinent Phenomenon which was this; I having two transparent Liquors by me,
one was rectified Spirit of Wine, the other a Mineral Liquor, upon the mixing
these, I had (besides the gentle heat caused from a moderate fermentation of
the Principles) forthwith the appearance of a Milk-white Liquor, through the
whole body of the mixture, which (and what was very curious and remarkable to
behold) within a very few minutes without any extrinsic addition, was
spontaneously reduced to a transparent Liquor, as limpid almost as either of
the Liquors was before mixture: and all this (which yet adds to admiration)
without the least precipitation, or any sort of sediment what ever.

I might further enlarge (Hydroph.) but that I pretend not here to give a Body
of Philosophy, therefore shall designedly contract.


Hydroph. Well, but seeing (Pyroph.) we have been discoursing of Colors, and
that you say light is essential in the Fabric thereof, Pray what do you think
of Light it self; do not we rightly define it to be actus perspicui quatenus
est perspicuum, and do not we truly distinguish betwixt lux and lumen, in that
we say, lux est lucidi corporis qualitas, being a quality of a luminous body as
it abides, and is fixed in the lucid body; as for instance, that light which is
in the Sun, Stars, or Fire, while it is in those bodies we call it lux, but
when it is dispersed in a perspicuous body, as the Air, then it is properly
lumen; and that in Fire the lux, or quality thereof sends forth that we call
lumen, which illuminates the body of Air, and thereby makes it perspicuous.


Pyroph. To which Hydroph. I answer, That your definition of lumen to be the
act of a perspicuous body as it is perspicuous, and your distinction of lux and
lumen, are all too short (in my apprehension) of the offense of a lucid or
luminous body, and that because what you call actus perspicui (as you define
lumen) is no more according to your own Hypothesis than a product of a quality,
or a quality of a quality: For it is (you say) produced from that you call lux,
and this, you say, is a quality of a lucid body; so that lumen must be the
product of lux, a quality of its quality, and by consequence one quality must
be the subject of another, and why not of a third, viz. splendor, and so a
fourth, and so ad infinitum.

Nay further, to suppose light to be a quality of a lucid body, as it abides
and is fixed in that body, and yet that this should produce that you call lumen
in another body, which it has or can have no essential dependence upon, is to
admit of qualities without the predicate of a subject, which according to your
own Doctrine is absurd enough.


Hydroph. But what think you (Pyroph.) of the genus of light, is it a substance
or body, or is it not rather a quality, or quid incorporeum? That it is not a
corporeal substance, we have several Arguments to urge; as first, If it were a
body, it could not so suddenly be diffused through the whole Hemisphere, and
that by reason of resistance of the medium. Next to that it would suppose a
penetration of bodies, and that because there is no part of a perspicuous body,
as of Water, and Air, but is illuminated thereby. And lastly, if light was a
body, so would also darkness be, because contraries.


Pyroph. These are indeed (Hydroph.) the main Arguments of Aristotle and his
followers against the corporealness of Light, which we shall easily impugn. As
to the first therefore we say, that it is not so difficult to apprehend that an
essential luminous body (such I mean whose light springs from the evibrations
of the intestine Fermentation (of its kind) of its intrinsic Principles, that
is, whose light is from it self and not from another) should upon its extensive
motion, immediately reach to the periphery of its Orbs activity, then that it
should perform that work of illumination by an imaginary quality of a quality,
by a lumen, which has its being from a quality of a lucid body. As to the
resistency of such mediums (the constitution of whose parts by its teniousness
and facil recess, render them diaphanous upon the access of the Rays of light)
is no more an obstacle to the speedy diffusion of the body of light, than the
Air does resist the explosive motion of Gunpowder, or than the Air does oppose
the activity of Fire within its own Orb.

And therefore (Hydroph.) we might better (and I think more agreeable to its
nature) define Light to be a quick Evibration or extensive and (of its kind)
fermentative motion of the intrinsic Principles of lucid bodies, stretching its
nimble corporeal Rays from its self as the center to the periphery of its Orbs
activity: a quick Vibration, and extensive Motion, I said, because that adds to
the quickness of its transmission through a proper medium: For we see that one
spark of Fire, or fired matter, moved suddenly in a round, makes an apparition
of a whole circle of Fire, which suppose it were a Radius, or a Ray of Fire
whirled suddenly about its own center, would immediately appear as a whole
sphere of Fire, and that merely from the quickness of its motion, which
seemingly makes Fire or Light appear much more than really it is.

So that we can no sooner consider a lucid body in motion, that is, its
Principles or parts in an intestine collision or fermentative extrusion, but at
the same instant we must apprehend it extended, and that extension is
terminated by the utmost circle of its activity: in so much as supposing a
luminous body moved, and extended, as aforesaid, is it self but the center to
the whole Orb of its light, whose Rays probably, in their extensive motion are
globular bodies, whirled about their own Axis, which very Orb may not
improperly be called the Luminary: unless we take in another notion of the
co-existency of fiery Particles: ( liquidi simul ignis, the liquid Fire, as
Virgil speaks, in his Eglog. to Sileno) interspersed in the depth of the great
Sphere, which becomes enkindled, and takes flame upon the access of the Rays of
the great Luminary, the Sun.

Whether way we please to take it, amounts to the same thing: For whether we
consider, suppose the Sun as the great Luminary in Motion, extending its Rays
instantaneously to the greatest circle of its lucid Orb reaching from it self
round to the supposed Vortices of the otherwise conceived fixed Stars, and
illuminates the whole Orb save the shades of the opake bodies, the Earth, Moon,
and other Planets, which in their motion about it have always some parts shaded
(which is that we call Darkness) which, I say, whether we consider the solar
Luminary, that great fountain and treasure of light, moved, extended, and
thereby filling its whole Orb (the shades excepted) even to the periphery
thereof, with corporeal Rays through the whole medium of the vast Expansum, is
the same as to apprehend a liquid Fire, or fiery Principle interspersed in the
whole depth of the Fabric of the World, which upon the access of its Compeer,
the Rays of light immediately darted from the Sun, or mediately reflected from
other bodies, joins issue therewith, takes Flame, and together by the agil
Motion of their parts, compose one great luminous Orb.

So that motion, and consequently extension is proper to both, making (either
way) light to diffuse it self speedily through our Hemisphere: For whether it
be darted immediately from the Luminary, and so fill up the whole Orb of light,
or it meeting with congeneal fiery or sulphurous Particles floating in the
great deep, giving flame to one part after another, till the whole become
illuminated, may be conceived readily performable by motion: For a few fiery
Particles put into a vibrating agil Flour, or into a rapid collision makes a
great light, and spreads far in a medium, whose texture of parts makes no
interruption in the transmission thereof.

To assign a precise figure to the Corpuscles of light, is too curious, and
perhaps hazardous of incurring a contradiction: For to say with the Democritans
that fiery Atoms are of a pyramid form, implies methinks a tacit contradiction
both in Mathematics, as well as in Physics; For according to their Doctrine,
Atoms) even as the word it self) implies indivisibility; which that these
minute Particles should be indivisible, and yet Pyramid-wise is to me very
strange, for being they are bodies, and these bodies Pyramids, must of
necessity be solid Pyramids: now that such which are always made up of Lines,
Superficies, and Profundities (the natural sequels of Solids) should (...)
^thstanding all this be supposed indivisible, is certainly indemonstrable.

Although indeed if we might imagine with the Cartesians, the Globulary Figure
seems to be the most congeneal to the nature and Phenomenon of Light, as being
of all Figures the most apt to be moved, and most capable of being reflected by
its hitting against other Bodies, and that because the globular in their
incidence upon other Bodies, of what figure soever, (saving such as are concave
in their Texture.) do always touch in puncto, which makes them so apt to
recoyl, and make Angles of reflection answerable to those of incidence: and yet
to determine a precise figuration of Atoms, as such, wants not its absurdity,
as we elsewhere in our Tentamen Physiolog. take an opportunity further to
enlarge.

These being premised, you see (Hydaoph.) it proves not difficult to assign the
cause, why the Rays of Light though corporeal, should so readily and
instantaneously be transmitted through the Hemisphere, or rather through the
whole Sphere, (excepting as aforesaid the shades of the Earth and other
Planets) as to make that Light we see in the World, notwithstanding the
immensness of the vast medium it wades through, the radius of which Circle, is
both in relation to its self as also to its Circle, incommensurable whose
motion is always in right lines, unless intercepted by the interpositions of
opake Bodies.

Your next Argument (Hydroph.) of the Penetration of Bodies upon the
supposition of the corporealness of Light, grounded upon the general
perspicuity of illuminated Bodies, will not be uneasy to refute, and that
because the bodies of perspicuous mediums are therefore diaphanous, in that they
are tenuious, and pliable and thereby easily, and readily give way to the
transmission of the nimble corporeal Rays of Light, which upon that account
pervade the tenuious Texture of such mediums even ictu oculi; and yet these
Rays if compared with other minute Bodies floating in the Atmosphere, are not
altogether so numerous, as we are apt commonly to apprehend: For although to
our eye placed in any point of the diaphanous medium, upon the extension of the
Body of Light we see the Air totally illuminated, as if it were nothing else
but Light, yet if we consider the largeness of the Texture of our Eye, and the
proportionableness of an object to render it capable of affecting thereof, we
shall find that it will require the mustering of a great many of minute Bodies,
to make up the least sensible Object: so that the Texture of the eye is so
framed by glassy humors, as to concenter the largely dilated Rays of Light,
That thereby it may become serviceable to the transmission of Species.

For the tunica uvea of the Eye being perforated and defended by the
transparent Tunicles called Cornea, and adnata, are supposed as a plain Glass
or foramen in a dark Room, through which the sensible Species of Objects, are
by the help of Light transmitted, but yet so as they appear only inverted:
Therefore that these Images ((...)) of things which float within their Orbs,
may appear in their proper form, is required the help of the Crystalline
humor, which is lenticular and unequal, inserted into the vitrious humor as a
Gem in a Ring whereby together with the help of the, albuginous humor, (which
is to dint and shade the Species of things with their accompanied Light, lest
it should come too strongly upon the Crystalline unequal humor) the Species that
were inverted in the tunica uvea might be reversed, and put into their due
posture in the unequal Glass of the Crystalline humor, like as the inverted
Species transmitted through a plane Glass or foramen into a dark room, are
reversed by the help of a Tube, with a unequal Glass in it, which thereby
represents the Species of Objects at a great distance upon the opposite white
Wall, or Paper, in their due and regular order; as for Recreation sake, we
sometimes have seen: For the most of the Dioptricks are chiefly grounded upon
the Texture of the natural frame of the Eye.

So that it is by these Glasses (that I may so call them) of the Eye, that the
distant Rays of Light become concentred, to make a sensible impression there;
whereby the Air seems to us to be so totally diaphanous, as if there was
nothing else but Light, when indeed it needs a Collection of its Rays by so
skilful a contrivance as the Fabric of the Organ of the Eye, to make it
sensible.

Wherefore it is very apparent, that notwithstanding the corporealness of the
Rays of Light, there is no necessity of the consequence of the penetration of
Bodies both because of the distance of the Rays of Light, as also of the
tenuiousness and pliable fluidness of the medium.

As to your last Argument (Hydroph.) viz. that if Light was a Body, so also
would darkness be, because contraries; for the consequence of which Isee no
reason at all: and that because darkness is nothing else but theinterception of
Light, which is further manifest in that at the same time that the lucid Body
of the Sun or other luminous Body is in motion, (I mean by its emission of Rays
extended) at the very same time is darkness made by the shades of opake Bodies.

For the radius of the Sunbeams extend far beyond the shaded, and therefore
dark cones of the Earth, and other Planetary Bodies: so that in the shade there
is darkness, because Light is intercepted by an opake Body; but beyond the
shaded cone, the Rays become further continued, even to the very circumference
of its vast luminous Orb: and so the like of any other lucid Body: for if a
Candle be placed at a competent distance from a Globe in a large Room; so far
as the Conical shade of the Globe reaches, so far it is dark, but beyond that,
the Rays are again continued even to the extent of its Orb's activity, if
nothing interrupt.

And now (Hydroph.) having overturned your Arguments against, let me give you
one (for all) for the corporealness of Light: and that is thus (viz.) that
which may be moved, percuss'd, or reflected, is a Body; But such is Light,
Ergo. The Major is apparent, both because qualities cannot undergo a
loco-motion, but as considered in their subjectum inh^sionis; nor can they
admit of percussion or reflection; as also because these are only proper and
peculiar to Bodies; for two Bodies moved toward each other, with a force, or
one Body hitting upon another at rest, must recoil in one Angle, or other, and
that necessarily, because Bodies.

That the minor is true, all the Rules of Dioptricks evince, besides we see
that the Rays of the Sun smiting against the dense Body of the Earth, and
becoming reflected therefrom, gives us that heat of Weather, we usually have in
June, July, and August: also the dispersed Rays of Light being collected by
burning Glasses, do concenter in a fiery Cone, which actually gives a flame to
combustible things: Hence it was that Archimedes, as by some mechanical Engines
he shattered, and sunk, so by some Glasses artificially contrived, and sutably
placed, he fired the Ships at a great distance, that besieged Syracuse: yea,
and by the same Light of the Sun concentred, may (for ought we know) this Ball
of the Earth be calcined into its primitive Embers, and may perhaps be
vitrified too at the last into a Crystalline transparency.


SECT. XV.
Hydroph. WEll (Pyroph.) but what think you of Sapours? Is not Sapour a quality
of a mixed Body, arising by Heat, from an earthy dryness, contemper'd with a
watery moisture? these no more than odours are substances or Bodies, but
qualities, which are in Bodies, tanquam in subjecto.


Pyroph. I think (Hydroph.) that Sapour is no quality of a mixed Body, arising
from any contemperature thereof, but consists only in a relation betwixt our
food, etc. and our Palate; is that whereby our aliment becomes sapid as I may
say, and indicates a consonance or dissonance betwixt Concretes, and our gust
or Palate; does not consist as the Chemists will have it solely in the Saline
Principle of things, although I must confess it much-what depends thereon: But
it is either from the predominancy of the Saline or from a commixture of that
with the Sulphurous parts of the Concrete, which together make up that we call
Sapour in Concretes: for one or both these upon chewing being dissolved (at
least some portion thereof) in the Saliva, presently thereby insinuates into
the pores of the Tongue and Palate, and so affects that Sense we call Taste, and
this by the different Textures and combinations of Salt, and Sulphur, in all
palatable or saporous Bodies.

The Organ of that Sense is situated chiefly in that Membrane which like a neb
overspreads the Palate, Tongue, Larinx, oesophagus, and is in common with that
of the Stomach: whence it is that some disgustful things only tasted, do
irritate the Stomach to that convulsive motion we call Vomiting: For Sapours
are no otherwise than as Concretes stand related to that Sense of which they
are the proper objects, being no qualities inherent in Bodies, nor are to be
found in Bodies as they consist of the quaternary of Elements: and therefore
are no results either of a terrestrial dryness, or watery moisture, nor from
the combination thereof.

And if I should acquaint you (Hydroph.) with my thought herein, I might not
let to tell you, that I apprehend (and see nothing in the Peripatetick
Philosophy of validity to contradict) that the essential difference of the taste
of Bodies upon the same Organical sense, does consist in a due proportion and
just adaptation of the sensible to the sense, I mean that as the Textures of
Bodies are various, having different complications of their Saline and
Sulphurous parts, so they accordingly do differently affect that sense, having
some parts by mastication (chewing) dissolved in the Saliva, (brought thither
by Glandules, and Lymphiducts) which by different Texture of their constitutive
parts, variously smite and affect the sensible Membrane, which as those
dissolved parts in the Saliva, become more or less proportionable to the Pores
of the sensative Organ, so do those affections of Bodies we call Tastes, prove
grateful or ungrateful, thereby variously affecting the Sense with those tastes
we call sweet, bitter, sharp, sour, salt, astringent; austere and the rest, (if
there be any more.)


Hydroph. But are there not some Bodies (Pyroph.) that have insipid Salts? How
do these affect the Senses?


Pyroph. No (Hydroph.) to talk of an insipid Salt, imploys no less than an
ignorance of the Physical construction of Bodies, and besides also a
contradiction: For therefore are things chiefly sapid, because Saline, in as
much as there is no Salt without its Sapor, which if it lose, its no longer
Salt (is indeed good for nothing) and therefore things are said to be insipid,
when their Salts are separated by washing orotherways, or when the Principles
are, locked up; so that I say what we call insipid, is such a Texture of parts,
where the Saline and Sulphurous ingredients are either totally exhausted, or
else interspersed so remisly as they affect not the Sense at all: of which sort
are all decayed rotten woods, Drugs, all calcineous powders of Minerals,
Metals, Animals, or Vegetables; all Marcasites, Stones, Sand, etc. or lastly
complicated and locked up, so as our Organs of Sense are not capable of
reaching or being affected by them.

But mechanically to represent those different Modifications of Bodies (called
vulgarly Qualities) which are nothing else but properties of Bodies as they
stand related to our Organs of Sense, how I mean such tastes result from such
and such different modes of the Principles mutually acting in Bodies, we might
illustrate from the following experiments and observations, that (for instance)
upon the dissolving Silver in Spirit of Nitre, or Aquafortis, and evaporating
the solution to a Crystallin form, those very Crystals become exquisitely
bitter, even as Gall; although neither of the ingredients had the least
perceptible taste thereof: the same acid menstruum poured upon another Body of
a different Texture, produces that quality we call sweet, as is evident in the
Crystals of Lead made by Aquafortis, Spirit of Nitre or even the Vegetable
acidity of Vinegar; which Saccharum Saturni (as it is called) is as sweet as
any vegetable Sugar. 3. The acid Oil of Vitriol poured upon another metalline
Body, as upon Mars or Venus, it causes an astringent taste, as is evident in
the vitriol of Iron, or Copper. 4. An esurin Acid complicated with an Alum
glebe, gives Alum and the stiptick taste thence emerging: also Oil of Vitriol
meeting with another Body, viz. Quicksilver, gives after edulcoration, a
factitious Alum, and Stiptick taste, thereto belonging. 5. An Aqua regis poured
upon Gold, gives a solution or Salt, whose austere taste will (as the worthy
improver of Mechanical Philosophy, Mr. Boil says) very much resemble that of
Sloes or of unripe Bullace.

And as bitter, sweet, astringent, stiptick, austere, so probably all other
remarkable qualities are producible by Art, imitating Nature; in as much as
both have the same Principles, only variously modified, to proceed upon: the
same Principles being substituted to both, that what Art goes upon the same
nature suo modo probably uses in the productions of Bodies and their qualities
Physically.

In all which aforesaid experimental observations we see the same (or
analogous) acidity being determined upon different Bodies, give various
Phenomenon of tastes, according to the difference of the Sulphur enclosed in
diverse Bodies it meets with: and whereas we have no better way of taking
measures of Natures workings in Bodies from her own intimate and Essential
Principles, than by Mechanics, or artificial imitations thereof: Therefore by
how much the nearer we approach by skilful contrivances to emulate Nature in
the production of new Bodies and qualifications or properties thence resulting,
the more likely are those Principles (we so search forth) to be consonant to
those of nature, the great matter we aim at.

For as sweetness (for instance) is made from some Acids hitting upon and
concentring with insipid Bodies, in whose Texture a peculiar Sulphur lodges,
(as in the examples aforesaid) so likewise probably Nature uses an acid and a
peculiar Sulphur (both native and seminal) as the mechanical Agents in the
Physical production of the Saccharin juice of Sugarcanes: that Vegetable Sugar
(as well as metalline) has its innate acidity, is evident, from the separation
of an acid liquor in the distillation of Sugar, as well as an acid spirit is by
the same way separable from Metallin or Saturnin Sugar; which very acidum as
well as that of Vinegar or Aquafortis will with the insipid Body of Lead or
Minium, gain a fresh sugarness or saccharin sweetness: and that it contains a
Sulphur, is evident, both from the coruscation of Sugar (I mean Loaf, or hard)
beat in a Mortar, which strikes fire at every knock of the Pestil: as also from
the Oil distillable with the acid Spirit. And what we have said of the
Vegetable and Metalline Sugars, Art imitating Nature in order to the producing
that property we call sweet, the same analogically may possibly, consideratis
considerandis, be said of all the rest of those other properties or relative
qualities we call Tastes.

But to say what combinations of Saline and Sulphurous parts in the various
Texture of Bodies, and what proportions and adaptations thereof will be
requisite for the making several sorts of Sapors, to rank them in their several
Classes from those peculiar contrivances of matter, which contribute to the
Fabric of Bodies, as they stand related to that Sense, is a work now Hydroph.
too tedious to insist upon: For it would require a diligent scrutiny into the
different figuration of Salts, and that not singly into the forms the variety
of Salts naturally shoot into, but as those stand entangled with Sulphurous
parts, and those again involved in the Texture of other combining Particles,
which much alter their former solitary figures, and thereby produce varieties
of Sapors: concerning which we shall touch in our Halolog. Chym. Nor shall we
here further discourse of those morbid disaffections or preposterous
prevarications of this Sense by the irregularities of the Organs thereof from
those alterations of the Juices and Solids of our Bodies, which we call
Diseases: but shall leave them to further inspection.


SECT. XVI.
Hydroph. SEeing we have discoursed of Sapours, lastly what think you (Pyroph.)
of Odours? Is not Odor a Quality of a mixed Body, arising from a dry Sapidness
contempered with a moisture, brought forth by Heat?


Pyroph. That Odor should be a Quality, (Hydroph.) I as much deny as I have
done Sapour, neither do I see any grounds, why it should be supposed to arise
from any dry sapidness, or any contemperature thereof, with a proper moisture
from Heat: For first having (and I think evidently enough) demonstrated the non
existency of Concretes from the quaternary of Elements; it will therefore
naturally follow, that secondary affections of Bodies, in order to their
relation to our Senses, are to be solved by some other more rational
Hypothesis, and that is by ascribing it to an extension of some nimble, agil
parts, carried off by an insensible collision of the intrinsic Principles of
Bodies; where the parts are from the intestine Fermentation subtiliz'd, and
highly volariz'd, which bears much upon the Energy of the Sulphur, the
different Texture of whose apporrhea's (chieflyemerging from their dilated
operative Sulphurs) do variously ferire nares smite differently upon that Organ
of Sense, as to produce that great variety of Odours, we find Issuing from
Concrete Bodies.

That Odours chiefly depend upon the Volatization, and Fermentative extension
of Sulphurs, is most-what apparent in Vegetables, where we see those are most
Aromatic, which are most pregnant with Sulphurous Emanations, and whose
Sulphurs are most subtle, and extensive, (from their intrinsic Fermentation)
always upon the wing: For we see that odorous Vegetables are most fragrant at
their time of flowering and seeding, during which season the Sulphurs or Oils
are most predominant, as being uppermost in the wheel of operation, and so
breath forth the effluvia to the utmost circle of their Orbs activity: which as
I said are not Qualities, but minute Particles of extensive active Bodies, set
on work by the springy Ferments connatural to their seminal Principles, and
wound off in the form of subtle and invisible Apporhea; whence probably
proceeds the great variety of Vegetable Odours,

Also in Animals, the Odours of all their Excrements as Dung, Urine, Sweat,
suppurated matter of Ulcers, etc. proceed from various Sulphurs excited by
different Ferments in the Analysis of Concretes in their Road to nourishment.
So also most faetid Odours arise from the Sulphurs of putredinous and
cadaverous Bodies, where they are taken in pieces by putrid analytical Ferments.

And as the objects, so the Organs of this sense, is next to be considered,
concerning which we we shall in short say, that the different Texture thereof,
is capable of rendering to us the causes of diverse, and those abstruce
Phenomenon, whence we say, that there are some subtle effluvia which exhaling
from Bodies, as the result from the Fermentation of Animal Juices, which
thereby become the Object of some curiously wrought Organs of Sense, how ever
acute, yet are sufficient to smite the delicately wrought Organs of other
Animals, is Evident amongst other Creatures chiefly in Dogs, who excel in the
curiosity of smelling beyond all comparison, who can by the great sagacity of
their Organs, or from such a Texture thereof as is susceptible of the most
minute impressions of the least Effluvia, who can I say by their bare smell
discern their master, among thousands and how they will trace their steps
throughout a whole Country, and find their own way home at a vast distance, by
the same faculty or acurateness of Organs.

Yea, that even the Organs of our Senses are in some persons (through an
idiosyncrisia) capable of arriving at a higher pitch of sensation, than is
vulgarly observed, even beyond the ordinary proportion of Men, may (amongst
other examples) be evinced by that strange relation, which Joannes Leo of
Africa, and quoted by learned Cafaubon, of a blind man that was a Guide to
certain Merchants traveling through the deserts of Arabia: Casaub. p. 23. The
man Rode upon a Camel, led his Company not by his eyes (for he had none) but by
his smell, which was so exquisite, that having been acquainted with those ways
before, he could find by the sent of the very Earth, nay of the Sand, (which
was reached to him at every mile) where he was, and describe the places unto
them as they went along, yea told them long before (which proved true though
not believed then) when they drew near to inhabited places.

Now how Bodies should by their extended Sulphurs or intrinsic Ferments, so
differently affect the sensative Organ, as to produce all those various
impressions upon our Sense, which we call Odours or smells, and those in so
different a manner as we (for want of a method of describing them) know not
whether we have all the same impressions of smells from the same Concretes: How
the composure of the sensative Organ consists, or lastly how the manner of the
various combinations of Sulphurous Effluvia (flowing from Fermentative
Collisions of their intestine Principles) happen to our Senses, we shall not
now, I say, take time further to discuss, but leave to further enquiry.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge. 6. l. 19. r. Physiology p. 8. l. 16. r. Systeme p. 21. l. 5. r. Crabones
p. 21. l. 20. r. Crabones p. 23. l. 21. r. Skenkins p. 26. l. 23. r. Monkshood
p. 38. l. 25. for bole r. trunk p. 39. l. 15. r. Malting p. 42. l. 6. for bole
r. trunk p. 43. l. 3. for bole r. trunk p. 45. l. 23. for hurling r. he wing p.
46. l. 1. accelaration p. 61. l. 2. dele your p. 73. l. 23. r. naturally p. 74.
l. 27. when r. where p. 75. l. 8. r. Swelfer p. 75. l. 14. r. offa p. 79. l. 5.
r. offa p. 79. l. 1. after for r. how p. 81. l. 14. r. globule p. 83. l. 26. r.
compage p. 110. l. 26. after to r. solve p. 114. l. 8. production r. reduction
p. 129. l. 16. r. Worm. p. 131. l. 16. r. impalpable p. 136. l. 26. after
retains add almost p. 141. l. 25. r. lares p. 152. l. 8. r. tenuiousness p.
153. l. 21. r. fiery p. 155. l. 7. r. fluor p. 162. l. 25. r. web.


