MORAL CONSIDERATIONS TOUCHING The DUTY of CONTENTEDNESS UNDER Afflictions.

In a LETTER to the most Affectionate and Best of FATHERS Mr. JAMES SIMPSON.

By R. S.

OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield 1685.

MORAL CONSIDERATIONS Touching the Duty of CONTENTEDNESS under AFFLICTIONS.
Dear Sir,
A midst all my Afflictions, nothing troubles me so much, as that, by the
disappointment of my hopes in this place, I am like to continue still incapable
of paying some part of the Duty I owe You, in a way suitable to my Education. I
mean, of giving you some handsome Evidence of my Improvement in my Studies. A
thing I have always infinitely desired; having perhaps the greatest obligation
to you that ever any son in the world had to a Father. But in the Circumstances
I am now in, cut off from the advantages of the Foundation, I must despair of
doing any great matters in the way of a Scholar. All my concern is what I shall
want in intellectuals, to make up in Morals; and tho I may not be a great
Clerk, yet to approve my self, in the whole course of my Life and Actions, as I
hope, I have hitherto done, a dutiful Son, an honest Man, and a good Christian.

Sir, In your last you were pleased to order me to send you some Considerations
of my own pening, touching Contentedness under Afflictions. I have very readily
obeyed your Commands; and such poor indegested Collections as I could make upon
this Subject, in the great trouble I am under, I now send you, wishing they may
contribute something to your Satisfaction and Comfort.

Tho I am sensible, in handling this Argument I shall fall far short of my
wishes, yet I have done (as under all the obligations of Duty and Gratitude I
am bound) what I could to please and satisfy you, being still desirous (tho
unable) in some measure to be a Comfort to you, and to Contribute something to
the Content and Happiness of your Life. I have chosen rather to deserve a check
for my bad performance, than for my neglect; and had rather you should be sorry
for my weakness, then my disobedience.

Tho, I must confess, I can expect nothing but Candor and Kindness from you,
in reference to what is here offered you, purely in obedience to your Commands;
and look for no worse censure from the Tenderness of a Parent, then they
usually have that are making their first Essaies under a Writingmaster, whose
first Copyes (tho the Letters are awkwardly made and crooked) are smiled upon,
not blamed, rather pitied than reproved. Now as I hope you will favorably look
upon this ruffled, undressed piece, and so lay it by; so I must earnestly
entreat you not to show it to any curious eye, not to expose your son's
imperfections to any Critical or Censorious persons, for you see it is huddled
up in a short time, and wants all the Beauty and Ornaments of Method and
Language.

My retiredness and solitude (which I take a great delight in) has given me
time and leisure, for the thoughts I here set down, and my late misfortune
abundantly supplied me with Subject Matter for them. So that most of the
Considerations I here present you with, are what every assault of grief, every
sad reflection upon my late disappointment here in the College put me upon,
whereby I endeavored to settle and compose my mind, to fit my self as well for
the sincerity of Chamber and Chappel-Devotion, (a great part whereof you know
consists in hearty Thanksgiving;) as for the Company and Society of my Friends
and Acquaintance. And I pray God these may prevail more, at least as much, upon
you, as they have upon me.

You desired a Letter of Advice and Comfort under your present pressure and
Trouble, or some Considerations touching the Duty of Contentedness under
Afflictions. I have here (I say) ventured upon something in order to your
satisfaction. I shall not, dare not, yet meddle with any thing of Divinity, but
design only to let you see, how strong and forcibly persuasive bare Morality is
in this Point. And that I may not arrogate to my self more than I ought, nor be
justly condemned for a Plagiary, I hold my self bound here ingeniously to
acknowledge, that much of what is here delivered, has been borrowed from the
Elaborate Works of the more Learned Heathen-Moralists, Latin and Greek
Authors, who have writ upon this Subject, so that a great part of my small
pains in this business, has been to Collect, Translate, and Methodize their
Morality.

The Ancient Moralists do usually teach and enforce the Duty of Patience and
Contentedness under Afflictions.

1. By showing the necessity of subduing and regulating the Passions, (those
great disturbers of the quiet and serenity of the Soul,) and consequently of
acquiring a constant peace and tranquillity of mind, and of living comfortably
and contentedly under all conditions and circumstances of life. For if the
irregularity of Passion, be the grand cause of Discontent, and if (which is
certain) the removal of the Cause be at all times the removal of the Effect
too; then the Inference is plain and clear, That a due Government and
Regulation of our Passions, as it takes away all struggling, disturbance and
discomposure of Spirit, so it leaves us in a quiet possession of our own Souls,
in internal peace and tranquillity of mind.

2. They enforce this Duty by laying down the necessity of Obedience and
Submission to Almighty God, in all the several dispensations of his Providence,
as to the Creator and Governor of the World. For all the Heathen Moralists
allowing the Existence of a God, (a Natural Principle, and known to all men)
they concluded him to be Infinitely Wise, Good, and Powerful: And from every
one of these Attributes they deduced a necessity of submission to, and
acquiescence in his pleasure, as to the disposal of all things in the world,
viz. In respect of his Omnipotence, we ought to submit to his Will out of plain
and absolute Duty and necessity; In reference to his Infinite Wisdom, we ought
to do in point of Prudence; In reference to his Infinite Goodness, we ought to
do it in point of Gratitude.

1. It Is the Absolute and Necessay Duty of every Rational Creature to Subdue
and Regulate the Passions, (those great disturbers of the peace and quiet of
the soul) and consequently to be Patient, and Content in all Conditions and
Circumstances of life. For it is undeniably true, that if the due Order and
Government of Passion removes all trouble and tumult, and disquietness of mind
from a man, then it leaves him in the enjoyment of all peace, tranquilty and
serenity imaginable, i. e. gives him Patience and Content. For what is
Quietness and Tranquillity of mind under Crosses and Sufferings but Patience?
What is Peace and Serenity of Soul under the loss of Friends, Estate, Credit,
etc. but Contentedness? I shall therefore proceed to let you see distinctly, 1.
That the Irregularity of our Passions does really create allthese troubles and
disquiets, under Crosses and Disappointments which give men so much unhappy
disturbance and uneasiness, in their several Conditions; or that it is the
Great Cause of Discontent. 2. That it is the absolute and necessary Duty of
every Rational Creature, to Rule, Govern, and Discipline these Passions; to use
his utmost Care and Endeavor, to bring them to a continued subjection to his
Reason and Judgment, and so introduce with ease into his Soul, a due,
Comfortable and Sanctified use of all Conditions; in Prosperity, Thankfulness
and Sobriety; in Adversity, Contentedness and Humility; in all, Moderation.


1. The Inordinacy of Passion is the great Cause of Discontent. This I take to
be so certainly and universally true that it may pass for an Axiom, or one of
those truths we call First Principles, so as to need no demonstration or proof.

The great evil of suffering is not so much in the thing a man suffers, as in
the mind and temper of the man, who meets with it. Impatience and Discontent
come not so much from the strength and force of any external Calamity, as from
the great Struggling, and reluctance of the mind that suffers it. For take a
humble, and moderate man, free from Pride, Haughtiness, Covetousness, and
Ambition, how easily and softly do Crosses and Troubles fall upon him? With how
much evenness and equality of temper does he recieve Calamities and
Afflictions, when God pleases to send them. The Reason is, his thoughts are
prepared and qualified for it; he is master of himself, and his Passions; never
transported or hurryed beyond what becomes a Reasonable man; is all quiet
within; does always possess and enjoy himself in a happy peace and serenity of
soul, a constant settled composure of spirit. On the contrary, a Proud and Lofty
man, swollen with the conceit of his own worth and goodness, how does he stomach
and rise at the least disappointment. Into what desperate rage and choler does
he throw himself upon any cross or misfortune that befalls him? He thinks
Heaven obliged to favor his great merits and gratify his humor. And if
dishonor, reproach, poverty, loss of estate or reputation, chance to happen to
him, how much trouble and tumult, disturbance and discomposure arises in the
mind hereupon? How does the rage and boylings of such an ones haughty,
ambitious, and distempered spirit raise a storm within him, that may possibly
endanger the whole man; his struggling galls worse than the Yoke it self
otherwise would do; and he himself contributes infinitely more to his own
uneasiness, than his Affliction does. Again, it is the overvalue we put upon
Worldy goods, and the seeming blessings, and conveniences, they yield us, that
gives us so much trouble and torment in the loss of them. What infinite
disorders of mind do our exvagant desires and longings after Riches create in
us? What care and trouble to get them? What anxiety and restless fear least we
should loose them, when got? What infinite strugglings and shiftings to keep
them when they are going? And what extreme vexation, sorrow and affliction when
they are gone? So likewise it is the excess of love we undeservedly place upon
our health, pleasure, reputation, greatness, honors, or the like, that makes
us so unable to bear the loss of them, by sickness, reproach, poverty, or false
friends, with that patience and quietness of mind which we ought. 'Twas Ahabs
Covetousness, that made him troubled, and sick, for a small parcel of his
neighbors ground. 'Twas Haman's pride, ambition, and excessive love of Honor,
that made him afflicted and discontented for the want of poor Mordicai's Knee.
Whereas if our desires of things here below were reasonable and moderate, we
should be little or nothing concerned in the want, or loss of them: For it
cannot greatly trouble a man to part with what he never greatly cared for.

Now it is certain that Pride, Covetousness, Ambition, etc. which cause all
discontent, and disturbance of mind in us, are nothing else but the
Irregularities and excesses of passion; for the excess of self-love is Pride,
the extravagancy of desire or delight, in the honors, or profits of this
world, Ambition, Covetousness etc. So that Pride, Covetousness, Ambition,
Intemperance, etc. really causing all discontents; and these being nothing but
the irregularities of Passion; We must conclude the irregularity of Passion the
Cause of all our Discontent.

1. A man ought therefore to disburden himself of these original foundations of
folly and misery, to give a Law to the Sensitive Appetite, bring it into
Subjection, and keep it within just limits and bounds, under the discipline and
rules of Reason and Religion. Which is the next thing to be proved. 2. It Is the
Duty, I say, of every Rational Creature to Subdue, Govern, and Regulate his
Passions, and to keep them in, that they may be in subjection, not in Dominion;
may Serve, not Rule.
The sensitive Appetite (to which the Passions belong) is the Inferior part of
the Soul, answerable to the Dreggs of the people in a Government; of themselves
indeed apt to be heady, tumultuous, unruly, and factious, if not restrained by
a Superior power. Now God has committed this Appetite, with its Passions, to
the Rule and Guidance of the Rational Soul, to the Government of the Judgment
and Understanding. It is therefore an Absolute and Necessary duty in the Soul
or Mind, to exercise a due austere rule and superintendency over these
Subjects, and by no means to suffer them (through want of vigilance and
severity in its Administration) to usurp and prevail over the Judgment and
Reason, and so invert the very order of Nature, by suffering the whole unhappy
man to be carried to serve the brutish lusts of an Insolent and Licentious
Appetite. She ought not to let them swerve from their due submission and
conformity; least they become rebellious, and bring in confusion and disorder
upon the whole Man. No, as God Almighty has substituted the Soul of man as his
Vicegerent in this Province which he has committed to it, so he expects an
account of the Management of this trust, and will certainly punish the soul for
the maladministration of its government. We are therefore under a great and
strong obligation to improve and govern this Province to the glory of God. We
ought to Resolve and practice severity over our unruly Appetites, to bring our
Passions into order and obedience, to refuse to gratify their intemperate
desires; to keep them in awe and under discipline; and so reduce the whole
Province to a due constant subjection.

Again, the sensitive Appetite is Common to us with Brutes, and its
inclinations, lusts, and affections are in a great measure the Law, in them and
us. If men therefore set up their Passions for the Rule and Guide of their
Actions, if they will yield to the craving of an importunate, inordinate,
sensual Appetite, and to serve and obey their lusts; they are no way superior
to the very Beasts that Perish. Now Almighty God having given to mankind a
higher, and a nobler Faculty, it ought in the very order of Nature to govern,
guide, moderate, and direct that inferior part which is common to us with
Brutes: and that man that keeps not this Government and Rule of his nobler
Nature over the lower Faculties of his soul, degrades himself below the Dignity
of a Man, and having forfeited all the Royal Prerogatives of his Rational
nature, debases himself to a parity with Beasts; nay and below them too; for
even these restrain their Appetites from Excess and Immoderation.

How admirably Great and Excellent seems that Noble temper of Mind, which is,
Appositely enough, called Equality of Humor! When a man keeps so much freedom
and liberty in his soul, as never to be disquieted; but as you leave him, so
you find him, always indifferently cheerful and ever the same. For is he rich,
prosperous, great? yet he continues safe, because he is still humble, thankful,
watchful lest he should be deceived, or transported; careful lest he should be
carried into Pride, Arrogance, Insolency, Presumption. Is he poor, neglected,
unfortunate? Yet he remains patient, humble contented, thankful, depending upon
that God he fears, looking up to the great Lord of Heaven and Earth, as knowing
that he observes and eyes all men, and that his Providence governs all things.
And this keeps him still even and square without any considerable Alteration,
whatsoever his condition be. His Soul is lifted up above all those
inconsiderable toys the world ranges under the smiles and frowns of Fortune;
and relishes more happiness in a peaceable and quiet Spirit, a comfortable
serenity of Soul, then he could do in the enjoyment of all that others court
with so much eagerness and ardour. How wonderfully happy is this temper of
mind, how infinitely preferable to the disorder and uneasiness of Impatience in
most men! When if a man be rich, or powerful, there is nothing more vain,
proud, insolent than he; but if poor, low, unfortunate, how does he sink, and
despond, and murmur and dye under his Affliction! And there is nothing under
Heaven more miserable and dispairing than he. We must conclude him therefore
happy to wonder and envy, whose noble Spirit does not vary with his Fortune:
Who scorns to let his Eyes be allways melting over a Remediless Evil, or suffer
one Misfortune to swallow up all his Joys; but notwithstanding all the
Calamities that either lay upon him, or hang over him, he can preserve a rare
and happy Calmness in his mind, which appears in an unclouded Serenity, that
dwells always on his looks and discovers him ever Well pleased. So great is the
advantage and happiness, that by a due rule, and Government of Passion does
acrue to a wise man. And I shall venture confidently, Dear Sir, to affirm that
this Freedom of Mind, and Serenity of Soul, ought to be preferred before the
Empire of the World. Besides it is a true Maxim in Morality. He that commands
himself, Commands the world too.

I should now proceed to Particularize the Passions, and show the necessity of
subduing each of them; I should likewise here enlarge upon those two known
general Rules, touching Regulation of Passions, viz.

1. That they ought always to be determined to their proper objects. For
Example, We ought to love and admire nothing but what is truly good, great and
highly valuable; nor hate and despise any thing, but what is bad, mean, and
contemptible: fear nothing, but what is truly evil and hurtful: hope for
nothing, but what is really good and desirable: rejoice in nothing, but what
will some way or other make us better: and so for the rest.

2. That being thus rightly placed as to their objects, yet that they be not
intended, nor acted beyond that degree that may justly be allowed to the
objects. Thus according to the several degrees of goodness and excellency in
the objects we ought to share out unto them our love and desires. The best and
worthiest ought to be prosecuted with the greatest love and veneration. We
ought not to love excessively what does not deserve so great a measure of it.
So likewise we ought not to be angry for a longer time, or in a greater measure
then the cause requires, etc. But leaving these, I shall confine my self to
those three Passions, which have a more especial reference to my present
purpose; Joy, Grief, and Desire. A due regulation of these being capable to
render a man's mind quiet, and constantly composed, his life comfortable and
happy. Treating of them in the particular relation they have to the good things
of this world, and First of

1. The moderation of Joy in the affluence of worldly things. The Consideration
of some present good, belonging to us in particular, begets in us that delight
which we call Joy; and it is generally defined to be a delightful commotion of
the Sensitive Soul, as it were Triumphing in the fruition of present Good. Now
that we may know how to regulate our Joy in the affluence of these things, We
are to consider the world, and examine whether those things which our own
thoughts, and the sense of the Generality call Good, be really so, or no; and
if so, what degrees of goodness they have; that we may share out to them, our
esteem, delight, and joy, accordingly. For, as I said before concerning our
Passions in general, our delight and joy in the fruition of any Good is to be
proportioned to the degrees of goodness in the object. Now we must grant that
wordly things (as riches, honors, greatness, etc.) are Good in their respective
uses, i. e. when they are honestly employed in the service of God, and to his
Glory: and consequently we must allow a sober, moderate Joy, in the fruition of
them, and a cheerful thankfulness to God for them. But it is against the Excess
and Irregularity of Joy that I am speaking, and do therefore affirm, that
because the Goodness and value of these things is really and truly very small
and slight, our Joy in the Affluence of them ought not to be great or
excessive. For those things which are very uncertain, very casual, and withal
many times extremely dangerous to the Soul; which are not capable to make us
either better or wiser; can scarce be said to be Good. We have little reason
therefore for any great or extravagant Joy, in the fruition of what we might as
well (nay, perhaps more safely) be without, than have. I shall enlarge upon
this Argument: Our Joy ought to be moderate as to these things. Because

1. They only concern this life, which is uncertain and transitory, and
passes away. These pleasures of Sin endure but for a moment; our whole Life is
no more. All the Good or Happiness they do or can yield, is fadeing, and
perishes in the very Enjoyment. And besides, a small matter, any little
inconsiderable accident, may put a Period to all these pleasures, these
delights, this life, in a year, in a week, in a day, in an hour, in a moment;
and then these gaudy things leave us, and rather load and hinder the Soul in
its flight to Heaven, than further it, in its Journey. A man ought therefore to
have a low esteem for, and delight or joy in these transitory things; to keep
himself in a constant love of Heaven, and the things above.

2. Our Joy in the Affluence of worldly goods ought to be moderate, because we
ought to look upon all our plenty, greatness or prosperity, not as our own, or
the reward of our own deserts, but as the Depositum of the great Master of the
family of Heaven and Earth: As Talents entrusted with us as Stewards, for our
Masters use, service and honor, not our own Grandeur, or pleasure. We ought to
consider, that the more we have the greater are our Accounts, and the greater
our charge. That God will most certainly reward our due and prudent Management
of our Trust and Steward-ship, and punish the contrary, and that to him we must
certainly one day give an account of this our Steward-ship. That we are
constantly under the view and observation, as well as under the care and
Government of this our great Lord and Master, who expects we should be
moderate, watchful, and discreet in management of these outward things. So that
our delight and joy in the Affluence of them, ought not to be over great or
excessive; seeing we can find in them, no just motive to advance our thoughts,
nothing to create any transport, triumph, or exaltation in us, but rather
matter of diligence and care how to employ these Talents entrusted with us.

3. Our Joy ought to be moderate and little, if we consider that there is a
strange kind of Witchcraft in these Worldly Goods to rob a man of virtue, and
peace of Conscience. They are dangerous temptations to deceive us of our
Innocence and Integrity. For we have observed, that upon the increase of these
things, the Generality make Shipwreck of their Consciences; become oppressive,
proud and insolent, disorderly and debauched; perfect Worldlings, as tho they
had never heard of Heaven or Hell, God, a Redeemer, o^ a Judgment to come.
Certainly therefore we ought not to please our selves too much in these
dangerous things, but be the more strictly vigilant over our selves, keep a
strict guard over our hearts, lest pride, or those other vices and temptations,
that haunt and wait upon worldly greatness, wealth and prosperity, should steal
in upon us and ruin us.

4. Our Joy as to wordly goods ought to be moderate, because, we ought to think
and aim at nobler Ends, namely God and Eternity; to present to our thoughts a
State of future happiness, that far surpasses any this world is capable of
yielding. We are to consider that this world, and all that we call Good in it,
is vexed with evils, with fears, with vicissitudes of sorrow and trouble, but
that the happiness of the next is perfect, sincere, and unmixt with any thing
that may allay it; we ought not therefore to fix upon this world, or throw too
great a portion of love, delight or joy, upon any thing in it, it is all
nothing, and Vanity; but we ought to set up our Hope, Joy, Happiness and rest
in another world; especially knowing that this lower world is only the place
of our Probation, not of our Happiness; our Inn, not our Home.

I have insisted the longer upon this moderation of our Joy in the Affluence of
Riches, Honors, etc. In order to the great Duty of Contentedness, because in
Experience we find those of all others most apt to be dejected and afflicted by
the frowns of Adversity, who have already been deceived, and puffed up, with the
Flatteries of Prosperity; And it is certain they that think the gain of worldly
things to be but small, will think the loss small too.

2. The moderation of Grief in the loss of the Good things of this life, is the
Second thing I undertook to treat of, as a means to gain Content.

Grief is a sad dejected languor of the Soul, under the pressure of some
present Evil. Now (as we did before) we are to see first whether the loss of
these worldly things be really Evil, and if so we are to examine its measure or
degree of Evil, that accordingly we may proportion our Grief. Now, I have
already granted the things of this world to be some way Good (namely in their
due and regular use) and must therefore grant the Loss of them to be some way
Evil; (for to be deprived of what is in some measure Good, is in some measure
Evil,) and consequently allow some Expressions of Grief. But then they must
have nothing of Extravagance, or Irregularity in them, they must not be
accompanied with bitter invectives against second Causes, or Instruments, they
must not reflect upon Gods Justice, nor revile his Providence; but must be full
of Submission, rather expressing our Humility, then our Anger. I am, I say,
against all manner of Excess. For as that value or Portion of Goodness I
allowed to worldly things, was slender and small, as likewise the Delight and
Joy in the increase of them, was to be light and moderate; so the loss of them
is little or no Evil; and consequently the Grief for it must be little or none;
a man is seldom sorry to loose what he does not much value; and it would
scarce trouble a Wise man to part with what is very often more safely lost then
kept. For in the loss of Honors or Riches, our accounts are the less, our
temptations not so dangerous, our cares fewer; and generally in all Afflictions
and Losses, our Lessons of Dependence upon God, of humility and lowliness of
mind, of temperance and sobriety, of contempt of the world, of our love of
Heaven, are much better Learned, then in the increase and posession of Worldly
Goods. Briefly therefore, As the Acquisition or increase of Riches, Honors,
etc. Ought not to be the object of any strong desire, or joy; so neither ought
the Decrease or Loss of them, to cause any great Grief or Sorrow. Gods Will be
done, ought to be the Language of every wise and good Soul in relation to them.

How have the Heathen Moralists adorned this Subject! How many curious
Expressions, touching the Moderarion of Grief, in their Writings! Nay (to say
nothing of those Eminent Authors, who tied their Studies and Endeavors to this
express Argument) The Poets, whose Themes were generally Casual, and Light, and
their Poems, the Productions of a roveing, idle fancy; yet even upon this
Excellent Subject, have they given us brave and admirable Strokes. A noble
Spirit must not vary with Fortune; for as no Condition is so high, as to be out
of the reach of fears, so neither is any so low, but may have hopes. That
Adversity overcome is the highest Glory, and willingly undergone, the greatest
Virtue; Sufferings being but the trial and touchstone of Gallant-Spirits. That
Impatience and Complaint show a narrowness, or weakness of Soul, according to
the old Maxim: Invalidum omne natura querelum. The more weak any thing is the
more apt to complain. Again, the more we struggle with our Yoke, the more
'twill hurt us. That the only allay under great Sufferings is to bear them
quietly and obey Necessity; to submit to what we cannot remedy. But without
enlarging upon these Excellent pieces of Morality, let us go on. We have no
great reason for excessive Grief in the Loss of Worldly Goods, if we consider
that the loss of Friends, and Relations comes from the common condition of our
Nature, and from the very notion of Morality; And can we think, that the very
Nature of things ought to be changed to please our humors? The loss of Goods,
Riches, Wealth, is for the most part by Thunder, or Storms, or Tempests, or
Fire; the loss of health from the Intemperature of Air, or Meteors, etc. And
can we rationally expect that the great God of Heaven should alter the settled
Laws of Nature, for the convenience, or profit of such Worms as we? In a word,
the Course of the world is such that Crosses and Afflictions must of necessity
come; And therefore why should any man sink into despair or discontent, because
the world does go, as it always did, and follows its own natural State and
Condition.

Many times when I have known my Friend dead, I could have bedewed my Face with
Tears, and as passonately have wept over his sacred Urn, as I ever rejoiced in
the happiness of his Company, while living: But I resolved to lay aside my
trouble; when I had considered, that it was more Kindness in me then Prudence.
For I might as reasonably have wept that my Friend was born no sooner, as that
he should live no longer. Thus I cannot but interpret even that extraordinary
concern, SIR, you have expressed upon my late disappointment in this College.
It signifies indeed rather a deal of tenderness and affection, than (allow me I
beseech you the Insolence of the Expression for once) of true wisdom and
discretion. You might with almost as much reason grieve that I was ever born
into the world, as that I should receive troubles and afflictions in it. This
world is nothing but a heap of Cares, Anxieties, and Miseries, with which every
rank of men and state of life is beset. Man is born to Trouble as the sparks
fly upward; says that great Example of Patience, and Resignation, Job. So
common and universal is an afflicted condition of life to poor Mortals, that it
seems to be as natural as that propriety in Fire to ascend. Nay our very
entrance into the world, seems to acquaint us with the Entertainment we are
like to have in it ever after. Our first Minutes being attended with bitterness
and pain, and it is certainly ominous to the remainder of our life, that we are
born Crying.

If then no Person howsoever Good, Just, Wise, and Pious, of what Age, Sex,
Degree, Quality and Profession soever, could ever yet boast an Exemption from
this Universal State and Condition of Humane life; we may as justly grieve that
God has given us life, and made us men, as that in this life we should meet
with Trouble and Afflictions, the common Lot of Mankind. We ought therefore
cheerfully and contentedly, to bear these light afflictions which endure but
for a moment, and (to speak with the forementioned Heathen Author) submit
patiently to what we cannot remedy.

Give me leave now to venture upon a Word or two of Advice, in order to the
preventing all excess of Grief under crosses and misfortunes.

1. In Reference to any cross, or ill success in business, or failure in any
undertaking. Take heed of being too solicitous about the Issue of things, and
of determining your self too peremptorily, to particular Events. It Is indeed
our business to serve Providence in the use of means, But to God alone belongs
the Issue of Things; and that which is not within our power, ought to be out of
our care. If therefore success of business does not at first answer your
expectation, let no fumes of Melancholy possess you. Use other Expedients and
Addresses, but do not by any means engage your Affections too passionately in
it, nor promise your self success; so you will not be disturbed if you
miscarry, which you must make account will often happen to you. For all things
by nature in the Universe are subject to a continual change, and alteration:
And there is no Constancy either in the favor of Fortune or minds of men; so
that no wise man can either wholly trust to the one, or depend upon the other.
Expect therefore often to be disappointed, and then you will not be disquieted
when the frustration comes. For what you do possibly look for, is come to pass,
and what should amaze you? That which has happened now, is but what you have
often seen and known; and what should either surprise, or disquiet you?

2. Endeavor by frequent Anticipation of affliction and misfortunes to
habituate and fit your mind for them, when they do come: For these thoughts
will furnish you with a suitable temper, for them, render them easy to you, and
keep your Soul in a due State of watchfulness and moderation, before they come.
Affliction makes the deepest impression, when it surprises us, and comes
unexpected; because it takes a man upon the sudden, and before he can compose
himself, or rally the succors of reason, and religion to support him against
it. It is like a sudden disease that surprizeth the body laboring under ill
humors, before it has dispersed and allayed these humors by preparative helps
or Catharticks. And then many times more danger arises from the discomposure of
the humors, then from the malignity of the disease it self. But if the mind be
prepared for troubles and crosses, by a kind of Anticipation, this abates the
edge, keenness, and sharpness of them, and makes them fall light, and easy upon
us. Now if in that various change and revolution of events which we behold in
the world, we do not look upon possible crosses and troubles as future, we lose
our selves in a dangerous security, and are little better then madmen. Where
therefore we see at any time the losses and imprisonments, poverty, and
misfortunes of others, we should presently reflect, this, tho at present it is
not, yet may be shortly our own case. Thus the stroke of Fortune will have less
force and smart, which is wisely foreseen, expected, and provided against. By
this means a man in a great measure knows the worst of them, before he feel
them, which renders them a great deal more tolerable, and easy. And by thus
Anticipating what we have just cause to fear, and putting our selves under a
pre-apprehension of it, we learn the Lesson of Patience, and Resignation before
we have occasion to use it. Thus we are prepared to entertain Affliction with
Courage and Christian fortitude, Thus we habituate our minds to a cheerful and
due reception of them.

But as to this, I desire, SIR, to be rightly understood. I would not have this
Anticipation so wholly to possess your Soul as to spoil the fruition, and take
away all the lawful pleasures and comforts of those worldly blessings God is
pleased to allow you. No; This were to let the thoughts of Evil swallow up the
relish and enjoyment of Good; this were to let your fears drive away all
tranquillity, serenity and happiness out of your mind, and yet never cure nor
remove the danger. As therefore the increase and possession of the many Good
things of this life, as the height of Prosperity ought not to delude us so far,
as never to think of a possible Alteration in our condition, (for tho we are
now healthy and rich, we must think there will come a time when we shall be
sick and under misfortunes.) So we ought to be careful, that the overmuch
thought of this change and alteration, in our Condition, these possible crosses
and misfortunes, do not so much possess our souls, as to make us forget the
Goodness of God, in bestowing these good things upon us, or neglect that duty
we owe to God for them, viz. An honest and charitable use of them in our
callings, relations, places and stations, a hearty, cheerful, and yet with all
a sober and moderate delight and satisfaction in these honest, lawful, Comforts
of life, and all possible praise and thanksgiving to that God, that has been
pleased by entrusting us with these things, to make our lives some way
serviceable to him, profitable to others, and comfortable to our selves.

Think therefore that things may be a great deal worse than they are now, and
that however they be, you ought to acquiess in in the will and pleasure of God
concerning them; but still be thankful for what you have, trust Providence for
the future; and always hope the best.

3. I come now to the due Moderation of our Desires in the want of what the
World calls Good. And it is certain that almost the whole Art of Attaining to
that happy, contented state of life,) after which we are inquiring) consists in
the due regulation and government of our desires. For that mind can never be
contented, that (having not regulated its Desires) is too furiously bent upon
the world, and those things which our own vain thoughts, and the mistaken
estimate of the generality of men call Good in it; that still runs before that
station, and condition God Almighty has ordered for it; and tho it attains
this year what it earnestly persued the last, yet still it will be gadding
farther, and keep before its Acquests. Its thoughts and endeavors are
restless, and still aspiring and aiming higher, and so it can never enjoy what
it has, because it always busies it self too much in the anxious pursuit of
what it has not. Whereas if a man would but bring himself and his thoughts
into a low and just esteem of this world, and all the gaudy vanities in it; if
he would moderate his desires and keep them either under and below, or at least
equal with that Station of life Divine Providence and honest Industry, has
allotted him, he might enjoy his Estate comfortably and happyly, and possess his
Soul in peace and quietness.

Now that our desires may be within their due bounds, and not run gadding after
what they ought not, nor be so irregularly bent upon things often falsely styled
Good. We ought carefully to direct them aright, i. e. to things which we
clearly and distinctly know to be really Good: And the only way so to direct
them is, to employ our understanding or faculty of discerning (which God to
that end has given us) strictly and attentively to examine and consider, the
real goodness of these things, and its measure; that accordingly we may
determine our will, to affect, and earnestly pursue them, or be indifferent
toward them, and fix our Affections upon higher, and nobler objects.

We are therefore to look strictly into Riches, Honors, Pleasures and
Greatness; and consider whether they are not uncertain deceiving things, what
Stability there is in them, what good they will do after death; what quietness
or tranquillity they will yield us, or rather take from us, whether they have in
them any real influence to make us better or wiser. And when we find (as we
needs must) that they have no Stability in them, will do us no Good after
death; we are immediately to withdraw all degrees of love and desire, from
them, and set up our hopes and hearts upon more noble and more durable
enjoyments.

Honors and greatness are known to be rather dangerous and troublesome, than
desirable; rather Curses than Comforts and Blessings. Envy, Malice, Jealousy,
and an infinite number of sins and disturbances always attend them. They make
Thrones, but uneasy Seats, and Honors no more than splendid Miseries. We ought
to consider them as Gilt that covers a bitter Pill; and looking through this
dress, and outside, easily observe, that it conceals a State obnoxious to
danger, solicitude, care, trouble, envy, discontent, unquietness, and infinite
temptations. A Condition, which, if there happen any alteration or change in
the Administration of Government, any distemper or rebellion in the Nation, any
faction among the Grandees, or Insurrection among the Vulgar, will be
infallibly hunted after, pusht at, and ruined: So that Honor is rather a
Burden, than a Privilege; it makes our charge and our accounts the greater;
our rest, and contentment the less. And we may find enough in great employments
to make us sensible of the dangers, troubles, and uneasiness of them, enough to
make us humble; but nothing to make us proud or haughty, or create any great
love and desire of them. To be short, the madness and folly of Greatness, the
vanity of Pleasures, and the deceitfulness of Riches, make up a great part of
the Writings of many Modern and Ancient Authors. I shall not then give you, or
my self, the trouble of tedious proving and insisting upon that, which all-most
every Book you meet with will do for me. Only give me leave to insist a little
particularly upon that immoderate Love and Desire of Riches, which is
observable in the generality of men. The getting and increasing of Estates, is
so much the Business of Mankind, as if they at the same time in buying of Lands
purchased Salvation and Eternal Happyness, to themselves. To let alone all the
dangers, cares, and other ill consequences of Riches, still Mortality, Death,
and the Grave terminate all the fading felicity they do, or can yield us; and
the fear, and pre-apprehension of such an end should be apt, one would think,
to sower and allay even that comfort and pleasure which these would perhaps
otherwise offer. This one thought is sufficient to embitter their enjoyment,
and render them insipid. It Is like the Worm at the bottom of the Gourd, that
withers and spoils their fruition, and puts the possession of them out of the
capacity of making us happy. For great cares, and great fears, can never
consist with true happiness.

Riches, I grant, were to be sought after above all other things, if they
brought content or peace of Soul (the greatest blessing of life) along with
them. But Moralists and Philosophers do usually teach us that Content dwells
not in Courts and Palaces, or Richmens houses, but in Hermitages and amongst
Shepherds and Swains: Where free not only from the Turmoyle, and distraction
of the world, but even from all Idle, Vain, and Ambitious thoughts and desires,
(those general causes of discontent) The poor man learns seriously to veiw the
Vanities of the world in their full proportion, and so to despise them. Where
he likewise can with cheerfulness and innocent joy look upon the honesty and
increase, that little stock of Goods, God is pleased to allow him; and living
in great tranquillity, and satisfaction of mind at present, for the future with
an humble submission refers himself to Providence. Thus the Poor, but honest
Cottager, that patiently endures his Wants, is rich enough, and by his
continued serenity of mind, invites Content to come and dwell with his humble
Fortunes; whilst the Greedy Miser, that spends his time, labor, life, and
very soul in scrapeing wealth together, is never satisfed, never content, never
at rest. For Experience has made it a Proverbial truth -- The more a man has,
the more he wants.

And here to make a little digression.

When my late misfortune put me upon solitude, I took delight in walking alone
in the Meadows and Pastures near this place; to observe the simplicity,
sincerity, and innocence I fancied in the Country Swains and Shepherds; I was
hugely taken with the calmness and security, as likewise with the honest pains
and industry of that manner of life, where they meet not with any occasions, or
opportunities of doing ill, have no alluring Temptations to sin or vanity, no
Cares, no Troubles to disturb the peace and tranquillity of their minds. And
here, to lay my heart naked and open before you, and let you read there my
inmost thoughts, wishes, and desires, I must confess, was I to dispose of my
condition of life, according to my own inclination, I should pitch upon this
before any other. I should willingly choose to be, as those Swains and
Shepherds of old, who tuned their Oaten-Reeds at the foot of mount Ida, or
upon the Banks of Tiber, so much celebrated by the Curious pens of Theocritus
and Virgil. And here bidding farewell to the Noise, Injustice, Ambition, and
Inquietudes of the world, I would give up my self to repose, and solitude, to
the pleasant retiredness of the Fields and Woods, where having less of Vanity,
but more of Prudence, less Pride, but more Virtue, less Ambition, but more
Content, I should fancy to meet with all the Remainders of the Primitive
Golden-age, and almost all the blessings of lost Paradise. Where I might
without interruption not only study the Book of Nature, as delivered to us in
the elaborate glosses of Aristotle, Pliny, etc. but have leisure enough more
sensibly to contemplate all the Excellencies of God, which are legible, and
conspicuous in the Creation, lose my self in admiration of those vast Movables
that adorn the highest Regions of the world, look upon with wonder and
amazement, Natures curious and unimitable Workmanship in every Flower and Herb
of the Field; might discern the being of a God, in every inferior Creature,
and in their fitness and convenience for man's use, read that propriety he has
in them; to be short -- Every where meeting with fresh Instances of the Divine
Goodness, liberality, and bounty, of his Power, Majerty and Glory, of his
Wisdom, Providence and Government (which are, (at least ought be) so many
precepts to learn us, to know, admire, and magnify him,) behave our selves
thankfully, dutifully, and obediently toward him; so many instructions to
teach us Resignation, Contentedness, Submission, and Dependence upon him.)
Every where (I say) discerning the Admirable Instances of Providence and a
Deity, I might wisely dispose and fill my mind for the reception of sublimer
truths; Thus happily spending my days in Contemplation of God and his
mysterious works, till I came to the accomplishment and completion of Knowledge
in another World, where I should spend not only my time, but Eternity it self,
in what I here imperfectly begun.

But to Proceed. -- I could easily prove this Paradox; That, what is beyond
that which is purely necessary, is useless, That he whose possessions are in a
reasonable manner proportionable to the exigencies of his condition of life,
and will afford him and his a competent livelihood, is really rich enough. That
nothing of superfluity, or redoudance can be of any service or use to us,
because we stand in no need of it, have enough without it. That money and
wealth which is over and above what serves for our present subsistence, and the
support and maintenance of our Families, is indeed our Burden, our Care, and
Trouble, but is of no more use to us in our Chests, than if it were in the
Center of the Earth.

Whatsoever therefore is more than enough for our natural support, and the
necessary supply of our Families, and is so employed, is in truth needless,
useless, and unserviceable; because the only use of externals, is to supply
natural necessities. Unless in an Age of Universal Indevotion, you would think
of reviveing that Antiquated Custom of putting out your Spare-money to
Charitable uses, as Buildings, and Endowing Churches, Colleges, Hospitals, etc.
So that it is not the use but abuse of Redundance and Superfluities, that we may
daily observe in all manner of Excess, either in eating, or drinking, in
gratifying our Lusts, Pride, etc. Now the Inference from discourses of this
nature would be, that the desires of men in reference to this life, and its
enjoyments, ought not to be lavish, and extravagant, in gadding after
redundance of Wealth, and Riches, but to be terminated in things of necessity,
for their present subsistence, convenient Food and Raiment for them and theirs;
and that if it please God to allow us a Sufficiency and Competency for the
Necessities of our Natures, and the honest supply of our families, we have
great reason to be contented with it, not only as it is a duty enjoined us, but
upon most evident conviction of sound reason.

Not that any thing we say of this kind should encourage any man to be careless
and remiss in his Business, or Trade, nor hinder him from employing himself
with honesty and diligence, in that Temporal calling and station Providence
has placed him in. No; tho we ought not to set our hearts upon the
conveniences of this life, yet we are not to reject them, but to use them
soberly and thankfully, for they are Blessings that deserve our gratitude, tho
they ought not entirely to take up our thoughts, or desires. God Almighty has
allowed and indulged a moderate care to get these goods and use of them when
got, as in the competent supplies of our Natue with Necessities, the Provision
for our Families, Relations, Dependencies; the diligent and faithful walking in
our Callings, and discharge thereof; but all this is to be done without
Covetousness, and a too eager persuit after these things. And there is a
business of greater importance, which without any neglect of what is necessary
to be done, in order to the common necessities of our lives and Callings, we
ought chiefly to place our endeavors upon, viz. Our Provision for Eternity,
and Salvation.

I should likewise here commend that Golden Mediocrity, (a state of life
wherewith I hope, Sir, you are at present blessed) so much celebrated by the
Heathens; I mean that safe and Eligible Condition, which places a man below
Envy, and yet above Contempt. A Condition, in which it is certain a man cannot
by any enlargement of his Fortune be made either more rich (in a true sense) or
more happy. For on one side a State or Condition too narrow for our
necessities, of Want and Poverty, is subject to so many troubles and
temptations, that it requires a very considerable stock of Patience and
Humility, to undergo it; and on the other, an Estate of Grandeur, Wealth, and
Power, besides its usual dangerous and deadly effects, as Pride, Luxury,
oppression, forgetfulness of God, and Heaven, etc, it makes the person that has
it only an object of Envy to all other men; which being a busy, restless, and
pernicious humor, always finding faults, ever picking, and fomenting quarrels,
and carrying them on very often to dreadful Issues; does eternally study, and
endeavor the ruin of its object. A man ought therefore withal thankfulness to
acknowledge both the Wisdom and Goodnefs of Almighty God in giving him so
competent, and so safe a Condition, by which he does deliver him from all the
difficulties, and inconveniences, dangers, and temptations of both extremes,
great Want, and great Wealth.

But if I should begin with these now mentioned discourses, enter upon the
proof and enlargement that ought to be made upon each of them, I should swell
too big, (the subject being very large and copious.) I shall therefore wave
them, and only desire you not to suffer your self to be too much engaged in
the cares of this life, taking thought (that I may use inspired Expressions)
what you shall eat, or what you shall drink, or where withal to be clothed;
But having by honest labor and industry done your part, I would entreat you
cheerfully to commit your self to Almighty God, Casting all your care upon him.

2. The Second general Proposition was. -- It Is a necessary and absolute Duty
in every man to submit to, and acquiesce (contentedly) in, God Almighties will
and pleasure, in all the several dealings and dispensations of his Providence.
And that upon the account.

1. Of his Omnipotence. 2. Of his Infinite Wisdom. 3. Of his Infinite Goodness.
1. We ought to submit to, and acquiesce in that will and pleasure of God,
considered as an Almighty Being. -- A humble Soul, like a white Sheet of Paper,
must be prepared to receive whatever the hand of God shall imprint upon it,
says an Excellent Heathen Moralist. He is certainly both Fool and Madman, who
struggles with Omnipotence, and most egregiously wicked, that while under the
Rod of Affliction dares murmur at, and revile Providence, as to the Government
of the World; and does not rather correct and amend himself, and resolve to put
a Period to his sins and provocations, that God may put a Period to his
Punishments. No man did ever set upon a due and attentive Contemplation of the
Power, Greatness, and Majesty of God, but besides his being struck into
Amazement and Extacy, he would prostrate himself in the Dust, acknowledging
himself to be but a poor Worm, and therefore infinitely unworthy to dispute the
dispensations, and providence of so great and glorious a Being. And without
all doubt, if we were but under a constant, firm, Conviction that he is a most
Powerful, Wise, and Almighty God, the Author of all things; Present in all
places; who knows our thoughts, our desires, our wants; of incomprehensible
Wisdom, and irresistible Power; is abundantly able to supply us with all
things, that are good and fit for us, beyond what we are able to ask, or think;
that he leaves not any of his works, especially Mankind, without his special
care and super-intendance over them; That he is the great dispenser of all
things; may even upon account of his Sovereignty inflict whatever he pleases,
upon any of his Creature, having an absolute and unlimited propriety in them,
to dispose them, according to his good pleasure: I say, if we were but under a
constant, sound Conviction that these things are really and undeniably true, we
should questionless cheerfully and freely submit to the dealings and disposals
of Almighty God, however grateful or distastful to our present sense. For how
dare any man murmur at the disposal the God of Heaven makes? What have you or I
to do to invade his Prerogatives? Or why may we not as reasonably refuse to
obey God in what he commands, as to submit to him, in what he inflicts? Again,
God has made the Order and Government of the World such, that it is absolutely
necessary that if some be rich, and powerful, Great and Honorable; others must
be poor, and subject, mean and neglected. If all were equally honorable, we
should lose the very notion and Being of Honor; because there is no Honor where
there is no Superiority, (Which we must not suppose in a State of Equality)
honor, being a preference given to some persons, for their Wisdom, Virtue, or
other extraordinary Merits above other men. And if all were equally Powerful,
there would be no Power or Government at all; the very Notion of Government
inferring Subjection and Power supposing Superiority. Why therefore should not
you or I be content to be of the lower sort of men, since the order, frame, and
texture of the world requires that some such there must be? Or why should we be
so unjust and unreasonable, to desire that the lot of Poverty, or Meanness of
Condition should be other men's, and not ours? Or if we refuse it, why may not
other men with as much Reason and Justice on their sides, do so likewise? If
therefore God shall please to give us, Wealth, Honor and Prosperity, we must be
thankful, and careful to employ these Blessings to Gods Service and Glory; If
not, we are still to be patient and content; and what ever our Circumstances
be, we are obliged under the greatest Obligations of Reason and Equity to a
quiet and patient, nay moreover, to a free, and cheerful compliance with that
State, and Condition of life, God Almighty has allotted us. And our life here
being (as it were) Militant, under our Great Captain and General God Almighty,
our part is not to dispute or offer Council; but to obey his orders, whether it
be to dig in the Trenches, or stand upon the Watch, or Fight. Finally, it does
not belong to us to choose our parts, but to act them. And God appointing us
time, and place, and the Part we are to act upon the Theater of the World, we
ought to apply our selves to the fittest means of representing that part
allotted to us, not to take upon us to murmur and repine at it, especially,
considering that it is his pleasure we should do so, to whom we owe our selves,
and whose Will we daily pray may be done.

2. We ought to be Content in, and cheerfully submit to, the will and pleasure
of God, considered, as an Allwise Being.

As God Almighty is to be acknowledged the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth,,
the great dispencer and Ruler of all events, in the world; so likewise is he a
most Just and Allwise Being; And therefore we ought not only to submit to his
Will, as it is an act of necessity, which we cannot control, or as an act of
obedience to our Sovereign; but as an act of choice and of prudence, because
our Maker is infinitely wiser than our selves, and perfectly to be folfowed,
and obeyed. For what is chosen be the Wisdom of God must be infinitely better
then what we choose; it is certainly much more prudently done to commit our
selves to God for Council, Guidance, and Direction, than to be left to the
headiness and blindness of our own councels, and to eat the bitter fruit of our
own rashness and folly.

For we may (especially in some late horrid Instances) easily observe, what
small occurrencies quite shatter and disorder and overturn the most Politic,
Subtle, Secret, and Well-laid designs in the world. And notwithstanding the
long deliberation, and forecast, the huge prospect and foresight of
difficulties, the great reserves and preparations against all imaginable
obstacles; in a word, notwithstanding all the advantages of Power, Secrecy,
Combination of Parties, etc. one poor unthought of Accident, craks in sunder,
and disjoynts, the whole Elaborate project, Destroys and Ruins the Great
Design. God Almighty thereby telling us, that the Actions of men, and their
successes are in the power of the Divine Will, and teaching us not to trust to
our own wisdom, in contriving and cutting out our own Fortunes, but to cast our
care opon him, who knows better then we what is fittest for us. Now unless we
could imagine our selves wiser then God, it will always be our Duty to resolve
our poor, narrow, improvident wills, into the will of the Most Wise God; who
will not suffer any hurt or evil, to befall us, unless it be for some greater
good upon another account. For tho some particular dispensations of Providence
may seem unto us to be difficult and obscure, His Judgments being unsearchable,
and his ways past finding out; yet we may be most sure, there is an Excellent
Contrivance in all of them; and there are Special Reasons and Ends, whereby the
Wisdom of such Dispensations may be Justified. As, to quicken our Relish of,
and our Thankfulness for, those mercies we enjoy; to Teach us resignation to
his Divine Will; to Enlarge our Experience; to prevent the surfeits of
Prosperity, and awaken as it were with Thunder, our Drowzy Souls, that have
long slept too securely in Sin, etc. Nay, we may consider Afflictions, as often
times the occasions of great temporal advantages. And we must not look upon
them, as they sit heavy upon us, but as they serve some of Gods ends, and the
Purposes of Universal Providence. Thus once a noble Heathen, after he had
experienced the great Advantage his Banishment gave him, as to his Temporal
preferment, cried out, Periissem, ni periissem. Thus if a man could have opened
one of the Pages of the Divine Council, and there read the Event of Joseph's
being sold to the Merchants of Midian, he might with great reason have dried up
the young-man's tears; And we may from an Infinite number of instances safely
conclude that God esteems it one of his peculiar Glories to bring Good out of
Evil.

So that whatever it is God appoints for us, it is not only fit for us to submit
to, but to choose, and cheerfully, and thankfully, as well as patiently and
quietly, to follow and embrace. And however troublesome, uneasy and grievous,
the Dispensations of Providence are to us, we ought patiently to acquiesce in
them, and wait upon God's All Sufficiency and Goodness, either to remove them
in his good time, or to support us under them.

3. We ought to submit to the will and pleasure of Almighty God in the
afflicting us, upon account of his Infinite Goodness; and this in point of
common gratitude. For if Afflictions be certainly sent as a real favor and
kindness; If (according to the Royal Prophet) God does indeed love those whom
he chastizes; Then they ought to be received with gratitude and
acknowledgement, not murmuring and repining. For the return of thanks (the
least and meanest requital) is indispensibly due to kindness received; And you
will scarce meet with a man so much a stranger to the common Rules of Civility,
as not gratefully to resent, and acknowledge a favor done him; or so void of
humanity, as to be angry or vexed, with any person, for being too much his
Friend. Affliction therefore sent out of Love, ought to be received with
thankfulness. Now it is undoubtedly true, that Affliction comes from God's
Love. For its end is to amend and better the man; and we may undeniably
conclude, that God loves him whom he does good to, whom he labors and
endeavors to save, and make happy with his own Eternity. Afflictions (says a
famed Moralist) are like a Friends Reproof, or a Fathers Correction, trouble
the man into Amendment, pinch the Soul into greater Purity. They make us more
humble, watchful and careful; draw us of from too much resting on the world;
make us bethink us of our Duty, and return to God by Repentance and Obedience.
Thus so long as God Almighty is pleased to afflict us, it is plain we are under
his Discipline, under his care. No man's Condition is desperate, so long as the
Physician continues his Administration, nor is any man wholly forsaken of God
nor past his care, so long as he is under Affliction, for this is a Medicine,
that without our own default will certainly recover, or better us.

If a Good man be not blessed with Success and Prosperity, yet even his Crosses
and Disappointments are turned into Blessings; as making him more humble, and
less esteeming, this present world. An Eminent Example of this we have in the
person of our late Martyred Sovereign. His Imprisonment was the happiest time
of his life to him. There it was that instead of a Prison, he begun to find a
passage into Liberty and true Freedom, and those better thoughts which the
crowd of Business, and the Intanglements of Interest had barred from his mind;
His meeting now with no such resistance, but being quickened from his present
misfortune, wrought Resolutions in him worthy a Christian, and a Martyr. There
did the Vanity of the world, the Folly of humane greatness, with all that is
splendid on this side Immortality, discover it self free from that false
Varnish, that had formerly wrought too much upon humane Infirmity. This raised
in him a just undervaluing and loathing of the bewitching, but deceiving Charms
of this world; And this made him acknowledge Gods great Goodness to him in that
restraint. Thus it is an Everlasting truth, that -- All things work together for
the best to them that love, and fear God: Thus Afflictions you see come for the
good and amendment even of good men, are always sent for our instruction or
prevention of Sin, and it is our fault and weakness, if they have not the
blessed effect. Now since there are few or no persons, who have been observant
of Gods dealing toward them, but are able to say from their own Experience, --
' It Is good for them, that they have been afflicted; We have reason to be
thankful for them, at least to receive them with Submission, Patience and
Content. Especially considering that God owes us nothing, is under no
obligation, no law of conferring benefits upon us, but all that we have, we
have of free gift and bounty: And Morality tells us, that if we receive an Alms
from another, it is very reasonable that we should be content, with what the
other pleases to give, without prescribing to his Liberality.

The best of men are Sinners, and therefore deserve far worse at the hands of
God, than the worst Afflictions, that do or can befall any man in this life. If
we therefore be not so happy, as we desire, it is well we are not so miserable
as we deserve; if things go not so well, as we could wish they had done, its
well they are not so ill as they might justly have been. And the worst we here
suffer, being less then we deserve, and the least we enjoy more than we can in
Justice expect; We ought in reason to be content and thankful for the least
Mercy; And to be patient and humble under the greatest Evil.

There have been Examples of great Afflictions, that have befallen better men
then we are And when our Condition is at the worst, it is much better than we
deserve, or what many others, better then we, enjoy. The Evils then we suffer,
being much short of our Demerit, the Good we enjoy much beyond what we Deserve,
what absolute and indispensible Necessity, lies upon us to be Content with our
Condition, though Afflicted or Poor! For though we want something that others
have, yet we have somewhat (by the Bounty of God) that many as good, if not
better, want. We should learn Contentment by considering others wants, and our
own Enjoyments; And not learn discontent from others Enjoyments, and our own
Wants.

Men would questionless be patient under Sufferings of any kind, if they
carried with them, a due sense of their unworthiness; and upon a judicious
account looked upon their meanest, lowest, worst Condition, as better than they
deserved at the hands of God. The best of Mankind may easily find, that all
that which was truly Good through the whole Course of his life, is a pitiful,
slender Scantlet, and would be infinitely outweigh'd by his Sins, Omissions and
Defects. And the due Comparison and Prospect of this, would quickly give him a
seasonable lecture, of humility and patience. And there is no man but upon a
strict and impartial search of himself, may find enough to deserve Affliction,
somewhat amiss that requires amendment, some Evils growing into Exorbitancy; in
a word, Corruptions enouth to grow into greater Enormities; which the
All-seeing God knows, and in mercy, and goodness prevents by the Corrosives and
Catharticks of Affliction. So great and constant is his love to us, even in his
punishing us! How many daily Sins and Offenses do we continually stand guilty
of? How many contempts and abuses of Spiritual and Temporal Blessings, have we
to answer for? And yet God does not punish these with an utter deprivation of
them. Nay, Corruption and Vice is con-genial with our very Being. In every year
you will find the Iniquity incident to that Age, And as we improve in Stature,
Age, and Knowledge, our Sins are rather varied, and changed, then forsaken. And
yet God does not (as most justly he might) cut us off in the midst of our
Iniquities, but spares, and gives us time and opportunities for Repentance. Now
if he be thus patient toward us in our sinning against him, when we oppose and
provoke him, it is but reason that we should be patient, in our sufferings from
him, when he endeavors to heal and reclaim us.

To Conclude: Gods Love and Goodness still continues even in Affliction; for he
has ordained, after a few years or days thus spent, after a few Afflictions
undergone, with Christian Courage and Fortitude, An Eternal State of
unchangeable and perfect happiness. And Death the worst of temporal Evils will
cure all these maladies, and deliver up the soul into a state of endless
comfort and felicity.

I Promised, Sir, in this short Discourse to confine my self within the Rules
of mere Morality, and I think I have been just to my Resolution. As to the
First Prosition, about Regulation of Passions, it is acknowledged to be a Moral
Theme, and that nothing almost can be writ upon that subject, which will nor
fall within the proper and peculiar Province of a Moralist. As to the Second
Proposition, Touching Submission to God, and Acquiescence in his pleasure, at
all times, and in all things; I will (upon your desire) give you the Names of
those Heathen Moralists, whose writetings do Authorize most of what I have here
set down. And how far bare Morality has gone in this point, I shall in
Conclusion of all represent to you in the words of a Heathen Poet.

Juvenal. Satyr 10.
Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris-
Nam pro Jucundis aptissima, etc.
Boyle's Seraphick Love, page 31.
Unto the Wiser God's the Care permit,
Of what is for us and our affairs most sit.
They will for Pleasant things the Best confer,
To whom man is, than to himself, more dear;
We by our blinder Passions led astray
Do for a Wife, perhaps, or Children pray.
Which they may chance refuse us our of love,
Knowing what both the Wife and Boys would prove.
I pray God Grant that these, and the like Considerations (which I hope will
work the better, because they come from your Son) may be effectual to create
holy resolutions in you, Contentedly to bear what ever God pleases to lay on
you. And may Heaven bestow on you such an Entire and Perfect Resignation of
your self to Providence, such a cheerful acquiescence in that state and
condition of life, God has placed you in; such truly Christian Patience under
Afflictions, that being in a Constant Readyness, with satisfaction and
thankfulness to receive whatever comes from his Will, and always
acknowledging his Wisdom, Goodness, and Justice in all his dealings toward
you, your life may be as comfortable and happy, as it is capable of being in this
world; and most excellently disposed for a better in Glory. I am, with all
imaginable Duty, and Observance,

Dear Sir, Your most entirely Affectionate, and obedient Son and Servant, R. S.
Qu. Coll. O^on. Dec. 20. 1682.
A Prayer for Submission to the Divine Will.
BLessed Lord, who know what is fit for us better then our selves, and
love us more truly then we do our selves; into thy hands I resign my Soul and
Body, Will and Affections, all I am and have in the World. Deal with me and
mine, as shall seem expedient to thy godly Wisdom. Leave me not in the hands of
my own counsel, my own hurtful devices and fancies, as a sore punishment for my
Sin: but take me wholly to thy self; dispose and order me after thy own good
pleasure. And make me not only sensible of thy love in all thy dealings with
me, but also thankful to Thee for the same, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for Contentment.
ALmighty God, who art kind even to the unthankful and to the evil, I humble my
self in the dust before thee; bewailing earnestly the secret risings of my
heart against Thee, my vile misconstructions and hard thoughts of thy
Providence. Thou know the anguish of my Soul; O Lord pardon, O Lord forgive.
Suffer me not, O my God, to be lost in my own wild murmurings and repinings;
but draw me graciously to thy self. Open mine Eyes, that in all these Crosses
of mine I may discern thy Love; and enable me by thy grace to welcome them, as
so many special marks and tokens of thy favor. It Is of very faithfulness Thou
have caused me to be troubled; O make me sensible of thy mercy. Send out thy
light and thy truth, that I may see the wonderful blessings I enjoy, and
continually praise Thee for them. Reconcile me daily more and more to my
present Condition. It Is the Condition thou have placed me in: it is fit and
proper for me, thou who art infinitely wise have allotted it: and thou art ever
gracious in thy alotments, it is the very best Condition I am capable of: Lord
make me thankful. Amen.

FINIS.

