THE SECOND PART OF THE MINISTER OF STATE.

Written by Monsieur de SILHON, Secretary to the late Cardinal RICHELIEU.
Englished by H.H.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, and are to be sold at his Shop at the George
in Fleetstreet, near St. Dunstan's Church, 1663.

To the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY.
SIR,
THE Women of Rome offered Jewels, The Greeks Silver and Gold, Sylla his Blood,
and Jeptha his only Child for Victory; But your Majesty made no such
Offerings, And yet obtained a Greater Victory than any of them, A Victory
without Blood: And as it is the Highest Victory that has been gained, So, in
forgiving Your Enemies, Your Majesty has taken the Highest Revenge; And as
very Acceptable to God, Because Forgiveness proceeds from the Heart, And, that
God, for Christ's Sake has forgiven Us.

The Prince that is Feared has cause to Fear, And, it is safer for Princes to be
Beloved for their Clemency, than Feared for their Punishments; The Law of the
Jews was the Law of Fear, But of Christians, the Law of Love, And the Enemies
of Caesar did more envy the Pard'ning of the Pompeians, than the Killing of
Pompey; Caesar is very Eminent in History for Pard'ning of Injuries, Alexander
for giving of Rewards: Yet to the Unthankful person Alexander would not give a
Reward, nor Caesar Pardon an Injury: And there is nothing that moves God to be
less Careful of us, than Ingratitude; which like the Sea, turns Fresh springs
into Salt water, and may mind them of their Duty and Gratitude, who are Guilty
of the contrary.

To present Your Majesty with a Serious Frenchman in an English Habit is to
invert the Mode and Humor of Court, And to expose my Confidence to Your
Majesty's Accurate Judgment in the Elegancies and Criticismes of the English
and French Languages, which are much Improved by the Learning and Industry of
them, who delight in adding to other men's Inventions; And, were not this Age
Curious in the Advance of Sciences and Arts, They would have their Cadences,
and be subject to Mortality with other things; Yet, they that busy themselves
too much upon Speculative subtilties, forsake the solid Foundations of
Religion, and pry so far into the Nature and unrevealed purposes of God, as to
forget the Nature and Duty of Man.

The Subject matter of my Author, is fitted to the Meridian of Statesmen and of
State Affairs, and communicates not only Politic Essays, but abstruse
Philosophical Notions, which are of Familiar converse with Your Majesty, whose
Experience in the Intricacies of Government gives the Rule of Conduct to Your
Privy Counselors; And what was said of the French King Lewis the Eleventh, is
verified in Your Majesty, That Your Majesty carries Your Council with You
wheresoever Your Majesty Goes.

That Your Majesty may be the Happy Instrument of Good to Church and State is
the daily prayer of

Your Majesty's most Obedient, and most Faithful Subject and Servant, HENRY
HERBERT.

TO THE READER.
READER, I give thee here the second part of the Minister of State, which long
since I promised thee, and Confess it unjust to make thee Languish so long in
expectation of so little a thing, and that thy good reception of the first
parts deserved better Expedition, and to supply that by Promptitude of Labor
which Could not be paid by the Excellency of the Work; but that which Caused
the delay and suspension of the performance of my promise, Was the Condition of
the Time and the present State of Europe, Having proposed unto myself not only
to speak of it, but to make it the Foundation and Basis of my Reasonings; In
the Execution of this Design many Impediments delayed me, as a person that had
nothing, but Moveable dust to build upon; And the frequent and unexpected
Revolutions, which the War has perpetually produced have often taken the
prospects from me, which I had taken, and made the Foot to slide, which was
Advanced toward my work. But to perform my promise at last, I have Leapt over
these ill paces, and have stolen betwixt these Rocks, to gain the place, where
I would Land, and where I was expected by the too favorable and too obliging
desires of many persons; And I have made the Ill fortune of the Times and the
Condition of Affairs to be subservient to my designs, and am entered upon a
Cariere, the War has laid open unto me with Convenience, and which Peace will
shut up at its Coming in by disarming spirits of sharpness, and in blunting the
points of Pens as of Arms; I could have heartily desired that the Ambition of
our Enemies, had been less Immoderate, and that the Attempts and Invasions they
have made upon the Estates and Liberties of our Allies had not tired the Kings
Patience nor Constrained that Generous Prince to take into his Protection and
secure by his Arms them, whom he could not defend by his Intercessions, and
good Endeavors; However, since the Lot is Cast, and that Justice has drawn
the Sword to revenge the Injury which Reason nor Intercession could cause to be
repaired, I thought, my course of life not permitting me to serve the King in
his Armies, that I ought to serve him some other way, and that there are Means
to Incommodate his Enemies without using of Violence; That the House of Austria
being the great Adversary the King has in hand, resolving to raise the
Greatness of their Ambition upon two Engines, Force, and Artifice, and this
last, though the most immaterial, removing sometimes Burdens, and sometimes
overthrowing great Weights, which by force were Immo^eable; I did conceive,
that I should not perform a Small Act, if I could render it less profitable or
less powerful; And cure the spirits of other Princes, and the spirits of their
Subjects, of the multitude of Errors wherewith that House has prepossessed
them to its Advantage; And break the Chain that holds them Prisoners to the
great prejudice of the Christian Commonwealth. I believed, that the Kings good
Genius, for that purpose might inspire my Writings with the same Virtue and
Success, which heretofore the Eloquent Discourse of Sir of Langey had in
changing the Belief and the Inclinations of a part of Germany, when Charles the
fifth had made such Malignant Impressions against his Master, that with great
Difficulty he obtained Audience of any person. We are not altogether in that
Distress, and the Corruption of Resentments, is not so general, as it was in
that Country; There are nevertheless many Enchantments both there and in other
places, and darknesses to dissipate, which are favorable to the House of
Austria, and this is my present Work, according to the Little Understanding God
has given me, and the little Knowledge gained in the Matters of the World; The
manner of Assaulting this House, (which I do otherwise ^^^^^ence with
Exceptions to the Kings and my Countries Interest) cannot be ge^^ler, unless it
were too light; And I blend so much Courtesy with the War I make it, that I
do^^^ not but many will Accuse me of too much Moderation, considering Chi^^^y
the Impudency and Venom of so many Libels, which his Creature have Cause^ to
fly from all parts against the King and his Ministers of State; But Imitation
is not a valuable Excuse for ill proceedings, and every sort of Revenge is not
decent for honest persons. The praises I give, to the good Qualities of the
Princes of that House, and to the Commendable part in the form of their
Government, which I do not Conceal, make it sufficiently appear, That nothing
but the Truth and the Interest of the public have forced me to discover the
Defects, which are of Importance for the public to know, and whereof it were
to be wished that these Princes were exempt for the peace of the World, and for
their peculiar Acquiescence. It were, I say to be wished, that these Princes
had not staid till other Princes had put bounds to their Ambition, and to
Attain their proposed Ends, had not made use of all sorts of Means. That if
they are notwithstanding ill satisfied with me, and take an ill Conceit against
my Book, I shall not think it strange, knowing very well, that Wounds cannot be
handled without giving Pain, nor some Truths published without gaining of
Hatred.

As it is them with some Trouble, that I do undraw the Curtain, wherewith the
House of Austria disguiseth their Defaults, and discover the Plaster,
wherewith it hides her Spots; I avow also, that it is with an unspeakable Joy,
that I have endeavored to represent the Kings Conduct altogether contrary to
theirs; That it is with an Incredible satisfaction, that I do render the Homage,
and pay the Tribute to his Person, which are due of natural Right to his
Excellent virtues; And that it is no small Content to Conceive, that this Essay
made for his service proceeds rather from my Choice and Zeal for his Glory,
than from any precise Duty required by Subjection. The Actions of this Princes
Life, are so many Wonders, on what side soever you regard them; And who can
propose to himself a more agreeable object than that of his Reign, Where Virtue
and Fortune seem to dispute to Emulation for production of the fairest Effects;
for provision of the greatest Recompenses for the highest Merit; for the
publishing of it to the most advantage; o whom the honor of the highest
Enterprises shall be given, and to whom shall be attributed the most happy and
highest Events, This is not all; This Reign, which in its self is so admirable,
and from whose form Issues so many Lights, as are proper for it, receives yet a
greater Luster and new Occasions of Admiration from the Opposition made to his
Reign by our Neighbors, and by the Parallel of their Affairs with ours. I will
not therefore enlarge or trouble myself to prove, what is not contested, and
which in a short time may be better known; when the Clouds the War of necessity
Interposeth to our felicities are dispersed, It will appear more Entire, and
with that abundance of Blessings, which Peace ought to Crown it withal.

The King next to God is the principal Spring, and the first Principle of the
wonders we speak of; It Is also to him, to whom I do attribute the first Honor
and Principal Glory, Though much reflects upon them, who have been the
Instruments of so prosperous a Reign; Who have seconded that Excellent Prince
with their Counfels and Actions; Who have aided in steering the helm of the
State, and to guide the Ship to a glorious Haven. I would not descend to that
particular, nor prepossesse the spirit of any preson, I have not made
distribution of that Glory, nor taken from the Reader, the right of giving it
to whom he shall think worthiest of it; I leave him then this privilege Entire,
and the Liberty to make Judgment, as it shall seem good unto him; I have not
offended against Justice, when I have made use of that right, or that the same
faith and sincerity have not always reigned in what I have written for the
past time, as in what I now write, and shall say for the future; And it is that
little good, which you may find in my writings of this Nature, or at least
that, whereof I dare glory. For they do me much wrong, who have accused me to
have Commended some persons with Excess of praises, and with Immoderate
compliance; That is very contrary to my humor, and I would have them know,
that it is as impossible for me to praise falsely, as to blame causlessly, and to
se^k Paint for what is foul, as to cast Ink upon a fair face. I have written my
Thoughts, the Words have issued from the soul; Painting has not Contributed
any thing to the subject, the soul represents; It Is a proceeding I will never
forsake; And Fortune has not hopes enough to give me, nor good enough to do
me, to oblige me to betray my Conceptions, and to tell a Lie, which is the
greatest of all faults. Posterity will speak with much more advantage than I
have done of the actions which I have praised; strangers applaud highly, what I
have said, and even they, who are affrighted, and whose eyes they dazzle, make
the same Judgment; if I have sinned against the Rules of good sense, and if my
Reasonings are found Weak, they shall very much oblige me in reforming them,
and in instructing of me. It Is a courtesy not to be rejected, and a blind man
should be very unhappy in refusing to be guided by a person that has a good
sight. This second part, and the third, which shall shortly follow, will open a
fairer field, and furnish a more Ample matter of Instruction for them, who
would do me that favor; I here they shall find more mysterious Politiques and
more profoundly handled, than in the first part, and there may be seen more
Lively and more Natural touches of that Incomparable Conduct, which will not
receive its true value but from the future, and from the Age of the World.

Thou will excuse, Reader, this small Apology, which ought not to be denied to
Truth, the Chief and best Condition of my works; I come to the Subject of this
Book, whereof the two first books have for Title and Matter, The Council of War
of a Prince; It Is not that I pretend there, to expound the Precepts of the
Military Art, or to show the Order of a Siege and of a Battle; such things are
not of my profession or force; my design is only to give some Notions and some
Lights to them, who having the honor to be of the Princes Council, ought to be
furnished, and able to give an Opinion upon the War, the most Jealous of all
humane Actions, and the most important of all politic Affairs; It Is certain,
that since a Man is not called to the Exercise of Justice without Learning and
Approved abilities; no person ought to rise rashly and without preparation to
that severe and dreadful Tribunal of Justice, which the Prince executes
against himself, and ought to exercise against other Princes; To that Tribunal,
I say, where no person can advise a War without giving Sentence of Death
against a great Number of Innocent persons, who are obliged to perish in the
Just or Unjust Quarrels of their Masters.

I pass from thence to the Third part, and there continue my Method, supposing
that the Arms of a Prince cannot have a juster Employment than to purge the
State of Civil Wars; And to divert them, which foreign Enemies Endeavor to
bring into the Country; And having declared that the King has stopped the great
spring of the Troubles of the Kingdom in suppressing the Hugonot faction; I
show, That he has disappointed the great design of Monarchy of the House of
Austria, in which was subtly and necessarily laid up the Ruin of France.
These wonderful Events, being considered, I conceive, that no man can say any
thing of so great advantage of this Prince, that is not beneath his Glory, and
that Rhetorique wants Figures, or the Art of Sophisters boldness to equal the
greatness of these two Successes; but since the Design of this pretended
Monarchy, which many persons of old date have attributed to the House of
Austria, passes into the Spirits of some men for an Invention or Fable; I am
resolved, to draw this. Truth from the Darkness where it was hid, and to clear
the belief of Princes and of Nations, with the Lights that History has
furnished, and with the results from the Conclusions of the Designs and
Enterprises of the Princes of that House, wherein I have endeavored, to give
them as much honor as is possible for me, in acting rationally and in order to
the proportion and appropriation of the Means to the Ends, they had designed.
For the World well knows, that I have not been of Ferdinands Council nor of
Charles the fifth, nor of the other Princes of that Line. I have yet, Reader,
two or three things, to say, before I finish, and it concerns me that thou
should know them. The first is, that in speaking of the raising of the
Catalans, and particularly of the Insurrections of the Portugeses, which
immediately followed, It seems, that I do presage and play the Prophet of
things past; To which I answer, It was foreseen, that it might be objected unto
me, and that I had not exposed my self to that Assault, if many persons of
great Quality and Merit, had not seen the same things in a discourse, which I
made from the beginning, and at the Apparition of that Occurrence, before the
Portugeses had thrown off the Spanish Domination; The second thing is, That
Foreiners may possibly take offense in that I do touch some Errors in the
persons of their Nation and discover some stains. But I assure my self, that
they will be easily satisfied, when they Consider, that it is not by a spirit of
Disdain or motion of Hatred, and that the manner of my Entertainment, is not
different from that which I give my Countrymen, whose defects and stains, I do
not hide or suppress, when the Truth and Necessity of the discourse oblige me
to expose and produce them. The third thing is, that a false date is stolen
into my Narratives, which is that, of the Treaty of Smalchalde and it may be of
some other Anachronismes, which are of no Importance to my design; And that it
satisfies me, that the facts whereon my Reasonings are grounded and built are
true, without respect to the time wherein they were done.

These Advices, Reader, being received, Thou may give what Entertainment thou
please this Book; Whatever it be, it shall give me no Trouble; being certain,
that no person can disappoint me, of the first Recompense and Principal End,
that I proposed to my self in writing, which is, the satisfaction of
Endeavoring the service of my Prince and Country.

SECOND PART OF The Minister of State. Of the Counsel of War of a Prince.
First BOOK.
First Discourse.
Whence it proceeds, That Beasts of the same Kind do not make War amongst
themselves as Men do; That Irregular Passions are the Cause of that Disorder;
That Duels are against the Right of Men, and particularly against the Authority
of the Prince.
AT the Entry of this Discourse, there is Matter of Astonishment; That Wars are
seen amongst Men; Rules invented, and an Art formed to direct them; That among
all the Arts exercised in the Society of Men, there is none that casts so great
a light, or that gains so great a portion of glory. And that in the Old Law,
War is found to be so solemnly Authorized, and, in a manner, Consecrated, by
the Command of God, as that amongst his high and most glorious Titles, He has
chosen That of the God of Armies. The inclination which naturally the greatest
part of Things has, not only to Conserve It Is Being, but also to Multiply
it, is evidently contrary to this Visible folly which incites Men to the
Destruction of one another; And we do not see, That other Creatures of the same
kind, make amongst themselves particular assigned Combats, or that they
assemble in Troops to decide any difference by Murder, and by the slaughter of
the greatest part of them. That Dereliction and Prostitution men make of their
Lives, and the Subjects for which they so willingly Sacrifize them, being many
times but a little smoke and opinion; Are they not the effects of a secret
Instinct? That it is not their Chiefest good, nor their Ultimate felicity,
which without doubt it should be, if there were not a greater Good: And the
Wars, which God permits or commands, where Life is given up as a prey to so
many Accidents that destroy it, are they not Clear evidences, and a Manifest
conviction, of the small Account God makes of it, and that it is not the
fairest present he makes to men, nor the subject, wherein accomplished the End
for which he gives them their Being?

But not to wander out of our way, and to take off the Amazement, whereof we
have proposed the Causes; I say, It must not be thought strange, that men enter
so often into Quarrels with their fellows, since they are so seldom at Accord
with themselves, and are scarce free from Troubles and Disorders within, and
that their very Souls are the Fields of the Combats that are fought, and the
Enemies that make the War quarter always within them. This disorder, which
happens in the condition of Men, and not of Beasts, in whom no discords, seem
to arise, nor contrariety of parts to be formed, has many springs from whence
it issues; the first is, as all the world knows, the Constitution of their
Nature, and the diverse orders of the parts that compose it; the Inclinations of
the one are ordinarily opposed to the inclinations of the other, and their
Appetites agitated with such Contrary motions, that they which cause the Fire
to arise are not more opposed, than they that make the Earth to descend. So
that there is neither peace nor quietness in the Interior of Man, longer than
the Superior part is obeyed by the Passions, and that the Appetite where they
are formed, permits the yoke, and resists not the orders that are imposed upon
it.

If it happen, and it is the second Spring of disorders, That in these Intestine
Wars and Skirmishes, which tear the Soul, the Interior part obtains the
Victory, yet Calm and Rest attends not upon that fatal Conquest, but greater
Emotions, and more dangerous Tempests are raised: And as there are People of so
unquiet a Nature, and of a humor so turbulent, as that they can never remain in
peace, and that of necessity they must stir within, when they have nothing to
do without, and kindle Civil, when they have finished Foreign Wars: So when the
Passions find no resistance from Reason, and have neither Bridle to retain
them, nor Barrier to stay them, they abate not of their Inquietude; they turn
their Forces against themselves; they trouble and hinder one another in the
pursuit of their Objects: Love flacks the activity of Ambition; Avarice stops,
the progress of Love; and the poor Soul, the Subject which these Furies
torment, and the Sea these Winds agitate, suffers more by their violence than
can be expressed; yet Reason is never so fully obscured, nor so generally
disarmed by the Passions, but that some beam always remains, which makes
visible to the Soul, at least at certain encounters, the Deformity of her
condition, and points out her shame and remorse for base condescentions. I
could here produce, if it were not a little from the purpose, though not
unprofitable, another Cause of Man's misfortune, who delivers himself up to the
mercy of his Passions, and permits them to take the place of his Reason, which
she ought to have over them: Man being unable to put of the Desire of
happiness, which Nature has planted in the Center of his Soul, nor to forbear
acting to its Content, though he intend it not; and incapable to fill or calm
it, but in the possession of that End for which he received his Being, as the
cause it was given unto him, or in the exercise of the Virtues, the means of
conducting him thither, having obtained the other good things pursued, and
enjoyed the other desired objects, is to begin again, and is as empty as He was
before; that instead of going straight on, He turned the back to the aspired
felicity; And nothing remains, if more were not to be feared, but a dull
saciety that besots him, a profound weariness of spirit that renders him
insupportable to himself, and such an inevitable melancholy as gnaws and frets
men who fall from their hopes.

As then, the Irregular Passions are the cause of the Intestine Troubles which
men suffer, and of the ill intelligence they hold within themselves; they are
also the cause of the Quarrels raised amongst particular persons; and of the
Wars made amongst Princes. The enterprises, which Ambition, Avarice, and the
like disordred motions form in some, to the damage of others, and the
oppositions made to their violence and rapidity, put all Civil Societies into
combustion, and cut asunder all the Bonds of the Politic Body. It were to the
loss of my Expressions, and to the abuse of the Readers patience, to labor the
confirmation of a truth, which Experience has taught in all places, Reason
causes to be touched with the finger, and whereof History gives constant
evidences.

As to Beasts, it is no wonder if they are not subject to so great strokes, and
to those furious storms, wherewith God has permitted Man's conditition to be
beaten; Their Souls are not divided by its Powers into opposite Regions, and
make not in them the conjunction of two different worlds, the Spiritual and
Temporal, as the Souls of Men do; but all it is Inclinations and Faculties are
drawn, as the Philosophers say, from the breast and power of the Matter; it
has no Appetite but what is bounded, and a small thing satisfies it; and as
Nature guides it by a true light to the Objects most proper, and prescribes the
degree of Enjoyment that is most convenient, and cannot exceed; she provides
also objects in such Abundance, and of so Easy an acquisition, that all the
Individuals of the same kind find what is necessary for them, and without
labor.

To divert these evils, wherewith the Humane condition's afflicted, or to
correct the malignity, and to dull the edge of them, Divine Providence has not
deprived the Soul of Means and convenient Remedies; if that had been, it had
left too shameful and too visible a stain upon that fair Economy, wherewith it
governs the World; and that admirable congruity it has observed in all the
other parts which compose it, had been belied in the noblest part of them, It
had acted with the imprudence of an Artificer, who lays out all his force, and
the excellency of his Art, upon a base subject, and takes pains to carve a
piece of Glass curiously, and to commit great faults in a matter of much price,
or to set a rich Diamond ill, which must abate the luster of his Art, and honor
due to Nature. But that is prevented; for as to the principal good of men, as
the inward calm and traquillity of the Soul, and victory of Reason over the
Passions, whence tranquillity and calm do issue, the Means to obtain them, is
in their power, and therein they depend not upon the fancies of Fortune, nor
upon the Passions of other Men: Yet since the Infidelity of Adam, and the
unhappy destiny of corrupted Nature, there are not only great Combats to be
fought, and strange Difficulties to be overcome for that Victory; but also
great Reliefs to be expected, and eminent supplies for Philosophy, and greater
from Religion; and the Grace of God is never wanting to them, who are not
wanting to themselves, and the good successes of this War attend always upon
good Designs, and lawful Resistances.

As for the spoils which Passions commit without, and the impetuous motions
wherewith they disorder Society; if they overflow against particular men; and
if they produce injuries and outrages, and the Revenge and Reparations which
offended persons take by their hands; greater and more dangerous Excesses
succeed the first, The Preservatives and Remedies against these evils, are
found in the same Society wherein they are seen to bud and grow.

Wherefore there is no Government in the world, of what Spirit soever it is
animated, and under what Form soever it is established, which has not
restrained from the hands of particular persons the use of Vengeance, to
transmit it to their Magistrates, as persons disinteressed; and for fear also,
lest Corruption should penetrate even to the Functions of their Charges, and
that the Justice they ought to distribute, should be changed by some tincture
of Passion which might invisibly steal in, it has been ordained, That the
dispensation should be made by the ministration of the Laws, that are
incorruptible, and being incapable of Affection and Knowledge, are by
consequent incapable of Passions, and inaccessible by Love and Hatred, by
Favor and Riches: And that there may be no power in the State, but what shall
bend under that of the Laws, nor so petty a person that shall not have Reason
of the Greatest that may offend him. The disposition of public Forces is
committed to the Sovereign, wherewith he may reduce the most refractory and
fierce Subject to the obedience of common Right, and confine him within the
bounds of Equity and Justice.

From hence it may appear, That the use of Duels, whereby particular persons
endeavor to do themselves Justice, and to draw Reason with their hands of the
injuries received from particular men; is a manifest violation of the Right of
the People, and a particular Invasion upon the Princes Right. And this Evil
began by the pernicious example of Francis the First, and Charles the Fifth, and
by the fatal accorded permission of Henry the Second, increased wonderfully in
the time of our Civil Wars, and in that general depravation of the obedience
and fidelity which Subjects owe to their Prince, and has since risen to its
height, and is multiplied infinitely by the indulgency of Henry the Fourth,
during the peace of his Reign. And as fruitful and fat grounds, if good Seeds
are not cast into them to exercise their fruitfulness, produce Thistles and
Gorst, and other hurtful Weeds; it has so happened to us, that men of courage
wanting matter to engender lawful acts of valor, have given themselves up to
unlawful productions, and not being able to gain the Body, have pursued the
Shadow, in these particular Combats, wherein France has lost more Noble Blood
in a few years of Peace, than it had done in many years of War. But it is to no
purpose to preach to our Nobility upon this Text, or to declaim against this
Abuse or excess of Courage, or to seek Remedies in Philosophy or Religion
against so Brutal a disease; or that the Blood which Henry the Second permitted
to be poured out in the Combat of Jarnac and Chasteneraye cried for vengeance
to Heaven, and obtained it; or that the Prince, whose Quality exempted him from
the hazard of Duels, lost his life in a Sport which was the Representation of
it; that the most warlike Nations, except ours, of the world, have not admitted
of that Bastard-Valour, or at least Naturalized it; That the Lacedaemonians, who
made a more express profession of true Valor than the other Grecians, and
whose Government seemed to have for Soul nothing but that Virtue, had no
knowledge of Duels; That the Romans; who were the Conquerors of so many Nations
and People, resigned it to their Vilest kind of men, and to whom they had
assigned Criminal lives only for their objects; That the Spaniards, who have
conceived that great design of the Absolute Monarchy, which has agitated them
above an Age, and for that purpose have declared and made War to so many other
Nations, have by consequence more need of Valor than any other Virtue, laugh
at our modern folly; and if a slight imitation corrupt them, or others of our
Neighbors, it is but a spark that flies to them from the great fire which
devours us; That it is an horrible injustice, that a person that has sweat in
Arms, and been victorious in many Combats, Battles, and Sieges, should be
obliged to put his Reputation and Glory to Question against a young Fool, who
has not seen any other Field of Battle than the Hall of a Fencing-Master,
whose courage rests upon the agility of his body, and swiftness of his hands,
and upon a long exercise of Assault and Defense: It Is to no purpose, I say, to
represent all this to our Nobility, which can never be converted or healed, but
by their own cure of this Folly, and by fixing their honor no longer in that
false and furious Valor, and by beating down with its own hands the ldol it
has erected for Adoration.

Second Discourse.
Why God has left Princes the Right of doing themselves Justice, when they are
offended by other Princes; That Lawful War is in the order of Virtues, and a
Branch of Justice; Why it is called the Flayl of God's Anger.
WHAT has been said in the Precedent Discourse, is one of the Motives which
have obliged Particular persons to make choice of Superiors, and to impose on
them the duty of distributing Justice; The price in part of the Liberty quitted
for the love of their Superiors: But that would not serve for perfection of the
end proposed to themselves in the establishing of them; And'tis not enough for
the safety and prosperity of a Country, exposed to the spoils of the Seas and
Rivers, to raise Causeys against the overflowings of the Rivers, if Banks and
Sluices are not provided against the Seas Inundations. The Invasions made by
Sovereigns upon the Estates of other Sovereigns, and the Ruins they bring,
when they enter with Armies, are evils of another weight and of another
consequence, than those evils particular men suffer from other particular
persons; and other labors and effects are required to stop the causes of these
public Springs of Desolation, when they break out, than to suppress the small
disorders, and appease the petty troubles which arise betwixt private persons.

It Is visible from hence, since Princes have no Superiors on Earth, to repair
the wrongs suffered by other Princes, that they may do themselves Reason; and
that the Right of Nature, which permits to every man the exercise of Revenge,
when'tis just, is not suspended, as to Princes, by the Right of the People,
which takes it from particular persons for the reasons above mentioned. Whence
it follows also, That God having taken away that Right, by reason of the
Ignorance which does usually accompany them, or Passions that betray them, and
walking in darkness, would grope to find the ways of Justice, or in weighing
the worngs received, and satisfaction due, the perpetual motions of their lives
might shake their hands, and hinder them to hold the Balance straight, This
Right has he given to Sovereigns, with this precise Obligation, That in their
Understandings and Counsels, Reason should preside in all the purity of its
light; that Passions should have no admittance to their Cabinet Counsel, and
that this holy place ought to be like the highest Regions of the Air, without
emotion or trouble; That the mischief is, that their Cabinet Counsel, instead
of resembling that high Region, is but too often the representation of the
Middle Region, and instead of calm and serenity, which ought to reign there,
nothing is heard but the noise of Passions, and seen, but the fruits of
Ambition and Avarice, and those other great wanderings of men's understandings.

Though this be so, and that Evils are never small, which grow from the
disorders of public causes; it is nevertheless the gentlest destiny, and most
favorable entertainment, which the present condition of men can receive:
Providence, after the loss of Primitive Innocence, and Original Justice, has
sufficiently provided against this Inconvenience, and strengthened Society
against the designs of Injustice and spoils of Violence, by inspiring men with
Policy and Judgment to make choice of Sovereigns, that should be obliged to
defend them against the force of strangers, and against the unjust enterprises
of their fellow-Citizens and Countrymen; and by imposing upon them a stricter
Obligation and severer Laws to do their duty; because the sole faculty of doing
Justice, and Inflicting of punishment is reserved to them against such as
disobey. To conclude, God has not only filled up the measures of good, which
he did unto men, but has also given them over-measure, in sending the Law of
Charity, and causing to descend from Heaven that holy fire, which dries up the
very spring, and consumes the very root of all sharpness and violence, that may
arise against ones Neighbor in the Souls of men. That if men fall so often
sick, and die in the abundance of Good things, notwithstanding the many
Preservatives and Remedies, and the large effusion of graces and Relief,
wherewith God has supplied them; If they are mastered by Vices, and led in
triumph by their Passions; if instead of Reason and Equity, Injustice and Force
Reign and condemn the Innocent with the Nocent; He has permitted it, not to
deprive men of the use of that Liberty, which he had given in favor of them,
nor to take from them the matter of Merit, by imposing the Necessity of doing
good; but that wicked persons might punish one another, and honest men
exercised by their contraries; and that all may learn, There Is nothing more
vile and more despicable than life; That there is nothing but vanity and
affliction of spirit in it; and that no true love is to be had for a Country,
which for a few Flowers it bears, produces many Briars and Thorns; and having
but a narrow path that leads to life, has many ways, and large roads that lead
to death, and end in precipices. This is to the honor of Divine Providence.
Let Us return to our Subject.

It Is easy to conclude from what has been now said, That as God is the Author
of the Justice, which Sovereigns distribute to their people, He is also the
Author of that Justice which Sovereigns exercise against other Sovereigns; that
both of them have the Seal of his Approbation; and that the use of Lawful Arms
is no less a Virtue than the use of Laws, when they are well dispensed. And
this first kind of Justice, resting upon the Basis of its Nature, and not
exceeding the bounds of the Right of the People, is more noble and glorious
than the other; is a livelier Beam of the power, which God confers upon
Princes, and a more illustrious evidence of the honor they enjoy, to represent
him on earth, as I have showed in another place. It Is no wonder then if God, in
the Ancient Law, commanded War to be made, and if he be there styled, The God
of Armies; it is of that Justice whereof we have lately spoken, and whereof we
will draw the Platform and Habit the Figure in the subsequent Discourses.

It may be demanded, whether the Doctrine which I have now delivered be true,
and that War is a Branch and a Stream of Justice, and in the Order and Classis
of Virtues? As, whence it proceeds, That in the Bible, It Is called one of the
Flayls of the Anger of God? And wherefore in the New Law, God takes not the
Title of, God of Armies, wherewith he seems to adorn himself, and to exalt his
Majesty in the Old Law?

As to the first Difficulty, it is not uneasy to resolve, and many Reasons may
be brought to prove it: The First, That the Justice Sovereigns execute upon
other Soveraign^, is called a Flayl, in comparison of that justice they render
to their Subjects; so that the administration of this Justice being forbidden
to particular persons, and committed to a third kind of persons, and of a
disinteressed condition, is, by consequence, less subject to Corruption than
the other sort of Justice, where parties are Judges in their own cause, and
where there is danger, lest self-love entering the Counsels of War with Passions,
wherewith it is usually accompanied, occasion a mixture of Injustice. The
second is, That although Right and Equity only are proposed in the project and
birth of War, Accidents unseen do many times happen in the sequel and progress
thereof, which change its nature, and degenerate it into a greediness of
Vengeance, or into a sole desire of Ambition; and it is certain, that the
Appetite is provoked by the facility of giving it content, and the abundance of
Meats makes it exceed the bounds of Temperance. The third Reason is, That the
Justice which Sovereigns distribute to their Subjects, is rendered without
Effusion of blood, and without Violence, at least in Civil affairs; the Justice
they exercise against other Sovereigns is never guided but by Force and Arms,
breathes nothing but death and murders: And were the Question only for one
inch of Earth, or a spoonful of Water, many Subjects must perish on both sides,
for the just or unjust Quarrels of their Masters; which ought not to be found
strange, since Sovereigns being the Heads of the Body, whereof the Subjects are
the Members, and as such, being not able to Act but in communion and
conjunction with them; That they make an indivisible communication in all
things amongst themselves, and that the Head being struck, the Members must be
offended; nor can the Head defend it self, without exposing the Parts to blows,
which make one Body with it.

So that the manner of Exercising this Justice, which is full of blood,
desolation, and ruin, may justly be called a Flayl; as Fire and Poison used in
Medicines may be called by such names, to distinguish them from the other
Ingredients made use of to heal ordinary Diseases: And it must not be denied,
but that the Justice rendered to particular persons is subject, though not so
often, nor so dangerously, to the same Inconveniences, and exposed to the
Assaults and Ambushes of Vices, which are contrary to it; It must be confessed,
That Reason and Equity do not always weigh down the Balance; That there are
bad Judges, as well as wicked Princes; And that in both Capacities, the Great
oppress the Mean persons, and the Poor are the Prey and the Sacrifices of the
Rich: And since it is the condition and common Portion of Moral Virtues to
Lodge betwixt two Extremes, and in the Confines of two opposed Vices, it is no
wonder, if Man be troubled to contain himself in the midst of these two
Confines, without Entry into the Country of Vices, where he finds on all sides
the passages Easy, and where the Errors and Inward Inclinations, the Objects
and outward Examples press him frequently to pass.

The fourth reason it, That God has sometimes commanded a People to make War
effectively upon another People, to Exterminate them from the face of the
Earth, and to purge them with Sword and Fire, of the Crimes wherewith they had
offended His Divinity, dishonored Nature, and defaced the Politic Body: Many
Examples there are of this Truth in the Old Testament, and among the Jews, that
besides the express Commands God has given to make War, He has sometimes
raised and caused Sovereigns and their People to take Arms by occult and
unknown Means, which are not here to be discussed, to chastise other People and
other Sovereigns, that had offended Him: And this is proved in the Choice given
to David by God, of the three Flayls of his Anger, the Plague, Famine, or War,
to expiate the Excess of Pleasure and Pride, conceived at the sight of the
Numberless Number of the People, whereof he was the Master.

In the third place, That he causes Accidents and Conjunctures, when he
pleases, which constrain Princes to make War that would continue in Peace, and
to break the Chains of Concord that bind them, though they Act cordially to
preserve it, as I might prove by many Examples, If I had not fear to be
tedious, and had not brought some Instances already in the First Part of my
Discourse, That the Fire being kindled betwixt two Princes, tired with Labor
in so painful, rugged, and dangerous a way, breathe nothing but Peace and Rest;
yet God hinders them to attain it by unexpected Accidents, which respectively
beget one another: and when the Haven is in hope to be gained, some contrary
Wind is raised that forces them to Sea again, and exposes them to new and
more dangerous Storms.

These Considerations, and many more whereof I am ignorant, are the Cause, That
all War, how just soever, may be called a Flayl of God's Anger, and an Effect
of his offended Providence; It may be demanded, since War may enter into the
Classis of Virtues, and is of the Apurtenances of Justice, how comes it to
pass, that God takes not, in the New Law, the glorious and fearful Title of,
God of Armies, as he has done in the Old Law?

To this truly the Answer is very easy, and who is it that knows not, if he
have received any Tincture of Religion, and learned the first Elements of
Christianity, that the New Law is a Law of Peace and Love toward our
Neighbor? That the Disciples of Jesus Christ are known by that Mark, and are
distinguished from other Men by that Sacred Character; That the Father could
not give a greater Evidence of his Love to men, than in giving his only Son
for their Redemption; That the Son gave the highest Proof of Charity in
offering Himself Willingly, and Sacrifizing His Life Voluntarily for the Love
of them; That the holy Spirit was not seen but in the Form of a Dove, or in the
Figure of fiery Tongues; And that the Church his Spouse caused Oil and Balsome
to be put into the use of the Sacraments, and other Holy Things, and no Violent
Substances; which denotes, That the Spirit of the New Law is a Spirit of
Sweetness, of Indulgency, and of Peace, and commands or advises no other War,
than what ought to be made to Passions and Vices; it is so far from allowing any
Usurpation, or Retention of other men's Goods, that it permits not men to Covet
them; and ordains not only, that Justice be done to our Neighbor, but
advises the support rather of Injustice and Injury, than the Pursuit of
Reparations by Lawful Powers; nor to ravish from Religion the Evidences of that
fair Maxim, which proceeds securely from it, That Action is less Noble than
Sufferance. If Justice then, which the New Law recommends so powerfully, and is
the Vital Spirit and Natural Heat of the Civil Body, were impartially executed;
and Charity that covers faults, which Justice would expose to light, and makes
up the Breaches that Justice would leave open, were cherished by Christians;
such men least, would have need only of the Conditions of Peace, and of the
Counsels of Natural Equity amongst themselves, and there would be no occasion
for prescribing to particular persons the Forms of Pleadings, or to Princes the
Laws of making War; there would be no occasions for Judges or Captains: All
that are enclosed in the Womb of the Church would breathe nothing but gentle
and peaceable Air, the Revenge of Outrages would be taken in the Retribution of
good Deeds, and there would be no cause to implore the Arm of the God of
Armies, of the Powerful and Terrible God, but only to invoke the Name of the
God of Peace, and Father of Mercies.

But the Mischief is, say the Poets, that Justice staid not long amongst men,
and having carried the Balance into Heaven, whither she is retired, has left
only the Sword on Earth, which Injustice and Violence have laid hold on; That
Charity, the Preserver of Union, and the great Virtue of Christianity, has not
reigned but amongst the Faithful of the first Generation; That its Heat has
ever sin^^ diminished; and it is visible, that the present Christians are more
divided among themselves than the Mahometans; and instead of acting against
that Immortal and Implacable Enemy of their Religion, and public Detainer of
their Estates, have neither Understanding, nor Courage, nor Power, but to hurt
and destroy themselves; Were Christians entire, and their Forces united, it
might cost the Turk too dear to assault them; but by their Discords and
diminution of Forces, they make the Victory easy for their Enemies, the Blood
which they pour out, and the Moneys they consume, are the Evidences of their
Design, and a Proof, That if they have not Resolution enough to fight the
common Enemy, they have at least Desire enough to be taken. The Reader will
excuse this small Digression, and this Complaint on the By, which the Zeal of
Public good has forced from me.

Third Discourse.
That Princes ought to Imitate God in the Use of the Right he has given them
to do Justice themselves; That it is very difficult even for Princes, who Love
and Understand their Affairs, to effect it; which is confirmed by two Examples,
the one of Henry the Second, the other of Philip the Second.
IN the precedent Discourse has been showed, That the Right God has given to
Princes of doing Justice themselves, is the richest Effusion he makes them of
his Power, and the fairest Beam he communicates to them of his Light; whence we
may conclude, To make this Representation perfect, and that the Copy differ not
much from the Original, it is necessary, that they Imitate His Conduct, and
March upon the Impressions of his Providence, in the use of that destroying
Right, and in the dispensation of that bloody Justice. In the first place, As
God never descends to this mournful Exercise, either prepossessed with Error,
or troubled with Passion, Princes, if possible, should do the same, they ought
to see clearly into the Action before they do Embark, and be well assured that
they do nothing, but what is lawful for them to do; and to that end they ought
to use the utmost of their Power, that Reason only have place in their
Counsels, and that that great Tribunal, where such important Resolutions are
taken, and the Sentences of Life and Death given, hold only in that high
Region of the Soul, where no smoke does arise from the lower Region, as is
above declared.

But as this is very easy to be said, so'tis very hard to be put in practice;
and it is as possible to resist the entry of the Sea, when the Winds drive it,
as to shut the door of the Counsels of Princes upon their Passions, or upon the
Passions of their Ministers of State. I will not here speak, because I have
done it in the first part, of the opposed Motions, and contrary Inclinations of
the Swordmen and Roabmen, equally admitted into the Counsels of Princes; the
first lean ordinarily to the War, as to their Element, and to the Field, where
the principal Harvest is made of their Greatness and Glory; the other incline
to Peace, as to their Center, and as to the Season which brings them the
fairest days; and where their good Qualities expatiate themselves in Pomp, and
are in their proper Lustr^. All the world knows of the violent Schism which
divided the Thoughts of the Constable of Montmorancy, and of the Chancellor of
the Hospital, upon the Matter of the troubles, which vexed the Minority of the
Children of Henry the Second: And the famous Answer the Chancellor made to the
Constable, who reproached him, That it belonged not to him, nor to them of his
Profession, to meddle with the Affairs of Wars; That is belonged not to him nor
to his Associates to make War, But it belonged to him and to his Associates to
judge of the Time when it ought to be made. No person also is ignorant of the
obstinate and invincible Aversion to Peace, which the Marshal of Biron had, and
what he said one day to his son, who being not so great a Politician as the
father, nor so foreseeing of the Future, acted vigorously to put out and
extinguish the fire of the War, which the father endeavored to cherish and
inflame; That if Peace was made, he resolved to set Cabages at Biron, and to
renounce the Court and Fortune. In this, truly there is nothing that is not very
ordinary, and it is but too natural for every person to love his Profession, and
what contributes most to his Advancement and Preferment. But this is very
strange, that intelligent Princes do sometimes abandont their Interests to wed
other men's, and are indulgent to the Jealousy or Ambition of their Ministers
of States, to the prejudice of their Affairs. Behold two memorable Examples,
the one drawn from our History, the other from the Spanish History. Henry the
Second was without doubt a Prince well instructed in the Art of Reigning, and
when he came to the Government of the State, very capable ot conduct it, his
Prudence and Valor equally shined in the first years of his Reign, and his
Fortune prevailed above Charles the Fifth's; and it may be said, That the Orient
of his glory was the Couchant of the others: After his Victories obtained in
all places by his Arms, and Triumph in his Artifices, as we shall show in
another place, he saw the Course of a happy War suspended by a Truce, which
Crowned the good Success with great Profits, and an incredible Reputation. But
the things of this world cannot stay long in the same condition, and that the
favors of Fortune are not fixed; or that as men have accustomed to be weary of
their proper felicity, and to love the change of good, it happened, that Henry
did not stand firm in that posture, which the Heavens seemed to have chosen to
make him happy. After the promotion of Paul the Fourth to the Pontificate, the
Ambition of his Nephews heated immeasurably the hatred he naturally bore to the
Spaniards, and put it into his head to endeavor a League with Henry, to drive
the Spaniards from Naples, and to conferr it upon a Son of France, with very
advantageous Conditions, as may be seen in the Articles of that League: The
thing was very difficult, and it was no small affair to enage Henry in an
Enterprise which offended his Conscience, in the manifest violation of public
Faith, and was evidently hurtful to the State, in making it put forth of the
Haven, whither it was arrived with so much Honor and Profit, and to expose it
again to the infidelity of the Sea, and to the danger of Tempests. Moreover,
Henry had so good a sight, as to discover the Apparances wherewith they
endeavored to blind him, and had in his Council Persons, that were proof to
the Subtleties of the Italian Wits, and to the Force of the Spirits of Lorrain.
But the Caraffes and Sirs of Guise laid their Batteries to break the Truce, and
the Queen was assaulted from all parts, and by all sort of Engines, to persuade
the King to condescend. The Proposition at first was ill received, for the
Reasons alleged; the Constable of Montmorancy, principal Minister of State, and
principal Favorite, opposed it courageously and constantly; the Marshal of
Brissac, an able man in business, and a great Captain, presented Remonstrances
from Piedmont, which were capable to persuade all that were capable to submit
to Reason, and give way to Truth; and there was no appearance, but that Reason
and Truth should prevail in the Understanding of Henry, upon the Matter of
their Contradictions.

But they did not prevail, and what one of the Caraffes, who was then at Court,
could not obtain by the Authority of the Pope his Uncle, wherewith he was
armed; what the Address and Eloquence of the Cardinal of Lorrain; what the
Credit and Reputation of the Duke of Guise, who was second Favorite, and the
Constables Rival, could not obtain, the Duchess of Valentinois carried; and
that Lady, whom the Sirs of Guise had gained into their Interest and Alliance,
was the Devil that had taken absolute and possession of the King, and forced
him to yield after a long defense, and to consent to what she would have done,
or rather to what the Sirs of Guise, or the Caraffes did desire, though it
justled Honesty, and was contrary to the Good of the State. Time made discovery
of the Imprudence of that Design, and broke the Charm which Reason could not
defeat. Our enterprise upon the Kingdom of Naples failed, so soon as it was
Embarked, and we received Affronts instead of making of Conquests; France that
was unfurnished of her fairest and best Forces, and of the most of her Moneys,
to give them to Sir of Guise, found it self weak to resist the Storm that came
thundering upon Picardy by Flanders, and being not foreseen, because it was
secretly raised, made the more dangerous Impression in the Surprise. The
Constable was overcome and taken prisoner before St. Quintins, and a little
after the Marshal of Furnes defeated near Graveline. Though France was
astonished at those two great Blows, it was not beaten down, and those
interwoven ill Successes, instead of choking the Kings Virtue, raised it, and
made him think of the Means of Return to his former Condition, and to withdraw
with Honor from that ill posture his Imprudence had cast upon him; The King
for that purpose recalls Sir of Guise from Italy, where he left none of his
Reputat on, though he made no progress there, who was no sooner arrived in
France, but he took Calais from the English, and Thionville from the Flemings,
who all obeyed one Master. These great Beginnings were the presages of a
company of greater Successes; and there was place for belief, that the
conjunction of Duke John of Saxes Army to ours, which was very fair, would
bring back to us the Victory, whereof our Enemies seemed to be in possession,
and would render us with interest our lost glory, under a Chief so valiant and
so wise as the Luke of Guise. But a Design, as imprudent, to make Peace, ceized
on the King, as that which prevailed with him to return to the War: And though
according to all the Rules of Civil Prudence, and to all the Maxims of
Reputation and Profit, he should have continued the War, though it had been ill
begun; it was staid in the strength of the prosperity that did accompany it,
and Fortune was repelled that pressed to be favorable unto us: He that exposed
so generously the Motion of an unjust War, was the Author and Instrument of a
pernicious Peace, and gave a pregnant Example of the ordinary humor of the
greatest part of the most eminent Servants, to second the Interests of their
Masters when they concur and agree with theirs, but quit them readily when
they disagree; and when it cannot otherwise be done, secure their particular
Interest to the Damage of the public.

The Glory of the Duke of Guise has long made the Constables heart to ache, and
he perceived that the Dukes Genius had the Ascendent of his, and that the
Elevation of the Duchess was his Descent and Decadency; The Constable by
virtue of the Peace, how disadvantagous soever to France, labored to withdraw
from the Duke the opportunities the War had given him of Advancements, and of
making further progress in the Affections of the King, and in the Esteem of all
France; He regained also by the same Means his Liberty, which enabled him to
put a value upon himself without patience, which is a Virtue that is not of
great merit, nor of great eminency in the Civil Life, and resumed the Place
which he held before in the Direction of Affairs: And so Henry, in being too
compliant to the covetousness of a Mistress, and to the jealousy of a
Favorite, made a Peace and a War unseasonably, and gave up to Love and
Friendship the Interests of Royalty, and the Duty of his Charge, which were
incapable of Alienation. His Father understood it much better, and expressed a
much stronger Passion for his Country, when pressed to receive his liberty upon
exorbitant and ruinous conditions, he protested, That he had rather die in
Prison, that receive a Maimed Crown, and to leave his Successors a Lesser
Kingdom then he had received from his Ancestors.

The Second Example is of Philip the Second, whom all the world knew to be so
desperately taken with the love of Sovereignty, and with the Good of his
Affairs, that he pardoned not his own Blood, nor the Life of his only Son,
upon the Advice was given him, that he studied Mischief, and was to pass into
Flanders, and there to Establish himself; Nevertheless this Prince, so Amorous
of his Greatness, and so Jealous of his Interests, has declined sometimes from
that strong Inclination, in favor of his Ministers of State, and to indulge
their passions to his prejudice; When the Flemings began to rise against him,
and to open that famous Scene, where has been spilt so much domestic and
foreign blood, Marguerita Princess of Parma their Governess reduced them, partly
with Gentleness and Address, partly with Justice and Arms, to a reasonable good
Acquiescence: But Tranquillity being not well settled, not all the Winds, which
might trouble it, fully appeased; It was proposed in the Council of Philip,
what was fit to be done in that Exigency: The Council was equally divided, and
as it were torn into two opposite Factions; the Chief of the one of the Parties
was Roderigo Gomez Prince of Eboly, who had for Followers the Duke of Feria, a
good equal Instrument of Peace and War, and Antonio Perez, no less famous for
the long and hot persecution he suffered, as for the Charge of First Secretary
of Spain, which he had long exercised: Gomez was dextrous only for the
Cabinet, and such Affairs were more in his Element, than the War; But his best
Quality was, the Inclination Philip had for him, and the Art, whereby he
adjusted himself dexterously to all the Apprehensions, and to all the Humors of
his Master.

The Chief of the other Faction, was the Duke of Alva, whose Name carries in it
self Reputation and Luster enough, without giving it any other Addition to make
him known; His Adherents were the Cardinal of Spinola, who formerly had so
absolutely governed Philip, that he was called the Monarch of Spain, and
Granuelle Bishop of Arras, who nourished always Warlike thoughts under a
Prelates Robe, and had a particular Revenge for them by whom he had been ill
handled, and Renouncing his Administration, forced Philip to Recall him. The
Duke of Alva was Improved in the Cabinet Counsels, and dextrous in the
Intricacies of them: But his principal Talent was the War, as the great Theater
of his Virtue; A Person, more considerable to his Master for the Services he
had rendered, and might render to Spain, than Acceptable for the Conditions of
his Person, who being of a Proud and Severe Temper, was not beloved of them for
whom he had done good.

Upon the Relation then, which was sent by the Duchess of Parma of the state
of the Affairs of Flanders, the Chiefs gave their Advice singly, and Declare in
show and with Colorable Reasons for the good of Philip; but in Effects, and
bottom of their Intentions, Answerable to their Passions and particular Ends.
The Prince of Eloby fearing, that if Philip went for the Low Countries to
compel by force the Flemings to their Duty, and to return them by Arms to the
yoke they had cast off, the Duke of Alva would be in great esteem with the
King, by reason of the Necessity of his Service, and draw the greatest part of
Gallant Persons, and the best part of the Court, in Relation to his Charge and
principal Command of the Army, rejected absolutely the way of Arms, and
Advises that of Sweetness, and to permit the Little heat of Inquietude, which
remained in the Rebels, to go out of it self and without violence; But the Duke
of Alva, who saw that the Peace had almost put him out of work, or left him on
the Stairs, whilst Gomez staid at the Feast, maintained, that Nothing, but the
Sword and the King's Presence could Cure the Disease of the Flemings, and that
the Power of Rebelling was to be taken from the Rebels to secure from future
Rebellions, And cut down the Tree at the root, to hinder the boughs from
growing and putting forth.

Philip enclosed between these two Contrary Opinions, and seeing clearly though
the Intentions of those two Counselors, loving Gomez with Passion, and
esteeming Alva to his Merit, forgets his Maxims, and departs from his own
Inclination, which was the Good of his Affairs, to content the Passion of them,
by a Moderation that was fatal to him; He resolved then for the satisfaction of
Gomez to stay in Spain, under pretense that his Presence was necessary to keep
the Moors to their Duty, and hinder his Son Charles to disturb in his Absence;
and to comply with the Indocile and Imperious humor of the Duke of Alva, He
constitutes him Governor of the Low Countries, and gives him the Command of an
Army capable to subdue them, in case of a general Revolt, and to force to
submission all persons that opposed him: Gomez found his Reckoning plentifully
in being the chief of the two Patties, and remaining the most powerful of the
Kings Council, was in some sort superior to the Duke of Alva, who ought to
receive Orders from the Council, and as to the Duke's Actions, could give what
countenance he pleased to them, being not cleared before the King's eyes: The
Duke of Alva also had cause to be ontent with the King's Design, to send him
Commander of so powerful an Army, and to exercise a great Charge in a Country,
where no person was above him, and where he should be Arbiter of the destiny of
a great number of people, and of seventeen fair Provinces.

But the Interest of Philip, and the Laws of good Policy, required, that no
Regard was to be had to the Inclination of Gomez, nor to that of the Duke of
Alva, and that he should have gone in Person, and with a good Army into the
Low Countries, to confirm the Tranquillity, as yet unsettled, and to dispense
Rigor and Clemency according to the disposition of Spirits, and exigency of
Conjunctures; Or if it was not expedient for the King for important
considerations to go from the Escurial, and to break the chains which tied him
to Spain; He ought not to have recalled the Governess from Flanders, who might
easily have finished what she had happily begun, and had no need for that End
but of a small increase of Forces to render her Administration a little more
fearful than it was to the Flemings; who had in other Things Love and Reverence
for her Person.

By these Example you may see, how hard it is for the Counselors of Princes to
enter their Counsels free from particular Passions; since the ablest Princes
and most interessed, are sometimes struck with contagion, and spoil their
Affairs by Compliance. It follows not, but that the persons whereof we have now
spoken were Great persons, though sometimes they committed faults, and that
their Lives were excellent Looking-glasses for them that Govern, though the
Glasses were not without spots; There are Illustrious Reigns, as Glorious
Temples, and Magnificent Palaces; And though great effusion of Riches have been
made, and choice of the best Architects of the world to build them, some errors
have been found in them. And the Things of Art have that in common with the
Natural, not to be in all parts perfect. As in the Economy of the Manners of
Men, Reason does not always hold the Ascendent over the Passions, but that
Passions sometimes take it above Reason, and what is of the Dominion of the
Understanding, gives place to what is belonging to a Beast; So, though Princes
oblige themselves as strongly as they can to represent the persons of Princes,
they cannot forbear many times to act the persons of particular Men, and to
cherish the Inclinations of Nature above the Duties of their Charge;
Immutability from Good, is not of the Lot and portion of this miserable Life;
And Constancy unshaken, but by some great change, is, in my sense, one of the
greatest Wonders of the world; There is no Soul so mean, that is not capable of
some fire, and of some strein of Heroic Virtue; but there is none so Heroic,
that can maintain without slacking the strength of the flight, which it has
taken, and hold all things under it without ever coming under them: such Souls
as approach nearest to this state, and rise and fall, whatsoever happens, less
than other Souls, are certainly the Noblest and Fairest of all Souls. And that
Equality of Conduct, such as may be gained in this Life, is more admirable and
of greater price in it self, th^^^h not of so great pomp nor of so great
profit, as the Science to ma^^ War, to conduct Negotiation, and to govern
Empires.

The second Rule, which Princes ought to observe in the Use of this severe
Justice, whereof we draw the Picture, is, That as God does not punish sinners
at the Instant they have offended, nor permit his Thunder to break upon the
first crimes of Men; Sovereigns also ought not to hasten to extreme Remedies,
and take Arms so soon as they have received an Injury; They ought to consider,
that of all Employments and humane Enterprises, there is none, wherein
Precipitation is so dangerous as in beginning a War, nor wherein more passages
are to be sounded, or more ways know before the War be undertaken. They ought
to remember, that besides the sad Necessity, which is inseparable from the most
Innocent War in the world, to devour a great number of Goods and Livers;
There Is none, wherein the Revolutions are so sudden, and the Conclusions so
uncertain; A Wheel moved with violence turns not down with more swiftness, what
was above; The Sea is not more unfaithful, nor changes her calm with more
promptitude; And the hope of Laborers is not so often deceived by the
sterility of Harvests; That the prosperities of Arms are subject to change, and
the Entries of War are belyed by the Issues; That after many Fires kindled, and
Tempests raised; After a great quantity of spilt blood, and wealth devoured;
After a long Circumvallation, the High way to desolation and ruin; It Is of
Necessity, that the Lists are to be re-entred, or a Retorn made to the firit
posture of Peace.

Fourth Discourse.
That Justice is to be observed in the Form as Matter of the War; That Faith is
to be kept with Heretics and Insidels; That Christians hate just Cause of
Warring with the Turk without making use of the pretext of Religion.
TO Avoid so dangerous a Precipitation, and not to Engage herein to ill
purpose, and hoise sail to the Wind out of season, It Is not sufficient to know
that the War is Just, which is to b' undertaken, but that it is Necessary to b'
undertaken; And it is the good of the State, which a Prince undertakes is this
occasion, more than any other Interest; It Is of Importance, that what is honest
and profitable march together; and that the whole Motion of the War ought to
turn upon those two Poles. But the Mischief is, That this second condition is
not always, as the first, in the power of Princes, and that there is no certain
Rule or Proof established to b' assured of it, as of the other: Some light
therefore shall be given to sobscure a Matter, and some Addresses communicated
to prevent wanderings in a Co^^^y so little known, when some thing has been
said of Justice; (...) what concerns it? In the first place, I say, that it is
necessary it Reigns, if it may be over the whole Extent of the War, and
expatiate it self over the Accidents, as Matter of the War, and over the Form,
as the Manner and Form, wherewith they ought to be conducted; For there are
Matters, whereof I will treat to the bottom, and others which I will but
lightly touch: For certain, it is unworthy of a Man of courage to foul his hands
in the cold blood of his enemies, and a most shameful thing for the feet to
tread upon what the hands have beaten down, or to take away the life from him
who demands it. Heat and Choler ought to be contained within the bounds of
Victory, and ought not to be carried beyond it, unless of necessity to be done,
which happens rarely, to assure the Victory, or in Right of Revenge, to give no
quatter to them, who Book would give no quarter; And permits that Plunderings
be destroyed by Desolations, and Fireings by Combustions. There are
nevertheless, some actions, wherein Revenge ought not to be taken, and it is
unlaw full to Imitate Robberies and Sacrileges, or to give the Enemies inhumane
Deaths by their Example; there are Laws, which are called the Laws of good War,
which the Marshal of Brisac has heretofore made so famous in Piedmont, that
they ought to b' observed, and made an Act of Justice, according to the
Intention of the God of Armies, and not a pure Violence and a manifest Breach
of the Right of Nations, following the suggestions of the God of this World and
of the Prince of Darkness, TO use expressions of the Bible.

It Is true then, That a Priuce ought not to Draw his sword, but when Justice
puts it into his hand, nor Handle it, but under some form of Honesty and show
of Convenience. It Is also true, that h' ought not to confound what is Honest
and what is Profitable, because they are not the same Things, nor blend two
Distinct qualities, as some of the Ancients and Moderns have Done. The occasion
of growing Greater, and the facility of Conquering, ought not to tempt a
Prince, unless he may Enlarge with a Good conscience and Conquer Lawfully. Such
a Moderation will be esteemed more Coragious and Magnanimous than any Act of
valor, and no Victory can be so Fair and of so High a price as that which is
gained upon himself.

But to depart from general Terms, which are too Wild and Indefinite, and to
descend to particular Considerations, which are more instructive and pressing
than the general. In the second place, I say, That care is to be taken not to
judge of the justice or injustice of an enterprise by the Event, or to call it
Bad or Good as it shall posper and have the Winds Propitous or Contrary. Let
him Observe with Aversion the Expression of that sottish paniard, who sollowing
the party of the Commons raised against Charles their King, writ to a friend of
the Adverse party; That the gain or loss of the Battle, to be fought the next
day, would declare, who had the Right of his side, and that the Mark and Reward
of the Justice of the good party would be the Victory. Let him abhor the
Advice the Admiral Chastillon gave to the Prince of Conde, To make no
Difficulty of breaking the Treaty, whereby he had obliged to go out of the
Kingdom.

If the Sirs of Guise Retired from Court of purpose to charge the Kings Army,
which they had laid asleep, with the hopes of Peace and Confidence in their
promises, would the Victory make his Cause honest and his Armies just? and all
other Justice ridiculous if it fell to the King, and all other Reason vain? If
that be true, as it may be true, and if Davila, who reports it be no tdeceived,
It were rightly to understand Machiavelles Maxim, Not to be wicked at Halfes;
And to know how to satiate Malice: It were some what more than to sew the Foxes
to the Lions skinn. It were not to make War in the Ordinary Way, but with
poisoned Arms; It Is then a prefixed point and a Constant Maxim of the Moral
and Politic, That as a true Measure cannot always be taken of the Prudence
of an Enterprise by the Good success, so true Judgment can never be made of the
Honesty of an Action by the Good success, nor the Justice of a War by the
Victory that may Crown it.

In the third place, I say, As there is no War of so strong a Necessity, and
that has the Outside so specious, as when Piety is joined in it to Justice,
and the Altars Defended in maintaining our Interests; To Interess God in these
Designs must be avoided, unless he be truly interessed; As to imitate Ferdinand
of Castille, who did much Worse than take Gods Name in vain, for He ever
Employed it to give Color to the Evil which was beneficial to him; And his
fears had been very much troubled to palliate their Ambition and Avarice, If
there had been no Religion, Infidelity or Heresy in the World: It ought not
also to be believed, as some have persuaded themselves, or Endeavored to
persuade Princes, That the goodness of the End, to the Glory of God, or the
Salvation of Souls, can rectify the Means, which are Ill in themselves, or
that the Venom or Malignity of a cause, is Corrected or tempered by the
Antidote of a Good and profitable Effect, as shall be showed hereafter.

In the fourth place I go on and say, That though a Hearty Submission is to be
given to the Authority of them, whom God has placed in the Highest
Administration of Religion, and in the absolute Direction of Consciences; They
must not, nevertheless, b' obeyed in all things, as they do not pretend unto
it; nor believe, that they can give License to do Ill, and disingage us from
the Obligation of the first and second Right of Nature. If Ladislaus King of
Hungary had resisted the Legate who persuaded him to break without Cause, or
without other Cause than Convenience, the Peace made with Amurat Emperor of the
Turks, He had not permitted himself to b' abused by that pretended Power, which
the Legate assumed, to untye the knot the Right of Nations had tied; He had not
lost his life at Uarnes, with the loss of the Battle; And Amurat had Reason,
when in the midst of the Fight and Heat of the Charge, the Victory seemed to
Incline of Ladislaus side, to call Jesus Christ to the punishment of a Crime
committed against him, and to chastise the Infringer of a Treaty, wherein his
Name was used to confirm it. If Henry the second had followed the Advice of the
Constable of Mountmorancy and of the Marshal of Brisac, who persuaded him to
observe the Truce made with the Emperor, which the suggestions of the Sirs of
Guise and of the Duchess of Valentinois diverted him from, under the pretext
that the Pope had given him a Dispensation for it, He had not Expiated that
Infraction by the unhappy success of his Arms within and without the Kingdom,
and by that Long and Heavy chain of Evils, wherewith France was after fettered.

Religion is not descended from Heaven to destroy the Virtues she finds on
Earth, or to Demolish Society, the most admirable Work that Reason has brought
forth, in over-throwing Faith its first foundation and principal Basis; That,
if she forbids Commerce sometimes and Communication with Infidels and
Heretics, It Is when that Communication may be Contagious to the
Understanding, and Dangerous lest the Errors and Vices be transmitted and pass
Jointly with the Things permitted. And this is not so much a new and positive
Right, which Religion has Introduced, as that Ancient Command of the Right of
Nature, TO avoid the occasions of Evil, which she renews; or rather, it is that
vast and unlimited Command which she gives and applies to a particular Use and
to a certain Matter; But though the Generation of Men be sine torn in pieces by
beliefs and customs, yet General Law; are left unto them, and a common Right;
and since Infidelity or Heresy impede not Sovereigns from being Lawful Lords
of their Estates, nor Particular Persons to be proprietaries of their Goods;
and by consequence, that the use of Commutative and Distributive Justice b'
equally open, and the Commerce for Temporal things, whereof they have need
amongst themselves, permitted to all Princes and to all People, To Christians
and to Infidels, To Catholics and Heretics, The Catholics, as making
profession of a more Heavenly Doctrine and of a more Innocent Life, are obliged
to observe more Inviolably the Laws, and to maintain more Religiously the
Privileges of their Nation than any People; To give no example of Infidelity
and Deceit, which the Wicked may rebound upon Religion, and to make that fair
Evidence of the sanctity of their Belief, to shine always in the sincerity of
their Actions. Not to sink too deep upon a Matter, which I handle fully in
another place, I will content my self in relation to what I have now said, to
place here this Argument; To declare the Necessity of Keeping faith with
Heretics and Infidels; as that with all them, with whom treaty and commerce
may be had with a good Conscience, Men are bound in Conscience to perform
things promised, when the Treaty is made, without fraud and violence, and
without Just fear, which falls into the Souls of Valiant Men, and leaves them
but a Lame Liberty. This Conclusion streams so naturally and necessarily from
its Principles, that there is no Need of other proofs to Establish it, not of
other Lights to Evidence it.

And yet, as there is no day so Fair, that is not over-cast with some Cloud; so
this Truth so Clear and so Comformable to Reason, has been exposed to the Art
of Sophisters: But who knows not, that this Depravation of Judgment has
proceed from an hot and blind Zeal, which many times ceiseth upon the greatest
Doctors? or from a base and prostiture Compliance to the wills of Princes, who
would not stick at Perjury, If it might serve their turn, but would not
publicly appear in it, lest it should Disgrace them; so, this Doctrine truly,
which came into the World but by Chance, has not appeared by day, but by the
violence of some causes, which have thrust it on, and has ever disappeared
with the causes that produced it. And St. Lewis, whose Piety cannot be
questioned, but by impious persons, was not stricken with remorse, when he had
treated with the Sarazens; And they that make use of such means, would be very
sorry the like were offered them: As they who have conceived, though falsely, no
better thoughts of the Truth of the Religion they profess, and believed it was
permitted them to do the like in their time under the same pretext; The force
and weight of this consequence shall be examined at large in another place. If
to this truth it be objected, That what is promised to Men, obliges not more
strictly, nor ties a more indissoluble knot, than what is promised to God,
wherein, it is certain, the Pope may dispense some occasions for important
causes: it may be answered, That the Pope may do it, and may discharge the
observation of the Vow of a good thing for another of a better condition or
equally good; But in this He does but discharge his Charge from God, by virtue
of his General and Particular Commission, to seek always what is most for his
glory, and for the greatest good of Souls; he does but manage God's Interests;
but and in setting a value upon the Talent of the Faithful, and to be the good
Husband and prudent Dispensator of the Benefits and Graces of his Master,
whereof the Bible speaks.

That to change a thing of small, for a thing of greater price; it is to gain
always by the Exchange, and to receive what is superior in value and goodness
to what was quitted; it is to be a good Steward for God, to Accommodate himself
to the Necessities of Souls, and to exercise a reasonable Indulgency; it is to
observe the Intentions of his Master, and the sweetness of his conduct; it is to
act the disposition of that generous Creditor, wh' exacts not in rigor of his
creatures what they owe him, but grants them always the compsition they desire
of him, and demands no more of them than what they can pay him conveniently,
and without violence. But as to the Rights and Interests of Heretics and
Infidels, they have not, as the World knows, constituted the Pope Master or
Arbitrer of their concernments; wherefore he cannot ordain or dispense any
thing to their prejudice in matters of Treaty, confirmed by mutual Oaths, and
of common Right in the affairs of Civil Commerce and Temporal Policy.

I pass from this Matter to another, wherewith it is naturally enchained, and
say in the fifth place, That Religion alone, whether it be for the planting of
it in places where it is not known, or for the defense of it in States where
it is persecuted, cannot be the foundation of a Just War. That if the Writing of
some holy persons are filled with Exhortations to Christians to take Arms
against the Turk, and if the Predicants endeavor every day to inflame them
with that holy zeal; If Popes have heretofore published Croisades for that
subject; And if the greatest Princes of Christendom did Enroll themselves, and
have raised for that purpose great Armies; It must not be believed, it was done
directly to Exterminate the Sect of Mahomet, and to abolish the Alcoran, that
Arms were taken up; or that it was to constrain the wicked persons to change
their Religion, or to force Christianity into their spirits by the sword: That
is much estranged from the condition of our Religon, and very contrary to the
exercise of the Primitive Church, which opposed patience only to force, and
permitted no other blood, but the blood of her Children to be spilt, when it
was oppressed, as shall be declared in another place, where the proofs of the
second branch of the Proposition proposed shall be produced. It Is then to the
Limits of the Temporal Interests, that the War against the Turk is chiefly
restrained; It Is directly against the Power of the Ottomans, and no against the
Errors of Mahomet, that Christians draw their Swords, and for their Commission
they have Right Valuable Titles; The Usurpations made of the fairest Members of
their Empire, and the spoils of so many Estates, wherewith the Tyrant adorns
himself, are subjects which put it out of question, that they may Lawfully Arm
to Recover their Losses, and to Recollect the Pieces, which are taken from
their Interests: And it is his constant design, and his Religion by a perpetual
Vow binds him to labor the Destruction of Christianity; and the spirit of that
barbarous Religion, adorned only with Rapines and Murders; with the
Proscription and Confiscation of the Lives and Estates of all them, who are not
of their Judgment, do give a just power to Christians not only to defend
themselves, when they are assaulted, and to resist the storm when it Beats on
that side, but also to assault, and to prevent, if some other Consideration do
not oppose it. That if the Course of the War and the Lot of Arms make it
sometimes necessary for a Christian Prince to conclude a Peace or Truce with
the Turk; He ought Legally t'observe Conditions, so long as the Turk observes
them on his part, and to make no breach, if the other do not begin or prepare
to break. But if the Turk, who keeps his Soldiers in Exercise, and his Men of
War in Action, and coasts the Countries of his Neighbors to gain some prey,
does rush upon the State of a Christian Prince in Confederacy with the Turk,
any Christian Prince may relieve him with a good Conscience, and Act Lawfully
against the Turk, without being a Violator of his Faith, or Desertor of his
World; For, besides the Duty of Charity, and that general Obligation, which the
Right of Nations Imposes to protect the Weak against the Strong; It Is Matter
then only of Defense, which is ever permitted, though it be Indirect, and
cease not to be Just, though it be Anticipated. And to speak the truth, what
else does a Christian Prince, in repelling the Violence made to another Prince,
than prevent what is prepared against himself? Than make haste to Quench the
Fire which burns his Neighbors House, before it lays hold on his, and assists
to make Rampars and Barricadoes against the Sea, which might overflow his,
after it had drowned the Country of his Allies? But whilst the Design of Ruin
reposeth in the Turks breast, and that the Execution of the Vow is suspended,
the Conditions of the Treaty made with him ought inviolably to b' observed,
without the least infringement of the Zeal of public Commerce, and of Faith,
the principal Bond of the Civil life.

It Is easy to infer from what has been said; That Christians in general have
but too many formed Subjects, and too many prepared ways to Enter, when they
please, upon a just War against the Turk; and there is great cause of
Astonishment, as I have observed in the first Discourse, That instead of
turning their Arms against an Enemy that is not less Powerful than
Irreconcilable, they convert them against themselves; they thrust them into
their own bowels, and make themselves drunk, if it may be permitted to use that
Poetique boldness, in the blood of their Brothers.

Fifth Discourse.
That the Defense of Injured Reputation is the subject of a just War; Wherein
that Reputation consists; That the King could not with honor avoid breaking
with the Spaniards, who had caused the Town and the Elector of Treves to be
surprised, being under his Majesty's Protection.
It Is not to the conceived that the defense of a Country, whether Direct or
Indirect, in the Manner as it has been circumscribed, should be the sole Title
of making just the Arms of a Prince; There are also other Titles and other
Considerations which put Arms Lawfully int' his hand; There are other wounds to
heal, and other breaches to make up, than the Ruin of his Subjects; the
outrages acted against his Honor are to be revenged, and the spots wiped off
which are imprinted upon the Reputation of his Crown, as one of the Pillars
which bear up his Greatness, and therefore to be carefully preserved from
Blows, that it fall not in contempt. But in regard some may equivocate upon
this word Reputation, and take upon that occasion a subject of dangerous
consequence; it may not b'unnecessary to clear and distinguish it, which may be
done by a very easy distinction, and in a manner is already declared.

It Is certain then, that there are two sorts of Reputation peculiar to States,
and which may be ranked in the number of Goods that belong to them; the one
consists in the Esteem which the strength of a Country has gained from abroad,
and in the glory of it; this is formed of the Merit and good fortune of the
Prince; of the Number and Virtue of his Subjects; of the Duties of Subjection,
and of the Rights of Sovereignty; in the Extent and Situation of the Country;
in the Fecundity of Mines; in Fortresses, and Arms, and Ammunitions of War. The
opinion then which streams and flows from these things and other the like in
the spirits of Men, Is the Reputation I speak of, and where of no question is
to be made, but that the Prince ought to be very Jealous of it, as of a thing
which sometimes is of great Consequence, when his forces are weak, and which
some have compared very aptly to the credit of Merchants, which maintains them
in honor and luster, though they b' effectively poor, and gives them often
Means to fill up the Concealed emptiness of their affairs, and to repair the
weak Invisible condition of their fortune; But when a Prince is wounded in this
kind of Reputation, and his Forces are cried down; when His prosperities are
lessened, and disgraces Increased; when Endeavors are used to obscure this
Luster of greatness and force, wherewith the Eyes of Strangers ought to be
dazzled, and to draw a Curtain before the Exterior face of his Affairs; It Is
not the subject of a just war; The reason of it is, that Strong Remedies are
never to be used but against Extreme Evils, nor Violence acted against
accidents that may be Overcome by Industry; There ought to be some proportion
betwixt the Arms of Resistance and those of Assault; When the combat is made
by the forces of Wit, there is no Reason to bring the forces of our Body for
defense; False Reports are scattered abroad to our disadvantage; Make the Truth
shine in all places, which is contrary to them; Vigilance and Ingenuity need
not fear such Artifices, and the designs of our Enemies will have a chance
answerable to that of Mines, which do no hurt, if Vent be given them.

But there is another kind of Reputation and another sort of Honor, wherein the
Prince ought not to suffer the least decay, but pursue a Reparation with Arms,
if it may not otherwise be had, when offended. To speak it in a Word, it is the
Dignity of the Crown, and the honor of Sovereignty: There are certain
Privileges and Prerogatives, which the Right of Nations have fastened unto them,
that ought not to be touched without Resentment, or Violated or slighted
without opposing it by force; Injury, for example, done to an Ambassador,
whose person is Holy and Consecrated by common Right, and by consent of all
people, and of all Ages, is the subject of a Lawful War; And Francis the first
cannot be blamed for breaking with Charles the Emperor by reason of the
Assasinat of Rignon and of Frigose, his Ambassadors, whom the Marquis of Gast
had caused to be Murdered, and could never have justice, in what posture soever
he put himself to Demand it; The Breach of a Treaty, which is the mark of
Disdain thrown at a Prince, or of the small consideration had of his Country,
is another Title of just War; That if the Persons of Ambassadors are
Inviolable, and ought universally to be respected, because they are the Living
Bonds of Commerce, and the Animated Instruments of the correspondency of
Princes; By the same Reasons Treaties which are the Inanimate Seals and dead
Impressions of that Commerce and Correspondency, ought to be holy; and the
breakers thereof corrected with the punishment the Right of Nations permits to
be inflicted; And as one of the Princes will take advantage of the violation of
the Treaty the other promises to perform, so by a necessary Consquence the
other must receive Damage, and that Right and faculty is obtained thereby to
take reason of that Injury with the sword in the hand, if it be not given
Civily and in a friendly Manner. It may be seen by this, That the War which the
King made to Duke Charles, is no Unjust violence, nor the Conquest of Lorraine
an unjust Invasion since it has been drawn on himself by the violation of many
Treaties made with France, and who can take it ill, if he have not lost all
sense of good, and the Taste of all that is just, That what was left in pawn and
for security of a thing promised, should be forfeited, when the promise is not
performed; and the deposite Detained when the condition for restitution is
broken? But I purpose to Treat fully of this Matter in the second part, and to
undraw the Curtain which I d' here leave, at least if the condition of the time
permits it, and prudence advises it.

Observe another Essential point wherein Reputation is offended, and for which
Arms may lawfully be taken in hand, and War made. It Is to redeem a Prince from
vexation for the hatred is born us, and because his Interests have some
Conjunction with ours. The King had just cause to defend the Duke of Mantoua by
his Protection and Arms against the design of the Spaniards to strip him, even
for that Reason, that he was born the Kings Subject, and that they could not
suffer a Frenchman to be a Sovereign Prince in Italy. How deeply the honor of
France was Wounded with that stroke, and what shameful Reflection was made by
that Attempt upon the Dignity of the Crown, There Is not a person but may judge
of it without Explanation. There Is not a person if he be not altogether blind
with passion for Spain, that can approve of their project to establish in all
places their Dominion and to extend their Monarchy; They shut the Door into
Italy, and forbid Entrance to the French, what Justice soever opens it, and
what Right soever calls them thither. And they who Take at all hands and Usurp
on all sides, will not permit the true and Lawful Masters to Enjoy their Lands,
or gather what belongs to them, if they are friends to France. The Reasons the
King had, are remitted to another place, and the other Motives which excited
him to Espouse the protection and undertake the defense of the Duke of Mantoua.

Honor obliges also a Sovereign, besides other duties which may invite him,
to make the protection given to a weak Prince to be esteemed, and to cause the
Sanctuary offered to an unfortunate Prince to be respected; I will explain this
proposition by an Example. After that the late King of Swede was Entered Germany
with that Extraordinary success which accompanied his Virtue, and that He had
taught the House of Austria to know that it was not Invincible, and had
astonished it with the blows received from the hands of a Conqueror; Its
greatest Care was to avoid a Ruin, and as in a wrack to get some planks
whereon to save what remained of goods and hopes. The King wh' alone could put
a bridle upon the Ambition of this brave Prince, and Resist the Tempest which
threatened the Catholic friends of that disconsolate Family, offered them his
Royal protection, and the shade of his Authority, without which there was no
Safety nor Recovery for them.

The Elector of Treves believing He was not bound to perish with them who
probably could not save themselves, nor hinder him from falling, but to fall
only for Company, accepted of his Majesty's protection. After that, who makes
question but the King in honor and Reputation was obliged to defend the
estates and the person of that Elector from all the Enemies Excursions, and to
turn also his Arms upon the Swedes in case they did not consider as they ought
his protection, but should violate his safeguard? And in truth the King was so
Religious in this behalf, that He considered not what was Profitable in
comparison of what was Honest, nor the good of his Affairs in comparison of the
honor of his Word. That his Majesty entered upon some Coldness with the Swede,
when he delayed the satisfaction was desired, and to restore a place the King
was obliged, after the Swedes had taken it, to cause to be rendered to the
Elector. That if the King had reason to use such a proceeding in favor of his
Allies, and to hold forth to them some Little Rigor upon that occasion; It Is
visible that he had cause upon Stronger terms of Justice and Duty to break with
them who gave such Advices, and Lent their Arms not only to undertake upon the
Estates of the Elector of Treves, but also to attempt upon his Liberty, and to
make a Prelate and a Sovereign Prince their Prisoner, with whom they had no
cause of dispute, not had offended them, and against whom they had not declared
any War. What can they allege to sweeten this Violence? and what plaster can
they find to disguise and make plausible so heinous a business? If it were for
the Love of us, and for the protection we did grant him, that they opposed an
Innocent Person, It must be confessed that the hatred they boar us was not
only very Implacable but also very Unjust, since it labors to kindle a fire
and exhale Venom even out of our good Actions which are not opposite to them;
since it cannot permit us to Protect them whom they could not Relieve, and
secure them as shelter against the storm wherewith they were first beaten;
since they deny us even the duties of Charity, which flow from the Right of
Nature, and would take from us all sorts of correspondence with other Princes,
and even the power of doing good offices.

It being thus, I leave it to the Judgment of the free and unpassionate Reader
if they or we in this have begun the Quarrel, Who were the Breakers of the
peace at Vervins and the first Authors of the War; Have they not done the same
things, as if they had broken the Express clauses of that Treaty, when they
have violated that for which there is never any Treaty, and which is sufficiently
understood without being put into a Treaty; that one Crown ought not to attempt
against the other, nor offend it in the person of them it protects and shadows
with its Authority and Arms; since they have not respected our Allies, and what
the Peace of Vervins laid Quiet has been Inviolable in relation to them; Can
it be said, that they have not been the beginners of this Quarrel? that they
have not lighted the Torch of the Dissension of the two Crowns, and begun the
War by Surprises and Robberies which have been continued openly upon us, and
after declaration of it? If they do remember the Moderation of our Conduct, and
the Favor showed, that was not less than of Life, to the Imperial Troops which
had surprised Heilderberge, they may see, that we have always avoided with
great care to Break with them, who have no Love for us, and having no fear for
the Forces of our Enemies, have always apprehended the Ruins of the War, and
the Deluge of the Evils that attend it; That if they will say, they have not
immediately assaulted us, and did not directly undertake us, and that they
looked only upon the Elector of Treves, whom they had right to chastise for
departing from the protection he was bound to receive from the House of
Luxumburge, whereof they are Heirs, and for repairing to a foreign protection,
which is a kind of Disobedience* That it is the Crime they have pursued, and
their offended Honor they would repair at the Charges of him that was
culpable; Observe truly the Foundation which bears and sustains all the Justice
of their specious Cause; behold the Pretext where with they do palliate it;
behold the fair Color wherewith they do paint it: There Is nothing nevertheless
easier than to ruinate that foundation, than to destroy that pretext, than to
rub out and deface that color, for when it shall be true, as they say, as it is
not, and that there were no Example, as we are assured there is contrary to
what they pretend, that the Elector of Treves is under the protection of the
House of Luxumburge, which they have annexed to theirs; dare they deny, when
that protection is unable to defend it, and the Fort not so well guarded as to
secure it, but that it is lawful to repair to a more Powerful protection, and to
seek a stronger Sanctuary? Does a first protection exclude a second? Is there
but one Sanctuary open against persecution? and may not Society be made, and an
Intelligence formed betwixt two good things of the same Nature? The City of
Geneva, has it injured the Canton of Berne, and wounded the Dukes of Savoy,
when it fought ours, and put Her self into Harbor and under the protection of
this Crown? Did the King prosecute and pursue to violence the Duke of Mantoua,
for obtaining the protection of the Venetians, at the same time he did enjoy
his Majesty's? And have the Venetians made War with him, or Incursions into his
Estates, or Invasions upon his person, for having so often implored the Pope's
protection? And there is nothing more compatible or more sociable, than a
permanent and ordinary protection with an extraordinary, which does not
continue, but passes and cease with the danger that procured it; And a
Prince is very Unhappy, or very Impurudent, who is reduced to a single
Expedient of Conservation, which may fail, and to get out of a crowd and
violence of affairs, knows but one Issue, which is not always Free, and has
but one Gate whereof he is not always the Master.

But since the Safety of the People is the Sovereign Law of Governors, and
that other Laws of States have neither spirit nor life, but what is derived to
them from that Principal; who can imagine that a Prince had made a Treaty, by
the which He had bound himself to perish, as often as another Prince had not
the power to protect him, and should embrace a Dependency, by which he
renounced all the means of providing for the Conservation of his Subjects,
which should oppose the pleasure of the other Prince? Such and the like
Treaties should be rather Prodigies and Monsters to be exterminated out of the
Politic, than valuable and lawful Acts that had proceeded from the Authority
of Princes, which is not instituted to destroy and to demolish States, but to
divert the fall, and repair the ruins. I add to this, that the word of
Protection sufficiently declares, what the operation and use thereof ought to
be, and having the safety chiefly of Estates, and good of the persons
protected, for its Mark and End; It cease to be what it was, if it falls into
Impuissancy, and if it has not force nor virtue to conserve and to defend; It
changes its kind, and passes into another Nature contrary to hers, if it
become a principle of Ruin to them whom it ought to serve for relief against
ill fortune, and if it degenerate into Poison intead of being a Preservative.

Let Us conclude, Since the House of Austria was not in a condition to warrant
any person from the ill weather wherewith it was beaten, and that even they who
were Embarked in the same Vessel with her were in danger to be lost, if they
did not quit it, the Elector of Treves did not offend the House of Austria in
making Addresses to Franoe, that was his only safe Haven to secure him from a
strong Wind and an angry Sea; I say further, That He did not only an action of
Duty toward his Subjects, in diverting by our mediation the infallible
desolation which hung over their heads, or an act of Piety toward the Church,
in securing by our means the Holy Places and Sacred Persons; but has not a
little merited from the House of Austria, if it were capable of some sense of
Acknowledgment, and would be sensible of a good Turn, by hindering his great and
formidable Adversary by his foresight and address, from growing greater by the
Conquests of those Estates, and to make a dangerous conjunction of the Rhyne
with the Mosselle, and at the same time to extend his Arms into Flanders and
Germany; And therefore let the World judge upon these true and pertinent Facts,
if that Elector has deserved the usage he has received for his love to us, or
whether the King could pass by such injuries without resentment, and declaring
a War to them, who have so highly offended in the person of one of his Allies,
and in the sight and knowledge of all Europe.

This Example, and many others which I shall speak of in their place, will make
it clearly appear, that the King did not engage in all the Wars, wherewith
miserable Christendom has been vexed for many years, but for the protection
of the weak against the stronger; and that the House of Austria by its
untameable Ambition, has broken the Bands of public Concord, and kindled the
fires, whose destruction it may feel, as well as any other House, before its
burning be quenched; God alone knows, what Event shall be of so many Armies
raised, and where the agitation of so many provoked Nations shall determine.
But the King ought to have this satisfaction and rest of conscience, that he
has not been the Author of these lamentable troubles, but has done his
Endeavor to divert them, spared nothing to stop them; and having labored
much, and taken much pains to establish and settle the tranquillity of his
Kingdom, Had not a livelier and hotter passion than to procure the entire
felicity of his people, and to see that peace flourish he would have given
them, by the abundance vvherevvith he had crowned it, had he been Master of
the Hearts of Strangers, and Arbiter of the Destiny of Things.

Sixth Discourse.
That a War ought not only to be a Just, but also Profitable for him who
undertakes it; Some Rules, which Princes should observe when they relieve their
Allies.
AFter Discourse of the Causes, that make a War Just, and handling of that
Thorny Matter, that has, yet, some need of culture, which may be given it in
its proper place; The Profit of a War must be handled, which is the other
Condition that ought to accompany a War, and without which a Prince ought not
to engage, though it should be, not only full, but filled up with Justice.

If follows not, nevertheless, that this Profit ought to be present and
sensible; nor is it in the order of things to Reap in Sowing, nor that the
first Prescriptions heal a sick person, or that a Picture be finished at the
first Draught: God alone, in giving the first stroke, can give the last hand to
his Works, and finish in beginning; yet, he has not always done it, and he
made use of six days to create the World, and to produce and publish the pieces
of that Mavelous Frame.

As for the Works of Men, Time and Patience are necessary before the End can be
obtained; there are many degrees to clime before they can get to the Feast, and
ordinarily it is with them as with those of Nature, where the Generation of the
most Excellent things, is but the sequel of a precedent Corruption; It
suffices then, that it be a future Utility, to the end it oblige to act, and
that it be known for such: not with Infallibility and Certitude, which
appertains only to God; But so far as one may judge of it by the disposition
of Second causes, and by the Rules of Civil prudence, which is all that can be
required from the conduct of Men, and from the chance of this Life. The
Advantages which ought to return from the War made in favor of Friends and
Allies, and from the Relief is afforded them, shall be here treated of; as for
others, either there is no difficulty in them, or what shall be said of this may
clear the Troubles that be in it.

I will give thee some Rules then, which will discover to Princes the ways they
ought to take, and the Rocks they ought to avoid, when they engage in such
Aids; The first Rule is this, That the Utility they ought to pursue and propose
to themselves before they take up Arms in favor of their friends, ought not to
be Mercenary; not of the nature of what Merchants seek for their Traffic; the
ultimate End of their Ambition, and the principal Object that stirs up their
Industry, is the Increase of their Riches; they hazard Little to gain Much;
they do like the Husbandmen, who sow not only to recover their seed, but to
multiply it; and it is not, to shut the door of their house upon Poverty, that
they labor, but to introduce Abundance; The Reputation also of able and
intelligent Persons in their profession concerns them not, or very little, they
think only of being Rich, and Profit makes up all the Glory of their Exercise,
and all the Price of their Industry. There have been Princes in all times, who
have acted in that Manner, and have been possessed with that base passion; that
the greatness of the Object and Enormity of the Evil, have caused to be called,
Illustrious; but they that are enflamed with the Love of true Wisdom, and with
the Desire of a fair Reputation, ought to sail with another Wind, and take a
very different way.

Let this then be a constant and indubitable Principle, That a Prince ought not
to be persuaded to take Arms in favor of another Prince by the spirit of
Avarice, and by a greediness to grow Greater at his charges, to enrich himself
by his Spoils, and to keep the Securities, which the other Prince has put into
his hands for assurance of his faith, or to serve him for retreat; If that were
modeable, no person would be found, that had not rather try the Hazard of Arms,
and run of the Fortune of Wars, whose Events are doubtful and uncertain, than
expose himself to the infallible Loss of all his Estates, or of a great part of
them. That as there is no question but the Wounds received in the heat of the
War, and from an Enemy to whom one does the worst he can, are less offensive
and grievous, than those that are received in Cold blood and from a Friend; so
the Losses received from them, who ought to secure us, are of worse taste and
of harder disgestion, than those occasioned by such persons, as have declared
the War against us, and have undertaken to ruin us. And the late King had
reason, after the Archduke had besieged Calais, and the Queen of England had
sent to offer him her Sea-Army upon exorbitant conditions; to refuse that
relief, and to command it to be told her, That he had rather his Enemies should
strip him than his Friends.

By this Artifice, the Romans have partly marched to the Conquest of the World,
and from People that made War against one another, they possessed the Country
of him who called them to their aid, and subdued the others Country; it is by
that means, the miserable Grecians finished their destruction, and that their
divisions and disorders delivered them up to the ambition of that People, who
found no better Expedient to determine their differences, and to extinguish
their partialities, than to take from them the power of Quarrelling, and to
deprive them of their Estates, which were the subject of all their hatreds.
It Is with this pernicious Artifice, and deceitful Charity, that the House of
the Ottomans has seized upon some Members of the Empire of Christians, and
caught into their Nets the fairest part of Hongary. The passage of Protection
to Usurpation, is so pleasant for the Conquerors, and their Limits so near,
that the most Religious stick not at leaping over them, and to confound the two
Actions, in distinguishing of them only by Name, and giving the shadow of
difference for what in effect is but the same thing-In Christendom a Family is
to be seen struck with the same disease, the design of Monarchy, as the ancient
Romans were, and the Ottomans are of this time, that has marched, to the
uttermost of their strength, upon their steps, and played, among Christians, the
like game; Their custom hat been to take part in all affairs, and to run to
the least noise of discord they hear amongst men, and to the least flame of
diversion that appears to them; they never observed a Neutrality whilst War was
amongst their Neighbors, and considered not so much the Justice of the Party
they made choice of, as the Means to gain by it, and thereby to get some Pawn
to keep, or make a Conquest; their protections have been the impositions of
many Yoaks; and where it has not imposed a Subjection, it established a
Dependency, not much lighter, and though less grievous, yet assured them who
depended upon their power, and held them by as strong and indissoluble Bands.

There Is no need of going out of Europe, or this present Age, to confirm this
Truth, by ancient and foreign Examples; Germany and Italy have been the
Theaters, wherein it has evidently appeared in our time, and entered in pomp
and glory. In two the most remarkable actions which have been there
represented, a more illustrious example of this nature can hardly be seen, for
the novelty of the Incidents, and for the rarity of the Circumstances, which
are there encountered, than that whcih happened in the Succession of the Duke of
Cleves, claimed by the Duke of Newbourge, who was protected by the Spaniards,
and by the Marquis of Brandebourge, whom the Hollanders assisted. But in regard
I have an exact and ample Treaty of this Affair in the third part, I send the
Reader thither, to speak of another Example which Italy has furnished; after
that the succession of Mantoua and Mo^^ferrat fell to the Duke of Nevers,
against which the Spaniards planted their Batteryes, and did their uttermost to
exclude him; TO attain then their End and to hit their mark, They made use of a
double Artifice, and planted both pieces in Battery; The first, in stirring up
the Prince fo Guastalde to intermeddle with that succession, and to oppose an
Apocryfal and Imaginary pretension to the Clear and indubitable Right of the
Duke of Nevers, They Endeavored, if what was published then in Italy be true,
to raise even a Bastard of the Precedent Dukes, named Yacinthe, to make him
Engage in the Quarrel, in purging him from the Viciousness of his birth, under
pretenses that had some Color, but which Justled directly a Constitution of
the Council of Trent received in Italy. But Lets leave the business of
Yacinthe, to hold us to that of Guastalde, which admits of no question, as
published to the Eyes of all Europe, and raised a scandal, as far as
Constantinople. The second Artifice is, That they abused the Name and Authority
of the Emperor to Compel the Duke of Mantoua to put his Forts in Deposite into
the hands of a Commissioner, who was their subject, till the Emperor had
declared his Judgment upon that difference, and done Right to the interessed
Parties; That Is to say, to give time to the Spaniards to form a Multitude of
Incidents and of Tricks to stretch and perpetuate the Matter in Contest; That
the Length of the pursuit, and despair of the success in a Court where the
Parties were Judges, might force the Duke of Mantoua to Consent to their Will,
and to yield a visible Title of Justice to a pure Oppression and an effective
Violence.

The design then of the Aid they offered to Guastalde, or that he, if you will
have it so, had implored from the, did not extend to the raising him to the
Sovereignty of Mantoua and Montferrat; But to make themselves Masters of Casal,
and to deliver themselves of the Jealousy that Fort gives them; and from the
Apprehensions it gives to the state of Milan, for which they have so much Love
and Tenderness; And that their Injustice might reign in all parts, and be
dilated as the soul, in all the body of that affair; And that there might not
be Principal or Accessory, but should taste of its venom and of some Tincture
of violence; It Is to be Considered, that before Guastalde had attempted this
Action and formed his Complaints at the Imperial Court; whilst the Prince of
Mantoua paid there his necessary Duties on his Fathers behalf, and made his
requisite submission; Whilst they gave him fair Words and Hopes at Vienna; When
the greatest part of the World believed, That the Emperor offended not
Willingly, but of Ignorance, and that he Was not Easily induced to do it, but
under the Species of good, and would not oppose the Right of the Duke of
Mantoua; The Governor of Milan ruined the Montferrat with an Army, and was
within Little of taking Casal b' intelligence of a Treaty, which he had long
practiced for the buying of that place; They staid not there, but having hoised
sail to the Wind, they were Engaged to pursue their Navigation, and to try the
Conclusion of that Course with honor which they had begun with so little
success; when they saw their stroke fail; That the war might be drawn int' a
damageable Length and gain in the End nothing but shame and displeasure, the
Rewards of unjust Enterprises, when they are not happy; They Caused other Mines
to play, and pressed the Duke of Mantoua to Accept a Recompense for Cassal in
the French County or in Cremonois, not Comprehending therein the Citadelle of
Cremona, That Is to say, That an independent and absolute Prince, as he Was in
his Country, They would have made him in another Country their Subject or
their Dependent, and offered him in Exchange, a Limited Revenue, and Lands
liable to be taken at all hours, for a Sovereignty above price, and a fortress
almost Impregnable.

And the great pressures they have since made, and the Extreme Heat they have
since expressed to put a value upon the pretenses of the Princess of Stigliana
to Sabionere, was not to leave her the free disposition of that place, But to
keep it under her Name, and to make it serve as a Bridle and as a Citadelle to
three or four Neighbour-states, in the midst whereof, it is Enclosed; Did they
not also in a strange Manner protect the Prince of Monaco against the
pretensions and Designs of the Genoese to that Principality? And in What did
that protection at last Terminate but in an heavy and severe yoke which
oppressed him, and compelled him to shake it off, to cast himself into the Arms
of a more just power and more humane domination? Such and the like Examples,
which I could bring in great Number, make a sufficient Discovery of the Genius
of that Nation, and of the boundless Avarice, which transports them openly to
Ceize upon other Men's Lards, or with subtilty to Enter upon them by a breach or
postern gate.

Seventh Discourse.
The second Rule which a Prince ought to observe in Relieving of his Friends.
THat notwithstanding, what has been said; A Prince that undertakes a War for
the Love of his Neighbor may Lawfully pretend to a Reembursement of part of
his Charges, If the person whom he relieves has sufficient Means, and may take
Cautionary Towns for the security of his Disbursements, or for the Retrait of
his Troops, or for Engagement of the Faith and Constancy of his Neighbor: For
truly, it is very just, That who spares not his own blood nor the life of his
subjects to secure his friend from servitude, should find Him liberal of the
goods and substance of his subjects to preserve in some sort his Protector from
damage, and pay willingly some of the Charges for the Remedies that save his
Life; My meaning is, in Case it may Conveniently be done, and that the estate
relieved has not been so much plundered and emptied of victuals and Riches that
little remains for life and sustenance, and that the least Emanation would
serve to make it yield up the Ghost and force it to the Extremity of the Evil
against which it took up Arms; Otherwise, the Aid given Would not be so much a
civil Charity, as the Supercery of a Robber and of a Pyrate. And by killing the
sick person to draw away his disease. When Matters are in that Condition, a
Prince ought to Content himself with the glory that shall rebound upon his Name
and Conduct in protecting his Neighbor from oppression, and with the benefits
that redound to his states in breaking the designs, and hindering the growth of
an Ambitious Master, wh' having devoured the Meaner, would infallibly thrust at
the greater persons, and respects his first victories but as Means and bridges
to pass hikm over to new Conquests.

I say the same, and for the same Reasons of those States that have but one
fortress, wherein all their safety Consists and all their hopes; It may be
received and kept till the End of the War, as a bridle and a security for the
faith of him to whom the Relief is given, but not to be r^teined after the
Peace, for the Charges have been laid out to Conserve and hold it; for that
were to exact the life of a Man, for having furnished him with Victuals, and
speaking generally, To seek the End for the price and Reward of the Means which
have been Contributed to produce it. And the Prince ought to secure to his
power the Land and goods of his friends Subjects, Whereof he is not Proprietary
but the Dispensor and Steward, and is bound to husband them with more
Circumspection and retention than his own Lands and Goods.

It Is then an Act of singular prudence and a Maxim of subtle policy to take
hold of some important place for security of the Moneys that shall be Lent and
advanced for the Affairs of Allies or Friends; The Venetians have often
practiced this prudence, and many good pawns have remained in their hands for
Want of Redemption, and and the Owners have been at last Constrained to pass
unto them the Revenue and Inheritance. So did Queen Elizabeth of England, when
after the Defection of the Hollanders from their Obedience to Spain, she
relieved them with Money and Men, and received Flushing, Brill and Ramachin in
deposite, till she should be reembursed of the moneys lent them, which did not
happen till the Reign of King James, her successor, It Is to b' ignorant of
King-Craft and to offend shamefully against the Art of Reigning, not to demand
places for the Retreit of his Troops in case of Disgraces, and to want an Haven
for Harbout, when the Wind is Contrary. The Necessity of this is Entire and
inevitable, to retain by that Bond, and hold with that Anchor, the Will of
them, who are relieved, lest they Change and faulter after Engagement, and
leave us to the mercy of Winds and Waves, and Accept without our Consent
Advantageous Conditions that may be offered them, in fear of our Arms, and to
disingage them from our Alliance. The French have often struck against this
rock for want of Care, and have fallen into these Ambushes for want of
foresight; It cannot be believed, how often their facility and excessive
freeness have drawn infidelities and Defection from them, who did not seek our
Protection or implore our Aid, but to agree with their Enemies to greater
advantage, and to make at our charges and under the shadow of our Arms a more
Honorable peace. This Unhappiness happened twice to Henry the second, and
Octavus Duke of Parma, whose defense the King undertook against the Emperor
and the Pope, who would have reduced the Duke to his shirt, made his peace with
them without his Majesty's knowledge and participation. And in the League which
Henry made with the Elector Maurice and the other Confederates of Germany
against Charles the fifth; The King having intelligence of their Treaty of
Accommodation, and seen Evidences thereof, which the Elector contrived to our
Disadvantage, was compelled to decline the faults he had begun in accepting of
Ostages, instead of Places, and to ceize upon the City of Mets, with the
consent of the Bishop and people, as shall be discovered in the Treaty of
Monarchy, for his security against the Germans, who came to fall upon him, and
to stop the Torrent was ready to overflow his Kingdom.

The present Elector of Saxe a most Worthy Branch of Maurices Blood, and a true
sprout of such a stock, did not degenerate from the faith of his Parent; For
he did not only imitate by the peace of Prague, the supercery that was done
us, at the peace of Passau, but the Copy surpassed the Original, and without
finding such advantageous Conditions as the others were; He did not only
abandon the two Crowns, which had spilt so much blood, and consumed so great
Treasure for the Liberty of Germany, but conspired against them, and Consented
to fight them, who Labored Earnestly to Deliver the Captives from the Chains
they seemed to be in Love with, or to compel them to Happiness who had not the
Courage to be happy; However, It Is certain, that the fair peace of Prague,
wherein the Accepters of it believed to be secure without running the danger of
losing themselves, as in the Continuation of the War they made to the House of
Austria, had not been concluded, if the two Crowns had not engaged in the
affairs of that Country; And the Emperor Had not Accorded unto them that
respite from their ruin, if H' had esteemed himself powerful or happy enough
to resist at one Time their forces and Ours; That if the Interessed Persons are
the better for it, and are at shelter from the Tempest they feared, they d'ow
us the obligation, which they have very ill acknowledged; That if their Peace
be Captious and unsettled, as it is, and if they have need, as there is no
Question of a General peace, which is the seal of the Security and Duration of
particular Persons. It Is also from the two Crowns, they ought principally to
receive that good, and it is from them that the Perfectest Cure ought to be made
of the German body, Instead of those Lucid Intervalls, which particular
Treaties do produce, and of those deceitful Recoveries which give Ease for
some time to the sick Person; but take not away the Cause nor the Root of the
Disease. It Is for this Reason, that they Act with so much Contest and Heat;
that they raise such great Armies, and support so great an expense; and they
may be assured that Arms will never be laid down till the Work b'
Accomplished; That they have not made so great expenses to lose them; And How
painful soever the Cariere be wherein they are engaged, They will never stay
till they have past through it; And either all Apparences are false, or the
time is not far off, and Christendom will very shortly see a Discovery of the
good it desires, though it have yet some Convulsion fits to suffer, and the
Light it expects, will quickly appear, though it has also some shadows to
disperse, and Clouds to dissolve.

The Easiness spoken of has not been pernicious to the French alone but also
to the Dutch; They have been also mistaken in their March into this Kingdom
upon the single faith of its confederates; And if that Prodigious Army of
Reiters which marched to Overrun our Nation under the Conduct of the Duke of
Bovillon and the Baron of Dona, had surprised some strong place; It had not
been so ill handled, as it was, in its Retrait, nor Feasted the plains with so
many Dead bodies, as it left there; It had been at least admitted to
Capitulation for the safety of its Return, and for a part of the Money which
had been promised in rendering what it held to its Lawful Master.

The Queen of England, of whom W' have already spoken, was much better Advised,
and her Conduct more prudent, when she would not open her Purse not Command her
Army to enter France in favor of the Prince of Conde, Till h' had put Havre of
Grace into her power, and delivered up that famous Haven, to give her Entrey at
pleasure into this Kingdom. It Is true, That I cannot excuse the pretense,
whereby she seemed to receive it, nor approve of the Declaration she published,
That it was not to break Amity with the Kings, with whom she desired to
entertain a good Correspondency, that she had Commanded it to be taken; but to
take it out of the hands of his Rebel Subjects, who might keep it to his
prejudice, and to Conserve it for him, during his Minority, and till he might
Act personally in his Affairs, and hold the Helm of his state in his own hands,
which was handled by persons who were not, as she said, Prudent enough or Well
enough disposed.

This Plaster was too gross, and this Masque too visible to Cover and disguise
so visible an Usurpation, and the Council of the King had reason to declare her
fallen from the Conditions of the Treaty of Cambray in Relation to the business
of Calais, since sh' had violated it in aiding the Rebels to his Majesty; and
that sh' had been the Receiver of places, which they had taken from him. The
Duke of Savoy, Grandfather to the present Duke, endeavored to exercise the
like Charity toward Henry the Third, and render the same good Office to the
Crown, when h' had seized upon the Marquisate of Saluces, for fear, as He said,
lest Esdiguieres should prevent him, and until the Troubles, which troubled
us, were appeased, and that our Civil Tempests were allaid. The late King paid
him that Charity, as a Debt of the Crown, so soon as h' attained it, and made
him see, that Great Princes know how to force Little Princes to b' honest in
spite of their subtleties, and to ease them better than any Persons of the
world, of the Obligation they are under to make Restitution of unjust
Acquisitions. The Method then spoken of, and for the Reasons alleged, to
require places, has been at all times familiar with Princes, who know how to
Reign, and particularly with the Spaniards. But if the Duke of Parma demanded
no place, the first Incursion he made into France, and marched to secure Paris
from the Armies of the late King, without seeking any place of Security for his
Retreat, but in the Forces He commanded; it was for a more important Reason;
'twas to blind the world by that show of Liberty; 'twas to leave an Impression
that his Master sent him, not to fish, as it is said, in our Troubles, and to
make benefit of our Disorders, as many murmured within and without the Kingdom,
but only to drive away Heresy, or at least to hinder the Ascent of it to the
Throne, where none but the True Religion ought to sit, as He made a solemn Oath
in the great Church of Meaux in the Name of King Philip. But he drew not long
that breath of Generosity, and could never be persuaded to come to the Relief
of Roven, till the Fere was delivered unto him and put into his Custody, which
assured his Entry into the Kingdom and his going out. As to the rest, the
sequel of time and course of affairs made it appear, that Philip made him take
a false Oath, and had deceived his General to make him deceive others. The Duke
of Sessa declared it sufficiently at Rome, when He could not hinder the
Absolution of the late King, nor his Reunion to the Holy Chair, the Center of
the Church; He protested against it, as prejudicial to the Pretensions his
Master had upon France, and the Charges expended to conserve Religion, and
expel Heresy. It was therefore to the Spaniard an extraordinary Case, and an
Exception to their general Rule, which they seldom break; as the proceeding of
the Duke of Parma in his first Expedition into France. For they have such an
unsatiable Appetite after other men's Goods and Lands, and are so violently
transported with that Passion, that they have not excepted the Holy Chair, even
at such times as they made a show to relieve it. In the Heat of the Interdict
at Venice, and when the Marquis of Veillane, Ambassador at Rome for the
Catholic King, had obliged the Pope to cast himself into the Hands of his
Master, and to accept of his Protection, amongst the things he demanded of his
Masters behalf for the Relief He promised him, which was but in Paper, and for
that Evidence of Good, which was but in Ostentation; what He most insisted upon
was, that Ferrara should be delivered to his Master for the Retreat of his Army
by Land, and Ancona for his Army by Sea; and the Count of Fuentes, who breathed
nothing but Fire and Sword, and was the principal Promoter of the Troubles, had
the boldness to demand Charbonnieres, of the Duke of Savoy, who was not
interressed in the Quarrel, as he said, to hold the Key of the Passage by which
Esdiguiere might descend to the Relief of the Republique.

Eighth Discourse.
That the Conduct which the King has observed in the Relieving of his Allies,
is full of Moderation and Generosity; That the Conduct of some other Princes of
this Age is not the same.
THis Subject may be wonderfully cleared and beautified by the Relation of the
Conduct which has been observed by four different Princes of this Age in the
Relief of their Allies. The Manner is very different, though it has been
exercised upon the same Matter, and in the course of the same business, the
troubles of Germany. Though there was no Power in Christendom uninteressed in
that affair, and that did not represent some Person in that famous Tragedy.
It Is certain, that the King of France, of Spain, of Swede, and the Duke of
Bavaria, have appeared in them with more glory than others, and that their
Policy was not less eminent than their Arms. But search being to be made in the
third part into the most secret Motions, wherewith these Princes have acted,
and what their Cabinet-Counsels have infused, of the most particular and
remarkable considerations in that long and sharp War, I will beseech the
Reader, to suspend his curiosity to that Edition, which shall follow this
immediately. And we shall see, that Spain never moved but upon the same foot,
and never sailed but with the same Winds of Ambition and Particular Profit;
That the French motions have been sometimes Slow and Irresolute, and sometimes
Quicker, and directed to the General good of the Christian Commonwealth. But
that the public good was always its principal Mark, and the ultimate End
proposed in its Interventions and Arms.

As to the King of Swede, He could not truly with better Judgment or Symetry
adjust the design he had formed for the Relief of Germany, and to take off the
grievous Fetters the House of Austria had imposed upon it, The Innate spirit of
a Conqueror considered, or to make his spirit serve the Relief under a more
specious and plausible convenience. Consider him then in this High and
Difficult Exercise, from his Landing in the Haven in the Island of Usdome to
the Plain of Sutzen, where he lost his Life without leaving the Victory to his
Enemies, who took his Life from him. The boldness of his Treaty with the Duke
of Pomerania, to establish himself in his Country, shall be represented, the
valiant Artifice h' used to cause Spomdau to be put into his hands by the
Marquis of Brandenburge; And after that Tilly, a famous Captain, was entered
with strong hand into the Countries of the Duke of Saxe, and had promised to
that Elector, unless he would be of the Party, to expound unt' him the mystical
sense of that saying, familiar with Charles the 5th, Wh' is not with m' is
against me. Consider the Prudence the King of Swede made use of in this
occasion, by raising advantage from the inevitable Necessity the Elector of
Saxe had of his Virtue and Fortune, against so fortunate and great a Captain as
assaulted him.

At last, after that by gain of the Battle at Lipsick, and by the Defeat of the
old Troops of the League, H' had forced all the Obstacles, and taken away all
the Barriers, which hindered to penetrate into Germany, and the Imperial Cities
opened unt' him their Gates at contest, and the Princes of the Empire crowded
to b' on his side; It shall be seen how he gave them the Law, for whom he
gained Liberty, and imposed a kind of yoke, which in time would have become
heavy, and began to be born with jealousy. This kind of Policy truly is not
the custom of all Princes, and enters as seldom into the Train of the affairs
of the world, as it arises rarely from Conquerors, and from those
extraordinary Persons, who come as the King of Swede did, to chnage the face of
things.

As to the Duke of Baviere, this praise is not to be denied him, That being
skilful in the Art of making War, he gave not place to any Prince of his Age in
the Science of the Cabinet Council; and that Germany has not born of a long
time, more dextrous and knowing Persons, to give Motions to those secret Wheels
and invisible Engines, which stir and cause to turn, what is most Heavy and
most Immovable in the Affairs: And since his Art and manner of Acting may be
reduced more commodiously into Practice, and drawn int' Imitation, than that of
the King of Swedes, a longer and more particular stay shall be made upon his
Conduct, than upon that of the King of Swedes; and all the Draughts and
Proportions for the Instruction of other Princes and their Ministers of State;
the diverse Persons he personated, and the different faces wherewith he
disguised himself to attain his Ends, and to maintain the posture gained by his
Industry, shall be fully discovered; how he raised himself to the Electorat,
and maintained it, notwithstanding the Spanish Jealousy, the Opposition of
England, the Contradiction of the Protestant Electors, and the Resistance also
of the Imperial Constitutions.

In giving frequent Jealousies to the House to Austria by the Hold he seemed to
take of France, and then joining more strictly with the Empire, and tying the
knot of their Conjunction the stronger to his advantage, H' often prevailed
over it; H' holds the power of it to this day, without being holden by it, and
has so blended his Interests with theirs, that he can sever them when he
pleases, and that he will do, when it is no longer good for him, or that it
will be better in another place for his affairs.

When he was delivered by the death of the King of Swede of the greatest danger
h' had run, and of the most furious Tempest that ever threatened him, He
believed, that h' had no cause to fear any future ill times, and to speak the
truth, so long as the English were content to make Generous Deliberations, and
to send Magnificent Embassies in favor of the Palatine House, it would not b'
easy for that Duke to part willingly with what h' had received, not to depart
with, but by the highest violence of ill fortune; and the Necessity must be
strong, if he could find no means of delivery from it, and all the Gates
strongly shut upon him, if he did not escape at some Postern door.

As to France, to speak again one word thereof, and so permit some Draughts of
her proceedings to pass by; it shall be represented entire and wholly, such as
it stood in the diverse occurrences of the Troubles; She will appear in their
Birth and Progress as Mediatrix of the Quarrel, and Cause of the Conclusion of
the Peace at Ulms, which had re-established the affairs of Germany, and
restored to the Empire its first Countenance, If they to whom it served for
shelter and plank of safety, had not broken it, and oppressed by surprise them,
who believing themselves out of danger by the conclusion of the Treaty, and
under the shadow of public Faith, were unprepared for defense. Since that
time, its action at Languy, and its Cares, have been faint in the behalf of
Germany, and the Cabinet Contests, to which the frequent changes of the
Ministers of State did ever contribute some obstructions to their resolutions,
and the fire which the factious Religionaries kindled easily in its bowels,
hindered the relief, till the Mantouan War was ended; then truly it began to
return with warm thoughts and cares; and the Experience gained in Italy, and
the present constitution of things, having given her to understand, that the
Septentrion Wind was only to b' apprehended in relation to her self and
Allies, She resolved to assault the Spring of the Evil, and to set, as it is
said, the Ax to the root of the Disorder, and to act vigorously in that behalf,
and to make its first attempt eminent in the Diet of Ratisbonne; And that as
France knew to make use of the occasion of the King of Swedes entry into
Germany, whither the Princes of that Country, suffering, or fearing oppression,
had called him; as since of the Treaties that Charnasse made at Berwalde with
the King of Swede, even to the Renewing of the Alliance with the Swedes, which
Sir of Avaux made the year before at Hambourge; so she has to admiration, and
with great dexterity managed two Interests. The first that most possessed her
spirit, was that of the Church and Holy things, which it espoused with hot and
constant zeal. Whereupon I dare boldly say, that I hope to make it appear,
there, and in other places, That the true Reasons of State do not justle the
Maxims of Religion; and that the same Authority which has put a distinction
betwixt the Secular and Ecclesiastic Powers, would have them bound up together
in Amity, and their hands stretched out to the aid of one another; That a wise
Prince ought never permit their Harmony to be broken, nor the bounds, which
sever, to be confounded. In the troubles of Christendom, and mixture of Parties
of different Religions, which tear it in pieces, the King had not only the
care to put in safety the Catholic Interests, and to secure the Holy Places
and Sacred Persons, against the Enterprises of such men as might have violated
them; but his Conduct may be found less prudent, since for his Love to the
Church he'th sometimes quitted the advantages, which he might have assumed with
a good conscience, and was firm for the good of Religion in all things, where
he might have safely taken his Liberty for the good of his Affairs, had he not
strongly believed, that the small prejudice he did himself would be plentifully
repaired by God, who suffers not a glass of water given in his Name to pass
unrewarded; and would not only accompany with his Blessings the justice of his
Arms, but also crown his Piety and the Passion had for the things which relate
unt' his Service; And to consider the Greatness and Number of them, which he
had undertaken, and the long course of Affairs which had entertained him, It
may be truly said, That a Prosperity less interrupted has been seldom seen,
nor a Reign that has received from Heaven more propitious and favorable
Aspects.

I dare als' affirm a second Truth, which adorns the Kings Reign with a
particular Glory, and promise to make it out clearly, That w' have not only
made faithful Societies with our Neighbors, but protected the interests of
them, whom we were bound to protect; and have exceeded our Limits, and in some
Cases, the King may b' accused to have been Indulgent to the Business of
Strangers, and too little sensible of the Necessities of his Subjects; were it
not, that from the Good of his Allies Success, he makes an inevitable
reflection of Good upon his own Affairs, and that in diverting the loss of his
Neighbors, he conserves the Borders of his Country, and hinders the Invasions
of his Enemies; And were there no other Reasons, than that the Evils and
Sufferings of his Subjects might the sooner determine, as the Seeds of a
permanent Prosperity, and to re-build the Temple of Peace, which was shaken,
and trembled for fear of Ruin; it was necessary, that the War should precede
that Holy and admirable Edifice; That in the Tragique and Common Misery which
makes Christendom to groan, the King has this Consolation, That the Guilty
are the sole Authors of unjust Wars, and that the Firebrands are justly
punished, but such are not to be condemned who suffer losses in the flames. But
God and the World know, the Defaulters in the Quarrel, which at this day do
exercise Christians; that the King engaged in it as an Assistant, and if his
good Offices and Prayers had been able to resist the Violence which acted upon
his Allies, h' had never drawn his Sword to defend them. And I will show, that
although all Christendom may witness, and his Allies taste the fruits of his
Labors and Charges for their safety; since He was compelled to procure it by
his Arms; He may be blamed with too great a Retention, and with too slow a
Resentment for the Injuries received in their Person, before he could resolve
to repel them by force; He may be blamed, I say, for it, if the fear of
avoiding and drawing upon his Subjects the Consequences of a War be
blameworthy, or not willingly to descend int' an Abyss, from whence there is no
ascent at pleasure, or to take the Flayl of Gods Anger in hand, whose strokes
fall without distinction upon all sorts of persons, and strike down equally the
Innocent with the Nocent.

The Reader will excuse, if he please, this light Digression, which may not be
disagreeable to him, and this little Interposition, which may give him some
taste, and serve him for an Essay of what is prepared for him in abundance and
bounty in the Sequel of this Work; And that he may judge of the Equity and
Freedom of the King's proceedings toward his Allies, whom He defends and
protects, I will here say a word of his Generosity in the behalf of one of his
Neighbors, whom h' had obliged to his Power to be's Friend, wh' has not
omitted any Acts of Hostility against the King, and to render him all proofs of
Hatred; and though he was engaged in many formed Conspiracies against France,
and that it had no secret or public Enemy, with whom He Would not declared or had
Intelligence; and though he was guilty, as all the world knows, of breaking
many Treaties, and of many Attempts made against France; yet so soon as he made
show of Repentance, and to abjure the contrary Party, the King opened his Arms
unto him, and re-established him in his Estates, with exception only to a few
Fortresses, which the King would not commit to the Faith of so changeable a
Prince, and to the flux and reflux of the humors that perpetually agitated his
Soul; That if this Prince was hardened in the habitude of failing; and if the
acknowledgment of good received, nor hope of what was promised after the War,
could retain him in his Duty, nor stop his moveable Spirit, there is great cause
highly to praise the Kings Moderation and his magnanimous Spirit, in rendering
Voluntarily what he might Lawfully have kept; And there is no cause to accuse
him of Facility and Imprudence, for being deceived, for that he made judgment
of the Duke's Conduct by the Law of his Interest, as the most certain Rule to
judge by, that Prudence affords; And there was no reason, that a Person in good
condition, and in a way to be better, should destroy himself in a capricious
humor, and choose rather to Err once more at the pleasure of another, and of
Fortune, and float in the Incertitude of what He might become, than to rest in
a Commodious posture, and enjoy a Safe condition.

Moreover, it is of no use to dissemble or to speak but half the truth; The
Event contrary the Presumptions raised, though very reasonable, have not
deceived the Kings foresight, and the Defection of Duke Charles did not
surprise him, but shut up bewixt two Extremes, to run the hazard of being
deceived, or the reproach of the rejection of him, who did cast himself at his
mercy, and implored his clemency, He judged it more honorable for him to expose
his Judgment to the first, than second Hazard, and to convince the world by
such an infallible evidence, That he could submit to any thing in order to
Peace, and for remove of the Impediments that did obstruct it.

Ninth Discourse.
Whether it b' Expedient to hazard the Remains of the Forces of a State, to
Recover Reputation lost by some Notorious Disgrace; That it is not safe to act
alone, or to permit all things to be done b' others in difficult Enterprises.
THings being thus established, as they have been in the former Discourses, a
Scruple is to be taken away, and a Difficulty cleared, which enters into the
Matter to be treated of, Whether to repair the Reputation ruined by some
infamous disgrace, and the Honor abused by some notorious loss, The Prince
ought to oppose the fortune that oppresses him, and put all his strength to
resist the Ruins of the Violence, and to hazard what remains of the Wrack,
rather than conserve it beaten with ill fortune, and covered with shame. That
which most sharpens this Scruple, and gives most color to this Difficulty, is,
That the Reputation of the Affairs of State ought not to be less dear to the
Prince, than Honor is to every Particular honest man; And yet, since all
agree, that the Wise as well as the Ignorant conspire in this Judgment, that
Honor is a Good which must be conserved, when it is gained, and recovered when
it is lost, at the charges of Life, and that it is better to die Honorably than
to live Infamously; Why should not the same Judgment be made upon the
Reputation of the State? And will they not believe, That a Prince is obliged to
maintain it, and to recover it without any exception of Means, and without
reservation of Lands or Lives?

And it may b' observed, that the Reputation now to be spoken of, is different
from the two others, already spoken of in the precedent Discourses, and it is of
another value, and of another importance, than the first, whereof mention has
been made, which consists in the sinister Reports scattered b' Enemies, and in
the ill savor they raise against the glory of a Prince, and to the
disadvantage of his Affairs, which is not, as has been said, the Subject of a
Just War; though the like offenses done to Particular persons, and the like
stains imprinted upon their honor, are but to' often the foundation and
original of their Resentments and Quarrels; which makes it appear, and I will
say this by the way, That this sense of Reputation and Honor, wherewith the
most Excellent Men of all Countries, and of all Ages have been touched, and
which they 've not only Authorized by their Precepts, but also Confirmed by
their Examples, Cannot proceed but from a Spiritual Nature; And this Privilege,
which our Soul has to raise it self above the Matter, and to despise not only
the sensible objects which flow from it, but Life it self that Depends upon it,
to subsist by that which is not born, but in the thoughts of others, and
Conserved only in their memory, sufficiently shows, That sh' is of a more
Exalted Spirit, and has a fairer Birth than the souls of Beasts. To return to
the Objection made, I say, that there is a great Disproportion and a Notable
difference betwixt the Honor of a Particular person and the Reputation of the
Affairs of State; That in the State, Reputation is a subaltern good to the real
force, and a Means, which has for its End the most Essential powers; That
this is the Health of the body, whereof the other is but the Color, and that
agreeable Light, which appears without, from the good Constitution within, and
darts into the Eyes of the Beholders; And it is of the same Concernment to a
Prince, as I Have formerly said, what Credit is to Merchants in order to
effective Riches; And therefore, as what is Superior in any order is never
abandoned for what is Subaltern, nor the End for the Means, which are
Constituted for its Accomplishment; As to destroy health for beautifying of the
face, and to hazard all our Lands to maintain our Credit, would be Condemned;
so a Prince would offend most shamefully against the Laws of Civil Prudence,
and be not only a most unjust dispensator, but a very ill Husband of the Powers
of the State, to deliver them up wholly to Fortune, and to expose them wholly
to the uncertain and unfaithful Lot of Arms; To support the sinking Reputation
of Affairs, or to raise it when it is fallen to the ground, all he can do in
General, and what he ought to do, if he be dextrous for the Interest of the
Reputation of Affairs, It Is to Imprint in Men a great Opinion of his Virtue and
Fortune; To give as much as he can Relief and day to the good Successes shall
befall him; And to Imitate Romulus, whom Titus Livius commends for his Admiral
Address and Incomparable Grace in giving Value to all his Actions; And to raise
it in the least part of his Greatness and Power. What Advantages will arise to
the State from such Apparances dexterously managed, and from that light
dispersed Artificially abroad; What great Respect and Confidence in Friends
these superficial things created from Opinion do produce, cannot fully b'
expressed, and to Enemies of Reservation and fear; As of what great Importance
it is, to sick States, for preventing the obstructions of Recovery, and of
Restitution to Health, That it be believed they are in Health, and have also
Forces for defense against Assaults, The two Principal parts of the Greatness
of a State. But when Power and Reputation meet in Conjunction, and that some
Notable Diminution of the one, or the other is to be suffered; It Is better
endured in the last, which may always Spring again, and retake its Glory, so
long as the first shall subsist, but cannot long survive the Ruin of the
other; nor stay long above ground after its fall; And truly, it is not a New
thing or Extraordinary to see Vicissitudes in the Reputation of Princes and
States; There Is nothing more frequent in the World, and there was never State
that has not suffered some Eclipse, and been Assaulted with some Ill success,
that has interrupted the Course of his Glory; But there may be a Resurrection
when the Fall is on that side; A spot Imprinted in the Reputation of Affairs,
is not a Spot that cannot be taken out; The first Considerable good Fortune
that happens does Efface it; And a Tree, which Winter has stripped of its
Leaves, and left Naked, renews in Beauty and Flourishes, as before, if it
thrust out other Leaves.

But it seems that some Corruption is permitted in that part, That a fairer
Generation may put forth; And it is certain, that the Glory, of the Romans, was
Livelier and more Entire, in that the Victory, after the loss of three
Battails, and the sight of Hannibal at the Gates of Rome, remained unto them
upon the Carthaginians, than if they 'd stopped them upon the Borders of Rhone,
or at the Entry of the Alps.

The Defeat of Quintilius Varus by the Almans was not s' infamous to the Reign
of Augustus, as the Revenge which Germanicus took, was honorable to the Reign
of Tiberius, The Virtue of the Republique of Venice, was more admired, and did
Dart out fairer Rays, in their Return from the greatest stroke it received at
Gyradade, Than if it had not received it; and in rising to its Ancient
greatness, than if it had not fallen. And without flattering of the Kings
Reign, and the present Administration, It may be said, That if it has
sometimes happened, yet but rarely, that some small storm of Disgrace has fallen
upon the Long Prosperity that accompanied his Arms; And if the Commanders have
not always Happily Commanded them; Fortune has so ordained it, as well to
conserve by those high Accidents the Right sh' has upon all humane Actions, As
to make the power of the State the better to be known, which was not shaken by
shakings that had overthrown other States; And to make the Prudence, the
Boldness, and Activity of the Conduct of the King and of his Ministers of State
to appear with the more Luster and Glory; who always made the advantages the
Common Destiny of War had given them, unprofitable to the Enemies; who always
cut off the Wings of their Victory, and hindered them from Flying over the
Limits of the same Field, where they gained it; And have so shut it up in the
midst of a great Number of Good successes that preceded and followed on our
part, That it may be said in some sort, that it has Disappeared and vanished
away, as if there had been no Victory. Before handling of the other branch of
Comparison proposed in the beginning of this Discourse, which is the sense of
Particular Persons in relation to their Honor; Two other very Important Maxims
shall b' added to what has been already said in Relation to the Reputation of
the State; The first, That there are some points of Reputation Ambiguous, or
Contested, and some Delicacies of Honor not sufficiently Cleared, or which are
Called in Question, whereupon a Prince or his Ministers of State ought not to
Contest opinionately, nor to debate Violently, when there is no Question then
made of it, and that some Affairs are to be Treated and Concluded, As a Peace,
an Alliance of blood, or a League, etc. For then Endeavors must b' used to
slide upon them with Dexterity, and handle those Thorns without pricking the
Fingers. Queen Elizabeth of England did the like upon the Contest that happened
at Bolognia, betwixt the Spanish Ambassador and Hers, for the Precedence. The
Expedient found was to Treat by Writing, and by Proposals, and Reciprocal
Answers. The same Moderation was observed in the Conference of Vervins betwixt
or Ambassadors and those of Spain, Ours were lodged there in such a Manner,
that w' had reason to believe, That the Right, Justice and the Prescription of
Time out of mind had given us, was preserved unto us, and there remained to the
Spaniards some Appearance and shadow, I know not what, to hide and Cover the
Disadvantage they had received in the unjust Pretension that torments them upon
that Subject, and entered into their Spirits with the design of Universal
Monarchy.

But when there is no Cause to pass beyond it, or to labor for some Treaty
necessary to the public good; Great Care must be taken of the Biased Men,
and to lose Nothing of those Rights in matters of Importance; The Dignity of
the State must not directly or obliquely be put to Reference, nor a Pretension
of Equality admitted where the Superiority has been gained. Such was the
practice of Pibrac and Ferrier at the Council of Trent, who chose rather to
Retire than to Assist at a Ceremony, where Precedence before the Spanish
Ambassador was not fully Accorded unto them, nor their Dignity sufficiently
acknowledged; And at the Wedding of the King of Denmarks Son some years past,
Sir of Avaux the Kings Ambassador to that Grown, Prudently Rejected and
without Reserve, All the proposed Means that left in the least Jealousy the
Precedence claimed by him without Difficulty and Modification, above the
Spanish Ambassador.

It must not therefore be forgot here; That there are sometimes little
Delicacies and Formalities of Nothing, whereon the Agents of Princes our
friends do ketch, and for which they cause Disorders; And are the Cause, that
whilst they amuze themselves in the Clearing and Debating of them, much time is
lost to the prejudice of the Affairs of their Masters. And that the secret
Acrimonies which have taken Root in the Hearts of those Agents, hold them
always divided, and occasion, that a good and sincere Correspondence is never
formed amongst them; That fierce and proud Spirits are subject to fall into
these Inconveniences, and particularly, when they begin to Act, and at the
Entrey to their Employments, they will publish it by some thing of Noise, and
to gain Reputation by some Novelty, that obliges the World to turn their Eyes
toward them, and to speak of their Administration; But the Dextrous and Wise
Men will divert, as much as may be, those stones of Offense, and avoid them,
against which their Fortune may break and make Shipwreck; And to speak
generally, they ought not to Engage, if it may b' avoided with Honor, their
Masters in any Trouble, but Conceive that they have business enough on Foot
without making of New matters, and Quarrels enough that arise from the
Incounters and mixture of things they do Manage, without the Interposition of
any Evil Humors, or of the Imprudent or Undiscreet Conduct of their
Ambassadors.

The second Maxim is, That the Love of a great Reputation, or the desires of
great Profits, ought not so strongly to Possess or Transport us, as in
Difficult and Long Enterprises to act All for to gain All; And to admit of no
Companion; To be free from sharing the Glory of the Success, or to Divide with
any Person the Conquest, which they would reserve to themselves. On the
Contrary, It ought ever to be Conceived, That in the Affairs of Great
Importance too much Safety cannot b' used to make their Business prosper, or
too many Workmen hired to fix a Design, a thousand unexpected Accidents may
Cross, and which Fortune has a thousand Inventions to Destroy, and to Convert
into smoke. I should never finish, if I did report all the Experiences the
World has made, and all The Examples History relates of this Important Truth;
There Is no need of going from the present Time, nor from the Affairs of Europe,
to find out Lively and Sensible Instances; There Is before our Eyes, what passed
this year in Germany, which cannot be Newer; And to go a little higher, if
after the death of the King of Swede, and the Loss of that Incomparable Prince,
from whose Discipline did issue no less Famous Captains, nor in less Number,
than from the Discipline of Alexander the Great, The Swedes had Acted with
France in better Correspondency, Their good Successes which began to Decline in
Alsatia by the raising of the Siege of Constance, and Blocking up of Brisac,
had not expired at Nortlinghen; And it had not been restored to the point of
Elevation, where it is seen, without the perfect Intelligence now Entered into
with this Kingdom. I pass by that Inordinate sense which strikes the persons of
Courage to a contrary Apprehension, whereof the Wise are sometimes sick by too
much Prudence; and the best way to draw the Figure of a Virtue perfectly, and
to represent it to the Life, is to Consider that she is lodged betwixt two
Extremes, and to be drawn by the Opposition of two Contraries where she
Confines.

There are Princes then to be found, who for staying too long from Declaring
for a Party in Communication of Interests and Fortune, and in Contenting
themselves by giving a secret Heat and a faint and oblique aid, see them at
last fall; Whence it falls out, That they are bound to oppose themselves alone
to the progress of the Contrary party, and to the course of a Prosperity
difficult to restrain, as to hinder the Overrunning of all that should oppose
it, and to stop its Impetuosity and Violence; This truly happens but too often;
but if from the beginning, and when the forces of both parties were balanced,
They had Joined theirs, to them they favored in secret and underhand, There Is
no Question but they had Carried it, and had made the Balance to fall on the
side they desired to have it fall.

I will explain my thoughts by a Memorable example. A conspiracy was formed
some years past by the Barons of the Kingdom of N^ples against Ferdinand the
Old and the Duke of Calabria his Son, who acted Jonytly with his Father in the
Government of that Country; The Duke of Lorrain by Reason of the pretensions he
had upon that Kingdom, and the Pope to whom the Ambition of those two Princes
was in Jealousy, and their greatness odious, Joined in the Consederacy. The
Republique of Venice wounded with the Popes passion, and whom the Arragons
apprehended as the greatest obstacle and strongest Barrier to the Designs they
had in Italy, would not, nevertheless, Embarque with the Barons of the
Kingdom, nor Enter into the League with the Confederate Princes, but made
Choice of a Temper, which prospered not, and of a middle Way, that at last was
fatal unto Venice. The Republique discharged from their service Robert of Saint
Severin, a Captain of great Name and of great Merit, and a part of those
Troops, which she suffered him to take, and some Money she gave him underhand
to pay them, and t'hinder that great body of Men of War to dissolve till the
Republique had taken party. I will say, on this occasion, That it is to be seen
from hence, That this manner so much in use in making War, without declaring of
it, and to exercise Acts of Hostility, under the Vizard of Newtral Persons, Is
not an Invention of these modern days, nor an Artifice peculiar to the House
of Austria, though they make use of it more than any other Princes; But it
Comes from an Ancienter Date, and descends from an higher and older spring. In
this Equipage then, and with this Masque, Saint Severin offered his service to
the Pope, by order from the Republique, and was ordained chief Commander of the
Armies of the Church, and Principal Director and first Instrument of that War.
But that which usually happens to the greatest part of Leagues, specially, when
they are Composed of weak Numbers, happened to this; Lorraines Army marched late
in the year and out of season, during which Time the Forces of the Barons and
of the Pope were ill handled, Innocent. 8.
and the Activity used by the Duke of Calabria in his March to find his
Enemies, who were not half Ready nor Well drawn together, and the good success
he had against Saint Severin, who left in that War a part of the Reputation
gained in many others, suddenly untied that Chain and broke that League. The
Pope was very glad to hear of an Accommodation, which was desired with heat by
the Arragons and the Barons, except the Prince of Saleme, who stood inflexible,
even in ill Fortune, and chose rather to quit the Kingdom, than to Live under
a Domination he hated, though others Labored to return to the good Graces of
the King and of the Prince.

The Venetians, observing that th'Effort of that League against the Arragons
had served only to make them the more powerful, and that th'Engines framed to
overthrow, had reinforced them, knew the Fault they had Committed in not
being of the party, and after an unsuccessfull solicitation of the Pope and of
the Duke of Lorrain to renew it, did resolve to oppose singly the growth of
Ferdinands power and of his Sons, and to put a Bridle to the Ambition of those
Princes which did overflow without Measure.

This Consideration now represented, invites me to another, which is not far
off, and may b' annexed without Violence, That there are also some Princes, who
loving too much their Ease, or fearing too much the Charges, will always stand
Newters betwixt two parties, that make War, and be immovable spectators of
their Actions; Though they have a Considerable Interest, That the one fall not,
and that the other become not the Master. The Reasons wherewith these Princes,
whom I suppose powerful, do support their Judgments, and flatter their
Proceedings, are these; That if the party who Labors for their Interests
receives ill Entertainment from Fortune, and becomes assaulted with some great
Disgrace, They shall come in time to relieve him, and that with the scattered
pieces of their Overthrow, which must be Considerable, and with his fresh and
Entire forces, shall not only make the Counterpoile of the Enemies powers,
aw^ary of their long Marches, and even tired with the gained Victory, but be
able also to reduce them to Reason, and Confine them to Limited bounds; That in
the mean time they spare their Men, and make a stock of moneys Open to their
Subjects Commerce, that will be Shut to Others, and enrich them with their
substance and spoils; That if he to whom they desire good, obtains it, and
have the Heavens favorable and Fortune propitious, They shall Enjoy the
Effects of their good success, without Contributing any thing to it, and have
their part of th'Harvest, without sowing of any seeds.

This truly, has some show of good sense, and is a specious Manner that has
Cheated some Politiques, who practice or Counsel it; As for me, I cannot
Apoprove of it, and what Color of profit at first sight, it presents, or flash
of Prudence it may Cast, It Is Certain that it ordinarily Conceals the Motions
and Principles of a great future Ruin, and hides Evils, which do not appear,
and are not discovered, but when there is scarce any Remedy; for, as it is, a
kind of Injustice, and seems to justle the General Law of the World, to desire
Goods without giving any thing for them, and to participate of the fruits of
another man's pains and expenses, without laying out any labors or Charges for
them, They, who build upon that Foundation, and feed themselves with the Fancy,
That they can stop when they please the fury of a Victorious party, have not
well Considered the Condition of the Conquered, and the Sequel of a Victory;
They do not remember, That they are but the Leven of affrights and
Consternations, which infect all that mingle with them; And that a General
Victory, if it be not forced to languish, but pursued with force and diligence,
resembles a Torrent, which makes a Precipice, having forced its resistance, and
to the Sea that over-flows, when it has broken its banks. I leave it to the
Judgment of these two Christian powers, wh' have stood Immovable to this time,
and have aided only, as a spectacle prepared for sight, To what has been done
since in Germany and in Italy, If they with whom the House of Austria had to do
in that Country had fallen, They had been in a state to have re-established
them, and to have taken the Burden of Ruined and Cast affairs upon them. It
must truly b'avowed, That the Constitution of th'humane spirit, is ordinarily
so Weak and of so soft a Metal, that it unwillingly resolves to enter upon
difficult Enterprises though they be necessary, or when it enters timely has
not the Constancy to presevere, and wants Breath to go to the End and finish
the Course.

Tenth Discourse.
Of the difference betwixt the Honor of Particular persons, and the Reputation
of States, And whether the Prince be Master of the Honor as of the Life and
Lands of his Subjects when Public Necessity requires it.
LEts Come now to the Honor of Particular persons, and to that sort of
Reputation, which is raised in the opinion of Men, above all, that the
greatness of Fortune can give, and the Matter and objects of the Senses, as
most Acceptable can contain. By honor, I do understand, the glory which
redounds, and the perfume exhaled from the Exercise of Probity and of the other
duties of every particular Condition, which leave in the spirits of Men a good
Impression, and an high esteem of him, who does practice them. It Is the Civil
life, exclusive to Beast, and whereby the Reasonable Creatures have a strong
Inclination, and a violent Instinct to Live and t'Ennoble their ordinary and
natural Being. This kind of life, as formerly observed, has been in all times
the passion of great persons, who have not only preferred it to Pleasure and
Riches, but even to the Natural Life. The reason of this difference is; That
Honor, being of the Appurtenances of Virtue and of her ordinary Train,
partakes of the Dignity of her Principle, and takes an Impression and Tincture
of the same order with her, and of a Superior value to all that can be exalted
in The Empire of Fortune, and t'all that can b' attractive in the womb of the
World.

I have said, that Honor is of th'Appurtenances and Train of Virtue, because
there is not a Nation of so dull and gross intelligence, and of so barbarous and
barren manners, that esteems not th'Actions of Probity, and commends those
inviolable duties, which no Legislator invented, nor any particular Right has
reestablished; but a common Nature, and an universal Law have ordained to be
rendered to God, to our Neighbor, and to our selves; That, if in the corruption
of the Manners of Society, and in the unjust distribution of Recompense and of
Punishment, Honest Men are laden with shame, and the Wicked with glory; That
Crowns are set upon the Heads of Criminal persons, and Thunder broken upon
innocent Lives; It does not happen by a public confession, or open profession
made to disgrace Virtue, and give honor to Vice; to judge Vice worthy of
Esteem and Veneration, and Virtue of Reproach and Ignominy; But that in effect,
The Colors of the one and of the other are disguised and falsifi'd, and their
Ensigns transposed; That in making War to Virtue, they seem to pursue Vice with
violence, and to do honor to Virtue, when their labor is to erect Statues and
Trophies to her Adversary; but there is no example that the most unlimited
License, or the most imprudent Calumny of the world ever dared t'assault Virtue
in her Name, and under Her Figure, or to procure it pain or shame.

Wherefore, since Virtue has so much Dignity and Elevation, and that in this
life it is th'Ultimate End of Man, and Crown of the Faculties and Operations of
the Soul; It Is no marvel, if Men are not only taken with her beauty, and the
form that constitutes her, but are so sensible also of what touches the
outside, and is called Honor, that they prefer it t'all, that is not of its
Order and Classis, and had rather suffer Natural Death, than permit the Civil
Life to be wounded.

The Reputation of States, is not the same, whereof so often has been spoken,
and it proceeds not from so pure a Spring, and has not so noble a Birth, as
The Honor of Particular persons: Virtue is not the sole Cause, as of the other;
The greatness of Successes, from whence it arises, is no less the work of
Fortune, than an effect of the Merits of Men; Princes are as formidable for
being happy, as for being Valiant; And some Pagans have affected particular
Commerces and secret Communications with some Divinity, to make their Victories
the more easy by that belief; And it is certain, That The Honor of Particular
persons is preserved many times from the Wrack, which falls upon the Reputation
of Public Affairs. Hanibal lost nothing of the name of a Great Captain, when
he was overcome by Scipio, though the Glory of Carthage was extinguished by
that disgrace; The Prince of Conde marched full of Honor out of the lost
Battle of St. Quintins, where so great a Breach was made upon the dignity of
the French Crown; And th'Admiral of Chastillon boasted, a few days before the
Execution on St. Bartholomew's day, That he had that Advantage of Alexander,
and of Julius Caesar, That the loss of four Battles, which had ruined or much
weakn'd the Reputation of his Party, had not diminished the least of His
Reputation. The proportion that may be found, and the Adjustment to be made
betwixt the Reputation of States, and The Honor of Particular persons consists
in this, That as the first is but the Opinion derived, and the noise spread of
their greatness and power, in the spirits of Strangers; The second also is but
the Impression received, and the fair Representation made of the Virtue and
Merits of others; And again, as the Reputation of States, is less Considerable
than the power, from whence it is derived; That the honor of Particular
persons, is inferior also in dignity to the Virtue, that is its principle;
which carries me to a Consideration a little alienated from my Subject, but no
stranger to it, That there is not any corruption which has so strongly ceized
upon Mankind, nor disorder, which does more universally disfigure, than this;
That though there be but a Few persons in the world, truly Virtuous, and that
acquit themselves faithfully of the duties of their condition; yet there are
none, but would pass for men of Honor, and are offended when they are accused
for such, as they know themselves to be, and if False Evidences are not given
in their favor.

Since we are thus far engaged in this matter, and entered into so fair a Field
as that of Honor; it will not be amiss to make some progress, and t'agitate a
difficulty upon this subject, eminent in the Politics; Whether Princes are as
well Masters of the Honor of their Subjects, as of their Lands and Lives; And
whether they have a Right to make them appear Culpable of some crimes, though
Innocent, and to charge infamous disgraces upon their Reputation, though but a
few persons are guilty of them, to discharge, from those crimes, the Princes
Reputation, of so great importance to many persons. In th'Affair of Antonio
Perez, which gave so great trouble to Philip the Second, and made of great a
noise over all Europe; Diego Chavez Confessor to Philip, judged it expedient to
sacrifize The Honor and the Person also of Perez to shame and torments, to save
the King's Honor, and to divert the dangerous consequences, which would have
resulted against the State, if they believed him The Author of th'Assassinate,
executed by his order, and by the direction of Perez, on the person of
Escovedo, Secretary to Don John of Austria.

This opinion nevertheless, seems not to me to be sufficiently grounded or
colored; And there is reason, that although The Authority of a Prince over his
Subjects be very large, and much dilated, yet not infinite, and receives
exceptions, which limit the extent of it; And as it is certain, that a Prince
has not a Right t'oblige his Subjects to violate the Laws of Probity, and to
become Perjured, Sacrilegious, or Adulterers; so it is probable, that he has
not a right to require them to disgrace their Name, and to defame their Memory
with dishonor that arises from Crimes, much less t'expose them, for the
salvo of his own Reputation, to punishments and torments, wherewith Criminals
are punished; As Perez was exposed by the advice of Philip's Confessor. I
conceive also, as it is unlawful for a King to forbid his subjects for any cause
the duties of Probity, and th'exercise of necessary Virtues; so it is not
permitted him, to deprive those Virtues of their esteem, being their first and
natural Recompense, or to take from them the Lights that guide them, and the
Beauty that adorns them, and gives them new graces t'improve their value, and
to beget in others a greater Love and Industry. The foundation of my opinion is
this, That Sovereigns have ordinarily no other power over their Subjects, than
what their Subjects have transferred unto them; nor Right, but such as
Sovereigns have received from them; it is probable, they did not intend to
deliver up unto them the disposition of their Honor, as they submitted unto
them their Lands and Lives; nor to disseise themselves, for the Love of
Princes, of that fair Possession and rich Inheritance, which they derive and
gather from their Virtue; It Is confirmed by this Consideration, which seems to
me definitive, That the Goods and Lives of the People being committed to the
protection of Sovereigns, and laid up in the benefits of the protection they
owe unto their Subjects, and obligations to watch for their safety, and to
preserve them from the Usurpations of covetous men, and from the force of
violent persons; it was very just, that to acquit themselves of that Duty, and
fill up that Obligation, they should be armed with the strength of particular
persons, and aided with their riches, that it might be in his power t'imploy a
part of them to conserve the rest, and t'expose a few lives for the security of
a great number of persons.

But it is not the same with the true Honor of Man, and with that just Esteem,
which accompanies naturally the exercise of Probity, and the other necessary
duties of every condition; as it has no need of the Sovereigns Authority to
conserve it, but of the Cause that produce it, and is no more subject to the
violence of a Tyrant, than to The Empire of a just Prince, and whithout the
intervention of the Laws, as having Laws that ordained it; It Is not, I say, a
marvel, if for that consideration, as it enters not into The End of the
Institution of Sovereigns, so it is not comprised under the extent of their
Power, and they have no right to sacrifize it to public necessity, as the
Lands and Lives of their Subjects, whose protection and safeguard they have
undertaken, and ought of secure it unto them.

In pursuance of this, it may be demanded, Whether Particular persons ought to
abandon their Honor for the Public Interest, and permit it to be sullied by
some villainous disgrace, to save the Princes honor, and the Reputation of
Affairs; This difficulty, I avow, appears to me so great, that I dare not
undertake to decide it, and that on both sides I see so many Reasons, and to
such equal force, that they balance my understanding, and hinder me to take a
Side; but I will only say here, That I have admired in the Instructions, the
Marquis of Bedemar, since called Cardinal of Cueva, left to Lewis Brave,
appointed his Successor to th'Embassie at Venice; That amongst other things,
the Cardinal does advise him, That to render himself the more Acceptable to the
Venetians, and t'insinuate the more readily into their understandings, provoked
against him and the Duke of Ossona, by reason of Renauts Conspiracy, whereof
the Venetians believed them the Authors; That the better to gain their belief,
he should make no difficulty to dissemble and approve of their Resentment, or
to Charge them with the malice of that design, and with th'hatred of that
Attempt, to discharge the King his Master of it; And that he should endeavor
it by private instructions, after great protestations made of the Cardinals and
of the Duke of Ossona's innocence, and after a subtle and artifical discourse,
to show, that that Conspiracy was but a dream and a stratagem the Senate of
Venice forged t'afright the people, and to make them suffer with more ease the
Subsidies and Impositions they did intend to charge on them, and whereof they
had need, to continue the War, they made to th'Archduke Ferdinand, and to the
Duke of Ossona.

In favor of this counsel, it may be said, which seems so generous, and has
so plausible an appearance, That if the Marquis of Bedemar was innocent, as he
would have persuaded it, and as piously it may be believed; He knew, that it
would be very easy for him to clear that blot, and that Time, the Father of
Truth, and which draws to light the things that Ignorance or Malice have hid,
would have cured the world of that Error and ill Impression conceived against
him; That if it otherwise happened, and that he continued, as the Venetians did
report, culpable in the public opinion, It would have been but of those
Illustrious Crimes, that ambitious men take for Virtues, and which the Reason
of State, that permits th'Acting of the Worst to its declared or secret
Enemies, does authorize and recompense. It Is true, that the Spaniards, to whom
the Reason of State is not unknown, looked upon the Venetians at that time as
their Enemies, by reason of the War they had with th'Arch-duke of Gre^s, their
Kinsman, and of the moneys they furnished secretly to the Duke of Savoy, whose
ruin the Spaniards had sworn, and whom they persecuted with violence; But
though you do permit that Reason of State, whereof it has been spoken; It was
a very foul things, if it were true, to stir up Traitors, and send them to the
service of a Prince in Amity with them, and to whom they sent Ambassadors, and
with whom they cherished all the Appearances and outward marks of Friendship,
to kindle the fire in their Gates, in their Towns, and in their Magazins; As
Renaut, Emissary of the Duke of Ossona, was accused or covicted to have done
against the Republic of Venice. That if this State were in War with the
Archduke of Grets, Brother in law to the King of Spain; And if the Destiny of
the Things of the world, which of custom leaves them not long in the same
condition, and traversed by a perpetual vicissitude of ^orments and
Prosperities, forced them to break with him, That Breach was such a War, as God
permits amongst ^overaign Princes, and wherein all the Rules, which the Right
of Nations ordains, were observed; As to the Money which they sent to the Duke
of Savoy, it was not forbidden them t'aid a weak Friend with their purse
against a powerful Enemy, in whose ruin they might have received much
prejudice, who would have stripped the Duke to his shirt, and by the conquest
of his Countries, have shut the gate to the relief, which might have come from
France to Italy, to hinder the formed design, to finish the Conquest of that
fair County, and to reduce it into a Province. To make yet a little further
progress into this Matter, and to raise some Judgment upon it, because a clear
sight and certainty cannot be had of it; I will only say, That if the
Conspiracy whereof the Question is, was not true, as the Spaniards did maintain
it, That it had color enough to dispose the Republique to the punishment was
executed upon them, whom it believed culpable; For t'imagine, as the Marquis of
Bedemar has published it, that it was but a half Alarm which they raised to
their Subjects, and a Fancy the Republic formed to make them afraid, for the
Reasons he supposed; And that being a Question of fact, it was of difficult
proof, and of hard discovery; ^he belief, it may be, if there had been no more,
would not be impossible; but that to gild th'Artifice the better, and to give
the fairer color to the deceit, the Republic had caused some persons to be
put to death, and in an extraordinary manner, whom they knew to be Innocent,
whereof I cannot be persuaded; And it is more probable, that two particular
persons, as the Duke of Ossona and the Marquis of Bedemar, the first whereof
played always with Religion and Conscience, as all the world knows, and the other
hated the Venetians, from whom he believing to to have received ill
entertainment, composed that Fable, and not that a whole great Body, as the
Senate of Venice, wherein are many persons of wisdom and eminent Virtue, would
consent to so wicked a proceeding.

To conclude, since men hazard their Virtue and Conscience so often for humane
Interests and subaltern hopes; since men do as the simple Inhabitants of the
New World, who prostitute their Gold and Silver, for Glass and for old Rings;
It Is not to be wondered, if sometimes, upon the like occasion, Honor be
exposed, which is but an accession of Virtue and good Conscience, chiefly, when
that prostitution is covered with so specious a cloak, as that of the Princes
Service, and the good of his Affairs; In all times, it has been the lot of the
Court, to poison men, if not with the profession, at least with the practice of
dishonest Maxims, which ruin Honor and Virtue, to gain Goods and Power. Few
long-livers in Court secure themselves from the Temptations; and Reason has
need of a particular Grace, and of an extraordinary Relief, to resist the force
of Objects, which continually besiege the Senses, and the multitude of
Examples, which from all parts assault it. The Luster raised by Luxury, makes
Riches, as th'Aliment to be beloved; And the Reverence rendered to Power, makes
it to be sought for with so much heat, and conserved with so much pain: And as
men fall not suddenly into the bottom of Evil, but descend by degrees into it;
so they, who pursue these things, or enjoy them, accustom themselves by little
and little to make it their Sovereign Good, and t'esteem all other things which
serve not to this End, for vain and ridiculous.

But this determines not, that all Courts are so corrupt, or that all they, who
are obliged to live there, are corrupted; There are some whom God calls
thither, and maintains there, to give good Examples, and to make Riches and
Power th'Instruments of Virtue; and the Matter of good Works; There are some,
that know and feel, that without such Considerations; these things being but
vanity and affliction of spirit, as well as all others of that kind, have but
this advantage, That they are a Greater vanity and a Greater affliction of
spirit. However, the Faith of Courtiers, who are so violently taken, and
desperately possessed with the desire of making their Fortune, That there is no
treachery they will not do, nor baseness they will not act for the love of
them, from whom they expect it, ought always to be much suspected; And there is
great cause of distrust, that such persons, worshipping only the Power men
have of doing good, will change their Affections with the change of Masters,
and fail of Acknowledgments when they fail of Hopes; And it is that distrust,
which in my opinion is the original of a Maxim, which is but too familiar with
great Princes; T'hold always the less considerable persons, that are useful
unto them, by the bands of that passion; And to cherish them, who ought to be
conserved, by not doing for them all the good at once they do intend them. But
if Men of Honor, they will always have a condign gratitude for their
Benefactors, and will raise no Hopes, if able Men, upon them that are in power,
but look upon the things of the Court, as the things of the World, the fullest
of Incertitude, and to resemble Lotteries, where for one Prize there are fifty
Blanks.

Eleventh Discourse.
When the War becomes too Ruinous to the Subjects of a Prince, He ought to
endeavor, if it be possible, The End of it; That the King has been forced to
make and continue the War till now, by an Inevitable Necessity; That his
Enemies rather than himself have always estranged themselves from Peace.
AFter the making of so great a Circuit, and so long Journeys, it is time to
return to the place from whence we parted, and to finish the clearing of the
point of Profit, by a third Rule, which shall b' added to the two precedent;
This ought, as has been said, t'accompany or follow the War; In the third
place, I say then, When the War inflames with violence and fury, and that
there is danger, lest it consume inavoidably the good of the State, and the
substance of the People, The Prince ought, if it be possible for him, to quench
it, and t'imitate those wise Pilots, who use to strike sail, and to gain some
safe Harbor, if the Tempest be too strong. Lewis th'Eleventh oractised wisely
this Rule, as Philip of Comines has observed it. The Venetians also have done
the like in all times, as I could give you several Examples; and even the
Spaniards, notwithstanding the fierceness of their humor, and jealousy for
their Reputation, have not always declined it, as they have done of late, in
their prosecutions of the Duke of Savoy, since the death of the late King, and
when they believed themselves to be sole Arbiters of the Destiny of Italy; As
Inexplorable as they were, when The Heavens smiled upon them, and that Fortune
was propitious to them; Nothing was seen more tractable or docile than they,
when Fortune changed her favor, and expressed a greater desire for Peace, than
they had made our for War. And the passage of Sura, being forced for the Relief
of Casall, and the State of Milan in danger to be our Prey, if our Thoughts for
Conquest had been as aptly disposed, as The Advantage and Justice: No persons
ever were more submiss to the King's Will in all things, or better disposed to
Accept of all the conditions his Majesty was pleased t'impose upon them.

The foundation of this Rule is, That the Felicity of Subjects, being the
principal Law, and th'ultimate Measure of the Actions and Conduct of a Prince;
To decline it, is never permitted him, but to return with great advantage, and
t'imitate the Sun, which draws not up the vapors and fatness of The Earth, but
to make it the more fruitful, and of a livelier spirit, and of a more active
virtue; Wherefore they, who by obstinacy, or by some other particular passion,
nourish a War that is fatal to their Subjects, wander very much from The End of
their Charges. And the memory of Francis the First, and Charles the Fifth, is
not recorded with Honor in History, for that both of them, and particularly
Charles, by a pure Animosity, and by a pure mutual Violent Hatred, labored one
another Ruin, which could not be effected but by the Rume of their Countries;
And chose rather to see Christendom swim in blood, and t'Expose it to the
common Enemy, who made benefit of their Discords, than to lay down Arms and
t'h^a^ken to a reasonable Treaty of Peace. Charles was so highly transported
with this Passion, and so strongly agitated with this Eury, That He permitted
Rhodes to perish, t'Intend wholly the Desolation of France, and abandoned
Austria to Soliman, to make War to the Duke of Oleves, who being the King of
Navarres Ally, was Entered into our Conjoined Interests.

This rule, thus laid, and this Maxim established, as an Inviolable thing,
which receives no exception, but what has been expressed; A little must be
said of the Kings Conduct upon this subject, and of the Condition of France, by
reason of the War; since He has been the Master of it. Whereupon, I say, That
though this Country never saw since Charlemains time, so great a Collection of
Forces, or so high an Elevation of Glory as has been manifested under the
Reign of this Prince; That though all the Course of his Reign be full of
Splendor, and every part of ^o remarkable by some Illustrious Accident; Though
this, I say, be very true; It must also be Confessed; That the War, that does
now exercise in has been made at a great Expense, and that it rises with much
pains and sweat to the Felicity it ought to Enjoy and is not far from it^ But
as the last sl^ps of a long Journey, are the weariest and most painful; And as
the last drops of Potions give the greavest distaste to the sick persons that
take them; so the Remainder of ^^^ill Time, which France is to bear, and the
last breathings the War yields, Lay the greatest Weight and Compl^ats the
Wearin^ss and Fainting where with she Labors; but besides the Brevity of Time
it has to suffer, and the fait hopes for the future, she ought to Consider, as
has been already observed; in another place, That the past Evil was
necessary, and that the War, which has ^asted so many years, is not of the
Chol^e of ^^iclination, of the Prince or of his Ministers of State, but an they
table effect of some Malignant Constellation, which affects Christendom; or to
speak to the Height of our Reason; and according to Experience, A fire, which
The Enemies of this Sta^e have voluntarily kindsed, and which the King and his
Ministers of Sta^^, what Ca^^ and Dexterity soover was used, could not
^^stinguish This, I will now without any, figure of (...) b^^orique and Elegant
(...) s^uation, discover by a brief and faithful Relation of what has passed
since the peace of Mo^tpellion and the Return of the Queen Mother to the
Affalts; even to this present Conjuncture. In another place, I speak of the
true and affected Causes of the breach of the B^ace; which was attended by the
War the English made in cur Islands, and with the third Time of taking up of
Arms by the Hugonots, since the Kings Reign. The Ministers of State, who had
neither made not broken that Peace, as the Hugonots pretended, and it may be
untruly, which I will not here discover, were obliged to prevent the Affronts
that might b' offered to the state, and to oppose th'Evill others had drawn upon
it, and whereof they had laid the foundations and sowed the seeds when they had
overcome that great storm, and that the Island of The became the Sepulcher of
them, who would have made it the Seat of their new Domination, projected in
France; The King conceived, that the fatal Instant was come, wherein the Nest
of the Rebellion was to be beaten down, and Rochelle the Sanctuary of the
discontented Persons; What the greatness of that Siege was, and what an
Incredible Wonder, the success will make appear to Posterity; It Is unnecessary
to explain it here, since no person is ignorant of the proceedings and may
Judge of them. Whilst that great Affair was in dispute, and that all Europe was
exercised in th'Expectation of the Event of so high an Enterprise, The
Spaniards to make use of the Occasion, made another Attempt upon the States of
the Duke of Mantoua; and put themselves into a posture to strip him of his New
Succession, for no other Reason, but that it was Convenient for them, and that
the Duke was not Acceptable to them, because he was a Frenchman. How much
France was offended with this Assault, and what a shameful Reflection it made
upon it, in the Ruin of a Prince stripped to the shirt for their sake, It Is
easy to Comprehend* Extreme Remedies nevertheless were not used to revenge the
public Injuries; And as before ^ouquingans preparations for Sea, and the
Expedition of The English to th'Island of The, an Extraordinary Ambassador was
sent int' England, to divert the breath was intended; And before Engagement in
the War of Italy and to pass the Mountains for the relief of Montferral; The
King had recourse to the Ways of Treaty, and sent Sir of Boutru, t'offer such
Civil and reasonable Conditions of Accommodation, that the Spaniards could
pretend to Nothing, but the Victory, of more Advantage. This way falling, and
the Reducement of Rochelle, upon whose subsistence, the principal Hopes of the
good Success of their Arms had been raised, having given Means to the King to
pass the Alps and t'had on to the Relief of Cazal upon its last breathly He
made The Enemies retire, upon a Treaty that left Moitsertan for that time safe,
and hindered the State of Milan to change it the Master of it That so favorable
and obiliging a Treaty, should not give an End to that War; And that the
Spaniards would not observe it, so long as they ought to have done, to prepare
for a new Assault, and to return to the List from whence they were come with
some loss, even of their Reputation, but with the Entire Conservation of what
they might have los^ in Italy was Hard of Belief; They behaved themselves,
nevertheless in that Manner, and to pay the C^^tesie done them, or to speak
according to their sense, to revenge the Affront they had received an fall;
They caused a part of The Emperors best Troops to march from Germany into
Italy, and sent the Marquis of Spinola thither from Spain with much Money and
great Forces to renew the Quarrel, which we thought had been ended; And to
deprive us of any thoughts of th'Affairs of the Duke of Mantoua, and to force
our Armies the second time to pass the Alps, They had prepared two powerful
Irruptions against France; The one in Champaigna by Walsthein to whom the
present Duke Charles of Lorrain gave passages through his Country, and furnished
Victuals for his Army; And the other in Languedoc by the Duke of Feria, who
drew not thither, either for want of Forces, or by Reason that Walsthein
changed his march toward Ratisbone to allay the storm that broke upon his head
in that Dye^.

Such was the Spaniards proceedings, and the Design they hatched against
France, whilst, we thought only of Composing the differences they had with the
Duke of Mantoua in a friendly Manner, and caused Endeavors to (...) used in
Italy and in Germany to withdraw the Spaniards with sweetness from that
prejudice, whereinto they had Cast the Duke, without offense given by him; And
that the Sir of Sabran, was sent to Vienna to make Plausible and Just proffers;
That undoubtedly the Emperor had Accepted them, if he had been Master of his
Desires; And if the Spaniards, who are predominant in his Counsels, had not had
the spirit so full fraught with the Thoughts of War, that there was no room
left for a Thought of Peace, nor a Motion which tasted not of Passion and
Violence.

The Arms then of The Empire, of Spain, and of Savoy Conjoined against us, and
against our Allies, had in the beginning, and in the Sequel of that War,
Considerable successes, Mantoua was lost by surprise, and Ca^ull, the only
Piece saved from the Ruin of the Dukes Fortune, and the last Anchor of the
safety of Italy, was in danger to be lost by Siege; But it was relieved by a
Miracle, and there was made a kind of Accommodation, which skinned the Evil
rather than healed it; And Fen^a, who succeeded to Saint Croix in the
Government of Milan, had a Design to convert it into smoke, so soon as our
Forces had repassed the Mountains, and should be in Condition to break it with
Advantage; He had truly done it, and had made it to be sufficiently understood,
as it shall be fully deduced in the Apology of th'Acquisition of ^ign^roll, if
the Vigilance of our Minister of State had not Countermined his Mine; And if
th'Arms of the King of Swede, which began to flourish in Germany, had not
caused the Imperial Forces to be re-called from Italy, without which the
Spanish Forces had not strongth enough t'Act powerfully, nor Pretext to cover
their Enterprises; that was the Cause, the Spaniards were Constrained
t'Acquiesce in the Peace Concluded at Quierasque, because they were not the
Principal parties in the War, which they had not begun, as they said, not
pursued, but for th'Interests of The Emperor, and as Auxiliaries of The Empire.

Before the Raising of the Siege of Cosall, and during the sitting of the Diet
of Ratesbone, The King treated with the King of Swede, whom the Protestants of
Germany had Invited to their Relief, and upon whom they had Cast their Eyes, as
upon their last Refuge, and the sole Haven, which was left them, against the
storm that did threaten their Country. Whilst this great Adversary was upon
the Stage, to try his strength with the formidable House of Austria; And to
speak the Truth, the Victory was not much less to be feared on the Friends,
than on The Enemies part, in Parties so full of Ambition; Reason of State
advised, That the King should be in Arms, to Cause his Authority the more to
be Respected, and his Protection the more to be Valued, which he so Generously
and Christianly offered to all the Catholics of Germany, as a Means to
retain, if there were Cause, the Victorious in their proper Bounds, and to
hinder the abuse of the Victory, and th'Enlargement of it, further than it
might be expedient for the Good of Religion or for the German Liberty. That if
the King had been as mortal an Enemy to the House of Austria, as the House of
Austria is to France, and had sworn its Ruin, as the other had the Ruin of
France, It cannot be doubted but with the least Effort made, when the King of
Swede did so violently shake it, He had laid it upon the ground; And if after
the Death of that Magnanimous Prince, and whilst good Fortune could not then be
separated from The Arms He Commanded, He had joined his Forces with the Swedes
for the Relief of Ratisbone, where all the Forces of The Emperor were Engaged,
It had probably fallen under that Weight. The King truly Religious to a scruple
in preserving the Peace that was betwixt us and them, and in sparing it in a
time when we might have lawfully disturbed it, has been ill requited for that
grace, and the same Men, to whom we gave life at Heidelbourge, were the Troops,
as has already been observed, which surprised Philisbourge from us, and made
that great Wound, that will bleed it may be to The End of the War. But the
Spaniards having Commanded Treves to be taken, and Carried away th'Elector, who
took himself to be safe under the shadow of the Flowers of Lillies and
Inviolable under our Protection, as to them with whom we were not in War;
Having forced us, by all sorts of Reasons, to declare it to those Ravishers,
and to purge that Injury, by Arms against them, who would not repair it
friendly; Since Peace appears, as a Monster t'affright them, what show soever
they have made to desire it, and what person soever they have put on to blind
the World with that Apparanc^; It Is certain, that they were never in Earnest;
And being always flattered with hopes that some Change would happen amongst^^,
that might make the Way plain to Victory, or that it might be made th'Easier
with their Arms; They raised so many Punctilioes, and so many Disputes upon
the form of Passports, Necessaries to treat of Peace, and then, upon the
Quality of the Persons, who ought therein to be Comprised, and upon other
studied Incidents, to delay that affair, as shall be represented in the
following discourse, That the worst sighted Men, have seen that the Spaniards
thought of Nothing less than Peace, and that all their Endeavors were but an
Illusion to Chea^ simple Persons.

But The Heavens, a weary of their Hypocrisy, and abhorting the loss of so much
Christian Blood, which their Ambition had Caused to be spilt, disappointed
their hopes in the highest Ascendant they were ever arrived into; And they who
had an Aversion for Peace by reason of th'Immense Advantages which they
represented to themselves in the Continuation of the War, were Constrained to
make a good show, and to keep it at distance, t'Endeavour the Recovery of what
they had lost, and to see whether the Wheel of Fortune that had brought them so
low, might not make one turn in their Favor, and restore them to the place
from whence she had Caused them to descend; They must nevertheless, after
Contest upon that Attempt and after a Trial of all Means to rise again, bore
under the Destiny, that handled them so ill, and resolve to quit something
whereof they had no sure Hold, and to save the rest they might have lost.
Either all the pressages the present State of things does hold forth are false,
or this time, as has been said, in another place, is not far off. And so soon
as Germany is reduced to Reason, which may be effected by some small Attempts
made on that side, The last Act of the Tragedy will be played, and Peace shut up
that bloody Theater, which has been so long open to the War.

Twelfth Discourse.
Where it is showed, by two manifest Proofs, That it is the House of Austria
that has always resisted the Design of Peace: To which the King and his
Confederates were disposed in Earnest.
THe World is to be satisfied of a most Important Truth, which is necessary to
be known, and the Matter more exactly handled, which has been but lightly
touched in the precedent Discourse. It must be made t'appear; That it is not the
King that has broken the Rule, which has been formerly established, but his
Enemies, who have forced from him the Means of observing it; They have always
obliged him to have the Arms in his hands, though he had a Desire to quit
them; and having pity for th'Evils of his Subjects, and trouble for all the
Wounds, which Christendom received, and for the great effusion of blood in the
War, made all the proffers he could make with Honor, t'obtain an honest and
sure Peace.

In effect, He has hearkened with the most favorable Eats, and with a spirit
the best prepared that could be desired, to all the good Offices, which his
Holiness laid out upon that Occasion; He delivered Faithfully and in
Warrantable form, the necessary passeports for our Enemies Deputies; He named
his Agents to go to the Appointed places for that Holy-work; And omitted
nothing of what might be expected from a Prince, really desirous of Peace; And
the demonstrations he has given, were not false Ensigns or deceitful
Evidences, but certain marks and Conclusive Arguments of the desire He had for
it; I affirm nothing, but what the Pope and his Nuncioes do certify; that
Newtral Princes and their Ministers of State have acknowledged, that the
greatest part of Christendom knows, and whereof the Conscience of our Enemies
is Convinced. But they made only false shows, and studied Countenances of
desires for Peace, and for the quiet of Christendom, whilst they Employed
their Wits to find out Inventions, to continue the War, and labored with all
their powers to lengthen the Troubles, and to Perpetuate the Actions of the
War. They sent indeed Deputies to Collen, wither they might go with Safety and
Honor, but 'twas for two Ends, both advantageous to them, but were not such as
the Christian Commonwealth aspired unto, with so much heat, and whereof there
was not so great need, as the Cessation of the War. The first, to deceive the
World by that fair Appearance, and to make simple persons believe, that they
had not only a desire for Peace, but that they made haste to make it, and
burned with Impatience to give a beginning to so necessary, and to so much
desired a Work; And all this, to secure themselves by these Illusions and
Dexterities, of the Blame would be given them for keeping of Christendom so
long in Trouble, and for pouring out so much Oil and Brimstone on the fires
that they have there kindled, and which have almost reduced it to Ashes.

The second End, was, to lay us asleep by that show, and to render us more
Defective and Cold, by that their exterior Desire for peace, to put our selves
into a Condition of susteining the War, which they would make us; To dead also
by the same Means them, who had a mind to join with us, and t'hinder them to be
of that Party, where their Interest and Honor obliged them; And to untye from
our Amity and alliance them who were already entered, by proposing to them
Conditions, in show of more advantage if they treated apart, than such as they
should have in a Treaty of General Peace; And in persecuting them, with that
politic Maxim, That in the matter of Society and Leagues the storm falls upon
the Last that treat, who pay the Charges of the War, and that the first are
the Persons, who gather the Profit, and who Carry in the Crops of the field
which others have Husbanded and thereof sowed the Seed. But our Deputies, and
those of our Confederates, for whom they sent no Pasports, or such, as were
Lame or Defective in the form or the matter, would not render themselves in
the place appointed for the Treaty, because they had denied them the Entry, and
shut up the passages by that Artifice; A proceeding certainly very Injurious to
the Holy Chair, whose Mediation they have long abused to dissemble their
Deceit, and Comical Demeanor to the rest of the World, which the Spaniards
have Acted by Apparances very distant, from their Intentions, and very contrary
to the Truth, as we shall prove by two Infallible proofs.

The One is, Th'Answer made at Vienna, in the month of July, in the year 1637,
to the Ambassador of the Duke of Florence, upon th'instance he then made to
have Authentic Pasports, as well for our Deputies, as for them of our Allies.
They would not, as they said, grant Pasports to the Crown of Swede, with whom
they had a particular Treaty, nor for the Princes in Rebellion to them; whereof
they that were in Arms, as the Landgrave of Hesse, labored to make their
Accommodation apart; and the others upon whom the storm fell, and had been put
into the Proscription of The Empire, were incapable to Treat, and had no
difference to determine, but what was determined by th'Emperors Sword, and by
the Laws of the Empire; And in general, it was their sense, That it did not
belong to Dependent and Subaltern Princes, in which number they comprehended
all the Princes of The Empire, to send Deputies to an Assembly, such as was to
be kept at Collen, where none ought t'Intervene, but the Deputies of Absolute
and Independent Princes; And that the King of Spain was justly to be condemned,
if he had not promised the contrary, which they were well assured he had done;
Not to meddle with th'Affairs of Germany; And that he would take it ill if
The Emperor should intermeddle in th'Affairs of his Kingdom, and favor the
Revolted of his Subjects, and give heat to their Rebellions; That if he desired
Pasports to send to treat of the Quarrel had with the King of Spain, and of the
difference had with the Duke of Lorrain, they were ready to grant them.

It Is easy by the whole course of this Answer, and by the secret sense it
contains, that the Hatred they bear us is immortal, and that the Envy they
conceive against us is th'ordinary Devil which torments them; That the
particular Peaces they have sought with so much Vehemence and Artifices, were
not planks for them to pass with more case to an Universal Peace, but the means
of making us the hotter and more violent War, and to charge us in more places,
and by a greater number of Engines; And to make some reflection upon the matter
of this plausible Answer, I will say, That being as the world believes them,
such great men of Policy, and so dextrous in Thou Art of dissimulation, whereof
they have gained the Reputation, They too openly vented their design to change
The Empire into Monarchy, and to leave no mark of Sovereignty, or any impression
of a Free Power in Germany; Or to declare the Truth, and make it out as it was;
It Is not, though they then had their spirits full, and heated with the design,
That they wanted power to retain it, if they had been willing to have concealed
it, and to have denied it the Light, but since the unhappy and fatal Peace of
Prague, they believed to have so well and effectively adjusted their Arrows, and
weathered them, that nothing could hinder them of success, and that the Answer
was made in the strength of their Hopes, and in The Highest Elevation of their
Thoughts.

For what other Thing could it signify, in Comparing the Princes of The Empire
with the Subjects of the King of Spain, and to put them in a parallel and equal
degree of condition, Than to begin to degrade them of their Sovereignty, which
no person to this day has contested with them? Than to make the Transmutation
spoken of, and reduce many States, who have particular Lords, under a single
Monarque? And yet no person is ignorant of the Dignity of The Empire of the
West, as of the Powers that constitute it; And that they reside not in the sole
Person of the Emperor, As the Power and dignity of Monarchies have their seat
in the Persons of the Princes that possess them, But in The Assembly and
Conjunction of th'Electors, and of the other Princes of Germany, who together,
make the Body, whereof The Emperor is the most considerable Member, and
Superior in Excellency to the other Members, considered apart, and severed from
the Body they form; There Is no person also but knows, That the Majesty of
The Emperor, and that August Character which does distinguish him from
Monarques, are not derived from the power he has over a great extent of
Country submitted unto him, and over a great number of Subjects, which he
governs, but arise from the Greatness to which he is raised, and from the Rank
that he enjoys above many Sovereigns that encompass him, who do him honor, and
are bound in certain occasions, as receiving th'Investiture of their Estates
from The Emperor, to serve him with their Lands and Persons, and owe him (with
exception the other Sovereigns not of the Body of The Empire) a particular Honor
and an extraordinary Veneration.

But lest the Emperor, following th'humour of Great Persons, should give too
great an Extent to his Authority, and make Invasions upon the Rights and
Liberties of the Princes of The Empire; And lest, the Princes puffed with the
spirit of Sovereignty, which they bring with them into the world, and drunk
with the sweetness of the Command they exercise over their Subjects, should
become Indocile toward the Emperor, and undertake to draw to them all
The Authority of The Empire, Constitutions have been made, and Laws established,
which bound their Jurisdiction, and qualify their distinct Powers, and hold
the Balance at its just point amongst them, and make the necessary
Counterpoise, Lest that the one becoming too strong, should force and destroy
the other; And it is that temper which The Emperor and the Princes of the Empire
have assaulted, by several stratagems on diverse occassions, and the Limits,
which they would have often defaced; It Is that Counterpoise which they have
endeavored to unsettle, and to ruin that Harmony, in whose conservation the
Happiness of Germany principally consists, the safety of Christendom, and the
most assured means of resisting the Ottoman Forces, when they overrun on the
Land side; And it is that, The House of Austria, does enforce more of late, than
ever to perform, what they labor with Sails and Oars; It Is the great work of
their Aim and Ambition, and could they master it, as many times since the
Battle of Prague they have been very near it, it would not b' Impossible for
them to convert Kingdoms into Provinces, and to make up in time the Monarchy,
whereof they have so many years past laid the Design.

And therefore the Affairs of The Empire being in this condition, I leave it to
the Judgment of every Impartial Person, whether the King had not a great
Interest in th'Affairs of Germany; and great reason t'engage; And whether
h'ought to have promised to The House of Austria the liberty of finishing at his
pleasure, and without resistance, that pernicious design of Universal
Monarchy? Whether h'ought with Newtral Eyes and folded Arms have permitted
The Inheritance of his Neighbors to be burnt, whose flames might easily reach
his Countries? To Judgment I submit it, whether the Aiding of Princes oppressed
and stripped, be to protect Rebellious Subjects? And whether distinction ought
not to be made betwixt them, in whose hands God has put the sword to defend
their Rights against Strangers, as well as to punish the Enemies of their
Country, and them, who have no other Right to bear Arms, than what they receive
from the hands of their Prince? The King then could not abandon the cause of
miserable Germany, nor permit the Liberty of its Princes to be ravished,
without being an Enemy to his People, and Desertor of the Christian Republique;
And he was no less obliged to maintain, by his Endeavors and Arms, the
Constitution of The Empire, against The House of Austria, which labored to
destroy it, than He was at that time, when He used his Authority, and permitted
his Forces to march out of his Kingdom to oppose the Count Palatin's design of
Alteration; And that the resolutions taken in The Assembly at Worms should not
be executed. But this matter shall be further cleared in the Treary of the
Monarchy of the House of Austria.

As to the Princes of Germany, who did not cooperate with the holy Intentions
of the King, and departed from his Alliance and that of Swede; who thought to
secure their Estates and Fortune by a particular Treaty, and to find in the
Peace of Prague an Inviolable Sanctuary against the Evil they did apprehend;
These Princes, I say, are very blind, or of small courage, if they do not see
the servitude is prepared for them; if they dare not refuse to put their hands
to the making of that Chain which is t'hold them; if they have been taken with
the Charms The House of Austria had presented unto them, and have followed the
ill inspirations have been given them by pretended friend; if the Peace they
thought to make, has not been so much a Peace as a change of War, and passage
to new Troubles, and to more dangerous Emotions than those they had quitted; if
in their present condition they march betwixt Precipices, and ought to be the
Prey of the Victor, on what Side soever the Victory falls, and bear the
punishment of their defection from the good Party, or become their last
Conquest, and make the Conclusion of the Design, they had in Judgment; In this
Dereliction, wherein their imprudence, and the Corruption of some other causes
had cast them; It Is yet better for them, to return to the good Party, and find
safety and honor by aiding in order to the Victory, than to persevere in a
Society, where they must perish whatsoever happens; I know well, that it is not
easy to get out of a Precipice, nor out of a Labyrinth, when a man is far
advanced into it; But, notwithstanding the Artifices of The House of Austria,
and the Toils they set in all places to stop the Princes escape from them; The
offenses they have committed against them, who came so generously to relieve
them, and the high ingratitude wherewith they have paid the precious Blood was
spilt, and the life of one of the most Illustrated Persons of the world lost
for their safety; If there remains, I say, in their Souls any dram of Love for
the Liberty of their Nation, which has been in great veneration with them,
and that they be ready to receive good fortune, when she offers herself unto
them, The favorable Revolution that begins to shine upon Germany, will give
them means to break the Bonds that hold them; ^o reconcile themselves to their
ancient friends, and to recover their first Correspondency with them, whose
Amity is their present Security, and future Protection; But they shall be
entertained more fully on this Subject in another place.

As to the particular Treaty which the Austrians then conceived to make with
the Swedes, and pursued to make with much vehemence, which has been very often
out in sunder, and as often tied up again; which was the design of the last
Resolutions of the penultime Diet of Ratisbone, and the foundation of th'hopes
of the good Success of The Enemies Affairs, The time has made it appear, that
it was nothing but a countermine of the Swedes, t'amuze th'Imperialists; As it
was the design of th'Imperialists, in case the Treaty became abortive, to lull
asleep the Swedes, and to render them flower and less inflamed to make War; or
it was a studied stroke of Address, and a subtle Artifice to cheat their
Confederates, with some show of Apprenhension and Jealousy, and to provoke
them t'intend with more vigor, and with stronger subventions, the Affairs of
the League; For that wise and advised Nation was not so great an Enemy to their
Good, nor so ill-sighted in the Truth of their Interests, as to be deprived
willingly, in favor of the King of Poland, of a great and rich Province, easy
for them to be conserved, and to be at greater Liberty to defend his Conquests
in Germany, and to make progress upon the Usurpators and Desertors of the
Liberty of that Country; And afterward to renounce, what he enjoyed, as most
stable and Immovable, for a sum of Money offered him, and for so casual a
Benefit, as Money, that may easily be spent or wasted. That if the House of
Austria consented, that the Crown of Swede should keep the Provinces and
Places, which it could not take from them; The Designs of that Ambitious House,
and the Policy of its Ministers of State, were too well known to be persuaded,
That it was for no longer Time than was necessary t'Accomplish in other places
their Designs, or to procure unto themselves either the greater Victory, or the
more advantageous Peace; That no Christian Power could or would oppose the War
to be made them, whom it calls Agressors of The Empire, and the disturbers of
the peace of Germany. In another place, Discourse shall be made of the
Certainty may be raised on the promises of that House, when it may break
t'advantage.

The Other Proof to be made use of is fresh, and Memory need not be strained to
remember it, It Is present to th'understanding, and to the sense of them; who
know any thing of our Affairs; It Is that which passed this year at Hambrough
touching th'Adjustment of necessary Conditions, for proceeding in the ^reaty of
the General Peace, and finishing that Lamentable War, which in the conclusion,
will make of Christendom but a shambles and a Glass-house; That Adjustment was
pursued by the Mediation of the King of Denmark, who to render himself the more
considerable to both Parties, and to give Jealousy to him, that should seem
opposite to the Peace, raised a great and powerful Army to make the Balance
fall on the Side he should take in that hot Quarrel, whilst the Ambassadors of
the King and of the Crown of Swede submitted, as the ever did, to Reason, and
made all th'Advances that could be expected from persons acting in Earnest, and
without Personating. It first happened, that Sir Sutzan, Deputy to the King of
Hungary, retired, when the other Deputies were upon the point of Resolving some
thing for that pretended Adjustment, without giving notice of it; in Imitation
of the Count of Curts, who practiced the same a little before, And returned six
weeks after with imperfect Authorities, and with defective Letters of Credence,
that it might not fail on the King of Spain's part; The Negotiation was
stopped: What the Imperialists did, was to thrust Time by the shoulder, and to
see whether that great Clowd gathered near France, would not produce something
to their advantage, and bring upon that Kingdom the Tempest, which they had
promised to themselves, and whereof they had furnished a great part of the
Matter.

Moreover, not t'appear Averse to Peace, nor to be Charged with th'Hatred that
would be charged on them by the Voluntary Continuation of the War, They
permitted, that the broken Treaty should be set on foot, and sent to Hambrough
the Count of Aversbery with a more Ample power, by virtue whereof, after long
Disputes, and long Contests of spirit and words, The Adjustment desired, was
resolved, and Conditions signed, to which nothing was wanting for Execution,
but the Ratification of Interessed Princes in that Affair. But that failed on
the part of the King of Hungary, who instead of sending a pure and simple
Ratification, as was necessary, and as his Deputy was obliged to procure, and
as the Kings was made, sent it lame, and Limited with so many Modifications and
Reserves, that it was easy to see; That it was but Comedy, and the
continuation of the Game, which the Sir Sutzan had played, t'Amuze the world,
and to give ^ime to ripen the Great Designs formed against France. And that
they may not accuse me to have supposed, what is not, and to have raised a fancy
at pleasure to quarrel them, I will only make use, for Justification of what I
have said, of the force of a Libel against us, which not long since they did
publish in Spanish, and under the sign of a pair of Spectacles; After a number
of foolish proffers, and of the Impostures vomited against the good Intentions
of the King, and of his Ministers of State; The Author concludes it with a
Prognostic, or rather with a Threatening, he makes of the great Disorder, that
was ready to Thunder in this Kingdom in the Concurrence of two Parties, that
would divide the Court, and which, as he said, ought to shake the Pillars of
this Monarchy.

I add to what I have before said, To discover the true passion the King had to
remove all the Rubs that might stop the way to Peace, and t'omit nothing that
might hasten that Holy Work; that he had given power to Sir of Avaux his
Ambassador, to Accord, in the Pasports, he should deliver to the King of
Hungary's Commissioners, a Title, which to that time h' had vainly desired of
us, and had always constantly been refused him, for the Considerations, which
shall be laid down in the Treaty of the Monarchy; And to show also
th'Indubitable Aversion the King of Hungary, with all his House, had to the
Peace, which all Christendom demands, and is so necessary for it; At the same
time that he refused it, by his Evasions and Proffers, He bought dearly the
Continuation of that Peace he had made with the Turk, and consented, That
almost two hundred Villages should be cut off from his Frontiers, to lengthen
the Territories of the Turk.

The End of the First Book.
OF The Council of War Of a PRINCE.
Second BOOK.
First Discourse.
That it is a great Misfortune to a Prince to want Power to make Defense
against the Assaults of a Foreign Prince, and thereby to depend upon the Will of
others: Which is confirmed by two Examples; The first, of the League made
betwixt the Pope, the King of Spain, and the Venetians, for the Relief of
Cyprus.
HAving given some Advises, and prepared some Directions for such Princes, as
will reliever their Allies; It may not be improper, t'instruct them who have
need of Relief, of the Manner whereby they may be most safely Relieved, and to
show them the dangerous places, and discover th'Ambushes, if Fortune casts them
into it, they will meet with in that way. T'handle then this Matter, and to
distribute it in Order, I say, That although a Prince ought to b' Industrious
to fortify himself with Alliances, and t'interess the greatest number of
Powers he can in his Conservation; It Is ever an ill fortune for him, if the
good weal of his Countries, and the Matter of his Fortune depends upon another
Man's will; And if he have not in himself, and in his Power, the principle of
his safety, and the Revenge of Disgraces; If that fail him, and a powerful
Enemy assault him, He is often oppressed before his Friends put themselves into
a posture to defend Him; And th'Evil has struck its stroke, before his Allies
are resolved to go to fight bis Enemies.

The Reason of this is, That a wise Prince ought not, but with the Latest
t'Embarque in a War, or expose himself with precipitation in a thing that has
nothing certain but The Expense, that therein is to be made, and whose success
more than all other things in the world, depends upon th'incertainty of
Fortune, and upon the motions of other Incident Causes. Wherefore he must ever
labor to divert the storm with Address, before he undertakes to break it by
Force; And endeavor timely the ways of Accommodation, and that the Means of
his Intercession and Proposals precede the Motion of his Arms; And when all
this shall prove unprofitable, and that the gentle Remedies to but sharpen
th'Evils, and that he must resolve to make use of Extremes; There is much way
to be gone over, and difficulties to be overcome, before arrival there, many
things are to be furnished and fitted before Entry unto the Lists, and
beginning of the Course for Contest.

And if he send but weak Supplies, and light Refreshings to his Friends, what
will it prove but an impertinent advance, and a lost Expense; To cast a few
drops of water upon a great fire, which kindle it rather than put it out;
Provoke the disease, rather than cure the sick person? And if he resolve t'Arm
powerfully, and to raise great Forces in favor of his Allies, but will not do
it without taking of Sureties and Pawns for the others faith; without agreeing
upon Re-embursment, and without many other Conditions, which occasion a long
Contest and Debate; The Prince who has The Enemy upon him, and the fire in his
Country, shall perish at leisure, or make some considerable loss: But the
Assailant makes his preparations beforehand, and in silence, the quickest and
suddenest Invasion possibly to surprise him, and t'oppress him, before he can
know it, or can be Relieved; and will cause all sorts of Inventions and Engines
to play to stop or subvert the Subventions which might come from his Allies.

I will produce, for the clearing and confirmation of what I have said, two
Illustrious Examples, and from two of the wisest and most famous Nations of
Europe, in the Art of the Conduct of Negotiations, and governing of
Enterprises. It must b' endeavored by th'aid of the Narratives, to make the
face of the Discourse cheerful, which too long a Reasoning would render
austere, and to divert the plunge him, if it were not interrupted. The first
Example shall be taken from the League made betwixt Pius the 5th, Philip the
2d, and the Venetians, against Selim the 2d, who had assaulted th'Island of
Cyprus. This Evidence is to be given to the Piety of Philip, that he did not
expect Solicitation for the Relief of the Venetians in this occasion, and that
he offered them, and sent them his Maritine Forces a year before the conclusion
of the League; But what was done in the pursuit of it, brought not the fruit
that was expected; The Remedies came not time enough, and the Relief was
prepared, with so great Tediousness, and Marched so slowly, That Nicosia was
lost before the Spanish and Venetian Forces met, That was the Capital City of
Cyprus, and one of the best Fortifications of The East. As the Spaniards put not
to Sea, but with the Belief to secure it, so they abated of their Edge, when
they knew it was lost; And though in the beginning, they would made show to and the
Venetians in Earnest; It was not possible, after that loss, to make John Adre
Doria their General to advance for the Relief of Famagoust, which then held out,
and wherewith, if it had been Conserved, there had been hopes to Recover what
was lost, and to retake Nicosia.

Though this was so, yet it was not the sole Rigor, which Doria Exercised
toward the Venetians, nor the sole Bitterness they had to drink from his Cup,
during the time of th'Expedition; whilst the Armies were at Sea, and that they
were apparently to march for mutual Conservation, He Commanded his Ships apart
from the Venetians, and marched separately, To be free from Engagement in any
Enterprise, or to second the heat of the Republique, which could not resolve to
retire without some undertaking. The small Designs they proposed unto him, he
rejected, as unworthy of the Forces ^e Commanded and the Reputation of The Army.
In the great and difficult Matters, He would not Engage by Reason of the small
Time that rested to finish them; And that they were upon the Declination of
Autumn when the Tempests are frequent in the Levant Sea, and Navigation
dangerous. So that two fair-Armies retired without doing more than making of a
Noise, and one of the greatest Preparations that has been seen upon the Sea of
a long ^ime, Acted no memorable thing, but in producing nothing that was
memorable.

It was said, That it was not of Kindness but of Jealousy, That Philip so
freely offered his Forces to the Venetians, and was Inclined to that Design for
fear, lest if they went alone to dissipate that storm, and to resist the great
Powers of Selim, Their Reputation might be raised to some Excess, and make them
Considerable in Christendom, and particularly in Italy, beyond what was
expedient for the Good of his Affair. But he sought a Temper of Aid, which was
impossible for him to find, and as his Retentive Spirit and distrustful humor
disposed him naturally in all things to allow the least He Could to hazard, In
this Action, He Endeavored to gain without danger of loss, and to Defend the
Venetians in declaring only a desire to Conserve them, and to hinder the
progress of the Turk by the sole Reputation of his Arms, and by the single
Demonstration of his Forces.

But this Design miscarrying, The League above spoken of, was Concluded the
following year, though it was not without much Contest and Labor, The violent
and passionate Endeavors of Pius the fifth for that business, were stronger
than all the Difficulties the Spaniards framed, and all the Inconveniences
which they Caused to Arise. A little stay must be made here, to relate the
proceedings which the Spaniards and the Venetians had there, and to represent
the subtilties and stratagems, which they practiced mutually in the war of Wit;
It being the subject, which engaged me to product this Example, and what has
been said above, was only to serve it for passage and Avenue. They were then
eight entire Months in Contesting upon the Conditions of the Treaty, without
finding an End of them; Much was agitated and little resolved, and the flow and
Difficult humor of the Spaniards furnished always Matter for the Lengthning
of it, and sometimes Pretexts for the Breaking of it. In the mean Time
Famagousto was lost; Insolence Increased in the Turk with the Victory; And
th'Irresolutions the Christians Labored of were a necessary Argument to him of
their Fear and Weakness.

And yet it was impossible to Join spirits, which had such different Interests
and such Contrary ends, as the Venetians and the Spaniards; They that were
first Exposed to the Turks Arms, and upon whom the greatest weight of the War
was to fall, pressed the speedy Quenching of the Fire; But the Spaniards more
remote from the danger, had not so great a desire t'expell it, and being out of
distance to be suddenly touched with th'Evill that pressed the Venetians,
Endeavored only to be delivered of another Evil, The Barbarian Piracies,
which constantly vexed them, They would have had the War Carried into that
Country for to repress them, or at least, be assured, that it should be done
hereafter; And that the Venetians and they should Jointly endeavor, and with
all their powers, to force from the Pirates their strong holds, and from the
Turks, their Harbors for their Fleets; But for Accord in this proposal an
expedient could not be found, nor security offered that would be received; The
disposition of the Venetians was suspected by them, and they were diffident of
such an interessed Policy as theirs; and believed it full of Artifices and
Snares; And as they who have Inclinations for deceit, have always fear of
being deceived, They feared that the Venetians being in th'Haven, would forget
who Aided them thither, and being safe from the Tempest that threatened them
from Constantinople, They would no longer think of the War at Argieres and
Thunis, nor Continue for another Interest the same Expenses, they had laid out
upon their own Interest.

The End then they pursued, and the Mark they aimed at, was this; To form a
League offensive and defensive the Pope and Venetians; That this League should
be perpetual, That it should have Forces always at Sea, and that the
Confederates should make use of them, according to the Exigency of the
Occasions and Necessity of their Affairs. Thereupon they made proposalls, as
Ridiculous as Magnificent, and formed upon that foundation Designs as much
swollen as their Courage, And as high as their Hopes; They desired, after the
taking of Constantinople, and Ruining of the Turk, That they should be bound to
make War to the King of Persia; To destroy Byserte, Thunis, and Argieres; TO
Exterminate the Seriphes from Africa, and to pursue in all places Mahomets Sect
with Sword and Fire, and to pay him with use, what He had so largely borrowed
of Christendom; They did after these Proposalls made, raise the powers of
their Master above all that was great or formidable upon Earth, and Amplify
his Zeal to Religion, Exalt his prosperities and give Wings to his hopes.

It was easy to be seen, That all their Proceedings were nothing but Illusion
and Artifice; And that they labored only to preserve th'Apparances of good
Christians, and gain Reputation amongst Credulous Souls and Weak spirits, who
are ever in greater Number than the Wise; But when it was necessary to Come to
the Particular Affair, and to the Subject for which they were met, The Relief
of Cyprus; There was nothing so Cold, as they; nothing less Treatable; and
after a long Debate and much Circumlocution about the Affair, They returned
always to their diversion; That they much desired a League, and that all
Christendom would Unite in a Common Quarrel; That Forces should be Constantly
on foot to Counterpoise and Check the Turkish Forces; But after all this
Discourse, they desired that their first Proposalls might prevail, and for the
present nothing Undertaken or Assaulted but on the Coasts of Barbary.

This League, as they had formed it, secured all their Estates, and no Design
was ever better Contrived for them, nor more to their advantage; for without
Hazard of any thing, they put themselves into a Condition to gain much; They
reaped without sowing, and contrary to th'ordinary disposition of the things of
this World, their advantages Came purely to them, and without any Precedent or
Subsequent Evil. The Levies permitted them to be made upon the Lands of
th'Ecclesiastiques, and the Croysades the Pope granted them in The Old and New
world, gave them means to prepare a Fleet, and t'Entertain the Ships they were
obliged to furnish by the Conventions of the League; They made no new Enemy nor
new War, They Continued only what they ever had with the Turk; And carrying it
into his Country they held it by Consequence at distance with theirs, as they
had done their Coasts; And without being Constrained to Fortify with Garrisons
and Ships, They became free from the Invasions of the Pirates, whose Aid the
Turk made use of at Sea, and of such petty Invasions, as ruined particular
persons, and much Incommodated Trade, and they gained a great Reputation by
that means in all places; And with the great Forces they had in Readiness to
pass from Italy into the Low Countries, They kept all their Enemies in Check,
and rendered themselves formidable from Levant to the Ponant with the same
Forces.

The Condition of the Venetians was very different from theirs, and the present
State of their Affairs had another Color and Face; They had an Enemy in hand,
whose Friendship they were careful to cherish, and with whom they could not b'
at difference without great losses, and without running of great danger; They
were exposed, as it has been already said, to the first Impressions of his
Arms, and to the first strokes of the Tempest; some parts of their States by
Sea, were at distance with the others, and they could not relieve them but at
great charges, and powerful Fleets; Candy alone was not less worthy of
The Ambition and Fortune of Selim, than the Kingdom of Cyprus, and that Island,
which bridles the Archipelagus, and is the Passage, by which the Pirates of the
Ponant ought of necessity t'enter, gives him as great cause of Jealousy as
the other, and no less desire of being their Master; And the nearness of the
Turk to Dalmatia, Esclavonia, and Frioul, obliged them t'Arm no that side, and
t'open all the veins of their Treasures to furnish so great an Expense.
Notwithstanding all these Considerations, and all these difficulties, The
League was concluded, The greater Interest over-swai'd the lesser, and the
general Afrights, which threatened Christendom, recollected particular
Affections, which had been estranged under a common design of Opposition, and
to stop the Course, and repress the Violence of their Enemies. Since it has
been seen in the things which have preceded the Negotiation of the League now
represented, what a dangerous Rock, and fatal Obstacle it is, to a Prince in
trouble, to depend upon another to get out: It may not be unnecessary t'observe
also the same Inconveniences, and the same Stone of offense, in the things
which have followed the Counclusion of that League.

When the League then was signed, and that each Confederate in the signing of
it, had made his Reservation, as it is the custom, of some secret Intention, and
some particular End, which he would not manifest; The time, which had been
vainly spent in Deliberation, was redeemed in executing their Resolutions. The
Confederate Forces were put to Sea with diligence, and the Turk, whom
prosperity made insolent, and boasted, that he wished nothing more to
Christians, than the courage to attend him, heard that our Army sought him; In
the mean time, his Army moved, and Selim knowing that ours drew toward his,
would meet it half way, and take a part of th'advance, for to see ours, and to
fight it. (But though both Armies burnt with the same heat, and desired equally
The Encounter, it is a remarkable thing, that both of them were equally
astonished at the first sight; so true it is, that Mansspirit stays not long in
the same station; That the Sight of an Object has another effect than the
Thought of it; And that th'Apprehension of a danger, operates diversely,
according to the nearness or remoteness of it; The two Generals only, Don John
of Austria for the Christians, and the Bacha Aly for the Turks, felt not the
weight and chilness, which had seized th'Armies; And they resolved to fight,
against the Judgment almost of all the Chiefs that did accompany them. Don John
of Austria was violently solicited by the Counselors of Spain that were with
him, not to endanger the safety of all Christendom, and the fourtune of his
Master; They represented unto him, That although th'Hazard of the Battle was
equal, the Consequences of the Victory were not the same; And that of Forces
gathered together, as the Christians were, the like use could not be made, as
of them which depended upon a single Prince, and were animated with the same
Spirit, and carried on with the same Interest, as those of the Turk: But he,
whose Soul was full of the Representation of the Glory this great Action
promised unto him, and of th'nopes of the Victory h'ought to gain, made them
this Generous Answer, That it was time to fight, and not to deliberate, and
that he had no need of Reasonings or of Counsel for that End, but of Courage
and Execution. The Event deceived not his Expectation; Fortune declared for the
Christians, and the Victory they gained, opened the way for them to fairer
Successes, if the Spaniards had not Betrayed them: But they had done enough,
and according to their Intention, which was, to prevent the Turk from making
any new Progress upon the Christians, or that the Venetians should at their
Charges repair themselves of their Spoils, and be revenged of their Losses. ^is
certain, that if Don John of Austria, after the Battle, had Advanced, in stead
of Retireing, and had entered into the Archipelagus, when all persons were
afrighted, and under the consternation of the noise of than great and happy
Event, He Had taken those Islands without Resistance, He Had shaken the Fortune
of the Ottomans, and Constatinople might have seen the Crucifix planted in the
places, where the Crescent is adored; And Selim having lost his best Maritine
Forces in the Battle of Lepantha, and the Sieges of Nicosia and of Pamagouste
having spent the best Men of his Land-Soldiers, he was almost void of Defense,
and his Empire remained, like a great Body that shrunk with Weakness, and
wanting Force of sustain it self, and to bear its proper Weight, falls of
Necessity, so soon as it is Jus^led.

Second Discourse.
Of The Unhappy Condition of Small Princes.
IT must not be conceived here, when I speak in the precedent Discourse of
Perty Princes, who 've need of Relief from their Allies for their Conservation,
and in pursuance thereof, have brought The Example of the Republic of Venice;
That I did intend to place that Commonwealth absolutely, and without Relation,
in that Rank; or that I do not know, that amongst all the Princes of Italy,
there is none greater, or whose power is established upon more solid
Foundations, and upon a more immovable Bas^s; I had not then other aspect in
The Example made use of, than to make it appear, That it is a hard Chapter, and
sad Necessity, to whomsoever it happens, to depend upon another will, to repel
a violence of Fortune, and to resist th'Effort of an Eenomy, who being
Superior in Forces, is ever carried with a hotter passion to Plunder and
destroy, than any friend can be to Conserve and defend; That at the best, there
is so much time to be lost, and so many Rocks to pass over, before a Conclusion
can be had of a Treaty, that it is a wonder, if in the mean time, some shipwreck
be not suffered, or some great Loss.

Moreover, though the Republic of Venice bears in it self much greatness, and
from all times, has joined to the Truth of a considerable Power, the
Reputation of an extraordinary Wisdom; Nevertheless, it is true, That opposing
it to the Great Signior, and making a Parallel with that proud Dominator of
Asia, of Afrique, and of a part of Europe, It stands obscured, and therein,
It Is to compare the Course of a little Stream to the Rapidity of a great River.

A word more, since It will not be impertinent, and that the Thread of our
Discourse leads us to it; Of the Destiny of Princes, who are little in
themselves, or who have but a moderate strength; It Is a pitiful thing to see to
what Necessity the Petty Princes are reduced to maintain themselves, and to how
many Real Evils they are exposed to conserve that vain Image of Liberty, and
that sweet Illusion of Soverain Authority that does bewitch them. In Expenses,
they consume themselves for their defense, and almost give All that might be
taken from them, that Nothing might be taken from them; They are obliged
t'observe all the Fancies and Motions of their Enemies and Friends; And if they
subsist, it is not by their Strength, because they have none, but by their
Weakness, and because their Countries are of so little Concernment, that they
beget not a Desire in Ambitious persons, nor that Justice should be violated in
the Conquest of them; or they are under shelter from the Enterprises of the one,
by the Jealousy of the other, and preserve their Liberty, for that The Ambitious
hinder one another to ceize upon them, and to become the Masters.

The Petty Republic of Ragousa maintains it self, by the Tribute it pays to
the Grand signior, and by the Presents it makes to the Great Persons of
The House of Porta, and th'Insolence of the Petty Sangiacs, their Neighbors, is
restrained by Money; And it does Homage to the King of Spain to be free from
disturbance; And permits, what may please the Venetians, who could be content
to find some just occasion to possess themselves of it, if they durst, being a
State very convenient for them, and seared in the midst of the Gulf, whereof
they call themselves Lords; And it would make their Possession and Enjoyment
the more complete and firm. There Is no question, but the Duke of Florence would
take from the Republique of Luca, the Liberty and Peace it enjoys, if Spain did
not Support and Relieve it with its protection, which is not given but sold, as
t'all the others that depend upon it. It would be a great trouble to The House of
Austria, if that State should fall to the Mercy of a Power, that might prove
too great by this Addition, after it had been made considerable; And would
recall, if it might, the Bounties, as it boasts, laid out upon it, or retain
the Recompenses, as the other says, that have Rewarded their Service; What had
become of Geneva, without th'Alliance of the Suisses, and without the
Protection of France? Who knows not how often the Dukes of Savoy have resolved
t'assault it with open Forces, upon th'hopes of promised Spanish Relief, when
they were Amity with it, and with the Holy Chair? which had not failed, if
they would been engaged in an Enterprise, whose Appearence had been holy, and
Pretense pious; And how often also (Fortune and th'Incounter of things having
discomposed their Designs, and sent into smoke th'hopes of those Princes) have
they formed Conspiracies, and prepared secret Parties to surprise and carry
that place? That if they now believe themselves free from that fear during the
Minority of the Duke of Savoy, under its particular dependency upon France; and
if the Suisses also seem to them a stronger Rampart, than they were, by reason
of the present Conjunction, which renders them more Considerable to them, from
whom they had cause to fear; so it is, that this perpetual Vicissitude, which
alters human Things, and that Incessant Motion, wherewith the Wheel of Fortune
does turn them, may produce such a Conjuncture, when the French shall not have
the Power, or the Will to protect them; And it would not be impossible, If the
Revolution, which has threatened Germany for many years, were Ended, But that
it might extend to the Suisses Country, which is the Frontier, and that the
Catholic Cantons might invade the Protestants, as they have often projected;
And make by consequence the Rampart which defends Geneva, to fall on the
Catholics side. How much safer, and with greater advantage, might some of
these petty Princes, be made the Government rather than under the protection of
a great Prince? And might they not be happier to belong to a powerful Master,
who would watch for their safety, and deliver them from the Fears and Expenses
they are at to conserve themselves? Their Privileges also would be as Entire as
they are, and their Liberty greater; since at least, they should be Healed of
the Passion, whereof has been lately spoken, and of th'Importunate Pursutes
made to them by those that Receive Pensions to Relieve them. The Princes to
whom they shall give themselves, will be more concerned in their own Interest,
than in that shall depend only upon their Crown; And the Breach made in their
Country, if it should be lost, would be much greater by th'Interest Reputation,
than if they lost it themselves, being upon their Faith, and charged solely
with their defense; And the more they are at the devotion of their Friends, the
more they will be indulged and in favor of their Inhabitants, lest, they
should be persuaded to some change, and that th'easiness of shaking off the
Yoke they have voluntarily put on, and to return to themselves, oblige them
t'undertake it.

But Man's condition is subject to so much Weakness, and our Reason is assaulted
with so many Errors, that not only Particular persons, but whole Companies are
often deceived in th'Election of the Good that is most proper for them, and are
taken with the Pomp and Apparences, rather than with the Solidity and Truth of
things; Or else truly, the Custom they 've practiced, and the Course exercised
in some kind of Life, and in some form of Policy, is so strong a Band, and so
powerful a Charm for them, who are taken with it, That it is very hard for them
to have so much as a thought to break and destroy; Or else the Absolute Power
and Sovereign Authority, are things so dear to them, who 'njoy them, That
there is no Recompense for which they would quit them, and they had rather only
possess the shadow with Notorious Incommodities, than to live in th'easiest
Dependency, and in the most commodious Subjection in the world; or at last, as
there is nothing in this world; that has not two faces, or Good, without
Inconveniences; so, though these Petty Princes are very sensible of the
perjudice they suffer, to conserve the fancy of Sovereignty they Adore, the
Matters of Subjection, be they never so pleasant, appear unto them more
insupportable; And they would b' afraid, to worst their Condition in the
Changing of it, and to quit a known and Certain Good, for a Doubtful and
unknown Good; And exchange Evils, which the Newness would make Sharper and
Heavier, for Evils, whose Custom had dulled the point, and allai'd the
bitterness: What I have said, is not to prepossess the thoughts of any person,
nor to persuade, what a man has not a will to believe, but only to show one
of the faces of the Medal; That by such a Representation, they may the better
judge of the other; or else truly they may take it for a game of Wit, and for an
exercise of Reasonings, which is void of Design and Consequence.

As to Princes, who have but a Moderate Power, as the Duke of Savoy for
Example, There Is no question but the Nearness of two great Crowns, betwixt
which he is shut, is his Security; And the Jealousy the one has, lest the other
seize upon the Dukes Countries, and take away that Medium and Barrier, which
makes betwixt their Territories the separation, sollicites them effectively
t'hinder the Conquest of it with all their Forces. There Is no doubt, I say, but
the French had rather have that Duke for their Neighbor, than the King of
Spain, and that the Spaniards would not bear any thing with more impatience,
than to see the Domination of the French extend to the Duchy of Milan, which
is the Basis that bears the rest of their Countries in Italy.

In the second place, it seems a happy Fate for The House of Savoy, to produce
such excellent Princes for Peace and War; And that Heaven had granted them High
Qualities to supply, what it has denied them of Power; That with Wit and
Courage they might make the Counterpoise to the Greatness and Powers of other
Princes. Add, that the Alliances of Blood, which they^ve from all times
contracted with the one of the two Crowns, and has been desired for their
particular Ends, have much relieved them in time of Need, and have not only
served t'hinder them from falling, but to raise them from their falls. And
speaking freely, Though the Duke of Savoy have no greater wishes to make than
for the good Intelligence of those two Crowns, nor any thing more t'appre^end
than their Contests, when they do fall out; The Ordinary Law of the Dukes
Interest requires, That being unable to stand Newtral, he takes part with the
French, and they ought not to do otherwise, unless some extraordinary
Conjuncture of Affairs does exempt them from it, without running Hazard to be
lost, and overcome with the Forces of a great Kingdom, before Spain has means
to stop th'Inundation, and to divert the Spoils; whereof, there are so many
Instances, that no person can make a question of it. And not to speak of Savoy,
which may be taken without much Resistance, and where there is but one Fort
which may be made useless by a Blockhouse that may almost defend it self; Who
knows not in how little time, Charles, led by the persuasion of his wife, being
a Portuguese, and chained to the fortune of Charles the Fifth, was stripped of
the best part of Piedmont by Francis the First, who had left his Posterity in
their shirts, if the Virtue of Philibert his son, who defeated us at St.
Quintins, and the will Fortune of France, had not opened by a Treaty of Peace,
the Gate to many places formerly shut unto him, for many years of War? It would
be a superfluous thing, no person being ignorant of it, To speak of the
Conquest the late King made of all Savoy, and of the Progress he might have
made in Piedmont, if a powerful Conspiracy that formed it self in the Heart of
his Kingdom, and the Reverence He bore the Pope, had not obliged him to hearken
to the Peace presented unto him from the Holy Chair.

I pass also in silence th'Expeditons of the King in Savoy and Piedmont, which
all Europe has seen; To what extremities he forced the late Dukes of Savoy, in
view of the Spanish and Imperial Forces, and in despite of their conjoined
Armies. The Dukes of Lorrain are not much different in Constitution, nor less
obliged in Dependency upon th'Interests of this Kingdom, than those of Savoy.
That if the present Duke Charles had well understood this Truth, which was of so
great Importance to him; And if some evil Spirit, or rather some evil
Counselor, had not blinded him from seeing, what was so visible and so full of
Light, H' had not suffered, as H' has done; He Had not s' often conspired
against France, nor quitted the Way his Predecessors held to their Happiness,
to cast himself upon By-ways, which have made him wander from his Interest, and
have led him to the Precipice wherein he is now fallen; At least, if he had
maintained Newtrality betwixt the Princes in War, and had been a Spectator of
the Quarrel, without being a Party, H' had been in esteem of both sides, and
might have made use of the Fortune of both Parties, and his Country having been
for some time one of the Theaters of the War, had not been one of the fairest
Members of the Kings Conquests, and one of the principal Pieces of his Triumph.

Third Discourse.
Wherein the Second Example is brought, spoken of in the First Discourse, to
show the Artifices Princes use in assaulting of Foreign Princes, t'hinder their
Friends to Relieve them.
THe second Example promised in the First Discourse, shall be taken also from
the Republic of Venice, and from a difference had with The House of Austria,
upon the Subject of the Uscoques. I will now give the whole Picture, for the
Curiosity of the Reader, and that he may observe the more distinctly, and in
their proper places, the Draughts which are of most importance for my design,
and deserve a serious Pause, and a prudential Reflection. It Is a pleasure to
see in the Lists two famous Combatants upon mutual Trials of their Skill; And
they, who have Inclinations for the Affairs of State, cannot be present at a more
useful sight, than The Encounter and Justle of the two Powers of Spain and the
Republique of Venice, dextrous in Thou Art of Reigning, and almost equally strong
in Artifices and politic Stratagems; Such and the like Observations are the
fruits that Ministers of State, in Reading of History, ought to make their
principal Harvest; And are the true Lights they ought to be furnished with to
guide their Conduct, and to clear the rich Matter, whereof their Knowledge
ought to be composed to make up their Profession.

The Subject then of this Discourse shall be the disturbance of the Uscoques,
which gave much trouble to the Republique of Venice, and traversed it by the
most sharp and intricate Negotiation, it ever managed; And determined at last
in a War, which consumed a part of their Treasure, and caused an infinite
number of their Men to perish.

Take the beginning and progress of this Affair. The Adriatique Sea, very
famous in Antiquity for the great Pyracies exercised in it, was rendered by the
care of the Venetians the safest Sea of the World; It was a protection for the
Ships chased by the Corsaires, and for the safety of Navigation upon the coasts
of some other Princes, as upon the Coasts of the Republique, and were not much
troubles till Soliman's time, then the Uscoques did violate their security; yet
they were quickly suppressed by th'Arms of the Republique, which by the Peace
made with Soliman in the year 1639, was obliged to clear the Gulf from Pirates,
and to repair, at their Charges, the Damages, the Subjects of the Grand
Signior should suffer in their Navigation upon that Sea. This Calm lasted
during the Time of the Emperor Rodolphus and Mathias, and of the Archdukes
Ferdinand and Leopold, and until some of the Uscoques did interrupt it, and
the Gulf was so much vexed with their Violence and Robberies, That they
extended them to the Republiques Havens, and in one of them Robbed a Galley,
and having killed all the persons in it, by a Barbarian Inhumanity of the New
World, did Eat The Heart of the Captain that Commanded it.

These Uscoques are a sort of People gathered of many Nations; Croates,
Hungarians, Esclavonians, and banished persons from the Republique, who have
neither Lands nor Industry, but Live and Maintain themselves by Rapines and
Murders, And whom th'Enormity of Crimes, and the Fear of Punishments, or the
Lusts of an Irregular Life, Exempt from the Bridle of Laws and Magistrates,
have cast upon a violent Association, and into a bloody Commerce; They dwell in
Esclavonia, otherwise called Venade, and anciently Liburnia, under the Mountain
Morlache, which makes a part of that, which is called the Chain of the World;
their principal Habitation and Den of Thieves, are the Towns of Segna and the
Fortress of Serisa, which was taken from them by James Zane, Governor of
Dalmatia. They Are Subjects to the Emperor and to the Archduke of Grets, who
may boast of Men at their Command, born only to d' Evil, and to be the Flayl
of other Men; As God has under the Generality of his Creatures, and in
the extent of his Empire, Devils, as good Angels, Thundrings and Lightnings, as
well as delectable and wholesome Meteors. These person then made Incursions
upon the Adriatique Sea, and though the pretense of their Robberies, was to
make War to the Turk, and as good Subjects, they Armed themselves with that
fair Color, which is so familiar with their Masters; yet they did not forbear
to Rob and put Christians to Ransom, and above all Men, the Venetians, as the
Turks. And the Banner of St. Mark, was not more Inviolable to them, than
th'half Moon of Constantinople. Their Inroads and Invasions stopped not at Sea;
They Landed often, and passing by the Lands of the Republique forced into the
Grand Signiours Countries, from whence they took all they could carry away, and
returned Laden with spoils, whereof the Richest and most Precious were the
Booty of the Officers of The Empire, and of the Archdukes; Besides the Duties
belonging to th'Admiralty, which they paid, as it is the Custom of Protected
Pirates, better than any people of the World.

There was no need of this occasion, to put the Turk into an ill humor against
the Venetians, and to Heat the Blood of those Avaritious Souls, who do not use
to suffer Losses from their Christian Neighbors, but are in perpetual Avarice
to draw Tributes, or to take somewhat from them; Quick expression were made of
it to the Republique, and their Resentments were accompanied with sharp
Complaints and Threatenings of Revenge, if they did not speedily remedy the
disorder, and cause that evil to cease which increased daily, and strengthened
by their Connivence.

This was the Read Design of the Princes of the House of Austria, and chiefly
of the Spaniards, who endeavored to raise an ill understanding betwixt the
Vanetian and the Grand Signior, and to put them into disorder; That the
Necessity of their Relief, if the Turk broke with the Republique, might take
away their desire of Crossing them in the Plot they had laid t'oppress the Duke
of Savoy. But the Republiques Dexterity, which is as great as the World
conceives it, and the Credit they had at the Port which was not small,
frustrated the Spaniards of their projected success; The Knowledge the Turks
had of this Artifice, allayed the Heat which began to inflame them, and
retained Patience and Moderation in the Bounds which are not natural unto them.

The like Accident happened during the disorder of th'Interdict, and a design
drawn from the same Idea, and Cast in the same Mould, and had an End very like
it, and fell away in the same Manner, whilst the ill Intelligence betwixt the
Pope and the Venetians was much inflamed, and that Matters of all sides
inclined visibly to a breach. The Spaniards sent the Marquis of St. Cross with
forty Galleys into Albana, who took and plundered Duras a Town belonging to the
Turk, and of some Reputation in that Province, Their intention was not to
Incommodate the Grand Signior by the Taking of a Place where they had no Hold,
and could not take Root, They prentended only to awaken by that Enterprise the
proud Enemy, and t'oblige him to Revenge that affront, which could not be
executed, but part of the Burden of the War must fall upon the Venetians, and
that their Countries would make out the first Scean where th'Ensigns of the
Turks Arms would be displayed, or at least, that they would pass by their Gulf
to assault the Coasts of Naples, which would give a great Cause of Jealousy,
and of Expense to the Venetians; but the Grand Signior having given vent to the
Mine, no prejudice fell upon them against whom it was prepared; But instead of
assaulting the States of the Republique, He sent t'offer them his Forces
against the Spaniards and the Pope, and Commanded Glassar Bassa with five and
fifty Galleys To Advance toward Gomonicics near Corfu, to Join with the General
Paschaligo as often as it should please the Venetians, who had not the Will or
the Necessity to make use of a Remedy, whose Operation was most Dangerous, or
t'enter into a Society wherein there was for them but a little Hope, and much
Fear.

Lets return to our Subject, The Republique seeing that the Affairs of the
Uscoques required a prompt Remedy, and that from that Root might bud, if it
were not timely Cut off, some great Accident to their prejudice, put themselves
into a posture to Repress it; for that purpose it tried first, as it is their
Custom, the way of Negotiation and Endeavors, before their Taking up of
Arms; but in all their Transactions they received Words only without Effect,
and perpetual Changes were given them, studied Invasions, and disguised
Deceits, and no Proceeding was ever more Oblique, more Empty, and more
Irresolute than what was practiced upon them. When the Republique solicited
The Emperor to suppress th'Attempts of the Uscoques, and to divert their
violences, they were remitted to the Archdukes as Governors of the Country
where the Uscoques dwelt; when they repaired to the Archdukes for the same
effect, They answered, that it belonged to the Emperor, as Sovereign, to
provide against it, and not to them, who had but a subaltern power; when they
had brought their Answers together, and put them in a condition to make no
further use of Collusion and Deceipts, They said, that the Affair would be best
determined in a Diet of Hungary, which should be called, because the place of
the Uscoques Dwellings were dependent, and a Feife of that Kingdom; Sometimes
they protested, that it dit not belong to them to receive Immediate Addresses,
but to the Count Sosimo and to Frangipani as to the particular Lords of those
places; That Order was to b' observed, and the Degrees of inferior
Jurisdictions tried before Address could be made to the Supreme Authority.

But after many Evasions and Windings, wherewith the Republique was delayed; It
declared, that their Patience was abused, and that it would assume the Right of
a Sovereign, and take Reason of them, who'd refused it. Agents were sent unto
them in the Name of the Emperor and of the Catholic King, who promised that
satisfaction should be given them, and that Complaints should be removed. But
all their proffers proving to be Wind, and Vain and hollow promises, and the
Republique having been long and too often Cheated by them, and preparing in
Earnest to Carry by Force, what they could not Gain by 'ntreaty, Comissaries
were sent upon the places, who Banished or put to Death some of the Meanest and
Least Culpable of the Uscoques, Touched not upon the Chiefs, or upon the other
most Considerable Members, But Cut off some Light and Unprofitable Branches of
Evil, and left entire the Body and the other parts of the Tree. And so the
Disorder being rather Pruned than Rooted up by this Proceeding, sprouted more
freely than before; And resembled to the waters of a stopped Torrent, which
over-flows with the greater Impetuosity and Ruin, Th'obstacle which held them
in being taken away, that when the Waters run at Liberty, and their force not
provoked by the Restraint. There Is cause of Astonishment in the Number of
Treaties, which were had upon that dispute, as of the success, and as it were
of the destiny of those Treaties, whereof not one was Executed, and that all of
them vanished into smoke. There was a Treaty at Ratisbone, at Lints, at Pragne,
and principally at Vienna of the 12. of May 1612. By which it was Agreed that
the Archduke Ferdinand should Clear the Adriatique Sea of Pyracies, and
t'hinder them of Segna to Rob on that Sea; But th'hour of Execution on was
deferred, and the Spaniards had use of the Continuance of the Evil, and that
the Republique should be diverted out of Italy; That it might not be forward to
look after the Spanish proceedings in Piedmont, and give less Heat to
th'Affairs of the Duke of Savoy. All the Commissioners sent to execute the
Treaties, fell sick on the way, and were recalled by an affected pretext; And
some Accident ever Intervened, which Disappointed the Republique of the Hopes,
wherewith it was so long fed, and made to know that Nothing but ^ron could cure
th'Ulcer which had Eaten to the bone, and festred by their Connivence.

This made the Republique to resolve upon a War against the Archduke Ferdinand,
and t'hinder th'Evill from streaming any further to fight in the Spring; for
this purpose, they commanded Gradisque to be besieged, and spared neither Money
nor Men to Recover that place, which had been built against the Invasion of the
Barbarians in Istria, and opened them the Way to the Conquest of Goritia. The
Republique with these two places, as with a stretched Chain, had shut up the
passage to the German Troops, which might have descended into the German
Troops, which might have descended into the Friol by the Mountains of Carso,
and by the River of Lizonso. This convenience was of great Importance to the
Venetians, and the opportunity of putting a powerful Bar betwixt the German
Territories and theirs, whereof they have always Apprehended th'Inundation,
gave occasions to some, to say, who measure always the Designs of another, by
their own Rule, and know no other Law t'Act by but their Profit, That the
Proceedings of the Uscoques, were but the Pretext of that War, and that the
Conquest of these two places was the Cause. But they who Consider the pressing
Interest the Republique had to repress the Attempts of the Uscoques, and the
perilous Consequences which would arise to their prejudice by a longer
Patience, will easily judge that they could not do less; And that in case their
Conduct was to be blamed, It was for too much flowness and phlegm, and by
discovering too great an Insensibility, which emboldned the Insolence of their
Enemies, and increased th'out-rages that were Acted against them. This is not
the proper place of reporting the progress of that War, or the different faces
that Fortune showed, sometimes in favor of th'Archdukes, and sometimes in
savor of the Venetians, and of the Spaniards, and to represent the various
Means wherewith two powerful Princes, as has been said, in Artifices, and
politic Prudence, made War, and the Mines and Counter-mines wherewith they
mutually assaulted and defended themselves. The Breach made betwixt the
Venetians and th'Archdukes, and the War growing Hot on both sides, The Duke of
Ossona, whose humor was naturally troublesome, and who, as the Natural Heat
cleaves to the Radical Humidity, when outward Aliment fails; not finding abroad
Matter enough for disturb^nce, raised it in the Countries of his Master, which
was the cause of his Ruin. The Duke of Ossona, I say, notwithstanding the
Continuation of the Peace with Spain; Arms at Sea to Trouble the Republique;
Scoures the Gulf under the conduct of Alonzo Rivera, takes away Ships, and to
be in a posture in case of necessity to be disavowed, and by an Artifice worthy
of the Spanish spirit, sets forth this Fleet under his own Ensigns; But
th'affairs growing by time more and more grievous, and the Animosity of the
Parties becoming stronger by the various accidents, which the War daily
produced; He displayed the Royal Ensigns, and by a Novelty of latter Times, and
unknown to former Ages, makes War without declaring of it, or confessing it to
be made. That all this was done, It was said, by form of diversion, and to
exchange it with the Venetians, who fomented underhand, as it has been
reported elsewhere, the Duke of Savoy, and paid him every Month a certain sum
of Money to maintain the War on Piedmont side; And that the Spaniards being
exercised by that Prince, might not touch upon their Frontiers, unfurnished of
old Soldiers, and provided only of Men, who served to make up the Number, as
the Militiaes of Italy. The danger on the Land-side, which vexed the Venetians
more than the Spanish Enterprises at Sea; And the Jealousy of conserving their
Campagnia, wherein they are more sollicitous than any Persons of the world,
occasioned, that they resolved to cause some form of Accommodation to be
proposed in Spain, betwixt th'Arch-dukes and themselves; And to comprehend also
the Duke of Savoy, with whom they were in society of Interests, and in some
sort in community of Fortune. It was t'oblige the Catholic King upon the
deference, not t'undertake upon their Estates, and not to treat them as
Enemies, who had chosen him Arbiter of their differences, and committed their
affairs so freely unto him. This Proceeding might have sweetened the Courage of
the Spaniards, it they had been as Magnanimous as Proud, and allai'd
th'Indignation they had conceived against the Venetians, by reason of the War
they made to the Archdukes, and the secret Aid they gave to the Duke of Savoy.

But in stead of softning the Spaniards by this great Respect which was offered
them, and abating of their Animosity, by a Submission that did them so much
honor; They 'xpressed the greater difficulty, and resisted the more t'hear of
any Accord. They were Exalted the more for th'Humility of the Venetians, and
taking them for Persons that wanted Courage or Power, they handled them with
Reproaches and Threatenings, they seemed without doubt the more Froward to be
the more Entreated; They believed to find less resistance in making the
Conditions of the Treaty, by the Indisposition they showed in Intermedling in
th'Accommodation, and conceived, that they who were in the dirt, would think
themselves happy to be delivered, though they were rudely drawn out, and that
there was not a Haven too Incommodious to them, who were secured from
shipwreck. But they were deceived, for th'affairs of the Republique were not
then so desperate, as to repair to dishonorable Means t'establish it, and it
never fell into such desperate disgraces, but that it was always in power to
rise again with honor. That the Spaniards in effect; were more reserved than
the had been, to offend the Venetians, and that they did not violate on the
Land-side the Peace the had made with them, were the things the effected, and
the principal Intention and Design of the Venetians.

The Proposition of the Accommodation being abortive at Madril, and th'humour
of the Spaniards and of the Venetians Incompatible for that time; The
differences were remitted to Rome, where the difficulties which interrupted the
Peace were no more taken away than in Spain; for, as the Pope was suspected of
passion in savor of the Spaniards; and that in th'Affair then acted, there
were some also who believed, That the Pope was not dextrous enough to manage
it, and would not willingly give others the glory to determine it; So
th'Inclinations of their Ministers of State in Italy, were too strongly carried
to War, that produced a present and certain Profit, which they had not in time
of Peace, Accompanied with th'hopes of some famous Success, which would have
rendered their Administration remarkable. And they endeavored still to gain
Time, and the Game was played till the Spanish Arms had gained Reputation in the
taking of Verecil; And the fears the Venetians had, that the Spaniards would
not be restrained in the Frontiers of the Mildnois, but overrun their Country,
being by that Accident Increased, They re-took the Paths they had quitted in
relation to Spain, and to replay their old Piece, but much better adjusted, and
with more Color, to desire a Conclusion than they had done the first Time. The
Spaniards also gave over their Subtilties and Rodomontadoes; The Duke of Lerma,
a Person of a pacifique humor, and who had long sought for some specious way
to get off with honor from the War of Italy, embraced the Conjuncture; It
could not be more advantageous to th'Affairs of his Master, because the Peace
came after the Victory, nor more favorable to his particular Affairs, because
by that Means he discharged Don Pedro of Toledo from the command of The Army,
who was of a contrary faction, and began to lessen the Dukes Cabinet power,
wherein the other was in his proper Sphere, by the glory of his Actions done in
the Field. He receives then with great Approbation the Proposals of the
Venetians, promises to remember the honor they did his Master, by the most
profitable and most honorable Conditions he could procure them, and no Treaty
ever had the Appearance of a more certain Conclusion that this.

But as Tempests are not more frequent at Sea, than Revolutions at War, and
that the Constitution of Piedmont had that in particular in it, As t'observe
the form of the French Government, and was dependent upon th'Inconstancy and
Changes of a Court, which at that time was more Changeable and Uncertain than
ever; It happened, that the Marshal of Anore, a passionate friend for the
Spaniards, and a great Promoter of their Interests being suddenly killed; And
the Spring he held shut up of the principal Reliefs, which ought to have passed
to the Duke of Savoy, being opened by his death; such great numbers of French
passed into Piedmont, That the Duke found himself in a condition to make his
Enemies Army to quit the Field, which the Siege of Verceil had much difordered;
That by taking of many Towns, he took from them the Remainders of their Army;
That he was ready to force into the Milanois; and that 'twas in his power to
give fear to the City of Milan, if the course of the Victory had not been
interrupted from France, and the Thunder restrained that was ready to break out
on the Spaniards; And Fortune that had ill used the Venetians before Gradisque,
began to declare in their favor, and a glorious Re-enforcement of Hollanders,
under the conduct of Count John of Nassau, promised them an happy success, and
quick Reducement of that place, which had cost them great sums of Money, and
much Foreign and Intestine Blood.

In this Change of fortune, and in this new face of Affairs, the Venetians
changed proceedings in relation to the Spaniards, and took off the Masque under
which they then concealed their Intentions, which never were, That the
Spaniards, so powerful and formidable in Italy, by reason of th'Estates they
there possessed, should become the Judges of the Quarrels there raised, and add
to the Powers they had in Italy The Authority of determining the Differences,
and to regulate the Affairs, wherein they would no power; They commanded it then to
be told the Catholic King, That their Ambassador had no command to make other
addresses t'him, than to know his Sense, and take his Advice upon the Matter of
the War of Gradisque, and that of Piedmont; And that they 'ntended to consult
him, as a Friend in that Matter, but not to refer the Decision to him, and to
constitute him for Judge. And so giving the Spanish King thanks in magnificent
Terms, and in words of great Respect, which they have accustomed to lay down in
abundance upon things they have no Will to grant, They disappointed the Spaniards
of their design, and reserved for France the Honor, the Spaniards had
passionately desired; So that in the whole course of this Intrigue, and in all
this Cabinet-War, the Field remained to the Venetians, who found not
nevertheless their Account in France, but either th'Interest of the State, or
the Genius of the Ministers of State, too much carried to oblige Spain; or for
fear of disobliging it; Was the cause, that too great a respect was had to the
Dignity of that Crown, or too little to that of the Republique, and to
th'Interests of the Duke of Savoy. Th'Emperors and th'Arch-dukes
disocntentments had upon this Peace against the Spaniards, is not to b' here
concealed, nor their Complaints against and Accommodation, that had not
bettered their Condition, but had returned them to the posture they were in by
the Treaty of Vienna, and had put them into th'Haven, from whence they were put
out, after the expense and hazards of an unprofitable Navigation. Thus the
Spaniards have accustomed, to sacrifize to their Interests some of their best
friends, and to strain them to their Ends, without Exception of Means of
Persons. The Use of this Artifice was not new in the world, nor th'Invention of
the Venetians; It was practiced long ago by Charles th'Eighth, to divert Henry
the Seventh the King of England from relieving the Duke of Britany, to whom h'
had a purpose to make War; T'allay then the storm that might arise from that
side, and stop the Relief which Henry might bring or send in favor of his
Neighbor, Charles made a show of desiring the Peace, and offered to submit to
Henry the differences h' had with the Duke, and to acknowledge him Arbiter and
Mediator of the Quarrel. Charles with this delicate Bait and subtle Charm of
Honor, disarmed Henry's warlick spirit, who was fully engaged with affections
and inclinations to Aid the Duke of Britany; But Charles made so powerful and
quick a Levy, and raised such great Forces, that the Duke was overrun before
notice was taken of it in England, That Charles was entered into his Country with
an Army, and the Tragedy ended before it was known that the first Act was played.

Fourth Discourse.
Some Rules that Princes, and especially they that are Weak, ought to observe,
when they have need to make use of the Relief of their Friends.
IN the precedent Discourse has been seen the unhappy Destiny of Weak Princes,
when they are assaulted by Powerful Princes, and the various Artifices
exercised t'hinder or slacken the Reliefs, which might come to them from their
Friends. But since it is necessary, that there be such Princes in the world, and
that in the distribution of the parts of that little Engine, for which men give
themselves so much Labor, and make so great a noise, Equality has not been
observed; It Is of necessity that the Weaker follow the General Law, and remain
the Prey of the Stronger, wh' assault them, or that they seek protection from
them wh' are able to give it, and secure themselves under the shadow of their
Authority, or by the force of their Arms; some Rules are to b'observed, as of
Importance to be known; The first is; That they make the strongest preparation
in their power to oppose The Enemy that comes t'assault them, and to resist his
first Impetuosity, which ordinarily is the most violent, and put by their first
strokes, which are ever the most Dangerous.

For this purpose, and in this public Necessity, they^re to sell or engage
their best and most precious things; To sink deep into the purses of their
Friends, and upon their Subjects to make great Levies; And it is better for
their Subjects to endure a little blood-letting, and for a short time, by their
Prince, than totally and for ever ruined by strangers; And a wasted Country, as
it is said, is better for him than a lost Country; and Subjects a little
plundered, than Subjects constrained to change Master; And though they cannot
long bear that extraordinary Levy, nor resist that excessive Charge, It may
fall out, that th'Heat of th'Assailant may grow cold by a greater Resistance
made on the sudden than was expected; And may not b' offended at Proposals of
Accommodation, and that a door b' opened unto them to get our with Honor from
an Enterprise, whose Beginnings being unhappy, the Progress might b' abated
without doing more than making of a Noise, and may return to th'Haven without
other danger than the fear of a Tempest.

Or if the Enemy do not withdraw upon the ill usage Fortune affords them at the
first Attempt, and refuse to quit the place, or to retire; In gaining of time
they 've done much, which is the great Remedy of Unfortunate and Weak persons,
and gives Means to their Friends to come to their Relief, and to bring them
fresh Troops, wherewith they may not only maintain themselves, but cause the
face of War to change, and turn the Defense int' an Assault, and become
th'Assailants of their Enemies. The Duke of Savoy, Grandfather of the present
Duke, did the like, since the death of the late King, in the Wars the Spaniards
made him, or H' had been suddenly overrun at the first sight, and swallowed by
the Spanish powerful Armies, wherewith the Governor of Milan entered Piedmont,
and gave fear t'all Italy, but to that Prince; And yet, with that wise and bold
proceeding, he not only received and resisted their first assaults, but gave
them affronts; And precedent it has been observed, that after the loss of
Verceil, which had it been well defended might have been kept, strengthened by
that fair and flourishing Relief Sir of Esdiguieres brought unto it, who put
the Spaniards upon the Defensive, and compelled them to desire Peace, which was
concluded at Paris to their Advantage.

The second Rule is, That as great sums of Money are to be expended, and a
great Army to be raised, it is of great importance to make them timely, and not
t'expose them to th'hazard of surprises, which being dangerous in all sorts of
affairs, are much more in the business of War, and d'ordinarily make breaches,
by which ill fortune enters so far into the Country, That it proves a difficult
matter to drive it out; And it often falls out, that they die of those strokes,
or are long sick of them; And it is what sometimes has been to be desired by
way of Addition, to the Wisdom of the Venetians, and to their excellent
Conduct; Their Historians also confess, That one of the causes of the loss of
the Kingdom of Cyprus, was the delays they used in preparing against the Storm
which they saw coming. And in the Motions, which troubled Italy about the
Succession of the last Duke of Mantoua, we have seen them Arm slowlier than was
necessary for their very design, and have suspended many times the Orders and
Commissions they 'd given for the War, upon uncertain and wild reports of a
Treaty of Peace, and were only a studied Deceit, and an affected Artifice of
the Spaniards, for to possess them with a coldness and relaxation of spirit;
It Is certain at least, That if after the King had forced his passage at Suza,
and taken away the Barrier that shut up their Entry into Italy, They had not
recalled th'Orders given to their General t'enter into Cremona, They had taken
of the Spaniards some eminent Advantage, whilst they wanted Forces, failed of
Courage, and th'Inclinations of the people were adverse unto them.

Who can, I say, doubt, but if they had taken possession of Cremona, which
opened her Arms unto them, and breathed after so easy a Yoke, as theirs; but
that they had greatly fortified the Party which they favored, and had obliged,
it may be, by that Declaration, the Spaniards to have observed the Peace of
Sutza, and to have caused to be sent to the Duke of Mantoua th'Investiures
Accorded by that Treaty, rather than to have shut themselves up betwixt two so
considerable Powers as France and Venice, and some other Forces, which Venice
might have drawn to its assistance? or if the War had re-kindled, as it did the
following year, and the Spaniards touched with th'Affronts they received from
all parts, have been forward at any price to take revenge of the shame by Arms;
The War without all doubt had taken another form, If the Venetians had been
Engaged in it; Mantoua in Appearance had not been lost; All the designs of
The Enemies had been Abortive; And insted of the unhappy success of th'Expedition
of Valese, for being undertaken too late and with precipitaion, The Republique
had seen the fruits ripen at leisure, if it had been timely acted, of so
generous a Design, and without much hazard; Nor had it been for that Action the
more Hated of The House of Austria; It had been the more respected; And all
Italy had taken the greater courage for defense of the common Liberty, if it
had had before their Eyes so great an Example of Courage from them, who give
every day so great Examples of their Wisdom. But however, it is the Lot of Human
Wisdom to be sometimes defective, or rather, it is the property of Evil Events
to b'always attributed t'Unreasonable Causes; or else it is the Nature of all
th'affairs that are put in Deliberation to have many faces and reasons of all
sides, which incline t'Act or not t'Act one manner or other; Right of
Providence, which governs the World, to frustrate, or cause to b'observed, as
it shall seem good, the reasons of the effects intended, and of the promised
success.

The third Rule shall be, That if the Prince, who is assaulted, endeavors
t'execute what has been advised him to do, and yet shall have need of Relief
from his Allies to make th'Evil to cease, or to stop The Enemies further
progress, He must make use of their Forces for Diversion, and cause them to
march into the Enemies Country, if he be not over-pressed in his own Country,
and if th'Evil he feels or fears may attend that Remedy. By that means he may
ease his Country of them, who would have laid it waste, and had sworn the ruin
of it, and will secure it also from the spoil of Auxiliaries, which cannot b'
avoided; And which may properly be compared to Physicians, who cannot cure the
body without the use of it, nor drive away the will humors which cause
Alteration, without the disordering of it, and without leaving also sometimes
some Ill Impression. As to the success of this Diversion, it is Impossible, but
it must prosper, and have the effect it Aims at, because it has the character
and mark of efficacious diversions, and to b'executed upon a Country, which is
ordinarily of greater Importance, and of stronger Concernment, being his own,
to The Enemy, than that from which they would force him; And there is no
appearance, That a wise Physician will neglect The Heart, or some other Noble
part, t'intend the cure of a light Contusion, or of some small Scratch.

Let Us also say, before return be made to our principal Subject, and for the
better clearing the Matter of Diversion, which will not much divert us, and is
a Neighbor to it, That one of the most memorable and the most judicious
Diversions, which the past Age has seen, was that which Francis the First made
upon the Spaniards, when the Constable of Bourbon, the Marquis of Pescary, and
the other Chiefs of The Imperial Army, came t'assault Provance; Instead of
marching straight to oppose them, and to fight them in his Kingdom; He marched
quickly with his Army int' Italy, and fell upon the State of Milan, and upon
the Country in most favor with The Emperor, and upon the parts of all the rest
of his Estates, which were dearest to him next to Spain; nor was he
disappointed of his Thoughts; for The Imperial Army failed not at the first
Noise of that Expedition to quit Provance, and to march toward Italy with so
strange a Nimbleness, and such an Incredible Diligence, That it prevented our
Arrival in the State of Milan, and gave means to recruit and fortify some
places, which were the security of the rest.

That if the Subsequent Success was as fatal to us, as the first favorable;
And if the Cause of that War was Ended in the Imprisonment of King Francis, and
by the Ruin of his Army; This Disgrace ought not to b' Attributed to the
Nature of the Diversion, which was very pertinent; nor a Prudential Cause
charged with the production of a Malignant Effect, which proceeded from another
Cause; This Disgrace, I say, is to b'attributed to the design of Fortune, which
undertook to mortify Frenchmen by the will Conduct of their Prince, and by the
faults of His Ministers of State, and by that unhappy and undiscreet Diversion,
which he made upon the Kingdom of Naples, whither he sent the Duke of Albany
with a part of his Army; For besides the great Weakness it brought to the
Remainder of his Forces, and the fair Game it made for his Enemies to advance
for The Assault, as they failed not to do in that Weakness; He considered not,
that the Kingdom of Naples being less Important to The Emperor, and of less
Esteem with him, than the State of Milan, His Army could not abandon the
Milanois to Relieve Naples.

The Fourth Rule, That if an inevitable Necessity b' upon a Prince, to procure
Foreign Forces to march int' His Country, and strengthen his Army; It may b' of
great advantage to him to have need only of moderate Forces, and such as b'
inferior to his; That he may always give the Law, and receive no Jealousy from
them, lest they should put him int' a kind of Subjection in the sight of his
Subjects, and abate the glory of Authority which governs his People, and
the opinion of his Greatness, by that mark of Dependency, wherein he must
inavoidably fall upon the Reception of str^nge Armies. I speak not of other
Inconveniences, which may arise upon th'introduction of Strangers into a
Country, and particularly, if Ambition enters with the Power, or if the Beauty
of the Country, or Riches of The Inhabitants, may serve them for Temptation to
desire it, who being born under a Rigorous Climate, and in Salvage Countries,
are but too much tempted to change Dwellings, and to gain Richer Habitations.
Philip, father of Alexander, by such an Invitation, attempted the Liberty of
Greece, whereof the Romans, as has been observed, made a Conquest. That the
Goths, the Vandals, and other Septentrionals, have possessed themselves of
their Countries, who called them to their Relief; And that six thousand Turks
marching from Asia into Europe, to serve The Emperors of Constantinople,
charmed with the sweetness and felicity of that pleasant Country, invited their
Countrymen t'establish themselves in Europe; And it was the first cause of the
Revolution of that Empire. Wherefore wise Princes and Republiques, well
instructed in Thou Art of Governing, have at all times avoided The Use of so
dangerous a Remedy, and th'Exercise of a Means so full of Jealousy, as
th'Introduction of a great Foreign Army into their Country. In the War which
th'antient Romans made against Pyrrhus, and when by the gain of some Battles,
that brave Prince had shaken the foundations of that Republique, They refused
the Cathaginian Army, sent to their Relief under the command of Mago, and
resolved in that great Extremity to owe only to Virtue and to their own
Powers, the Re-establishment of their Affairs, and the Return of their Fortune.

After the Rout of Giragdade, and the sad success of that Battle, which at one
Blow took from the Venetians all their Lands; The Republique would not accept
the offer of Forces made them by Bajazet the Second, nor use that Means to
deliver themselves of the will fortune that pursued them, which was violent, and
to get out of a Precipice which was dangerous; It Is certain, that their ill
fortune could not be greater, nor the Precipice deeper; All Christendom was
combined against it, and a powerful victorious Army; And it had lost an Army,
when it was impossible for them to raise another; Terror and Despair entered
int' all their Towns, upon the Noise of this Disgrace; And by a strange Motion
of Prudence, and an Extraordinary Act of Policy, it was constrained to advise
their Subjects t'open their Gates to the Victorious, and to do that without
breach of Duty, or guilt of Treason, which the Consternation they were fallen
into, and the Current of The Enemies Victory would have forced upon them; And
yet, chose rather to seek safery and resurrection in its Wisdom, and in the
sole Means left to restore it self, by th'Imploying of all their strength, for
the Disunion of the Confederates, and Breach of the League, than to draw into
their Country those barbarous Soldiers, from whence they could not withdraw
them when they would, or t'expose Italy to the same conditon, the Neighbor
Provinces to Constantinople were in, under the Turk, as has been formerly
spoken.

In the growth of Heresy in this Kingdom, and of the first fires which burnt
it for the matter of Religion; Francis the second refused Philip his Brother in
Law, who fearing that the Contagion of th'Errour and Treason, which reigned
amongst us, should pass into Flanders, and complete the Corruption of his
Subjects, that had then taken some taste of it, sent to make offer of all his
Forces to fight them; The duke of Alva also, after h' had obtained in the
Low Countries many happy Successes against the Rebels of his Master, besought
Charles the Ninth to give him leave to bring 15000 Foot and 5000 Horse, all Men
of War, and accustomed to Victory, to reduce his Subjects t'Obedience.

But the King, by the advice of his Council, refused also that offer and would
not in accepting of it, either discover the Weakness of his Reign, or give to
the factious Religionaries more pretense to call Strangers to their Relief, and
to them the more color of coming into his Country; or t'introduce into
The Heart of his Kingdom an Army of valiant Persons, whom He could not easily
drive away, who would have demanded places of security for their Entry, and
Immense Damages for their Return, and might in time be the cause of a more
dificult and longer War than what troubled him. That whereas a part only of
his Subjects were in question, and that the Rebels to be reduced to reason,
made a profession of fidelity, and by consequence might easily be disarmed by
Indulgence, when it should appear too dangerous to repress them by Force; H'
had been under the Necessity of a defense against his Subjects and Neighbors,
and to fight Enemies, wh' having some Title of Justice, and making War without
Remorse or Scruple of Conscience, would have made it the more violent, and the
less susceptible of Accommodation.

From what has been now said, a fresh Rule to clear it may be raised; That an
Army of Foreign Forces to be drawn int' a Princes Country, and in so great a
number, as to give the Law, or raise Jealousy in him that Imploys them, is to
b' avoided; And that H' observe, also if it be possible, two things;
T'Endeavour, that the stranger Forces depend more upon the Prince that calls
them in and pays them, than upon him who leads them in and commands them; And
that their Relation to him be stronger and more absolute, than their Dependency
upon their Commander. The other thing is, to hinder their Conjunction in a
Body, and to keep them always severed, if there be not special cause to draw
them together; and to rejoyn them. The Venetians not long since Endeavored to
divide the Troops, which the Sir of Roquelaure brought them, and to take the
Command from him: And the Hollanders labored to do the like to the Count of
Mansfield, after he had Relieved Bergenopson; But they met with bold spirits
that resisted their Artifices, and defeated the subtle Attempts of their
Policy; It Is true, That this Trial is not to be made upon any Persons, but
Casual Chiefs, who depend only upon their Sword, and upon the Prince that
Imploys them, and having drawn together such Troops by their Industry and
Credit, maintain them also in Dependency by their Authority and Address.

As to th'Impeding the Conjunction of Forces, that might make great and
considerable Bodies, It Is an undubitable Means to divert the Disorder, and to
prevent the License, which of custom grows in Mercenary souls, from th'Hopes of
Impunity; As th'hopes of Impunity are usually engendered from the multitude of
Culpable persons: From this Root, Sedition and Mutinies have often budded in
the Ancient and Modern Armies; And the boldness of the Pretorian Troops, did
heretofore stream from this spring, in killing and choosing their Emperors,
and abused too often the Royal Purple, in taking it away, and giving it to whom
they pleased, by that blind incitement, which animates Courages, and being not
Regulated by Reason, are not restrained by Respect or Fear. Seianus, the
greatest Favorite of all Ages, and the first Example the world has seen of
excessive Favor, Having the Command of the Pretorian Troops, resolved to draw
them together, To render himself the more formidable by the quick and present
Relief had in hand of the best Soldiers of The Empire; The Soldiers provided
their Quarters, and drew them into the form of a Citadel to Command Rome, and
t'hold, in subjection the Capital City of the World. The great number of
Janissaries, which the Gram Signi^r keeps at Constantinople, is the cause of
the Tumults which often arise there, and of th'Insolencies they commit in that
City, which are extended sometimes to the violating of the Seraglio, the Grand
Signior's Palace, To compel their Prince to deliver unto them his Favorites,
To do Justice, as they say, upon them, and not to spare his Person, but even to
kill him. That if the Prince ought to avoid with great care, and for the
Consequences which have been represented, the drawing together of a great
Number of his subject Soldiers, H' ought much more to be careful to keep them
sover'd, so long as it may conveniently be done, who depend not upon Him; but
by the consideration, as strangers of their Pay; And respect him at the Rate
they fear Him, and fear Him at the Rate of his power to Punish them.

The sixth Rule is; That a Petty Prince Assaulted by a Greater, wh' has need
of a more prompt and Efficacious Remedy, than Diversion, against the Violence
that oppresses him, before He resolves to receive int' His Country a Foreign
Army, stronger than his own, and to give him place if they be demanded for
Security and Retreat, ought to make a just and exact Comparison of th'Evills,
to which he does expose Himself in the doing of it, and of them, he must of
necessity fall into, if He do it not; ought t'Examin Coldly and without
Passion, the Nature and Circumstances of the Affair which vexes him; The
conditions of his Enemies and of his Friends; The Faith and Ambition of all of
them; The convenience of his Countries or of any of his places for them; And
the Comparision and Examination being made of th'Inconveniencies, he must run
of all sides, H' ought to make Choice of the least offensive; H' ought to Agree
with his Enemies, if they are tractable, or make use of the Relief of his
Friends, if they are Faithful; And when H' has made a good Choice, and shall
put into the Haven without Shipwreck, He must praise God for it, as his
peculiar Grace and Extraordinary Favor.

The last Rule is; That in General, a Prince ought if He can to have one or two
Fortresses, for the security of his Country, and to serve for a stop to the
Forces which may overrun him, and to th'Invasions of an Enemy, who without
Impediment may suddenly become Master of it. For example, The Duke of Sax at
Dresde and Vittemberge; The Marquis of Brandburge at Custrin and Spando; The
Lantgrave of Hess at Castle and Sigenham. In these places Consists without all
doubt the safety of their Countries; and without them they would become the
Prey of the first Possessor; As are the Countries of some other Princes of
Germany, wh' have no Fortresses upon their Frontiers; And what had become, I
pray, of Montferrat, but for the Citadelle of Casall, that Excellent Piece,
which had defeated so many and so great Armies of the Enemies, whose Situation
and the Jealousy given by its strength, have invited to besiege it?

But Care must Here be taken of a specious Fault, and to avoid the Defects of
some Princes, who through Weakness fall to th'Extremity of other Princes by a
certain Irregularity of Fancy, not to think themselves Powerful or
Considerable Enough. If their Estates be little, and their Revenue small, they
ought not to Charge their Countries with many strong Places, nor to imitate
Intemperate persons, wh' Eating to excess, Cannot Digest what they Eat, and
fill themselves with so great a Quantity of ill Humors, that the Natural Heat
cannot dissolve them, or discharge the body of that plentiful spring of
Incommodities, and of that fruitful Mine of Maladies. The desire of many
Fortresses arises from an irregular Appetite, and from an Intemperate spirit,
which the Prince being unable to finish, and to furnish with necessary
Provissions, or to keep the Garrisons well manned and paid; some of them are
lost by some of the named Defects; And it happens also that The Enemy upon the
Taking of a Fort finisheth the Fortifications and Garrisons, and by that means
makes himself so strong an Establishment in that Country, and takes so deep
Rooting, that it is a difficult Business to get him thence, but by a Treaty of
Peace, and by that Lassitude and ^nability which the War produces, and Compels
him to hearken to an Accommodation.

From this Principle also is derived another Inconveniency that puts the whole
State in danger, and Cuts the Sinews and Nerves, which Bind and Join the parts
together; That the Excessive Number of Garrisons the Prince is obliged to keep,
is the cause that He becomes Weak when he is to draw into the Field; And that
the Enemy being Master without resistance of the flat Country, all places at
once are blocked up and lost, and at Contest, which shall begin to Render, for
want of an Army to relieve them, and to avoid the ill usage of an unnecessary
Defense, and having no reasonable Means of security, can have no Thoughts but
of perishing a little later than others, and of Consuming th'Assailants by
delay.

The Dukes of Savoy are fallen into this Inconveniences; In having a great
Number of Fortresses, and the greatest part of them Accompanied with some of
the Defects which have been represented; The Situation truly of their Country,
and particularly of Piedmont, shut up in the midst of the Countries of very
great and formidable Princes, as a King of France and a King of Spain, has
contributed much to this Disorder; And that some of the places have been often
taken; And it is impossible but that amongst so many weak Forts in their
Countr^ys, some Fort or other will be taken, and that a very dangerous
prejudice must arise from that Improvidence. The Duke of Rohan has also
observed in his Remembrances, That one of the Ruinous Causes of the Hugonot
party, and Principal Means of the dissolution of that great Body, was the great
Number of their strong Cities; And that by Endeavoring to save them, they lost
them all; And unable to dispute the Field, with the Kings Armies, as it
formerly had Done, That they fell under the Virtue and Power of the King. It
belongs only to the Flemings and to the Hollanders to have their Countries full
of strong Holds, and all those strong Holds Manned with powerful Garrisons,
and at the same Time to raise great Armies.

But as to the Flemings; Thought their Countries be of the best of the World,
and are called the Indies of Christendom, by reason of their Wealth; It had
been quickly drawn out and Left Dry, but for th'Influence of Spain, and
The Abundance of both Indies laid out to nourish the War, and to support the
Motions which have vexed that people for many years; Nor has it been always
in their power to furnish the Necessities of that War, and th'Hunger of that
insatiable Monster. And we have often seen the Armies of that Country perish for
want of Moneys, and from that want Considerable Bodies of Mutineers to arise,
as so many Republiques, which subsisted by Order and Discipline without
Rejoyning to the body from whence they drew away, till payment was made of what
was due to them, and so thereupon desisting from being their Princes Creditors,
they returned to the Duty of Subjects.

As to the Hollanders, who knows not also that they 've not been always in
their present Condition, nor ever had so many strong Holds or so well Manned as
now they Have; That they have been long upon the Defensive, and with so Mean an
Army, As that they believed to Gain what they did not Lose, and t'overcome
effectively when they were not overcome; It was at that time when they
subsisted only by the good pleasure of others, and by the subventions and
Reliefs which came to them from France, England, and Germany; when the had not
made Acquaintance with the Indies, or Robbed the Spanish Fleets, or sailed into
the Levant Seas, but under the Banner of France; when they were not Masters of
Trade and Navigation, as they are at this day; but since the Sea has Enriched
them of all sides, and has caused great Wealth to come to them from all parts
of the World, It Is no wonder if their Forts and Armies are supplied with all
Necessaries; And being so great Husbands, and taking so true Measure of all
things, which is the property of Republiques, They never fall short in their
Military Expeditions; And yet, it is not to be denied, but that they cannot draw
their Armies several years together into the Field without being weary of it,
and consuming of their Treasury, and that they will have need of rest and
breath, or to receive Contribution from abroad, as they have often received
from France.

These are General Propositions, which for the most part are true, but not
always, no more than the greatest part of other Rules of Policy. 't will
concern the prudence of Governors to Adjust them to the Nature of the Affairs
they 've in hand, and to the condition of their present Conjunctures; But not
to adjust th'Affairs and Conjunctures to the Propositions and Rules.

Fifth Discourse.
What Kind of Confederacy and Correspondency may be formed betwixt a Prince and
the Subjects of another Prince in Rebellion with their Prince; That the King
ought in Consequence to Aid the Catalans.
HAving discoursed the Manner of the Relief that ought to be given or taken
amongst Sovereigns; It shall not b' Impertinent t'Examine here another Matter
which is fastened to it, in searching what Kind of Confederation and
Correspondency may be formed betwixt a Prince and the Subjects of another
Prince in Rebellion with him. Whereupon, I first say, That the Risings of the
people against their Prince, and th'Intestine Agitations of States, being
ordinarily the strokes of th'Anger of Heaven, or rather the Effects of his
Justice, have also very different successes, according to the different
provocations; sometimes they make a Total change, and introduce New forms, if
it be resolved in the Council of Providence; And then no Force nor humane
Industry can divert The Event; A small spark does then kindle so great a Fire,
that no Relief can put it out, And Daniels little stone overthrew Huge and
Prodigious Statues. The defection of the Su^sses from The House of Austria of
Germany, and the defection of the Flemings from The House of Spain, are such
clear proofs of this Truth, that others are not to be Looked after. Sometimes
these Disorders are nothing but bare Threatenings from God to Direct Princes,
and the People wh' have offended him, to Repentance; And then, whatsoever
Disposition there may be in th'Inclination of Second Causes, and how steep
soever the descent or Precipitation, yet the Fall is prevented, as by Miracle,
the disorder of Affairs is reconciled against all hopes, as th'Intrigue of a
Comedy, and Things return to their first Being, without discovery almost of
the Way of their Return. France has made many Experiences of this Truth,
without speaking of other Countries. The most Modern of all shall here content
me, The descent of the English in th'Island of The. There was no Appearance to
the contrary, but that their Design ought to have been Executed, and they to have
been Masters of that Island; And therefore if it had happened, It had been a
difficult Matter to resist the Tempest that then Threatened us, and to secure
from Loss Provinces of this Kingdom.

The Mouths of the Rivers of Loyre and Garronne which The English Naval Army
ought to have seized upon, and by consequence all Manner of Communication shut
up from thence to Britany, Poitou, and Guienna. A considerable Army ready to
Join with th English, and marching from Languedock had been Increased by a
great Number of Hugonot Forces, that would have joined with them, as a River
swells in Rolling, by many Rivers that do discharge themselves into it; A great
Captain at the head of them to make use of all Advantages they should gain, and
all that Fortune should offer them, and many other Circumstances formed a very
dangerous Conjuncture against France.

It Is not to be doubted, but that the Virtue and Fortune of the King, The
Prudence, The Courage and th'Activity of his Ministers of State, and the Forces
of a powerful Kingdom might have Corrected all that this Conjuncture had of
Malignant and deplorable in it; But it is also to be Confessed, that they could
not have been put to a stronger proof, and that Less than that, was not
Convenient to break the Designs of the Rebellion, and t'hinder th'Establishment
of it in the State, which might have lasted as long as the Monarchy. But the
Love of God to France was so great, as not to permit it to come to such a
proof; And the Glory of the King was to be raised upon a fairer Occasion than
the Necessity of the Defense. For the Invaders of the Island of The were struck
with the Spirit of Confusion from the beginning of th'Enterprize; A fatal
Blindness, which did not abandon them from the time it had ceized them, till
they were lost, and had made Abortive one of the boldest and best laid
Projects, which of a long time has been contrived; And it happened unto it, as
to those formidable Engines, sometimes seen in War, which a little thing
renders useless and unprofitable, at The Instant that they begin to break.

In the second place, I say, That it must be laid for Foundation and Maxim;
That Subjects may of themselves rise against their Sovereign, and break the
Bonds of Obedience which they owe him, by the sole strength of their Passions.
But that this Rising can maintain it self in heat, if it be not heated from
abroad; Or this new Liberty long Lived, if some Foreign Power did not nourish
it, Is that which has been seldom seen, and there be but a few Examples of it,
But there are a great number which testify, that The One cannot be without
the other; And that a Revolt is Ill seated, that has for Foundation but the
Forces of a Rebellious People. I will also make use, to confirm this Truth, of
The Example of the Suisses, and of that of the Flemings, because I have already
made mention of them. There Is no Question, but that after th'Inhabitanes of
that salvage and rule Country, to which the Village of Suits has given the
name, had taken Arms against the Princes of Austria, and to deliver themselves
from that Long Violence, and Insupportable Tyranny, which they exercised over
them by their Governors, and that they were delivered from the Domination of
their bad Masters; But that the Republique remained a long time Trembling, and
ill Assured; That it did not begin to settle and draw a free Air, but under the
protection of Charles the Seventh, and received not its entire Consistency, and
its perfect Establishment, but from the Alliance it made with Lewis the
Eleventh. When the Flemings had resolved to shake off the yoke of Spain, and
to adore no longer an ill managed Power, though it was Lawful; They had not held
out long, if Neighbor Powers had not interessed themselves in their Contests,
and if several Reliefs had not been drawn unto them from Germany, France, and
England. I add to what has been abovesaid, That, when in the time of our
Fathers, Heresy and Ambition united against Sovereign Power, and that from
these Two Springs of Rebellion, a Party did arise, which left to our Kings but
a part of their Authority, and to this Kingdom but a part of their Forces;
Though this Party was animated by them of the Blood of our Kings, and guided by
one of the ablest Commanders of his time; Prince of Conde and Chastillon
Admiral of France.
Though it had all th'Allurements that Novelty gives t'Error, and all the Zeal
which accompanies the Confederates of growing Sects. Though th'Union amongst
the Member^ could not be greater, nor the Accord of their Wills more Universal;
It Is nevertheless certain, That with such Advantages, and such favorable
Encounters, they had not maintained themselves, as they did, nor had made so
deep foundations in the State, nor stretched so far its Branches, ^f Foreign
Forces had not supported them, and if it had not been often relieved by English
Gold, and German Forces. For the Decay and Ruin of that Party was dated
effectively from the dryness of the Springs, which had furnished it with
powerful Contributions, and that the Veins which had brought it Blood and Life,
were obstructed, and no longer open; When Germany fell into an Inability, and
England became Fearful or Weak, and Spain Slow or Irresolute to relieve it.
Thence it arises, That the People who study Changes, and dispose themselves
for bold and violent Resolutions, never undertake them but upon some Foreign
Inspiration, accompanied with promises of great Reliefs, or in such a
Conjuncture of Time and Affairs, as makes out unto them some Haven which may
put them in safety, and secure them in time of Tempest. But to speak of present
things, and of the Rising of the Catalans, There Is no question, but that the
had never undertaken it, what pretense soever they had, which is not here to be
examined, but by favor of their present Conjuncture; And though it was
contrived long before, and the whole matter prepared, whereof it was then
formed, yet it had not issued from the Womb of its Causes, not taken Light, if
th'Arms of France had not been Triumphant in all places; If those of Spain had
not been unfortunate in Flanders, and in Italy, and if the Reputation of the
Imperialists had not been abated in Germany. In the third place, I say, That in
the Matter of the People's Emotions, nothing of certainty can be promised, nor
of Knowledge of the Duration, till they have treated with the Prince from whom
they Implored Aid, and have given him Pledges of their Faith to content; And
that there is no greater or surer Pledge, than in giving up themselves; Till
then, he may have cause to doubt, that the show he shall make to protect them,
will serve only to raise Jealousy in the Prince, whose Subjects they are, and
provoke him the more to Turn all manner of Wheels, and Employ all possible
Inventions, to reduce them to their Duty, and to disolve th'Union that is not
well assured; Till then, I say, he will have just cause to distrust an
Accommodation with their Prince; And lest, shaken betwixt the Apprehensions of
the Troubles and Miseries that attend the Victory, if it should remain to their
Prince, and th'offers not only of Impunity, but also of Recompense, wherewith
h'endeavours to blind them, They take the occasion to return to his favor; It
being the nature of the People to change readily their passion; As to return
willingly to a more peaceable condition, and to a gentler state than theirs may
appear to them in their Revolt. That being so, there would not be less fear of
Evil in their Accommodation, than hopes of Good in their Disorder; Their
Repentance might prove as fatal to him, as their Sin favorable, and they would
b' obliged to purge at his Charges the fault they had committed, for the not
finishing of it, and to turn against him the Forces they had prepared against
their Prince.

That if they resolve, not t'undertake by Halfs, what otherwise they ought not
to have Begun; If they resist th'Offers and the Threatenings of their first
Prince, and take them, as it may be they are, for the Snares he lays, and for
th'Ambushes he sets for them; If they persuade themselves, That he will not
believe himself bound to keep that to them, which he had promised with all
Ill Will, and they had Forced from him; nor t'observe the Faith he had given
them, since that, he may say, he would not break it, but for their good, and
t'hinder them another time to become Rebels: But if they pesevere in the
desire of shaking off the Yoke, wherewith they may believe themselves in time
oppressed, and t'implore th'Aid and Protection of another Prince, There are
some Considerations to be had before He consents to their Relief.

At first sight, It seems to be a thing of an ill savor, and of a dangerous
Example amongst Princes, That a Prince should oblige himself by Treaty to
defend and protect another Princes Subjects in Rebellion; That it is to wound a
Right wherein all Sovereigns are interessed in the Consequence, and give Heart
to Rebellion to b' in all places more busy and bold than it would be, if it
did believe it self destitute of Foreign Aid, and of Auxiliary Forces. It Is not
truly to be denied, but that generally taken, it is so; And it happens not
often, that Princes declare themselves publicly in favor of the Subjects of
other Princes, nor that they relieve them openly and with flying Colors; When
they do it, it is ordinarily done without noise, and as it were in private; It Is
like hiding th'Arm after the Stone is thrown; It Is either in furnishing of
Money secretly, as Philip the Second did to the Chiefs of the League during the
life of Henry the Third; or in Licensing of Troops, and permitting them to pass
to the Rebel Party, as the Venetians did in the War of the Barons of Naples
against the old Ferdinand and the Duke of Calabria his son, as it has been
observed in another place.

In this, a Distinction is to b' used, which will clear this Doubt, and
reconcile what may seem to b'opposite and contrary; It Is, that neither the Law
of Conscience, nor that of Civil Prudence does permit, That in time of Peace
and Calmness, and at least, when there is no cause of Revenge, or to divert a
Storm that threatens, that Troubles should be stirred up in the Neighboring
States, nor that Subjects b' invited to take up Arms against their Prince; But
when War is kindled betwixt two Princes, and that they burn with a Reciprocal
heat to do their worst, and to destroy one another, The Difficulty is abated,
and there is more reason to ask, Whether one of the Princes may with a good
Conscience cherish the Rebellion of another Princes Subjects? Or to repeat the
same things in various Forms, or to rehabit the same Idaea and the same sense
with different Expressions, Whether a Prince with a good Conscience may Join
his Forces with Rebel-Forces, and Act jointly, and by way of Conservation with
them against an Enemy whom he may with a good Conscience fight without their
aid? Or if it be permited him to diminish the number of his Enemies, in giving
Heat to persons, who will be of Necessity Against him, if they are not For him,
and will become His Enemies if He holds them not in good humor and Power to
remain His Friends? or else, if that be less allowed him, than to receive
Officers and Soldiers from the contrary Party which come to Join with his Army;
Than to make use against his Enemies of Horses, of Canon, and of other
Instruments of War, He shall gain from them? And in general, Whether H' have
the same right t'use The Enemies Arms which Fortune presents unto him, and
causes to fall int' his hands without Labor, As those which he gains with his
Arms, which by force He makes His, and are of Lawful Conquest, and fruits of a
Justs War.

But it is certain, That these things move upon the same foot, and equal force;
And that if the one are permitted, whereof there is no Question, There Is no
difficulty nor scruple for the others. At the worst, there is no doubt, but that
his proceeding is gentler and less odious, than to corrupt the fidelity of the
Governor of a place, which is every day practiced by the most Religious
Princes, who make no conscience t'endeavour the taking of that by Good Will,
which they believe is permitted unto them to take by force; And to buy with a
little Money that, which would cost the Blood and Lives of a great Number of
their Subjects. In this, a very notable difference may be seen, for in the
first Case, whereof there has been discourse, Princes are solicited,
Protection demanded, their Aid implored against Violence and Tyranny; They give
only Aliment to what has already Life, and make profit of th'Evil, if there
be any, which others have committed, and make use of the Benefit which Fortune
offers them. But in the second Case, they seek, they draw, they debosh, they do
in some sort give birth t'Infidelity and Treason; And nevertheless they
believe, that it is permitted them in good Conscience, and they practice it
whithout scruple, and with glory. It Is true, that the Justice which Sovereigns
exercise against Sovereigns has a long extent, and its bounds are enlarged
beyond the distributions made to Particular Persons; That the Right of War,
which is a Right of Force and Subtilty, is maintained by strange Means, and
with Addresses forbidden to the Right of Private Persons, and that the safety
of the People is in the Souls of Princes, a Law predominant t'all other Laws,
and th'obligation they have to procure it, is superior to the other Obligations
of their Charge. From hence it may appear, That the King in receiving the
Catalans, who did cast themselves int' his Arms, has not committed so great a
Crime, as ignorant, and Passionate persons for Spain have published it; That
therein he has done nothing, that was of ill Example, but what he might
Lawfully have done, which the Law of Conscience has appointed, and that of
Prudence advised. And since that in the midst of Peace, which the Spaniards had
with us, They made no difficulty openly to favor, and in the sight of all the
world, the Rebels of France; And that before any breach, they treated with the
Duke of Rohan, whilst he was Head of a Party; and made use of the
coffeehouse of one of our Pritces, and sent with him into this Kingdom some
Troops of casual Polaques; who live only of Prey, and whose Valor consists
not in the Taking of Places, that Resist, but in Burning them, which cannot
Defend themselves; nor in gaining of Battles, but in Killing after the Victory.
Since that the Right of Revenge belongs to Princes, and that it is Lawful for
them to render, what has been lent them; I do not think, that in the Terms we
were with the Spaniards, and in the Heat of the War had with them, the King
ought to make difficulty of granting to the Catalans the Protection they
desired of him, or to receive them, who gave themselves up voluntarily, since
it was lawful for him to take them by force, and to have made himself Master of
them by His Armies.

Sixth Discourse.
Wherein the Protection ought to Terminate which Princes give to the
Rebel-Subjects of another Prince; That it b' effected faithfully by the Prince,
and securely by the Rebels; This is Confirmed by the Proceeding the King has
observed in the business of Catalognia.
IN the precedent Discourse, we have cleared the Doubt that concerns Conscience
upon the matter of Relief, which Princes give to the Rebel-Subjects of other
Princes. We must now treat of an Inevitable Inconveniency in this Matter, and
of a more difficult Resolution, To wit, wherein this Protection shall
Terminate, and what the Prince who gives it shall do'n their favor, in case
Peace be made; How at last it must be made, that Rest may succeed Trouble, and
a Calm to a Tempest: For Rebel-Subjects must return to their Natural Princes
grace by means of a Treaty, and be reconciled unt'him by the Mediation of
the other Prince their Protector, or must be freed from his Domination, and make
a State apart, and a separated Body, As the Suisses have done, and as the
Hollanders do; or that they hold of him, wh' has delivered them from
servitude, and as the second Master, whom they make choice of to get out of
the others Yoke; or that they b'abandoned and left, as a Prey, to the
Displeasure and Anger of their Prince.

As to the First Point, (the same Judgment may be made, and in stronger Terms
of the Second and Third) It must be a very difficult thing for a Soverain to
digest, That another sold take that Advantage over him, as to be the Mediator
and Arbiter betwixt him and his Subjects, and Fortune must put him int'a low
Station, and offer him a strange Violence, to make him accept of such hard
Conditions, and such dishonorable Terms. In the Treaty of Madrill, and that of
Cambray, which was, to speak properly, but the Corrective and Moderation of th
other, some particular French Persons indeed, who followed the Spanish Party,
were restored to their Honors and Goods by those Treaties. But who knows not
in what Constitution France was at that time? Who knows not that The Heavens had
none but malignant Aspects and froward Influences for it? And that Fortune
pouring out her Favors upon Spain, had forgot she was Changeable. It has been
seen, what a hard Labor it was some years past t'obtain Pardon for the Marquis
of St. George, and for some other Montferrans, who served the Duke of Savoy in
the Wars He had since the death of the late King, with the Dukes of Mantoua.
The difficulty the Genouese Expressed, and the Resistance they made against
pardoning the Prisoners, has been seen, whom the Accused to have Conspired
against their Country with the Duke of Savoy, to give him Entry into Genes; And
that at last in the Accommodation the Republique made with the Duke, a Means
was Invented, and a Temper found t'hinder these Criminals of the State to
perish; And that it might not appear, that the Republique had given them grace.
And in the Treaty of Vervins, the Deputies of the late King opposed vigorously
the Comprehension of any Frenchman, that had taken part with the Spaniard, and
to deny any favor to th'Intercession of Strangers, of what belonged to the
Clemency of a Prince.

Moreover, it was not without a great grief of heart, and a great Repugnancy,
that the Spaniards permitted th'Embassadors of France, England, and Venice, not
only to sign, as Moderators, but also as Sureties on their Masters behalf, the
Treaty of Verceil, which determined the War raised from the not Execution of
that of Ast; And nevertheless, the Question was not herein, of a difference
betwixt Subject and Sovereign, and of those Quarrels of State, which are not
Appeased, but by the Submission or Punishment of The One, and by the Indulgency
or Justice of The Other. The Question was only of a Punctilio of Honor, and of
a Pre-eminence of Authority, which the Spaniards affected, to Treat in all
Italy as Masters; T'^mpose Laws on Princes; To give Form, as it shall seem good
to them, t'Affairs, and to put out the Fires, which they permitted to kindle by
the sole signification of their pleasure, and by the single demonstration of
their Arms. It angered much those ambitious Persons, That a Duke of Savoy had
the boldness to oppose that public Necessity, and to resist the common Destiny
of the petty Princes of Italy. They could not endure his Thoughts of a Free
Pince, nor that he should use the Privileges of Sovereignty, and Act the
Independent near them. It was the cause of the Troubles they raised upon him,
and renewed two or three Times. This obliged France not permit him to yield
under so just a Cause; This made France with England, and the Republic of
Venice, to undertake the Warrantry of what was Accorded to the Duke by the
Spaniards; and this was the cause of bitterness and grief to them, to be
constrained, for the Avoiding of worse, and to draw upon them, with the War,
Strangers int' Italy; following the Maxim they then held, and which they ought
never to abandon; To be compelled, I say, after the Offer of all imaginable
Advantages to the Duke, and search of all possible Expedients, to divert the
Mediation of the forementioned Ambassadors, to consent, That they should become
Pledges of the Observation of the Treaty. That if we have seen happen somewhat
like it between the King and his Rebel-Subjects; And if England mingled with
their Affairs, and Interposed in the Treaty which was given them before
Montpellier; It Is to be considered, that 'twas permitted by that hard and
Inexorable Law, which makes the Lesser Evil to b' Accepted to avoid the
Greater; and that in respect of the Weariness which oppressed France, It was
adjudged to be more Expedient to procure its Rest with a Little shame, than to
Leave it in the Trouble of War, with an Extreme peril; Or truly it must b'
avowed, That there was not Vigor and Courage enough in the Council, or Care
enough of the King's Honor, and of the Dignity of the Crown, and that the veins
of them, who Governed in that Time, were not filled with those Generous
Spirits, and that Magnanimous Blood whereof so great Effects are seen in the
present Administration. And to speak the Truth, these forced Peaces, and these
violent Reconciliations are not of Long Duration; They must quickly break, from
what side soever the fault comes; And the Subjects proud and fierce upon this
Foreign Protection, cannot contain themselves within their Bounds, which are
marked out unto them, or the Prince cannot permit his Subjects to have relation
t'any other Sovereignty than his, whereby shadow only of Authority remains to
him, and from which he receives only an Appearance of Affection, whilst they
give the Heart and Reality to another Prince.

What followed the Peace of Montpellier has given us occasion to verify this
Truth, and show, that it being made of necessity, or for fear, and Forced
rather than freely Accorded; That th'Intervention and Warrant of the English
was of use to give the greater Jealousy to the King against them, wh'had made
Addresses to England, to give him a greater curiosity in the observance of
their Deportments, and a greater Inclination to interpret them with a spirit of
distrust; That they served only to make them the more Tender and Sensible of
the least scratch, they Imagined to be given to the Peace; to make them the
more bold in demanding of Reparation, and to demand it with Threatenings; TO
Encourage them to proceed rather as Equals than Subjects in all these Troubles;
From what cause it proceeded this is not the time to enquire after, and that
I Have designed it for another place. At last, all things conspired to an open
breach, as has been observed, and from all those Collective Causes, was formed
the most dangerous War that threatened the State, since the birth of Heresy.
Nevertheless, God Converted into Good those sad Apparences, and hindered the
Evil to Accomplish its period; He stopped it in the strength of its Motion, and
in the midst of its Course; And raised to the King Ministers of State, who
would not strip him of his Virtue by their Coldness, but give him an Edge by
their Courage; not to go awry at the sight of the Disorders, and to cut off
some Branches; but to Assault it in a strait Line, and to cut it up by the
Roots; Not to Allay for some time the Rebellion with Promises, which they knew
would not be kept, and may be believed ought not to be kept; but to put it in a
Condition to Capitulate no more with his Master, and to take from it for the
future, the Will to rise, in taking from it the Power of Rising. And that fell
out happily, for the English were beaten, and the Hugonots humbled in that War;
Rochel fell to the ground, and Spain became Blind or Lazre in not furnishing
the Relief it had promised to the Dying party.

Somewhat like to this last Circumstance has been seen in the Peace which the
late Emperor made a little before at Lubec with the King of Denmark. The
Princes whose Protection he had undertaken were admitted only under the General
Clause, which was a Mark of Dereliction, That The Emperor should not disturb any
Person against Justice and Equity: That during such time the King of Denmark
should not Engage in the Affairs of the Empire, And that he should no more
Interpose in the Affairs of Germany, th^n the Emperor in the Affairs of his
Kingdom. It must nevertheless be confessed, to speak Truth of that Occurrence,
That the Advantages the Emperor ^^ew from that Treaty, were not the Just price
of the Successes H' had obtained in that War; And that the Collection of the
Fruits Answered not the Promises which did precede it. In the King of Denmarks
Condition, His Declining the Protection of his Allies was no more, than to Part
with that which was not in his power to Maintain, and to Quit that he could no
longer hold, and to Renounce that which produced no real Thing to The Emperor,
In the Month of June, 1629.
and was but an unprofitable mark of Superiority, which Victory had made very
visible. He did receive solid Benefits, redeemed all his Losses, and allayed
the Tempest that was ready to break upon the Rest of his States. But the
Ambition of the Spaniards, and the pressure th'used to The Emperor to send his
Armies into Italy, against a Catholic Prince, wh' had done him no hurt,
compelled him to make e Peace, as has elsewhere been observed, with a
Protestant Prince that had offended him; To cool his good Fortune in its
greatest heat, and to restrain the Current of the Victory, which might have
passed the Bounds of the Baltique Sea; And to have stopped that fatal Power
which has since Overrun the Empire, and shaken the very Foundations of the
House of Austria. However, it is a proof of great Superiority in Power, or of a
great height in Success, to Exclude out of Treaties of Peace, or to Comprehend
in them, whom they will. And Interests of State must be very Violent, which
oblige Princes to forget their Friends in their Accommodations, whose
Faithfulness they have made Trial of in the Quarrel. In such a Dereliction, they
cannot save their Honor, but by the Extreme Necessity of their Affairs, nor be
dispensed from the observation of their Faith, but by that Supreme Law, which
ought to regulate their Conduct in the safety of their Subjects. Whereupon they
that would Excuse them, may say; That it is a Condition which Enters privately
int' all their Alliances, and a Reserve which needs not be Comprised, because
it cannot b' Excluded, and which Equally concerns th'Interest of all the
Confederates; And there is none but makes use of it in case of Necessity, or
that believes himself obliged to perish, if he cannot be secure in Company;
There Is none that believes himself forsworn, when h' holds not that, which he
believes never to have promised. And though in the Treaties of Confederations
all do promise, not to make Agreement without the Knowledge and Consent of one
another; All understand it, nevertheless; with that Exception, But it the case
of an Extreme ill Fortune, which allows n' other Security; or from an utter
Ruin, that admits of no Safety, but by such a Breach; That if this were not
so, it were t'act against The End of Confederates, wherein many d'Engage and
Unite themselves, to resist together an Evil, which would be Superior to the
Forces of each particular person, but none of them would shut up himself, if it
were not Lawful for him to go out, when he shall not find safety there, and
should be Lost in a Longer stay; That they are like Ships, where they that guide
them, oblige themselves to work all they Can to defend them against a Storm,
but where every person reserves to himself the Liberty to provide for his
safety in forsaking of them, when they are ready to strike ground, and that the
Wrack is Inevitable. That Countries are in th'hands of Princes, as the goods of
Minors; They Are the Guardians, but not in all Senses the Masters of them; And
in the whole humane Society there is no Deposite so Sacred and so Inviolable as
that is to them. The people from whom they hold it, have committed it unto them
indeed, but have not absolutely given it unto them, and without a Condition.
They Have indeed given them the Tuition, but have not given them the Power of
Alienation, or to put them in Danger of Perishing, and of changing Master.

To what has been already said, may also b'added, That' it is better that one of
the Confederates giving way to Time, and striking Sail before Fortune, make his
Peace alone, the better to Endeavor th'Improvement of the others Conditions,
and to serve them for Relief, than that they should Lose themselves by the
pretense of a false Courage, and by a Delicacy of humor, which may indeed be
permitted in the Conduct of Particular persons, but ought never to b' admitted
into that of Princes, nor find place in their Affairs. That, besides this,
there is no doubt, but that it is a most base dishonor for them to fail in the
observation of promises; And that no Greatness can be gained, or Establishment
made, that can repair the breaches of violated Faith, and purge the shame of
Perjury.

These are Considerations, which have entered into my Understanding, to
discharge as much as may be, the proceedings which Princes sometimes are
Constrained to use in the matter of Treaties. I do not pretend, nevertheless,
to warrant my thoughts from Infallibility, or to make them pass for Decisions
and Dogmatiques. I leave to every person the Liberty of Judgment, according to
his Sense to Condemn or Approve them, as it shall seem good to him, and to take
them for sound Reasons, and for Addresses of good Direction; or only for
Colors, which paint, or for Ways that occasion Wanderings. However, great care
must be taken not to Exercise and Practice so ticklish a Conduct every day; And
no other use is to be made of them, than as of Poisons in Medicines, That Is to
say, sparingly, and against Extreme Evils, and with Excellent Correctives, and
Exquisite Preparations. I add also, that in the Example, which I have alleged
of Demark, I do not understand Fundamentally to condemn the Conduct of that
Prince, nor to Constitute my self Judge Sovereign of a thing whereof I do not
know all the occult Reasons by which that Nation might have cause to get out,
which ought to be presumed to be Just, nor all the hidden Wheels that gave it
Motion, which might have rendered it necessary; I Have only drawn th'Exterior,
and what has appeared without, and has not a plausible show, which I Have
endeavored to Temper and Sweeten by my Lenitive Considerations. Not touching
then upon what may b' of Truth in the Foundation of such proceedings, what
appeared without, seems to b' an Argument of Infidelity or Weakness, and both
of those Qualities are Precipices, wherein a Prince will never fall if he be
Virtuous, and will seldom fall into the other, if he b' of good foresight, and
knows well how to take his Measures. From whence I conclude, That the last may
not happen, And that the Prince who protects, be not compelled to give the
World so shameful an Evidence of his Weakness, That either h' ought at first
Instance to Reject the proposals of the people, who Implore his Protection, and
shut the Door to all Importunities; or if he receive them, to Act Vigorously
with so Considerable Forces, that apparently Nothing ought to deprive him of
the Victory; nor hinder by consequence the Peace to be made upon his own
Terms, and Secure the People, whose defense he had undertaken, and with whose
safety he had charged himself. A worthier Example to follow cannot be presented,
nor a more excellent Model for Imitation in like Occurrences, than the Conduct
the King observed in the Business of Catalognia. So soon as it appeared, and
that so great an Occasion to advance our affairs showed it self, He wisely
judged, That there was no reason to permit it t'escape; That there was no Cause
for Resisting the good Fortune, which came to seek us without a Call, not to
refuse a Favor, which The Heavens offered us so freely. And as it is seen
sometimes in difficult Maladies, that Nature makes some Demonstration, which
declares to the Physicians the way the ought to take to cure the sick Persons,
and discovers to them the place by which the disease is to b'assaulted; The
King also very well understood, That by this unlooked for Accident, and by this
unhop'd for Chance, of the rising of the Catelans, God marked out unt'us one of
the ways w'ought to take, t'arrive at th'Haven we went to Sea for, and t'attain
that End for which w'undertook the War; A sure and honest Peace, a firm and
lasting Rest to Christian Princes.

He understook, That if he had reason t'undertake the War in that Country, when
all Spain opposed it, and that all the People joined with the Prince to ruin
our Designs, and to make our Arms fruitless; The same Causes and Reasons being
on foot, The best Peopled, and the most Warlick Province of that Nation being
severed from the other Provinces, and Joined with our Forces; There was no
probability, but that we might promise to our selves a good success of that
business; H' ought indeed so to believe it, and believe also, That if that
affair was happily Embarked, and that the favor of Heaven did not abandon the
progress of it, That the prosperity would not be confined to the Frontiers of
Catalognia, That its good Influence might extend its self further; And as a
Needle rubbed with the Loadstone has the virtue to draw others, That the
subsistence of the Catalans might be th'Attractive to draw the other
discontented Provinces after it. He knew that the Portuguese were full of good
will to rise, since the time of their submission to the Crown of Spain; That
they could not bear any Yoke with more Impatience; That they always breathed
after their ancient form of Government, and that th'hatred they had for the
Castillians was so natural and strong, that no length of Time, nor moderation
of Conduct, could efface The Impression, and allay the Violence. He judged, that
the Arragons, wh' have not yet lost the Remembrance of Philip the Second's
usage, wh' are outrageous with spite for the breach of their Privileges, and
loss of their Liberty; Who know that of Right it belongs to Us, would observe
what the first Successes of their Neighbors Arms would be; What form of their
Establishment, and what the signs and presages of their future duration, to
Join themselves, it may be with us, if they might do 't with safety, and if
they saw in that Union Resistance and Force enough against the Enterprises of
their common Enemy. H' also judged, That if that War could be drawn out into
length, and that the first Effort of the Troops the Spanish King should draw
together to reduce or confound the Catalans, before they were in a condition to
Resist him, failed of its effect; It was of Necessity for him to recall from
the Low Countries, or from Italy, some part of his Forces to oppose them which
were drawn out against him in the midst of his Country, and as in the Center of
his Monarchy. And by Consequent, that his other States remaining naked and
weak, they would b'exposed to very dangerous strokes, and to very great wounds;
And that many other good Effects and happy Encounters might derive themselves
from that Cause and Spring. And therefore the Kings proceeding upon
th'Occurrence of Catalognia, could not be more Judicious, nor the motion of his
Arms better adjusted to the Laws of Civil Prudence.

Seventh Discourse.
That it is a great Secret in War, to know how to make best Choice of the Place
against which the strongest Assaults are to be made. That the Spaniards are
seldom deceived in that Choice: With some other Observations upon their
Conducts. That the King's Conduct is Admirable, in ordering the War he makes in
so many places in Christendom.
WHat I have said of the King's Proceedings upon the Insurrections of
Catalognia, carries me t'another Consideration, which is not of small weight
for the managing of a War made in several places, and divides it self into many
Branches at distance with one another; It Is, that in this Action, the supreme
degree of Military Wisdom, and as it were the precious Elixar to render any War
happy, Is, t'Endeavour industriously to know the place, which ought to be the
principal Siege, and to turn on that side the chief of their Forces; As to b'
always ready to change Conduct, as cause shall be given, and the War to take
another Conduct, and another Form in order to that End. The House of Austria
has always understood and practiced this secret t'Admiration; And if the late
Emperor forsook it, when he made War to the Duke of Mantoua, and neglected that
of Germany, to apply himfelf powerfully to the War of Italy; It Is that he was
forced thereunto, as has been often observed, by The Ambition of the Spaniards,
who preferring their Interest to his, obliged him to draw his Forces where they
might b' of most use for them, and to labor their Greatness in Italy, which
then concerned them more than the Greatness of The Emperor in Germany.

The cause why the Spaniards possess this secret in perfection, and are seldom
deceived in the Knowledge and Choice of what is most important in their
Affairs; Is the order of their Government, and that variety of particular
Councels, whereof it is composed, as their various Countries or their
Domination is distributed, and where their Arms are exercised. For Example, as
to what respects Italy, There Is an established Council in Italy, which is
formed of the Correspondencies and Relations observed amongst the Ministers of
State whom they there entertain; And especially betwixt the Governor of Milan,
and the Vice-King of Naples, and their Ambassador at Venice. In the occasions
then which happen in that Country, the first Declarations are made by these
four Heads, which constitute, as it were, the first Tribunal, where the
Difficulties are agitated, and Resolutions taken of what is most expedient to
do in the present occasion. The Result of the Advises of that first Council,
with a faithful Relation of the Facts whereon they were formed, and the Reasons
whereon they were grounded, is sent into Spain t'another Council framed of
Intelligent Persons in the affairs of Italy, and who, having past the great
Employments of that Country, have also the greater Lights and exacter Motions.
There the second Examination of the Business is made, and th'advices and
Reasons of the first Councels are put again to the Trial and Re-examination.

And, as in th'Oeconomy of th'Human Body, the Spirits which are formed in the
Liver, pass to The Heart to be purified, and there to discharge themselves of
the grosser part, and from thence arise to the Brain, where they receive the
ultimate degree of subtilty and light, whereof they are capable, and such a
temper as renders them the nearest Organs of the Motion of the Body, and of
th'Operation of the Senses; In like manner, the Resolutions of this second
Council are carried to a Third, which is the Council of State of the Prince, to
receive there a Third Examination, and to see, if they may find a place in
the order of his affairs; And if that which is conformable to the good of
th'affairs of Italy, whereunto the two first Councels have only their Aspect,
be not contrary to the general good of their Monarchy. They Act not only in
this Order, and with so great a Refinement of Prudence in their own Affairs,
and which immediately concern them, but they bring also the same Cares, and the
same contest of Spirit, to Examine the Affairs of the House of Austria in
Germany; and to direct the Form and Motion that ought to guide them;
Nevertheless, with this difference, That although they address, as to their
Center, the Particulars which they have collected, as to the general Good of
their House; They so order it, That the general Good remains always inferior
and subaltern to the particular Interests of their House, and to the great
Design they have had to greaten it without Measure, and to raise it to the
Universal Christian Monarchy. I Have already brought some Examples for the proof
of this Truth, and I could bring others above number to confirm it, if there
were need, and if it were not so evident and known, that it would seem to give
light to the Sun, and to make his Light visible; So that you must not b'
Amazed, if the Council of Vienna is but th'Instrument of the Resolutions,
whereof the Council of Madril is The Author; And if you see nothing come from
that, which bears not the mark of the other, and received th'Impressions of
their Maxims and Conduct.

And since the knowledge of facts, and of the true state of things, is the
Basis of Reasonings, and that these have no subsistence, if the others b'ill
grounded; And resemble the Colors of the Bow in Heaven, that are false,
though they are full of brightness and comeliness, for want of a Body, wherein
they might b' infused and fastened; They provide against this Inconveniency two
way; The One is, by an unlimited Power they give to their Agents to distribute
Moneys, and not to consider any sort of Expense to be well informed of what
passes; As to penetrate what is deliberated and resolved at the Results of
their Enemies and Friends; And that Expense is fully allowed them without
Examination or Restriction, and upon the single Account which they present.
Their Reason is, that although this be Matter for Deceit and for Avarice to
make unjust Harvests; They Would rather run th'hazard, as Inconsiderable, for the
good which may arise to them, as very great; And they believe, That an Expense
well employed in that behalf, and a good advice given to purpose, make them
Recompense with Interest for a hundred lost Expenses, and for a hundred
unprofitable Advices. The other way is, That no People of the world were ever
more careful t'entertain their Correspondencies, or a greater Number of them;
They do not affect only specious ones, and with illustrious Persons, but they
also form Correspondencies with all them that will b'obliged with them; And
Experience has taught them, that a Person of a Low Condition, and of little
sense, may discover to them sometimes an important Truth, which might have past
by the Cares and Subtilty of great Personages. So that it is a wonderful thing,
and I Have been sometimes a^^onish'd at it, to see the great Number of Persons,
who make Copies in the Chanceries of their Ministers of State, and the great
quantity of Letters, which their Ambassadors by every ordinary Messenger write
by way of Original; And it is incredible to believe their diligence t'inform the
Prince, and his other Ministers of State, of War or Peace, of what is necessary
for them to know; As well the Bad as the good News is speedily sent away unto
them, and above all the will news, as that, which is of Importance to be timely
known, and without disguise, to remedy in time, and with necessary Provisions,
th'Evil which they declare or presage; And that the Posts that bring them are
as largely paid, and as civilly used, as they who bring the good tidings. After
then that they have understood the present state of their Affairs, and observed
the place where it imports them most t'Act, They turn on that side, as has
been said, the chief of their Forces, to Act the more safely, and to break and
overcome by an excess of Power all that may oppose it, and give Resistance;
They resolve to permit small Losses, and light Disadvantages in one place,
t'obtain great Successes in another; and they well know, that the Branches
cannot remain safe, when the Body of the Tr^e is cut down, and that after the
wounding of the Nobler parts, the others Die of themselves. It Is by this
Principle, that we have sometimes seen our Frontiers covered with fearful Clouds
of their Men of War, which have been nevertheless dispersed, and that the Lower
Germany has seen formed against it great and formidable Bodies of Imperial
Armies, which have also been defeated.

Since w' are in the way to speak of the Conduct, which the Princes of the
House of Austria have accustomed particularly to observe in the War, it may not
be amiss to remark also here, That when they resolve upon any great Design, and
that they prepare for some High Enterprise, The act it with the most Privacy,
and with the least possible Noise; The use their greatest care, that it take no
Air, as if they wrought in a Mine; They make show of Rest and Sleep, when they
Labor most, and are most Awake; They Are not angry when they are accused of
Impuissancy, and they scatter of themselves Colorable Reasons, and furnish
Specious Colors to make that Accusation probable. It Is not hard to divine
The End of that Artifice, which is to lay asleep and to surprise: And History
and Experience do sufficiently instruct us, what incredible Advantages they do
sometimes draw thereby to themselves, and what great and prodigious strokes
they make by the force of that Artifice, and by the favor of that Silence.
The Will success of the Battle of St. Quintin had its beginning in those secret
and hidden Preparations, which Philip the Second made of the great Forces
wherewith he did enter Picardy; And in that fatal Credulity that possessed us
of his Weakness, and of the small Means he had to Arm powerfully, till we
learned it at our Charges, and were beaten with the Thunder, before w' had any
sight of the Lightning: W' have not lost the memory of a thing so fresh and
sensible as the surprise, which had almost oppressed Banier in The High
Palatinate, and the Storm that broke s' unexpectedly upon him, that it failed
but little, but that the whole Power of the Swedes in Germany had with that
stroke been overthrown with the German Liberty.

I add also, that when The Heavens second their Providence, and becomes
propitious to their Designs, there is not a People in the world, to speak
ordinarily, wh' understand better to make good use of her favors, and to serve
themselves of their Advantages; Whereas others do become remiss by their good
Success, and Prosperity seems t'abate and dissolve their Vigor, and do stop to
take breath in the best of their way, and letting pass good fortune before
them, without the Courage of pursuing it, They lose the sight of it. But the
Spaniards never Labor more than after a good Success, and are never hotter to
Fight, than after the gaining of a Battle, nor more desirous to return to the
Carier than after the Victory: They know how to pursue a Victory to the last,
and they lose not a happy Sequel that it may produce, nor a Fruit that may
rationally be gathered from it, That of Norlinghen, to go no higher, is an
evident proof; and if France had not interposed to stop the Current, and
restrain the Rapidity, ^h' had had nothing more to do in Germany than to have
taken possession of what would have rendered, or to march and present themselves
t'overcome in all places.

So that if the wonderful power of the House of Austria be considered, which
maintains it self, and stands up after it has received so many shakings; after
the loss of so many Battles; after the Insurrection of Provinces and Kingdoms;
And on the other side, if their constant and politic Order, and the Virtues
practiced in the Cabinet Council, and exercised in the Field, be well observed,
It must be confessed, that t'hinder the completing of their Designs, it was
necessary, that The Heavens did undertake particularly to cross them, and to
raise Forces to oppose them, equal or superior to theirs; A Policy at the least
as Wise, and incomparably more Just, and Virtues as strong and active, but more
true and effective. Wherefore th'obligation, which the whole Christian
Commonwealth has to the King, cannot be sufficiently comprehended; And
whatsoever the Acknowledgment be, it cannot be proportionable to his aid and
him, for confirming its Liberty so violently shaken; for giving stop to
The Ambition of so powerful and Enemy; for having raised so great Forces upon
that Occasion, which might have been reported too great, but that they were
necessary. The Reader will not take it ill, that I have here made this rough
draught of the Conduct of that House, and particularly of the Branch of Spain,
which is as the Mobile and Soul of the Conduct of the other. If it cannot
entirely b'imitated by other Princes and States, for the Reasons not here to
b'expressed, It may be in part, and with some proportion. However, it is no
small Matter to have made it known, that a Defense may with Power and Knowledge
be made against it.

Let Us see now, if in these last Times France has well understood the public
Mystery, whereof it has been spoken in the beginning of this Discourse^, and
if in the execution of its Design, it has observed the Order as has been said
ought to be kept, and changed Conduct according to the change of Conjunctures.
To be satisfied in this, it must be supposed, That the Intention of the King
having been only to oppose the unjust and unmeasurable Greatness of the House
of Austria, and t'hinder th'Usurpations that it projected on all sides to make;
The Law of Contraries required, That he repaired chiefly to the places, where
it endeavored to make its principal Establishments, and to break the Design,
where the strength of Industry ought to be, and the gross of the Work which it
designed; And it cannot be doubted, that almost in all the course of that long
and sad War, which devours Christendom, to the raising of the Siege at Casall,
and to the rising of the Catalans, which followed it, but the places have been
Germany and Italy. As to the first, it is certain, That it is a constant
Resolution, and an Immortal Design in the Soul of those Princes, who take up
The Empire, as by Succession, to make also Germany their Patrimony. No person is
ignorant what Charles the Fifth did, and what he did not, t'attain that End; And
all the world knows also, and we do deduce it fully in the Treaty of Monarchy,
How that Vast and Warlick Nation, whereof he did promise himself the Conquest,
did escape him, and broke the Nets, wherewith he had entangled them. We have
seen where it failed, That the Emperor did not finish the Work h' had more
than half done. But for the Peace of Lubec, whereof we have spoken, and the
Degradation of Wa^sthein at the Diet of Ratisbon, whereof we will speak in the
Third Part, nothing visibly could have hindered him to have given the last
stroke; And it may be said of him, That after his Entry into the Port, he was
beaten back to Sea, and reduced to the danger of drowning; We have seen the
hopes which Fortune made to flourish in the Soul of the King of Hungary, by a
most desirable Conquest and how far the Success was advanced, If Torgau Banier
in his Retrait, had not disingaged himself, as by Miracle, from so many Armies
as environed Him; And had, it may be, been destroyed, but for that wonderful
and unheard of passage of the Rhine, made by Sir of Longueville, and but for
but for the Relief and Courage which the Kings Arms commanded by that brave
Prince, gave to them, who fought for the German Liberty, and to them who durst
not have but good Intentions for the same Liberty. W' have formerly observed
the Extreme peril the Swedish Army, which had to that time been the Basis of
the good Party of Germany, run in th'Higher Palatinate, and how near that
Foundation was to b'overthrown, and The Imperial Party to have gained
th'Ascendent, which might have been impossible for the Swedes to have taken from
them.

Moreover, as the flight from Evil is the first and the strongest Inclination
of Nature, and as the Smarts of Pain and Image of Death stir the Soul Livelier,
than th'Attractive of Pleasure, and th'Idaea of a Happy Life; so in The Order of
Passions which a Prince ought to have for his Countries, the love of
Conservation ought always to precede the desire of Conquest; And before the
thoughts of undertaking and making of any progress abroad, h'ought to provide
for his safety within, and ought to submit to the public Preservation at home,
and cut off the Passages by which Disorder might Enter. And therefore since
Germany only can do us the most considerable mischief; since it is that
Country which has always sent th'Armies which have always overrun France, and
that it is certain, That if The Imperial Arms should be Victorious in Germany,
they would not be confined to that Country, and that being augmented by
th'Access of Confederate Forces, and with a number of other Forces, who would
run thither by a Contest of Envy, They would discharge themselves upon our
Country; They might fall into Italy, and make there the same Spoils, and cause
the same Desolation, as when they descended there under the command of Colasto;
or at least, they might so fortify the Spaniards there, and affright the
Italians, that it would have been a great trouble t'us t'hinder them to finish
the Designs, which they had much advanced in Germany, and to divert the Italians
from accepting the Chains of Servitude or Dependency which had been prepared
for them of so many years.

Since, I say, that all this is possible, I conclude, that th'heat, which the
King gave to th'Arms of the Late King of Swede, and which h' has Continued to
the Party he left in Germany; That the endeavors h' used to raise it after it
had been almost beaten down before Northlinghen; That the Supplies of Money and
Men which he sent diverse times into the Country; That the Treaties he made to
uphold the Affairs, with the Late Duke of Weimar and the Troops he Commanded,
and with that Generous Princess, Madam the Lantgrave of Hesse.
whose Judgment and Constancy may serve for Example to the most Magnanimous
Princes, and for shame to Cowards. I conclude, That whatsoever it has Cost or
may cost this Crown, That nothing was projected or done, but according to the
Rules of good Policy, and particularly according to the preventing of it, and
not to stay till it has made it Impression for the Repelling of it. I go on,
and say further, That the King not only ought to have sent into Germany Forces
capable of Conjunction with the Confederates, to Counterpoise and hold in Check
th'Imperialists, as the have done to this time; But that in that posture the
least favor of Fortune might remove them out of Check, and that in a just
Counterpoise, Nothing would be Easier for him than to make the Balance fall on
the others side. This King then cannot be too much Commended for the Resolution
he took to send such powerful Arms; That they put the others Indubitably upon
the defense; That they gave them Constantly the Law, and prepared a sure way
for the German Liberty, and for the General Peace of the Christian
Commonwealth.

As to Italy, there is no Question to be made, but that it has been a fixed and
unchangable Design in the Spirit of the Spaniards to put the Italians to the
Yoke, and to Rob its Princes of all th'Estates they possessed there, or to
reduce them to a Dependency which should not be much different from Subjection,
but by the Vanity of Titles and by th'Exteriour of Forms. There Is No need of
Refreshing their Memory with th'Attempts of Charles the fifth, against the
Liberty of this fair Country; The Violence he Committed and the Ambushes he
formed against it; That shall be represented at Length in the Treaty of
Monarchy. There Is no need also of Reporting all that the Spaniards undertook,
since the Death of the late King; Sometimes against the Duke of Savoy;
Sometimes against the Venetians, and against the Valtoline; Sometimes against
the Duke of Mantoua; That Is to say all th'Attempts they have made, and all the
Quarters they Endeavored t'Assault, and to Weaken what remained there most
Entire and Vigorous; ^t shall fully be seen in the Third part, in the Apology
of the Treaty of Moncon, and in that of the Acquisition of Pignerol. It Is
necessary only, that memory b' had of the pitiful Condition of that Country
and of th'Auguries which appeared of its Approaching Ruin. That when the
Spaniards had forced the Duke of Parma, Subdued the Grisons, Usurped Zabionette
and Miranda, Invaded almost all Piedmont, and all the Montferrat, and besieged
Casall, All the hopes of its safety were reduced to the Heroic Courage of a
Prince, who would perish, or save that place, and to the good success of the
King's Arms, which are not subject to The Order of things, and sometimes makes
that facile which appears impossible.

I speak not of our Expeditions in Flanders, where it seems the King for some
years has employed the principal part of his Arms. It belongs not to me
t'undertake the Revealing of that Mystery, and t'hoise the sail of a thing,
which the Prudence of Governors would have secret. There are in the Matters of
State places, as dangerous for particular persons to talk of, as Banks and
Sands are to them who sail; And as to them, the Motives of the Conduct of wise
Princes in many things, ought resemble to the Roots of Trees, which are covered
and invisible, whilst the Body and Branches are visible; or to the Virtues of
the Heavens, whereof the Nature is not known, though The Effects are felt, and
the Power admired; So, no Question is to be made, but the King had great
Reasons t'apply his Arms, as h'hath done, to the War of the Low Countries,
though they be not known t'all the World, and that the prospects had on that
side were Just, though they pass the Reach of our sight.

Besides, what appeared and falls under the sense of every person, which was to
deliver our Frontiers from the Jealousy they received from some of The Enemies
places, and chiefly to secure and reinforce Paris the more, which is as
The Heart and Noblest part of France; He was also, it may be, engaged there by
other Interests, which are not altogether his, and t'adjust himself to the
Interests of some of his Neighbors, by that prudent Maxim of Policy, which
holds forth, That great Persons ought sometimes to take the Law from their
Inferiors, and follow their Motions when they have use of them; And that a
Disagreement would endanger th'Enterprize, If any of the Wheels, to which it
ought to give Motion, came to fail and to be loose from the others. It may be,
that in the Subjects of great and profound Designs, which the King had upon
that Country, ^e foresaw, that if they were all as happy, as they were wisely
projected, some Resolution might happen, that would for ever deliver his
Kingdom from Alarms, and from Incursions, which are made sometimes from that
Neighborhood. And truly, if the Assault of Calo, and the Siege of St. Omer had
prospered, as in appearance they ought to have done, or if an unexpected stroke,
which made a Noise upon the Frontiers of Campagnia, had not diverted the
favorable progress, which promised the taking of Airs, The Effects of that
Princes prevoyance, it may be, had been seen; It may b'also, That h' had a will
to shut the Gates for a time, by which the Forces of Germany entering into
Flanders, might overrun and make spoil in France.

But when things changed their Countenance, and that the Risings of the
Catalans formed another Conjuncture, he changed also Conduct, and judged, as it
has been already observed, That after th'Affairs of Germany, there was none
whereunto h' ought to apply himself with more heat, and to make a greater show
of his Forces, than to them of that Country; He foresaw, that the fruits which
might be gathered from that Expedition, were not ordinary, and that the
advantages which might arise to the common cause might prove strong Motives to
the Peace, for which the War was made: For besides, that the Spaniards could
not long act powerfully in Spain, in Flanders, and in Italy, and the
nourishment they ought to give to their Original Country, would consume the
food of the others Country, If the King of Hungary was seen full of troubles
in Germany, and the King of Spain assaulted in The Heart of his Estates, and
troubled to defend his Life. It was not impossible, but that two Benefits also
might arise very considerable; The One, that the Princes of Germany, separated
from the good Party, might take courage to rejoyn with it; The Other, that the
League, wherein to that time they had labored unprofitably, t'introduce the
Italian Princes, might be formed, and that they would not lose so fair an
occasion to drive them away, who had stolen the Liberty of their Country, and
to take away the mixture and confusion of Nations, and foreign Manners, which
sully and disfigure it. For t'imagine, that for less than that, the Republique
of Venice, the most considerable of all those Princes, for what concerns
Temporal things; That can give a shaking the other Princes, and after that make
no difficulty t'enter the Lifts it had opened, would be persuaded to that
League, It Is to b'ignorant of their spirit; It were to b' a stranger to their
Maxims; And to believe, what is desired, upon the single Motions of passion.
This point shall b'examin'd in the following Discourse, this having been but
too long. I add only, for advise of them who might find cause to desire
something here on our part upon the subject of great Extremities, wherein
th'Affairs have sometimes fallen in Germany and Italy; That the King could not
do all things in all places, and that it may be he had done too much, as has
elsewhere been observed, but for an absolute Necessity and Inevitable, even
for the good of his own Kingdom, to do it; That he could not alone divert all
th'Evils that might happen in that Country, by the failings and insensibility
of them, who were more interressed than himself, and for whose Liberty he took
so great pains, and made so great an Expense; That in the course and great
variety of Affairs, which exercised him, he could not always ordain, That they
who received his Orders, should b'as happy t'execute them, and to complete
them, as he was prudent in laying of the Design, and preparing the Model; But
it is a wonder, which will appear almost incredible to future Ages, and will be
one of the fairest Beams of the glory of this Prince; and one of the Noblest
Monuments of his Incomparable Reign, That by his Wisdom, his Courage, and his
Power, he raised at home, and with his Allies, what was ready to Fall; That he
did set straight there all that began to Lean, and ever disappointed Fortune of
her Malicious Progress, and of the Consequences of her Surprises.

Eighth Discourse.
In what Conjuncture it may be probably thought, That the Venetians will enter
int' a League against the Spaniards.
THough I do not think it necessary that this League, whereof has been spoken,
be made, or that the time of a General Peace be so backward, as to attend the
finishing of so difficult a Negotiation; I have believed nevertheless, that it
would not b'impertinent for me to speak my thoughts, to make the Genius of the
Venetian Republique to be the better known, and what may b' expected from it on
like Occasions, and at the same time to make it appear to the Author of a small
Pamphlet, which appeared a little after the last Stege of Casal, under the name
of a Montferrat Soldier, That the Season was not then come to form that League,
as he did pretend it, and that the King was not ripe, according to the Sense of
that Republique, and the Maxims of their Policy.

The foundation whereupon I do build my Opinion is this, That it being
th'ordinary Nature of Republiques to be very distrustful, and to fear more than
hope, when th'Apparances of Evil and Good are equal; It may be said, That
Venice, of all other Republiques, Labors most of that humor; And that
th'Inclination it has in all it undertakes to give the least it can t'Hazard,
and the most to Prudence, is the cause, that it is seldom inclined for the War,
which is an Element of Fortune, unless an extreme Danger do force it, or a
visible Benefit invite it. I could bring a number of ancient Examples to
confirm this Truth, if I did not believe, that Modern would be of most use and
credit, as most efficacious, and of greater Instruction than the others. In that
high and wonderful Design, which the late King had formed against The House of
Austria, and to put the Quiet of Christendom, so often troubled by that House,
in some state of consistency, he caused the Republique to be solicited to be of
the Party; And notwithstanding the power h' had with them, which could not be
greater, and the Advantages h' had proposed unto them, which were not small,
for the Price of their Arming, and for th'^nterest of The Expense it should
make; Though it was only intended for the breaking off th'^rons of Italy, and
to force from the Spaniards what they held unjustly there; Though all the
fru^ts of the Conquest, whereof the greatest part was to be at his Charges, and
by his Forces, were to be gathered for the Italians, and that he reserved only
the glory of being their Liberator, and to make the Spaniards lose the place of
drawing together the greatest part of their Armies, which was then the State of
Milan; Yet he could never draw from that Republique, but general Words of
Good Will and of Praises, which were uttered above measure, as it is its custom,
to that Magnanimous Prince, who had no lesser Thoughts than to be the Flayl and
th'Exterminator of Tyrants, the Restorer and Arbiter of the Christian
Commonwealth.

The Republique then of Venice was not so blinded with the proposals that were
made unto it, nor with th'Apparences wherewith they were clothed, but that
they had before their Eyes th'Instability of Human Things, and th'ordinary
Games of Fortune, the perpetual Motion of her Wheel, and the sudden and
frequent Revolutions which sh' occasions in the World. It apprehended, that
before the Work, whereof the Platform was represented was finished, or else
well begun, th'undertaker might fail, either by a natural Death, which would
not be strange, or by a violent End, which was not without Example. It desired
to see all the Contexture of the League; The Seat and Action of the Pieces of
that Engine, and the Success of its first Motions; That if it saw cause to
renounce it, or to b'assaulted with some sad Accident, there might be no cause
of Repentance for Joining, not to accuse themselves of Precipitation and of
falling, for having made too much haste; That if The Heavens looked favorably
upon that League, and gave it a propitious Wind, It knew well, that the door
would b'always open unto't; It knew, that without her, the Expedition which was
discoursed of for Italy, would be weak and lame, and that the perfections of
its good success depended upon the conjunction of their Arms with those of
other Princes. And then in entering the League it should run but a little
hazard, and make but a small Advance of Moneys; It might find th'Harvest ready;
It would have nothing to do, but to pursue the Remainders of the Victory, and
should come rather to the Dividing, than Taking of the Prey. Such was the
belief of the late King upon the Demeanor of that Republique, and to that
purpose he gave charge to Sir of Bullion to speak to the Duke of Savoy, to whom
he had sent him to Conclude and Terminate the League, which the Sirs of Nemours
and of Vaucelas had begun with him. The Reader may see it at length in the
Instruction given to the Sir of Bouillon, which in my opinion is a very
excellent Piece, and one of the best things that I have seen in its kind. Let Us
go on.

After that Cordova had besieged Casall, and by an Attempt, whose beginning
wanted a pretense to color it; And had made it appear to the Italians, That
his Master would make no difference betwixt what might accommodate him, and
what did belong to him; The Republique armed vigorously, and made some
demonstration of interessing themselves in that Quarrel. Nevertheless, of
whatsoever Importance the conservation of Casal was for the safety of Italy,
and though the Ambition of Spain had not a stronger Barrier in that Country
than that place; The Republique could never be persuaded to relieve it, or to
send their Army into Montferrat t'assault Cordova's Army, which was not
Invincible, or to make a diversion on Cremona's side, which was very easy to
be done. But after it had seen th'happy Success of the Siege of Rochel, and the
passage of Suza forced, and by consequence one of the Gates of Italy open to our
Armies; The Republique resolved to command their Arms t'enter into the State of
Milan, in whose defense it saw but a few Astonished Troops, and the Relics of
an Army, which Winter and the Besieged had ill used before Casal, and which had
no strength, but to fly and to save it self at the sight of ours.

Though it was so, and that probably the fruits of the Victory the King had
obtained could not be more certain or more fruitful, if it had been pursued;
Though it seemed then, that no labor remained, but to gather the Favors which
Fortune offered us of Her self, and to receive what would be rendered, yet many
strokes ought to have been made, and Combats fought, to make the Republique
resolve to send Orders to their Generals to pass the Rubicon; That is, t'enter
with a Warlike Posture into Cremona, and to Leap the Bounds had been almost an
Age Sacred and Inviolable unto them. It was not without a long Agitation of
Thoughts and extreme Labor of Spirit, that it was persuaded to that bold
Resolution; Th'Eloquence and Address of Sir of Avaux, how great soever, was
never more pusled than to make the Republique to undertake it; It brought the
same Formalities, and the same Precautions, as when it determined t'accept the
War, which the Herald of Lewis the 12th declared against it on the behalf of
the League of Cambray; Or that which the Chaoux of Selim the Second did
intimate unto't for the possession of Cyprus: And since, after that, for
Important Considerations, which I have touched in the First Part, the King had
stopped the course of the Victory of Suza, and given Peace to the Spaniards,
who were no longer in a condition to d'Evil to our affairs; The Republique many
times avowed to Sir of Avaux, That their Resolution to break so suddenly with
Spain was Matter of great Astonishment to them, and was done by a kind of
surprise, and contrary to th'ordinary course of their Conduct, so far t'Engage
in the Quarrel of the Duke of Mantoua.

It may also b'observed by the War, or rather by the Persecution which the late
Emperor and the King of Spain exercised upon that Duke, That it is very hard to
draw the Venetians to an Offensive League, and t'engage them in a War, but by
the Temptation of some great Advantage, which may appear to them as infallible,
or by the Fear of a great Evil, which assaults them with Fury, and is ready, if
it be not staid, to break upon them. So they could not b'induc'd to draw into
the Field against the Spaniards, when Casal was at Bay, and all the Montferrat
at Mercy; Till they saw on the other side the Mountains, the French Colors to
be displaied, and with them th'Hopes of the Conquest of Milan, and of the
partition of that fair Country, which seemed to b'open'd unto them by the
Fortune of France; When they saw Mantoua in danger, and upon the instant of
loss; When they saw that th'Affair pressed on that side, and that th'Evil was
Inviolence; And by consequence, that the place which, in The Hand of the Duke of
Mantoua, served for a Rampart to some parts of their Country on the Land-side,
falling into th'Hands of The Emperor or the King of Spain, would be made as a
Citadel to command it; They gave orders for their Army to advance for the
Relief of Mantoua. But whether the Remedy came too late, or that the Malady was
no longer capable of Cure, or that the will Conduct or Imprudence of them, who
were ordered to dispense it, corrupted the Virtue, or hindered th'Operation, It
happened, that it did not produce the effect which the Venetians had proposed to
themselees, and t'express the matter, as it was; The delays they used in
resolving upon that Relief; The Order of that Design the Duke of Rohan had
contrived, which one of the chief Commanders of their Army changed by
Jealousy, and the Ill Intelligence which did arise betwixt the Duke of Candale
and the Marshal of Estree, were the fatal Causes of the Loss of a place, which
was of so great Concernment to the Venetians to Conserve. I conclude, from
hence, That the Eminent danger which excites them to Act, hanging no longer
over their Head, and the defeat of the Spaniards before Casall; the great
losses they suffered before Thurin; And the other disgraces which have since
happened unto them, Having dissipated the fears they Labored of, lest the
Spaniards should extend their Invasions upon the rest of Italy; And seeing that
the Fortune of the House of Austria was Highly sustained in Germany, and that
the Spring which might send powerful Reliefs to the State of Milan was not
drawn dry, It Is not to be wondered, if they do refuse to embarke in a Quarrel,
wherein there is no great Evil for them to fear, nor certain good t'hope for,
in case they did embarque in it. But if they saw the Confederate Forces
Superior, and prevalent in Germany, as they saw in Spain, the Seeds of a long
War, and the Matter of a lasting Quarrel; And by consequent, that it should act
no more in Italy, but by languishing and weak Means; There Is probability that
they would make use of the Conjuncture, and would have been glad to have gained
some part of the State of Milan, which might have been convenient for them; Or
at least, that they would put themselves int' a posture to make the Spaniards
throw up th'Usurpations the had made in Piedmont and Montferrat, being able to
do it safely and without fear of Revenge. And in truth, it would be a strange
and very unjust thing, that being so interessed as they are in the Liberty of
Italy, and having so much there to lose, they should ever stand there, as
immovable Spectators of what passes in that Country; And in rest and ease,
leave their Friends always to labor the Work of their Safety, and contribute
nothing to the advancement of the Peace, and raising of the Temple, that is
prepared for them; but Idle Reasonings; but superfluous Wishes and Endeavors
without Effect. For that Peace, I say, which is the End of the Kings Arms, and
the object of his Hottest and Constant desires, for which, He lays up so many
Cares and Labors; Exposes His Person to so many Dangers, and draws so much
Money from the purses of his Subjects, and so much blood from their Veins; for
that Peace, which ought not only t'ease the Wounds of Christendom, but ought
fully to Heal and strengthen it; which ought not only to be a Remedy against
present, but also a preservation against future Evils; which ought to put
Inferior Persons in safety from the Violence and Attempts of the greatest
Persons, and under whose shadow all shall enjoy what shall belong to them
without Trouble or Jealousy.

Ninth Discourse.
What Conditions that Peace ought to have which all Honest Persons desire, That
it may be Just and Sure; That the particular Peaces which the House of Austria
Endeavors to make would be the Ruin of them who make it.
WHat I Have said of the League, which the Republique of Venice might be disposed
to make, and of the Peace, to which it ought to Contribute more reality and
effect, than wishes and Endeavors, Invites me to say a Word of the Conditions,
which such a Peace ought to have, and of the will Fortune of those Princes, wh'
have estranged themselves from it in Germany. To the end then, that it may be
such, as all Honest Men desire, and to lay the Foundations so deep and solid,
That there may be no fear of the falling of the building, or that it Crack of a
long time, It must of necessity be a General Peace, And that all they wh'
associate to make War, make but one Composed Body of many Members, and have but
one soul to Move them, and but one End t'Aim at; That the Confederates procure
to themselves mutually and without the spirit of Emulation, all th'Honest Helps
and all the Reasonable Advantages, which may serve for common safety; That
although the League offensive does separate, and their Armies disband, a
defensive League do remain ever a foot, As Guardian of the Peace, and as
The Holy Ancre upon which it may repose, by which all the Confederates ought
t'oblige themselves to run the first down, that shall undertake to break it,
and to rekindle the Torches which it had put out, and revive the Troubles which
it had quieted; And that from th'Indissoluble union and the perfect
Correspondency of Princes and others of that League, so powerful a
Counterpoise be formed, and so Strong and High a Levy made against the Ambition
of the House of Austria, That it might be Compelled to contain its self, within
the Limits, which shall be prescribed, and to enjoy the good of Acquiescence it
would lose by taking it away from others.

It Is of this Matter, that the peace whereof Christendom has need, ought to
be made, that it may be durable; It Is upon this Basis that it ought to be
raised, if Men would have it subsist. Besides this way, I do not see, That
strength Enough or subsistence can be given it; And it is certain, that if the
Confederates shall be tempted by the Baits and Advantages, which will be
presented unto them by particular Treaties, and that the Members of the League
do sever from the body, that they compose; They will infallibly be lost; And it
will befall them, as to those Insects, which are cut in pieces, that preserve
for a little time some Motion and Life, but Dye and Perish a little after, for
being deprived of the Virtue, that did arise from th Union of all the parts, as
the Principle of their Duration. From whence it may be seen, what Imprudence
the Duke of Saxe is guilty of, and the other Princes of Germany who followed the
course of the first Mobile, to sever themselves from the Swedish Alliance. For,
without speaking of the offense committed against Honesty, by that separation
whereof, mention has been made; of that Villainous Blot of Ingratitude,
wherewith they have Charged themselves in the Memory of a Prince to whom they
were so much indebted; Their Interests obliged them always to stand united;
And instead of that unlucky Peace of Prague, which was sold unto them so dear;
They should have Labored a General peace, which had not left open any Wounds
nor Burning-firebrands in the Empire; which had not left any Snares, nor
concealed any Ambushes, and which might have been gained by a shorter or a less
grievous War, than that which was shut up in the other and yet continues. In
Effect, if Powder had not been Cast into The Eyes of those Princes, and if their
Council had not deceived them; If some little Light or some little Liberty had
been left them to see, what they did, or t'hinder the doing of it; Is there any
Appearance but that they had seen the Precipice, whither they brought them, or
that they would have descended Voluntarily into it? Is there any Probability
that they would have taken so grossly The Exchange that was given them; That they
would depart from a Society to put themselves into Chains, and that from Equals
and Companions as they were of the Swedes, They would have made themselves
slaves of th'Imperialists, and Dependents upon the Spaniards? Would they not
have Known, that instead of passing by a light discontent and a small distaste
received from one of the Ministers of State of the Crown of Swede, wherein an
easy Remedy might have been found, They exposed themselves to all th'Injuries,
which Tyranny has Accustomed to practice with them, of whom they will
b'assured, and are afraid of, lest they should Escape them? That in the
Alliance of that Crown, what they Contributed to the Entertainment of the War,
was voluntary, or could not exceed the Contents of the Conditions of the
Treaty; what they ought to Contribute to that of The Emperors, had no other
Limits but their want of power; That the Charge of The Expense, which they would
be obliged to make would re-double without stint, and would b' Heavy without
Measure; And that they would not less endeavor in that deceifull and
unfaithful Confederation to cause all their Heat and Spirits to b' exhaled, and
to draw from them Moneys and Men, Than t'exterminate the Swedes out of Germany,
and to purge, as they say, The Empire of foreign Nations, wh' have Cast
themselves into 't, that they might have nothing to do, but with them, when
they 've done with others?

If from the Principles of the Spanish Policies, which Reign as freely at
Vienna as at Madrid, they will not draw so necessary a Conclusion; Let them
infer it at least from their own Experience, and Consider, That if others
would not Hold them but by the Bands of Friendship, and by the sense of good
Turns; if they had not a design to Consume them in destroying the Swedes and
other Strangers, and to make use of them against Swedes and Strangers, as the
Refiners do Lead, to Purify Gold and Silver in the Refining Vessel, which, in
the same instant it sends into smoke the other imperfect Metalls, Evaporates it
self and is lost with them it forces away. They would not have made, as they
have done to their power their Countries the Theater of the War; They would not
have made the same scorn of their Troops, as of their Enemies; And they should
have received at least, as gentle Entertainment, as what the Duke of Baviere
received. Let them remember the discourse held at Rome by the Ambassadors of
the Late Emperor upon the Complaints there made of the Concession their Master
had granted of the Goods of the Church to the Duke of Saxe, to the great Damage
and Disdain of Religion, and to the great scandal of good Catholics. That it
was the small Aid and Subvention received from the Holy Chair, which
constrained him; That it was the Violence of his Affairs that had forced him;
And that it was th'hardest and most Inexorable of all Laws, That of Necessity
to which He had obeyed.

Let the Clearing now of this Mystery and of the Concealed sense of these Words
b'examined; Let the secret spirit they contain be drawn out; And it may be
Judged in my opinion, That that peace Holding more of Force than of Election,
and Being rather torn, than freely past from the Will of The Emperor; There
would be no want of Doctors to prove that it ought not to b' observed, at least
by his Successors who had not made it; That they could not b' obliged t'hold
what was not lawful for their Predecessors to grant, and that no Promises were
more unlawful, and whose Ligament is sooner to be Cut, and Damage repaired,
than such as wound Religion, and dissipate the goods of the Church, for the
Protection and Defense whereof, they 've a particular and inevitable
Obligation. The Princes then, who 've quitted the Confederations so Solemnly
sworn, and so often renewed with their true Friends, to cast themselves into
the peace of Prague, ought to hold for certain, that they 've abandoned the
pursuit of a Reality, and of a Body, to embrace an Apparition and a shadow; And
that there is but one of these three ways open to their future Condition,
Either to remain for the final prey of th'Imperialists, as has been expressed,
and to make up the Conclusion of the Game they play in Germany, if the
Confederate party be subdued; or if the Victory fall on the Swedes side, TO
endure the Troubles of the violation of public Faith, and The Effects of the
Vengeance which the blood of the King of Swede requires, poured out for the
Redemption of their Liberty; or at last, if they will see the Truth of this
Amnestia, which is the Subject of the Confederate Arms, instead of that other
Imaginary, which has been the Bait, wherewith the House of Austria has caught
them; If they would see the Constitutions and the Ancient Order of The Empire to
reflourish; If they would see a perpetual Fence made to the Ambition of them
that throw it open, That I say, This may be done Quickly and Easily, There Is
nothing to be done, but to return to the good Party, and to rejoyn with them
who Labor with so much vehemence at this Immortal work. I go on and say also,
That as there is no doubt to be made but the House of Austria will move all the
Wheels of their Policy to disunite the League, which is on foot in Germany, and
to reduce the present Troubles to particular peaces, and like to that of
Prague; And it is not, I say, to be doubted, but it will be made, that every one
of the Confederates Engaged for his particular, and severed from the body of
the League, may be found the weaker to resist him, when he shall be Assaulted,
Though the Contrary be promised. And to be secured from this Inconveniency,
It Is necessary to take the Counter Course taken by that House, and to put in
practice the Law of Contraries, which is of so great Use in the Affairs of the
World; All the Confederates ought to resolve never to Disunite; To reject all
proposals, that may be made them of particular Treaties, as a designed Poison
which shall be presented to them in the form of a Remedy; and t'Insist upon it
till it be concluded in the project of a General Peace; That it be not
declined, till it be Accomplished, and in such a Defensive League, as I Have here
above described.

But lest, that in Threatening them with the License, which is said, The House
of Austria gives it self to violate all Treaties, whose Observation is
Damageable, and the not Observation Advantageous unto it, I may give them a
false Alarm, and raise fear from a false Imagination. It may be, that it is as
Careful to perform what she Promises, and particularly, when the Name of God
is Interposed, as it has been, the other specious Apparences of Piety, and the
outside of Exemplary Religion; And that it Aims at nothing more than a good
Peace, and that its Intention is, when it has gained this Haven, to put it
self no more in danger for the Future, unless it be forced upon so Dangerous a
Sea, as the War. I will demonstrate here the Contrary, and make it Evident,
That in truth, it gives it self that License, and that it does abuse the Name
of God, and plays with the Public Faith, when their Interests require it,
more than any Prince of the World. For this purpose, I do not intend to play
the Orator, nor to make use of an Art, which boasts of her Colors, and lights,
to Change, when it pleases the state of Things, and to make them seem Great or
Little, Fair or Ugly, when it shall seem good unto Her; This is as much
Estranged from my Humors, as it is above my Forces; And I do Heartily renounce
an Exercise, which I should discharge Unhandsomely, if I did undertake it. I
will not here neither, produce all the Breaches of the Treaties, which this
House of Austria has made, nor all the Infidelities, wherewith it has stained
its Conduct. Great Volumes are only capable to Contain them. I will touch only
upon somewhat more Modern, as more Sensible, and upon what has passed in these
latter times in Germany and Italy.

As to Italy, who knows not that the last Wars the Spaniards have made to the
Duke of Savoy, Grandfather to this Duke, have always budded from the Breach
on their part of the Treaties, which preceded? And so soon as the fear of the
Evil, which had Obliged them for Accommodation, was over, and that the hope of
the End which they had Proposed to their Arms, began to Revive, They lost the
Memory of the Peace they had Sworn, and made no Difficulty to renew the
Quarrel, and to re-kindle the Disorder at the Charges of their Faith, and
against all Justice. So that what Intervened betwixt two Wars, was not so much
Peace as a Suspension of Arms, nor the Cure of the Fever, as the Remission of
the Access; The fire was Covered under the Ashes, but Dyed not in the Intention
of the Spaniards, and it happened to all that Affair, as to Wounds ill Dressed,
which often break out; It was renewed frequently; And that Game lasted till new
Accidents made the Spaniards take new Designs, and that the Troubles of Germany
allayed them of Italy.

I speak not here of the Peace of Suza, which they Violated without other
Color, than that they were Necessitated to do 't, for the Interest of their
Reputation; nor of the Ingratitude, wherewith they requited the Courtesy,
which the King did in their behalf, and that rare Moderation which made him
bound his Prosperity by the delivery of his Allies, and permitted him not to
Overcome, but where it found Resistance. It has been spoken of in another
place, and shall be Spoken of more fully in the Third Part. I remit also to
speak there of the Treaty of Cuirasque, which the Necessity of the German
Affairs forced from them, rather than the Love of the Peace of Italy; And to
which, the Resolutions of the Diet of Ratis^one, and the Entry of the King of
Swede into Germany, where the Evidences of the Tempest did them Appear, which
has since fallen upon the House of Austria, forced them to consent, and to set
their Hands with design not to observe it, so soon as they had sent us over the
Mountains, as shall be declared at large, in the Apology of the Acquisition of
Pignero^. I will not also, Revive here the Deceits they practiced toward the
Venetians, and the Alterations they gave them upon the business of the
Uscoques. It were to repeat, but what has been said. I pass also in silence
the various ^ricks which at several times they put upon the Grisons, and the
Artifices, and open Force, wherewith they have s' often assaulted their
Liberty, against the Faith of the Treaties, made with them, and with their
Allies.

That will be seen in the Third Part, in the Apology of the Treaty of Moncon,
where I give a very Exact Table of the Affairs of that Commonwealth. I come to
them of Germany, and to what passed upon that Scean, not less Famous by the
Treaties, than by the Wars, which were managed there: Who knows not that the
Peace of Ulmes, Concluded by the Mediation of France, gave Means to the
Emperor to Ease himself of the Weight of the War under which he Groaned, and
to unravel the Perplexities from which he could not be dis-intangled but by
that Expedient? And who knows not also, That he observed it no longer than was
Necessary for to prepare for a War, which he resolved in Swearing the Peace;
And that the Ruin of the Count Palatine, and of his Friends, proceeded only
from the Confidence they raised in that Treaty, and from that Ruinous
Foundation, whereupon they trusted, as upon an Holy Anchor, by the Right of
Nations, by the Reverence of the Name of God, which therein was Interposed, and
by the Authority of so Great a Mediator as the King of France?

After the Gain of the Battle of Prague, and that fatal Series of Prosperities
which follows great Victories; After that the Imperial Arms had Triumphed over
all that favored the Palatines party, and that the Count of Tilly, and
Marquess of Spinola, had stripped Naked that unhappy Prince, The Emperor
transferred his Electorate to the Duke of Baviere, and divided his Country
between him and the King of Spain; But it being pretended, that the Formalities
Ordained by the Golden Charter, and by the other Pragmatique Sanctions, had not
been observed in that Translation and Partition; and for fear, that proceeding
which they supposed to be Violent, should Offend the other Electors by a common
Interest, and Provoke the King of England to a Revenge, and to Prosecute the
Reparation of the Outrage done to his Son-in-Law; The Emperor protested in
the Diet of Ratisbone, in the year 1662. That h' had transferred the Electorate
to the House of Bavi^re for the Dukes Life only, that was Invested with it; And
for what Concerned the Palatinate, he would make Reparation to the Count
Palatine, and give Satisfaction thereupon to his Friends: He gave the same
Assurances to the King of England by his Letters, in the year 1623. which the
Duke of Baviere also Confirmed by his Letters, and signified the King; He
understood that it was only for his Life, that his House should Enjoy the
Electoral Dignity, and that h' had Accepted it upon Condition of Return to the
House, from whence it was taken, and should be the Privilege of his Person, and
not the Inheritance of his Heirs. It was the Allay that was always Presented
to the King of England, and wherewith he Suffered himself always to be
Surprised; And his Inclination naturally disposed to the Sweetness of Rest, and
to the Delicacies of Peace, was Easily diverted by that show, which was made of
giving him Content, from the Thoughts of War, which were not Natural to him.
In the Expectation of the Effects of those hopes, he finished his Life, which
from time to time were renewed unto him; And the Earl of Gondemar, who had
seized upon the Kings Understanding, and taken Sovereign Possession of it to
Govern him absolutely, knew how to represent the Execution of that Affair so
infallible, as not only to Hinder the King from Arming against the Usurpators
of his Son-in-Laws Lands, but Inclined him also to Lend Ships to his Master, to
secure against the Hollanders the Spanish Fleets, which Sailed from the Indies.

That business has ever since been in the same Condition on the Emperors
part, and stood always floting in Irresolution and Incertitude, till the
Accident of Northlinghen, which was fatal to the Swedes. The grearest part of
the Princes, and free Towns of the Empire, fell from their Confederation, and
Conspired at Prague with the House of Austria, against the German Liberty. The
Emperor High and Proud with his prodigious Success, and believing himself
Master of Affairs and Fortune, forgetting the Promises he had so Solemnly made
to the Late King of England, and the Faith h' had so often given him in Favor
of his Son-in-Law, though nothing had passed against him on that Princes
occasion, nor by the Means of his Children, but a Sad and Lamentable Progress
of Calamity, and of Disgraces, declared by his own Authority, (though he could
not Lawfully do it) but by the Authority of a Lawful Diet, and all Parties
heard, declared I say, The Electorate duly Translated to the Duke of Bavaria,
and to his Heirs, and that it could not Devolve to any other Family till his
was Extinguished; Moreover, He declared the Opposition made by the Duke of
Newbourge, as Prince of the Palatine Family, to be Void, and that he was not to
b' admitted upon his Claim; And that this was done upon great and important
Considerations, known to his Imperial Majesty; That he Maintained and Confirmed
in the Partition and Possession of the Palatinate, them, Wh' had taken it in
his Name, and by his Authority, with Respect to b' had to the Count Palatines,
and to the Requests of Princes, who should Intercede for them, and under such
base and shameful Conditions, That he knew well they would never b' Accepted.

But remembering the Bloody affront done to the present King of England, and the
Counterpoise that he might bring to the Balance, where the Victory hung
betwixt two Parties, if he should declare for his Enemy; Remembering also the
Damages the Low-Countrymen would receive in the Cessation of the Recruits the
English might bring them; And other Consequences that might arise from the
Hatred of a Prince, provoked to Revenge by frequent disdains offered unto him,
and by the Extreme injuries done to his Nephews; He reassumed the Foxes skinn,
which h' had put off at the Treaty of Prague, and Exercised the first Art,
wherewith h' had so often played his Game with the Father, to abuse the Son,
and to suspend the Resolution he might take, to seek by Force, what had been
denied to his Intercession and Endeavors. He made show then of Entertaining
the profers of Accommodation, which were made to Him; He received the King of
Englands Message for that purpose, and seemed to desire a Solemn Embassage to
yield with the greater Honor, and to give the more Glory to the Treaty he
would Conclude. But the Journey of the Earl of Arundel; The several Distast^rs,
which he there received, and the Dissatisfaction, which at last he brought
back, made Clearly manifest to the World, the Truth of the Emperors
Intentions, and that it was a studied Artifice to gain Time, and to try the
Fortune of War with the more Advantage, having to do with the fewer Enemies.

I speak not of what happened to the last Ambassador, that was sent from
England, nor of the success of his Embassy, which has not given the Lie to the
former; It Is a matter too new and present to b' unknown by any Person. And this
may be said in favor of the House of Austria, That it being necessary, the
Treaty to be Concluded, should be debated by the King and Parliament of the
Kingdom; The time was not proper for it, whilst the King and his Parliament
were divided; That truly is not without Reason and plausible Pretense, but the
secret of the Affairs is, That so long as the Schism shall last, and the Fire
which the English have kindled in the midst of their Country, be maintained in
Heat and Force, The King of Hungary, and they of his Party, have no Cause to
fear their Arms, nor to hasten a Treaty. And if it b' Expedient, that they
treat in Earnest, it may be time enough, when the English have reassumed their
former Union, and the design of restoring the Palatines House, and
re-establishing of the Princes, the Emperor and his Adherents had stripped to
their Shirts.

That whilst they run the Hazard of the War, either they may gain so
Considerable Successes, and their Power may Increase so Plentifully, That when
England shall enter into the League, which all sorts of Reasons d'invite it to
do, and to Join his Forces with the Forces of the Confederates, They would have
nevertheless Cause to hope for Victory, and should not b' obliged to part with
that Willingly, which they could not take from them by Force.

These Prejudications, which are Offered, accompanied with many others shall be
set down in the Third Part, may suffice to make it appear to our Confederates,
what Foundation they can raise upon the Duration of particular Treaties, to
which the House of Austria does press and solicit them. And the Swedes above
all Persons, whom they would debosh from the Confederation of France, and
against whose Faith they raise their strongest Batteries, and Arm their
subtilest Artifices, are too Dextrous to b' ignorant of the constant
Resolution, and immovable Will of those Princes of that House, not to Suffer
them, having advanced their Power so far into Germany, to take deep Root there,
or that so Powerful a Member, and of so Warlike a Nation, should b' adjoined
to the Empire. I believe also, that they doubt not, as to what respects the
Duration and Subsistence of the particular Treaty they should have made with
them, but that they would find a thousand Pretenses of Honor to break without
Disgrace, and a thousand Evasions of Cons;cience to Violate it without Scruple,
and that they will bring to their Relief, as has been in another place
Discoursed, that Maxim, which they hold ever in Reserve to make use of in time
of need, That they are not obliged to hold Faith with Heretics; Chiefly, when
it has been given in things which help to confirm Heresy in any Country, from
whence they have a design to Banish it, which furnish it with Food and
Strength, which swells and makes it proud with Temporal and other Human
advantages for Subsistence. That giving them the Reputation of Robbers of the
People, and for Ravishers of Estates, as infallibly they will do; They make use
against them of that Opinion of the Casuists, which is derived from the Root of
Nature, and whereof the Heathen have not been ignorant; That promises made to
Robbers by force, when Men are at their Discretion, and the Power is in their
Hands, oblige not by Consequence the Observation of them, and impose not a
Yoke, which may not be broken without doing Evil.

Briefly, they ought to hold for certain, That the Spaniards enjoying Spain,
the fruitfullest Mine, and the fullest Spring of the Cases of Conscience that
is in Christendom; And being Masters of the Stock, from whence more
abundantly, than from any other place, the sharp and subtle Doctors, who make
when they will, such curious and exquisite Anatomies of the Actions and Manners
of Men, and wh' have full Magazines of Colors to disguise things; who decide
with a wonderful Boldness, such Difficulties, as the Bible, the Councils, the
Popes, and the Fathers would not touch; And failing for the most part of a
fixed Point to establish their Opinions upon* and making use of so soft and
flexible a Rule to measure them by, as their Reasoning; Know by consequent
t'accommodate them when they please, to th'Inclinations of them who consult
with them.

The Swedes, I say, ought t'hold for certain, That the Princes of that House
will ever find some of their Doctors (for the same Judgment is not to be past
upon all of them) who will maintain, That not t'hold to Heretics what has
been promised them, is no Evil, when a Good may arise from it to Religion; And
to strip them of Temporal Goods, which serve for Nourishment, and And
t'Heresie, though the possession of them had been promised, is not an Action
more blamable, than to take a Sword from the hand of a furious Person, who
might run it through his Heart, what promise soever had been made to the
contrary. At the worst, The Princes of the Time, and particularly they of
The House of Austria, are too Intelligent and too Ingenious to want the
occasions of Troubles, when they have use of them; And the Affairs of
Christendom are at this day so vexed and confused, that what care soever is
taken to clear and compose them, it is certain, that for a long Time there will
be but too much matter of Quarrel and of offense, for them wh' have a mind to it.

Tenth Discourse.
That the Confederation between the King and his Associates has all the
necessary Conditions required in a durable Peace; Some Considerations upon the
Nature of Leagues, that they may the better be maintained.
IT appears clearly by what has been abovesaid, that the Troubles of
Christendom cannot b' appeased by such deceitful and unfaithful Means, as
particular Peaces; And that it were to build its Acquiescence upon Ice, which
would dissolve at the first Beams of the Sun, to raise it upon so uncertain and
shallow a Foundation. And that it may be such, as is desired, it must be raised
upon the Basis of a General Peace; And that a permanent Confederation of them,
wh'are associated to make War, be the Buckler of that Peace, and the Rampire to
secure it, from the assaults that may be made against it; It must b'also the
perpetual obstacle to restrain the House of Austria, and t'hinder it from
making Invasions upon his Neighbors, and to vex it for the future, as it Has
done others for the time past. And as there is so strong a Bond, and so
straight a Correspondency between the Branches and the Dependences of that
House, that it may be said, they have all but one Interest, and that the are seen
to run to the Relief of one another with the same Heat and Impetuosity, as if
it were their own business. In like manner, all other things laid aside, the
Confederate Powers ought always to b'of a good understanding, and ever ready
t'act unanimously against The House of Austria, as often as it shall stir
injuriously against any of them; And resuming the spirit of Ambition, which is
so natural to it, and gives it so much trouble, shall presume again to conspire
against the Peace of Christendom, and against the Liberty of those Princes.

And it seems to me, that the Confederation now on foot between the King and
other Princes, who join with him to procure a just and sure Peace to the rest
of Christendom, has all the necessary Conditions to form and maintain that
fair Union and perfect Correspondency, which we would oppose to that which
unites and conjoyns The House of Austria, and its Dependences. It Is what, I
pretend to make appear in the following Discourse, and in examining the Nature
and the Conditions of the most famous Leagues, which Christendom has seen for
the two last Ages, and in discovering the Defects and Weaknesses where they
have failed, and which have been the Means of their Dissolution and Ruin.

To discourse then of then Matter, I say, That although there are two sorts of
Leagues, or that they may be considered under two different Considerations, and
under two distinct Functions; Both of them have need of the same Supports for
their Establishment, and of the same Cares for their Duration. There are some
Leagues which, according to the first Intention of them that made them, have no
visible Action in them, nor Motion, nor Life, that is sensible, which properly
signify no more than to secure from apprehended Motions of War, and t'impede
turbulent Princes from making of Troubles; As Banks stop the Sea from
overflowing, and restrain th'Invasions and Spoils which otherwise it would
make. Other Leagues are all in Motion, and the first Idea under which they are
projected, is to serve for Remedies against th'Evils which press, and not
against them which are feared; To repel the Tempests which break forth, and not
to cherish the Calms that reign. I will give you of both some Examples, which
shall be the Foundations of our Reasonings, and may render th'Instructions to
be drawn from it more easy and sensible. In the time of Lawrence of Medicis,
the greatest Politician of his Age, a League was formed and flourished, and
many other Princes and States of that Country associated to conserve the
public Peace, and t'Arm unanimously against him that should first disturb it,
and break that sweet Harmony of the People, which made Italy happy.

The League had aspect chiefly upon the Venetians, who being then the most
powerful of all the Princes of Italy, were esteemed also the most ambitious,
and it may be for that reason only, that they were the strongest; And that
they did not believe, That the Moderation of Desires, accompanied willingly
with Great Forces, nor that Sobriety could b'observed in the Temptation of
Abundance. But the Cement of that League being the wisdom of Laurence of
Medicis, and that it wanted somewhat of more strength and duration for its
subsistence; It happened, that it fell by the death of Laurence, and that
Lodowick Sforza was the first that broke off from it to gain the State of Milan
from his Nephew, and which opened the Gate by which the French entered Italy,
and after them the Spaniards, and the Germans. It happened also, as by a just
Judgment from God, That th'Usurpator of the State of his Nephew, and the
Perturbator of the Peace of his Country, saw himself stripped of that State,
and banished his Country, to pass the rest of his days, and die a Prisoner in a
Foreign Country. That which was to be desired to complete that League, and which
made it break, was the want of a real and effective great Power to support the
weak Pieces of it, which should not have been subject to yielding by death, nor
of falling by disgrace, and might serve t'all of them for a Haven in time of
Tempest, and for Resurrection in case of Misfortune.

But in th'Establishment of durable Leagues, and in the collection of Pieces
that compose it for duration; It Is not sufficient, that a great Power be
conjoined, unless the Motions of that Power be Moderate, and have the General
Good of the League for its End, to which it serves for Chief and Center.
Otherwise, if that Superior Power do determine the Ruin of others, and aim at
doing Its business, and not theirs, they will quickly sever, and so soon as the
great Evil they feared is over, and that the Torrent which gave them trouble is
stopped, they will withdraw their Contributions, and no longer furnish
Materials, nor lend their Arms to constitute a Society, which might in time
prove fatal unto them. Let Examples explain our Meaning.

When the Heresy of Luther had taken root in Germany, and stretched its
Branches almost over all the North, a League was formed at Smalchalde against
Charles the Fifth, of the greatest part of the Princes and States that had
embraced their new Sect; The Emperor was constrained to form another League to
this, and to implore th'aid of Catholic Princes in an occasion, where the
Ancient Religion had cause to fear all that could issue of sad and tragical,
from the fury and zeal of the new Sects; Some Catholic Princes refused to
Join, as the Venetians; Others did Engage, whereof the most considerable, and
who sent the fairest and greatest Army, was the Holy Father; The Emperor with
this Supply, which was useful, and with his Virtue and ordinary Fortune, got
the better of the Associated Protestants, and had forced his Victory further
into Germany, if the Pope, who knew, that Charles aimed not at the Heretics,
but at the Rebels of The Empire, had not staid his course, and withdrawn his
Forces, whereby The Emperor was disappointed, and stood as Immovable in the
pursuit of his designs, as a Ship, when the Wind suddenly abates, and is
surprised with a Calm.

Two things are here to b'observed, which establish and confirm the
Propositions proposed, The One, That the Protestant League fell by the first
Blow it received, without rising again, and one lost Battle made it vanish into
smoke; for the first Reason given, and because it wanted some great Power that
might have rallied the scattered Forces; That might have raised new Men, and
have drawn them together to fight their Enemies, and for other Trials of
Fortune. And indeed, to speak truly of the thing, It Is the same with petty
Princes, who make a League against a more powerful Prince, as with a Society of
Gamesters, wh' are not rich, and having made a Stock, to which every one
contributed all the Money h' had, so soon as that Money is lost, are out of
countenance, and are constrained to break up company, and to retire with their
loss; In like manner, the others setting a foot at first all their Forces, and
straining to their uttermost, being defeated, are without recovery, and disband
immediately, if some great Power do not interpose to rally them. W' have also
seen the same thing happen to the Protestant League, which took its beginning
from th'incident Troubles between the Pretenders to the Succession of Cleves,
and which dissolved upon the occasion of th'Election of the Count Palatine to
the Kingdom of Bohemia; The first great Blow that was given became mortal to it;
And it was so astonished at the loss of the Battle of Prague, that it could
never recover its strength again; And all that the King of Denmark, Halberstat,
and Mansfielt have since done, to reinforce that Party, have served only to
make it languish the longer, and resembled the precious Waters are given to
desperate sick persons, which make The Heart a little to recover, and prolong
the life some few hours, but restore not health, and prevent not death.

The Other thing to be considered in the Catholic League, which subdued the
Protestants, is, That it held indeed of great Powers, and that it had for
Foundation and Ligament a great Emperor, who made the Eagles of The Empire fly
higher than they would done since Charlemain's time. But being more Ambitious than
Powerful, He carried not falsely that Emblem which discovered th'Immensity of
his Desires, Never to stop, but to pass always further. For without respect to
the good of his Confederates, He studied only his Particular profit; That was
the cause, as has been observed, that they retired from the League. The same
Emperor endeavored, after the re-establishment of Sforces in the State of
Milan, to form in Italy another League of the first sort, under pretense of
employing it against the French irruptions that should undertake to trouble
their Peace, and to draw thither to raise Quarrels; or to make use of them
against the Turk, if his Fleets assaulted the States of any of the
Confederates, and Infested their Shoars. But the Italians were as Cautious as
he was subtle, and discovering the Hook he did cast into so specious a Bit,
They would not be taken with it. For it was very visible to them, That
The Emperor aimed from thence to confirm his Power in Italy, which the French
alone were able to shake; And in holding the Turk at Bay, to labor with more
ease and less opposition the ruin of Christians. The Germans were not so well
advised and wise, when they formed that League of Suaube, which served so long
to do the Affairs of The House of Austria, and to advance their Greatness, under
color of suppressing the Rebels of The Empire, and the Disturbers of the Peace
of Germany; It had not staid there, and The Will which it did, believing to do
well, had not so soon ceased, if it had not been dissipated by th'Endeavours of
Francis the First, and by th'Industry and Eloquence of Sir of Langey, who made
the Dutch to comprehend the Austrian Artifices, and laid open the Stratagems
that were on foot by that Family to destroy them.

In the precedent Discourse, I Have given you the platform of that League, which
Philip the Second endeavored to make with the Pope and with the Venetians,
after the Selim the Second had assaulted Cyprus, and that the noise of the
Ottoman's Arms, with the consternation and fear of them, had flown about Italy.
We Have also there seen the Resistance made by the Pope and the Venetians, to the
proposals of that Prince, which breathed only his particular Interest. And we
shall see in the Third Part the small satisfaction that the Venetians drew from
that League, which was concluded with him, and that at last they were
constrained to make a separate Accord with the Turk, and without the privity of
Philip, as many years before they would been obliged to buy their peace of Soliman,
after that the proceedings of Charles the Fifth, with whom they were in League,
gave them occasion to know, That they could not continue the War in so ill
Company, and in so unfaithful a Society, without running th'hazard to Ruin. It
has not been dangerous only to make Leagues with Charles the Fifth, and with
Philip his Son; The Evil came from a higher Line, and the Corruption has a
higher Spring; Ferdinand of Arragon their Grandfather transmitted unto them
with his Blood, that too much interessed Inclination; As he was one of them who
broke the League of Cambray, to the prejudice of Lewis the Twelfth, who had so
Legally observed it; And the League he made at Blois was to strip the King of
Naples his Kinsman, of his Inheritance, and for the full Conquest of his
Kingdom. And after he had gained by the Valor of the Great Captain, what did
belong to his Partition, he caused us to be vexed, and made studied Quarrels to
take away the Partition that did belong to us; By the Invincible Habit The House
of Austria has acquired not t'observe, what it has promised; And from their
subtle Art to dispose the Leagues where it Enters, to its particular Ends,
without respect of the Good of the other Confederates. In that of Germany, which
subsisted under the name of Catholic; In appearance, it avoided the direction
of that Army t^abate the Jealousy of the Confederates, and that the Forces of
that League were put into th'hands of the Duke of Bavaria, a Prince of another
House, and under the Count of Tilly, a Lieutenant General, which depended upon
him. But in this there was but a Transpostion of Colors, whilst the Things
were the same; And The Emperor gained that by a by-way, which he could not
obtain by a straight; whilst the Forces of that League held the Protestant Arms
at a Bay, and hindered all that they could undertake against the Catholics;
Heresolved to raise others in his own Name, and under General Wallestine, that
had dependency and relation only upon himself; The Emperor with these Forces,
which made themselves formidable and prodigious by the inventions of Quarters,
which this great General gave to th'Officers to make their Levies, began to
give the Law t'all Germany, and threatened all that was independent and free;
And when th'Affair of Mantoua happened, it appeared then certainly to the
Catholics, that it was not so much to the Religion of the Protestants that
the Emperor made War, as to their Estates; And the Peace he made with the King
of Denmark, t'intend th'oppression of the Duke of Mantoua, made them
understand, That if the progress of the Arms was not stopped, Catholics and
Protestants should be concerned in the same Mischief; And that they had not
begun t'act by the ruin of the one, but for to finish, by the ruin of
the others. The descent then into Italy of The Emperors best Forces, under the
Conduct of Cosalto, and the condition Germany found it self in from thence to
be discharged of that burden of Soldiers which oppressed it, gave courage to
the Duke of Bavaria and his Party, to speak high at the Diet of Ratisbon, in
favor of the German Liberty, and then to demand the Degradation of Walsthein,
who was the Flayl, and the most proper Instrument The Emperor could have found
t'impose servitude on Germany. The Spaniards also, to whom the fierce and
indocile humor of Wallesthein was odious, and who looked upon him as the
greatest Obstacle they could have encountered upon the way they had made plain,
for the re-uniting of The Empire to their Branch, thrust stoutly at the Wheel
the Duke of Bavaria had set a going. The Protestants on the other side, who had
been plundered, or believed that they should be plundered, and to whom
th'exorbitant Contributions, which Wallesthein had raised on their Estates,
were as forerunners and presages of their approaching ruin, Treated with the
King of Swede to come to the relief of their dying Liberty, and to make use of
the Conjuncture of the disarming of Wallesthein, and of the Licensing of his
Troops, who demanded but safe retrait and protection against the Commissions
which were t'issue t'enquire of the Spoils his Soldiers had committed upon the
Lands of the Empire. And so the Catholic Princes breathed away the fear
The House of Austria gave them, and were assaulted with a greater and more
dangerous fear, raised from the Swedish Victories. But if that Evil had not
preceded, the Remedy had not followed; And if the Designs of that House had
been moderate, the Arms of that Prince had never entered into Germany, and that
House had not tried the same Lot it made other suffer.

As to the League made between the King of Swede, and the Prorestants who
called him to their Relief, It cannot truly be said, that the King of Swede was
one of the great Powers, whereof we speak, if they are considered by the
fertility and riches of their Country, By the Multitude of their Subjects, and
by other Advantages, which are rather fastened to the Domination, than to the
Person of Princes. But this Prince had such admirable Conditions in his Person,
and such a collection of natural and acquired Virtues, that the quickly put
himself into the posture of being that great Power, whereunto the Powers of the
League were subaltern and dependent. At first they cast their eyes upon him
through Jealousy had of their Countrymen, and gave not The Honor to one of
their Nation, but made the King of Swede chief of the League; Or they thought,
it may be, none of courage and understanding enough to bear the weight of that
War; And judged also, That the King of Swede being in some sort under their
pay, they might dispose of him as they pleased, and might retain him justly to
the necessary Considerations, for the suppressing of The Ambitious Designs of
The Emperor, and to restore to The Empire its lost Peace, and its ancient
Privileges. But they were not well advised; for that Prince was so brave, and
so full of courage, that he could not act such a person; And as a Torrent is
not to be stopped at pleasure, which the force of dissolved Snows forces from
a Mountain, nor a great Fire easily put out, which the Wind blows, and is
fastened to a great quantity of combustible Matters; So this Prince rendered
himself so powerful and so formidable, by the Victories which crowded upon him;
For his Conquests were the Adamants which drew others unto them; that many of
the Confederates before his death had him in great jealousy. But let us leave
there those Apprehensions, the suspicion of an Evil which did not happen, to
speak of that which concerns us. It Is easy to judge by what has been said,
That the League which is now of foot between us and our Confederates, has all
necessary Conditions for Continuation of the War, so long as it may be useful,
and to make the Peace that must determine it Sacred and Inviolable. This great
Power, whereof it has been spoken, is there to be found, which has not only
the right of Birth before all other Powers of Christendom, by the Antiquity of
its Original, but has it also by the greatness of its Forces, and by'n
abundance of Money and Men, which resembles not to the Waters of Cisterns, which
are easily drawn off, but to them that issue from living Springs, which refresh
and renew themselves as they run off. This Truth is so certain, and of an
Experience so general and so confirmed, that to b'ignorant of it is not to be
of the world, or to know any thing of what passes in it. It Is, not to know
that we have done in Italy in favor of the Duke of Mantoua; And not to have
understood, that notwithstanding the fearful difficulties which accompanied
that War; The Desolation which the Plague and Famine had made in our Armies,
and the Disgraces happened to our Allies by their ill fortune, or by their fault;
We forced Germany, Spain, and Savoy associated, to restore what they had
usurped, and to re-establish the Duke of Mantoua and the Grisons in their
Estates and Garrisons; It Is to b' ignorant what the King did for the Swedish
Party, and for his Confederates, since the Battle of Nortlinghen; What he daily
does in Germany, in the Low Countries, in Italy, and in Spain; The Money and
Men which he sent thither, and the number of his Armies by Sea and by Land,
which filled our Enemies with fear, and all Europe with astonishment.

As to the second Condition, The Moderation of Desires, and that fair
Temperance, which puts a Bridle into the mouth of Ambition, and ties up
Courage, which the Heroes are more troubled t'observe, than to defeat Armies,
and to tame Monsters, It cannot also be denied, that it is the more admirable in
the Kings Soul, that having all the Lights which enlighten the Cabinet, and all
Qualities that are active in the Field, He has besides these, the Forces of a
great Kingdom to put them in Motion; He has all that is necessary for Invading,
and for Usurping, if he did not believe, That it is more Magnanimous and more
Glorious, to conserve and to defend; Somewhat more divine to exercise Justice,
than to make Conquests.

I have sowed so many proofs of this Truth in so many places of this Book, that
I conceive it a superfluous thing to repeat them, and repoint to the eye of the
Reader the same Figures. However, I do beseech him to remember, that in the
long and tragical actions which vex Christendom, the King never began t'any
person, and that he stirred not, nor engaged, but to relieve his Friends, which
were oppressed, and t'abate the Designs which would have consumed their
Estates. That he never took Arms till he had tried the ways of sweetness; and
of good Endeavors; That before he passed the Alps for the delivery of Casal,
which Gonsailes had besieged, he sent into Spain; He caused Endeavors to b'
used at Vienna; He prevailed with the Pope to interpose his Authority to oblige
the Spaniards to retire, and with honor, their Arms from Montferrat; As before
the beginning of the War he commanded a Treaty with the Duke of Savoy by
several Agents, and with most advantageous Offers, that could be desired, if he
could admit of equitable ones, to compose civilly the differences h' had with
the Duke of Mantoua; And after h' had raised the Siege of C^sal in forcing the
Alps, and had given peace to the Spaniards, which was so necessary for them, He
sent to Vienna to hinder them from being perjured, and to divert the Seeds of a
second War, in causing to be delivered to the Duke of Mantoua th'Investitures
promised by the Peace of Suza.

As to Germany, all the world knows that the King did not for present interpose
in the Troubles that have vexed them, but to appease them; And that in the
Quarrel of the Emperor and the Count Palatine for the Kingdom of Bohemia, he
sent a famous Embassage to th'Inter^ssed Princes to determine it friendly, and
caused a Peace to be concluded at Ulms, as has been already said, which
re-established th'Affairs of The Empire in the Conditions they ought to be, and
in the Temper, if it had been observed, which is assigned them by their
Constitutions. Since that time th'Affairs of the Empire being raised to a
prodigious Success, and the King observing, that the Treaties of Ratisbon and
of Cairasque had not shut up all the Winds, which might trouble the third time
the Tranquillity of Italy, and carry the Storm further, if The House of Austria
had nothing to do 'n Germany. He caused a Treaty to be made with the King of
Swede, whom the Protestants had called into Germany, and furnished him with
some Money, to give him the better means to give Employment and Exercise to
that House, that it might no longer think of giving trouble to his Allies, nor
to himself in his Kingdom. To conclude, he had never declared a War to S^ain, in
the Spaniard had not commanded th'Elector of Treves to be taken away, wh' had
put himself into the King's protection, and had provided for his safety by his
Intervention.

In the second place, t'assure the world that the King's Arms are not
mercenary, nor moved by the spirit of Particular Interest, let the last Treaty
be remembered which he made with the Duke of Cleves, and the generosity,
wherewith he renounced, in favor of the Duke, one of the Justest Conquests
which could arise from the right of War. Be It remembered, how freely h'
abandoned by the Treaty of Cairasque almost all Savoy, and a part of Piedmont,
which h' had lawfully gained, to cause Mantoua to be rendered, which was but a
colored Usurpation, and the Country of the Grisons, which was an Usurpation
without color. That if it appears the King and some Garrisons of The Empire in
his hands, the number whereof is very small, or some others of his Allies in
Italy, It must be considered, that it is only to keep them for the Owners, wh'
are not able to defend them, which to the King is matter only of great
Expense; or to free his Frontiers from the Jealousy they would, receive from
them, if they fell into th'hands of his Enemies; or to serve for a Retrait or
safety to his Armies, when they are obliged to march far for the good of the
common Cause; Or lastly, to sacrifize them to the good of the same Cause, and
to the re-establishment of his stripped Friends in the Treaty of a General Peace.

That if Pignerol remain in the King's power after the Wars of Italy, which
have preceded the Peace of Cairasque; And if that place seems to be the
recompense of so many thousands of the Kings dead Subjects, and of so many
millions of Money, spent for the Liberty of that Country; It Is a thing, in my
opinion, which cannot reasonably be reproached unto him, nor envied; since he
does not keep it as a Conquest, but as an Acquisition, and that he has bought
it with the good will of him, wh' had power to sell it; since it was not done
so much of serve for Rampart to his Kingdom, and to secure the Frontiers, as
to have a free Entry int' Italy, and to make the more haste to its Relief, when
it should b'assaulted. Let the Disinterest and Magnanimity be considered, which
have appeared in all the Treaties on the Kings part made in Germany, since that
which Sir of Charnase made at Beerwalde; And that which Sir of Avaux renewed
the last year at Hambrough. Let the sweetness and equity of the Conditions be
considered, wherewith he received into protection th'Elector of Ireves, as may
be seen in the Treaties made with him by the Sirs of St. Chaumont and of
Saludie; Let the cares had of the Swedish Interest be considered, and
th'effective and real Acknowledgments which the Swedish King always exhorted
His Confederates to pay the King, as may be justified by the Orations which Sir
of Feuquieres made to The Assembly of Hailbrun and Franckford. Let Consequences
at last be drawn out of the like Actions from the Kings Promises to the Princes
of Italy, concerning the places h' holds in Piedmont, and which he confirms in
this manner, in the third Article of the Treaty he made with Sirs the Princes
of Savoy. That the King newly ratifies the Declarations which have been made by
his Ambassadors in diverse Otcafions, and by the Letters his Mejesty has
written to the Pope, and to the Republique of Venice, upon the restitution of
the Places which his Majesty holds in Piedmont, since the death of the late Sir
Victor of Amedee Provided, that such Places as are held by the Spaniards his
Enemies, be reciprocally restored, and that Sir the Duke of Savoy remain
certainly the Master of them, under the Tuition and Regency of Madame. Let the
consequence of this, I say, be taken into consideration, and it will appear,
that our Confederates may take a full and entire confidence in this Conduct;
And that the Counselor of the Elector of Mayence, above all question a very
able Man, in the Diet held some months past at Mayence, believing to decipher
the Kings Designs t'establish himself in Germany, deviated from the Truth,
though it was by way of probability, and that he discovered effectively the
Means, wherewith he might do it, if he had had the Will.

Before this Discourse b'ended, the Reader is to b' advised, That I had
finished two Treaties which are of the Subject I handle in these two Books;
The One of the Nature of Equivocations; The Other, of the force of Opinions,
which are of great importance for Ministers of State to know. But insomuch that
this Book is already too long, and that these two Treaties may enter
commodiously into the Third Part, I have believed it was most convenient to
place them there.

End of the Second Book.
OF The pretended Monarchy OF The House of AUSTRIA.
Third BOOK.
First Discourse.
That the true Exercise of the Magnanimity of a Prince Consists in Securing his
Country from Civil Wars, and in Diverting of Foreign Wars; That the King has
Admirably Prospered in these two Things.
It Is certain, That the true exercise of the Magnanimity of a Prince, and the
Just handling of his Arms, Consists only in these two things, The one in
quieting of his Country, when it is agitated, and in Cutting up the Roots, and
stopping of the Springs of the Troubles, which may there arise; The Other in
defeating the Enterprzes, which strangers may set on foot against him, or his
Allies, and in Confining Ambition, within the Bounds of Justice: When He has
gained these two Ends, and that these great Conclusions have prospered with
him; He may say, that nothing is wanting to his glory; That his Life has
nothing more in desire to become The Example of Princes and th'Admiration of the
people; And such a prosperity is th'ultimate proof of the Love of Heaven, and
the most wonderful effect that Virtue can produce.

It Is not truly to be denied, but that the Kings Reign is very observable by
these two wonders; That h' has effaced the glory of the fairest precedent
Reigns, and has not lest to subsequent Generations, Matter for Equality, nor
any thing to Mow, the whole Crop being carried away; As to the first point,
which respects th'inside of the Country, and the obedience which Subjects owe
their Pricne, who knows not that is was so loose amongst us, That very often it
was entirely divolved into the Hugonots, and that it was not rendered so Pure or
so Neat, as it ought to have been, from the greatest part of Catholics?
France was a horrid Spectacle, and a Monstrous Confusion; for in the midst of
the State, another State was to be seen, where a confirmed Faction did Reign,
which was maintained at the Charges of the Prince, and became Rich by his
Wealth; To whom leaving places of Security, It was a Tacit Declaration to the
world, that their faith, which ought to b' as firm and Immovable, as the Poles
of Heaven, and Foundations of The Earth, was doubted and fuspected; Where there
was n' other discourse than of Assemblies, of Circles, of Abreges of Circles,
of Chiefs of Parties, and of the like Denominations of ill Augury, which were
the Evidences of a present and future revolt. How just a thing then, and how
necessary was it, that such a Faction should be suppressed, and that they wh'
had a common Birth, and drew the same Air, and rested under the cares of the
same Prince, and under the Protection of the same Laws, should be reduced
t'equal Subjection, and Pay a common Obedience to the Power that Protected
them? It Question be made of this, Let the same Faction now Live, and the same
Insurrections and Violences Assault us.

But as this was very Just, so it was very Difficult; And if it were The Effect
of an ordinary Address, and of a Mean force to destroy so bold and opinionate a
Rebellion, and to Remit to their Natural places, the parts torn from their Head
and from the rest of the Body, as were some of this Nation; Philip the second
and his Successors have made Experiment of it, in the Defection of the Low
Countries. And truly a Party, as that of the Hugonots, Rooted in so many places
of this Kingdom; Animated to its Defense by Religion, the most Violent and
undaunted Motive that can provoke the Spirit of Man; Proud and fierce, not only
by the Consideration of Effective Advantages, and present Forces, but also by
the Memory of the Losses from which it was relieved, and of the Weakness from
which it was Restored; A Party, I say, such as that, strengthened with three
hundred places, whereof some were strong; Aided by many Chiefs of Repute and
Merit, and supported by a great Foreign Power, was visibly Invincible.

In effect, It could not have been overcome, but by such a Warlike Prince as
ours, wh'had the Courage t'undertake all that was not Impossible, if it was
necessary; The Prudence to Conduct that great Design, and to disunite them,
whom it head not been safe to have Assaulted, Joined and united; T'apply gentl
Remedies, where violent had been dangerous, and to Move by persuasion and
Address, where it was difficult to prevail by force, and Constraint; wh' had
resolution to force the business to the Wall, and not to stop on the Half way,
as it had been often done, nor to retire by reason of the length of Time, or
Difficulty of the Work, nor for the secret Contradictions of his Counselors,
nor for the open Oppositions his Enemies would make him, nor for the Resistance
He might Encounter in the Elements, nor for the contrary Alterations, the
stars might raise against Him; Wh' had a strong Piety to attract the favor of
Heaven upon his Enterprises, and t'Invite them to descend upon his Armies,
without which, all the powers of Men are Impotent, and all their Designs
Barren. To declare now, what Fruits we have gathered from the Ruin of this
Party, and what the benefit of them shall be, which are yet unripe, and cannot
long be ripening. No person can truly doubt, but that the first fruits are very
great, unless it be thougt a small thing, That the King has recovered this
Party to the Sovereignty, which his Father could not leave him, and his
Predecessors had lost; That He is become Master of all his Subjects, and
Possessor of all his Kingdom; That his Country, which division rendered weak
and open to many Injuries, has reassumed its forces, and repaired its
breaches, by th'Union and Concord of its Inhabitants; That the most culpable
have no places of Refuge for their faults, nor the most discontented any
Retrait, where they may Meditate and form Rebellions in safety; That by this,
the King, in Imitation of God, has drawn Good from Evil, and so strongly
reunited them to his service who had given him Troubles, that they have since
labored profitably in his Designs, and Aided Jointly with the rest of his
Subjects to gain him Victories, and to prepare Triumphs for him; That by this
General and profound peace, which h' has established in his Kingdom, H' has
been more safe and free to march abroad, to quenon the fire that burnt his
Allies, and to break the Irons were forged for Italy, and for Germany.

As to the good, which the future Time does provide for us, as one of the Happy
Consequences of the suppression of the Hugonot party, We cannot indeed Relish
it sufficiently, whilst the Miseries of the Want do afflict us, and Peace only
can make us truly sensible of it. It Is then we shall know by Experience that
the King has no otherwise done in the Levy of Moneys, and in the subventions,
which the necessity of his Affairs forced him to draw from his people, but as a
good Father of a Family, who does not demolish any part of his House, but to
make it better than it was, and of a fairer Structure; The bounties wherewith
he desires, though to this day he cannot perform it, to gratify his Subjects,
Resemble to certain Rivers, which being hid for some time in The Earth, break
not out, but never to return, and to Run always upon its surface. The time of
this favorable Change, and of this profitable Revolution, is very near; The
Clemency of God is ready to disarm his Justice, and to take out of her hands
the Flayl wherewith h' has beaten us for so many years. All the causes of our
Expense cease with the War; Peace, which never comes into the World, but
Crowned with Abundance, and hands full of Riches, will issue shortly from the
midst of this Confusion, and from the Chaos, wherein Christendom is plunged.
It shall not be a Peace of Glass, as many others which have been seen, but a
Peace of Diamond, which shall have beauty and solidiy; And the foundations,
which the King makes and lays in all places, shall be so deep and large, so
entire and sound, that of a long time, a fault is not to be feared.

It has not failed truly on this part, but that It had been Accomplished; And
the Moneys He has advanced, and the things h' has quitted upon that Account
are a sufficient Evidence to Christendom, that nothing is so dear to him as
the Repose of it. The passion h' has for Peace, will Triumph at last over the
Inclination of The House of Austria for War: Though it cannot be stronger or
more obstinate than it has of late appeared; It Is not nevertheless Invincible,
and the great Engine that sustained it, whose wheel was even in Motion in this
Country, being stopped, and th'Hopes, which do yet Nourish and give it a
little Life, which is Germany, being of short Continuance, It must of Necessty
shortly fall and be destroyed. And though the King had Power and Means to
overcome, and to make more Conquests than that House has t'Engage and Lose; He
never had a greater desire to lay down Arms than at this time, and the Higher
he is in Prosperity, the Readier to descend for the General Good, and the
stronger and more Impetuous the Current is of his Victories, the more he is
disposed to stop it for public benefit. By virtue of his Magnanimity, he will
do more than all the forces of his Enemies can constrain him to do, all will
render Generously, what will b' Impossible to take from him. Nevertheless
t'induce the German Circles to furnish them with Money to Compel us t'hearken
to Peace, whereunto by their Report w' are adverse, they fail not to publish in
all places, That the Treaty of Hamborough was not staid by them, nor the Peace
of Christendom. But the contrary is so fully declared in Germany, The King of
Denmark has so clearly understood it, and the Ambassadors of Newtral Princes
Resident in the Court of the King of Hungary, have expressed it in such certain
and positive Terms, that there is not a Person, wh' has not discovered the
Deceit and the Design.

As to the second point; it is certainly much advanced, if not effected, and all
their Apparences will prove false; for the King by the Aids of his
Confederates, will destroy in the Souls of the Princes of The House of Austria,
and especially in that of the Spaniards where its principal Seat is, the Design
of th'Universal Monarchy, whereof they are Accused, and that Eminent Crime
imputed to them, which has been the Spring of so many Troubles and Disorders.
And it is that, which will make the Reign of the King, Remarkable and Glorious
above the Reigns of all his Predecessors, and will be the Cause, that
Christendom have an Immortal Obligation to him for hindering that Proud House,
that had Devoured it in Thought, to Advance one pace toward that End, or to
take any Measure thereof that has not been Broken. But that no Person may
suppose that I d' Offer at this by Chance, and that speaking of the design of
this pretended Monarchy, I make a Monster of my Self in the Contest; I am
resolved here to Lay out some Pieces, and to give you a Part of the Platform
framed in Spain, as well as it has been Understood; others may make up what
shall be wanting to Complete the Discovery, and Finsish the Painting, whereof
you shall receive now only the first Draught. I will take this Design from its
first Original, and from the most Concealed Spring, and Continue it to the
Troubles of Bohemia, where it appeared most Evidently, and broke out with
greater Light, Noise, and Violence, than it had done before; for it is true, That
the first Motion of Defection or Revolt, call it what you please, raised in the
Minds of the Bohemians against the House of Austria, and the first Thoughts
they had to withdraw themselves from that Power, and to submit to another Yoke,
proceeded from the fear they had to fall in Time under the Spanish Domination.
The Love of Liberty, wherewith the Northern people are more taken than any
people of the World, made them Apprehend the Death of their Liberty, wounded in
many places by a Power, which always holds Strangers by such Charms, as they
cannot break; And is never Confident of their Faith, but by the Impotency
wherein they are Cast, not to Rebel.

On the other side, the Zeal of Religion, which is equally Violent, whether
Good or Bad, in all them that have it, suffered them not to make a
Representation of that severe Tribunal without horror and despair, which in
permitting them but one Religion, has Sword and Fire to Root up and to Destroy
all others. From these two undaunted Passions did Grow and Bud, as the Fruits
of that Seed, and the Bows of that Tree, that memorable Rising, which they made
against the Emperor Ferdinand, and their fatal Election to the Kingdom of
Bohemia, which they fixed in the Person of Frederick Count Palatine. It shall
be made to appear at the End of this Book by Authentic proofs, That his
Judgment of the Bohemians was not Vain, not their fear Panique; And that the
Spaniards had of a long time forged that Project, That they did daily lay the
Foundations, and brought Materials to Continue it, and to Cherish it to the
Rearing. As to what is of the sequel of Defection, which is not yet Finished,
and the Troubles it has caused in Europe, which are not yet Ceased, It has
been spoken of in many places of this Work, and it shall more fully be spoken
of in the Third Part, where I hope to make 't appear, That whether the History
b' Ancient or Modern, There Is not a Mapp to be found, where more Rapid and more
changeable Passions are to be seen from Men, more sudden and unexpected
Strokes from Fortune, and more famous Occurrences, and of greater Instruction
for Princes than those that happened in the Affairs of Germany.

Before the handling of this important Matter, and Entering into so fair a
Field, I cannot hold from Speaking a few Words of the Deportments of a part of
them whom the House of Austria employ to make War, and of the ways they take
to assure their Conquests. These men then whom we have often in hand, and from
whom w' have been sometimes Troubled to defend our Frontiers, Are a certain
race of Men, in whom the Vicinity and Commerce of the Turks, whereof their
Troops are made up, have made lose all Sense of Humanity, and of Religion; And
that the Impurity of their Crimes, which they received instead of Pay, had
begot an Invincible habit in the Exercise of all manner of Cruelties, and in
Committing all sorts of Sacrileges. The Laws of Civilized War, which the
Marshall of Brisae ^ondred heretofore so famous in Italy, and which were more
Indulgent and Favorable to the Enemies Country, than the Laws that are now
Executed in a Friends Country, are to them a Subject whereof they have not so
much as heard; They never enter in a Country, but the Sword in one hand, and
Torch in the other; They make the Fire to Consume, what the Sword cannot
Destroy; They spare Sacred things no more than Profane; The Religious Women,
and such as are not, are the Equal Object of their Brutality; And their
Pleasure would not be Complete, if Murder did not succeed Rape; And if after
Satisfaction given to what is most Indocile, and most Disordered in the
Concupiscible part, they did not surfeit also with horrible Punishments, and by
barbarous Deaths, of what is most Inhuman and most Savage in the Irascible
part: I say nothing, but what Experience confirms, and whereof Lorrain and
other Countries have seen the Examples, wh' are at this day the Astonishment of
all Nations, and for the future shall be the Reproach of our Age.

As to them, in whose favor these Tragical and sad Conquests are made, It Is
certain, That if they beat down or destroy and thing of a Country, It Is so far
from being their Design, as '^^s of a Lawful Prince, to Repair the Ruins to
his Power, and to Re-build in a more Magnificent and Stately manner than it was
before; That they would lay it flat to the Foot and Earth; That if they could,
they would pull up Foundations; That they would plow up the Earth, and sow Salt
in it; That no Impressions of their first Government might be seen, nor one
single Draught of its Ancient form; And their Method to Establish themselves,
and to give Root to their Domination, is to take off all high Heads, till none
are left, but what are Humble and Low; And to Esteem the Courage, and
th'Understanding of the Inhabitants, for Treasonable Crimes, and to hold all
them Rebels, wh' have Qualities capable of Rebellion; To Destroy or to
Transport them into other Countries, where they shall raise no Fears, and where
they shall not provoke so tender a Jealousy, and so delicate a Distrust as
theirs. And insomuch, that they well know, that many Generations must pass, and
many Ages slide away, before the Conquered people forgetting their first
Domination under which they Lived, b' Accustomed to the New, and that forced
Obedience, and such as is not in their power to Refuse, agrees better with
their Proud and Imperious Humor, than Voluntary Obedience, which may be lost,
as often as Subjects change their Affections, and gain New Masters; They secure
them by Garrisons and Colonies, and by the Power of Governments and
Magistrates, which they put into the Hands of their Countrymen, with Exclusion
to strangers, and by that means are Punished for the Vices of their Birth, and
make Repentance for Sins, whereof they are not Guilty.

It Is a Picture, whose Touches are not from my Pencil or Fancy, but which has
been borrowed from their Relations, and from their Histories, and whereof
Italy, the Indies, and other Countries are yet the True and Indubitable
Originals. And it is the Desolation the King would prevent, before it grow
Dangerous, and bear even upon the Heart of his Affairs; It Is the Tempest that
he would allay before it break forth; It Is the true cause of the Relief, he
requires from his People, and the Reason that compells him to set on foot that
hard and sad Law of Conservation, which permits the Diversion and Aversion of
the greater, by the lesser Evils.

Second Discourse.
Of the Spring of the Design of the pretented Monarchy of the House of Austria:
some Advantages, which the Imperial Dignity brings with it above the other
Secular Dignities of Christendom.
FErdinand of Arragon, one of the Greatest Politicians of his Time, and who had
always Vaster Thoughts than Power, was the Person that began to Conceive the
design of the Monarchy has been spoken of, and did lay the first Foundation,
in giving in Marriage his Daughter and Heir, Jane, to the Archduke Philip, Son
of Maximilian the Emperor. His Marriage with Isabella of Castile, had United,
and as it were Grafted int' his House all the Countries of Spain, with
Exception to the Kingdom of Granada, whereof after a Ten years War, and by the
Courage of Ferrant of Gonsalve, h' became Master, and carried away the Surname
of Catholic, which he has Left to his Posterity. The same Success in Arms,
and the Virtue of the same Captain gained him from us the Kingdom of Naples,
recovered from the Kings of Naples his Kinsmen; And rejoyned in his Person, to
the part w' had allowed him, what w' had by Conquest kept for our selves. The
Interdict, which Julius the Second thundered against Henry King of Navarre our
Ally, gave him Color, and Furnished him with a pretense to usurp that
Kingdom. Hazard rather than Reason, or to Express it better, a secret
disposition of Divine Providence, which inclines sometimes to its Ends, above
the Reasons of Men, and contrary to the Appearance of Things, made him hearken
to the Proposals of Christopher Columna, for the discovery of the West Indies,
and Exposed unt' him the benefits of the Richest Mines of the Earth, and the
Abundance of the longest Labor of the Sun, since it has Shined. So that his
Daughter brought Great Countries, and Fair Hopes to the Archduke her Husband,
wh' Enjoyed from his Mother, the Low Countries, and the Country of Bourgognia,
above what he was to Enjoy from his Father, which was not small or
Inconsiderable in Germany.

The Conjunction then of the Heat and Courage of Germany, to the Dryness and
Prudence of Spain, being made, and so many different Countries Collected in one
House, As so many Arms Expatiated into diverse places, to surround and
straighten the rest of Christendom, He laid it for a Ground and Principle of
the Doctrine he left to his Posterity, to retain always the Empire in their
Jurisdiction; As the Basis that ought to bear the greatness of their Ambition,
and as the Center, where all the Countries, whereof the Conquest was intended,
ought to Unite to make the Circle of the Absolute Monarchy. This was the first
Idaea of this great Design, and the Bud from whence he discovered himself; This
was the forecast of Ferdinand, and his sweetest Hopes. And though the Ambition
of his Son-in-Law gave him much personal Trouble, and was the Disturbance of
his Rest, and Torment of his Age; it might b' Endured with the same sense, That
Agrippina Mother of Nero, did the Advice of an Astronomer, who threatened with
the Sad and Tragical Entertainment her Son would give her if he came to the
Empire, Answered; Let me Dye, provided that he may Reign.

Lets make a Halt here, that shall not be unprofitable, and Consider before we
go on, what the Possession of the Empire may Contribute to the design of the
Monarchy. It Is certain, that as, amongst the secular Dignities of Christendom,
There Is none so High, or whose Light shines so Lively as the Imporial; It has
also Extraordinary Means to become great, or to draw where it please, Unjustly
or Justly, all the Countries that depend upon it; And the House of Austria 'th
made it appear, since Charles the fifth was Elected to that Dignity, and had
Fortified the Powers of the Empire by the Conjunction of so many gathered or
usurped Countries. The most remarkable Means, and which have made most Noise,
whereof he and his Successors have made Advantage, or Endeavored it to Extend
their Greatness under the shadow of that Dignity, are these.

The first is, the Leagues which they have made or found in Germany, and which
they have ever had the Address to fit to their Interests under other Pretenses,
and to Convert them to their particular Ends under color of Searching and of
Pursuing the good of their Confederates. This Invention has been one of the
Rarest and Subtilest Stratagems of their Policy; And they 've scarce ever moved
any Wheel that has produced such great Success; That had so present a Benefit;
That has so long Acted, and so Insensibly as this. By this means they have
disposed of Forces that did not belong to them, as of their own; And having not
the Fountain in their Power; The Countries of their Friends; They 've had
nevertheless, the Commodity and use of the Stream, That Is to say, of their
Powers. All the World well knows how much time they Employed to Invade and
Obstruct the League of Snaube, which was not Settled, as has been observed, but
to prevent the Invasions that were in preparation, and to repair the Violences
that were Acted in the Empire. And the History instructs us sufficiently of the
Troubles Sir of Langey had, to break the Charm that Bound the Members of that
League; To give them a Clear sight of it, and to make them Understand that what
was prepared for a Remedy, was become their Poison, in the hands of the
Emperor Charles, and of Ferdinand his Brother; so great a Truth it is, That
France has always been the Providential Buckler of Germany, and the Appointed
Rampar, to stop the Motions of them, wh' undertake upon its Liberty.

It Is also a Thing sufficiently known in History, and whereof w' have made
Mention in the last Discourse of the second Book, That if the Emperor had not
found Means to form in Italy and in Germany a Coun^^^-League to oppose that of
Smalchalde, where all the Protestants almost of the North had united to strip
him of his Powers; It had Reduced him to his Shirt, Degraded him from the
Empire, and made the Rodomontada of the Duke of Alva ridiculous; who answered
him, That to describe the Greatness of Forces, and the Number of Powers united
against his Master, said, That the Duke of Saxe, The Lantgrave of Hess, The
King of Denmark, and Swede, etc. were of the party; That the King of Spain, and
of Naples, the Archduke of Austria, and the Count of Tirrol, the Duke of
Milan, and the Lord of the Low Countries, were entered int' a League, which his
Master would oppose to the Multitude and Forces of the united Powers. But by
the Power of that League, he suppressed the other; forced the Gates of the
Mutinous Cities to be opened, and might, it may be, have finished his Design,
which has been since so often and unprofitably Attempted, The Reduction of all
Germany, if he had not been hindered from other places, as has been related in
the precedent Discourse.

I will not now Speak of it, because I have amply spoken in the second Book of
that League, which in Germany is called Catholic; It Is true, That never any
League was made of greater Importance, or of a more regular or stronger
constitution for the interests of the House of Austria. And though it had only
for Foundation, and pretense of it is Establishment, the defense of Religion
against the Threatening of the Protestants; It Is certain, that it has not
Labored, or Lent its Forces to this Time, but to relieve the Ruinous Affairs
of the Emperor; And to make his Success the more Glorious, and his Power the
more Fearful. Another Expedient which the Possession of the Empire has
furnished to the House of Austria, to enable it to undertake without Punishment
upon other Christian Princes, and to make the preparations of their Enterprises
without Trouble and Allowance of Jealousy to their Enemies, has been the
special Obligation The Empire imposes upon Germany to make War to the Turk, and
the particular Personage, which the Emperor sustains of Adversary to that
great Enemy of the Faithful. And nevertheless, how often has Charles the fifth
raised Great Forces, and Commanded Germany to do the Like under that pretense;
And how often has he deceived the World, and given the Germans the Dog to
hold, in Turning his Arms against France, or to the Oppression of some of our
Allies? As it happened to the Duke of Guelders; And when we made show of raising
Men at the Noise of those preparations; when we put our selves into some
Posture to secure our selves against the Storm that Threatened us; when we would
have used some Precaution to give a Necessary security; Then the Declarations
and Invectives were busy; Then their Cartells and Manifests were published;
That the Conclaves and Dyets were Troubled with the Complaints they made
against our Kings, and the Accusations wherewith they did Charge them, in
diverting them from an Holy War, and by th'Intelligence they held, as they
would have it, with the Turk, to the prejudice of Christendom, and the Princes
of it; so that by the Artifices and Practices of the Emperor, we were reduced
to that sad Condition, and to that hard Necessity, either to Suffer our selves
to be surprised in the Ill of the Time that was framed; as it once happened to
Francis the first; or to hazard the blame of Insensibility and Coldness for
Religion, if we prepared not some Shelter and some Recrute to secure us; as it
happened to Henry the Second.

I will say, upon this Occasion, and for the Direction of the Reader; That the
Successors of Charles have not lost by his Example, and that they have been most
Worthy Imitators of so good a Master. Barbary has been often the Visible
Subject of the Armies they have Raised, and of the Naval Forces they have sent
against France; It Is an Artifice, which seems Natural and Infused into the
Blood of Spain. And Examples have been seen in the past Ages; And in Times,
when Deceits did not pass for Prudence, and when there was Ordinarily in the
World, Faith that was pure, and sincerity that was not Sophisticated.

Behold, a Remarkable passage; After the Peter the third King of Arragon had
lost Sicily, and that w' had taken that fair Island from him, which was not
less dear to him than the Kingdom of Spain; As he was a Great Master in the
Art of Dissimulation, He presently made show of Consolation in his Loss, and
though his Heart bled inwardly, He made no show of Grief, and discovered no
Thoughts of repair but on the Barbarian Coast. Upon so specious a Report, which
he scattered in all places, and plausible Impression for to Entertain other
Christian Princes; H' obliged some of them, and amongst them was St. Lewis, to
aid him with Money, to provide Ships, and to make ready a Naval Army, which h'
intended for so Holy an Expedition. That good Prince, who knew not how to Reign
but for the Glory of God, and on whom the Crown he woar, had weighed too much,
if Charity had not supported it, failed not to assist so pious an Enterprise,
and was easily surprised by so subtle a Device, and by so delicate a Bait. But
this Army which ought to have Conquered Afrique, and put to the Sword the
Infidells of that Country, had n' other Object than the Ruin of the French,
that were in Sicily, and by a Supercery without Example, and by a Sea of spilt
Blood, not to be paralleled, Commanded those infamous Vespers, which since have
been called Sicilian Vespers. It Is not, to speak Clearly of this Affair, That
it was a Crime in Peter, if there had been no other Thing in it than to conceal
a Design that could not have prospered but by silence, or that the Answer he
made to Martin the fourth, deserved not Commendation, who sent to Demand of
him, For what place that great preparation and powerful Fleet was intended;
That if his Shirt knew, what he had in his heart, He would burn it at that
instant. Princes truly are not obliged to make known their Secrets to other
Princes, and to give Account of all their Actions to them that would Demand it.
But theirs no Color no Art, that can disguise or Sweeten the breach of Faith
in Peter, and that black proceeding, which made him Divert the Money which St.
Lewis had given to make War against th'Infidels, to the Oppression of the
Christians. And to Convert a Matter ordained to an Holy use, to the Massacre
and Slaughter of Lewis his Subjects. What I shall Infer from these Examples,
and from many others of the same Nature, which the House of Austria may
abundantly Furnish, is; That there is too great a Facility, and too stupid a
Disposition in the Souls of many Persons, and particularly in the Souls of
them, wh' are inflamed with Devotion, and make profession of a Life, more
reformed than that of other Men, To believe all things, which the Confederates
and Agents of The House of Austria publish in favor of its Piety; That the Zeal
which seems to burn there for Religion, is sometimes Nothing else but a fire in
Picture, and a Zeal in show; And that the fair Appearance which dazels so many
men's Eyes, resembles the Colors of the Bow in Heaven, which are but an
Illusion and a Deceit for the Eyes of silly Persons.

That particular Obligation, which the Christian Emperors have to oppose the
^urks Armies, and to be the Rampar of Christendom on Hungary side, provides
for them also of special power, which other Princes have not, in making of
Leagues, and to engage other Princes when it is necessary to Arm against the
Immortal Enemy of their Religion and Countries.

Third Discourse.
Other Advantages that attend upon the Imperial Dignity above the Secular
Dignities of Christendom.
A Third Expedient, which The Empire does furnish their Emperors withal, to
advance, and promote their Affairs in distributing of favors, or in raising of
Troubles, is the power, be it lawful or usurped, they have from all time
assumed to the Convocation and Assembly of oecumenique Councils. There Is no
question, that being the most exalted Heads of the Secular Body of
Christendom, or by reason of some particular Right annexed to their Dignity
(If any has been annexed) But that they 'nterpose with more Authority and Awe
than other Princes in those great and Important Assemblies; And especially in
these last Ages, where it has been of Necessity to Treat of Temporal as of
Ecclesiastical affairs, In regard of th'Heretique and Infidel Powers; That the
Emperor had it in his Choice to render himself formidable or indulgent to whom
he pleased. And as it is the condition of Man's Spirit to overreach things
permitted, and t'Enlarge the Limits of Jurisdiction; And instead of providing a
Remedy, against th'Invasion of Infidels, and the Defection of Heretics by
convenient Means, has endeavored to impose a yoke upon Popes, and to put
Fetters upon their feet; As the Ambassadors of Charles the fifth said upon the
Subject of the Council of Trent; And have Cherished the Murmurs of Heretics
and their Complaints against the Church, by reason of the Catholics
deportments, and chiefly, in respect of the vices and th'abuses whereof they
Accused the Court of Rome.

This Reformation truly of particular Manners, is a thing much to be desired,
and it has been always the wish of Honest Men to see the ancient Discipline
reflourish, and th'Innocency of the Golden Age of the Church to Revive. But
works are no so easy to be done, as wish made; And the Pope by whose
Authority the Council of Trent was Called or Hold, had reason to Declare it
Just; That the Church should be purged of the Corruption stolen into some of
its Members, and the Spots taken away that had Disfigured some of his Legates.

And it was no less Just and Reasonable, That the Princes who desired with so
much Heat and Vehemence that Reformation and Renovation of Ecclesiastique
Spirits, should labor on their parts, to make Clean what was Sullied in their
Dominions, and to Cure their Souls of those furious passions of Ambition and
Revenge, wherewith they were vexed; and filling Christendom with fire and
Sword, made nothing but Desolation and a Burying place. That the War ought
first to be banish^ as the Mother of all Vices, and as the Springs of the
License of some Ecclesiastiques, and the cause of their Ignorance; That Peace
ought to be given to the World to abate the sharpness of spirits, and th'hatred
of parties; That the Fathers, wh' are called to Council, might appear there,
free from their Masters passions, and their Souls full of the Churches Interest.

As to th'Heretiques, who have separated themselves upon the pretense of
observing Corruption in the Church, and have done it, supposing it to be true,
upon the occasion of a greater Curruption; That they were unworthy Brothers, wh'
instead of Laboring the Recovery of their sick Brethren, suffered them to dye
for want of Help, and unnatural Children who forsook the old Age of their
Mother, upon Pretense, that Her beauty decayed, and that they discovered some
Spot or Wrinkle upon her face. That the superfluities and Excrescencies of the
Tree, if there were any, and the hanging Boughs ought to be cut off; but not
the Tree cut down at the root; That they made War, to the Luxury, to the Pomp,
and other Vices of the Court of Rome, which were th'Appurtenances of the
senses, and of the Matter; And to the Pride and Felony, and to the other Sins,
which Arysing from the Spirit had the more dangerous Venom, and were of a
Superior order in Malice.

Let Us return to our Subject, and for Proof and Confirmation of what we have
above said; Let Us not forget t'observe, that the Council of Trent in the
Progress of its Convocation, or in its Continuance, was in th'hands of Charles
the fifth, like a knife that did one while Cut against the Pope, another while
against the Protestants of Germany; or as an Instrument, whereof He made use,
sometimes to gain the Inclinations of the very Protestants, and to draw them to
his side; Sometimes to make himself Acceptable to the Pope, and to place him in
his Interests; And so by the Means of Fear and Hope, and by the Ministration of
those two powerful passions, Endeavored to Govern all Rome, and in Germany,
To give the Law to the people of Christendom, and to Circumvent and Undermine
France, and to take away the great Counterpoise he found against the Execution
of his Designs by the force of this Kingdom.

To the Protestants, full of Luthers Spirit, and poisoned with his Doctrine,
who burnt with Hatred against the Holy Chair, He promised the Convocation of a
Council, wherein the Popes Authority should be reformed; And to the Pope, ready
to burst with Grief, to see such great Schism, and defection of so many Souls,
who breathed not, but for their Return to the bosom of the Church, and their
Reunion to the Center of its Unity, the Holy Chair, He gave hopes of commanding
the Protestants to attend at the Council; And in case they should refuse to
submit to its Resolutions and Decrees, to constrain them; And for that purpose,
he caused his Threatenings to b' Intimated to the Protestants, and frighted them
with th'Armies of the Holy Chair, which he would strengthen with his Arms; And
'twas then, when they appeared averse to his desire, and that they would not
Conspire and Labor Jointly with him in the Ruin of France, which was The End
of his Artifices. At another Time he 'ndeavoured to terrify the Pope, and
threatened so to Bridle him by the Council, and to reduce his power to such
straight Limits, That He would repent him of the want of Compliance to his
desires, and of consent to the passions He had against France; And to render us
Odious to the Protestants, and to sharpen th'Hatred H' had Imprinted against
us, and to make fruitful the Seeds which H' had long before Sowed, He made them
believe, That we were the Cause that the Council did not hold in places
Convenient, and afford Convenient Conditions for them; And at other times, He
would aggravate before the Pope the Precautions which were offered, and the
Preservatives, wherewith we were furnisned, to provide against the practices
they formed, and th'Evils they prepared against us at Rome and the Council.

Insomuch, that we had an hard Task t'undeceive the Germans, to whom h' had
given such Sinister Impressions of our Conduct, and had use of an Extraordinary
Industry, Boldness, and good Fortune to make abortive the proposals, which his
Ambassadors made at Trent; That all Christendom would make a League to force
us to renounce the Alliance made with the Turk, though no use was made of it,
but for the Good of Christians, and for a necessary defense; And to
re-establish the Duke of Savoy his Uncle in the places of his Country, which
w' had taken, though Lawfully and by a Just Title of War; And for other Ends
that concerned them, and not Christendom, and that tended to the Promotion of
their Interests, and not to the Advancement of the Churches Interest. From
thence Issued those prudent Necessary protestations, which Henry the second
Commanded to be published at Rome, and at Trent, by his Ambassadors, against
those Conspiracies, and Monopolies; From thence came that General Resistance,
which the Suisses made to the practices of the Popes Nuncio, Invented by the
Emperor, and to the violence of his Endeavors to remove them from our Alliance,
and to impede the permission of the Levies of Soldiers to be made in their
Country in our favor.

I will not here forget a Remarkable passage of Charls's ill will to France,
though the Turk was the public Adversary, as we have already said, which the
Imperial Dignity did assign him, and that the Contributions of The Empire, which
they call Romas Zuk, are principally ordained to make War against the Turk.
That though the Princes and Protestant States, t'ease them of th'importunities
the Emperor made them to aid him against us; As unwilling to shake the
foundations of their subsistence, which are in the Protections of this Crown,
and to give the occasion of a nobler Trial, more worthy of his Dignity, made an
offer to serve him with an hundred thousand Men against the Turk; Yet he
refused them, and was obstinate in having that relief and subvention against
the Crown of France. Another passage also, no less remarkable, must not be
forgot, of the respect this Prince paid, and the esteem he rendered to the Holy
Chair, and to the Council, for to gain the heart of the Protestants, and to
employ their Forces against us; He permitted them, during the sitting of the
Council, and before, in the view of the Legate, and the Nuntios of the Pope, and
without their interposition; He permitted them, I say, diverse Assemblies and
Conferences, to handle there, and resolve of several Points that concern
Religion, and which ought to have been decided by the Council. This was in
effect to settle Herisie by his Authority, which had been planted by his
Connivence, and give a new Title to those Errors, which were believed to be but
too deeply rooted. If any thing of like nature had been acted by our Kings, and
if they had so insolently forgot, that they were children of the Church, there
had not been Lightning enough in the Vatican to have darted on our heads in the
judgment of our Adversaries; There had not been Colors black enough to obscure
their Honor, nor Satyrs violent enough to blast it. No question will be made
of this Truth, if memory b' had of the Noise, which the Discourse of Poissy
made at our Neighbors Courts and ours, though it was assembled by the Pope's
consent in the presence of the Apostolic Legate, and to appease the Schism
which toar us in piece, and to degrade Heresy with the greater Solemnity, as
the Cardinal of Lorrain had made the King to believe it. And nevertheless, for
such wicked Enterprises, and such sacrilegious Attempts, as those of
The Emperor, they murmured at Rome, but betwixt the Teeth, and secret
Complaints only were made, and Discourses in th'Ear; And whether the softness
of some of the Court would not permit the Power and Fortune of Charles to be
justled, or that Prudence did advise Dissimulation, and the Concealment of an
Evil, which to chastise had been a dangerous thing; This proceeding passed
unpunished at Rome; Th'Arms of the Holy Chair were not employed to punish it;
And the House of Austria has not since failed to conserve amongst its
Subjects, but also amongst the Subjects of other Princes, the Reputation of
being the Sword and Buckler of the Church; For that House is so powerful in
Artifices, that it has close and subtle Wheels to remove beliefs, and fine and
small Plasters to disguise its foulness, and cover its faults; And it is true
also, that France is unhappy in that behalf, and that the zeal it has ever had
for Religion, and respect it has ever born to the Holy Chair, have scarce
gained belief amongst men, and t'insinuate into the spirits of its own
Children, and also of them wh' have truly piety and good Intentions, but give
too much way to their heat, which is not sufficiently enlightened nor discreet,
and too little credit to the light of others, whose heat is prudent and
considerate.

A fourth Expedient, capable to gain Countries at easy Charges, and Victories
without Combat, which th'Emperors of The House of Austria would introduce into
the Empire, and would have carried them far, if they had not been hindered, and
if France had not been found in their way to stop them; Is, The device of
Sequestrations; This Stratagem has so bad a Consequence to the Liberty of the
Princes and States which depend upon The Empire, that even the most affect onate
to The House of Austria have been afraid, and were scandalized. And the Duke of
Bavaria, who from all times has been one of the Pillars that has supported
the Greatness of that House, sufficiently understood it in that sense, by a
Letter of the 13th of December. 1629. which Sir Jocherius writ in his name to Sir
the Nuntius Bagny, in Answer to what the said Nuntius had written of the 5th of
October in the same year, by which he represented unt' him on the Kings behalf,
The consequence of th'Emperor's Refusal, at the request of the Spaniards, to
give the Investiture of such Estates to them who were the Lawful Heirs, and
comprehended in the first Investitures, and to strip them to the said Estates
by the means of Sequestration. This concerned the last Duke of Mantoua.

They began to take this way, and to put this Design in practice, after the
death of William Duke of Cleves. The Spaniards, that would upon any account
invade his Succession, which, besides The Extent and Goodness of the Country,
was of mavelous convenience for them; Obtained of The Emperor, That he would
ceize upon Julliers by the Archduke Leopald their King's Brother in Law, and
hold that place in Sequestration, till h' had judged to whom of right the
Succession did belong, and had in Justice determined that famous difference,
wherein there were so many knots t'untie, and so many Parties to content; That
the decision could not but be very long, and very difficult. This Invention of
Sequestration, if it had been in their power to have settled it, would have given
them Means, under the pretext of Justice, to have assured themselves in time of
the possession of what did not belong unto them, and whereof they were ceized
by a mere congruity. And there is nothing truer, but that of Pretenders, whereof
there is ever some of them at their dispositions; or the nature of the business,
which cannot be so neat and clear, but that there will ever be some Shadow or
Clowd that would be hard to disperse; or the Forms also of Justice, s' often
contrary to the Expedition of Justice, would make so many Difficulties t'arise,
and discover so many Incidents, that the true Masters of a contentious Good,
tired with delays, without an end, and dispairing of ever drawing it from so
powerful and covetous hands, as theirs that retained it from them, should be
compelled to hearken to Proposals made them, to receive a Compensation, and to
take some real and effective thing, for a few hopes ill grounded, and for some
vain and frivolous Titles. Insomuch, that they would become in Appearance Lawful
Masters of that, whereof they were before but unlawful Detainers; And what in
the beginning, and in its original, was nothing but force and violence, would
in its progress and sequel take the visage and the colors of Justice.

In that manner, the Spaniards had resolved t'handle the Duke of Mantoua, if he
would have consented to the Sequestration of the Citadel of Casal; And they
would, it may be, have done the like t'him, if they had taken that place by
force, as they made great Assaults to take it. Th'Offer which they caused to be
made unt'him of Cremonis, with reservation of the Citadel of Cremona, or of
some other Country of like value in the French County, instead of Montferrat,
is a tacit Approbation of the Violence they exercised, because they did
endeavor in some measure to repair it, and a manifest Argument of the
proceeding they would hold in the use of Sequestrations, and by th'Introduction
of that new Expedient, to insinuate into the Countries, which are commodious
for them, under some form of Equity, and in preserving th'Apparences of Justice.

Charles the Fifth in truth, in the difference which has so long exercised the
Dukes of Savoy, of Mantoua, and of other Princes, upon the subject of
Montferrat, did not proceed by way of Sequestration, before h' had given
judgment upon that Affair. The Enterprise seemed unt' him too bold and jealous,
respect being had to the present Conjuncture; And h'understood well, that it
cooled the goodwill or them whom he had a desire to keep in Newtrality; That
fear stopped his desire t'usurp Montferrat, under the pretext lately mentioned;
And he chose rather to draw that business into length, and to make use of it as
a Lure or a Bait to draw the Duke of Savoy to his Party, and to debosh from our
Interests the Marquis of Salusse, in hopes that the Montferrat, on which h' had
also pretensions, should b'adjudged t'him; As Antonio de Leve had given him
t'understand. At last, having long played with the Duke's credulity, and
deceived the Marquis, h' adjudged the possession of Montferrat to the Duke of
Mantoua, and left the claim to the Duke of Savoy, to pursue it civilly, and
according to the forms of Justice in the Imperial Chamber. He did not intend to
make him Greater, on whose Countries h' had great designs, and whom he would
not permit to be Master of the Barriere which severs France from Italy, and
Keeper of the Gate by which the French might enter. His Successors have been
more hardy and inconsiderate than he was, and have stirred an Engine, which is
never shaken, but to their shame and ruin; For that cause they raised a cruel
and long War in Italy, but what they gained thereby, was to fall by the just
judgment of God into the Precipice they would have avoided, and to draw the
French into that Country, whom they would for ever have excluded.

Let Us return to the Matter of Sequestrators, who have plunged us so deep into
this Subject, and observe it, as a strange thing, that the Spaniards, wh'
approved of them as plausible and just in other men's affairs, will not hear
talk of them in matters of Contest that concern them. And all the world knows,
that in the Succession of Portugal, Which five or six Pretenders rendered famous
in the time of our Fathers, Philip the Second would never consent, that that
Kingdom should be put in Deposite, or permit, as he said, his Right to depend
upon another man's Judgment, which nevertheless was never so clear and
indubitable, as that of the Marquis of Brandeburg, and of the Duke of Newberge
for the Succession of the Countries of Cleves; And that of the Duke of Nevers
to the Succession of Mantoua.

A Fifth Expedient to grow Greater, and a Right which The Empire sometimes
appropriates for its Advancement and Enlargement, Is the Confiscation of the
Feifes which do arise; But in regard that we will treat of them in the Third
Part, of the Affairs of th Palatinate, and make a stay therein of purpose, at
least if some prudent consideration do not hinder us, we will content our
selves in sending the Reader thither, and pass on, having only observed, That
The Imperial Dignity brings with it these great Rights, and fair Prerogatives,
and that it shines by these Illustrious Privileges, above all the Secular
Dignities of Christendom. But insomuch, that th'Abuses and Excesses of great
Powers are not less dangerous, than the overflowings of great Rivers; And that
they resemble to the Chariot of the Sun, the Poets feign, which cannot go out
of its natural walk, nor quit the Ecliptic Line; without burning a part of the
World. The Powers of Emperors are limited, as in other places has been said,
and Boundaries are raised, that they may not go out of their Places, nor pass
their Limits; The Paths H' ought to walk in are set out unt' him, and the
Course h' ought to take, by the pragmatique Sanctions, and by the Resolutions
of the Dyets of the Princes and States of The Empire. Those Laws and Resolutions
Moderate that Power, and make that Symetrie of Temper, and Harmony of Humors
of all the Body, whereof th'Emperors are but The Head; It Is, what th'Elector
Maurice of Saxe intended, when he said, That Germany advanced so many paces to
its ruin, as The Emperor added new Degrees to his Power; and that it might b'
ever free and flourishing, it was necessary always to conserve the Princes
Authority and their Power, in the Constitution of The Empire, which were the
Counterpoise that balanced it.

But since it was very hard to maintain the Evenness of the Counterpoise, and
that Ambition, like the Fire, says, It Is never enough; And that to rule it
breaks all the Chains that Justice thinks to withold it by, and respects
neither Laws nor Customs to satisfy its Ends; Support for the Empire has been
sought out of The Empire, and the Subsistence of the Body and Liberty of the
Members have in a special manner been under the Protection of France. In what
way this Protection is formed, whether by Reciprocal Treaties, or by Custom
changed into the Force of a Law; What this Crown has ever practiced to hasten
the Relief of the Empire, and hinder the Dissolution of the Body, and the
Annihilation of its Natural Form; It Is not any business here t'enquire after;
It Is sufficient that the Germans are agreed, and have always declared it in
their Treaties, which they have made with our Kings, when they were to be
redeemed from vexation, and came t'implore their Endeavors or Arms. This
Formal Acknowledgment, and Express Declaration is seen in the League of
th'Elector Maurice, and the other Princes his Associates, made with Henry the
Second, to secure Germany from th'Irons which Charles the Fifth would have
imposed on it; That there is no question to be made of it; Insomuch that France
cannot b'accused of Temerity, or of Undertaking, when it appears in th'Affairs
of Germany, and that it interposeth its Cares and Arms, That the Balance
spoken of stand straight, and Lean not on the Emperor's, nor on the Princes
side, and Free Towns of The Empire.

I speak not here, because I Have elsewhere done it, of that General and
Indefinite Obligation, which Great Persons have to relieve Inferior persons
when they are oppressed; The common Law of Humanity, whereof they are not exempt,
and the particular Law of Charity, which sometimes enters into their Conduct,
exact this Duty of all that can render it; And the Law of their Interest, which
is the supreme and powerful Law of Princes, does sufficiently press them to
hinder the Great from devouring the Lesser persons, lest they should grow too
Great, and lest Power enflaming their Ambition, thrust them on, and extend it
to the Dominions of other Princes. I speak not also of another Obligation, more
Bounded and Circumscribed, which France has to protect some Princes and
particular States of The Empire, and to b' a Shelter and Haven unto them in time
of Persecution and Tempest; Such as the protection and safeguard it owes
particularly to th'Elector of Treves, which was respected by the King of Swede,
and Sacred with victorious Heretics, with whom neither he nor we had any War;
It Is true, That th'aid which France owes to The Empire, when it is threatened with
Ruin, has not much appeared since it entered into the house of Austria, but in
favor of the Members against the Enterprises of the Chief; As also
th'oppression and violence which has been opposed, proceeded from that side,
and had their Beginning in th'Invasions the Princes of that House would have
made upon the Liberty of others. Yet France failed not the last Emperor, when
there was need of it. And if in the Troubles of Bohemia, and after those happy
beginnings, and the visible Evidences of a more happy Sequel of the Palatine's
Arms, the King had not permitted the French to go out of France, to fortify
th'Emperor's Troops, and sent the most Solemn and Illustrious Ambassy, which of
a long time has gone out of this Kingdom, t'untie the Protestant League, and
break the Course of their Prosperity, The Emperor had run the hazard of being
stripped of his Countries, and to have tried the same fortune he has made the
Palatine to suffer, and to become Pensioner to the Spaniards, as the other has
been to the Hollanders.

It Is easy to conclude, from what has been abovesaid, That it is not without
Reason, that The House of Austria makes The Empire the Basis and Center of their
pretended Monarchy; That it is not without Reason, that the late Emperor writing
to the King of Spain, to incline him to approve of the translation of the
Electorat of the Count Palatine to the Person of the Duke of Bavaria,
represented unt' him the consideration, That it had ever been the Judgment of
their Predecessors, that the Seat, whereupon the Greatness of their House ought
to rest, was Germany, and that the Empire was the highest and the most eminent
piece of all Germany; That that Dignity was to be conserved in their House
above all other things; And that the promotion of Baviere, and of his
Successors to the Electorate, rendering the Suffrages of the Catholic Electors
superior in number, which should ever descend to the Princes of that Race, the
possession of The Empire would be the better established, and what in Form and
Apparences might appear Elective, would in Effect and Substance become
Hereditary. And the late King, wh' had so many Natural and Acquired Lights of
the things of this world, and in whom the good sense, wherewith he was born,
was so much improved by The Experience h' had gained, said in a contrary sense
to that of the Duke of Anhalt, when he was sent unt' him from the Princes of
Germany, wh' had made a League with him, to be delivered in good earnest from
th'Attempts and Allarms, which they s' often received from the House of
Austria, That it was necessary to force the Empire from that House, where it
seemed to have taken root, and to pass it int' another Catholic House, but
less Ambitious; And having shorter and weaker Wings, might not extend them so
far, nor fly so high.

But Death caused that magnificent Project to miscarry, when it was but in the
Flower, and the Execution it may b' is reserved for some of his Heirs, who may
inherit such magnanimous Thoughts, and march upon such generous Impressions as
the King does at this time; Wh' is as worthy an Imitator of the Virtues of his
Father, as Lawful Successor of his Kingdom; He Is inflamed with the same zeal
for the establishment of the Peace of Christendom, and has this satisfaction,
to have omitted nothing that might b' instrumental to cut off that fatal
Succession of The Empire from The House that enjoys it; And that Transaction of
ill Augury, which is made from the one to the other, in the Persons of their
Princes. That he spares not any thing to reduce the Empire to its first
Condition, and ancient Form; That what they would make Absolute and Monarchick,
is tempered by the Aristocracy convenient and proper for it; And that all is
Governed in Germany by the Laws and Constitutions there Established, and not by
the Ambition and Capricious humors of them, who would put themselves above the
Constitutions and Laws. That by the Re-establishment of that fair Order, and by
the Observation of Things that ought to maintain it, The Peace, which ought to
be given to the World, b'Established in great Safety, and that the Remembrance
of Evils past, whereof the return will not be feared, serve only to Augment the
sweetness of present Benefits, which are not in danger to be lost. We shall
shortly be sensible of the Time of this most happy Condition, and though the
War seems to be stronger and hotter than it has formerly been, It Is the last
Breath it yields up, and the Liveliest flames of a Torch, which is ready to go
out.

Fourth Discourse.
Charles the fifth was of Opinion, That to attain the Monarchy; H' ought to make
himself Master of one of these three Countries, France, Italy, or Germany; That
he failed of all of them, and could not subdue but a part of Italy.
HAving cleared and unfolded that Principle of the Doctrine, which Ferdinand
left to his Successors to gain the Monarchy; Lets see, what profits they have
made of it, and what has been the Harvest of s' admirable a Seed, Death which
took away Philip of Austria in the Life of Maximilian The Emperor his Father,
permitted him not to carry his Thoughts out of Spain, nor to Labor at the
Work, whereof his Father-in-Law had drawn the Platform, and which so long
Exercised, and so Vainly, his Son Charles. This Charles then failed not, to turn
his first paces of Youth toward the Empire; And though the Steps which carried
to this highest Dignity, were Rude and Slippery, and that many Enemies were to
b' Overcome, and Barriers broken before Arrival there, yet he undertook it. The
Maternal Family, from whence he issued, was had in Jealousy with the Germans,
wh' had no mind to submit, but to a Blood purely German, and that should
receive no Alteration by a proud and subtle Mixture, as was that of Spain; He
found also upon his way, a brave and powerful Competitor; And Francis the
first, as well as himself, aimed at the purchase of a Mistress, for so the
Emperor called the Empire, which was worthy of all his Love, of all his
Fortune and Powers.

H' overcame, nevertheless, these two Obstacles, and was happy enough in
allaying the Aversion of the Germans, and in Triumphing over the persutes of
the French. The manner of the proceedings of these two Princes in this glorious
Address, was very different; Francis, it may be, who was too Magnanimous for a
Prince, at least for the Age wherein he Lived; and whose Soul did breathe
nothing but Generosity and Liberty, said that Charles and himself offered at the
purchase of The Empire, as two Honest Men pretended to the Love of a Fair Lady;
That they desired it, without wishing ill to one another, and for that cause
were provoked by Emulation, and not by Envy; And having Acted in that
Concurrence only by good Endeavors, with Promises, and with Money, He ^ood
inferior to his Rival, who besides the Advantages of his paternal Birth, added
Threatenings and Force, and made his solicitations in the Equipage of a Man of
War, and accompanied with a good Army. This high pretension having been Crowned
with the Success he desired, invited him to form another, to which that served,
as a Plank, as has been said, for the Christian Monarchy; And the youth
wherein he then found himself, made him also hope, That h' had time enough for
the Cariere, and was long to Enjoy the good h' ought to gather at the End of
that course.

But the Execution of this great Project, answered not his Hopes, and Fortune
made them to Vanish, when they made the fairest and most pleasing show; The
Monarchy wherewith he was so bewitched, slipped almost out of his hands, and
resembled the Apples of the Fables, which falling upon the Lips of the famished
Tantalus, and having Kissed them, fell back and flew away: That happened twice
unto him, The first after the Journey of Pavia, where Francis the first was
taken Prisoner; And the second, after the defeat of the Protestant League of
Germany, where the Duke of Saxe was also defeated. In this success, he was
stopped, when he was most Elevated, as has been often said, and the foresight
of Paul the third hindered his Progress, and cut the Wings of his Victory in
the strength of its Flight, and rapidity of its Motion. In the other he was
Blinded with that unexpected prosperity, as with an Excess of Light, and
finding his Success higher than he had proposed it, his Head turned in that
manner, that he knew not how to take the Advantages over us, which h' had
before his Eyes, nor give his hands to Fortune that would have Led him
effectively to what h' had before but in Desires and Thoughts.

However, Charles had no sooner turned his Eyes to the pretended Monarchy, and
faced that charming Object, but he found himself Opposed by two great
difficulties in the Acquisition of it, which neither he, nor his could ever
Overcome, nor heal one of the two Wounds, but the other was open. The first and
the most Important, was the want of Men of War, which nevertheless was less
felt in Charl's time, than in his Successors; And the second is the want of
Money, wherewith Charles was much Troubled, and his Successors less felt. And
for that Reason, it has happened unto them for their great design, as to him
that would raise a great Building in a place where there are no Materials, and
having not Command of Quaries or Forests for Stone and Timber, know not almost,
where to have any, nor from whence to bring any. Above all Impediments, God
permitted, that a constant supply of Men; the most necessary thing for the
Accomplishment of their Work, failed them; for without Men, as all the World
knows, great Wars cannot b' Entertained or Continued, permanent Progress
cannot be made, nor lasting Conquests; A warlike Prince may run and pillage a
great Extent of Country, but he cannot take Root, nor settle without supplies
of Men. And that Collection of Bergers and of Vagabonds, from whence issued the
Republique that Commanded all the World, began the Monarchy, which their
Successors raised in making a Provision of Men; in changing the Inhabitants of
Conquered Cities into Citizens, and Burgesses of Rome; And by 'stablishing in
the Circumvallation of Rome, the principal Body, from whence their Armies
should be formed, from whence their Garrisons should be drawn, and from whence
their Colonies should be sent. These things nevertheless, did not cool the heat
of Charles, and these Difficulties did but the more inflame his Courage to
overcome them, and above all t'Endeavour the Opening of some Spring of Men of
War that might be Plentiful, and to assure himself of some well peopled
Country, that might serve for the Recrute of his Armies, and the Relief of all
his Losses: for that End, Italy was very Rich, and well Peopled; Germany that
was well Peopled, and indifferently Rich, and to which, the Low Countries,
whereof he was Lord, served for a Binding and Fringe; And France, which had
both these Conditions, almost in an Equal degree, and was equally Peopled and
Rich. As to France, h' had no Lawful pretense to assault it, and there is no
Country in the World, whose Possession was more Entire or less Troublesome to
its Master; Besides, that it was then so strong, and so well semented a Body,
and the Union of the Head with all the Members was so strict and firm, that in
the Condition wherein Charles then found himself, there was no place for hope to
Conquer it by Land, not so much as to Shake it. For that purpose then, it was
necessary for him to attend till he became more Powerful, and that Fortune
offered him some just Object, or some specious Color t'undertake it, which
happens, but too often in the Intricacy of Affairs, and in the Confusion of the
Things of this World.

As to Germany, and that Vast and Warlike Country, where the Men of War do not
decay, and where Men are seen to be Born, as to Dye in their Armies, The
Enterprise would bring with it Extreme difficulties, and almost Invincible; for
though Charles was invested with the Imperial Dignity, which is particularly
Known and Reverenced in that Country, and that he had there a considerable
Patrimony; yet, the Dignity being in it self but a single personal Title, or at
least not bringing to him, wh' Enjoys it, a handful of Hereditary Land; And
the power Joined to it, being but Subaltern and Dependent upon the Resolutions
of the Dyets, and Voluntary contributions of the Princes, and free Towns of
the, Empire. But that, and all the rest of the Revenue of Charles, was not
sufficient to oppose the Powers of those Princes and Towns, who would not fail
to unite themselves to defend the Common Liberty, so soon as it should be
Threatened; And to draw to their party other Powers, who would be Jealous of s'
Ambitious a Design, and Interess themselves in Impeding the setting up of a New
Monarchy in the midst of Christendom. So that he well Understood, that he
could never subdue Germany, so long as it Continued Entire, and that nothing
but the Wind of Division could bring him to the Haven of his Ambition, and to
gain it, many Ships must be Rigged, and many Tempests Endured; And to Conquer
it, many Parties were to be stirred up, and disorders kindled in Germany, or to
b' ever in Arms, and ready to Embrace all Occasions that should appear, and to
make use of the Disorders which should arise.

But till Fortune provide so propitious an Occasion, and so favorable a
Conjuncture, the most present Object, which then appeared to tempt Charls's
humor, was Italy; And that fair Country had lo many Temptations to make him in
Love, That the passion of Conquest began to fix on him, and to Dart his first
flames at it, which truly was no strange thing for the Emperor, nor for Italy.
The Advantageous situation of it, by which it borders France, Spain, and
Germany, and upon the Countries of the Grand Signior; The Greatness and
M^^nificency of its Towns, The fertility of the greatest part of the Lands; The
Havens, wherewith they abound, and the great sums of Money which Trade brings
thither; the Wit of its Inhabitants, and the Temper of their Souls, make up in
one person an Excellent Negotiator, and a great Soldier; And above all these
Temptations, the Seat of the Chief of the Church contained in it, and the
Advantages might be raised there in Temporal Matters by the Master of it, are
capable to quicken a Soul, less sensible of greatness than Charls's, and to
provoke an Appetite less greedy of Domination than his.

Though all this be true, and that the Excellencies and Enchantments of Italy
might oblige him to undertake the Conquest, yet the Execution was not easy,
and many Inches were to be gone over, and ill ways to be past, before be could
Arrive there; for though Charles had then one foot in the Country, and was
possessed of Naples, one of the fairest Portions and powerfullest Members of
Italy; It Is to be considered, That the Country being but at one End of it, and
by consequent, Frontiere to the rest, He could not advance without Encountering
the Church Dominions, and without an Hostile Entry, which would have been an
odious Business and Matter of scandal to other Princes, and have raised an ill
Sent amongst the greatest part of his Subjects, and even in Spain; That the
Italians were not a people to be surprised by Artifices, or amazed at
Apparences; That they looked far into the future, and very clear int' others
Intentions; That they would discover his Design at the least noise he should
make, and smell the sent that should evaporate, though never so little; That
the Jealousy they had for their Liberty was so tender, that a very small
Emotion would serve to awaken it; And distrust is so natural to them, and they
sharpen it so keenly by the vivacity of their understanding, and by the
subtilty of their speculations, that they would not only take Apprehensions of
visible things, but also suspect often what was not, and give themselves many
false Alarms, not to be found asleep when true ones happened. And as that Prince
in many occasions was Happy beyond his Hopes, and Prudent above his
Contemporaries, in making good use of occasions, Fortune presented him with a
favorable Opportunity for his Design, and managed it with so much
Circumspection and Wisdom, that he gained Milan, and was seized at last of the
noblest part of Italy. This Country is the Center, whose Extremities confine
almost upon all the other States of Italy, and the Line which makes the
Communication of Spain with Italy, by the vicinity of Genes, an Appertenant;
And of Italy, with the Suisses, the Grisons, and the rest of Germany, by the
vicinity of the Voltoline; It Is the place of Arms, and the Rendevous to receive
from the Low Countries, or to send thither from Italy, Germany, and from Spain,
the Men of War, whereof those Countries may have need. Insomuch that since the
Emperor was assured of that Country, and had put his foot in Piedmont and in
Toscany, H' had his Reckoning, and took his Measures to that End, holding all
the Ecclesiastique Countries, as Environed, and the Gulf of Venice in
Jealousy, by the Means of the Coasts of Naples; He commanded Sienna, Porther
cule, and some other places which h' held on that side, to be Fortified, to
bridle all Toscany; He would have had Montferrat of the Duke of Mantoua, in
exchange of Cremona, and transmitted it to the Duke of Savoy, with the
Reservation of Casall, Trin, Mont calne, and Pontdesture; To draw from him
Vercel, Gallinare, Inree, St. Germacia, Mazin, and Crescentine; H' intended to
fortify those Ten places, so strong, and to raise such powerful Barriers
against the Irruptions of the French, that they should for ever lose the hopes
of forcing them, and of marching int' Italy, and the Italians by consequent the
Will of calling them in, and soliciting of them to an unprofitable Protection,
and impossible Defense. Besides all this, He conceived to pinch so near the
Genoues, and so to straighten them, that they would permit of a Citadel, and
deliver up to him Savonna, to make him Master of the Ferry of Barcellona, and
of Genes, and that the Duke of Savoy would also accord unto him Nice, and hold
in subjection the Coasts of Provance, and of Languedoc, and to have in his
hands the Key of the Commerce of those two Provinces in Italy.

There remained also to Consummate the Work, and to finish the Circumvallation,
which had taken away from the Italians all Hopes of Relief, and all Appearance
of Resurrection; but t'Invade the Voltoline, and to ceize upon that famous
Gate, by which the Suisses, the Grisons, the Germans, and the French and
enabled to descend int' Italy; but H' had Eyes only to Covet that Valley; And
it had been then too Dangerous for Him to have used force to Ravish it; The
Venetians also, whose Spirits were never more Warlike, nor Arms sharper than at
this Time, would never willingly have suffered such an Usurpation upon the
Liberty of Italy, and such a particular Block-House against their Country of
Ferme Land. Besides the strong Troops and Excellent Chiefs of War which they would
on Foot to fight the Evil in its Spring, They Would as they have now a backdoor open
by Sea, and the facility of setting forth a Powerful. Navy, to make a
Diversion upon the Kingdom of Naples.

But what most affrighted Charles, and Tempered most the Heat wherewith He
burned for the Conquest of the Voltoline, was the Interest which the Suisses
would make use of, t'hinder him, and with all their Forces to oppose him. It Is
certain, that there was not a Nation in Christendom more Warlike and more to
be feared than that of the Suisses; The variety of Religions which has since
Traversed them, did not weaken them in the Division, and the Time which
changes and alters all the World, had abated nothing of their strength, nor
diminished their accustomed valor. These Considerations suspended for that
time th'Emperors design, and made him resolve to attend till Time and Fortune
made some occasion t'appear more favorable for the Execution. In the mean
Time, by th'Evenness and Beauty of the Platform, which h' had drawn to subdue
Italy, may be seen, what a Great Master this Prince was in the Science of
Conquering, and Ingeniere in the Work of Destroying and Founding of
Republiques. It may also be seen by the Success, which befell him in that
behalf, How God Confounded his Wisdom, and laughed at his Projects; How He
made them miscarry, when they seemed to be the most Happily advanced, and
nearest to their Period, and how his Posterity, which has stuck to 't, have
found the Labor of a Squibb, which scatters, as it is fired, and th'Exercise
of Homers Penelope, whose Web untyed, as fast as it was Woven together.

Let Us return to the occasion, which Fortune made to arise for Charles, and to
the way it opened for him to pass through int' Italy. That proceeded from the
Quarrel, which kindled betwixt Francis the first and Sforces by reason of the
State of Milan, whereof they were in possession, and which Francis would
Recover, as a Piece that did belong to him, and as a Member Dependent upon the
Succession which was fallen to him. It was not difficult for a Prince great in
Virtue and Powers as Fancis was, to strip Petty Princes, as the Sforces were,
whilst they were alone to resist him, and sole supporters of the Quarrel. But
they staid not long in that Posture, and the other Princes of Italy suffered
with too great Impatiency of Heart, and as in the Center of their Country, a
King of France, who besides the pretensions he had the other States there, had
also, as they Conjectured, too great a power for small Designs, and to
Ambitious a Soul to be their Neighbor only, to whom he might become a Master.
But all that was nothing to the Jealousy Charles Conceived, and h' had there a
stronger Interest than others, by reason of the Kingdom of Naples; The
possession whereof being but staggering, as of a Country newly Conquered, to
which Francis had Right, and whose Inhabitants were naturally Lovers of Change,
and greedy of Novelty; That made him resolve to Aid the Italians Design
vigorously, and to Labor with all his Power the Re-establishment of the
Sforces.

But He staid not there, and He was so happy, That the French were not only
driven from Milan, and that the Sforces re-entred it; but that the Sforces
dying without Children, He retained it for Himself, or at least Conferred it as
Emperor, and as a Feif of the Empire upon his Son Philip; And so the Italian
Princes had the good luck to gain their desires in sending us beyond the
Mountains; but they had not all they aimed at, which was, that the State of
Milan should not depart from a Prince of their Country, and of Italian Birth.
In that, Fortune supplanted their Providence; and in being delivered of a
stranger, whose Neighborhood was in Jealousy with them, They had the
displeasure to see his place taken by another, who was not in less suspicion
with them; or who knew better than the French to keep his Conquests, and gather
the Fruits of his Victory, as Charles and his Successors have done. It Is not
here to be forgot, that after the Gain of the Battle of Pavia, and the taking
of Francis, which were Acted in that War; The Emperor took off his Vizard, and
declared himself publicly for the design of the Christian Monarchy; That
happened at the Consultation made, whether he should set Francis at Liberty, and
whereupon the Duke of Alva gave his opinion boldly, That h' ought not to do it,
and that the fatal Time was Come, wherein it was necessary to Collect the many
different Countries, which compose Christendom, into one Body, and under one
Head, to oppose it entire and united against the Turks Empire, and the Ottomons
Greatness; as the sole Means to abate and destroy it. But insomuch that the
strongest Opposition, and the most Invincible Obstacle, which the Emperor had
Encountered to his designs, came from France, and on what side soever He turned,
H' always found French Forces in his way, or the Authority of this Crown; He
resolved to turn all his Arms against us, and to destroy the Foundation upon
which the safety of Italy and of Germany was raised. But all these Assaults did
but discover an Impotent Will of doing mischief, and the various Expeditions he
set a soot upon that occasion on Picardy side, Champagna and Provance, amounted
at last to shameful Retraits, or to great Losses of Armies. And what appeared
most admirable, and made the Deceit of the Discourses of Men the more Visible,
and the vanity of their Wisdom, was, That the Enterprise which Charles supposed
to be the most certain and happy proved the most unhappy and Ruinous.

In the Journey He made to Provance, the Expedition whereof I speak, He came
not, as to make a Conquest, but to take Possession; And Antonio of Leve the
first Author of the Design, dissuaded it not, as Judging it Difficult, but as
esteeming it Infallible; And that his Master might have all the Fruits of the
Success, and all the Glory of the Design, Italy, Germany, and the Low Countries
were Infected with a certain Prophecy, which the Emperor had caused to be
scattered in those Countries; That France ought to change Master this year; And
upon that Ridiculous Fear, and upon Hopes no less Ridiculous, The Marquis of
Salusse General of the Kings Armies in Piedmont, quirted his service, and by
the Basest and most Infamous Treason, whereof Mention ever has been made,
became the Desertour of the Army he Commanded; As a Pilot, who gets out of his
Ship at the first Noise of a Tempest. 'Twas then, that the Emperor published it
openly, and in the Excess of his vanity, That the King of France ought to strip
him, or be stripped by him, And that the King of France should become Emperor,
and King of the Spaines, or that he would become King of France. That is to
say, The Monarch of the Christian Republique, by a necessary Consequence. And
yet the Success gave the Lie to that fair Prophecy, Antonio de Leve paid with
his Life, which he left in Provance, the Rashness of his Counsel, and Novelty
of his Dissimulation. And the Emperor had the shame with his Ferrant Gonsalve
Marquis of Gast and Duke of Alva, To retire without doing any thing, but the
loss of thirty thousand Men, in Taking what we did not defend, and in Entering
of Places, which we had abandoned.

Fifth Discourse.
Of the third Enterprise of Charles the fifth to gain the Monarchy, and how it
failed him.
THE Emperor having failed of his stroke upon Italy and France, applied
himself to a Third Enterprise; And as they wh'Assault a place by a Quarter
which they found stronger than they did Imagine it, Change their Design, and
Assault it another way, which they believe Weaker and less Defensible; He
resolved to try whether the wind would be more favorable unt' him, and the
Conquest of Germany more easy. Two Heads shall here be proposed to
Consideration, which may serve to whet th'Understanding, and open the
Reasonings of them, wh' are yet in The Elements of Policy; And, if I may dare,
to turn a word in some manner Sacred, to an unsacred use, wh' are but
Catechumenes in this Science; It Is for them also for whom alone I write. And I
am not so vain as to pretend to Instruct and Discipline them, wh' are actually
Ministers of State, but only them who may be such, and labor to strengthen
themselves with necessary Experiments, and proper Dispositions, to receive so
noble a form. As to others, by whose Conduct my Works are enriched, and my
Discourses draw spirits and life, I should not be less ridiculous, if I had
undertaken it, than if the Stars, having Reason and Liberty, should presume to
give a great Light to the Sun, from whom they receive all their Light, and all
the Beams they send us.

The first Head then whereof I will speak, is, what I have already discovered,
of the Constitution the Emperor found Germany in; That Is to say, as a strong
and thick Body, which could not b' overthrown at once, but must be divided and
put into parts, to usurp them all, in getting them by parts. The division ought
to b' in part a work of Fortune, and some effect of a Malign Planet to fall on
that Country, and partly a stroke of Human Industry, and the fruit of that
Reason of State, which may be called, if you please, Prudence or Malice.

As to the second, it is certain, that Charles was a great worker of Division,
and a dextrous sower of Discord; And it is certain also, that it is not uneasy
to sow that Grain, and to make it fructify where there are different
Interests, and where many may pretend to the same things of Right of
Convenience. But for the effecting of Charls's great design in the Usurpation
of all Germany, and of so many Sovereign Members that compose it, to make a
Monarchical Body, A light and short Discord was not sufficient, or to divide it
into parts, unless it were of Continuance, to prevent their Rejoyning; There
ought to be somewhat of permanency and of duration; The Fire ought to be
lasting and opiniated, and the Matter to maintain it ought to be combustible,
but not perishing; Otherwise there is nothing more natural and ordinary, than
that a general Interest, as of Liberty oppressed, rally them, whom a particular
Interest had divided. And it has been often seen, that the Conjunction of
Enemies has restored Concords and good Intelligence in Armies, which before
were but Partialities and Discords.

But Fortune did that in favor of Charles, which his Industry could not effect
for his Interests, and kindled that durable and opiniated Fire in raising
Heresy, whereof h' had need, that cut all the Sins of the German Body, and
broke for ever all the Union of its Members. The business is but too well known
and tried; That there is no subject, wherein the Wills of Men are so
Irreconcilable, as that wherein Men's Understandings have contrary
Apprehensions in Matters of Salvation, or Wounds so hard to heal, as them which
Heresy makes in the Politic Body. Wherefore Charles connived at the Birth of
Luther's Heresy, and choked it not when he might have done it: supposing, it
may be, that He could when He pleased smother it. And having beaten his Enemies
with that Flail, suppress them, and even by their Means whom He would beat. But
He was deceived in both, and God did not permit that so subtle a poison as his,
should make his Operation, and so studied a Mischief b' happy. For that new
Sect had so many wishes from the Princes; to whom they did abandon the Goods of
the Church, which were yet in Germany; And so many Courtesies from the People,
whom they freed from the various Mortifications of the Blood and Flesh; That no
Sect ever made so sudden a progress, or took so rapid or so impetuous a
course; So that, whether the Emperor had not then strength enough to justle it,
or that He would permit the Zeal to cool, wherewith all young Sects do burn, or
that more pressing occasions did call him int' other places, as the defense of
the State of Milan in Italy; He resolved for some time not to disturb the
Religionaries of Germany, but to make use of the Advantages, which the
permission of that Novelty might prepare for him, and to serve himself of the
Demands, of the Threatenings, and of the Forces of th'Innovators, for the
Designs h' had in Italy, and in France, as it has been represented.

But the Destiny of worldly things, and the Concatenation of the Affairs of
Europe, having ordained, that the Attempts of Chals in Italy and in France,
should prove abortive and vain in both Designs; And having no hopes of acting
any thing in those places, where He was emptied of Invention and Forces, and
where H' had lost so much without the least gain, as in France; and gained so
little by his Labors and Conquests as h' had done in Italy; He resolved
t'apply himself to the Conquest of Germany, and to revive in good earnest the
Design, which till then h' had laid asleep, for the reducing it to his
obedience. For this purpose, and it shall be the second Head whereof has been
spoken, the Considerations shall be made out which probably prevailed with him,
and the Reasonings whereupon He grounded his Resolutions t'engage in that
Enterprise, and hoise Sail, which was not at last propitious to him.

Germany then torn in pieces by different Religions; And the Powers of Evil
having been so efficacious, and its progress so active, that the number of the
sound were found much inferior to the sick parts, and these more incapable to
return to health by the proximity and influence of others, than they to be
spoiled by the Contagion and Malignity of the first. And time, having opened
the Protestants Eyes, and the various face of Affairs, by which the Emperor had
managed them, betwixt contrary Motions of Hope and Fear, of Promises and
Threats, giving them cause t'understand, that his Intention was never to make
use of them, but as the Instruments of his Designs, and Agents of his Passions
to torment Italy, and give trouble to France; And wearied with so many
Artifices, and so many Changes, and knowing Charls's humor impatient of rest,
and his Spirit transported with a perpetual Ambition, and agitated with a
continual Flux and Reflux of Turbuleht Projects, and Warlike Thoughts;
Considering, that having stirred so much, and overthrown so much in other
places, sometimes with success, and sometimes unprofitably; And having cast his
last hooks, and employed his last strength, without taking or carrying away
what he desired; Making no question, but at last would assault them, as a more
probable and easy prize of prey; And as Victims sacrifize them to Ambition,
the Idol he did inwardly serve, under pretext of sacrifizing them to the
Religion he outwardly professed; They did resolve to think of their safety, and
not only by attending the Evil to repel it, but to advance for to fight him,
and to be the first in the field, where they foresaw the Emperor would
endeavor to be before them. For that purpose, they made a League at Smalchald,
which had for principal foundation, the consideration of giving a Coadjutor to
Charles in the Administration of the Empire, and to revive one of the
Constitutions of the Golden Charter, which says, That to divert the Succession
of the Empire, there ought not to be three Emperors successively of one Family.
The Emperor, who knew, when there was occasion, how to make use of force and
subtilty, seeing that he could not Master the Protestants by surprise, as was
his design, made no scruple in taking off his vizard, and in going boldly to
them, as it is said, with displayed Ensigns; To compass it the more easily, and
to make the way to Victory the plainer, He practiced a double Artifice, which
at the instant prospered and had a present effect, as h' had projected it; He
made it to be reported at Rome, that he marched to oppose the Heresy, which
excessively overflowed, and which had the design to pass from Germany int'
Italy, by the destruction of the true Religion, and upon the Catholics heads;
Nothing could more provoke the spirit of the Pope, and stir up his zeal to
Religion, which in his person was assaulted; He knew well, that Heresy knocks
most particularly at his door, and that the first Groans and Attempts it had
made upon its entry into the world, had been employed against his Power; He
considered, that the number of enemies was great, and apprehended the same
fury, He did, when the Troops of Fustenberg marched to Rome, in the Name, and
under the Authority of Charles, a Catholic Prince, and was nevertheless but in
his passage; H' had cause also to fear from them the conjunction of the
duration to the violence, that came thither in their own name, and under the
Auspitious Motives of Heresy. Wherefore in the Emperors favor h' opened the
Treasures of the Vatican, and them of the Castle of St. Ange; Accorded unt' him
Croysades and Tenths in all his Countries, in the Ancient and New World;
Commanded great and strong Levies of Men of War to be made, which he sent him,
and procured him from all Quarters powerful Reliefs and considerable
Subventions. The other Artifice was, Considering the great Collection of Men,
which the Protestant Party of Germany raised, and other Northern Forces, which
were of Smalchald League; That h' ought to labor the diminution of those
Powers, to deprive that League of the greatest number he could of the Princes
which were not yet engaged, and to impede the greatning and swelling of that
Torrent, by the concourse and confluence of those Waters that might run into
't; He knew the Nature of Leagues, and their Weakness; He knew, that they were
made only for Conservation and Defense; That in them the most Ambitious and
most Powerful made haste to Embark; So that they were the Men, wh' ought to
gather the principal fruits of the Victory, and allowing others a share of the
Conquest, keep to themselves the most rich and fair things of the Body and
Spoil; That the most Moderate and Weakest would engage slowly; These, by reason
of the Accidents of War, which are always full of obscurity and incertitude;
And the others, that if Fortune were contrary, and the Vessel wherein they would
put themselves should make wrack, they should be the first to be carried away
by the ill success, as having least Means of resistance, as to be the first
drowned, as they wh' had on the sudden neither Boat nor Plank to save
themselves.

And upon this foundation, and to give color not to enter into the League, to
them who were not very desirous of Emotion, nor so transported with hatred
against him; As the Duke of Saxe, and the Lantgrave of Hesse; He withdrew the
cause of Religion, for which the coldest and most fearful are accustomed to
take heat, and to grow bold, and the most wicked and the most prudent are
ashamed t'appear without Zeal and Violence; This obliged him to give it our in
Germany, That his Arms were not raised against the new Religion, and Liberty of
Consciences; That his design was only to suppress Rebellion, which being
hatched in the Heads of the Duke of Saxe and of the Lantgrave of Hesse, was
discovered in the Empire; That the intention of those Princes was not to defend
or preserve their Religion, which was neither assaulted nor threatened, but to
suppress the House of Austria, whereof he was the Chief, and to Extinguish or
Appropriate to themselves the Empire, whereof his House was the Guardian.

This pretext striking at the root of Rebellion, He made no question, but that
it was less powerful than it would have been, if the Conspirators could have
covered their design with so specious a sail, as that of the Honor of God, and
that the wisest and least interessed of the Protestants could be content to see
the first successes of those Arms, and on what side Victory would incline,
knowing well, that if it favored them of their Sect, they should be always
welcome amongst them, and that the hands of the Society should be also
stretched out unto them; But if the Heavens declared in favor of Charles, and
that he triumphed over the Confederate Forces, They did conceive, that the
Thunder prepared against Rebellion would fall only on the Conquered wh' had
rebelled, and that the vengeance would rest upon the Borders of their Estates,
wh' had not acted criminally, nor given Trouble, or excited Revolt. So that the
Emperor held it for certain, That if nothing were stirred up against him but
what appeared in Germany, he should Easily overcome it; And that the great
Forces he saw on foot, resembled the waters of a Torrent, which descent with
Pride, and overflow with Noise and Spoil, but run not far, and whereof the
Impressions only are seen, and the Evidences of their Violence. To these
prudent Considerations, h' added them of particular Interest. To fortify
Virtue; and to Whet the point of it; He made great promises of Honor, and of
Goods, to the Ambitious and Covetous, who might b' useful to him; And with
this Lure, he drew to his party the Duke Maurice of Saxe, To whom he promised
the Electorate, and the Lands of this Cozen, which are to this day in the hands
of the heirs of his Brother Augustus. This Age has brought forth somewhat like
this, which shall be spoken of in the Third Part.

As to the Strangers, which the Protestants might Engage in their Quarrel, He
knew well that there was none, but the French King, that could powerfully Aid
them, and that could Contribute to so great an Expense, and to the Necessaries
of a long War; That he alone could long Feed that great Monster, which always
Eats without ever being Satisfied, and which wants always some necessary Food,
though there be all provided that Industry and Force can Contribute. But for
this, he foresaw, that the Germans being naturally Valiant and Feirce, and
Nourished in an Air like to that of the North, which puffs up and ordinarily
inspires a good Opinion of themselves, would move slowly to the posture of
Suppliants, and publish to the World that they had need of Relief; That they
would not demand it, till they saw themselves Lost, and would not repair to the
Remedy, till the Evil became Stronger than the Remedy, and that oppressed
Nature had not Force nor Virtue to Support it; That it was the Custom of
Princes, whose Aid was Implored, to try first a Diversion of the Evil, and to
Conjure down the Tempest which fell upon the Heads of their Allies, by good
Offices and Intercessions, before any Force was raised; And by consequent, That
the Overthrow might be given before any Person could appear to Support, and the
deadly Stroke before any Hands could be raised to hold the hands of them that
Struck it; And it is the Nature of the Relief, which Princes give to one
Another, to prepare slowly, To send fewer than are necessary in the Judgment
of them that seek it, and that they are rendered less in Number than they are
intended by them that send them.

That this being common to all States; In that time, it was particularly so to
France, and that it often lost its Charges and Loans for not Acting in Time, or
not Sending of sufficient Forces; As to this business, it did not resolve to
Act Powerfully, nor to make any great Collection of Moneys and Men in favor of
the Germans, without knowing the Reasons, under what Conditions, and what the
Fruits should be of so much Money and of so many Lives to be hazarded; That it
would have some security for the Faith of them, with whom it was to make
Society; As politic Prudence does advise, and demanded places of surety for
the Retrait of their Armies, and not to remain there the Prey of their Enemies,
and the Laughing stock of Friends in case of Disgrace; As the Maxims of War
require, and other Conditions of a long Contest and difficult Resolution.

That it was the Custom of the Germans of that Time, to expect a freer Relief
when they had need, than any people in the World; And when all that could be
done, was done, to think, that enough had not been done for them, and that the
Debt of doing more did remain on our score; That it would Trouble them to
resolve upon giving places of surety for the Retrait of the Armies, which
should March to relieve them; To Bridle themselves by Voluntary Blockhouses,
and to make Wounds in the Empire which peradventure could never be healed; That
if the Providence for the future, and the present Constitution required, that
the French should be Accommodated with some place to secure their Return, when
they should b' Engaged in another Country, The Germans might have Jealousy of
their design, and fear lest under an apparent Protection, the French should
introduce amongst them a Visible Usurpation, and repel one Servitude in the
precipitating of them into another; That such an Apprehension would make them
Agree without the French, when they might do it with an Advantage, and to Leave
the French in the Dirt, when they had got out of it, and by the Aid of them;
That such a Pretext would not be wanting to turn against their Liberators, and
to pass from the Defection to Hostility, and of Unfaithful Confederates to
become Declared Enemies.

That France would make good Pawses upon all this Matter, and deliberate long
before it did Embarque in so high an Enterprise, and in so Jealous an
Expedition; And by Consequent, he promised himself to have Dissipated that
great Body of Tumultuary Troops, which made the Protestants so Proud, and to
have Annihilated the Enemies League, before it could find a foreign Relief, or
that France would stir in their Aid. This prospered with him as he did Project
it, and h' had then Finished, what h' had happily begun, and which h' had above
half done, if h' had not been hindered by the Causes which have been in other
places reported. To this League another succeeded, under the Direction of the
Elector Maurice of Saxe; It was truly wiser than the former, and the Entery of
Henry the second into Germany, and the Apparition of that new Star, which in
some sort might be said to have hastened the setting of the Emperor, and
darkened his Light, gave them such a Fright, that he sought an Accommodation
with the Protestants, and offered such advantageous Conditions, provided they
would quit the French protection, that they Accepted of them, and made their
Peace at Passau, without Comprizing of the King of France, who did personally
assist them; They made it also without remembering the two Princes, whom they 'd
given him for Hostages; And he restored them to their Liberty, with as high a
generosity, as the confidence h' had expressed unto them, In asking no other
gages of their Faith, nor n'other earnest of their Constancy. It had not been
sufficient for Maurice to have Violated his Faith, and failed so Magnanimous a
Protector; He who betrayed his own Blood, and made War to his Cozen Frederick,
to gain his Countries and Elector at Dignity from him, In the year 1552.
If to Complete his Baseness, and Crown his Ingratitude, H' had not ^als'
Accorded to the Emperor that the Troops of the League should march for his
Service, and b' employed against France, which had so much Contributed to make
them Victorious, and to free Germany from Servitude.

The Pretext the Germans made use of, to excuse that foul proceeding, and the
Plaster they used to Cover that black Spot, was the Recovery of the City of
Metts, which Henry the second had taken in his March, with the Consent of the
Bishop and People, who chose rather to Live under the Government of a Just and
Powerful Monarch, as was Henry, than under the Tyranny and Weakness of many
Masters, as were the Majestrates who Governed it. The King having taken the
Wind of the Infidelity of Maurice, whose Interessed and Changeable humor was
not unknown to him, and foreseeing of future Tempests that might break upon
France, believed that the least he could do, was to Seize upon some Important
place, to put a Bridle into the Easiness of the Confederates Mouths, and to
hinder them from breaking, for fear of losing that place; And in all Accidents,
to Secure and Strengthen his Frontier at their Charges, for whose Security h'
had hazarded his Country, and exposed his Life, and the Lives of his Subjects
so Liberally for their defense. That was but very Just, and therein nothing
done but what the Right of Nature permitted, and the Law did Command. And
truly, he that Remembers by what Title and Pretext the Emperor did seize upon
Cambray and Constance, which were Imperial Towns, and that it was done only to
make Cambray a Rampar against France, and Constance a Bridle to curb the
Suisses, would have Judged the King too delicate, and too weak, if upon better
Foundations, and stronger Considerations, h' had made scruple to take
Possession of a City, whose greater part of Citizens did Invite him thither
with earnest Desires, and to March within their Walls, after they had Lodged
him in their Hearts and Affections.

All the Forces then of the Emperor were drawn toward Metts, the Rock,
against which the Emperors Fortune was broken, and where he began to
understand, that it was necessary for him to Leave the World, where he could
not be, what he had been, and descend from the Theater, where he could no
longer appear but in the posture of an Unfortunate Prince, and as the Example
of Fortune. The March to Ranty finished the Piece, and the fear h' had there to
be taken, as infallibly h' had been by Sir of Guise, if one of the Commanders
of the Kings Army had not caused the Retraict to be sounded in the heat of
Fight, and confidence of the Victory; The fear, I say, which Charles had of that
Accident, confirmed him in that noble and bold Resolution, which h' had taken,
to Leave the World, and to Renounce Ambition, the Empire, and so great a Number
of Kingdoms; He well saw, that by the Experiences h' had made, and by the
Disgraces h' had received since the Access of Henry to the Crown, that the
Genius of that Prince was Superior to his, and that h' ought not to oppose his
declining Age, and the infirmities of old Age, to the growing Vigor of a
flourishing Youth; He considered, that Henry was in Power to affront him in
War; That h' had always the Advantage of him in Negotiations and Treaties;
That h' avoided the Nets were set for him at Rome, and in their Councils; And
having dissipated the Practices that were hatched there, to stir up all the
Catholic Christendom against him, h' had the Dexterity to cast the
Protestant part of Germany on the Emperors back.

Behold then Charles out of the World, wherein h' had made so much Noise, and
disordered so many things; behold his Monarchical design fallen, and the three
Countries in safety, any of which might have served for a Plank, if h' had
Conquered it, to pass him to the Conquest of the rest. But what is most
considerable, and the greatest Treachery that Fortune ever played him, Is, That
while he Lived, he saw the Empire transferred out of his House, and to pass
into the House of his younger Brother; That he saw that Breach, and had not the
Power to prevent it, and his Power and Credit unprofitably employed to repair
it. The Germans Inclination to have no Emperor but of their Nation, and the
Necessity h' had of them in the Wars h' had in hand, obliged him to Consent,
that his Brother should be named King of the Romans; He did indeed consent,
Conceiving in time, either that Ferdinand should give the Demission in favor
of his Son, or to cause his Son to be named King of the Romans, in quitting the
Empire to his Brother.

But Ferdinand, wh' had remembered all things that might raise him to that
Dignity, and for that End, had been every Pliant to the Germans, even to the
prejudice of his Conscience, And who saw himself reproached at Rome, in the
Person of his Ambassadors, That h' had made way to the Empire by the disdain of
Religion, and by the Injuries h' had permitted to be done him, would not
willingly divest himself of a thing, which h' had so dearly bought, and h' had
too much passion for his Son, to prefern his Nephew before him in the highest
Dignity of Christendom.

Insomuch, that the Emperor having sent before his Retreat, the Queen of
Hungary his Sister to Ferdinand, and Maximilian his Son, to obtain either a
Demission of the Kingdom of the Romans, or a Substitution to the same Kingdom
in favor of his Son Philip, submitted to what he could not Avoid, attended the
Destiny which had Enthralled him, and delivered the Empire to his Brother,
which he could not settle upon the Person of his Successor.

Sixth Discourse.
That Philip the Second applied himself principally to the gaining of France,
to open the way to himself of the Monarchy; That his Successors have
Endeavored to Establish themselves in the heart of Germany, to make the Empire
return to their House, and pass from thence to the Monarchy.
PHilip the Second was sick, as his Successors have been, of Charls's passion,
and was in Love with the Monarchy, as a part of his Heritage; but insomuch that
England which had much Aided the Advance of his designs, had taken the Wing,
and that the Empire which would have furnished him with Pretexts and Forces,
for the Execution of many great Enterprises, had failed him; He gave rest for a
time to his Passion, and made no other Passion to appear than for the
Conservation of what his Father had left him, and to fix what he found
Changeable in his Countries; He gained indeed at that time some Eminent
advantages from Henry the Second, which had the same Effect upon the Son it had
upon the Father, and which paid for the breach of the Truce, wherein Sirs of
Guise, the Duchess of Valentinois, and the Caraffs did seduce him, by the Loss
of the Battles of St. Quentin, and of Graveline, and by the the Peace made at
the Castle of Cambresis, where he Delivered up in one day, what could not have
been taken from him in many years, and opened the Gate of Civil Wars in France,
and shut it for the benefit of their Enemies, since the success of the
discovery of the Indies, which made him Depopulate Spain, and Exchange Men,
whereof h' had great need, for Money, whereof h' had not so great Need. The
Flemish Defection, which he could not prevent by his Power, though h' Enjoyed
so many Kingdoms, nor by his Wisdom, though he was called the Solomon of his
Age; And the Mutinous and Unquiet humor of the Mores, gave some allay to his
great Design, and abated in him that Monarchique Spirit, which had so vexed
Charles the Fifth.

But so soon as h' heard the Noise, that the differences of Religion made, and
saw the Troubles, which the Civil Wars had raised amongst us; H' awakened a
Desire, which was but laid Asleep; H' Embraced the occasion which did Smile
upon him; He resolved to Cut out the way to the premeditated greatness through
the Ruins of France; He conceived that he could not Work upon a Richer stuff
for the use he had proposed; That he might find amongst us, what h'unprofitably
sought amongst others; And the Spaniards having ordinarily that Advantage of
us, which grows from the Temperament of the Body, and from the Constitution of
the Climate, to Act with more foresight than the French; The Abundance of
Wealth and Men, whereof this Kingdom cannot b' Emptied, would Cure them of a
Defect, to which w' are not subject, in making the preparations of their
Enterprises with great Slowness and destructive Length. But this has not as
yet happened, and the same Providence, which to this Time has not permitted Men
to cut the Istmes and the Streights that sever the Seas, which God would have
divided, has not permitted the Advantages which one Nation has upon another,
to Conjoyn with duration under the Power of a single Person; Though Philip set
all sorts of Engines in Motion, and employed all manner of Workmen, he could
never make such a Conjunction; And France could not become his Prey, though it
was his Envy, and he could not Enjoy it, though he was passionately in Love
with it; And having lost great Forces, and thrown away many Millions amongst
us; having Trassiqued much, and made much War in France, and stirred up the
good and bad Religion to attain his Ends; nothing remained of Consolation to
him in the failer of the true matter of his Arms, and Practices employed for
the usurpation of the Crown, but the Beauty of the Pretext, by 'ndeavouring to
give us a Catholic King.

For the Diversion of the Reader, I will here observe, and for an illustrious
Example of the Vanity of Greatness and Instability of human affairs; That it is
hardly possible to find a Life more Interwoven with good and bad, and more
Embrodered with happy and unhappy Accidents, than the Life of Philip. It Is
certain, that if he got much one way, he lost much another way; And that if one
part of his Designs has prospered, another part has mis-carried, and become
abortive; The Accomplishment of his Marriage with the Queen of England, which
Encountered with so many Contradictions and Difficulties; The Victories of St.
Quentin, and of Graveline, whereof it has been already spoken; The
Re-establishment of the Duke of Savoy, stripped for the Interests of his House,
and the French forced from Italy; so many Countries Conquered, and Mines
discovered in the West Indies; the Succession of Portugal with its Dependences,
which he secured by his Arms against five famous Confederates; The suppression
of the Privileges and Liberty of the Arragons; The defeat of the Mores; The
gain of the Battle of Lepantha, wherein h' had so great a share, and the
Re-taking of Thumis and Gouletta, are indeed great Successes, and will make a
Noise to the Worlds End.

But on the other side, the Death of the Queen of England without Children, and
by Consequent, the Possession of that fair Kingdom Eclipsed; The loss of the
true Religion in the Low Countries, without preserving, as our Kings have done,
the faith and obedience due to him; France delivered out of his hands, when he
held it as taken; The Assault of Gelves, and the Landing of his Troops in
Ireland, which were unhappy t'him; And th'Invincible Armado, that would have
put England to the Chain, and for which the Rodomonts it carried, said, That
they desired no more of God, than that he would not meedle in that Affair, and
Leave them to themselves; That Invincible, I say, Armado, that was but the
sport of a grain of wind, and The Example of the greatest Shipwreck that the
Ocean has disgraced since the time of Tiberius. In a word, of the three
places, which his Father had recommended unt' him to keep with greatest Care
and Jealousy, as the Key of Spain, of the Low Countries, and of Africa; Cadis
was taken by the English; Flushing by the Hollanders; and the Goulete by Bosha
Pialy. These disgraces nevertheless, and this variety of Accidents, took not
from him that Reputation which has flown through all the places of The Earth,
and which will be repeated in all the Ages of the World, And as no wonder or
new thing; since it has been the destiny of the greatest part of great persons
to b' exposed to the flux and reflux of Fortune, and to dye rich in honor
after many Losses. Though it was the Progress and Catastrophe of Philips Life,
He could not forbear to turn his Eyes toward the Monarchy, and to cast some
Glances upon Germany the Seat of the Empire, which is the Foundation and
Center; It was, it may be, to show his Successors the way they ought to follow
t'attain it, and the string by which they might recall and bring the Empire to
their House; from thence proceeded th'Expedition of the Admiral of Arragon
beyond the Rhyne, whereof shall be fully spoken in the third part, in the
Treaty of the Succession of Cleves; from thence issued the Renewing of the same
Enterprise by Spinola, under the Archdukes of Flanders, and under Philip the
third; And though both of these Expeditions had a nearer End, which was the
Communication of Germany and the Low Countries, and the Convenience of making
War with most Advantage to their Enemies, and to draw them into their Channels
and Rivers, yet the Spaniards, whose spirits are always much vexed with future
Considerations, and in all their Actions, have more than one mark to shoot at,
besides the Particular and present Design, had also in memory the other
General, and more foreign design, to open the way for themselves to The Empire,
and to the Monarchy.

The Successors of Philip did not suddenly cast themselves upon so vast
Enterprises, nor discover Designs that would much enlarge their Domination and
Limits; And to the Time of the Kings Death, the Low Countries were the Field
wherein they did most exercise their Arms, and where they have most appeared;
Sometimes in the Quality of Assaulters, and sometimes in the Quality of
Defendants. A little before, and presently after the Death of that Prince, wh'
of right was called the Great, and to whom amongst all our Kings the Title of
Incomparable was Justly due; if h' had not left a Successor that did Equal him.
The Spanish Arms raised Troubles, and occasioned some Innovation in Germany
upon the Succession of Cleves; But their Arms were Chiefly exercised in
Piedmont against the Duke of Savoy, and they made their strongest Assaults to
strip that Prince, and to Ceize upon the Intermedium, which severs France from
Italy; This bloody Game wherein France Acted sometimes with Faintings and
Weakness, and sometimes with Force, and with some strains of Courage, continued
to the Troubles of Bohemia, and to the last Emotions of Germany; The Empire also
from Charles the fifths time to that time, had so much Changed from what it was,
that nothing almost remained, but the Name and Arms, and instead of that proud
and high flight, which their Eagles heretofore made and have since done, they
did now beat only with one Wing.

But after that the Count Palatine had begun that famous Quarrel, which could
not b' ended by the fighting of above fifteen Battles, and Angered them, whom
since he could, neither overcome nor appease; when he had taken Bohemia from
The Emperor, and carried the War into the Heart of Austria, and to the Suburbs
of Vienna; The two Austrian Powers being United, had speedily their Revenge of
that Affront, and having changed the Course of the Action, and turned their
Defense into an Assault, thrust out the Victory with^^ great Advantage, that
they were within little of the Completing of it, in seeing it Crowned with
th'Entire Conquest of Germany, That without doubt had happened, if the Impatient
greediness of the Spaniards, as has often been expressed, had not made them
forget that old Maxim which was so familiar with them; Never to undertake New
Conquests, till the first had been well settled. And if the Countries of the
Duke of Mantoua, which in appearance ought to have changed their Master, Had not
made them quit the Certainty, for the Uncertainty, and to Hazard what they
Possessed in Germany, to Usurp what they could not take in Italy.

But let us leave the Affairs of the Duke of Mantoua to the third part, and take
up the Designs of the Kings of Spain to cause the Empire to return to their
House, and to put under the Wings of those Eagles, what they had in their
Possession, and to Join, what they did not Possess, and was necessary to make
up the Wheel of their Monarchy. They well saw, That after they were Possessed of
the Avenues, and had Ceized upon the Borders of Germany, That if they advanced
but slowly in that great and vast Country, The business would be too long, and
that upon the way they should meet with so many Rubs and Impediments, that they
might peradventure be Constrained to stay or retire. That did not divert them,
from the project of Invading the Voltoline for the Communication of Italy with
Germany, and t'establish themselves beyond the Rhyne for the Comerce of Germany
with the Low Countries. As to the first, the Inhabitants of the Voltoline, whom
they would long prepared to Revolt against the Grisons, their Sovereigns, and the
grain of Discord which they had there Sown and Husbanded with great Care, made
them believe that they should always find the Door open there, when they would a
Mind to enter, and that the pledges would remain in their hands during the
Contestation of the Parties. As to the second, the Death of the Duke of Cleves
without Children, and the Concurrency of many Pretenders to that Rich
Succession, put it out of Question, that if they did not possess themselves of
all the Country, yet they should gain some Important Member, and some
Considerable piece. But their Providence carried them further, and by an
Intrigue Contrived with much Subtilty, and Cherished with Constancy in the
Family of the Princes of the other Branch of their House, They endeavored to
fix themselves in The Heart of Germany to gain there great Countries; To take
away the great stone of scandal, and the fatal Obstacle, which hindered them
from Attaining The Empire; They they were Strangers to The Empire, and no Members
of the German Body.

Two Principal Considerations gave them Courage to frame this Design, and to
Contrive the Intrigue; The first the Weakness the Empire was fallen into since
the Death of Charles the fifth, and the use the present Emperors had of their Aid
and Protection against the fervent Invasions of the Turk, wherewith Hungary was
much annoyed, and against th'Enterprises of Protestants, who were held at Bay,
and hindered to stir for fear of their Powers; The second Consideration was,
th'Imbecillity of the Understanding, and base Inclinations of The Emperor
Rodolphus, under whose Reign the Peace begins, which shall shortly beset forth.
His Brother Mathias's humor being always unquiet, and to whom Novelty,
troubles and disorders were vvonderfull Baits to carry him any vvhither; And
the humors of the two younger Brothers, Maximilian and Albert, vvh' had
neither Action nor Vigor, and were wholy for Dependency in a Submission,
and a blind obedience.

On the other side, The Genius of Ferdinand the Archduke of Grets their Cozen,
and Brother in Law of Philip the third, bred to Devotion, and by the Custom of
Dependency upon Spiritual Things, much disposed to be Governed, and to permit
Direction in Temporal Things; And no marvel, since it often happens that one of
the Dependencies draws on the other, as well on their part who submit and
follow, as of them who Govern and Conduct, and not being content with so
absolute and delicate a Domination, as that which is exercised upon
th'understanding, cannot forbear from enlarging of it upon material Objects;
And if they make not firm and durable Usurpations in that Province, to make
there at least from time to time, Irruptions and Incursions; And in Relation to
the objects themselves which are often much Complicated, and Mixed and Composed
of what regards the Understanding, and Concerns the Matter, and in which by
Consequent, their Princes have no less need of the Council of Conscience, than
of Council of State, and to b' enlightened with Lights of Christian Morality, as
with the Lights of Policy. Sothat though Ferdinand naturally loved Justice, and
hated Improbity, It was no difficult thing to persuade him to Consent to
things, which justled Justice and Probity, in Coloring of them with the
Apparences of Religion, and in gilding them with the Pretext of the greatest
glory of God.

Besides, That Prince had a Weakness, to which all of his disposition are
Subject, being of a benign Nature and sweet Temper, not to resist a long
Importunity. The Spaniards easily foreseeing, that Assaulting him in that place
they should gain diverse things, to which He Had an Aversion, and Accord them, to
Redeem himself from Vexation. And for to Compel him to yield, It was necessary
only to redouble their batteries, and to summon him often to yield, which
frequently happened; As it also fell out, that in Consideration of his zeal for
Religion, of his Love for Justice and other good Qualities in that Prince, God
sent him prosperities, which had no mixture or proportion of Moral virtues; And
for the punishment of his defects and weaknesses, which he permitted to be
th'Organs and Instruments of other Men's passions, he sent him such violent
disgraces, that he thrice saw himself within a little of being lost without
Remedy, and upon the brim of a Precipice from whence no person falling in,
recovers himself; but at last good Successes carried him over all disgraces,
and H' had this Satisfaction before Death, to see the Promotion of his Son to
the Kingdom of the Romans, though it was held unlawful, and the greatness of
his House in some safety, and in some good condition of Subsistence.

Let Us Resume, what we have quitted; Ferdinand had a Brother called Leopold,
who was not truly a Prince of high Understanding, nor of great Ambition, nor
Unfurnisht of Common Sense and Martial Heat, and obliged to depend, as younger,
on the Motions of his Elder Brother. The Spaniards Judged also, That He would
b' obliged to depend on them, who gave the Law to Actions, and to the others
Conduct, and that He might b' a proper Instrument to advance the Designs they
had on the Grisons Liberties, and for the Usurpations of the Voltolines.

Seventh Discourse.
In what manner the Successors of Philip Endeavored to establish themselves in
Germany; The Motives which obliged the Bohemians to withdraw themselves from
the Government of the Emperor Ferdinand, and to call the Elector Palatine to
the Crown of Bohemia.
THe Conditions of these Princes carefully observed, as has been said, and in
strength and weakness well known to the Spaniards, They began to Work at their
Business, and to give Fire to their Artifices, whilst Rodolphus made a Shop,
and forge of his Cabinet, and reduced all his Emperial Thoughts into the search
of the Philosophers Stone, and to make Watches and Dialls. They made a Treaty
with Paul the fifth, In the year 1606.
and with the Archdukes, by which, And all for the Conservation and Exaltation
of the Catholic Religion, It was resolved with a Common consent, to declare
to Rodolphus, That he Dying without issue Male Lawfully begot, The Eldest of
the House of Austria should succeed him in his Hereditary Countries; which
Declaration being made, He would Endeavor to cause him to be chosen King of
the Romans, lest the Empire should fall into the Hands of the Protestants, but
if this could not the Effected, He would declare him King of Bohemia; That this
Protestation should be made to the Emperor with an Army, to Compel the
Bohemians to Accept of this Declaration, in case of Refusal, and the
Confederates bound themselves to Aid him with Moneys and Men, if they were
thereunto required.

In this business, the Pope's zeal is excusable, wh' had truly for his End the
Conservation and Exaltation of the Catholic Religion, whereof He was the
Head, who believed, that it could not receive a more dangerous wound, than in
permitting the Imperial Crown to fit upon an Heretics Head; And to whom,
without question, Advice was given ^^that the Election of the Kingdom of
Bohemia was an Usurpation made by the Bohemians, whereof they ought to be
delivered, and an Invasion of the People upon the Right of it, which they would
restore to its Original. Moreover, Popes pretend to some right of Superiority
and Superintendency over the Matters of The Empire, and which concern the
Electors, whereof one of them is King of Bohemia. They pretend to have been the
Founders of the Empire of the West, and that Leon the third made the separation
of the Body of those Countries, which belonged to the Grecian Emperors, and
gave to Charlemain the Western parts, as Members at too great distance from
their Head, to receive any influences of Life. They call themselves the
Establishers of the Electoral College, Gregory the Fifth.
and the Authors of reducing the Suffrages to the present Number, for the
Election of the Emperors; Thus one Lonigy amongst the Modern Writers, has
published it, not Problematically, as a Thing to be disputed, but
Affirmatively, and by positive Resolutions, in the Aphorisms which be published
at Rome upon the promotion of the Electorate to the Duke of Bavaria, when he
sent to Demand the Confirmation of it, to Gregory the Fifth. Upon these
Foundations, and with these Titles, Popes. presume to mingle safety with the
Affairs of the Empire, and that they are bound to provide that what is of their
Institution, and has Issued from the Authority of the Holy Chair, turn not to
the prejudice of the Church, and make waste in Gods Vineyard, committed to
their Charge. Whether Popes are well or ill settled in those Pretensions, and
whether there are pertinent Replies, and just Exceptions to those Aphorisms,
It Is the business of interessed Persons, and not mine, to make the discoveries.
I say only, that in Case these pretensions are probable, and likely, they are
secure from Injustice and Unbelief, when they 're to b'used; And that Opinions
truly probable are sufficient Principles to Act Lawfully and with a good
Conscience, as I shall make it appear in the Third Part.

But as to the Spaniards, as they had another End, than that of Religion, or at
least, that they did but Obliquely look upon it; I know not, how their
Proceedings can b' Excused, or the Violence Swee^ned, that gave Trouble to the
Peace of the Emperor and Empire; They were busy where they had no right of
Intervention, and entered by a Breach, when they could not enter at the Gate. I
know not by what Law of Conscience they could raise a Subject against his
Sovereign; How they could make Mathias a Felon against his Brother Rodolphus,
and Compel him with a strong hand and with a raised Arm to Act Mathias's Will,
though it were Just, though it were Holy; not by what Right of Nations they
could deprive a Kingdom from all times Elective, of the Liberties and Customs,
which were not unknown to them, and Violate the Privileges, which to that time
had been Inviolable.

But if in this, as in mamy other things, they would Cover themselves with
their old Cloak, and say, that it was still to pare the Wings of Heresy, and
to Cut off its way, lest it should pass further into Germany; To that, Answer
may be given, That the End was goods, but the Means were not, and that they
took a way to gain it, wherein were so many ill passages to get over, and so
many precipices to avoid, That there was as much cause of Fear as of Joy, In
behalf of Religion, and the hazard betwixt Gain and Loss, was equally
uncertain; That in matters of Religion, the Heavens ought to Act, and
Providence to Govern; And an Entire submission ought to be given to that Power,
which Conducts things to their Ends, according to the good pleasure of its
Will, and not according to men's Fancies; That it did not belong to them to
Command the Times, which were not Ordained in the decrees of the Eternal
Councils, nor to hasten the Maturity of Accidents, which appear only in their
Season, and discover themselves in the Appointed hours of then Time; That they
were to be Confined to the Limits of the received Order of things, and in
Obedience, not to Wander from the Common Right, nor to Honor God by Vice, or
to seek his Glory in the way of Injustice, Violence, and Breach of Faith.
Nevertheless, by this proceeding of the Spaniards may be seen, how Licentious
their Appetite is of Governing, and their Ambition boundless; How Active and
Destructive that fire is, and Nourished with all sorts of Materials; That it
Consumes not only them that are not of Relation to them, but Burns their own
Parents, and dissolves the Cement of Blood, and of Alliances. Lets return to
our Subject. When the Plot spoken of was formed, and the Conspiracy resolved
upon against Rodolpe, The Evidences thereof were suddenly Visible, and Mathias
made haste to give them credit by memorable Attempts; And for that purpose, he
Commanded the Army to march toward Prague; where the Emperor was, which had
been raised in Goritia; And having, as it were Enclosed him in that Capital
City of Bohemia, He sent him, in that Posture, and with that Equipage, the
Protestation which had been agreed with the Spaniards and the Pope. What should
a Disarmed poor-Spirited and Ignorant Man do, as Rodolphus was, in the straight
wherein h' had shut himsels, but receive the Law from him, wh' had Power to
give it, and to yield to the yoke, that was forced over his Head? An Agreement
then was made in the Month of June, in the year 1608. by which it is ordained;
That he deliver up to his Brother Mathias, the Crown of Hongary, the Scepter,
the Royal Hat, and the other Ornaments which were carried unto him by the
Cardinal Dietresthien; That he reserved for himself the Title of that Kingdom,
to bear it Jointly with Mathias; As also he did relinquish unt' him the Lower
and Higher Austria, whereof he retained only the Title, discharging the
Inhabitants of the Country from their Oath of Fidelity, which they had Sworn
unto him, and Consents, that the said Archduke should be nominated Heir to the
Crown of Bohemia, in Case he Died without Heir Male, and all this to be done
without prejudice to the States of the Kingdom, in their Right of Election and
other Privileges. The States of the said Kingdom consented to the said future
Succession upon two Conditions, which were, That no prejudice should be done to
their Privileges, and that the said Archduke, during the Life of his Imperial
Majesty, should not in any sort meddle with the Government of the said
Kingdom, nor with the Provinces Incorporated to it; And in Case he did, that
he should be deprived and forfeit the Right of Nomination, which was Accorded
unto him, and that he should Entitle himself only, the designed King of
Bohemia, Rodolphus was not Entirely degraded by this Treaty, nor the Liberty of
the Bohemians wholly suppressed; There Is always a middle betwixt two Extremes,
and some kind of distance to pass from the one to the other. All the Wounds
which are received, do not Kill a man suddenly, and the Vigor, which that
people Expressed, and the Resistance they made in the Occasion, secured to the
Emperor and them, the Remainder of Liberty which appeared in that Treaty. The
boldness of Mathias, and the practices of the Spaniards, staid not there, and
stopped nor in so fair a way. They had not begun so well without Resolution to
pursue it, nor so happily Entered upon their business without finishing of it;
The Dye was cast, And it was an Inviolable destiny in their Judgment; to
Abolish the Right of Election in the States of Bohemia, and to make that
Kingdom Successive and Hereditary; For that purpose, it was thought necessary
to vex the Bohemians; Their yoke was to be made heavier, and their Servitude
larger. All obstacles were to be broken, and all Gates opened that opposed that
design. The Cardinal Clessel, Rodolphus's Confident, and Governor of the
Affairs of Bohemia, made a great Opposition against them in the Councels, and
feared not to resist them publicly, and break all their Stratagems; It was
the Cause that Mathias at the suggestion of the Count of Ognate, the Catholic
Kings Ambassador, caused him to b' Imprisoned, unknown to the Emperors and
without any Consent of the Nonce resident in that Court; And thus having
disarmed Rodolphus of his faithful and bold Minister of State, and taking down
that head, which infused vigor and understanding into the Bohemians, he
thought to reduce them easily to what they desired.

After these Actions of Mathias above spoken of, and th'Innovations h'
Introduced in The Emperors Court; after h' had there done for a time all that
he would do, and Governed at his pleasure The Empire under the Name and
Authority of his brother, He came at last to his desire; but he was no sooner
settled in his Throne, whereunto the Spaniards had aided him t'ascend, but they
made him to Adopt his Cozen Ferdinand, to the Exclusion of Maximilian and
Albert his Brothers, and declare him his Successor to Hungary, Bohemia, and the
Hereditary States.

This Declaration was not barren and vain, it was attended with its effect, as
the Lightning is sometimes with the Thunder; Mathias caused Ferdinand to come
to Prague by deceit, and with Money, but more effectively by the power of the
Army h' had in Bohemia; He compelled Ferdinand to Crown him King of Bohemia,
leaving out the word of Election, and without any Appearance of th'Intervention
of the States Authority, which was the work the Spaniards aimed at, and for
which they had long given themselves much trouble; The Complement of the
business, and the Conclusion of it was, That they made a Transaction with
Ferdinand, by which it was resolved, In the year 1617.
That the Election of the Kingdoms of Hungary and of Bohemia should b'
abolished, and that the King of Spain should succeed to those Kingdoms, in case
of default of the strait Masculine Line of Ferdinand; Provided, That the King
of Spain should relinquish all the Rights h' had in that Country in title of
Granchild of the Eldest of that House.

Whereupon it is to b' observed, that all this was done and concluded betwixt
the Spaniards and Ferdinand, with full Power, and pure Violence, and without
the knowledge or participation of the States of those Kingdoms, which are
Elective; And it was the occasion of a great displeasure conceived by the
Bohemians, when it was made known to them, and the greatstone of scandal,
against which they struck, and which carried them to the Resolution they
afterward took, to reject Ferdinand from being their King, and to call int' his
place Frederick Gount Palatine, under whom was framed in Germany an Intricacy
of Affairs, which five and twenty years of War could not dissolve; And that a
thousand new Accidents, which every day arise, forbid the wisest Men to
discover the Events, and the way to get out of that Labyrinth. That the
Transaction was the principal and most violent Motive of the Insurrection of
the Bohemians, appears by the Declaration of the States of Bohemia, upon the
rejection of Ferdinand, of the 23d of May 1618. by which they complained
amongst other things, That there was an endeavor to transport the Kingdom to
another House; It appears by the Letter, which the Elector Palatine wrote to
the Emperor the 25th of June in the same year, wherein he says expressly, That
the Authors of those Troubles were Persons, who sought the Improvement of some
Foreign Greatness, and represents the Troubles which the Provinces of the Empire
would feel, if Strangers were Introduced, as had been done in the Duchy of
Juliers. It appears also by the Declaration made by the Bohemians in the year
1619. upon the Election of Frederick the First, wherein they clearly said, That
Ferdinand endevour'd to translate the Kingdom of Bohemia under a Foreign Power.

But since there is nothing so easy as to Accuse and Disguise an Accusation;
That every Person flatters himself in his own Cause, which h' adjusts and
beautifies as he pleases; And that the Paper receives what is imprinted upon
it, as a Glass does represent all that is set before it. Let Us produce the
testimony of Ferdinand, and the proofs h' has furnished to the Bohemians
Complaints; It Is certain, that his Predecessors speaking of their States ever
put this Expression, of our Kingdoms and Hereditary Provinces; The word
Hereditary Accompanying only the Provinces and not the Kingdoms; He
Transposed the word to the beginning of the Clause, that he might Fix and
Incorporate himself upon the Kingdoms as Provinces, and made it thus, of our
Hereditary Kingdoms and Provinces; And in his Monitory Letters of the 30.
April 1620. against th'Elector Palatin, by which he summons him to Leave in a
Month, The Kingdom of Bohemia, and pretends that that Crown was fallen to him
by Natural and Successive Right.

There was another Cause, which was doubtless known to the Bohemians, and
obliged them to change their Master, and to seek another yoke than Ferdinands,
whose person otherwise was not unacceptable to them; It Is the strong and
Implacable Aversion that Prince had against Heresies, and th'hot and burning
zeal t'Exterminate them out of his Dominions, and in all places where his
Authority was acknowledged. At twenty years of Age, He made a vow to our Lady
of Loretta; He renewed it at the Age of forty three, to our Lady of Celles,
which is betwixt Austria and Styria, and Confirmed it a little before his Death
by the Report of Father Lamorman in that Book of the Virtues of that Emperor.
The Zeal truly of seeing the Ruin of Heresies, and of placing living stones in
the Temple of God, to use the words of The Apostle, is very Commendable in it
self, and to have no sense thereof is to be wholly deprived of Charity toward
ones Neighbor, which is one of th'Ends of Christianity; There must be a want
of Piety to the Church, to which Heretics make Wat; No Love for the Glory of
God, which is Profaned by Fable Worship. But though this Zeal may be as hot in
the Heart, as it should be, and burn within; Though it may be much inflamed in
it is Principle; yet it ought not to appear but Tempered with Discretion, nor
break out but by measure and Rule; thought not to procure its End but by
convenient means; by the ways which God has ordained, or has left to
Prudence to make Choice of; Above all, he may b' assured that its Operations
are ordinarily better effected by gentle and peaceable, than by violent and
bloody hands. And suppose it to be an ill Invention, to Kill instead of
Healing, and to pull down an Edifice t'hinder the burning of it; That in Truth,
there are Constitutions and Encounters, where strong Remedies are to be used to
stop the Contagion of Diseases which gathet, and where Houses are broke down to
prevent the fire, which they cannot put out from burning of others men's houses,
and consume that which might have been preserved. In this, I have given some
Rules in the first part, and in several places, I say some what of it here and
there, as conceive it necessary, and as the Abuses, which I see there Acted
oblige me.

But it is Chiefly necessary, in kindling that Zeal in the Spirit of Princes, to
infuse also convenient Lights for their Conduct. And what I have said in other
places ought to b' observed, and cannot too often be remembered, That great
Persons cannot commit small faults, nor General Causes removed by small Ruins.
Sebastian, the last King but one of Portugal, before that Kingdom was subdued
to the Power of Spain, is a very Remarkable Example of what I have now said,
The Queen Catherine his Mother having trusted his Education with Religious
persons, honest Men indeed, and of Eminent Learning according to their
profession, but unexperienced in the Affairs of the World, and in the Science
of Princes; Their greatest care was, to imprint deeply into the Soul of this
Prince, naturally valiant, the desire of making War to the Mahometans, and to
Convert that great Principle of valor, wherewith he was born, to the
Destruction of th'Infidels. This was truly very good, but the precepts were
given him, and the Impression made without Discretion and Choice, without
Moderation and Rule, which spoiled the Goodness, and corrupted the Virtue of
that Education; So the fruits, which it produced, were not beneficial to
Religion, though it was his Principal End, but fatal to his Country, which
changed its Government, and fell under a yoke, which it has since born with
much Impatience, and at last shaken off, after the loss of all patience. As to
Ferdinands vows, which are much esteemed by them, not to permit any Heretics
in the places of its Dominions, and to suppress the least Impressions there of
Heresy; Not to speak of the Nature of those Actions, which may b'Excellent in
themselves, I find great Imprudence in the Solemnity, and in that Eminent
condition of Acting them publicly, and to the knowledge of many persons.
There are Actings indeed, which ought to b'Acted in the sight of the World, and
Exposed t'high Noon, and put, t'use our Saviors Comparison, in High places, as
Cities built upon the Top of Mountains, that they may be the better seen, and
that they, who shall see them, give God the Glory; And a Doctor that shall make
a vow to Apply himself wholly to the Combat of Heresies, and to purge the
Spirits by his Doctrine of the venom, which is the more dangerous and mortal
to them wh' are the least sensible of it at their Deaths, might perform an Act
of great value, and a thing in some sort Heroique: But for a Sovereign Prince
that would Exercise Proscriptions and Punishments against that kind of
Diseases, not to use greater Circumspection and Secrecy than a particular
person, and to publish his Zeal and declare his Design by some public
formality, what other things is it, than to advise his Enemies to b'upon their
Guards; Than to awake them that sleep, lest they should be surprised; Than to
give them the Will and the Leisure to put themselves into a posture of defense;
To seek Friends and Protectors; to Fortify themselves with Confaederations,
And to Cast them into Despair, which is more to be feared than Courage? This
happened to the Bohemians, and it is the second spring of the German Troubles,
which Ferdinand opened, and one of the principal Causes of th'Emotions in
Germany, which continue to this day.

End of the third Book of the second Part.
FINIS.
THE TABLE OF The SECOND PART OF The Minister of State.
First BOOK.
First Discourse. WHence it proceeds, That Beasts of the same Kind do not make
War amongst themselves as Men do; That Irregular Passions are the cause of that
Disorder; That Duels are against the Right of Men, and particularly against the
Authority of the Prince. Page 1. Second Discourse. Why God has left Princes
the right of doing themselves Justice, when they are offended by other Princes;
That Lawful War is in the order of Virtues, and a branch of Justice; Why it is
called the Elayl of Gods Anger. p. 6. Third Discourse. That Princes ought to
imitate God in the use of the Right h' has given them to do justice
themselves; That it is very difficult even for Princes, who love and understand
their affairs, to effect it; which is confirmed by two Examples, the one of
Henry the Second, the other of Philip the Second. p. 11. Fourth Discourse. That
Justice is to b' observed in the Form as Matter of the War; That Faith is to be
kept with Heretics and Infidels; That Christians have just cause of Warring
with the Turk, without making use of the pretext of Religion. p. 18. Fifth
Discourse. That the defense of injured Reputation is the subject of a just War;
Wherein that Reputation consists; That the King could not with honor avoid
breaking with the Spaniards, wh' had caused the Town and the Elector of Treves
to be surprised, being under his Majesty's protection. p. 24. Sixth Discourse.
That a War ought not only to be a just, but also profitable for him who
undertakes it; Some Rules which Princes should observe when they relieve their
Allies. p. 30. Seventh Discourse. The second Rule which a Prince sought to
observe in relieving of his Friends. p. 34. Eighth Discourse. That the Conduct
which the King has observed in the relieving of his Allies is full of
moderation and generosity; That the Conduct of some other Princes of this Age
is not the same. p. 39. Ninth Discourse. Whether it b' expedient to hazard the
Remains of the Forces of a State, to recover Reputation lost by some Notorious
Disgrace; That it is not safe to act alone, or to permit all things to be done
by others in difficult Enterprises. p. 44. Tenth Discourse. Of the difference
betwixt the Honor of particular persons, and the Reputation of States; And
whether the Prince be Master of the Honor as of the Life and Lands of his
Subjects, when public Necessity requires it. p. 51. Eleventh Discourse. When
the War becomes too ruinous to the Subjects of a Prince, h' ought to endeavor,
if it be possible, the end of it; That the King has been forced to make and
continue the War till now, by an inevitable Necessity; That his Enemies rather
than himself have always estranged themselves from Peace. p. 58. Twelfth
Discourse. Where it is showed, by two manifest proofs, that it is the House of
Austria that has always resisted the Design of Peace: To which the King and
his Confederates were disposed in Earnest. p. 63.
Second BOOK.
First Discourse. THat it is a great misfortune to a Prince to want power to
make defense against the Assaults of a Foreign Prince, and thereby to depend
upon the will of others: Which is confirmed by two Examples; The first, of the
League made betwixt the Pope, the King of Spain, and the Venetians, for the
relief of Cyprus. p. 71. Second Discourse. Of the unhappy Condition of small
Princes. p. 77. Third Discourse. Wherein the second Example is brought, spoken
of in the First Discourse, to show the Artifice Princes use in assaulting of
Foreign Princes, to hinder their Friends to relieve them. p. 82. Fourth
Discourse. Some Rules that Princes, and especially they that are weak, ought to
observe, when they have need to make use of the relief of their Friends. p. 90.
Fifth Discourse. What kind of Confederacy and Correspondency may be formed
betwixt a Prince and the Subjects of another Prince in rebellion with their
Prince; That the King ought in Consequence to aid the Catalans. p. 99. Sixth
Discourse. Wherein the protection ought to terminate which Princes give to the
Rebel-Subjects of another Prince; That it b' effected faithfully by the Prince,
and securely by the Rebels; This is confirmed by the proceeding the King has
observed in the business of Catalogni^. p. 105. Seventh Discourse. That it is a
great Secret in War, to know how to make best choice of the Place against which
the strongest Assaults are to be made; That the Spaniards are seldom deceived
in that Choice: with some other Observations upon their Conduct. That the Kings
Conduct is admirable, in ordering the War he makes in so many places in
Christendom. p. 112. Eighth Discourse. In what conjuncture it may be probably
thought, that the Venetians will enterint' a League against the Spaniards. p.
121. Ninth Discourse. What Conditions that Peace ought to have which all honest
persons desire, that it may be just and sure; That the particular Peaces which
the House of Austria endeavors to make would be the ruin of them who make it.
p. 125. Tenth Discourse. That the Confederation between the King and his
Associates has all the necessary Conditions required in a durable Peace; Some
Considerations upon the Nature of Leagues, that they may the better be
maintained. p. 134.
Third BOOK.
First Discourse. THat the true exercise of the Magnanimity of a Prince
consists in securing his Country from Civil Wars, and in diverting of Foreign
Wars; That the King has admirably prospered in these two things. p. 144.
Second Discourse. Of the Spring of the Design of the pretended Monarchy of the
House of Austria; Some Advantages which the Imperial Dignity brings with it
above the other Secular Dignities of Christendom. p. 150. Third Discourse.
Other Advantages that attend upon the Imperial Dignity above the Secular
Dignities of Christendom. p. 155. Fourth Discourse. Charles the Fifth was of
opinion, That to attain the Monarchy, H' ought to make himself Master of one of
these three Countries, France, Italy, or Germany; That he failed of all of
them, and could not subdue but a part of Italy. p. 164. Fifth Discourse. Of the
third Enterprise of Charles the Fifth to gain the Monarchy, and how it failed
him. p. 171. Sixth Discourse. That Philip the Second applied himself
principally to the gaining of France, to open the way to himself of the
Monarchy; That his Successors have endeavored to establish themselves in the
heart of Germany, to make the Empire return to their House, and pass from
thence to the Monarchy. p. 180. Seventh Discourse. In what manner the
Successors of Philip endeavored to establish themselves in Germany; The
Motives which obliged the Bohemians to withdraw themselves from the Government
of the Emperor Ferdinand, and to call the Elector Palatine to the Crown of
Bohemia. p. 185.
FINIS.

