Colonel SIDNEY'S SPEECH, Delivered to the SHERIFF On the Scaffold December 7th
1683.

printer's or publisher's device

ANNO 1683.

Colonel SIDNEY'S SPEECH, Delivered to the Sheriff on the Scaffold.
MEn, Brethren, Fathers, Countrymen and Strangers;
It may be expected that I should say some great matters to you, but the rigor'
of the season, and the infirmity of my age, (increased by a closs imprisonement
of above five month's) do not permit me. Moreover we live in an age, that makes
Truth pass for Treason; And as I dar not say any thing against it, so the ears
of those that are about me will probably be found to tender to hear it. This my
Trial and Condemnation do sufficiently evidence. West, Rumsey and Keeling, who
are brought to prove the Plot, say no more of me than that they know me not:
But that some (equally unknown to me) had used my name, and the names of
several other persons, to give some litlle reputation unto their designs. The
Lord Howard is too infamous by his life, and the many perjuries not to be
denied, whereof he has been guilty to deserve mention. And being but a single
witness, his Testimony could be of no value, tho he had been of unblemished
credit. Or had none seen, nor himself confessed, that the crimes committed by
him, could be pardoned only for committing more. And even the pardon that was
promised him, could not be obtained, till the Drudgery of swearing was over.
Thus his Testimony being laid aside, the whole matter is reduced to the papers,
said to be found in my Closet by the Kings Officers, without any other proof of
their being written by me, than what was taken from suspicion upon the
similitude of a hand, that is easily counterfeited, and which had heen lately
declared in the Lady Carr's case to be no lawful evidence in criminal causes.
But if I had been seen to write them, the matter would not be much altered.
They plainly appear to relate to a large Treatise written long since in Answer
to Filmers Book, which by all intelligent men is thought to be grounded upon
wicked principles equally pernicious to Magistrates and People. If he might
publish unto the world his opinion, viz. that all men are born under a
necessity derived from the Laws of God and Nature to submitt to an absolute
Kingly Government, which could be restrained by no Law or Oath. And that he who
has the Power, whether he come unto it by Creation, Election, Inheritance,
Usurpation, or any other way, has the Right. And that none must oppose his
Will, but the Persons and Estates of his Subjects must be indispensably subject
unto it. If he might publish such a Book? I know not why I might not have
published my opinion to the contrary without the breach of any Law; and as
freely, (as he) have publicly declared my thoughts and the reasons upon which
they were grounded. And I am persuaded to believe, that God had left Nations to
the liberty of setting up such Governments as best pleased themselves, and that
Magistrates were set up for the good of Nations, not Nations for the honor and
glory of Magistrates. That the Right and Power of Magistrates in every
Country, was that which the Laws of that Country made it to be. That these
Laws are to be observed, and the Oaths taken by Rulers to be kept. And that
having the Force of contracts between Magistrates and People, they can not be
vsolated without danger of dissolving the whole Fabric. That Usurpations can
give no Right. That the most dangerous of all Enemies unto Kings, are they who
raising their power to an exorbitant height, allow unto Usurpers all Rights
belonging to them. For usurpations being seldom compassed without the slaughter
of Reigning Persons and their Family's; the worst of Villainies should thereby
be rewarded with the most glorious Privileges. That if such Doctrines were
received, they would stir up men to the destruction of Princes with more
violence, than all the passions that have hitherto raged in the hearts of the
most unruly. That no Magistrates could be safe, if such rewards were proposed
unto any that could destroy them. That few men would be so gentle as to spare
even the best, if by their destruction, vile Usurpers could become Gods
anointed, and by the most execrabl' wickedness invest themselves with that
Divine Character. This is the Scope of the whole Treatise, and the Writer gives
such reasons as at present did occurr unto him to prove it. This seems to agree
with the Doctrines of the most renowned Authors of all times, Nations and
Religions. The best and wisest Kings have ever acknowledged it. The present
King of France has declared, that Kings have that happy want of power, that
they can do nothing contrary to the Laws of their Countries, and grounded his
quarrel with the King of Spain Anno 1667. upon that principle. King James in
his Speech to the Parliament Anno 1663. does in the highest degree assert it.
The Scripture seems to declare it. If nevertheless the Writer were mistaken, he
might have been refuted by Law, Reason and Scripture. No man for such matters
was ever otherwise punished, than by being made to see his error. And it has
not (as I think) been ever known, that they have been referred to the judgment
of a jury, composed of men utterly unable to comprehend them. Yet this is but
little of my case, the extravagance of my Persecuters goes higher. The
abovementioned Treatise was never finished; nor could be in many years, and
most probably would never have been. So much as is of it, was written long
since, never revieued, nor shown unto any man. Scarce the fiftieth part of it
was produced, and the tenth part of that was not suffered to be read. That
which was never shown unto those who are said to have conspired with me, was
said to have been intended to stir up the people in prosecution of the
designs of the conspirators. When no application unto time, place or persons,
could be found in it, (as had ever been done by those who endeaveured to raise
infurrections) all is supplied by innuendo. Whatsoever is said of the expulsion
of Tarquin, the insurrection against Nero, the slaughter of Caligula or
Domitian, the transtation of the Crown of France, from Meroveus race unto
Pippin's, and from kis Descendants unto Hugh Capet etc. is all applied by
innuendo unto the King. They have not considered that if such Acts of State be
not good, there is not a King in the world that has any Title to his Crown.
Nor can his Heir have any, unless He could deduce his pedigree from the eldest
Son of Noah, and show that the Succession had still continued in the Eldest of
the eldest Linie, and been so deduced unto him. All may see what advantage this
would be to all the Kings of the world, and whether that failing, it were not
bettet for them to acknowledge they had received their Crowns by the consent of
willing Nations, or to have no better Title to them than Usurpation and
Violence, which by the same way's may be taken from them.

But I was long since told, that I must die, or the plott die. And least the
means of destroying the best Protestans in England should fail, the Bench must
be filled with such as had been blemished at the Bar. None but such as these
would have adviced with the Kings Council of the means to bring a man to death:
suffered a jury to be empannelled by the Kings Solicitor and the
Undersheriff: Admit of jury men who are not Freeholders. Receive such Evidence
as is above mentioned. Refuse a copy of the Indictment, and not suffer the
Stat. 46. Ed. 3. to be read, that does expressly enact it should in no case be
denied to any man upon any occasion whatsoever. To overule the most important
Points of Law without hearing. And whereas the Stat. 25. Ed. 3. (upon which
they said I should be tried) does reserve unto the Parliament all Construction
to be made in poins of Treason; they could assume unto themselves not only a
power to make Constructions, but such Constructions as neither agree with Law,
Reason, nor Common Sense.

By them and their means, I am brought unto this place. The Lord forgive their
practices, and avert the evils that threaten the Nation from them. The Lord
sanctify these my sufferings unto me and tho I fall as a Sacrifice unto the --
Idols, suffer not Idolatry to be established in this Land. Bless thy people,
and save them. Defend thy own cause, and those that defend it. Stire up such as
are faint. Direct those that are willing. Confirm those that waver. Give Wisdom
and Integrity unto All. Order all things so, as may most redound unto thine own
Glory. Grant that I may die Glorifying the for all thy Mercies, and that as the
last thou have permitted me to be singled out as a Witness of thy Truth, and
even by the Confession of my Opposors, for that Old Cause, in which I was from
may youth engaged, and for which thou have often and wonderfully declared thy
self.


