A DISCOURSE OF THE Sulphur-Bath AT KNARSBROUGH IN YORKSHIRE.

BY WILL. SIMPSON, M. D.

LONDON, Printed for Will. Cooper at the Pelican in Little-Britain, 1675.

A Discourse of the Sulphur-Bath at Knarsbrough, concerning its Causes and
Virtues.
THat I may not be injurious to what I have already writ in my two former
Books, entitled Hydrologia Chymica and Hydrological Essays, concerning the
Sulphur-Well at Knarsbrough, as a mineral water of great use in its virtues
inwardly taken. But now designing an account thereof, as a Bath for outward
use, shall therefore, in order to the better understanding of what I aim at,
here resume so much of my former discourse, concerning the Essential
ingredients, and necessary principles of that Water; together with an addition
of some more recent observations, as may serve to illustrate what I now intend
to be my present task: Our method will be as follows.

1. To lay down the constitutive ingredients or mineral principles of that
Water. 2. To show the process (as near as we can apprehend) Nature uses in the
preparing this excellent water. 3. To show the difference betwixt this and
other natural Hot-Baths, as in their original and inbred principles; so also in
some sort as to their virtues. 4. To show how, and by what means, the Sulphur
(as the chief mineral ingredient in this water) is so opened, as to become, not
only so subtle, as thence to be solvable odore tenus therein; but also so
volatile, as to pass off in a continual steame, and insensible effluvium. 5.
How this Sulphur-water comes not much short, as to its original principles, nor
is much (if at all) inferior in its efficacy, to some other Sulphur-waters,
which are Hot-Baths; inasmuch as this is lately found to be successful for
outward applications, as well as those by late observation are remarked for
inward use. 6. To show, that the artificial heating of the Sulphur-water, bears
some analogy to the inbred heat of other Baths, as they come hot out of the
Earth. 7. To show, how Art may imitate Nature, (but yet from the same
principles) in the resemblance of most Baths, viz. how to prepare such Baths
artificially, as are natural. Lastly, To inquire how and after what manner this
Sulphur-water performs those expected helps, as a Bath: where, in short, will
be illustrated its various virtues in order to the help of several Maladies.
First, As to the constituent ingredients or mineral principles of this water:
We say they are comprised in these three, viz. 1. A marine or fossil Salt. 2. A
Sulphurous Apporrhea or steam of Sulphur. Lastly, A little aluminous acidity.
As to the first, viz. Salt, is apparent both from its brackish taste, as also
from what remains upon its distillation or evaporation; of which we find
betwixt one and two drams in a quart thereof: as we further show in our
Hydrologia Chymica, etc.

2. As to the Sulphrous principle, that's manifest, 1. From its Taste and Smell;
as also from its hogo upon the riflings and regurgitations of the Stomach,
after taking thereof. 2. From its coloring of Silver dipped therein; which it
does as readily as the solution or washings of crocus metallorum from the
Sulphur of the Antimony; or as the solution of common Brimstone in the
preparing Lac Sulphuris, both being made from the Acids of alcalizate Salts, as
will appear (although a paradox) more clearly anon.

And lastly, from its coloring of Silver by its very Steams, as we shall show
more afterward.

Now the question may be asked, whence this mineral water has its Sulphur? I
answer, that there are plenty of vitriolin Marcasites well saturate with
Sulphur, out of which I have, by an artifice (taught in my Hydrological Essays)
separated perfect Brimstone, which melted into magdalions or rolls, are not
distinguishable any manner of way from the common: besides which Marcasites
(found not far off this Spring) the very adjacent Earth is full of Brimstone.

Lastly, As to the ingredient of Alom, its discoverable these ways following,
first from the Alom-Bed through which this water at last passes, or at least
touches upon, as is obvious to any eye that will look at it, being close
adjoining to the exit of the water.

2. By its acidity in the water, as is evident from its curdling of Milk: for
the Salt separated from the Sulphur-water, being put into boiling Milk, will
make it shil into Curds and Whey, as if some acidum was poured thereto, which
common Salt will not do; for we tried both, and that in the same proportion,
and found the Sulphur Salt to cause a speedy separation, and that in great
quantity; and the common Salt made a little separation, of a lighter coagulum,
but did not make it shil, or alter the seeming color or consistence of the
Milk: And lastly, if the powder of Coral or Crab's-eyes be put thereto, they
imbibe or mortify the acidity of the Alom, and cause a Milkieness from the
volatile Sulphur.

And as the three aforesaid ingredients are found to be the constitutive
principles of this water, so that neither vitriol nor nitre (however some
imagine the contrary) are contained therein, is evident, first as to vitriol
(which gives the most suspicion from the plenty of its Marcasites, found not
far from the Well) because it will strike no tincture with Galls, as we shall
shortly further evince: And as to Nitre, there is not the least suspicion,
either from what is separable from the water, nor from any mineral glebe
adjacent thereto, that we have yet discovered.

Secondly, As to the process Nature uses in the preparing this excellent
mineral water, or the manner of her mixing the foresaid ingredients, by her
Chemistry in the bowels of the Earth, in order to the making up the forenamed
Sulphur-Bath: In short has, a water Spring, suppose, passing through or by a
minera of fossil Salt, part of which it dissolves, and afterward in its
current either meeting with some acid juice, whether of vitriol or of other
mineral glebes, becomes impregnate therewith, and obviating, or rather
supervening a Sulphurous Mineral, from the concourse of which two, happens a
Fermentation: or else, this Saline Solution comes upon a minera, whether that
of vitriol, or what other soever it be, in the meanders of the Earth, whose
principles are yet crude, and only embrionativs; whereupon it sets those
native and congenit principles awork, into a Fermentation, either way, I say,
it becomes capable of raising that intestine motion, we call Fermentation, and
thence of so subtilizing and volatizing the Sulphur, as to make it solvable in
water, (as we have illustrated more demonstrably above in our Doctrine of
Hot-Baths.) But not staying here, because of the continual afflux and pressure
of water, at length it passes through an Alom-bed, whose acidity precipitates
in great part the body of the dissolved Sulphur; in which very precipitation
happens its fatid smell, and Sulphurous hogo, which only passing through a
slender Colander of Sand, retains its lately contracted odor; where it filters
off from the more gross precipitated body, and so makes its exit.

Which gives great probability of heat in the source of its original mixture,
and that if the Spring did immediately after that Solution and Fermentation
break forth, it would be hot, at least warm, after the manner of other
Hot-Baths; but being carried on in a longer line, in its subterraneal current,
before it breaks forth, loses that heat contiacted upon the Fermentation of
the aforesaid mineral juices.

And this is likewise remarkable concerning Alom interested in the fabric of
this water, viz. that I have (as often as I pleased to make the experiment)
taken some of the succulent Alom slate or stone (found close by the Well) which
has had the Salt discernably extraverted, which when I scraped into simple
water, would with Galls forthwith strike a deep Purple: after the manner which
the succulent Alom-stone does, which is got upon the Scarbrough Bank, near that
Spaw [about which our great controversy, concerning that waters being
aluminous, and not vitriolin, did chiefly depend] which experiment I have
several times showed to persons no less ingenious then inquisitive.

I also ordered an infusion to be made of some of the same Alom-stones in above
a Gallon of fresh water, then to be evaporated to about half a Pint, which
filtred, I evaporated further in Balneo M. to try if it would shoot per se, but
it would not, only came to a soft sort of matter or mellago.

3. As to the third thing propounded, viz. the difference betwixt this and
other natural Hot-Baths in their original principles, and primary causes: We
think that from what has already been said, and especially what yet remains to
be discoursed of, in the next, and other succeeding proposals, that the
difference of these from other Sulphurous waters, both as to their origin and
virtues, will sufficiently be declared: And that Sulphur (of one sort or other)
is chiefly concerned in the fabric of all Hot-Baths, and other Sulphurous
waters, completing with other concurring juices, the essence of them both.

4. As to the fourth proposal, viz. how, and by what means, the Sulphur (as the
chief mineral ingredient in this water) is so opened, as to become, not only
so subtle, as thence to be solvable odore tenus, but also so volatile, as to
pass off in a continual steam, and insensible effluvium; For the great query
is, how Sulphur may be so opened, as to make the Sulphurwell, and other
Sulphurous waters of the like nature.

While I was therefore seriously ruminating upon this matter, viz. what it was
that might truly be said to open the body of crude Sulphur, whether it was an
Acid or an Alcali, I began to consider how many ways, and by what means, it was
usually so opened, as to make a solution in any Liquor: First I considered it
was solvable for the most part in all Oils, by the help of Fire: and that I
imagined happened from the analogy of parts, betwixt Oils and Sulphurs; both
of them being chiefly Sulphurs under a disguise, the one in a concrete, the
other in a liquid form; both of them also in their bellies hiding their
intrinsic Acids, the Oily or Sulphurous parts of both by Fire melting
together, in the fluid form of a Balsome, while the acidum, chiefly of the
Sulphur, being thereby in part separated, does concrescere into a saline form,
under the appearance of crystals, as is obvious in the preparing the Balsome of
mineral Sulphur or Brimstone.

And as vinous Spirits are vegetable Sulphurs, comminuted and subtiliz'd by
Fermentation; so these are also succedaneous to Oils, in the solutions of
Brimstone, yet need previous preparations by fixed Alcalies, (as they are
called) for being so spiritualized, are not such apt menstrua for solutions of
crude Minerals, as Oils are, although either of them are powerful enough for
making very strong and furious Fermentations with the aforesaid mineral
Sulphurs, once by their congenial Acids, brought, by help of Fire, into a
fluor, in the form of corrosive menstrua: witness the high ebullitions betwixt
vinous Spirits or Oils, and Spirit of Nitre, Aquafortis, Oil of Vitriol,
etc. some of them so very furious in their Fermentation, as to arise to an
actual flagration (as we elsewhere demonstrate.)

So that crude Sulphurs, unopened by the acuations of the acidum of Fire,
(which also sharpen the implanted Acids of such Minerals) do dissolve quietly
without any tumult, (if done leasurely) and melt together into one Balsamic
Liquor, (though if hastily done with a pretty smart Fire, they make a crackling
noise) whereas the foresaid mineral Sulphurs being subtiliz'd by their own
Acids, fortified by the acidum of Fire, in their distillation, are brought
thereby into a fluor of both principles, and if then mixed with the foresaid
vegetable Sulphurs, contract a furious Fermentation, from the fresh collisions,
betwixt Acids and Sulphurs, and if close shut up, would break in pieces the
strongest Vessels art could contrive.

And as the foresaid solutions of mineral Sulphurs, are performed by Oils and
vinous Spirits, from analogy of parts; I considered whether other sorts of
solutions of crude Brimstone, or the like Sulphurous Minerals, might not also
be done, by the like analogy, and then I pondered upon the alterations made
upon Brimstone, etc. by fixed alcalies (which how properly called, we show in
our Halologia) and quicklime, and by well weighing the matter, found, that as
Brimstone was dissolvable in Oil and Spirit of Wine, as aforesaid, so fixed
alcalies work upon Sulphurs, no otherwise then as they are acido-sulphurous
Salts.

For I considered that volatile Alcalies, such as are all urinous Spirits, work
not at all upon, nor cause any alteration in Sulphurs: therefore it must needs
follow, that wherein fixed and volatile alcalies do agree, or in that property,
which is common to them both, I mean, their precipitating faculty, neither of
them is concerned in the solutions of Brimstone, and that is common, both to
fixed and volatile Alcalies, to precipitate, what Acids have dissolved. Now the
reason why urinous Spirits, I mean volatile Alcalies (as they are called) do
not at all work upon Brimstone, is, because they contain so very slender a
texture of Acids, and no Sulphurs (if highly rectified) and therefore are
incapable by analogy of working upon the aforesaid bodies: how fixed Alcalies
are a new compage of their own native Acids and Sulphurs, together with the
intertexture of urinous Spirits, (from whence proceeds its precipitating
faculty) all bound up by the acidum of the Fire, (which is their vinculum) and
not a simple Salt, we elsewhere in our History of Tartar, declare more at large.

While I was pondering upon this matter, at length methought I espied a great
harmony in natures works; I saw that she performed the same solutions of
mineral Sulphurs, in some parts of the bowels of the Earth, by her own menstrua
of Acids, prepared by her dextrous Art of Chemistry (the very foundation and
exemplar of all we call Artificial) as she did in other actions, reputed
(amongst most Authors) Heteroclites; and was the same in the latter, as the
former; and from hence I saw, that reputed causticks, I mean fixed lixivial
Alcalies, were no other then Acids, viz. of the Fire, fixed upon bodies: so that
I found nature symbolical in all her actions, and always consonant to her own
principles.

And that I might improve this notion the better, (not taken notice of by any
other Author I know) I began to make a strict scrutiny into the nature of fixed
Alcalies; I considered, First, That the more Fire they endured, and the higher
they were calcined, and the sooner used after calcination, the stronger and
more fiery Causticks they were.

2. That they would never calcine to a strong Salt, unless performed in open
Vessels or Crucibles, where the Fire might more immediately touch upon them,
and concentre its own acidum.

3. That if after they were cold, and kept from the Air, and then Spirit of
Wine or Water was put thereto, thence a heat was presently produced, which as I
conceive, was from no other cause then this, viz. That either of those Liquors,
sets the acidum, contracted from the Fire, and the Sulphur or volatile Alcaly
in the Salt, into a sudden Fermentation, dissolving, and so putting them into
an intestine collision.

4. And fourthly I considered, That the longer these Salts were exposed to the
Air, even to a solution per deliquium, the more mild and soft in operation they
become; loosing thereby gradually their Acids imbibed from the Fire; insomuch
as by often solution per deliquium, the compage of that Salt, from the vinculum
of the fiery Acid, is taken off, as that the whole may thence be reduced into
an insipid Water and Earth (and no Arcauum neither.)

Lastly, That although these fixed lixivial Salts, do make strong Ebullitions
with Acids put to them, yet that happens, either betwixt the additional acid,
and the Sulphur in the Salt, or betwixt it, and the volatile alcaly, bound up
in the artificial concretion: That there are Sulphurs in those Salts, or new
textures of Plants, appears from their lixivial or saponary property: and that
there are also volatile alcalies, is evident from their precipitating faculty,
and from their intestine struggling with acids.

To which may be added this observation, that after fixed alcalies have lost the
acidum contracted from Fire, (which they do by keeping, and sometimes exposing
to the air, together with the addition of somewhat which dints the foresaid
Acidum) may then by Art, be made to split into Oil and urinous Spirit, or
volatile Salt.

As to that great objection against the acidity of fixed lixivial Alcalies, viz.
the precipitation of such solutions made with Alcalies by Acids, inasmuch as it
is generally observed, that what solutions Alcalies make, are most promptly
precipitated by Acids. I answer, First, That although what more simple, I mean,
volatile Alcalies do dissolve, are precipitated very readily by Acids, and vice
versa, yet where Alcalies are more complicated, and interwoven with other
essential parts, there the precipitation by Acids, of what those already have
dissolved, are in no wise wholly ascribable to them as alcalies, but equally
compitible to other parts in the concretion.

And in the next place I answer, that even some acids are capable of
precipitating what others have dissolved; to prove and illustrate which, I
tried this following instance, viz. I took a clear solution of saccharum
Saturni, which I had prepared with distilled Vinegar, which no man will deny to
be an Acid; upon which I poured a pretty smart Spirit of Vitriol, whereupon it
presently became Milkie, and caused a precipitation of a pure white calx of
Saturn, which precipitation may also be done with Spirit of Salt.

The same likewise will Spirit of Salt do, poured upon a solution of refined
Silver, made in double its weight of Aqua fortis, in preparing that admirable
anomolous neutral concretion, called Luna Cornea, mentioned by the honorable
Boil in his origin of forms: and not only Spirit of Salt but also Oil of
Vitriol will cause the like precipitation.

Whence its obvious to any eye, that what some Acids dissolve, others may
precipitate from the congenealness of the solvend, to one solvend more then
another: For both those wherein the solutions of the metals were made, viz.
Spirit of Vinegar and Aquafortis, are as undoubtedly acids, as those which
cause the precipitations, viz. Spirit of Vitriol, and Spirit of Salt.

So that the precipitation of bodies depend not upon acid or alcalizate
Liquors, as such; but upon the consanguinity (if I may so say) of bodies or
solvends, to liquors or solvents, viz. whilst an acid having dissolved one
body, meeting with another akin thereto, lets the former fall, and from an
abstruce affinity of parts, dissolves the latter.

From whence it need not seem heterodox, (although to the most it may, as yet,
a paradox) to say, that fixed Alcalies open the bodies of mineral Sulphurs, as
they are acido-Sulphurous Salts; and that chiefly as they partake of the acidum
of Fire, assumed by calcination: and that precipitations of the same solutions
may be performed (and that too without the least absurdity in Philosophy) by
other supervening Acids, as we have even now demonstrated.

As I observed all fixed Alcalies made out of Vegetables, to work upon Mineral
Sulphurs, on the account of their being Acido-Sulphurous-Salts; so I could not
otherwise (whilst I looked upon the matter with a very intent eye) judge of
calx vive; whose manner of operation, in opening the bodies of Brimstone, and
other Mineral Sulphurs, I could not charge to any other then its Acid, which it
had contracted from the Fire, in the very calcination of that sort of Stone,
called Lapis calcarius, ( viz. Freestone or Limestone) which that it chiefly
partakes of the Acidum of Fire, and thereby performs not only that, but various
other effects, we have already in short demonstrated, and shall further in
Lithologia Physica.

From the premises it will easily appear, in confirmation of our former
Doctrine, that all solutions of Mineral Sulphurs in the bowels of the Earth,
are made by their peculiar Acids; and that other solutions made by Art, are but
from the same principles under other disguises; Therefore that which opens the
body of Sulphur in these Mineral Marcasites, through which this water (we treat
of) runs, must of necessity be an Acidum, which afterward is precipitated by
another Acid of the Alom-bed, through which at last it passes.

As to that experiment we gave to illustrate the cause and manner of making
that water, by opening those vitriolin Marcasites with quicklime, in our
Hydrological Essays, although we there imputed it to the alcali; yet now from
second and more mature thoughts, grounded upon experiment, as aforesaid, find
it otherwise; where we profess such an avowed proselyteship to truth
(sufficiently amiable and worthy in it self) as upon nearer apprehensions
thereof, grounded upon better weighed principles, to decline what we have
formerly at greater distance in any matter opiniated, and in this particular,
have thence reason to wave the former, and to ascribe the solution of this
great Phoenomenon to the latter, viz. to the Acid in calx vive, which, in some
measure, bears an analogy with that Acidum, nature uses by her own Chemistry,
in the intrails of the Earth, for the solutions and extractions of Sulphurs.

As to the 5th thing proposed to discourse of in this our method, viz. how this
water comes not much short, as to its original principles, nor is much
inferior in its efficacy, to some other Sulphurcus waters, which are
Hot-Baths, which is evident (besides what has already been said) by the sequel
thereof, viz. because the manner of use of both, in respect of what they have
been, are now reciprocal; those of Hot-Baths being formerly chiefly known for
outward, and these for inward use. But now of late are found, the former in
some cases to be successful for inward use; the latter by observation, are now
eminently remarkable for outward application: so that the manner of use of them
per se considered, is inverted, and in a mutual respect, is reciprocal.

As to the virtues of those Hot-Baths (which are lately found remarkable for
inward as well as outward use) I mean especially those of our own Country, the
Reader may consult Dr. Jorden his discourse of Natural Baths, and of late the
Physicians, who have and yet do attend those waters.

As to the virtues of this Sulphur-water (our present Theme) as to the use
thereof as an inward Medicine, the Reader may consult Dr. French his Book, and
the patient the Physicians there. It remains now to speak of it in relation to
outward use, as a Bath, and this leads me to the next considerable, viz.

6. That artificial heating of the water, bears some analogy to the inbred heat
of those other Baths, as they come hot out of the Earth.

To the illustrating of which we are to consider Sulphur or Brimstone
(according to out former Doctrine, that it may become solvable in water, is
either to be comminuted and volatiz'd by the native or superinduced Acids, and
that by a brisk Fermentation from the mutual collisions of the two principles,
whence the heat of natural Baths, as aforesaid, or else the Sulphur, by
sleighter touches, and slenderer vibrations from congenial Acids, becomes
solvable in a preterlabent water, whose heat therefore (if any) in the source
of Fermentation, is but gentle: yet by that slight solution of Sulphur, it
becomes capable of precipitation by another Acid, (viz. of Alom) as happens in
this water we treat of: That a body of Brimstone is precipitated is evident
from Dr. Neals observation, concerning a crust of Brimstone which he found
under the Stones of the Old-Well at the removing them, through whose crevices
the water sprang: and that the Acidity by which the precipitation is made, is
from the Alom, does as clearly appear from the Aluminous black Stones, found in
the further digging for a better Spring. Now what remains in the water after
the foresaid precipitation, is no other then the apporrhea, or subtle
affluvium of Sulphur, which being dispersed through the whole body of the
water, is always upon the wing, flying off continually.

This effluvium of Sulphur complicated with Salt in the body of the water,
although it be very volatile, (as I said) yet that it may the better permeate
our bodies, in order to the performing those expected helps, its necessary (as
to outward use) that the waters should be heated, by which the volatile parts
are put into a more vigorous motion, and made capable of penetrating our juices
the better: For although in frigido, the Sulphurous parts are by a volatility
continually winding off, yet by heating, its put into a more lively action, and
made more readily Fermentable with the humors of our bodies.

Now that the Sulphur in this water consists of tenuous parts, and very
volatile, is evident (besides what already has been said) by this following
observation, viz. that during the time I Bathed therein, and afterward went to
Bed, having laid my Silver-studded Watch upon the Table, thereby to observe the
time of Bathing and Sweating, I found the steam of the heated water had gilded
it at such a distance; and is so conspicuous, as to change the color, (as I
have observed) of the Brass-Candlesticks which stood in the next room to the
Bath. Yea, although this be very volatile, yet that it does not sudd enly take
wing, is hence evident, because after three hours time, that the water had been
heated, when I got up, I dipped a Sixpence therein, which it still gilded very
readily.

7. As to the artificial resemblance of Sulphur Baths by imitation of Nature:
First as to Hot-Baths, that indeed we fall short in, because its the work of
Nature in the great Fermentation of Mineral juices, in order to the production
of Mineral concretes: And seeing Art does of necessity always petere principia
from Nature, and that those principles are seminal, therefore not to be
imitated by Art; But inasmuch as all Fermentation amongst Minerals, (as we have
formerly showed) consists in the inward conflicts of Mineral Acids and
Sulphurs, and that according to the different assaults of the said Acids, upon
varieties of Sulphurs, depend the specification or formal difference of Mineral
Waters; so in particular this Water being chiefly composed of a Sulphur,
wrought upon by an Acid, and afterward precipitated by another; the
resemblance by Art must be from the same sort of principles, grounded upon the
natural: Thus what an Acid, (native or superinduced) performs upon Mineral
Sulphur, in order to the making that Mineral Solution, required for the natural
composure of this Water; The same will the Acidum of calx vive, or of fixed
Alcalies do suo modo to Common Brimstone, or other Mineral Sulphurous
Concretions, as aforesaid.

And lastly, As to the virtues hereof: This Water being gradually heated (as is
said) becomes a Bath, whose Sulphur hereby first penetrates the better into our
Fermental juices, exciting them, if languid through Hydropick Acids, or
spurious, through Scorbutic Acids, in the one by helping (with other
concurring Medicaments) to remove obstructions from coagulated Acids; in the
other, by predipitating, altering and sweetening Scorbutic Acids, the cause of
pains and particular tumors.

2. Hereby it the better reaches to dint that Fermental Acor of the Gout,
impressed upon the Synovia of the Joints, so easily communicable to the
adjacent Nerves; hence is the reason why its found so effectual for the
Scurvey, Gout, etc. viz. because these forenamed Diseases are chiefly
determined and specificated by Acids, coagulated upon different humors and
parts: For its the Essential efficacy (if I may so say) of a subtiliz'd Sulphur
to dint Acids, and thereby to resolve such as are coagulated; so that to me the
discussion of all tumors, whether Scorbutic or others, depend upon the
resolving those coagulated Acids, the intimate and real efficients thereof. No
sooner does a Spurious predominant Acid coagulate any portion of the blood, or
other juice in any part of the body, but presently an obstruction of those
parts happen, more or less, according to the intense or remiss degree of the
prevalent Acid, which as it falls out in Vessels or Bowels reputed more or less
noble, viz. intensely or remissly concerned in the fabric and circulation of
vital juices, and animal Spirits, so it becomes the patron of different sorts
of Diseases; some whereof easily bending to more facile methods of Cure; others
more stubborn (of which are the last mentioned) not yielding but to more
volatile, subtiliz'd, and penetrative Sulphurs, such as are in this and other
Sulphurous Baths.

By which (I mean our Sulphur-Bath) Scorbutic and Podagrick Patients have
received considerable relief: for which cause, many persons, finding thereby so
much alleviation of the otherwise grievous Symptoms, and such a mittigation of
the severity of future fits of the Gout, (I mean as to what they might have
expected, without such a previous help) do voluntarily make their annual
returns to the Bath: of which I could give several instances, but that it does
not suit my present design.

3. By the use of this Bath, the blood and humors are purified, whence it
becomes proper for Blotches, Scabs, Itches, Elephantiasis. or Bastard Leprosy,
and other Scorbutic impurities of the Blood; For it procures most excellent
Sweats, whereby the other impure Acids, (which are precipitated or cast off
from the Blood in its circulation, and topically fixed upon this or the other
external part) are loosened, dissolved, or mortified; which depraved Acids
lodge in the habit of the body, having their very Roots fixed in the ultimate
digestion, vitiating the Blood and Latex, sent thither for the ordinary
nutriment of the body, in the common circulation thereof; yea, they are
sometimes so fixed upon their own Roots, as to transmute the otherwise
alimentary juice, by their Ferments, into those external impurities: which they
do as really as a Crab-tree-scions, or Bud, ingraffed into a good Apple-stock,
does (from its own seminal Ferment) turn the juice of the Stock, into the
nature and property of a Crab: So that in such external vitiating of the
humors, which are only skin deep, the applications in order to Cure or
Abstorsion, must be such as can mortify, dissolve, alter or correct the
foresaid externally situated Acids, which may be, and is, most aptly performed
by this Sulphur-Bath.

So that in many the like cases, where those Acids are most pertinacious, and
the Maladies thence have taken deepest root, viz. in the Elephantasis, Psora,
Leprosy, etc. the most common and usual Purges and Diaphoreticks, are
altogether insignificant, because they reach not those deeply impressed Acids,
nor correct those spurious Ferments, seated, yea rooted in the habit of the
body; which such subtiliz'd Sulphurs, as are in this Bath skilfully applied
(with other assisting Medicines) are apt chiefly to perform.

Amongst which external impurities, the Lues Venerea (being made by carnal
contract) may not improperly be reckoned; which consists in a peculiar sort (in
its kind) of a contagious Fermental Acid, thence communicable to the juices of
the body, especially where the contagious Ferment, by the first contract,
entered; which by its corroding acor, as a caustic, fretting and inflaming
those tender parts, or coagulating the juices of some particular parts (brought
thither by an afflux of humors) into venereal tumors, whose restless Ferments
yet lodge in their Bellies, or inwards, in both become the Authors of Noctunal
pains, polutions, etc. to the dinting of which spurious Fermental acor, (the
cause of the aforesaid dolours) the just mulct of that Sin must be chiefly
aimed at, in the curing thereof: which besides other Diaphoreticks, may very
well be performed by the help of this Bath: And that too, because Sulphurs,
(especially such as are prepared and volatiz'd by the admirable Chemistry of
Nature in the body or bowels of the Earth) do sweeten and mortify all such
sort of Acids: For which purpose, in order to the Cure thereof, not only
Bathing, (and some other assisting Diaphoreticks) but also the drinking the
same water is requisite.

4. By the use of this Bath, the nervous maladies are also much helped, of
which sort are Cramps, Convulsions, Palsies, Apoplexies, being caused from the
various seisures upon these juices, also from the contorsions and disablements
of the Vessels or Conduit-pipes, (the Nerves) those juices are circulated, or
at least carried in, being the Organs wherein the animal Spirits move in order
to sense, motion, and other vital sunctions, proper thereto, whose tone are
altered, contorted, contracted, or relaxed by several sorts of supervening
Acids, sent up in flatulent steams, resulting from some spurious subordinate
Fermentation, whose Acids being strong, have prevailed, and by a sort of
sublimation are at length fixed upon those animal Cords, causing obstructions,
contractions, relaxations, etc. (according to the morbid Acids) the causes of
Diseases relating to the genus nervosum.

Now as Acids are the cause why Nerves undergo those various alterations in
their tone or texture, by contractions, relaxations, etc. and in their juices
by coagulations, and thence obstructions, or other debilitudes, whereby the
volatile nimble animal Spirits become interrupted in their motion, being
blocked up by such sort of coagulations: so in order to the Cure of these
Diseases, such Medicaments and Methods are to be inquired into, as may dint,
alter, and dulcifie such kinds of Acids, and thence may loosen the contracted,
smooth and make even the contorted, may strengthen the relaxed Cords, yea and
may every way answer the indications of the depraved tones of those animal
pendula's or vital strings, whereby the imprisoned Spirits, (the immediate
product of vital Fermentation may again be set at liberty, and all the animal
functions be restored to their pristine state: of which sort are our
Sulphur-Bath, which by correcting the Acids, supple and soften the contracted,
strengthen and bind up the weak, and very much repair, in the maine, the
depraved tone of the genus Nervosum.

Lastly, By the use of this Bath, the contraction of the tendons, and musculous
parts, I mean stiffness of the Limbs, Joints, etc. (where the contraction is
not too fixed) are often remedied: For these outward maladies being caused
through some rejected Acids, which wanting a due Fermentative motion to give
them wing by perspiration, are coagulated or hardened (partly by the assistance
of the Air) in the external parts; but by the Sulphur in the Bath, the pores
being opened, and they dissolved, and put into motion, are either sweetened or
carried off.

Also its proper for alleviating Aches, Old pains, Strains, Sciatica's, (which
is a sort of Gout in those parts) Rheumatisms, and other griefs now too tedious
to relate: concerning most of which we might have given some particular
instances, but that it does not suit with our present design, undertaking
chiefly a rational account of its causes, and in general of its virtues: As to
the particular cases themselves, which may confirm what we have already
deposited, as to the medicinal efficacy thereof, we shall refer to another
opportunity.

The END.
Certain Books Printed, and to be Sold at the Pelican in Little-Britain,
London.
SPencers view of the State of Ireland, fol. Dystica Regum Angliae, -- Seberi
Index in Homerum, 4o Waraeus de Scriptoribus Hiberniae, 4o Strada's Musical
Duel between Natural and Artificial Music, or the Nightingal and Harper, 4o
Vsserius de Primordijs Ecclesiarum Britannicarum. 4o -- Ejusd. Historia
Gotteschalci de Praedestinatione. 4o -- Ejusd. Sylloge veterum Epistolarum
Hibernicarum. 4o Seldeni de Synedrijs liber 1 and 3. 4o Ferrarij Euclides
Physicus, 4o Chrysostomi Democritus Reviviscens de Vita and Philosophia
Democrati and de Manna Liber, 8o Sancta-clara Deus Natura and Gratia, 8o
Frommenij Metaphysica. 12o Jonstoni Lexici Chymici liber 2. 8o French Grammar,
by the Doctors of the Sorbon at Paris, for Reformation of the French Tongue, In
French and English, 8o Secrets Revealed, or an open Entrance to the
Shut-Pallace of the King, containing the chief Treasury of Chemistry, 8o The
Philosophical Epitaph, etc. together with a Catalogue of Chemical Books in
three Parts, 8o Dr. Simpsons Philosophical Discourse of Fermentation; with a
Discourse of the Sulphur-Bath at Knarsbrough in Yorkshire, 8o A Caveat for the
Protestant Clergy, or a true account of the Sufferings of the English Clergy
upon the Restitution of Popery in the days of Queen Mary, 8o Paracelsus his
Archidoxes, discovering the way of making Quintessences, Arcanums, Magisteries,
Elixirs, etc. 8o -- His Aurora and Treasure of the Philosophers, together with
the Water-stone of of the Wisemen, 8o The Fame and Confession of the
Fraternity of the Rosie-Cross, 8o
Where likewise most sorts of Chemical or Philosophical Books, may be had,
whether in English or Latin.

FINIS.

