A SHORT ESSAY Toward the HISTORY and CURE OF FEVERS, Particularly of this New
AUTUMNAL-FEVER.

Humbly proposed to the Consideration of the Royal Society, and the College of
Physicians, in Order to the Improvement of Physic, and thereby the benefit of
our Contrymen.

By W. Simpson Doctor in Physic.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman at the King's Arms in the Poultrey, 1678.

A short ESSAY toward the History and Cure of Fevers, especially of this new
Autumnal Fever, etc.
PReliminary Discourses of the Nature of Fevers in general, I must for
brevity's sake studiously omit, and refer the Reader to such Authors as have
made it their business to treat hereof, and particularly to the industrious and
worthy Dr. Sidenhams History of Fevers: It Is my present task barely, first to
relate the History, giving a short account of the most usual symptoms that do
accompany this new Fever; next, to propose the true Method of cure confirmed by
matter of Fact, the most evincing Testimony in the world. [Whence may probably
elsewhere, as from a better Basis, be raised an Hypothesis, different from what
has gone before].

As to the rationale, which order or method of proceeding, although by some it
may possibly be looked upon as empirical to propose the cure before erection of
the Hypothesis; yet I must necessarily crave leave to tell such, that it has
been the only way toward the curing of all diseases, (since diseases began to
have a Being, or rather since the juices of our bodies began to be depraved and
altered into those specifical differences toward mortality, we call diseases)
that ever has been known in the world, and that truly, because of our ignorance
in the nature of things, a priori, limiting now our Theories or Hypothesis,
(which are but a series of notions filled together, or methodically ranged in
order to the explicating the nature of things from their supposed causes) to
the current of visible phenomenon, attended with most obvious circumstances.
And in deed, at this door ( viz. trial of things) has been admitted all the
known cures of diseases, whatever the Hypothesis has been. And for my part, if
I might freely speak, I do really think (and that not without good grounds)
that diseases would be better cured, (the great work of Physicians) if all
hypotheses were swept off the stage, qeing greater remora to more noble
disbuisitions, and set-fasts to more generous trials, than we are truly aware
of, which duly weighed, let the Reader excuse me, if I take another track then
what is vulgar, especially if thereby I come more directly to the proposed end.

First, Then as to the History of this new Fever, it appears under different
disguises; the most usual symptoms that are the true emergent effects, and
natural results thereof, are pains in the head and back, coldness, chilness,
and in some downright shaking; upon which follows intense burning-heat,
thirst, (in some more than in others) violent and profuse sweatings, faintings,
and great debilitudes, with a stupor in the head, and general indisposedness,
which is followed in many) by a delirium, attended with slumbrings. It
most-what emulates a Tertian by its paroxysm, especially for three or four, or
more of the first assaults; then afterward in some appears under the guise of
a quitidian; the pulse is high with great disorder: sometimes (but more rarely)
it begins with vomitings, and purgings, pains also at the stomach etc.

As to the cure (the main thing aimed at, and of greatest use for the benefit
of patients), The observations I made was, That although sweating, or a
moderate Regimen, be the general and most usual indications for purisying the
blood; the one by carrying off that which frequently caused a spurious
Fermentation therein; the other by reducing the blood to its eucrasia,
lessening its high-pac'd and furious Fermentation, rejecting its heterogeneous
particles into some common ducts, which by Glisters, Blisters, etc. are carried
off, and thereby discharged. By both which Methods, the usual symptoms of
former Fevers, (but more by much from the latter than former), have frequently
been taken off. Yet here I found, what by my own and others observations,
neither would perform the intended work, and especially that the former, viz.
Sweating, did not (as often as trial was made) succeed at all; the patients
under such sweating Medicines, generally growing worse and worse, found that
the profuse Sweatings, patients spontaneously fell into, were no other than
symptomatical, which either carried off much of the spirits in a colliquating
fluor, through the pores, (those minute-sluces of the body,) by precipitation,
or other manner of separation, leaving the fermentative matter behind
unsequestred; or the exotic acidum, fixed upon its own caput mortuum, only
laid by against another paroxysm, ready to be imbibed to the procuring the next
Fit; and all this to the great debilitude, faintings, and languishings of
patients. Whence I say, by many remarkable observations, I found that sweating
Medicines were no adequate remedy at all for the cure; nay further, were indeed
wholly noxious, and where used, rendered the cure more difficult: whereupon I
made bold to prohibit (in those patients I was concerned with) all manner of
Sweating, as much as possible, by denying sweating Medicines, (or at least if I
did advise any Diaphoreticks, it was so ordered, as not at all to cause any
sensible sweat), and by ordering those heaps of clothes to be taken off, with
which they usually loaded themselves, (and that sometimes by the advice of some
Physician), through the blind hopes of advantage by sweating, finding hereby no
disadvantage at all to accrue to the patient; although no Medicine should have
been prescribed, but only a due temperate Regimen to be observed, which
doubtless is a much better way, and the patient shall come off with less loss
of spirits and strength, by this than by sweating Medicines.

Whereupon that I might the better prosecute my design, I set upon the
preparation of a Chemical Arcanum, which I hoped would prove generous in the
successful cure of Fevers in general, especially and more particularly of this
new-minted Fever, resulting from the late vicissitude of weather, and
interchange of seasons, thereby disposing the blood (in which this disease
chiefly lay) to those new sorts of Fermentation which give being to this Fever.
I wrought day and night till I had brought it on so far, as that upon trial I
found it a very noble and generous Medicine, hiting exactly upon this Fever, as
peculiarly adapted thereto, answering my expectation, yea far transcending it,
even to astonishment.

The first trial I had of this noble Arcanum (thus prepared) was upon two
Seamen; the one of which had this Fever in a very intense degree, even to a
delirium, with profuse and exhausting sweatings, which I hoped to take off by
the more beaten track of Blisters, Glisters, Spirit of Hartshorne, Milk and
Water, and for a while thereby he seemed to recover; (having not then prepared
this Medicine) but it happened his Fever came afresh upon him again, with the
recurring of the wonted symptoms; and when the Apothecary brought me word what
a dangerous condition he was in, and delirous, I had then almost finished my
proposed circle of operations upon my Medicine; however, as it was, ventured to
send him two or three doses, which I ordered the Apothecary to give him in
Black-Cherry water, at such and such intervals of time. The Apothecary at the
same time gave me also an account of the other patient I had been sent for to
that day, to whom after blooding I had prescribed a Glister, and Milk and Water
for his ordinary drink: the account was that he grew worse and worse, the Fever
was growing stronger upon him, and that he also was delirous. Whereupon I
ordered him of the same Medicine, thirty drops in three ounces of Black
Cherrywater, to be taken at convenient distances of time in the night. Word was
brought me next morning, that the Fever in both was so allayed, as they thought
it was quite gone; both slept very well, their thirst wonderfully quenched, and
their delirium quite taken off. This was surprising news, but desiring to be
further satisfied of the truth thereof, I went my self to see them both, and
found indeed the relation I had to be true; one of them had slept very well
that night, after taking once or twice of his Medicine, and in the morning
called for some food, and was when I went fallen a sleep after his repast, and
they told me was so well, as had thoughts of going abroad that day;
notwithstanding that he had had his Fever upon him for near a week, at tended
with violent heat and sweatings, etc. The other I sound was got up, and pretty
cheerful, and I think had taken some food too: and from that time the Fever
never returned, and they without any more ado recovered very well: only this is
remarkable, that the former of them, who had been blooded, vomited, and purged,
and (if I mistake not) some sweating hot Medicines given before I was sent for,
and had been a week under such a Regimen, who notwithstanding all this grew
worse and worse. I say that which is much to be noted in this patient, (and
wherein he differed from the other) was, that I observed that he recovered not
so fast by far as the other; the reasons whereof ( viz. the great exhaustion of
spirits, and debilitude of strength, what by the Fever, and the medicinal
Method he was treated with) are obvious to every eye.

Another trial I had was upon a Tradesmans daughter, of about 10 or 11 years of
age, who having labored under this Fever for about ten days; they mean while
had the advice of a learned Physician twice, (whose name to prevent reflection
I willingly conceal) who had put her upon Sweating, and Glisters:
notwithstanding all which attempts (set on by the Galenical Method) her Fever
grew higher and higher at every paroxysm; the symptoms more severe, and she at
length delirous: I was sent for, would have consulted with the Physician first
advised with; but being at a distance, the Parents were resolved solely to
adhere to my advice: Whereupon I presently took off the heap of clothes, they
had by advice in order to further Sweating laid upon her, (they suspecting
malignity in the case) and it was feared (she being so extremely weakened, what
with the Fever and pressures to sweat) that the next fit would have carried her
away: I ordered the Apothecary to give her three doses in Black Cherry-water,
at about three hours interval from each other; being the very day before her
expected Fit (which the night following) was to come: she being at ease from
the weight of clothes, after the first or second dose fell asleep very sweetly,
and in lieu of her expected Fit, she slept very well, and scarce drank any
thing all night; and the next morning when I went, found the scene quite
altered for the better; the Fever and its attendants had made their exit, she
cheerful, very sensible, her stupor being gone, which before she had had (both
during the paroxysm and interval) and called for food that day, which she eat
without being sick at all, but fell to sleep after. I went several days to see
her, she continued recovering, but slowly, because of the great languishment
she had been brought to before.

The next I gave it to was a man who had languished for about 10 days under
this Fever, had violent sweating, spontaneous, besides what was artificially
contracted by Venice-Treacle, or some such heating Medicines: I asked him if he
was mindful to be cured (for I was occasionally in his house) if so I would
cure him for nothing, (being still desirous of making further trials of my
Arcanum); yes willingly he answered, and thank me too, and should look upon it
as a providence toward him: with that I ordered him some of the aforesaid
Medicine, three or four doses in Thames-water (he having no distilled Water by
him), as also as much the day after in springwater, being the day before his
Fit was to come, took them, and had no Fit then nor after; for I called once or
twice on purpose to enquire, was gone abroad, and pretty well as his wife told
me. This is what is done in the main, only I order at the heel of the Fever a
purge to carry off the precipitated matter, or other rejected feculencies, to
prevent the foundation for future diseases which might thence arise.

As to the operation of this Arcanum, which so strangely quieteth the seditious
tumult of the blood and spirits, allayeth the feverish heat, and thirst, and as
a great anodyne in this Fever, composeth to sleep and quiet rest, and yet has
not one grain of opium in it; add to which it takes off deliriums, which no
opium does, although prepared after the best manner that I know: as to which
operation, I say have not yet in all my trials met with any thing comparable
thereto, and yet is but in its minority, in the road to further improvement.

For it neither operates by vomit, purging, or sweat, has no sensible operation
at all, save that the symptoms go off, and the Fever disappears.

As to the ingredients of it, I shall speak something, darkly enough (as others
in things of the like nature usually do), it is in short, therefore prepared
with a Mineral, by an Animal, and vegetable menstruum brought on by a circuit
of operations to its expected height: as to which I confess this is but in
limine, to what is intended, and to which it is capable of being brought. Which
when completed by what I have already seen of its operation in its state of
Infancy, may ex ungue leonem, easily conjecture; it will when perfected, and
come to its full ripenss and perfection, be one of the best Medicines in the
world for the cure of most, if not all sorts of acute diseases, viz. Fevers,
Agues, Pleurisies, small Pox, Gripes, and the disease morbus Cholera, and
dysenteries thence emerging, the graduating of which menstruum, that it may the
better work upon the aforesaid mineral, and both be brought to their acme, is
the work I am now intent upon, which Arcanum hides in it self a noble, but
invisible sulphur of great energy in composing and quieting the tumults of the
stomach, and intestines, apparent in the acutest of Fevers, called morbus
Cholera, as also in Dysenteries, both which it cures almost infallibly. As to
the now grassant Epidemick Fever (attended with its peculiar, but various
symptoms) a worthy and ingenious Friend of mine (to whom I am in these affairs
highly obliged) has frequently tried this Arcanum, as also in Pleurisies,
Morbus Cholera, and Dyfenteries, even with admirable success.

This Medicine succeeds the best, if taken according to a right Method, at the
beginning, or first days of a Fever, and that especially in Fevers of Children,
where it seldom fails: But we do not propose it as Universal in the Cure of all
Fevers; for if the Fever have continued long, and that Sweating, or other
debilitating Medicines have been given, by which the spirits are exhausted, the
Ferments depraved, and the whole Mass of blood and other juices brought into an
Ataxy, or if the compage of the blood be too much relaxed by an immoderate
cooling Regimen, then it has not the expected success; therefore in such and
the like cases other Methods must be used, or this must be higher graduated by
further preparation. What those Medicines and right Methods are which may
conduce to the Cure of Fevers in general, we shall elsewhere in our
Pyretologia, or Essay to an Hypothesis of Fevers, take the liberty to declare.

And as to Tertian and Quartan Agues, those obstinate, and to common Method
rebellious diseases, I know two Doctors in Physic (both worthy, learned, and
judicious men) who besides my self have a certain and almost infallible Method
of Curing them, without either Vomit, Purge, Sweat, or other sensibly operating
Medicines; so certainly, as scarce one in ten shall either fail or relapse; so
quickly, as they shall hear no more of their Ague after the first or second
days prescription; and so easily, as it is done without any sensibly working
Medicine; whereby the three grand indications are answered of Curing, Tuto,
cito ac jucunde, the great work of Physicians.

To say nothing here how we know a certain, quick, and pleasant Method for
curing Cmvulsions without danger of relaps, (those to common Method refractory
diseases) as for the former. To confirm the truth of which we might, if at
leisure, give considerable and remarkable instances by matter of Fact. Nor here
further, then to name our effectual and speedy way of curing venereal Diseases:
as to all which we are resolved (for brevity's sake) not further here to insist
thereon, but shall refer the discourse thereof to another opportunity.

These things I the rather name, and but transiently hint, partly thereby to
demonstrate by matter of Fact, that somewhat besides, and beyond the wonted
Methods, are truly worthy Physicians best Essays; and to put them upon new
attempts, and fresh discoveries, in finding out Remedies suitable and
appropriate to every emergent Malady.

And now, if any morose humored man (as perhaps such their may be found) shall
enviously call me a Quack, I shall answer by querying, whether he that can Cure
diseases, or he that cannot, is the Quack? Let them call me so, I value it not;
if I can but successfully cure diseases, the great aim (at least should be) of
all Physicians: They may upon the like grounds give the same name to Riverius,
and to those other worthy, judicious, and learned men aftermentioned.

And lastly, As to such who shall Momus like, enviously carp at any thing, not
to be had in their own Vulgar beaten Track, who hereby give a large and clear
evidence of the ignobleness of their souls, in that they neither are willing
themselves to search into the mysteries and wonders of nature, not daring to
put their laborious hand to draw the curtain nature has veiled her choicest
secrets with: nor (which is yet worse) are they pleased with such as really and
successfully do, envying those whose labors nature has crowned by her
bountiful denation and liberal discovery of her self; to such (besides the
deformed Idea's which may easily rebound from the reflecting glass in their own
breast, enough to affright an ingenious and ingenuous soul); I would answer in
short, by biding such ignorant and envious spirits, be silent, and cast their
eye backward to former Ages, and consider, that besides the ancient Hermetick
Arcanum, kept a-foot in all ages of the world, the famed Hippocrates had his
(...), (ex inguish'd as much as could be by his successor Galen).

To say nothing of the two Pillars of new discoveries in Physic, viz. the
famed Paracelsus and Helmont; nor yet more than to mention the Hybernian
Butler, with his Elixir salis, or lapis ignis, by which wonderful cures were
performed. Had not Poterius his Arcana, by which he effected wonderful cures,
as also Rulandus, Angelus Sala, etc.?

And to look to contemporaries to this very century, had not Riverius his
Febrifugum (a Remedy in effect parallel to ours)? had not the learned Langius
his secrets, as his Miscellanea curiosa Medica testify? Had not Dr. Davison,
Physician extraordinary to the French King, famous for his Chemical writings,
his Arcanum for curing the Lues venerea, for which the Physicians in Paris gave
him 20000 Pistols for discovering it to them, and to desist practice (only to
the Kings Person)? Was not Dr. Anthony famous for his aurum potabile? Had not
the Learned and Industrious Silvius, University-professor of Leiden, his Sal
volatile oleosum, prepared by his own hand? yea, had not our famous Countryman
Dr. Willis, his secret preparation of Steel, and other Arcana's he kept to
himself?

And to look now abroad into foreign parts, may not the learned and worthy
Borrichius be reckoned amongst this Classis? as also Langelotus, Balduinus,
Tackius, Morhofus, Kerkringius, Tachenius, Becherus, etc. whose Writings in
spite of Envy have made them famous.

But to return home, and there to wrap up, have we not of the very College of
Physicians famous men, learned and judicious? viz. Dr. Rugeley, Dr. Dickenson,
Dr. Goodal, who have their Arcana, which they use in their practice? and for
the present, to complete the number, till another more worthy be added, why may
not I as the least of all the aforesaid cast in my mite to this of Natures
Treasury? If thereby I excite other ingenious men to the laudable seize
in searching the hidden secrets of Nature for the improvement of the noble Art
of Healing; that the desire of filthy lucre being laid aside, we may be more
studious really to cure (to answer the great intention of our Employ) and may
thereby (if God will) live to see a new Scene of Physic appear, even more
certain; and therefore more amiable than ever it has been since the days of
Solomon (who knew the virtue of all things in the threefold Kingdom of Nature)
I shall have what I aim at; of which more elsewhere.

Our Hypothesis for the solution of the usual Phoenomena or symptoms of Fevers,
as also for the rendering a more intelligible account of the successful
operation of Arcana in the cure thereof, we designedly omit here, reserving it
to another opportunity, where we shall give a more ample relation of the
further successful trials of on Medicines by matter of fact.

From my House in Chappel-street near New Chapel, Westminster, London.
FINIS.

