ZYMOLOGIA PHYSICA, Or a brief Philosophical Discourse OF FERMENTATION, From a
new Hypothesis of Acidum and Sulphur.

WHEREBY The Phoenomena of all natural Hot-Baths, the Generation of Minerals,
the Production of many Acidulae or Spaw-waters, the Grand apparances of Heat,
Fire, and Light, throughout the triplicity of Natures Dominions, in the
productions of Bodies, are solved from the intestine duellings and inward
collisions of the foresaid principles.

Whereby also Various other subterraneal Phoenomena, as Damps, Earthquakes,
Eruptions, etc. likewise the appara^ce of Meteors etc. and diverse other no less
remarkable ^ ^^aining, are from the same Doctrine of F^mentation genuinely
solved.

With an additional Discourse of the SVLPHVR-BATH at KNARSBROVGH.

By W. SIMPSON, M. D.

Altiora cogitando robilitatur men's humana. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and N. T.
for W. Cooper at the Pelican in Little-Britain, 1675.

TO THE Right Honorable THE PRESIDENT and FELLOWS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY.

The following DISCOURSE OF FERMENTATION Is most Humbly Presented BY THE AUTHOR
W. SIMPSON.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HE that attempts any thing that is new, whether in Natural Philosophy, or
other Sciences, ought with the famed Archimedes, to beg a sure footing; and he
that builds had no less need to lay a good Foundation, least in the former he
be driven back, and in the latter, the fabric by over-hanging, endanger its
fall by its own weight. What care I have taken herein, I am now likely to run
the hazard of thy carping or candid interpretation, the common fate to all
Books.

We here present to thy view, (Candid Reader, if such thou art) a small Scheme
(such as it is) of the principles of Nature, which though few, yet probably
very teeming: We offer here a little draught of those pregnant mechanical
agents, Nature (we suppose) uses in the Formatations and Transformations of
all bodies, drawn as near as we can to the life; which at present we have
comprised into this Epitomized bulk, least by the swelling of its Volume, thou
shculdst conjecture its Title before thou read its name. I have been not a
little cautious in the modelling this small Platform, (though perhaps not
without its Chinks and Chasmes, discernable to a curious prying Eye) by which
(if it take) a larger draught probably may afterward be drawn; having
endeavored to calculate this Physiological Scheme, according to the meridian
of an inquisitive searching Age.

When I had well nigh finished another piece, entitled Lithologia Physica; as
also another, which bears in its front Halologia Chymica, (both writ in Latin)
two as considerable Subjects (I mean Petrification and Salification) as I could
then pitch upon, both grounded upon a different Hypothesis then was y t extant:
before (I say) I had completed the two foresaid Tracts, it came into my mind,
to give a little compondious account of a new Hypothesis I had often ruminated
upon, which I thought I could not better do, then by undertaking thereby to
solve some of the most remarkable and entertaining Phoenomena of Nature, such
as are natural Hot. Baths, the generation of Minerals, the appearances of Heat,
Fire and Light, etc. which therefore we made the subject matter of this ensuing
Discourse: and do therein ever and anon, refer to what we write in those other
mentioned pieces.

And when I had well nigh finished this small tract, I began to look about me,
and to consider on which of the Philosophers side I was (seeing they by their
various and different Hypotheses are apt, instar Audabatum, to fight in the
dark) I could not tell of a good while, till at length I considered, that the
great Hypocrates himself has given touches thereof, Tach 84. Jord. 114. De
Dicta lib. 1.
while in his Book de Dicta he tells us, Constituuntur tum omnia animantia, tum
homo ipse ex duobus, igne and aqua: And that our Doctrine does coincide with
his contenentia, contenta, and impetum facientia: The contenentia are vasa and
viscera: The contenta are Fluids, viz. Water the material principle of bodies:
The impetum facientia are Ferments, or Acidum and Sulphur put into an intestine
collision or Fermentation: And as he tells us all things are made of Fire and
Water; and that these two are sufficient for all generations: so he adds, that
Fire gives motion, and Water nutrition: which how it agrees with our
Hypothesis, let the ensuing Discourse speak for it self.

So that it appears that Fermentation in our sense, is the same with his
Spiritus impetum faciens with his (...), Fire hid in bodies, Its also the same
with that Aetherial matter, the Panspermion of other abstruce Philosophers,
that divinioris aurae particula implanted by God (the Parent of Nature) in
Water; which from seminal originals, produce, by a genuine expansion, all
concrete bodies: its likewise the same which the noble Helmont calls semina
rerum. Those indeed foecunda semina rerum, which as the Poet goes on, Vivaci
nutrita solo, ceu matris in alvo, creverunt.

And by the more recent Spagirical Physiologists its called Spirit, or a
combination of Spirit, Salt, Tach. clar. p. 40.
and Sulphur: Its what Tachenius intends by his Acidum pinguae and filius
solis, etc.

And lastly, (to name no more) its what in a more plain dialect has been
represented to us by the Poets from the ancient sage Philosophers, where one of
them says, Quippe ubi temperie sumpsere humorque colorque
concipiunt; and ab his oruntur cuncta duobus.


When I had viewed the many high roads and broad tracks (distinguished by the
first tracers, and bore their names) at the first sight each seemed large
enough, and promised a fair passage into the beautiful Garden of Nature. But I
found, that as often as I took along them, though I went on pretty merrily at
first, because the path was well beaten, store had gone that way, yet I had not
gone long, ere I perceived still they ended and spent themselves into a wide
barren Common, where I was ever and anon bewildred, and at a loss whither to
turn: so that amidst such difficulties of Rocks, Precipices, Hilly-places, etc.
I was glad I got safe off: at length I espied a little narrow way that had been
little beaten, so that the footings of those who had tract it was scarce
discernable; and it lay off from all the rest of the broad paths: so that
(after I had tried in vain most of the rest) I took into that, kept in it as
well as I could, which was difficult to do from its foresaid narrowness, and
its being unbeaten: and although I now and then deviated, yet I found I was not
strayed so wide, but that with some trouble I got in again; and following this
path, it led me directly into the amiable Garden of Nature: where, what
contemplation I made, what prospects I took of those curiosities and rarities I
met with, let this ensuing discourse give some foretasts, which as it finds
admittance into the World, may give encouragement to publish more.

And here I might take the liberty to assure the World, that nothing does give
a man a fairer prospect into the inward recesses and secret retirements of
Nature, nor does offer a better view into Natures Land-skips, nor does more
open the Cabbinet of her choicest rarities, then that most admirable Mistress
of Arts and Sciences, the noble Chymia, that clavigera arcanorum naturae, which
gives admittance into the surprising Arcana of Nature, whose entertaining
Phoenomena in her genuine encheiresis, are such as may strike admiration (not
to say amazement) in the Artist: I mean not here that spurious brood of
swarming Chemists, those fumivenduli, who fill the World full of Smoke and
Noise, who are but indeed the blemishes of that noble Mistress; the spots in
that solar Beauty, the soils that set off the Luster of the legitimate Sons of
Art, who will shine with an oriental Luster amidst such empty Clouds.

He indeed that would be a diligent searcher of Nature (thereby to become
useful in his generation) must not disdain the soiling his Fingers with Coals;
nor think it below him to converse with the meanest of mechanics, but may take
time to wipe his Fingers while he is refining his notions, and rectifying his
contemplations by remarking the obvious Phoenomena of his or others works.

If this Essay hold good, as its probable in the main it may, it will in great
likelihood be as an introduction to further and more clearer discoveries in the
knowledge of the hidden mechanical agents, employed by the divine hand in the
fabric of all bodies: and gives great probability of being an in-lett into a
better understanding of the causes and efficients of Diseases, and their Cures,
then at the first can easily be apprehended: and in general may be as a
foundation toward further improvements in all manner of Physiology or Natural
Philosophy.

We would not presume to say, that all other Hypotheses ought to truckle (far
be it) but shall leave the Peripateticks quadriga of Elements, with their first
and second qualities, their matter and form, etc. The Epicurcan or
Corpuscularian Doctrine, founded upon Matter, Figure, and Motion, the Figures
depending upon those of round, quadrate, acute, cylindrical striate, etc. of
Atoms, making a pleasant Methematical Scheme, adorned by the curious notions of
Cartesius and others: The quinary of the late Spagyrists, The ternary of the
Chemists (although that in a genuine acceptance is the most plausible) The
Binary of the Tachenians, etc. But shall I say, leave each of the foresaid to
the judicious, to compare with this, and to judge of according to their worth
and intrinsic value.

And only shall refer to the computation of the unbiased Reader, whether an
ingenious person may not be enabled to take a further prospect into the nature
of things, and be capable of making better inspections into the insides
thereof, and of taking larger measures toward a further and future
improvement, then from any other yet extant: where, although I should be found
wandering, yet would not (Candid Reader) despair of thy favorable aspect, and
that upon the very foresaid reasons, viz. both of the uncothness and
untractedness of the path, having neither guide nor leader, yea scarce any
Landmarks, but what was set up by the industrious labors of the Spagyrical
Science, whose ne plus ultra Pillars are beyond our hopes of ever reaching.

I would here once for all say, that I only propound my Hypothesis as a modest
Essay toward the further improvement of that noble Doctrine of Fermentation:
For not being satisfied with any thing I have yet seen extant upon that
Subject, has given me occasion to search further into the nature and causes
thereof: not being content with a bare ipse dixit, or to sit down under the
dogmatical placets of Authors, at the foot of such Gamaliels, gave my self
scope to trace nature (if I could) in her more hidden paths and secret tracts.

And indeed the only right way of establishing any sort of Hypothesis, is
first to procure a set of parallel experiments, and to be furnished with a
competent stock of mechanical Trials, which are so well to be contrived, as to
accord amongst themselves in their most remarkable appearances; and this is to
be observed in the erecting any Hypothesis, whether Physics, Medicks, or any
material branch of either, as the true basis to build upon, consulting in the
one the experiments, in the other, the observations of ingenious persons, in
order to the raising such a structure as will not easily fall, and of
confirming such a Theory as will abide the test of after ages.

Now how ours of Fermentation square herewith, I must appeal to the judicious
Reader; For after we had laid a great many of experiments together, and had
found where, in their most observable Phoenomena they hit and concentred; by an
induction I say of which particular experiments, conspiring in the reasons and
causes of their main solutions, we began to propose to our selves an Hypothesis
which might best suit therewith, and most genuinely result therefrom, and found
from its congenialness to the principles of Nature, not only to hold good in
those which at first fell under our consideration, but also in others which
afterward occurred to our thoughts, and that from the consonancy and
consistency of Nature to her self in all her actions, both in the genesis and
analysis of bodies.

And now, kind Reader, (that I may conclude) thou have viewed the front, and
passed the Portal, if thou has taken any pleasure therein, and art at leisure,
my advice is, that thou forthwith enter, and I would lead thee by the hand into
the building it self; consider the materials, look at the foundation, pry
(though not too narrowly) into the cement, pass through every Room, observe the
proportion and symmetry of the parts; and if thou can not otherwise come to a
resolve in thy judgment, yet at least guess at the design from the contrivance
of the plot: if thou say it wants finishing work, we confess it, by
acknowledging it to be the first, and therefore more rude draught: if thou say
our Lights are too much shaded, we say so too, owning our weakness in that Art;
if, that our Fires which should warm, dry, and do other offices to the Natives,
are too much clouded with fumes, we will not contend: only beg of thee, by
putting things into a just balance, to weigh them well before thou pass thy
severest judgment, and thou will oblige him to concern himself further in the
like matters, who remains Thine

W. S.

BIBLIOPOLA-LECTORI.
Gentle Reader,
THe Authors more earnest occasions not permitting him time to wait upon the
Press, has occasioned some literal mistakes; and although small ones, yet will
not the exact curiosity of the Author pass them by, but that I must lay them
open to thy view, and crave thy Correction. But more especially I beg yours and
the Authors excuse for a more considerable mistake by me committed, in
returning to the Printer a wrong Paragraph in page 11. an atonement for which
I have endeavored to make, by giving you the corrected one, which you will
find Printed at the end of this discourse.

VALE.

PAge 17. l. 13. minglable, p. 30. l. 2. viride aeris, l. 7. incorporated, p.
37. l. 21. hewing, p. 42. l. 10. cork'd, p. 44. l. 28. patent, p. 51. l. 7.
bilious, p. 36. l. 17. are pleurisies, l. 28. before gentle add seasonable, p.
61. l. 27. maternal, p. 62. l. 1. invigorating, l 25. turns, p. 63. l. 3.
cuellings, l. 5. vitali, l. 17. leffas, p 69. l. 24. tempered, p. 71. l. 13. of
r. upon, l. 23. barm, p. 72. l. 17. Bye, l. 22. your r. yea, p. 73. l. 20.
their r. the, p. 74. l. 29. fat r. fall, and florid r, soft; p. 76. l. 20.
maturations, l. 24. neutral, p. 77. l. 1. there r. thereof, p. 79. l. 15. wood.
r. woad, p. 80. l. 2. Urinous, p. 85. l. 21. with r-which, p. 87. l. 17. Tabes,
p. 88. l. 4. dele world, l. 28. closing, p. 98. l. 4. after closing add with,
p. 105. l. 6. intence'd dele d. p. 113. l. 7. spring r. syringe, p. 118. l. 5.
intromission, p. 121. l. 12. breathed, p. 123. l. 18. globuli, p. 139. l. 24.
dyscrasie, p. 142. l. 6. tinge. Sulphur-Bath, p. 25. l. 11. solvent.

A Philosophical Discourse OF FERMENTATION.
CHAP. I.
WE shall not here ravel into the opinion of others concerning this great
doctrine of Fermentation, which whether we look upon in a more large sense, as
the very Basis of Natures workings in the formations and transformations of
Bodies, or in a more strict, limiting it (as some Authors do) to the bare
confinements of some animal and vegitable juices: If the former, it might come
in competition with all other sorts of Principles, laid down in the various
kinds of Hypotheses by diverse Physiologists, whether Peripateticks, Epicureans,
Cartesians, (which is but the latter polisht) Paracelsians, Helmontions,
Willesians, Tachenians, etc. and so might require a larger discourse then here
we intend: If the latter, we stint and straiten Nature in her more ample work
of generations, making her square to our strait-lac'd and biased notions: We
shall in neither sense, I say, take an occasion to examine the Opinions and
Judgments of others, referring that task to another place. But shall without
any unnecessary Prologue fall to our intended work.

Only we would premise, that whereas the Corpuscularians (who are now the most
recent Physiologists) suppose matter under the consideration of motion and
figure, to be the competent Elements and Principles of Bodies, we shall anon
show, that by the power of Fermentation, one part of matter mechanically
indivisible, may for ought we know be splitt and sub-divided by a subtle
comminution into 1000. perhaps 10000 parts: now whatsoever figure these (not
almost but altogether) unimaginable minute parts have or may be supposed to
have, yet can signify nothing in the fabric of Bodies, till they jump
together again or coincide into a stricter compage: So that such parcels of
matter as come nearest to a mechanical division, or at least come nearest to be
perceptable to the acutest Organs of our Sense, fortified by artificial
contrivances, are such as we ought chiefly to look after, and to consider as
principles in order to the genesis and analysis of Bodies.

Nor are we to look at the Elements of Bodies as confined to such narrow
limits, that thence of necessity they should be pent and thrust up into
indivisible figured points: So that matter under the notion of figure, as of
round, square, cubes, etc. in Physically indivisible points, cannot truly and
in a genuine Physiological sense, be reputed the Elements of bodies: For the
reason, suppose, of extension of matter in the concretion of Bodies, consists,
(we conjecture) chiefly, if not solely, in a coagulating texture of pliable
parts of matter, wrought up before while in Succo Soluto, by Fermentation: and
not only extension but divisibility of matter previous to extension in the
production of concretes, we ascribe to the same cause: so that whatever the
Corpuscularians, attribute to motion, divisibility, and figure or size of
particles of matter in order to make up the Elements of Bodies, we see no other
cause but to ascribe to matter, viz. (water or watery particles) set into a
Fermentative motion, which without any more ado, performs the whole business,
as we shall in the sequel of this discourse illustrate, this being premised.

The Method we intend to insist upon and to trace in order to the right
understanding, and toward prosecuting the due improvements of the doctrine of
Fermentation, according to our Hypothesis, will be first to explain what we
mean by Fermentation, giving as concise a definition as the nature thereof will
admit; next, to signify of what large extent it is in the whole round of
Natures workings, which will be elucidated by an induction of particulars, viz.
how the Phoenomena of hot Baths, the production of Minerals, the origin of some
Acidulae, or Spaw waters, the grand apparances of Heat, Fire, and Light,
throughout all Concretes, whether in the family of Minerals, Animals, or
Vegitables; also how many other sorts of Phoenomena, obvious in the large field
of Nature, may without straining be solved from the true principles thereof,
consonant to Nature in all her workings.

In the handling of the first, we may take leave to say, That Fermentation in
the true genuine sense thereof, is nothing else, but an intestine Collision or
mutual wrestling betwixt Acidum and Sulphur, put together by Nature, (or by Art
in imitation of Nature) and set in a combating motion, in order to the
production of some Concrete, or to some other equivalent end, whereby, if not
interrupted, in liquid juices, heterogenities are separated: whose first
on-sets are sometimes, especially in the Embrio-state of some things, slow and
indecernable motions, whilst in other Stades they pass through, they arrive at
more brisk frettings, and yet heightened, may sometimes arise to actual
flagration, as we shall show afterward: And that nature (as we shall anon show)
uses these two as the grand mechanical principles in the productions of all
concretes, whether mineral, animal, or vegitable, and that too not only in
their concretions, but reductions, in their genesis, but analysis evolutions
and revolutions, weavings and unweavings, windings on and off in all Bodies.

Only, First with this difference in the threefold Kingdom of Nature, that tho
the acids of vegitables be different from those of animals, and both from those
of minerals, retaining a specifical difference amongst themselves, whereby they
constantly keep up the bad e of their distinction in their several Classes, yet
all are in a true (and not metaphorical) sense, acids, the like may be said of
their Sulphurs, which are truly (and not analogically) Sulphurs.

And Secondly, with this difference amongst the same Acids and Sulphurs, as
they are considered under the notion of the genesis and production of Bodies,
from what the same are in the right understanding of the analysis, reductions
and unwearings of Concretes. So that nature hereby is every where uniform to
her self, and that ^o from the consonancy and harmony of her principles: We say
therefore and shall prove in the series of our following discourse, that there
are no concretions of Bodies, as they assume their birth from the legitimate
broodings of nature in all seeds and seminal offsprings, without the concurring
efficients and principles of Fermentation, which as they are hid and close shut
up in the very primordial seedlings of things, and are known to us only a
posteriori (inasmuch as they are indiscernable a priori, but by an intuitive
knowledge) yet ex ungue leonem, we may easily take their measures from those
Scantlings we can trace in their footings.

Now for the better rendering our Doctrine of Fermentation intelligible, viz.
how nature by the foresaid principles set to work in the very primordials of
things, goes on (if not interrupted) in a linear process toward the
productions thereof, we shall begin with the mineral Kingdom: where we shall
illustrate the veracity of our principles of Fermentation, by thence solving
the Phenomena of hot Baths, the productions of minerals, and other subterraneal
apparances, as they will in course fall in our way.

In order to the right understanding of hot Baths, and to demonstrate they have
their original from Fermentation of mineral juices, our method will be to lay
down two positions, the first whereof is, that ^^re is no hot Bath without
Sulphur. The Second, That an Acid is necessarily requisite in all mineral
Fermentations; and that all Acids so concerned, are either native or
super-induc'd, also to show what we mean by Sulphur, and how hot Baths differ
chiefly according to the difference of their Sulphurs: And which amongst them
are not safely to be taken inwardly and which are: Then to show how from the
foresaid principles put together into an intestine collision and Fermentation,
the waters that pass through them, must necessarily become hot, and this is
then to be confirmed by an induction of mechanical Experiments, also to show
how Sulphur by Fermentation, becomes comminuted volatiz'd, and capable of
Solution in Water, as happens in all hot Baths, and to signify a parallel
betwixt mineral and vegitable Fermentations, etc.

CHAP. II.
AS to the truth of the first position, viz. that there is no hot Bath without
Sulphur, appears, because as there is no heat without Fermentation of mineral
juices (I mean as to subterraneals) as we shall make evident afterward, so no
Fermentation without Sulphur; For although indeed from mixtures of Acids and
Alcalies, (whether fixed or volatile) Fermentation and Heat does necessarily
result: yet because they are artificially produced; and next, because it will
be difficult to find out the sources of these heats, and the true genuine
causes of such Fermentations, from the variety of those efficients, I mean
alcalies: for notwithstanding there be plenty of alcalizate alcalies, (as I may
call them to distinguish from lixivial) wrapped up in the texture of Petrifick
concretions, yet there must be store of very Corrosive acids, that can be
sufficient to cause so great a Fermentation, which we may never expect to find:
Therefore Tachenius his Hypothesis of acids and alcalies, will not do our work,
as being too narrow in the foundation to raise so large a structure of
philosophy upon, as genuinely to solve the various Phoenomena of nature, and
particularly in this appearance of hot Baths, as anon will be more evident.

By Sulphur I do not confine my self in my Hypothesis to that particular
mineral Concrete called Sulphur or Brimstone, which although that be a Subject
in whose concretion more plenty of that matter I call Sulphur is interwoven, or
rather coagulated, then in any other: yet by that term, I do not only mean what
is flammable in that body; but also the like anologous flagrable matter in
other minerals or metals, as to minerals whether in Antimony, native Cinnaber,
Arsncck, Auripigmentum, Marcasites, Pyrites, Succinum, Ga^ates Lythanthrax,
etc. As to metals in Lead, Tin, Iron, Copper, and Quicksilver, or in both,
viz. Vitriols, which are metals, especially Mars and Venus reduced into that
form by the help of mineral acids; I say I do not only mean what is flagrable
in the foresaid Bodies, or may be separated in a combustable matter: But also I
include all bitumen and unctuous matter; whether reposed in Earth, Stones, or
the like: As to which Sulphurs, even in all combustible Concretes, we know not
that ever they appear sincere, but always more or less complicated with their
connate acids, and upon every sort of Fermentation, (as we shall show more
afterward) whether in the slow or quick, low or high degrees thereof in
vegitation, animation, mineralization, ignition and flagration, they
continually wind off, and do tenues evanescere in auras.

And also in the fore said Bodies wherein Sulphur predominates, or is
separable, an acidum is plainly discoverable to be the inmate or companion
thereof, as is obvious by the burning of Brimstone, the Sulphur of Antimony,
etc. which by condencing the fumes, give an acid Spirit (which whether all
combustible matters amongst animals, vegitables, and minerals, will yield
peculiar sorts of acids, I may elsewhere treat) yet because the Sulphurous
principle has the pre-eminence in such concretions or unctuous Liquors, we
shall therefore discourse of them under the notion of Sulphur.

Now to prove that Sulphur, either crude or volatile, is found in most, if not
all known hot Baths, let us consult what Authors say herein: who have seen and
made observations upon them.

Thus in the aqua Aponensi that famed hot Bath near Padua, so much discoursed
by Fallopius, certo collegi (says he) etc. vaporem Sulphureum in illa aqua
Aponensi contineri, and says further, est aqua ferventissima, and dum calida
est sapit Sulphur and Bitumen, etc. The learned Dr. Ed. Brown fellow of the
Royal Society in his Travels tells us his observations: Sulphur (says he)
which is in great quantities in many hot Springs, flies away continually, and
is not to be found in them, if you boil or evaparate the Bath-water: and
therefore to discover it, I thought it more rational to look out of the water,
then into it; for upon many places which were over the Baths, and received the
Steams of the hot wate, I have seen Sulphur stick: And to satisfy my curiosity
further herein, I caused once a Pipe to be opened at Baden in Austria, through
which the hot water continually ran, and took with my hand from the upper part
of the Pipe, diverse Boxes full of a substance scarce to be distinguished from
Flower of Brimstone.

Thus we see how Sulphur dissolved in these Baths does sometimes precipitate
along the sides of the Channells through which it runs as also being volatiz'd
does pass away (I mean the purer part) in vapors or steams insensibly till
arrested by some particular bodies, it settles and sticks thereto: Thus the
foresaid Author observed, That walking about one day in the lower Bath at
Baden, and leaning over the Ballisters, perceived that his Buttons, and what
else he wore that was Silver, were all turned yellow of a fair Gold color,
although he was at some distance from the Water: whereupon he tried this
Experiment, viz. of hanging money over the Bath at a foot distance, or at a
greater, and found it colored in a minutes time, and that which was nearer, in
half a minute.

Next we are to consider how these Thermae or hot Baths differ amongst
themselves (which as we conceive) chiefly proceeds from the difference and
great variety of Sulphurs or Mineral Bodies, wherein are wrapped up a diversity
of Sulphurs, through which they pass, and with which they are impregnated,
together with some other mineral parts which they take in, either at the place
of Fermentation, or afterward in their passage. For Sulphurs (which we suppose
to be chiefly concerned in all mineral Fermentations differ much amongst
themselves, common Brimstone being different from that of Antimony, and that
from the Sulphur of Vitriol, Pyrites, and other mineral Marcasites, all which
are yet different from Arsenical Sulphurs, and from bituminous matters, one
sort or other of which are most what the predominant ingredient and mineral
principle of these hot Baths.

Hence it is that some of these Sulphurous waters, may with good success in
order to the cure of some diseases, be taken inwardly, others not, Those that
may not, are generally such whose Sulphurs are Antimonial, Arsenical or
Bituminous, or at least border upon such minerals as are allied thereto; of
which are the generality of hot Baths, and in particular those of our own
Nation, of which the Sommerset-shire being the hottest, are found altogether
unfit for inward uses, are not safely to be drunk, inasmuch as they are
impregnated (as I conceive) with antimonial, or perhaps bituminous Sulphur, or
the Sulphur of some Pyrites or other Marcasite, a kin to Antimony or Bitumen,
which lodges in the bowels of those great Mountains, at the Foot or Center of
which those hot Baths break forth: for the acid which concurs necessarily ( as
we shall show afterward) to those Fermentations, as an indispensible
principle, opens the body of those Sulphurs, or detains them whilst in fieri in
their crude nature, and thereby renders them wholly noxious for inward use, as
we could further illustrate, but that we have.

Nor is Buxton Bath in Darby-shire (from the same cause, although in a remiss
degree) fit for taking inwardly: inasmuch as that according to all probability,
partakes of a bituminous Sulphur, and that I gather from the plenty of a
bituminous or oily substance, got out of the very Clefts of the Stones in the
Peake, yea this bituminous or oily matter is found in the very Pores, Clefts
and Cavites of the Stones themselves, as was communicated to me from the
judicious, and my worthy Friend Mr. Jossop, whose Father (as he acquainted me)
got two Spoonfuls out of one crevice in a Stone, which bituminous matter is
lodged not only in those stones, but also in a sort of light lithanthrax: which
rubbed (being a smooth polite body) is Electrical (as I have found by trial)
which distilled, yields an oil and acid Spirit, almost like that of Amber, as
the ingenious Mr. Fisher informed me he found by trial, yea the same bitumen is
imbibed into a fungus matter, which Dr. Lister supposes (and that very likely)
to be rotten wood long buried in the earth, into which this oily matter or
bitumen has sunk, which keeps (as I have found) continually moist, tho kept in
a dry place. I say, its very probable that the Sulphurous principle of Buxton
Bath, has its determination from this sort of bitumen; And as to those
Sulphurous waters which may safely be taken inwardly, are chiefly the
Sulphur-well at Knarsbrough, of which we shall further discourse in a Chapter
by it self afterward.

And as to the different degrees of heat in Baths, may proceed either from the
more remiss or intense Fermentation of mineral juices, or from the different
place of Fermentation, as it may be deep within the bowels of the Earth, or
near the place of its Exit, thus if the Fermentation happen to be far within
the Earth, and so remote from the place of Erruption, that the Sulphur therice
become much what precipitated, or left in the colander or filter of Sand,
through which it passes, and the acidum thereby so dinted as to become very
languid (if at all perceptable) in the Water, and yet by reason of its
closeness from the air, may retain somewhat of its first conceived warmth, of
which sort are those Sulphur Baths near Villock in Carinthia, which are gently
warm, (as the learned Dr. Brown notes in his book of Travels) as also as I
suppose, Buxton Bath in Darby-shire, whilst in other parts of the earth, the
foresaid Fermentation may be strong both from the plenty of the two combating
principles, as also from their nearness to the place of breaking forth, of
which sort are those at Glass-Hitten, Eisenbacke, both not far from Schemnitz
in Hungary (where are silver mines) also those of Stubn near Newsol in the same
Country, those at Baden in Austria, and especially ours at the Bath in
Sommerset-shire.

We say also, that Fermentation of mineral juices is most necessarily requisite
to the producing of all hot Baths, and consequently all hot Baths depend
thereon, because hereby is made a comminution of Sulphurous, or other
bituminous juices, which thence become communicable to, and dissolvable in
ordinary spring water, for hereby the Sulphur is severed into volatile parts,
easily permeating the body of water. The parallel of what is produced by
Fermentation in vegitables to what is performed by the same amongst mineral
juices in order to the making hot Baths, is not inconsiderable, whether we look
at the agents, or at Fermentation its self, or lastly at the effects, as to the
agents, which here are requisite to perform mineral Fermentations, we shall
demonstrate afterward to be no other, then mineral acids and mineral Sulphurs
intoris mineralibus: That also Acids and Sulphurs (to wit of their own kind)
are the true agents in the performing all vegitable Fermentations, we may
elsewhere ex instituto discourse: as to Fermentation it self, which whether in
minerals or vegitables, is nothing else but an intestine motion of the
essential constituent principles of Acidum and Sulphur, which is in a more
remiss or intense degree, and the heat consequently more or less, according to
the slower or more brisk on-sets and inward struglings of those combitant
principles; Lastly, the parallel will hold good in the effects of Fermentation.
Thus as the effects of the sensible Fermentation in all vegitable Fermentative
Liquors is the comminution and volatization of their Sulphurs, as that what
before such sensible Fermentation was separable in the form of an Oil by bare
infusions and distillations in ordinary water, is now by the comminution of
previous Fermentation, so divided, sub-divided, and volatiz'd, as that these
vegitable Sulphurs will not only arise by the gentlest heat, but will also
easily dissolve in any water or common vehicle; As we plainly see that any
vinous Spirit made from vegitables by Fermentation, will easily mix with
ordinary water: which the oils of those vegitables separated before
Fermentation would not do; So likewise the effects of those sensible (at least
by their heat) Fermentations in mineral Fermentative juices, is no other then
the comminution and volatization of their otherwise crude Sulphurs, For what is
it (would I ask) that can render Sulphur and bituminous juices capable of
incorporating with Spring Water? Seeing that neither fire (which what that is
in a true Physiological sense according to our Hypothesis, we may elsewhere
declare) in the vulgar notion thereof, nor Salts (I mean fixed or volatile) can
alone perform that work, For by fire if in open Vessels, Brimstone being burnt,
it arises with a fume condensible into an acid Sulphurous Liquor, witness the
oil of Sulphur per Campanam, made by flag ration, and in close Vessels, it
makes no alteration, arising only in Flowers, which are nothing else but the
entire body of Brimston, unaltered or opened: and as to fixed vegitable Salts,
those indeed open the body of Common Sulphur, or Sulphur of any of the
minerals, so as to make them more capable of dissolving in those congenial
menstrua's of Oil, or vinous Spirits, but do not at all procure their solution
in common water, for water being poured to any of the foresaid solutions of
Sulphur, made either with Oils or vinous Spirits by fixed Salts, do forthwith
lactescere, causing a precipitation of the very body of Sulphur in a milkie
form called lac Sulphuris; So that it remains that nothing else short of acid
juices, can perform this great work of dissolving mineral Sulphurs, so as to
make them mingable with water; which is performed one of these three ways, viz.
either by bare solution, distillation, or Fermentation; in all which the acidum
must have the pre-eminence before such sort of alteration upon Sulphur can be
made; thus as it is ex intuitu Sulphuris, that all metals are dissolvable in
the Sti^ian or other proper menstrua, which being taken in pieces by acids
(together with their congenial Sulphurs) the mercurial and other parts
complicated in the texture of that body, does colliquescere: So likewise it is
ex intuitu acidorum that all mineral Sulphurs., or Sulphurous Concretes, do
either dissolve in water, or are capable of distillation into Liquors; or
lastly, do undergo Fermentation and the products thereof.

First, As to solution in water thus vitriol or vitriolin marcasites, which
contain plenty of Sulphur do either per se, or exposed to the air, become
capable of dissolving most what in water, and that from the prevalency of their
acids above their Sulphurous principle, whereby the Sulphur lurks under the
mask of the acid.

Secondly, As to their distillation, I mean of Sulphurs in the form of Liquors,
that happens also from the powerfulness of their acids assisted by the acidum
of fire, used in such distillations, whereby the Acidum and Sulphur do
colliquescere into a corrosive Liquor, as appears in Oil of Vitriol.

And Lastly, This Acido-Sulphurous-Liquor, (and others of the like nature
prepared as aforesaid, by distillation) if diluted by the addition of a little
water, or of any oily Liquor, or vinous Spirit be mixed therewith, the Sulphur
is presently set upon by the acid, from whose mutual assaults arises a strong
Fermentation, making the Glass intensely hot, and thereby sometimes comes near
to an actual flagration: So that it is the acidum variously treating the
Sulphur, whence all these varieties of operations proceed; And by this last
work of Fermentation, the Sulphur is more comminuted, volatiz'd, and altered,
then by either of the two former. Its true indeed, that fixed alcalies, or Calx
vive (being analogous to the former) does so work upon the body of common
Sulphur, or Sulphur of some minerals, and thereby opens it, so as meeting with
an acid juice, may make a resemblance of some Sulphur waters, as we have
elsewhere largely discourst in our Hydrologia Chymica, concerning the
Sulphur-well at Knarsbrough, which is without doubt, I mean the precipitation
by the supervening acid, the cause of the strong smell of this and some other
the like waters.

Amongst the causes assigned by diverse Authors of the heat in natural Baths,
those of subterraneal fires are not the least, which because we have by
sufficient arguments at large exploded in our Hydrologia Chymica, shall now
therefore wave: But the great and most authentic opinion is that of Dr.
Jordens in his book of natural Baths, which by many learned persons, has (and
that not unworthily) the kind acceptance, and the most general applause which
is grounded upon a Fermentation from a seminary Spirit of minerals, in the
bowels of the earth, meeting with convenient matter, from which Spirit acting
upon the matter in generation of minerals, is caused that heat which
perpetuates hot Baths.

It would be too tedious a task, for this intended short tract, now to wade
into a deep examination of the Hypothesis of this learned man, I shall only say
(leaving the rest of that doctrine in its own worth) that had that judicious
person been better acquainted with the understanding of the true and genuine
sense of Fermentation, would no doubt have polished his notions much better
then we find them, and would have told us wherever Fermentation was found (in
whichsoever of the triplicity of natures Kingdoms) that there necessarily must
concur the principles of Fermentation; and that Sulphur or Bituminous matter
(being a kin to Sulphur) must be one of those principles, as to the mineral
Kingdom, and consequently be an indispensible ingredient in all hot Baths: For
Fermentation can no more exist without its own principles, then fire can
without combustible matter (or the principles of firing) nor then animal bodies
can be sustained without their peculiar Ferments, which what analogy these,
viz. vegitable and animal juices in their Fermentations, as to their
constituent principles bear to those of minerals, we may elsewhere give an
account.

Only here we shall take occasion to answer that grand objection the foresaid
ingenuous Author makes against Sulphur, being the cause of heat in Baths: For
though we do not assert, that Sulphur singly considered, is the cause of
Fermentation or Heat, but that it is one of the principles of Fermentation: yet
we judge that objection touches upon the Verge of our Hypothesis, and
therefore worthy our solution: The Objection is, That if Sulphur can give
actual heat to our Baths, it must burn; the like he says of bitumen, that
unless it be kindled, it can yield no heat to our Baths.

I answer, That hereby it is obvious, that the foresaid Author did not
thoroughly understand the true efficients of Fermentation in mineral juices; for
if he had, the question had been beyond dispute; for though Sulphur or common
Brimstone in its concrete substance, is not the Sulphurous principle nature
uses in the producing of Fermentation in the primary disseminate juices, where
such things are in Embrio, or in solutis principijs; yet even that very
concrete body, whether in the form of Brimstone, or complicated within the
texture of other minerals, Pyrites, etc. is by the supervening of a powerful
acidum, capable of Fermentation, and thence of imparting its more subtle
apporrhea or steame (by the comminution of the foresaid Fermentation) and
susceptable of the virtues thereof: So that it appears, that Sulphur may be one
of the efficients of heat in Baths; and yet its flagration not requisite at
all: the same we may safely say of Bitumen.

Now as we have endeavored to prove Sulphur whether in succo soluto in the
very primordial shapings or generations of minerals, or the same reduced from
mineral concretions by the superinduction of congenial acids, to be one of the
two ingredients or mechanical Organs nature uses in mineral Fermentations:
This therefore leads me to our second position, viz.

CHAP. III.
THat there is no Fermentation amongst mineral juices, wherein an acid is not
concerned: Or thus, That an acid is necessarily requisite in all mineral
Fermentations: By acidum here I mean one of these two sorts, (viz.) are such as
are imbred in the same mineral concretion, whilst in succo soluto, etc. in the
beginings of its generation: Or Secondly, a superinduced acidum, which is
powerful in the reductions of minerals already concrete; so that if we have our
eye upon Fermentation from mineral concrete bodies, which have already past
their Embrio-state, and are come to the solidity of complete bodies; then by
acidum we do not mean such a one as is intrinsic, connatural to, and implanted
in all Brimstones and mineral Sulphurs, more or less, for no Sulphur nor
Sulphurous body as such, can alone be the cause of Fermentation or heat in the
Earth: but an extrinsick supervening acid, which must by reduction set those
minerals by a kinship or consanguinity of parts into Fermentation de novo.

Now therefore it remains to prove, that there are acid juices in the bowels
of the Earth, and that these are either embryonative to the same mineral where
the Sulphur is, or else peculiar to some other bodies by which the transient
waters become acuated, which if the former, then the Acidum and Sulphur being
natives of the same mineral, do more easily by their mutual contact and
intestine struglings, cause a Fermentation, even whilst the minerals are in
solutis principijs, which being constant, those waters which pass through them
must as certainly and constantly be heated. So that from the unerring rules of
nature from perpetuating the cause, the effect must be no less: The acid which
causes the latter sort of Fermentation we shall shortly touch upon.

First then, the acids of the former classis will be apparent to us, if we
consider that there are no minerals produced in their peculiar beds, in the
intrails of the Earth, without a previous Fermentation from their congenial
principles of Acidum and Sulphur. For our Hypothesis concerning the generation
of minerals is grounded upon Acid and Sulphur; from which foundation we say,
that these two being actually put into motion by the mineral seed in Embrio,
distinguished according to the lubet of the divine fiat, in the great
wheel-work of generation, do by their mutual innate wrestlings, cause a
Fermentation, and this to be one (yea the chief) cause of heat in natural Baths.

These in-dwelling acids, I say, are manifest, and easily discoverable to us a
posteriori, from their not difficult separations out of the bodies of most
known minerals, thus we see plenty of an acidum separable from common Brimstone
by bare flagration, and the slight artifice of condensing those fumes: witness
the Oil of Sulphur per Campanam, which is acid: Thus also we have separated an
acidum from Saturn Ore; and know how to do the same from Antimony, both which
are performed two manner of ways, viz. First, By separating their Sulphurs,
(which I have done both from the Ore of Saturn, as also from the minera of
Antimony) which by flagration like common Brimstone, yield an acid. Secondly,
By distilling the foresaid minerals (I mean Lead Ore, and Antimony) per se in
close Vessels by a peculiar way, may be drawn an acid.

Thus likewise out of both Vitriol and Alom, as also from common fossil (which
is all one, marine) Salt and Nitre by bare distillation in close Vessels are
frequently acids drawn, which are singly or jointly thence preparable, witness
Spirit or Oil of Vitriol, Aqua fortis, Spirit of Salt, Spirit of Nitre, etc.
all of them sufficiently acid. Thus out of all the Pyrites may an acid be
separated; yea further, out of bitumens, amber, jet, (which is kennel coal) and
other sorts of Lythanthrax, may by distillation an acid Spirit or Liquor be
easily separated. Thus my ingenious Friend Mr. Fisher has separated an acidum
out of a concrete bitumen got out of Lead-mines in the Peake in Derby-shire
(not far from Buxton hot Bath) which is an Electrical Concrete, as also has
done the like from the rest of the last recited mineral bodies: And the like
acidum has been drawn from a bituminous fungus found in those parts.

Now come we to treat of our second sort of acidum, which is one of the chief
ingredients or principles of our latter sort of Fermentation to be numbered
amongst the causes of some hot Baths, and that is a superinduced acidum, viz.
the current of a living Spring (as such are called) in its subterraneal
passages, meeting with some Salts in Embrio or Bed of Earth, impregnated with
acid juices, of which sort are all or most of the mineral Salts, whilst in
fieri before they by a further maturity reach the state of concretion, I say
passing through these Beds, becomes (by reason of its facile imbibition of such
juices) acuated therewith, and then falling into a bed of Brimstone, or other
minerals or pyrites, etc. impregnated with Sulphur, begins a solution thereof,
so raises a Fermentation betwixt the Sulphur and the supervening acid: which
gives heat to the water; and becomes more or less hot, according to the more or
less powerfulness of the Acid and Sulphur as it passes: As also according to
the nearness or remoteness of the waters exit from the source of Fermentation:
which acid dividing, subtilizing, and volatizing the Sulphur, does brake it
into such small parts, as that it becomes (I mean as to the purest part
thereof) dissolvable in water (according as we have more largely explained
above) and thence it is (I mean from the Fermentation made from Acid and
Sulphur, whether performed the former or latter way) that all hot Baths have
somewhat of Sulphur in them more or less.

This last sort of Fermentation, which I may call (if we have respect to the
already concrete body of Sulphur, or Sulphurous minerals, and that not
improperly) Fermentation at the Second hand, I say, is no less to be performed
by minerals then vegitables: For as amongst vegitables, Corn, when ripe and
reaped, its fermenting principles of vegitation (as we may elsewhere show how
all vegitation is nothing else but a natural slow-paced Fermentation from each
plants peculiar principles of Acid and Sulphur) are shut up, and would
constantly remain dormant, till it either be committed to the ground, in order
to fresh vegitation and multiplication of its species, or be malted, whereby
its vegitative Fermentation is perverted, and the same principles driven on to
another design of fermenting in water after malting, in order to the making of
our drink: wherein both ( viz. Vegitation and Malting) the same fermentative
principles are kept afoot though to different ends.

So likewise it happens (by a parity of principles amongst minerals, where when
the Fermentation necessarily in their production sometimes terminate in
concretion, in which the Sulphurous principle (being prevalent) most what
coagulates the acidum, and both with some other heterogenious parts, combine to
the making up this or the other mineral Sulphurous concrete; I say there in
that concrete the principles of Fermentation cease to act, and so would (if
unexcited) remain always dormant, until by a congenial powerful supervening
acid, the intrinsic principles be put into a fresh intestine struggling or
regular motion, which we call Fermentation, which heating the transient waters,
becomes the efficient cause of some natural hot Baths.

CHAP. IV.
HAving already showed that Acidum and Sulphur are the chief ingredients of hot
Baths, as the essential principles thereof: Now come we to demonstrate how and
in what manner the waters in hot Baths become hot: which to do, we must
endeavor to show, that some sorts of acids have so powerful an operation upon
Sulphurs, or Sulphurous concretes, as that being actually set a work, or put
into motion, are sufficient causes of Fermentation in mineral juices; and next,
that heat (which will necessarily follow) is the immediate result of such
Fermentation.

The First we shall elucidate with an induction of many parallel instances,
whereby we shall perform two things at once, viz. both illustrate our doctrine
of Fermentation, grounded upon the genuine principles of Acidum and Sulphur, as
also solve the Phoenomena of the occurring instances: The first mechanical
instance shall be, the solution of any metal (except Gold) in an Aqua fortis,
and of Gold it self in an Aqua Regis, which are no sooner put together (both
being duly qualified) but the action of Fermentation is plain to any eye, in
the dissolving or breaking to pieces that metal: what it is that causes
Solution and Fermentation, which immediately happens upon the working of the
solvent on the solvend: It is not (as I conceive) from the complications of the
fluid Salt in the menstruum, with the fixed Salt in the metal, whereby the
metallic compage is broke, and the particles thence hid in the pores of the
menstruum, according to the judgment of the learned Dr. Willis. Nor need we
with him imagine a vitriolick Salt in Silver, or an armoniack in Gold, but is
it not rather the Sulphur in the metal, and the acidum of the menstruum; for
the sake of which Sulphur the mercurial part is also broken to pieces, and the
whole by that Fermentative motion dissolved: cujus Sulphuris intuitu totum
liquescit metallum, in which corrosion or solution of the imperfect metals in
Aqua fortis, or the like corrosive menstrum, there is no such great danger of
breaking the Glass if stopped, as happens inevitably in the solution of the
Sulphur of the more crude minerals, the reason of which is from the more fixity
those Sulphurs arrive to by metallization, from what they are in unripe
marcasites or minerals. Hence we may certainly conclude, that in the
Fermentation requisite for hot Baths no metals are concerned; and that both
because of the more fixity of their Sulphurs, as also from the deficiency of
such corrosive menstrua in the earth: for nothing short of an Aqua fortis or
Aqua Regis can make a Fermentation with a metal. Hence also nothing but
minerals (or liquid bituminous juices) wherein the connate Sulphur is of a more
loose compage, also more volatile, and consequently easily fermentable by more
lanquid acids, are the proper and essential ingredients of hot Baths; where we
may observe both by the preceding, and by this following instance, That the
Sulphur in the metals acting upon the acids, or vice versa, are the true causes
of corrosive Fermentations, and thence of heat. Thus the caput mort' of
viridaris (from which I had according to Zuelfer, drawn off the concentred
acetum) being a subtle calx of Venus, I mixed with an equal quantity of Sal
armon: (in order to the preparing a sort of that (vulgarly called) ens veneris)
which mixture (being well impropriated by a sufficient triture) within less
then one quarter of an hour caused so strong a heat as I could scarce get it
into the retort without burning my hand.

The next instance therefore shall come nearer to the matter in hand, and that
shall be concerning Sulphurs more Crude, as they stand related to the minerals.
Thus in the affusion of Aqua Regis upon Antimony, or Spirit of Nitre upon
butirum Antimonij, where the acidum of the menstruum acting upon, and struggling
with the crude Sulphur, either of crude solatary Antimony, or of the same
carried up by Salts in the form of a butirum, does cause a very strong
Fermentation, where the Sulphur by the assaults of those corrosive acid Spirits
grows so high in its Fermentation, as that it almost takes flame, passing off
with a strong stifling and incoarcible arsenical vapor, by the former of which
prepared with common Salt, my ingenious Friend Mr. Wilkinson and my self have
after Fermentation separated a Sulphur out of Antimony, not unlike the common
greener sort of Brimstone.

That the Fermentation caused in the last of which experiments (I mean betwixt
Spirit of Nitre, and Butter of Antimony) is not (as some might urge) from the
Salts in the Sublimate, mixing with the acidum in the menstruum, appears,
because the same menstruum poured upon the same Salts, while incorporated with
Mercury in the form of Sublimate, causes no such Fermentation; yea, on the
contrary, I have seen Sublimate (wherein the foresaid Salts are lodged, which
are in butirum Antimonij) dissolve in an acid menstruum, without the least
tumultuous Ebullition, even almost like (and perhaps near as soon) as Ice in
warm water.

Another mechanical instance shall be from the pouring an Aqua Regis upon well
dried Danzick vitriol, upon which well blanched, I poured the foresaid
menstruum, from whose mixture (being made per vices) such a strong impetuous
Fermentation, with thick red fumes was caused, as that it seemed to come little
short of actual fire, causing an intense heat: Now that it was the Sulphur in
the vitriol, which meeting with the acids in the menstruum, produced that
violent Fermentation and Heat, is evident, because out of a pound and a half of
well dried vitriol after the Fermentation was over, and that the fumes had
passed off in a thick cloud, there remained after the solution in a
distillation in a coated Glass retort (being at length urged with a very strong
fire) searce five Ounces of a Spongy red colored cap' mort' totally insipid.
The like may be performed by acids upon any of the Pyrites, or other imperfect
minerals, whose native Sulphur being crude, hangs but loosely in the compage of
such concretes.

That this foresaid Fermentation proceeds not (as some may object) from the
Salts in the Vitriol, is evident, because if the Salt of Vitriol prepared by
Fire (by whose stress the Sulphur is either banished or fixed) be mixed with
such sort of acid menstruum, it causes no Fermentation: besides which, this
Fermentation happens betwixt the acidum of the menstruum, and the Sulphur of
the body dissolved, where there is no suspicion of implanted Salts, (other then
what is acid) which the foresaid instance of Fermentation from aqua regia upon
crude Antimony, sufficiently evinceth.

Lastly, As acids working upon the Sulphur of metals, cause a Fermentation, and
thereby their solution, and setting upon minerals (which comes nearer to our
purpose) does cause a most strong Fermentation, unhinging their Sulphurs, which
being unripe, are the more apt to ferment; So likewise meeting with bituminous
juices, they do in like manner, become the efficients of Fermentation, which
sort of bituminous Oils, I account to be of a middle nature betwixt mineral
and vegitable Sulphurs, and therefore we shall illustrate the manner of their
Fermentation with acids by vegitable Sulphurs.

And so mineral acids mixed with vegitable Sulphurs, cause Fermentation this
threefold way, viz. First, as meeting with them in a more solid substance, as
with turpentine, rosin, resinous gumms; or Secondly, in a more liquid form, as
of Oils; or Lastly, in a comminution of those Oils into highly rectified
vinous Spirits, where the vegitable Sulphurs are comminuted and subtiliz'd by
Fermentation into smaller parts.

Thus as to the first, aqua fortis, with turpentine, rosins, or resinous gumms,
makes a Fermentation, which happens from their implanted Sulphurs, (mask in
that solid form) and the acidum in the menstruum. Hence it is, that some
resinous gumms, for instance Camphire, will dissolve in Spirit of wine, or aqua
fortis singly; but not jointly, the reason whereof seems to be this, that in
the former it dissolves from the analogy of Sulphurs (comminuted and volatiz'd
Sulphurs the more easily permeating from the nimbleness of their parts, the
like Sulphurs lurking in more solid forms) which indeed is the reason why
vinous Spirits are the proper menstrua for dissolving many resinous woods,
roots, gumms and inspissated juices, as of Turbith, Jallap, Mecoacan, Scamony,
Myrrh, Aloes, etc. by extracting their resinous or sulphurous parts. In the
latter, (I mean aqua fortis) Camphire dissolves from the acidum of the
menstruum, and from the same cause, ( viz. of acids working upon Sulphurs) it
is, that other resinous gumms do also dissolve in acids, as we find Ammoniacum,
Galbanum, Tachamahaca, etc. do in Vinegar. But these two menstrua's being
mixed, after Fermentation degenerate into a quid neutrum, will not then
dissolve Camphire, as the ingenuous Dr. Lister has tried.

As to the second sort, Oil of Vitriol being mixed with Oil of Turpentine,
causes a strong Fermentation and Heat; and by distillation gives plenty of a
Brimstone: which Fermentation and Separation of Sulphur being rightly
understood, is (as we judge) from no other cause, then from the acidity in the
Vitriol, working upon the vegitable Sulphur in the Oil, and thence the
Fermentation, (according to our Hypothesis) whereupon having deserted its own
mineral Sulphur, contained in it self, gives cause of the facile separation of
its formerly implanted Brimstone.

Lastly, Thus Spirit of Nitre, or Oil of Vitriol, being mixed with a highly
rectified vinous Spirit, (which is prepared from the Fermenting juice of
Grapes, or with any other vegitable fermentative Spirit, does presently cause a
violent Fermentation, which heats the Glass (its done in) so intensely, as that
it can no more be touched then fire; whose cause (as I apprehend) is no other
then from the strong acidity in the menstrua, which meeting with the highly
graduated Sulphur of Vegitables, in those admirable depurated and volatiz'd
Liquors, the one frets upon the other, causing that intestine collision, which
we call Fermentation, whence immediately results the heat: which Fermentation
betwixt the Acidum and the Sulphur in that violent hurricane of rapid motion,
wheels off along with it a great part of the Sulphur contained in the corrosive
acid menstruum.

Another argument why the Fermentation in mineral juices, is the cause of heats
in Baths, may be taken from the perpetuation of their cause; for seeing no
other incessant cause can satisfactorily be assigned, which may in all things
so well square with the nature of hot Baths, as the aforesaid, therefore till a
more rational cause can be found out, (if any such there be in nature) it may
not be unacceptable to the ingenious.

Now that their cause is certain and constant (according to our deposited
Hypothesis of Fermentation of minerals in their production) is evident from
their continual generation; for where once begun, they cease not to perpetuate
their Offspring: which is evident from the observation of Mine-works. Thus
Salt-peeter men find, that when they have extracted Salt-peeter out of a floor
of Earth one year, within three or four years after, they find more Salt-peeter
generated there; and work it over again, the like is observed (as Dr. Jorden
notes) in Alom or Copperass or Vitriol. And this is not only usual to all
minerals, but also the same may be said of metals: For the Tinners in Cornwall
have experience (as the foresaid Author well observes) of Pitts, which have
been filled up with Earth after they have wrought out all the Tin they could
find in them, and within thirty years they have opened them again, and found
more Tin generated: The like has been observed in Iron, as Gaudentius Merula
reports of Ilva, an Island in the Adriatic Sea, under the Venetians, where
Iron breeds continually as fast as they can work it, which is confirmed by
Agricola and Baccius, and by Virgil, who says of it, Insula inexhaustis
Chalybum generosa metallis.

The like is found at Saga in Lygis, where they dig over their Iron mines every
tenth year: Mathesius also gives examples in almost all sorts of minerals and
metals, which he has observed to grow and regenerate. Erastus (as Dr. Jorden
notes) affirms, that he saw in S. Joachims Dale, silver grown upon a beam of
wood, which was placed in the Pit to support the works: The like of
reproductions of metals, is also observed in the Lead-mines at Mendip and the
Peake, which do not only stretch further in extent of ground, then has been
observed heretofore, but also are renewed in the same ground, which has been
formerly wrought, which we have touched upon in our Hydrological Essays.

Wherefore seeing minerals are continually generated, their constitutive
principles in their fermental operation, must as constantly be at work,
especially where concretion is interrupted by a continual flux of water, as
happens in the source of most of these hot Baths.

Now where the seeds of minerals are once begun, that their active principles
are set a work, in order to the heaving forth a body answerable to the type
implanted in the primordials thereof. If this happens, I say, where water in
his subterraneous passages has its constant current, it can never arrive at
the completing of the body according to the intention of nature; for although
it be always aiming at the perfecting of a solid concretion; yet the constant
afflux of waters, impedes that attempt, and only serves to keep the
fermentative principles in a constant motion; so that water does but set the
inbred principles of Acidum and Sulphur more into an inward struggling, and
makes the Fermentation the stronger, and consequently the greater heat, a very
pertinent instance, which may lead us to a better and more familiar
understanding, how this Fermentation is promoted by water, we may (not unaptly
represent by Oil of Vitriol and Water; for a little water being put thereto,
it presently sets the fermental principles of Acidum and Sulphur (connatural to
that Oil) into a strong Ebullition or Fermentation, whence results so great a
heat as the Glass (its done in) is scarce tolerable to the hand; especially if
the Oil be well rectified: whereas, before the addition of water, the Glass
(wherein was the Oil) was cold to touch, the principles lying dormant from the
thickness of the Liquor, and its tendency toward the concretion of a more
solid body; but upon the addition of a little water, it thins that Liquor, at
least in some measure, and so puts the foresaid principles into Fermentation:
And that in the production or generation of minerals; Fermentation of their
implanted principles is chiefly concerned, is further evident in what Agricola
and Erastus says from the observation of Mine-works, who affirm, That in many
places they find their Mines so hot, as they can hardly touch them; from the
same reason of Fermentation it is, that the minera of Allom or Vitriol, being
broke and exposed to the air, contract a strong heat, which sometimes may arise
to that height, as to cause an actual ignition, by which, not long since, a
Barn at Yeeland near Hallifax was burnt; and from the same cause the minera of
Tin-Glass being exposed to the moist air will become very hot; for upon the
access of moisture in the air, the intrinsic acids of the foresaid minerals
are dissolved, which as they dissolve work upon their implanted Sulphurs, from
whose mutual Collision and Colliquation is caused the foresaid Fermentation and
Heat.

CHAP. V.
HAving thus delivered our Hypohesis of the causes of hot Baths, from the
Fermentation of mineral juices, whose mechanical and efficient principles
consist in an Acidum and Sulphur, it will not be difficult from hence to solve
various other subterraneal phoenomena, such as are damps, (and from thence the
reasons of poisonous Springs, Baths, Pools, Lakes) also Earthquakes,
Erruptions, etc.

First, As to Damps, to me they seem to be nothing else but certain gusts or
steams arising from mineral Fermentations, which are more or less noxious or
mortal, by how much they proceed from minerals, whose Sulphurs are more or less
venomous: for if either a Fermentation happen in the very generation of some
poisonous mineral, as suppose Arsenick, Risogalla, Auripigmentum, Sandaracha,
Rusma, Cadmia, etc. from the intestine struglings of their innate Acidum or
Sulphur; or if it happens from the supervening of an acidum upon the minera of
any of the aforesaid poisonous juices, I say from either way an effluvium does
forthwith arise, which (being the product of Fermentation) is very subtle, and
thereby can easily permeate the Cranies of the Earth, and reach at a great
distance from the first source of Fermentation, which is able by its Sulphurous
Arsenical odor, not only to extinguish a Candle or Lamp, but also exsufflate
or puff out the very vital taper of men or other animals, that it meets with
in subterraneal passages, whence many men have suddenly perished by the breath
thereof in Mines: yea so strong is it sometimes, or in some places, that it
infects some waters that lie over it, or come within the orb of its action;
whence posonous Springs, Baths, Pools, Lakes, etc. take their beginning, which
will kill suddenly, as at Circum in Thracia, Fons Neptunius in Terracina, at
Perant by Mompelier: the Lake Avernus, the Cave of Charon by Naples, etc. yea,
from hence those waters take their original, which by their mortal odours kill
Fowl that fly over them, of which sort are the foresaid Lake Avernus, as also
the vapors arising from Charons den, between Naples and Puteolum, etc.

Next to which, the Phoenomena of Earthquakes are (from the aforesaid
principles) not difficult to solve, if we in rendering an account thereof, shall
say, that they are likely to happen, when some Sulphur or Sulphurous body,
either in Liquid or Concrete, meets with a fermenting acidum in the bowels of
the Earth, in some narrow passages, where, when that elasticity and
explosiveness of Sulphur by a supervening acid is excited, and being pent up in
the straights of the Earth, cannot easily get forth, forces and presses on
all hands upon the adjacent bulkes, heaves and lifts like a mole in its
subterraneous workings, and thence causes that terrae tremor, which may not
improperly (amongst the rest) be illustrated by these following instances:
First, I took floores of Brimstone (which is all one with Crude Brimstone) two
drams, upon which I poured about half an Ounce of that sort of aqua regia,
which is called (by Mr. Boil) menstruum peracutum, which though at first, for
a while, it kept quiet, causing no sensible ebullition, but afterward the
menstruum began to work thereon, and to bring the Sulphur to a gellied matter:
this Glass I set loosely upon the very surface of my Sand digesting Furnace,
whose heat was very soft and slow (possibly the same might happen though it had
no external warmth at all) yet although the Glass had a long neck (being a bolt
head) and but slightly cracked, it broke all in pieces; and with the force
thereof broke another Glass by it.

Thus Secondly, by putting one Ounce of Sal armoniack to four of Aqua fortis,
if the Glass Viol be close stopped, it will presently with a great noise break
the Glass into a Thousand shivers; for the acidum in Common Salt, which is in
Sal armoniack, meeting with the Sulphur in the Aqua fortis, sets upon it,
whereby a strong Fermentation is presently raised: which wanting room, breaks
all in pieces before it.

Thus Thirdly, by pouring Aqua regia upon Antimony, or the Spirit of Nitre upon
butirum Antimonij, put into Glasses, or the strongest of Vessels, and close
stopped up, would break them (though never so strong) into many pieces; and that
from the foresaid Fermentation, which happens from the acidum in the menstruum,
and the Sulphur, either in crude Antimony, or the Butter thereof; many more of
which sort of experiments we further illustrate in our Halologia Chymica.

Thus also from the aforesaid experiments, may (without any more ado) an
account be given of many subterraneous Eruptions: for I have by them at once
given a sufficient demonstration (as I think) both of the reasons and causes of
Earthquakes, and also of Eruptions, inasmuch as that Fermentation from mineral
juices made in straight meanders of the Earth, when it cannot find vent, if
moderately strong, they only cause terra tremor; but if very violent, even nigh
an actual flagration, then the greater the weight of Earth, Rocks, or other
matter is, which lies upon it, the stronger and more hideous are the
Eruptions: breaking in pieces all before it. So that I suppose all Eruptions
and subterraneal belchings, to proceed from one of these two causes, viz.
either from subterraneal fires of Sulphurous minerals actually, but
accidentally kindled, witness those Vulcano's of Aetna, Visuvius, Strongilo,
etc. of which we have discoursed in our Hydrological Essays, or else from
subterraneal Fermentations, amongst which, some may possibly rise so high and
strong from the great plenty of Sulphur and Acids, set into an actual
Ebullition, as that they may (by the air which may probably reach them through
some small crevices) actually take fire and burn. Thus besides the foresaid
instances, if Spirit of Wine be mixed with Spirit of Nitre, or be added to a
mixture of Oil of Vitriol, and Spirit of Nitre, makes an exceeding strong
Fermentation, even almost into an actual flame; and the Glass will be intensely
fiery hot, as that ones hand may as long endure a hot cole as it, which if pent
up, would for want of room to expand it self in its Elastick power, would I
say, by its explosive force, break all before it.

In the next place, we shall endeavor to demonstrate, how, from the premised
Doctrine of mineral Fermentations, may also, not only Brimstone or other
mineral concrete Sulphurs be generated de novo, in some parts of the Earth, but
likewise how many of the fontes acidi may thence take their original. As to the
generation of concrete Sulphurs, we suppose it thus, viz. when or where a
strong Fermentation happens from mineral juices, whilst in Embrio; and that
there is no immediate current of water to carry off the looser part of the
principles, as they ferment (as happens in all hot Baths, as we have before
sufficiently declared) which not being pent up, as happens in the most usual
Earthquakes and Eruptions, as aforesaid, but finding room enough in the most
potent places of the Earth, percolates some more loose bed of Earth, and
thereby leaves that Sulphur (which was carried up along with the fermenting
steam) as it were in the filter; For that the acidum being prevalent in the
foresaid Fermentation, may in those steams it arises with the Sulphur, in some
peculiar colanders of the Earth, desert its former companion, may somewhat
appear to us, by pouring Oil of Vitriol upon Antimony, or the minera thereof,
and distilling it thence. The Sulphur in the Oil after Fermentation, becomes
separated, and as it were percolated, by the body of the Antimony, while the
acidum arises more simple, leaving the Sulphur behind, which afterward by a
stronger fire is carried up in the form of Brimstone, taking along with it
(through the congenialness of parts) some of the Sulphur of Antimony.

Next to which, how many of the fontes acidi, may from the foresaid
Fermentation of mineral juices, take their original, we shall thus explain,
viz. by supposing that in some mineral Fermentations, whilst in Embrio (and
where no current of waters nor strait passages happen, for causes aforesaid)
the Ebullition from their Acidum and Sulphur, may be so intense, as that
thereby a fresh acidum may be engendered, or the former multiplied (vires
acquirit eundo) with deserting Sulphur its companion in the colander of some
Earths, may be sublimed and carried in steams (as a thinner and more subtle
acidum, at a great distance from the Source) where afterward, touching upon
and irroreating some Earth, or some Stammina of the mineral beds of Iron, or
Alom-stone, impregnates them to further uses: So that where a current of water
touches either upon that Earth, and afterward upon either of the foresaid
minera's, or does touch upon those minera's impregnated with the aforesaid
acidity, I say, either way are made vitriolin or aluminous waters or spaws.

Now that an acid may (after the foresaid manner) thus ascend from fermenting
juices, barely from the Ebullition of the principles, even without any
extrinsick heat, will appear from this following mechanical experiment, viz.

I poured six Ounces of rectified Spirit of Wine upon half a pound of Spirit of
Nitre, which I put into a double bolt head, with a pretty long neck, after a
while, as soon as the vinous Sulphur in the Spirit of Wine, had set the Acidum
and Sulphur of the Spirit of Nitre a work, they caused such a furious
Fermentation, that it drive up the stopple, and forced it self forth up to the
top of the Room, whereby a great part was lost, whereas, if the Glass had been
very close stopped, it would without doubt have broke the Glass into shivers: to
what was saved, I added of the same ingredients of each four Ounces, it began,
after a while, to fall into a strong fermenting Ebullition, so boiled, and
bubled forth very fiercely, and sent forth a strong fume, which heated the
Glass so intensely, as I could not hold the very top of it in my hand, then I
set a small Glass-head over the Glass, to condence some of the fumes; which I
found gave a very smart acid Spirit, not but that there are other causes of
some of the foresaid acidulate Spaw-waters, concerning which, we have at large
discoursed in our two books of Hydrologia Chymica, and its Vindication.

And now that I have laid down my Hypothesis of the causes of hot Baths
(branched into many sorts) subterraneal Damps, Earthquakes, Eruptions,
Regeneration of some Sulphurous concretes, and of the original of some of the
fontes acidi, all from the Fermentation of mineral juices, as aforesaid; which
how well grounded, and how further improveable, I shall leave to the unbyassed
reader to examine and judge; as also to consider, whether from the same
Hypothesis or supposition of causes, may (and that not impertinently) be solved
the Phoenomena of the diversity of Winds, the vicissitudes of heat and cold,
the reasons of Snow, Hail, Meteors, and other apparances, common to, and
peculiarly obvious in the Atmosphere. So here, I would take an occasion from
the nature of the foresaid Fermentation, to insist a little upon the two grand
Phoenomena's of heat and light, found in concrete bodies from the same
principles.

CHAP. VI.
I Shall not here (by climing so high) insist upon the causes of heat and
light, in that great and inexhaustible Fountain thereof, the Sun; whether its
perpetual Spring, and incessant emanation, may not consist in a peculiar
Fermentation of its own, set a work by the divine Fiat, and kept a foot by a
continual circulation of ethereal matter, concerning which, we may elsewhere
modestly propound our thoughts, nor shall I descend so low, as to treat any
further of the causes of heat in those known subterraneal Vulcano's.

But shall at present make it my task in short to show, First, That
Fermentation is made from the mutual struglings and intestine combatings of
Acid and Sulphur, in all juices and concrete bodies where it is evident: And
how heat is produced from Fermentation in all such bodies where it is found.
Secondly, To show how from the same principles, and after what manner, light is
made.

That Fermentation and Ebullition in mineral juices, whether naturally or
artificially prepared, proceed not from the contrariety of Salts (as many
worthy persons urge) is evident, because there is no such Ebullition amongst
Salts, but what are from the contrariety and struglings of Acids and Alcalies,
whereas no man ever yet could make it appear that those minerals either in
succo, or in actual concretion, contained any sort of Alcalies, either fixed or
volatile. But on the contrary its most certain, from irresragrable experiments,
that Sulphurs and Acids are separable from them all.

And as before we have showed, the Fermentation of minerals to consist in the
collision and intestine wrestlings of their Acid and Sulphur, as the causes of
hot Baths, etc. So the Fermentation in animals is no less observable to proceed
from the like inward struglings of their imbred Acid and Sulphur, continually
(till they dye) kept on foot in the body of animals, and that will appear, if
we consider their implanted acid juices (the very foundation of all Ferments)
and the daily occurrence of such sort of Food, in whose texture both Acid and
Sulphur, chiefly Sulphur, does reside, in order to the keeping those Ferments
at work, for the nourishing and upholding the fabric of those bodies.

The first wheel (as I may say) of these Ferments, or the primordial Stamina of
acids in animal bodies (after their formation) are placed in the Stomach, where
the Fermentation begins from the native acidum, acting upon the acquired
Sulphur of nutritive food, and is carried on into the second digestion into the
intestines, where a fresh gentle acidum from the pancreatick juice, and a
Sulphur from the Gaul, sent thither by the ductus biliaris, promote and assist
a further Fermentation, and thence carried into the blood, where the same
principles of Fermentation, together with a volatile Salt, complicated with the
Sulphur and Acidum, are still at work, and undergo new separations and
depurations, as also acquire new helps of volatization from the continually
inspired Air into the Lungs, (through which the blood passes) which still
promotes the begun Fermentation, in order to the circulation thereof, and
nourishment of the whole.

So that the native acid juice of the Stomach, is not in a strict sense a
Ferment, till such times as it finds some Sulphurous food, upon which, as its
proper subject, it begins to work; and then upon its action, collision, and
mutual struggling with the Sulphur in the assumed aliment, begins the
Fermentation, which being vital, we suppose to be the very first spring of heat
in the animal body, after it has passed its Embriostate.

Yea, all the rest of the Fermentations in the body, are but the continuations
of this Fermentation begun in the Stomach; for the blood is made up of that
Chyle, which by Fermentation is wrought in the Stomach, retaining so much of
its first principles of Acid and Sulphur, mixed in a just temperature (assisted
with the pancreatick and bilous juices) as may be sufficient to keep that
Liquor still in a Fermentative motion, such as may help to supply with a new
offspring of animal Spirits (the very product of that Fermentation) as also to
fill up the interstices of that matter, or those parts, which are continually
upon the wheel, winding off through the perspirable Portals of the body, as we
may elsewhere, God willing, take an occasion further to discourse.

How powerful a menstruum this Stomachial acid (the first efficient of heat)
is, does appear both by the great force of working upon, and dissolving all
alimentary things, which are all of them such, as wherein Sulphur, whether
vegitable or animal, is more or less complicated, and cujus intuitu, viz. for
the sake of which, all the rest wrapped up in the same concrete, are also
dissolved, as likewise does appear from those strong vellications of the Nerves
and Tunicles of the Stomach upon hunger, being a nothing else but that
aforesaid acid menstruum, preying upon the next adjacent parts, through the
want of some Sulphurous subject to work upon.

That Sulphurous concretes, whether animal or vegital, are the proper Subjects
for the native acidum of the Stomach to work upon, in order to Fermentation, is
clear; because neither Stone, Clay, Earth, Marle, Wood, nor such like, wherein
are no Sulphurous parts, or at least, such as are not congenial to the foresaid
acidum, can become capable of being food, inasmuch as no genuine Fermentation
(essentially necessary to the upholding the fabric of an animal body) can
thence be made.

Not now further to show, how Fermentation begun in the Stomach, and carried on
in the blood, and other humors, is not only the efficient cause, and
effectual source of heat, but also of all animal Spirits, carried thence by the
conduit-pipes of the Nerves, into the habit of the body, in order to the
performing those peculiar functions of sense and motion, both ( viz. heat and
animal Spirits) being the immediate products of animal Fermentations.

We say, that in the circle of natures operations, throughout her triplicity of
bodies, there is no such thing as Spirits separable, but what are the immediate
results of Fermentation: For, however, among some Physiologists, they are
reputed inter principia corporum: yet according to our Hypothesis, they are no
principles, but the posterior products of Fermentation, and appear in bodies
according to the slow or quick, low or high degrees of Fermentation, from
whence proceed their threefold order in the productions of concretes: For
either these Fermentations are to be considered in their primordials, or first
workings in bodies, in order to the fabric thereof, and so the Spirits which
thence result are in a low depressed state, deeply immersed in corporeal bulk,
as appears in vegitables, etc. in their state of Infancy and Crudity.

Or Secondly, These Fermentations are to be considered in the further progress,
and closer interweavings of the principles, whereby they become to be more
quick and high; the Sulphur gradually softening and sweetning their connate
acids, and thence the bodies wherein those Fermentations happen, becomes more
pregnant with Spirits, being now more plentifully engendered, and more easily
set at liberty by the power of Fermentation, then before: And this is evident
in all things brought on to maturity, and becomes sensibly apparent chiefly in
all odorous Plants and Fruits.

Or Lastly, They are to be considered in the more sensible brisk conflicts of
the principles, even after the bodies they work in are brought to maturity, one
dulcifying the other, by the concurring causes of solar heat, etc. the
principles, I say, being yet kept on in motion in all fermentable juices and
grains, do produce the greatest plenty of Spirits, which being set at liberty,
are all those we call vinous Spirits, in animals those we call animal Spirits,
the genuine product of vital and animal Fermentations, and in minerals their
Spirits in some places after heating transient waters for hot Baths, appear in
volatiz'd Sulphurs, otherwhere in subtle acids, as the causes of some
aciduloe; and elsewhere in apporrhea, steams, etc. (as elsewhere we have
showed) Thus in all fruits, brought on to maturity, and all grains ripened for
the harvest, the principles in their mutual Collisions are so pregnant, as that
by being put nearer together (which happens by their being juiced or malted,
they are thereby set a work into a sensible Fermentation, as appears in all
fermentable juices and malted grains, the immediate result of both which, are
vinous Spirits.

Thus in all natural animal Fermentations of their juices, requisite for
circulation of the blood, nourishment of the body, and for the performing other
functions peculiar thereto the animal principles are so pregnant, as in their
continual wrestlings and inward collisions, incessantly to produce such a stock
of Spirits, a being rightly disposed, and carried in their proper Conduits, the
Nerves are sufficient to the absolving the functions of sense and motion And
the like in their kind may be said of minerals, concerning which, viz. the
origin of animal Spirits from the foresaid Fermentation, we may elsewhere
largely discourse.

We shall only say at present, that as the natural Fermentations in animal
bodies, are produced from the intestine collisions and inward struglings
betwixt the native acid of the Stomach (fortified perhaps by some connatural
acidum in the aliment) and the acquired Sulphur of nutritive concretes,
separating Hetrogenities, and graduating themselves by successive depurations,
till they in their proper juices, perform those circulations requisite to the
peculiar funcitons of the body. So likewise from the Catastrophe of the
natural, and superinduction of other not congenial acids, may be made such
mortifications, precipitations and depravations of the genuine ferments, and
such new complications betwixt the recent acid, and the Sulphur in the
otherwise natural fermenting juices, as to lay a foundation of new spurious
Fermentations, the causes of Fevers of all sorts.

Not to say here, how most, yea, (for ought I know) all sorts of Fevers, are
nothing else but spurious Fermentations of the blood, and other juices of the
body, distinguishable, or (if I may say) specificated by variety of acids, not
congeneal, but wholly disagreeable, gradually heightening the natural, and
otherwise slow paced genuine Fermentations: whose various degrees of Fevers
are most what differenced or specificated from the low or high, slower or
quicker degrees of spurious Fermentation: or to speak in a more plain dialect,
how Fevers are various sorts, or different degrees of inflammations of the
blood and other juices. For an inflammation, according to our Hypothesis, is
nothing else but a heightening of Fermentation from a more strong collision of
the principles, whereby, from their mutual wrestlings, they arrive to the
height of causticks (which as we show elsewhere, differ from corrosives, only
from the difference of their acids) such I mean, as in a lower degree
pleurising from an inflamatory transposition of the fiery particles of the
blood upon the pleura, and in a higher degree, as are the plague and
pestilential Fevers, which are Fevers in their highest inflamatory and siery
degree, witness the Anthrases, Carbuncles, and other pestilential badges, which
show perfect Eschars upon the skin as if performed by cauteries Lixivial, or
fiery: which are with due caution to be cured by such ways and methods, as
allay that furious fiery Ebullition by Phlebotomy, and gentle breathing Sweats:
but here we must cut short, intending (as this finds acceptance) a fuller and
more free discourse of the nature of Fevers, how essentially specificated, and
what methods accordingly they best yield too; concerning which, we may (Deo
dante) treat in another place.

Only this (by the by) we would observe, that amongst animal juices, those
from vegitables made by animal Ferments, suppose Milk, by the various actions
of the innate or adventitious acids, upon their inbred Sulphurs, happen
different products: First therefore, as to the coagulations and alterations, to
be made from the inbred acidum thereof.

Thus Milk, while in an equal temperature of its constituent ingredients,
undergoes no separation of parts, remaining in an uniform Liquor, but being
exposed to the Air, after a while the innate acidum of the Milk, being acuated
by that of the Air, makes a spontaneous separation of a cremor from the more
thin part, which Cream having some acidum in it, (as we elsewhere prove, that
all Cremors, Oils, Fatts, Axungia's, etc. are but different disguises of
animal Sulphurs, have their implanted acids) by keeping, grows more sour, this
by concussion of the parts (in that motion we call Churming) undergoes a
Fermentation of its kind; from whence happens another sort of separation, viz.
into Butter, (which is Sulphur in another form then before) and a more serous
part, called Butter-milk.

And as Milk after the separation of Cream, by longer standing, comes to a
thick, and almost gellyed consistence (by Country people called Loppard) and
by a little heat splits into Curd and Whey: so Butter-milk, if kept long, will
come to the like consistence; but if heated, the acidum presently coagulates
the Curdy part: if that coagulation be made in heat after the mixture of
New-Milk, the acidum in the Butter-milk, coagulates both the Curdy parts of its
own, as also Butirous and Curdy parts of the New-milk, into that sort of sour
coagulum called hatted Milk, which is more or less sour, according to the
prevalency of the acidum, or more or less affusion of New-Milk.

And Lastly, As the foresaid alterations are made from the various coagulations
of Milk from its implanted acid. So likewise other sorts of coagulations
thereof are produced from additional acids: Thus any Fermentative potable
Liquor, as Wine, Ale, Beer, Syder, etc. mixed with Milk, the acidum in such
Liquors coagulates the Sulphurous parts into a Curd, separable from the serus
Liquor; the like will a few drops of any acid juice do, whether vegitable or
mineral, as of Vinegar, Vitriol, Sulphur, Salt, etc. yea, the runnet which is
made up of Milk coagulated by the Stomichal acid of an animal, which by
keeping, sours yet more, and is made up with Salt to preserve it from decaying,
by the addition I say of the foresaid acid ferment, or animal Runnet, to Milk
especially in heat, is made that coagulation of the Sulphurous and Curdy parts,
out of which our Cheese is usually made.

So that from the different actions of the acid (whether native or additional)
upon the Sulphur, are produced those usual coneretions, or rather coagulations
of Butter and Curds, separable from the more liquid serum: which Butter has
also its connate acid, which is the cause of its liquidity in heat, and
coagulation in cold, as we could sufficiently demonstrate the liquidity and
coagulation of such, the succulency and concretion, the softness and hardness
of other sort of bodies, chiefly to depend upon the various modes of acids,
either considered in Fermentation or Concretion, and as assisted by other
concurring causes, chiefly of the Air, which we now with difficulty, and
chiefly for brevity sake, refer to another place.

We might (if willing to enlarge) take an occasion here amongst animal
Ferments, to insist upon the causes and reasons of those strangely surprising
effects resulting from the invigorated Ferments of some venomous animals, and
show, that all their poisonous properties consist chiefly and solely in the
Ferments of their juices, which may be invigorated to that height, as to become
poisonous Fires, which by a bite (or the like) getting admission into the blood
of a humane body, will, according to the degrees of their exasperation, make
their transits in the bearing down, and mortifying our animal Spirits.

Hence those fiery Serpents we read of, were probably such whose Fermental
principles was by exasperation wrought to that height, as to become a venomous
Fire, by whose least entrance into the blood by their sting, or the like, did
presently mortify the Spirits of those who were bitten, whereby they were
suddenly killed.

And to show, that as the strength of our bodies depends upon the energie of
the animal Spirits, the product of vital Fermentation, according to whose
remiss or intense degrees of depuration, sublimation, and eradiation in their
proper Channels the Nerves, the weakness or vigor, yea the whole crasis of the
body subsists, (Diseases generally prevailing upon us from their various
assaults which are made upon these in their original source of production, I
mean in the fermentable juices of the body) so likewise the Spirits of venomous
animals (the product also of the Fermentation peculiar to their juices) being
by exasperation so subtiliz'd, as that they are highly in vigorated, and beyond
imagination Spiritualized, do by their sudden fiery vibrating motion, (if
admitted) make their transits quasi ictu oculi, through our Fermenting juices,
presently arrest our Spirits, and by coagulations, and other manner of
mortifications, suspends their generation and motion, which being precipitated
and born down, and the future vibrations of the vital Acidum and Sulphur
mortified, must needs bring on death, which is nothing else but a period put to
the mutual collisions of the vital principles.

Where we might show, that the deleterious properties of venomous Animals, as
Vipers, Adders, Snakes, Scorpions, etc. reside not at all in their flesh,
because they may and are frequently eaten, not only without harm, but also in
some cases with good success, but in their peculiar Ferments (consisting
(according to our supposition) of Acidum and Sulphur of their kinds) which
being capable of exasperations and heightenings, are also as liable to have
their Spirits invigorated, insomuch as the more those animals are angered (as I
may say) the stronger the Fermentation, and the more subtle the Spirits are,
yea the more mortal their fire, which bearing the character of their material
principles, have the foresaid sudden mortifying influence upon our vital
juices, and the Spirits thereof.

We might also show, how those sorts of Ferments in their strong inveterating
motions, do sometimes fix themselves upon some peculiar matter, or coagulated
juice in their bodies, where the Ferments lurk as in a seminary; and this is
the reason why that matter vomited by some sort of venomous Scorpions, (If I
mistake not) called Gecco, upon their being whipped and hung up (thereby having
their Ferments exasperated) is used by the Indians as a speedy death to their
malefactors, by pricking the skin under one Nail of the hand, and applying a
little quantity thereof to it, which immediately thereby getting entrance into
the blood, presently suspends the Fermentation thereof, mortifies the Spirits,
killing them presently; yea, at Macassar a Town in the Island Celebes,
belonging to the Molucco Islands, there is a sort of poison (whether made by
the foresaid artifice from enraged venomous animals I know not) which the King
of that place uses for expeditious killing those he would dispatch out of the
way, by applying it to any breach of the skin, it immediately from its
Fermental corrosive poison, not only kills, but burns the whole body into a
corruptive putrilage; concerning which, and many other things of the like
nature, we now for brevity sake willingly desist to enlarge.

CHAP. VII.
HAving in brief thus signified the causes of the Fermentations in animals, to
consist in a brief, but suitable intestine dwellings betwixt the two principles
Acid and Sulphur, which coincide in puncto vitalo, according to our Hypothesis,
and that their heat is immediately thence produced.

In the next place, let us consider whether the same Hypothesis may not hold
good in the due explicating the Phoenomena in that other kingdom of nature, I
mean the vegitable, where (besides what we have already said) vegitation in our
account, is no other then a gentle vibration, and slender collision of the
Vegitable Acid and Sulphur, from which two principles, put into a wrestling
motion in every seed, after the loosening its body or husk in the lessas
terrae, is begun the vegitable Fermentation, which cease not till the body
(shaped according to the form of those minute Types, wrapped up in the seedlings)
and in some obvious to the eye, assisted by good microscopes, is brought in all
its pourtrayings upon the visible Stage of the World.

And from this Fermentation, set afoot in the very primordials, seedlings, and
first hewings of vegitable forms, are deducable all the observable Phoenomena
of vegitables; for not only vegitation it self consists in a slow-paced motion
of the foresaid principles, set into a slender easy Fermentation, but also
their colors, sapours, odours, also other medicinal qualifications, and their
propagation by Seeds, and their future Fermentations, as of Corn, Grapes, and
Fruits, etc. in order to our Bread and Drink, are referrable to the various
intestine wrestlings of the inbred Acid and Sulphur.

First, As to Vegitation it self, we have already hinted, how its performed by
a secret Fermentation from the inward combating of their peculiar Acids and
Sulphurs. Secondly, What are Colors but the ludicra Sulphuris? the sportings
of vegitable Sulphurs, from whose interweavings and coagulations upon their
genuine acids, are struck those beautiful colors which so gratefully salute
our Optics, and that by making such alterations in the texture of the parts,
as to admit those various reflections and refractions of Light, and causing
such mixtures of Shades and Lights, as lively to represent those amiable, and
no less admirable appearances of Colors to our Eye. Thirdly, What are their
Sapours but the deductions of Plants by their peculiar vegitative
Fermentations, to any equal temperature, whereby they become pleasant or
ungrateful to the Palate, and whereby those that are for food become nutritive;
whose grateful gust in all, especially Fruits brought on to maturity, signify
the soft sweetnings of their Acids, by the ripenings of their Sulphurs; whereby
they become sit objects for the Ferment of the Stomach to turn into nutritive
juices, quod sapit, nutrit, is from this ground most certainly true. Fourthly,
Again, what are all odours of Vegitables, but the efflor scence of their
Sulphurs from vegitative Fermertations, whereby, from the continual hits and
incessant touches of the native acid upon the Sulphur, the Sulphur thereby
becomes in part so comminuted and volatiz'd by that gentle Fermentation, as to
pass off (especially in the more odorous Plants) in a sensible apporrhea, able
to smite the Nostrils at a great distance; So that Vegetable odours are the
immediate products of intrinsic Fermentation, which by how much the nobler the
specific Sulphur is, and by how much the higher graduated, the more gratefully
are we accosted by it, odor, and at the greater distance it is carried.
Fifthly, How much the medicinal properties of vegetables depend upon the
foresaid Fermentation, will not be unaptly represented by observing their chief
dependence upon their Sulphurs: For what is it in most vegetables that we seek
after, or that does the work, but the Sulphurous and Oily principle, which is
no otherwise brought on to maturity, but by the uninterrupted collision and
inward wrestlings with its connate acid, whereby it sweetens the Acid, is it
self volatiz'd and graduated. and most what complicated with a volatile Salt,
the product thereof. Sixthly, As to the propagation of vegetables by Seeds, how
that also is performed by the foresaid Fermentation, will be evident, if we
consider, That as Fermentation in vegetables begins in a seminal punctum,
wherein is delineated all the organical parts (if I may so say) the whole
plant-Embrio, (being by the great and most skilful contriver of nature)
epitomized into a punctum mechanically indivisible, only discoverable to the
Eye, in some Seeds, by the help of good Glasses, according to the excellent and
curious micro-scopical observations of the worthy Malpigius. So I say it
cease not till it terminates in a new seminal punctum, its set afoot in the
very first motions of Seed, and ends not till it have by the same wrestlings of
Acid and Sulphur, produced a new Seed, or rather a new Clothing for the Seed,
nor does it then cease to be a Ferment, only lies dormant, close shut up, as
in a Prison, in the husk of the Seed, till it be set awork again, by being put
into a proper matrix or analogous moisture, and then the compage of its body is
loosed, the Prison doors are set open, and the Embrio Captive set at liberty:
yea, if Fermentation of vegetables was duly understood, and carefully
attended, it would never cease to act, during the world: for if when by
Fermentation the two principles concenters themselves in puncto, shaping a new
domicil (for their retirement a while, till other assisting causes, according
to the appointment of God, conspire at their due seasons) should then
immediately be committed to its proper matrix, the Fermentation would keep
onwards in its pace, which being continually observed, would never cease to
act. But because God the great Builder of all things, has limited the
Fermentations and Productions of all vegitables to certain seasons, therefore
do the principles take sanctuary for a time in those visible ^rains and husks
we see; which husks, although to us they seem new Seed, yet they are but new
Cloathings at the best, to that inward Seed, which cease not, and from this
Fountain it was, that Paracelsus and Helmont truly tell us, that essentiae
rerum non pereunt.
And indeed we cannot but look upon Seeds, or Seminary principles, in all
things thence producible, as Embrio-Ancherites, concentred and thrust up (by
the great skilful Builder and Contriver of all things) into small parcels of
matter, which (at least in some) are mechanically (I dare not, nor indeed can
say Phisically) indivisible: Now that these Plant-Embrio's are so minute in
most, as to escape any mechanical division, and in some so inconspicuous, as
not to be discernable by the most curious, assisted by the best and most
skilfully contrived Glasses, is very evident to those who are very inquisitive
herein: And yet these so minute points, mechanically indivisible (which is
worth our remarking) being put into their proper matrix, or having a competent
moisture allowed them, do by a slow Fermentative motion, compitible to all
vegitation, begin to make intestine collisions and inward wrestlin's of their
inbred principles of Acid and Sulphur, whereby that little parcel of matter, so
small as not to be obvious (at least in some) to the Eye, assisted as
aforesaid, is by the power of its implanted Ferment, capable of being split and
subdivided into plenty of yet more minute parts.

Lastly, (for at present we only design transient slight touches upon each)
That the Fermentations of vegetables, as of Corn, Grapes, Fruits, etc. in order
to the preparing our Bread and Drink, depends upon the foresaid collision and
inward stru^lings of the two principles Acid and Sulphur, is hence evident,
because if the Acidum of Paste, Must, Wurt, or the like Fermentable Liquors, be
by the addition of any other thing precipitated, altered, or mortified, then
will those Liquors never Ferment. Thus if quicklime, coral, Crabs Eyes, or any
sort of fixed livial Alcalies, be added thereto, either before it begin, will
prevent, or if while Fermenting, will cause the Fermentation to cease.

Ferments are so obvious in the preparing our Bread and Drink, as that usually
Fermentation, (through the defect of the right understanding the nature and due
improvement thereof) has been imputed to few other things. The brisk
effervescence of Wines, which work without any additional Ferments, owe their
Fermentative motion to no other, then to the quick struglings, and inbred
collisions of their native Acid and Sulphur; a great part of whose superfluous
Acidum and Sulphur, complicated with a volatile Salt, together with other
Heterogenities, are, during Fermentation, rejected and precipitated in the form
of Tartar (of which more in our Halologia) The rest from a genuine wrestling of
the principles compose an equal temper, and generous potable Liquor, viz. Wine,
the noblest of vegetable Fermentable juices. The like may be said of all other
vegitable Fermentative Liquors, such as are Ale, Beer, Syder, etc.

If the efferuescence of Wines prove strong, either from the too brisk assaults
of the inbred Acidum and Sulphur, (as sometimes happens in new Wines) or from
the reimbibition of the formerly deposited Tartar, or rejected rich Lee or
Faeces, (both well Saturate with the foresaid principles) or from too great
agitation, or immoderate warmth, or some heterogeneous Acids, as of different
sort of Grapes pressed into one mustum, or from the addition of Mercury sublimate
(wherewith sometimes it is adulterated) or the like; if I say, from any of the
foresaid ways, Wines be set into a Fermentative motion de novo, and put into a
high efferuescence, the remedy chiefly consists, either in the racking it often,
whereby the contracted fervor is to be abated, and future imbibitions are to
be prevented; or by precipitations of the foresaid Tartarous particles, or
extraneous bodies, which is to be performed by affusion of plenty of Milk, or
such sort of Liquors; by which, not only such kind of precipitations are well
performed, but also does help to allay those Fermentations too much exalted
from agitation by Carriage; or which happens from immoderate heat, by
attempering and softening inordinate exaestuations.

And as this is to be done in Wines, whose principles are too active; so on the
contrary, in the great impoverishment of Wines from the depressed state of the
principles, somewhat of a like Ferment should be added, such, I mean, as may
not only acuate the dormant principles, but also may inspire a new sort of
Ferment, congenial to the former, of which kind, is a well impregnated Tartar,
or stong Lee to be put thereto, or a Fermental Syrup composed from a generous
Wine, Sugar, or some Aromacticks, to bring on a fresh Fermentation, or a little
Fermenting Wine, freshly working upon its Lees; if in Ale, which wants a due
Fermentation, either a little fresh Ferment, I mean the flores Cerevisiae,
called Yest or Barn, or a little new working Ale is to be added, especially
after a cohobation of fresh Malt, or upon Malt once by infusion extracted; or
some dust of Malt, and some sliced Ginger; or Eggs well beat; but to return:

Yet some of these will not easily Ferment per se, but require an additional
Ferment to excite their implanted Acidum and Sulphur, into a brisk motion or
struggling, which we call Fermentation. Thus in the making Ale or Beer, from the
infusion or juice of Malt, a congenial Ferment, viz. Yest or Barn (which is
flos Cerevifiae, or the seedling of its Fermentation, able from its Symbolical
principle, to propagate ad infinitum, of which more elsewhere) is to be added,
to rouse up the like principles of Acid and Sulphur, in the foresaid juice, to
a Fermentative motion.

Thus also in the preparing the potable Liquor from Sugar (which if done with
Birch-water, makes it the more medicinal) a Ferment of Yest, or the like, is to
be added, which sets the foresaid principles in the Sugar, into a Fermental
motion, whereby it becomes a good potable Liquor, bearing some resemblance to
Wine: Now that there is Acidum and Sulphur in Sugars, Grapes, Apples, Berries,
Cherries, and other Fruits and Grains, is very obvious: First, As to their
Acids, those are plainly discoverable both by the facile degenerating of
Liquors or Juices hence made into Acids or Vinegars, if I may so call them;
thus Sugarcanes, laid by in Troughs, becomes very Acid, and so of the rest: As
also by their distillation, as appears in the distillation of the Floors of
Wheat, Wrye, etc. which give an acid Spirit; so all Fruits, Sugars, Honey, etc.
which by Fermentation are capable of becoming potable Liquors, by distillation
yield an acidum, witness the acid Spirit of Sugar, Wheat, Honey, etc. Your
Bread distilled yields an acid Liquor, chiefly from the added Ferment, which
sets the Acidum of the Corn more at liberty; from both which proceeds that acid
menstruum taken notice of by the honorable Boil, which will draw a tincture
from Stybium, as we have tried.

And as to Sulphurs, they are demonstrable to be in all the foresaid Fruits,
Sugars Grains, etc. First, By their Vinegars, in all which lurk an Oil,
separable by Art two or three ways, as we show in our Lithologia and Halologia:
For when the Acid prevails, it dissolves the Sulphur per minima, and hides it
in it self, under the mask of an Acetum. 2ly. By Distillation, as when urged by
stress of Fire, they give besides their acid Spirit, an Oil, which from the
forcible actings of the Acid upon the Sulphur, and some terrestrial parts, by
the violence of Fire makes it become Empyrhumatical, (as in our Halologia we
further enlarge.) 3ly. By putrefaction and Distillation they give an Cyle. 4ly.
By Fermentation and Distillation, whereby they become vinous Spirits, whose
Sulphur is discernable from their flagrablity. And Lastly, (to omit what might
probably be done in order to the separating genuine Oils from some of them by
bare Distillations in water) by their ^^^perations of their juices, and
extractions by vinous Spirits, whereby their tinctures are drawn, which are
nothing else but specimens of their Sulphurs.

As to Corn, suppose Wheat, or any other Grain, the same principles of
Fermentation are evident; for when wrought into a mass with water, and the
addition of a little vegetable Ferment, suppose Yest; this by the congruity and
congenialness of its parts to the similer Ferments implanted in that Grain,
sets it into motion; for all additional Ferments do no more but excite the
principles of Fermentation, native to the body, or Liquor to be Fermented: for
neither Yest put to water, nor Old Leaven put to powder of Stone, mixed with
water, will cause either of them to work for want of Symbolical principles.

Yet this last Paragraph we are to balance with this following consideration,
and that is to illustrate the reason why Corn (for instance Wheat) sprouted by
overmuch wet in the reaping, or moisture by bad laying up, will not make good
Bread, at least, other sorts of Table Food, because hereby the vegetative
principles of Acid and Sulphur are excited, which should either go on in order
to propagation by vegetation or germination, or that design of nature being
perverted by artificial malting, might thence be used for preparing a
Fermentable, and afterward potable Liquor: but being employed for other
purposes, from the activity of the principles, already set into a vegitative
Fermental motion, as soon as they feel the Heat retaining their vegitative
sprouting motion, break the Prison doors; and in short, if the heat was
answerable, would Sprout and Grow; but because the heat is stronger then is
required for such purposes, it only makes the Mass Fat, or become more Florid;
and thence it is that such paste bakes not solid and firm, but falls and runs
in the Oven, as being more fit for making Malt then Bread, or other such Food.

CHAP. VIII.
NOw that there is some gentle warmth in all vegetable Fermentations,
undiscernable to our senses, is apparent, because the same principles of
Fermentation being invigorated in their brisk intestine duellings, may become
sensibly hot, witness the heat of steeped Barley, laid on a heap in order to
Maltin, which if neglected for want of turning and ventilation by Air, will
become so hot, as one cannot induce his hand long in it: Yea, and from the same
principles, yet heightened in their inward Collisions, may an actual burning
Fire be produced: Witness Corn wet, laid in heaps in Chambers if neglected,
will take Fire: Also Mows of Corn laid up too moist and close, have been Fired.
So likewise a Rick of Hay is sometimes burnt to Ashes, from the violent and
furious Fermentations of its principles, and that from its moistness and
closeness, setting its principles of Acids and Sulphur into a violent motion,
so as to break forth into aciual Flame.

Not to say here how Acids are sweetened by Sulphurs, and sometimes coagulate
into a neutral body: For although all Fermentation is certainly (at least
according to our Hypothesis) cause d from the Collisions and inward combatings
of Acids and Sulphurs in the production of things: yet as Acids amongst bodies
(as I have before, and may more largely hereafter show) differ amongst
themselves, so they make different assaults, and are variously reacted by
Sulphurs, whence both, by their mutual actions, undergo various changes and
different modifications amongst bodies in their transformations.

And as some Acids ferment with their Sulphurs in an inward wrestling, the
Sulphurs afterward as they predominate upon the wheel of operation, softening,
sweetening, and ripening their Acids, making gentle coagulations in their
naturations, both amongst animals, vegitables, yea, and Minerals too (although
more obvious in the two former) so likewise some Sulphurs ferment with some
Acids, while with others they combine in a natural texture, to confirm which we
shall only (because in have) give this single mechanical example, which shall
be in Mercury or Quicksilver, to which if a Spirit of Nitre or Aqua fortis be
added, the mixture presently ferments from the collision of the Sulphur in the
Mercury, and the Acids in the Menstruum, whereby the compage there is broken
from the intimate commixture of the Sulphur with its Mercurial parts, whence a
solution of the whole: But if in lieu of that corrosive Menstruum, the dry
Salts (of which that Menstruum by a colliquating fluor with their inbred
Sulphurs by Fire is made) be mixed and sublimed together, there happens no
Fermentation, but arise in a corrosive sublimate; to which, if such a due
proportion of fresh Mercury be added and re-sublim'd, they coagulate and
sweeten each other into a solid concretion of a neutral texture, which is that
trite preparation we call Mercurius dulcis, in which the acid Salts of Vitriol
and common Salt is so dulcified by their interweavings with the Sulphur of the
Quicksilver, as that it will not coagulate Milk, and so becomes (being well
prepared) a very harmless and innocent Medicine: whilst the same sublimate
(thus sweetened by the Sulphur of its Mercury freshly added) if therewith
Antimony in lieu of Quicksilver be mixed, the same acid Salts, meeting with a
different Sulphur in Antimony then in Mercury, falls into a colliquation and
fretting Fermentation, causing a great heat, and becomes a strong corrosive.

And as from the difference of Acids amongst themselves, and their various
assaults upon their Sulphurs, cause various changes in the geuesis and
transformations of Bodies, both in the texture of Liquors, and the concretions
of Bodies: So from various modes of aggression of our principles, justleing
differently, according to various applications, are produced varieties of
effects, which are discoverable from the difference of Spirits thence
separable, which in some (at least upon rectification) smite our Organs of
sense with great variety, as will appear these following ways: Thus, First, If
the principles are set awork in the seminals of things, in a generative way, as
suppose in Vegetation, here the principles by an evolution, expand themselves
in a slow but genuine Fermentation, whose effects (I mean their Spirits) most
what guise themselves in the minute effiuvia of odours, especially in odorous
Plants, and that chiefly in the opening of the Flower (though in many through
the whole plant) when the Sulphur is by circulation (as I may say) so
subliliz'd by its connate acid, as to pass off in a subtle Steam, for hereby
the acid not only strikes the color, (according to the varieties of Acids
acting upon their proper Sulphur) but also causes an expansion and emanation
of subtle parts. Secondly, If this Fermentative Vegetation be carried on to
the maturation of Fruits, and in their Juices the foresaid principles be again
set awork, they then make different assaults, combining in other manner of
collisions then before, as is evident from the vinous Spirits thence easily
separable, which partake much of the volatiz'd Sulphur. Thirdly, Thus if during
Fermentation, any quantity of a plant (suppose Wormwood, Mugwort, Tansey, etc.)
should be gathered and laid together in heaps: Here the principles make new and
different collisions then before, making retrograde motions, which tend to a
putredness of the Plants, the product of which Fermentation is a volatile
Vrinous Spirit, as appears by Distillation thereof: which is so strong in some
Plants, as that it does very discernable ferire nares, as I have felt in the
Glastum or Wood, prepared by that artifice of putrefactive Fermentation, yea,
the workers thereof told me, that when after a previous preparation (by
Grinding and exposing to the Air in Cakes) they are laid in heaps, the
Fermentation is so very strong, as the Vrinous Spirits thence issuing, are
searce tolerable to those that are near it: which last named Spirits are as
much a product of that sort of Fermentation, as the two former are of theirs;
and therefore as we are not to guess at the quantity of vinous Spirts,
separable by that Fermentation peculiar to those Fermental juices, as if
pre-existent; nor of Odours in Plants, as aforehand, in their minute seedlings
before the openings of those powers by their own vegitative Fermentation: so
neither indeed ought we to esteem those vinous Spirits, pre-existent in the
Plants before putrefaction.

And as the different modes of the principles, aggressions, and collisions,
cause various sorts of Fermentations, and different kinds of Spirits, thence
separable in the Vegital; so likewise with some variation, they do the like in
the animal Family, I mean, that according to the vi^ious methods of the
principles mutual (...), different sorts of Spirits thence result: thus from
the intestine struglings betwixt the native Acidum of the Stomach, and the
Sulphur in the Food begun in the Stomach, carried on by the intermediate
Ferments, and compieated in the blood, are produced those sorts of Spirits we
call animal.

Thus from the same principles acting upon each other in a retrograde motion,
which is that we vulgarly call putrefaction, are all other sorts produced; and
so of the rest, which we shall not now enlarge upon; and as to what results
from mineral Fermentation, we have elsewhere discourst.

That moisture or water (the former of which is but the latter rarefied) is
absolutely necessary, both to the setting the principles of Fermentation a
work, as also to the keeping them afoot even in all such motions, from the very
lowest degree of vegetable Fermentation, to the highest of actual flagration,
is evident in most things throughout the series of natures triplicity; thus
Vegitables necessarily require moisture, not only to set, but also to keep
their principles of Fermentation in a constant Spring. Thus the Ferments of our
Stomachs do really need the pouring down of Water, Wine, Ale, Beer, or other
potable Liquors, for the perpetuating and invigorating their active principles.

And hence, for ought we know, may be the reason why a Glass of Water, taken
after a plentiful repast, is found to help the digestion, by setting the
Fermentation awork, which otherwise, by the glut of Food might be interrupted,
and that too by diluting the assumed aliment, and so setting the Acidum of the
Stomach and Sulphur of the food into a mutual collision, even as a little water
poured to the thick Oil of Vitriol, by diluting, sets the inward principles of
Acidum and Sulphur into a Fermentation, thence producing a considerable heat,
as we elsewhere further treat.

So likewise do the principles of mineral Ferments, in their source no less
require the continual afflux of Water, in order to the heightening their heat,
and making of hot Baths: Thus also Brass Lumps (which are a sort of vitriolin
marcasite) laid in heaps, do from the moisture of the Air, or sprinkling of
water, suffer their principles of Acid and Sulphur, by their mutual collisions,
to be set awork, which are invigorated to that height, as to rise to an actual
flagration.

The same will Metal-Coals, Mines of Tin-Glass, Alom, etc. do, and that from
the identity of causes with the former: So likewise moist Hay, Corn in Green or
Moist Sheafs, Corn Steeped or otherwise Moistened, do all of them from the same
heightening of the action of their principles by moisture, conceive heat, yea
take fire too, as is abovesaid. So that wherever Fermentation happens, and that
there is plenty of moisture or water, there the Fermentation is considerably
heightened, as may be illustrated by all the foresaid instances. And wherever
there is heat, proceeding from the same principles of Acidum and Sulphur, if
these by the addition of moisture become sufficiently intended, will certainly
cause Fire.

Yea perhaps fire it self, I mean, the culinary made up, and fed with
combustible concretes, does as necessarily require a moisture in the Air, to
the performing its quick rapid Fermentation of ignition and flagration, so as
to make (...) principles liquid in the very act of flagration (...) that
mineral corrofive Fires do require the addition of moisture or water, upon no
other account then for the dissolving and putting into Fermentation, their
corrosive Acids and Sulphurs, is evident, not only in the Oil of Vitriol, but
also in the Stigian waters, viz. Spirit of Nitre, Aqua fortis, and Aqua regia,
the two former of which being the same thing, as made from the same principles
of Acid and Sulphur, (dissolved by the help of fire in water, as we further
declare in our Halologia) all which are corroding menstrua's, or liquid burning
fretting fires, which while in the form of dry Salts or Sulphurs separated, are
not at all apt to make such corrosions of Metals, Minera s, etc.

For according to our Hypothesis, corrosive menstrua, are not made from Salts
in fluor, nor are they bare acetous Liquors, or Saline particles driven by
force of fire, from the embraces of their own Earth, as the learned Dr. Willis
would have them, but are an Acid and Sulphur brought over in a Liquid form:
That they are all Acids, needs no proof; and that they have all Sulphurs, may
very easily be made to appear, by the resinous, oily, or other Sulphurous
separations to be made from all of them, even from the leanest, I mean
distilled Vinegar, (as we demonstrate in our Lythologia Physica, and Halologia)
so that Acidum and Sulphur by stress of Fire, raising up some Liquid or watery
parts, fall into a fluor, and thereby become corrosive menstrua: For mineral
Salts never become corrosives, till their Sulphurs and Acids colliquate, and
that they do, either by distillation from stress of fire, the acidum of the
fire assisting their colliquations, as is evident in the making of the Stygian,
and other corrosive menstrua, or by Fermentation, as appears in the mixture of
Mercury sublimate, and crude Antimony, or regulus of Antimony, where the acidum
of the Salts, catch hold of the Sulphur in the crude or reguline Antimony, and
cause a Fermentation, colliquating together, or rather by their colliquations,
cause a Fermentation, which you will; for we see upon the Fermentation, the
mass of Salts and Antimony flow together, appearing in a liquid, although thick
form, which Colliquation and Fermentation is performed, without the least
specimen of any alcali, or quid alcali analogum: to which many ingenious
persons (for want of a true Basis and right Ariadnes Thread to extricate them
from difficulties) are driven to take Shelter in the solving these and the like
Phenomenon.

And not only corrosives, but causticks also, we suppose (according to our
Hypothesis) to consist both of them chiefly in the vigor of Acids, raised to
the height of Fermentation, and to differ only in this, that causticks are
made from the acidum of Fire, and that either as in its own rapid motion of
Fermentation, happening betwixt the Acidum and Sulphur of the combustible
concrete, or as its Acidum is fixed inter cremandum upon such sort of bodies as
can grasp hold of, and detain it in its intrails, of which are all sorts of
fixed Alcalies (as they are called) minium, calx vivae, etc. whereas Corrosives
are made from the acids of Minerals, complicated with their Sulphurs, and
heightened by Fire, which by the medium of an ingeint moisture, or by a
colliquation betwixt themselves, become liquid corrosive Menstrua; of which,
more elsewhere: And of whose manner of workings in the solution of Metals, we
have above given a short account, according to our deposited Thesis.

Yea, and that some Acids and Sulphurs will colliquescere, even without the
help of Fire in distillation; and in that colliquation will cause a strong
Fermentation and intense heat, is evident from the mixture of Antimony, or the
regulus of Antimony and mercury sublimate, with dry powders, will melt (being
mixed) as if fused in a crucible.

We shall not here say, how by the Fermentations of our foresaid principles,
all vegetable and animal concretes, (for the texture of whose bodies, water, as
a material principle, is absolutely requisite, and which is wrought up into
those bodies in their natural generation) are continually, by a constant
wheeling off, after a little rotation in the Air, in the great capitellum of
the Amosphere, turned into water again, or into watery vapors, which are but
water rarefied, and how that watery vapor is as one spring in the Air, for the
setting all other Fermentations awork; not only useful toward the actual
flagration of combustable matter, maintaining thereby the great round and
circulation of generations and reductions of all bodies. But also from the same
moisture in the Air, carried thither in the great circulation, and fed by
incessant subterraneal steams, arising especially from Springy and other watery
places, which whether in the form of Dews, helps to feed Corn and Grass, kept
back by long droughts, or whether wrapped up more invisibly in the Air, does yet
reach some of the tender veins of other vegetables, or uniteth with the slender
fibers of their roots, placed in Sandy, Gritty, or other barren Ground, and
thereby either way by a sort of filtration, is communicated to their Juices,
whence such Plants (which otherwise could scarce be thought to receive any
sufficient supply from such barren Soils) admit of a competent stock of
moisture, able to carry on their vegetative Fermentation, whereby they grow and
thrive well: And hence it is, that C^pin, and several other Plants, only set
in Sand, and sometimes sprinkled with water, does from the foresaid moisture in
the Air, vegetate and like well.

Nor here to show how Air, after a double manner, contributes toward the
Fermentation both of animals and vegetables: yea, toward the producing the
highest of Fermentation, Fire; nor shall we take time here to insist upon
water, as the true material principle, indispensibly necessary for the
production of all bodies, the want of which in the grand circulation of nature,
bring on a consuming drought in all bodies, whereby those concretes (whose
natives the principles are) wither and dye, because their principles of Acidum
and Sulphur, having not whereon to work, and model bodies with, desert them,
taking wing into their own ether, leaving their former receptacles to pine
away in a continual marasme, and unavoidable tabers; Nor to show, how water is
indeed as essentially requisite, materiae gratia for natural, as Stone and
Wood, are for artificial fabrics; whilst the active principles of of Acidum
and Sulphur, are the inward artificers, the implanted fabers, yea the hidden
limners, who by the manuduction of Seeds, hews out forms, shapes, and draws
forth the lineaments and portraitures of all things, answering ad vivum (from
the unerring rules of nature) their beautiful antitypes, invisibly coucht in
the initials of all bodies: But (now studying brevity) shall leave them to a
further discourse.

From what is premised concerning this our Doctrine of Fermentation, how it is
performed in all vegetation, as being the lowest orb (in the whole round world
of nature) it moves in, and yet is the true beginings of all fire in bodies;
and that the most violent of fires, is no other then this Fermentation in the
most rapid manner; the principles furiously driving upon each other, will be
evident, and very obvious from this following mechanical experiment. Take the
subtle ethereal Spirit of Venice Turpentine four Ounces, (which is nothing
else but the Sulphur of that vegetable resinous gumm, comminuted and subtiliz'd
by gentle distillation, and intimately married to a defaecate implanted acid)
as also Aqua fortis six Ounces, both recently drawn, mix them together in a
Glass-Viol, and they will presently fall into a furious Fermentation, which
will arise to that height, as actually amongst the thick clouds of fumes to
burn and blaze out of, and above the Orifice of the Glass in a visible flame.

Now what is observable in this Fire, thus by the foresaid mechanic produced,
and whence the causes, the same may truly (we think) be said of all other fires
in combustable concretes, for here the Acidum in the Aqua fortis (lately made)
is very strong, closes with the Acid in the Spirit of Turpentine, immediately
sets upon the Sulphur in the same vegetable Oily Liquor, which Sulphur being
congenial (as Sulphurs usually are to each other) to that in the Aqua fortis,
increases in its vigor, whereby both the Acid and the Sulphur, even in both
Liquors become fortified, and forthwith fall into an intestine Collision,
whence the Fermentation begins, which being by the purity and sincerity of the
principles, more and more heightened and invigorated, (having no heterogeneous
matter to interrupt their inward duellings) at length arise to that degree, as
to colliquate into an actual fluid flame, which is the very same cause we
elsewhere assign to to the production of all usual Fire in combustable
concretes, only with this difference, that in such stagrations, conceived from
the immediate conflicts of the principles, there are not, as I said, those
heterogenities interwoven, as in other combustable concretes, set into that
rapid motion by kindling or firing.

Thus I say these actual flagrations, whether from the furious assaults of
fiery acido-Sulphurous Liquors, as is apparent from the foresaid mechanical
experiment, or from Acids and Sulphurs, set into intestine conflicts in
combustable concretes, as is evident in all usual Fire, is no other then our
foresaid Fermentation in a most violent hurry, the principles acting furiously
upon each other; while other slower Fires are maintained by sleighter, and more
gentle touches of the same principles. Hence methinks, when I behold the
varieties of Vegetables, I cannot but esteem them as so many igniculi, little
Fires, showing their various luster in their peculiar colors.

Yea to me the whole appearance of nature in the concretions of most bodies
throughout the triplicity of her dominions (some Petrificks, and such like
anomolous productions excepted) is nothing else but so many Lamps burning in
water, each of them distinguishing a parcel thereof, into this or the other
visible figuration which we commonly call bodies or concretes, so that the
Philosophers ignis aqua, I mean, both their Mercury, and the grand Solvent the
Alchahest, in which the ignis Sophorum is artificially implanted in the
mercurial or watery juices, is but an Epitome of what nature in the great
volume of the World, sets down in Folio; yea, is no otherwise preparable by
art, then what (to a Philosophic eye) nature is constantly performing in its
great orb of productions.

And as each Body carries its central Fire shut up in its Bosom, expanded or
blown up by the evolution of its seminals, depending upon the implanted active
principles of Fermentation; so likewise that adventitious heat, which helps to
foster Fermentation, (in such juices or concretions, where the active
principles seem to be immured, in the weighty bulk of terrestrial strial parts)
ought in its degree to be gentle, soft, and symbolical to the Fermentative
principles: which if it exceed, in lieu of chenishing, dissipates the nimble
agents, and spoils the act of Fermentation, and this is evident, not only in
the concretions and maturations of Fruits, but in the Fermentations of potable
Liquors.

Thus as to the First, Fruits while upon the Trees, by the help of the Sun,
have their vegetative Fermentations completed by the Sulphurs, sweetening and
maturating their Acids, the like is done (though nothing nigh so well) in
Fruits taken off the Trees before they be ripe, and laid by in Straw, Hay, or
the like, whereby the warmth of the Air, there formerly begun Fermentation, is
in some measure carried on to maturation: whereas, if exposed to a more warmth,
or a greater degree of heat, if done in Water, they are Codled; if before the
Fire, they are Roasted: In both which, although somewhat sweetened from what
they were, yet are far short of the pleasant gust and delicate color they
arrive at, by their more natural and gentle maturating heat.

Thus if any Grain, suppose Barley, etc. be steeped, and afterward laid in
heaps till it contract a spontaneous heat: this very heat transcending that
which is peculiar to its own vegetative Fermentation suspends, or rather indeed
perverts the intention of nature, whereby it will never so vegetate afterward,
as to go on to a propagation by Seed, but only if permitted (by neglect of
turning) will shoot forth a spurious branch, called vulgarly an Acrespire.

Thus as to the last, Fermentative Liquors, if they have any other heat but
what results from the collisions of their own active principles, or at least in
degree is congenial thereto, then the intention of nature is perverted by the
dissipations of the principles of Fermentation, or at least, by the graduations
of the Acid above the Sulphur, as appears in heating the Fermentative Liquor
too much, or in putting it up too warm in the Vessels: the like happens (I mean
a dissipation of the Fermentative agents, or an exorbitancy of the Acidum) in
hot seasons, or with the percussions of the Air by the noise of Guns or
Thunder, or from insolation, or the like; In all which the crasis of
Fermentable Liquors are perverted, and the Acidum by overpowering the Sulphur,
grows exorbitant, subverting the temperature of the whole.

CHAP. IX.
HAving thus slightly (for brevities sake) run through the reasons and causes
of Fermentation, from the lowest to the highest degree thereof, in all natural
productions throughout the threefold kingdom of Nature, and showed those from
the genuine causes and natural principles, to be the fountain of Heat in and
amongst bodies: Now come we to consider of some other sorts of Heat, that seem
to arise either from other manner of Fermentations, or from other causes: of
which are all Fermentations or Ebullitions made betwixt Acids and all kinds of
Alcalies, whether lixivial or alcalizate, fixed or volatile; the Fermentation
and Heat obvious in quicklime, made by the affusion of water, heat also caused
from the collision and attrition of solid bodies. For indeed, from a due
examination I find, there is no Heat produced amongst bodies (I mean from their
own intestine principles) what sort soever it be, but what is referable of one
of these two, viz. either Acids and Sulphurs, or to Acids and Alcalies: The
first is the natural cause of Heat as thence springing from its genuine source,
which admits of degrees even to actual flagration: The other is artificial, and
never arrives to the height of the former.

I found therefore upon due consideration, that the foresaid Fermentations and
Heat reckoned amongst those which arise betwixt Acids, and some sorts of
Alcalies, might be soly'd from one of these two causes, viz. either from our
deposited principles of Acid and Sulphur, or from a mutual fretting betwixt
Acids and urinous Spirits: Thus we suppose (and elsewhere in our Lithologio
Physica illustrate) in all Petrifick concretions, somewhat of a Sulphurous
principle locked up in the strickt texture of the petrifying native Alcaly;
which when an acid menstruum comes to terebrate, finding the Sulphur its proper
object, closes therewith; and from their mutual struglings, happens the
solution of the body; thence proceeds the Ebullition, and consequently in some
(where it is strong) Warmth: For we suppose a Sulphur or Sulphurous principle,
to be as a cement, to bind up the petrifick Alcali in all or most of stony
concretions.

Thus also we suppose in all fixed lixivial Alcalies, (or fixed Salts as they are
vulgarly called) a Sulphurous principle, to be close shut up in the texture
thereof; and that every fixed lixivial Alcali, is a new compage of the same
prae-existent principles, produced and bound up by the Acidum of Fire, where
the Acidum and Sulphur are so interwoven with a volatile urinous Spirit or
Salt, as that by force of Fire they do colliquescere, melt down into a body
dissolvable per deliquium, which is generally esteemed a simple Salt, but
having discourst largely thereof in our Halologia, shall now wave it, and only
say, that these fixed Alcalies (vulgarly reputed solitary Salts) being new
textures of the intrinsic principles, do by that neutrality of Essence they
are wrought into by the Fire, from new complications, I say, do make different
assaults upon Acids then before.

Hence it is, that upon a double account, as I said, that Acids mixed with
these Alcalies may cause an effervescence, viz. either as meeting with the
Sulphur close bound up with the Acid and urinous Spirit or Salt in the compage
of the Alcali, and so to cause an Ebullition and Heat, according to our
foresaid principles; or as meeting with the volatile urinous Salt close
rivetted with the Sulphur and Acid, may either way cause an effervescence.

Only this difference (which is considerable) is to be noted betwixt these
Fermentations made between Acids and Sulphurs as they happen in petrifick
concretions, and fixed lixivial Alcalies; from those which happen in the general
course of nature, inasmuch as Fermentations which are set awork amongst
animals, vegetables, yea, and many minerals, do produce a quite different
effect from those lately cited, as appears in animal Fermentations, their
effects are the production of animal Spirits, etc. In vegetable Fermentations
their effects are either such which immediately result from the slow paced
motion of the principles, viz. Vegetation, Volatization of their Sulphurs,
Odours, etc. or are the effects of the more sensible Fermentations in all
vegetable juices, in order to potable Liquors, which are vinous Spirits, or the
effects of mineral Fermentations, which if done in the bowels of the Earth,
where no current of water happens) are the productions of mineral concretes,
etc. If where waters have their Channels (in their great circulation) their
effects are hot Baths, etc. Or Lastly, if the Fermentation be from mineral
bodies, and corrosive menstrua, the effects are stifling fumes, etc. All which
in their different classes happen from the looseness of the compage of their
Sulphurs, and from their facile inclination to volatization. But in the late
cited effervescences betwixt Acids and Alcalies, whether in Petrifick or
lixivial Salts, their Sulphurs being naturally fixed, as in Stony concretions,
and are made so in lixivial alcalies: So that although Acids may touch upon
them, and cause a little fretting effervescence, yet cannot volatize them;
therefore upon their collision and Ebullition, we find no different hogo to
smite our Nostrils, the usual products of other Fermentations.

And then as to volatile Alcalies, which put to Acids, cause a fretting heat,
they do consist of an Acid and an urinous Spirit (as in our Halologia we
further demonstrate) which being complicated together, retains so much of the
Acidum, as is sufficient to its concretion into a saline form, and yet is so
much subjugated by the Vrinous Spirit, as to be overpowered thereby; and from
the neutrality of their nature to cause the foresaid effervescence, being mixed
with Acids.

In the next place, as to the reasons of Fermentation contracted in quicklime,
from the affusion of water; in short thus, we suppose (and think to
demonstrate) that heat to proceed from a Fermentation, betwixt Salts of a
different nature; which upon the affusion of water are dissolved, and thereby
set into an actual struggling. These different Salts are an Alcali and an
Acidum: Now that fixed alcalizate Alcalies (not lixivial of Plants) are
disseminated in the bowels of the Earth, to which petrisick concretions chiefly
owe their original, we at large show in our Lithologia Physica; and that such a
sort of Alcali is implanted in calx vive (which in the calcination required to
the making thereof, becomes yet heightened) is evident, First, by its
mortifying and sweetening Acids, witness its being put to water acidulated with
Spirit of Salt, Nitre, etc. the acidity will presently be altered, and
mortified: next by its closing Acids wrapped up in the texture of another body,
as appears by its mixture with Sal armoniack, where its Alcali, (for it can be
no other) catches hold of the Acidum of Sal marine, and so breaks the compage
of the Armoniack Salt, setting the volatile Vrinous Spirit at liberty. Thirdly,
by the heat it makes (after extinction by affusion of water) with an acid
Spirit, as when Spirit of Vitriol is poured upon extinguished Lime, a heat is
thence caused. Lastly, By the observing that the water of its extinction, will
serve to open the body of mineral Sulphur, by boiling them together, which it
will do almost as well as if the water had been acuated with fixed lixivial
Salts: both which work upon mineral Sulphurs by their Acids, as we shall
demonstrate more clearly afterward.

And as to the Acidum in quicklime, we say, it owes its original to no other
then to that of Fire, contracted in the calcination of the Stone, and that it
was not pre-existent before calcination. Now that Fire in the actual flagration
of combustable bodies, does (in that violent Fermentation of its principles)
fix its acidum (while the Sulphurous principle wheels off into the Air) upon
some bodies it meets withal, suitable for the reception thereof; and how that
from the difference of Acids in several combustable concretes by flagration,
intangling themselves with, and fixing upon other bodies, different effects are
produced: I might confirm by many instances.

The former is evident (amongst the rest) in the reverberatory calcination of
Lead, in its preparation into minium, where the Acidum in the flame of Wood,
centers and fixes it self upon the Lead, and gives considerable increase of
weight thereto: So in like manner (to come nearer to our purpose) the Acidum of
Cole in the calcination of Limestone, does by a continued reverberation, fix
it self in the cranies and inward recesses thereof: Thus in the calcination of
Vitriol by the rays of the Sun, in the preparation of the Sympathetick powder,
the pondus thereby becomes increased.

And then as to the latter, viz. the different effect upon bodies from the
variety of Acids in actual ignition or flagration, either fixing themselves
thereon, or at least by some sleighter intrusions, showing a different
operation, we could demonstrate from our observations upon burning of Bricks,
hardening of Iron or Steel, calcinations of minerals and metals, various
reverberations, and many other mechanical operations, (solely owing their
original to the difference of the foresaid Acid;) nor to say here, how amongst
other Phoenomena, the difference of colors amongst minerals and metals,
contracted by calcinations and reverberations, owe their original to this
source of varieties of Acids in different sorts of Fires, which for brevity
sake we now omit, referring to a further discourse thereof in another place.

By the power of the foresaid Acidum in quicklime, communicated thereto by
Fire, in the calcination thereof, it is, that the water of Lime will perform
what other more usual Acids cannot; for instance, That Limewater mixed with
any volatile Vrinous Salt, and distilled therefrom, fixes, yea, turns the Salt
into an insipid powder, or indissolvable calx; concerning which, the ingenuous
Zuelfer well notes, quin etiam (says he, speaking of this very thing) huic
aquae recenti salia volatilia jungerem, moxque vidi effectum, sc. salium
dictorum totalem destructionem, and eorum in calcem vel pulverem insipidum
indissolubilem, omni odore, and sapore, privatum, ignisque violentiam in
posterum strenue sustinentem, conversionum. The like probably would minium do
to the same volatile Salts, if mixed therewith, and that from the same cause,
viz. the Acidum contracted by the Fire, and from the same Acidum it is also,
that water of Lime cast plentifully upon boiling Milk, will curdle it. And from
these two, viz. the Alcali and Acidum (which we have demonstrated to be in
Quicklime) put into a struggling fretting motion, by their solution in water,
is (according to our Hypothesis) the very cause of heat, obvious in Quicklime:
For unless these two be dissolved, no Fermentation happens, and consequently no
heat. Hence it is, that although rectified Spirit of Wine, Spirit of
Turpentine, or other such like Sulphurous Liquors be added, yet cause no heat,
because they are not competent menstrua, nor suitable Liquors for the
dissolving the foresaid Alcali and Acidum, from whose solution and combating
motion, proceeds the heat: But we have at large discourst upon that subject in
our Lithologia Physica, to which I refer the Reader therefore shall now forbear
further to insist thereon.

CHAP. X.
LAstly, as to heat, and sometimes ignition, which is caused from the
collisions and attritions of hard solid bodies, we may without any difficulty
solve from our formerly deposited principles: As (for instance) that heat and
ignition which proceed from the attritions and percussions of Flint and Steel,
the attritions of Steel and Wood, of Steel and Pyrites, or any other Gritt or
Freestone: The attritions of either sappy or dry wood, as happens in the
violent motion of the Axis, or Wheels of Coaches, Chariots, Wagons or Mills:
all which Phoenomena we can well (and we think rationally) charge to the
account of our former Hypothesis, viz. That they are performed no other way,
then by a quick and sudden excitation of the implanted principles of Acid and
Sulphur, being by percussion, allision or attrition put into a speedy
Fermentation.

For the better understanding whereof, we are to consider both the nature and
temperament of those bodies, as also the manner of the production of Heat or
Fire therefrom, as to the first, they are all of them such, in whose texture
our principles of Fermentation, viz. Acid and Sulphur, lie scattered and
interspersed; what are Flints and other Pyrites, but stony concretions, who
have a Sulphurous principle for their cement, which lies close shut up in
their bodies, especially in some of them, the flagrable Sulphur is so fast
locked up, as that it appears not by any usual manner of way: unless either by
attrition of other bodies (wherein an Acid and Sulphur hang more loosely, viz.
Iron or Steel) or by the solution of some powerful menstruum, such as the grand
solvent the Alchahest: whilst others of them have their Sulphur more easily
extricated: of which last sort it is G. Fabricius speaks when he says, that
out of any the Pyrites; equo excutitur ignis, excoquitur etiam Sulphur.

What is Iron or Steel (the latter being but the former hardened) but a metal
wherein eminently (above the rest of metals) does appear an Acidum? witness its
easy mouldering into Rust, being a natural calcination thereof by the bare
acid moisture of the Air: For what Fire by its Acidum, does to Iron, loosening
the innate acidum thereof by actual calcination, the same in a longer tract of
time does the connate acidum of the Air to the inbred acid of Iron, which then
working upon the native Sulphur does unhinge it, and so together takes in
pieces the whole body into a crocus; And although Copper has also an implanted
acidum (the chief cause of its contracting an erugo in the Air) yet it is not
so easily extravertable by the acidum in the Air, and therefore defends it self
the better from the injuries thereof.

Lastly, (not now to name any more) what is Wood, whether in a sappy Branch or
dry (but firm) stick, but the more strong concretions of vegetable juices,
wherein the foresaid principles of Acid and Sulphur are, in the one freshly
acting in the work of vegetation, and in the other lie dormant under the bonds
of coagulation: So that if the same principles be actuated and accelerated in
their motions, as they are by sudden collisions and attrisions, they may
thereby be put into stronger Fermentations; and at length be invigorated to
that height, as actually to take Fire: which (according to our Hypothesis) is
the very reason why a Green Branch or Stick, by strong and frequent attritions
(one part upon another) will Fire; also why the Axis, Staves, or Wheels of
Coaches, Wagons, and Mills, will from strong and violent motions and
attritions, take Fire and burn. The like may be said concerning all the other
foregoing Subjects, as to the causes, or manner of their striking Fire; which
now we shall insist no longer upon: only this (by the by) I would take notice
of (before I have done with this matter) that frications (which are slight
attritions) of the parts of the body, which by the Ancients were much in use,
toward the assisting the cure of many Diseases, whose peccant matter lay much
in the habit of the body, were grounded upon this very reason, viz. that they
thereby helped the Fermentation of the blood, and other dormant juices, which
lay coagulated in the outward parts of the body, benumbing the Nerves, Muscles,
and other outward parts; and that if Physicians would now more frequent the use
thereof, might probably find an advantage thereby in order to the Cure of
Diseases by invigorating those dorming Ferments, putting them into action,
whereby the offending matter might the better be discussed and evaporated.

CHAP. XI.
THus having (as compendiously as we could) run through the causes of Heat and
Fire, as the result from all sorts of Fermentations, in the triplicity of
natures Empire: and showed Heat to be Fire in a remiss, and Fire Heat in an
intenc'd degree, or if you will a slow or more quick motion of the principles
(I mean Fermentations) solves both; and showed also these Fermentations to
proceed from a wrestling of Acidum and Sulphur, excepting those made from an
intestine struggling of Acidum, and a fixed Alcali, or Acidum and Vrinous
Spirits: Now come we to the last thing we propounded, and that is, how from our
deposited Doctrine of Fermentation, to solve that other grand Phoenomena, viz.
Light.

Not now to treat of Light as it is communicable to us from the great Fountain
thereof, the Sun, which, as we suppose, consists in an illumination of Air by a
perpetual emanation or eradiation of solar beams, springing from an incessant,
but peculiar Fermentation in the body of the Sun, and fostered by an unwearied
circulation of Ethereal matter, Light and Heat, as proceeding from the great
scuree thereof, we conceive to differ only in this, viz. That Light is the bare
illumination of the medium the Air, by a direct progressive motion of Ethereal
matter, from the foresaid Fermentation, as the proper object of the Eye, and by
which all other things are seen, while heat is the reflection or reverberatory
motion of the same luminous beams (proceeding from the said Fermentation) from
the Earth or other solid bodies, affecting (by that Fermentative motion) our
Organs of feeling, concerning which, we may elsewhere modestly propose our
opinion.

Our design at present is, only to discourse of the nature and manner of such
sort of Lights, which we find amongst bodies we usually converse with upon the
Earth, and within the verge of our Atmosphere: which are as follows, viz. the
Light of culinary Fire; I mean, of most usual combustable concretes, the Light
of all Sulphurous matters, whether in the form of mineral Sulphurs, Gumms,
Rosins, Turpentine, Axungia's, etc. or in liquids of Bitumen, Oils, vinous
Spirits, etc. The Light of rotten Wood, long dried Fish, as Codds, etc. who
have an incipient putrefaction; The Light of Glowworms, Cats-Eyes, Light from
attrition of Wood green or dry, which have thereby taken Fire, from the
attrition or percussion of Steel and Flint, or any Pyrites, from the frication
or pectation of animals: such as are Light from the Combing a Woman's head (as
sometimes has been known) Light struck in the currying of a Horse; and that
Light I have seen from a sudden frication upon a Catts-Back; of some Liquors
the Light of subterraneal Lamps; the perpetual Light preparable by the
exuberate Mercury of the Philosophers, graduated by circulation and cohobation,
according to our English Anonymus, who had seen it done.

The Light of some precious Stones, as Carbuncles; some sort of Diamonds,
magnetical of Light, as the Bononian-stone, prepared by an artificial
calcination. Lastly, The Light of meteors, amongst which may be reckoned
Lightening, flashes of Fire, or Light seen in Storms upon the Sea, also those
luminous meteors which in great Storms at Sea are seen to cleave to the tops of
Maine Masts, and at the Sterns of Ships, by the Ancients called Castor and
Pollux, by our Englishmen corpus-Ants, and very probably is the same with that
meteor we call ignis fatuus, of which, as also concerning the Light seen upon
the impressions of footings in the Sand upon Sea-shores: we shall shortly speak
more.

All which give Light in the Dark, viz. in the Air not illuminated by any Light
from the Sun; so that we may say of things that occur to our sight, that they
carry Fire and Light in their Bellies, and that by an excitation of their
intrinsic Ferments, their inside tapores are set above board: It remains
therefore that we try these Lights, and examine whether all or most of them,
may not (according to our Hypothesis) be solved from various degrees of
Fermentation, grounded upon our principles of Acidum and Sulphur, from various
causes differently excited.

We shall begin with that which is most obvious, viz. culinary Fire, and
examine how Light is produced therefrom: no sooner are the inbred Acidum and
Sulphur of any combustable concrete, set into a violent Fermentation, kindled
by the Fire or symbolical Fermentation (already in actual motion) put to it,
but forthwith by the help of the Air, the principles are set into a rapid
intestine motion: which yet more and more being sharpened by the Air, arises
by degrees to that pitch, as to fall into an actual ignition; and from thence
being yet more thin'd by the interweavings of the Air, breaks forth into
flagration, or ignition with Flame; Fire and Flame seem to differ only in this,
that in the struglings of the principles, and thereby in the rejecting the
heterogenites, the Air is more complicated in making Flame, then in bare
ignition, Flame being but Fire, rarefied by the intertexture of Air, which by
such rarifaction of a dark cloudy smoke or fume, makes a diaphanous Flame.

Air is necessary for ignition and flagration upon a double account: First,
from its moisture (brought into it from the grand Fermentation and Circulation
of other Bodies) whereby the principles of Firing become more liquid, and
thence fall into a more intensly furious and colliquating Fermentation,
according to that of Silenus the Epicurean, brought in by Virgil, semina
terrarum, etc. -- Et liquidi simul ignis; next by its own peculiarly, pliable,
penetrative, and circulating nature, whereby it insinuates into every of the
principles actings, keeping them in a constant agitation, thereby maintaining
their wheel of motion, as long as any combustable matter remains, and is well
put together.

So that by the first qualification, Air by its spongy nature, imbibes
moisture, wheeling off from other bodies in their incessant Fermentation, and
thereby becomes qualified for keeping other Fermentations afoot, and then by
its other qualification of penetration, and being as a Fan to blow off the
loose Corns, (as I may say) or heterogenious matter, engendered by the foresaid
rapid Fermentation: And by both it becomes truly capable of assisting the
principles of Acidum and Sulphur in their furious combating, as thereby to turn
vast bulkie bodies of combustable matter, first into Fire and Flame, and at
last (by winding off) into water, leaving some few Ashes, wherein remain some
Salt, and in some vegetable concretes, the seedling of the former body: For all
combustable bodies, are by this agitation of the innate Acidum and Sulphur,
with the cooperation of the Air (in that double foresaid respect) reduced
after a little rotation into the Air, to water again; And although Fire
moistens no bodies put thereto, yet does it really go off, not only in a
liquid, but humid form, witness the condenc'd steams of mineral Sulphur, or
Brimstone, burning under a Glass campane, is saved in an acid Liquor, also
Spirit of Wine, fired and condensed by such an artifice, appears in an infipid
water: yea, for ought I know, the like might happen (with some small variation)
to most combustable bodies, if their fumes were condenced by such a
contrivance: however the Air at the long run condenceth all those steams ( Fire
wheeleth off in) into water.

This being premised, we say that the highest degree of Fermentation, whereby
the principles are put into a rapid motion, makes Fire, and that is done by
the help of Air as aforesaid, which Fire of ignition gives Light by a continual
winding off in luminous rays, springing from the foresaid Fermentation, and
that by the further complications of Air, interwoven in the texture of Fire,
whereby the otherwise gross fumes gains a more Ethereal liquidity, is that we
call Flame, which is yet more luminous then bare ignition.

Not here to insist, whether Light, either of the Sun, or other luminous
bodies, be made any other way then by refraction; for although the rays of the
Sun make their exit in right lines from the source of their Fermentative
motion: yet being to wade through a fluid medium, I mean our Atmosphere, where,
ever and anon hitting upon liquid particles of rarefied water, born up by a
Column of the same, extended perhaps as far as the surface of the Earth, (and
may be further) must needs have their Lines broke, their Files disordered, and
their Rays much altered, being put into oblique motions, amongst such a Sea of
watery atoms: Notwithstanding which refraction, a luminous body may not undergo
any sensible variation as to locality, and that because our Eye is placed in
the same medium with the luminous body, (if such as represented to us here
below) And as to the Sun, perhaps that may be the very reason of the difference
betwixt the apparent and real place thereof: whereas, an object so situate, as
to have the reflecting luminous rays to pass through two mediums of different
textures, must need sustain a greater difference, as to the locality thereof,
witness an oar part immerst in water, part out, or a piece of Silver in a Basin
of water. But a luminous body, becoming such by having its principles of Acid
and Sulphur, heightened by a furious Fermentation, and being placed in the same
medium with our Eye, the luminous rays continually winding off in that rapid
motion of the combating principles, although (I say) they make their Exit in
right Lines from the Source of their motion, (viz. the body they issue from)
yet must they be continually hitting upon watery Atoms they meet with in the
Air, which are many times backed with strong Cylinders of the same, whence they
are distorted from their right Lines, and become refracted from each of the
adjacent watery bulla's, whereby, for ought we know, the rays of such bodies
in their illuminating motion, may become the more intended, then if they should
have reached the Eye in right Lines, directly from the object.

For hereby those watery particles may become as so many minute apake
Specula's, by which, each of these luminous rays, being once broke from its
direct line, becomes by various reflections and refractions multiplied, first
hitting upon one, then slanting off another, and so ad infinitum, yet retaining
their first impulse from the Fermentation or transmission from the luminous
bodies, whereby those rays of Light are infinitely increased in their
illuminating property, easily communicating a diaphaneity to the adjacent and
ambient Air, to confirm which, we may observe how notably a stream of watery
particles cast from a Spring, through a Cylinder of Sunbeams (the eye being
placed in the shade) cutting it at Angles, intends the Light thereof, make by
reflections and refractions new appearances of Light.

CHAP. XII.
THus much concerning Light, as proceeding from culinary Fire, or from ordinary
combustable concretes, put into that rapid furious Fermentation we call Fire:
The same we may say of the causes of Light in all Sulphurous matters, whether
in the dry form of mineral Sulphurs, resinous Gumms, Turpentine, etc. or in
Liquids, as Bitumen, Oils, Vinous Spirits, etc. All of them in their
flagration or flammability requiring Air, and that in the double acceptance
thereof, as aforesaid. We shall therefore in short take leave to say, that
these have their intrinsic principles of Acid and Sulphur, set awork into an
actual flagration, by being kindled by some congenial fiery Fermentation, and
that by the assistance of the Air both as a Sponge and as a Fan, especially the
last, which thereby not only promotes the incipient Fermentation, but also is
necessarily required for the perpetuation thereof, as long as any of the
principles remain yet unwound off by flagration.

That there is an acid principle in all these, we may elsewhere prove by
demonstrable and undeniable arguments, etc. That there is also a Sulphurous
principle, no eye will doubt it, upon beholding their flagration, inasmuch, as
according to the vulgar acceptance, Sulphur must be in all combustable
matters, only we may observe, this difference there is betwixt common culinary
combustable matters, and those last named, viz. That the first are complicated
with more heterogenious matter, wrapped up in the texture of those concretes; the
latter are more simple, come nearer to the nature of the principles themselves,
and therefore are the more readily and easily flagrable, and consequently
sooner give their exuberant Light; to which the Air has more easy admission,
toward the keeping the principles at work, and to the facile boying them up in
a constant luminous aereal flame, burning without glowing, or any considerable
residence of a Caput mort', especially in some Oils, and in all rectified
vinous Spirits.

The same may be said of Light, arising from attrition of Wood green or dry,
which having its inward principles of Acid and Sulphur roused up by so quick a
motion as attrition produces, gives the same appearances of Fire and Light,
and that from the same causes, as that which is done by actual flagration from
other external Fire added thereto.

So likewise the same may be urged in the solving the Phoenomenon of Light,
arising from attrition or percussion of Steel and Flints, or any Grit-stone or
Pyrites; for as by that sudden motion of attrition or percussion, the acidum of
the Steel and the Sulphur in the Flints or Pyrites, are set into a rapid
Fermentation, whence (as we have showed before) arises Fire: So Light being
the immediate product and result of Fire, must needs appear. Wherefore the
causes of Fire and Light arising hence, are the same with those produced from
others more obvious, only are differently put into action, yea the Air is as
much interested in the excitation of the one, as the other: And that according
to the qualifications and manner aforesaid.

Nor need we go much further for solving the reasons of Light, which appears
from frication or pectation of some animals; such as are Light from the Combing
of a Woman's head, (as has been known) that struck in the currying some Horses,
and that from a sudden frication of a Cats back, if we consider the two first,
as depending upon the peculiar texture and singular disposition of the
Fermentative juiees; For it is not all individuals of either of the species,
from which that appearance of Light is obvious; but only those in whose
constitution the principles arise, or are graduated to a peculiar
efflorescence, in the very formation or genuine production of animal Spirits,
carried by the nervous juices, as their proper vehicle, into the habit of the
body, which being excited by that sudden motion of pectation, etc. readily by
the help of the Air, give those quick flashes of Light. And as to the last,
viz. the striking Flame or Light from a Cats back by frication in the dark (as
I have sometime taken pleasure to see done) that I cannot otherwise impute,
then also to proceed from the peculiar graduation of the principles Acid and
Sulphur, in the texture of that animal, and what is done by that slight
artifice in exciting the efflorescence of the principles in a luminous flame,
may (for ought we know) be done naturally by a brisk, but slender woven
Fermentation, performed either in the texture of their eyes, or rather in the
very fabric of their animal Spirits, being a brisk floridues of those juices,
proceeding from a most depurate and heightly volatiz'd Sulphur, carried away to
the Eyes by the optic Nerves, from whence we suppose it is that their Eyes
shine and give Light in the dark.

Which last I am induced to believe, viz. That this luminous efflorescence,
peculiarly resides in the animal Spirits, even in all the foresaid instances,
carried by the nervous juices into the habit of the body, because (in the last
instance) the frication being made along the Spina, running down the vertebre
of the back, excites that volatile and highly depurated Sulphur, into a
luminous flame: whence its very probable, that many other animals, especially
those which are highly fed, and whose animal Spirits are of a fine spun
texture, having their Sulphur highly volatiz'd, would I say upon trial be
found, (from the foresaid causes excited by attrition, pectation, or the like)
to give the same luminous flame.

In the next place, we come to give the reasons of Light in rotten Wood, and
dried Fish, etc. where we are to observe, that as in the causes of Light
aforesaid, from the principles of Acid and Sulphur, variously put into motion,
being excited into a Fermentation diverse ways: So amongst the rest, this by
putrefaction is not the least; for Wood shines not tift its principles of Acid
and Sulphur, by a retrograde motion, fall into a new sort of Fermentation,
whereby it winds off what the principles in their generative Fermentation wound
on, viz. unravels its own Clew, taking in pieces what the other built up, in
which putrifick analysis, the foresaid principles make different assaults upon
each other, by the intermission of moisture in the Air, fortified perhaps with
an acidity, repugnant to that of the concrete: And as moisture in the Air, is
necessary toward the promoting Fermentation in a generative way; so likewise
as necessary to the helping forward the destructive or retrogressive
Fermentation in taking bodies in pieces.

For putrefaction always begins where the principles terminate their actions in
generative motions, viz. upon the external superficies, or outward rims of all
Bodies, where the ambient Air touch them, and thence begin their retrograde
motion in the natural analysis of Bodies; which is evident from this
observation, viz. That I know by an artificial exclusion of Air, how to
preserve most (perhaps all) sorts of Fruits, newly taken off the Trees, as
suppose Gooseberries, Apricots, Damsens, Cherries, etc. so that in January I
have had Tarts made of them to entertain Strangers with, as we elsewhere in our
Lithologia Physica further show.

So that it is from a peculiar sort of Fermentation betwixt the Acidum and
Sulphur in the unhingeing the compage of the concrete; whence proceeds the
flaming brightness of rotten Wood; For the principles are not all wound off,
but only are a going off in a luminous brightness, whence also proceeds its
facile susception of Fire from any Spark thereof: insomuch, as the last Threads
of natures unraveling in the reduction of bodies by putrefaction, (especially
in some) is of the finest sort, the volatile Sulphur winding it self off (by
slender vibrations from the connate acid) in a subtle but luminous rotation.

The like account may be given of Light, from some sorts of Fish, hung up till
they undergo an incipient putrefaction: For while their principles of Acid and
Sulphur, do by the moisture in the Air, undergo a putefactive Fermentation, the
Sulphur by those retrograde motions, becomes more volatiz'd, and by gentle
touches from its inbred Acid, winds off in a luminous flame: In which
supposition we are the more confirmed, inasmuch, as they shine not till a
slight putrefaction of their juices be already begun: To which may be added,
that in their putrefactive reductions, a mucilage is made to appear, which is
the receptacle, and as it were sperme, wherein the two principles do the better
show themselves in their vibrations and luminous productions: which mucilage
the Fish imbibed and incorporated into its self, (according to all probability)
from the estuations of the Sea, upon Storms and Tempests, of which we shall
speak further below.

As to the Light from Glo-worms, its probable that sort of insect takes its
original from the putrid juice or excrements of some animal or other insect,
wherein the principles are winding off in a slender texture of an eradiating
brightness, which juice that insect yet retains: For I look upon the slender
woven flame inherent in Glo-worms, and other foresaid putrid juices to proceed
from a mutual, but gentle vibration of the principles in their retrograde
motion; which although without any sensible heat (that it has none, we dare not
say) yet ceteris paribus, to be in some measure answerable (as to the ground of
the causes) to that flame, made from the principles in their generative motion,
heightened by frication, attrition, or the like, into a burning luminous flame.

CHAP. XIII.
NOw come we to treat of the production of luminous Meteors, and to enquire
into the causes of their Light; such I mean, as happen within the compass of
the Atmosphere: For the better understanding whereof, we are first to conceive
of the Earth, as a body, in whose intrails various Fermentations (especially
such as relate to minerals) are continually at work to the completing the
generation of Minerals and Metals to the making Hot-Baths, the producing the
fontes acidi; and to the perpetuating other grand Phoenomena of Nature: Next,
that these Fermentations of subterraneal juices (I mean as to the effects
thereof) terminate not always upon the external cortex of the Earth; but are
continually breath forth: whose subtiliz'd and volatiz'd particles, (especially
the Sulphurous) are incessantly passing off in the slenderest of textures,
viz. in a subtle apporrhea, or invisible steame into the Atmosphere, filling
it with plenty of agil nimble parts, floating in the Air, as in their proper
Sea, and dissolved therein, as in their peculiar fluid menstruum.

Also we are to conceive, that the Atmosphere does not only lodge plenty of
the foresaid effiuvia, arising from mineral, but likewise from animal and
vegetable Fermentations, wheeling off in tenuious combinations, and slender
woven nexures, (undiscernable to our Eyes, although fortified by the best
microscopes) whereby the Air becomes the common receptacle of innumerous
multitudes and swarms (as I may say) of volatiz'd Acid and Sulphurous
particles, not only issuing through the pores of the Earth, but also from
other bodies upon the surface thereof, continually spending themselves in
insensible effuvia, kept a foot by their unwearyed Fermentations.

In which consideration we are to apprehend of the Earth, not only as the
common matrix, impregnated with those intestine Fermentations from mineral
juices; but also as from whose exuberant lap, plenty of other more simple, and
sometimes sensible (I mean watery) steams, are, especially from springie
places, continually issuing forth: insomuch, as those last are discernable to a
curious eye, intently looking upon the surface of the Earth, a little after
Sunrise, the eye being somewhat elevated above the Level of the ground, and
directed toward the Sun, by which curious observation, Springs themselves are
sometimes found out.

And as the Earth in the consideration aforesaid, so also every particular
concrete has its Atmosphere, more or less extending its orb of activity,
according to the quick or slow paced inward Fermentations, I mean, according to
the more brisk or flat onsets and encounters of their principles Acid and
Sulphur: And further, that many of those slender woven combinations, are by
reason of their tenuity, so indissipable, as to retain the specimen of their
first original, even after long, at least succedaneous rotations in the
Atmosphere, whereby they become capable of performing other effects, to which
they are naturally propence, from the occurrance of other co-working causes, as
is evident in many unusual effects in or from the Air, whose causes, lying so
remote from our senses, we do not easily apprehend, concerning which, we have
not time now to reckon.

These considerations being premised, it will not be difficult hence to solve
the Phoenomena of those short lived luminous textures, Meteors: where we shall
not need to our help, to call in, either the exhalations of the Peripateticks,
because grounded upon improbable causes, amongst which that of the supposition
of extrinsical heat, as the efficient, is not the least: Or the Cartesian
Globeloy. Or Gassendus, his Glomeres, being supposed complications of
Nitro-vitriolick-Sulphurous-steams: Or Nitro-aereal particles, common to the
Air and Nitre, according to the Hypothesis of a late Author. Nor lastly shall
we call in any other Hypothesis to contribute to our assistance: But shall
study to trace the sootings of our own principles, although making their way
through (as yet) hidden and unknown paths; making our free inquest, whether
Meteors, may not from our foresaid principle, be genuinely and satisfactorily
solved.

We say therefore, that amongst the Mineral and other Apporrhea, the
Sulphurous, especially the Acido-Nitro-Sulphurous are not the least; which
mustering in long-droughts, when the Clouds ride high, being born up at those
seasons by a stronger elasticity of the Air, upheld by strong and long Colums
thereof, and one Cloud being higher then another, by its own weight (and
wanting stress of Air to bear it up) falls upon the subsiding; which by the
sudden percussion of the Air, makes that explosive motion or crack we call
Thunder, together with a rushing wind, which usually attends those
Thunderclaps, which is nothing else but a pressure of Air, circulating from
the coincidence of the two Clouds: Now by the sudden allision of the foresaid
Clouds upon the Acido-Nitro-Sulphurous-complications, floating in the
Atmosphere (as aforesaid) heightens them into a quick vibration, and momentary
flagration, we call Lightening; which although it be done in the very same
moment with the crack, as proceeding both from the same causes with different
respects; yet because luminous percussions do more quickly make their transits
through the medium, therefore it is sooner seen, then the other heard, (as
might further be illustrated, if I would now insist upon it.)

So that Lightening owes its causes to the sudden percussions, or attritions of
the Acido-Nitro-Sulphurous apporrhea in the Air, made by the sudden falling of
one Cloud upon another: which we cannot better represent by similitude to our
understanding, then by the observation of a sudden flash of Fire or Light,
struck from the allision of a Flint and Steel: For the thin
Acido-Nitro-Sulphurous textures, are in that part (as well as in others) of the
Atmosphere, which is comprehended betwixt two Clouds, and the percussion of the
Air, as also of those foresaid minute effluvia, wheeling in the Air, make them
to appear in a sudden flash, as happens from the foresaid allision of Flints
and Steel.

Not here to insist upon the reasons, why (according to our Hypothesis)
Lightening is sometimes so penetratively powerful, as to kill men, or other
animals, without the least appearance of any bones broke, or breach of skin;
How so piercing and liquifactive a caustic, as to melt a Sword in the Scabbath
(which sometimes has been known) while the Scabbath it self has remained safe?
Why it comes with such force and fury, as sometimes to tear up by the Roots the
strongest Oaks, and other Trees of mighty bulk; and other-while breaks and
splits the bodies of huge Trees; throws down Houses, overturns Wind-Mills, and
causes other the like Catastraphies, dismal and frightful to behold: witness
amongst the rest, the late sad and dreadful calamity, which happened from
Lightening and Thunder the last year, in several Cities in Holland, but
chiefly in Vtrecht; which although that, and the like, be Judgments from GOD,
yet are not without their natural causes.

And from the foresaid Acido-Sulphurous effluvia, passing through the Sea, and
sometimes gliding upon the surface thereof, happens those sudden flashes of
Fire or Light, taken notice of by some Seamen, by them seen in Storms upon the
Sea, shining in the Night like Fire, being struck up by sudden percussions
betwixt Air and Water from the furiousness of Storms; whose corruscation is
observed in more plenty, during the collisions of Clouds, Winds and Seas,
whence Storms and Tempests then at any other season.

The like may be said as to the causes of those luminous, but narrow-siz'd
Meteors; which in great Storms at Sea, are seen by Mariners to cleave to the
Masts and Sterns of Ships, anciently called Castor and Pollux, by our Seamen
Corpus-ants; in both which, the foresaid apporrhea, whether floating in the
Sea, or Air, conterminous to the Sea, being agitated, the one into a
Fermentative flagration, or thin-woven flame, the other into a figured Meteor;
in both, I say, the foresaid Acido-Sulphurous effluvium is struck up into a
luminous flame, by the fore-nam'd attritions and percussions.

Which last, I mean the Corpus-ants, are very probably (as my ingenious Friend
J. R. well observes) the very same Meteor, upon the Land, we call ignis fatuus,
which seems to run before people, and is sometimes in Storms seen to cleave
to Horses Maines; which I say is very likely to be carried by Storms ashore to
inland places, and that too at remote distances from the Sea: which ignis
fatuus, or noctivagus, is observed in greater plenty in or upon Storms, and
more rare in a clear and serene Sky.

And lastly, (to name no more) we may reckon that sort of Light, to be from the
same causes with that of Meteors, which my foresaid ingenuous Friend (whose
unsuspected veracity in matter of fact, is sufficiently obliging to me, to be
credulous of his relation) has observed to appear in dark Nights, upon walking
on the Seashore, in every impression of his Foot, upon the lifting up his
Heel, he espied a Light, or sparkling brightness, with which being surpised,
and desirous to know what, and whence it was, fetched a Lanthorn and Candle,
took up in his hand some of that matter which gave the Light, which he found to
be a mucid matter fere instar pituitae, and that he had often seen this matter,
which was a pellucid recrement, cast off upon the Shore, from a boiling Sea
aestuating with Storms.

So that it should seem, as if by the percussions and attritions, betwixt Wind
and Seas, made by Storms, upon the mutual collisions of the aforesaid
principles, or effluvia, whether in Water or Atmosphere, or both, not only the
foresaid sudden appearances of Meteors happen, but also by the estuating of the
Seas, a mucilaginous matter is engendered, wherein as a sperme, those forenamed
luminous effluvia (I mean such as are struck up by percussion and attrition)
fix themselves, which sometimes is hovering in the Air, and cleaves to Masts or
other parts of Ships; other while is carried off by Storms upon the Seacoasts,
and thence further in Land, gives those appearances of ignis fatuus and the
like: and sometimes, or in part is rejected upon the Shore, and gives cause for
that foresaid Phoenomenon of Light in the impressions or footings upon the
Sands, after Storms are over; and may contribute to the making some sorts of
Fish, upon their putrefactive resolutions, give that usual appearance of Light,
according to the account we have given thereof above.

We might here take an occasion of insisting upon other sorts of Meteors, as
Mill-dews, Blastings, etc. all which proceed from the same Acido-sulphurous
effluvia, floating in the Atmosphere, and struck up, by the mutual attritions
and collisions of winds, clouds, and the like; being carried in certain
Channels or Peroledi of the Air, to the producing their usual effects, but
shall now wave any further discourse thereof.

CHAP. XIV.
NExt to which, we come to enquire into the reasons of Light from precious
stones; of which there are three sorts, which will give light: first such as
show their native luster, by shining in the dark, without any previous
excitation; of which sort are native Carbuneles. Secondly, Such as need a
previous frication to the exciting their Light and Luster: of which are some
peculiar sorts of Diamonds. Or lastly, Such as are magnetical by a preparatory
calcination, of which sort is the Bononian stone.

As to the first, viz. That of Carbuncles, the cause of whose luminous rays we
can no otherwise attribute, then to the irradiation of a glaurious
incombustible Sulphur, disseminated through its whole body, imbibed in, and
fixed to, a most defecate matter, (imbibed, I say, whilst that exquisitely pure
petrifick matter, was yet in its pristine juice) through which that highly
graduated tincture, or Philosophic Sulphur, is incessantly vibrated;
concerning which we have discoursed more at large in our Lithologia Physica.

The same we may say of some sorts of Diamonds, only with this difference,
that these to show their Luster, require a gentle excitation by a previous
frication, whereby the foresaid luminous incombustible Sulphur gets more at
liberty, and darts forth the better.

Now that some particular sort of these do by a gentle frication show their
luster in the dark, I have from the autopsie of my worthy Friend Mr. Shippen:
Yea that some sorts of Diamonds are not only luminous, but also electrical of
a Needle after a previous excitation by frication, I am assured by the
honorable Boil, who acquainted me, he has had one of that sort: As also, that
the King (as he told me) has one that will do the same very remarkably.

As to the cause of Light in those which by a foregoing calcinatory
preparation, become magnetical of Light, of which sort is the Bonian stone,
(and perhaps others might be found out, that by the like artifice would perform
the same.) It depends, I say, on, and proceeds chiefly from, the peculiar
texture of such sort of Stones, so wrought upon and altered by the Fire, as not
only to imbibe as it were, the rays of the Sun, but also for a time to fix
them, suffering them leisurely to go off again, and so become by fresh
impregnation, capable of performing the like emissions of Light ad Lubitum:
concerning which Light issuing from the three foresaid noble petrifick bodies,
we insist more largely in our Lithologia Physica, to which (when extant) we
refer the Reader.

And as to the Light of subterraneal Lamps, although those be generally reputed
(and that too by very learned and intelligent persons) amongst Chymera's,
supposed to be merely fictitious, yet I am not altogether of their opinion; but
do think, there is a possibility in nature for them to have been really
performed. Now the reason why it is generally concluded in the negative, is
taken from the defect of Air in those close caverns; inasmuch as all sorts of
vulgarly known Fire, need the access of Air to the keeping up that rapid motion
in combustable bodies, which being secluded, those Fires thence depending, of
necessity must dye.

But we suppose, and in part know, that there is lodged in most, especially in
some particular bodies, an incombustible Sulphur, known chiefly to the Adepti,
to whose invigorating actions, and enlivening operations, the outward Air of
our Atmosphere does not at all contribute, yea during some particular seasons
of working, ought wholly to be excluded. To confirm the possibility in nature
of such kind of Fire that may be maintained and perpetuated without Air, I
might add, that I have with my own Eyes seen a Flame or Fire in the cavity of a
Glass, which as soon as the Stopple was taken forth, became (contrary to the
Genius of all vulgar Fires) immediately extinguished: So why might not those
sorts of Lamps recorded in History, to have been performed by the Ancients,
(viz. amongst the Romans, who might probably have the Art from the Grecians,
and those from the Egyptians) have been Fed with such kind of Fire, even in
the greatest seclusions of Air, and upon their being exposed thereto, when
found, might as easily and speedily extinguish: concerning which, we may
probably elsewhere further enlarge.

Lastly, as to the perpetual Light, preparable by the Philosophers exuberate
Mercury, graduated by circulation and cohobation, as also a luminous Liquor
demonstrable by Art: upon which we shall not now insist, both because we do not
pretend to be a Master of any such thing; as also because we have touched
thereon in our Lithologia Physica.

CHAP. XV.
THus having compendiously run through the great varieties of Fermentations in
the threefold Kingdom of Nature, and showed the various Phoenomena of Light in
different bodies, in that part of the Scene of visibles we converse with,
solvable by our principles from different causes, put into various motions. Now
it remains to conclude this Doctrine of Fermentation, first by elucidating our
principles from collateral authority: Next, by showing how from the great
vdriety of Acids acting upon Sulphurs, may diverse other Phoenomena be naturally
solved.

As to the first, viz. to confirm and illustrate our principles to be in all
concretes throughout the triplicity of natures Empire, besides what we have in
brief said, and reserve also for a further discourse, we might here bring in
the Authority of the great Hypocrates, and some others of the Ancients, to show
how this concordia discors, the principles I mean of Acidum and Sulphur,
contracted into Seedlings, are interspersed in the seminals of all things;
whence by such kind of Fermentation (as aforesaid) all things vegetate, come to
their acme and decline; yea, from which the whole Scene of visible concretions,
are by a certain s^^^gling from their central Fires, brought into action,
lively portrayed upon the Stage of the World.

But because we take an occasion in our Epistle to touch thereon, we shall
forbear; and at present only add the authority of the intelligent, learned,
and worthy Borichius, who in his late piece de Hermetis, Aegyptiorum, and
Chymicorum sapientia, a tract highly valuable, and worthy the perusal by all
ingenuous persons) in one place, as if measuring forth our principles, says to
this purpose, viz. Nullum animal ostendi potest, p. 413.
ex quo oleum [and hoc est animalium Sulphur] educi nequeat; nullum, ex quo
nihil aciduli possit seperari: nulla planta, quae non vel oleum vehat, vel
spiritum admoto igne flammantem; nulla, quae non pressu succum profundat, si
sibi permittatur, in acidum quiddam sponte abiturum. Metallica ut robustioris
temperamenti, Sulphur and Mercurio non carent, equidem hoc primum illis cum
animalibus and plantis commune est, quod rara minera illa sit, quae Sulphur
verum and flammaturum solicit inquirentibus non offerat; nulla, quae ingeniose
in alkohol tenuata, and aeri, si opus est, tantillum exposita, distillatione
non spiritum acidulum expromat.

Not here to insist on what the learned Dr. Willis says in this matter in his
Doctrine of Fermentation, who as he urges, ob salis fluorem (how rightly let
others judge) so we, De Ferm. p. 10.
ob acidi predominium, vinum, lac. sanguis, cerevisia, edulia prius grata and
dulcia, quando corrumpi incipiunt, ingrate acescunt. To which we shall add the
suffrage of the industrious Tachenius (a consideration highly worth his own due
and well-weighing inspection) Lac (says he) sponte acessit, Hip. Chym. p. 90,
91.
sicut and reliqui succi tum vegitabilium quam animalium, cum in putrifactionem
tendunt: imo nil putrere neque generari potest novi, nisi praecedat aciditas.

As to the last thing propounded in order to the concluding this discourse: we
might say, that Acids in order to the concretions and reductions, coagulations
and liquifications, condensations and rarifactions, solidity and fluidity, and
other various modifications of bodies, differently denominated, according to
the different impressions they make upon our sensual Organs; I say, Acids in
the solving the foresaid appearances of bodies in the main, fall under a double
consideration, viz. either as active and fluid, or passive and consistent.

Under the first, viz. while its active, and so its succulent, liquid, or
fluid, after which manner it appears in all actual Fermentations, whence
immediately result those grand distinctions of concrete bodies, known to us
under the notion of animals, vegetables, and minerals; which Fermentation is
previous to all manner of concretions in the triplicity of natures workings (as
we have in the foregoing discourse briefly illustrated) For while vegetation
amongst Plants, animation in the composure of juices, and thence of the
structure of animal bodies, and mineralization in order to Hot-Baths, are
performed; the Acids concerned, must, I say, of necessity be fluid and actually
succulent; otherwise a stop or let would immediately be imposed upon the
workings of nature in the formations and transformations of bodies, and
consequently would cease to propagate themselves.

For no growth or accretion of parts in the genesis of natural bodies is
performed, without a succulent Fermentation, where an Acid is in an actual, yea
fluid motion: From which succulency of Acids together with intermediate
coagulations and hardenings, performed at due seasons, all concrete bodies in
the threefold Kingdom of nature are produced: and from these two, viz. Acids in
succis solutis, working upon their inbred Sulphurs by a natural Fermentation,
and from the concretions of these juices by the help of the ambient Air, always
(in the genoration of bodies) conspiring to such effects, I say from the motion
of liquid acid juices, and their weavings by concretion seasonably performed,
it is, that from very minute seedlings, Plants are brought on to great bigness.

Thus from Oak-Seedlings, called Acorns, (whose seminal part lies in a very
small and inconsiderable compass) may be produced too, and is daily growing to
be, great bulkie Oaks: So that when we see a vast spreading Oak, and look at a
small seedling, whence such in process of time, is produced: if we consider
what has been done, and which way nature has so busied her self, as to bring
forth so disproportionable a bulk to the little plant Embrio comprised in the
seedling: we cannot, I say, choose but view the inward agents, set at work in
the epitomized Oak, in a fluid state, which by the expansive motions of their
juices in their natural Fermentative vegetation, as they come to the Air,
become thereby woven into Stems and Leaves,, and by further hardenings, are
condenced and incrustated in part into Wood and Bark: So that by the
concretions of the Sap (wherein the principles are in a liquid state or
Fermentation) carried up betwixt the Bole and Bark, are made considerable
increase in Bulk, till at length it swell to that huge stature, we see many of
them grow too.

As to the bulk it self of an Oak, Ash, etc. it owes its original (as well as
all other concretions do) materially to water: But that water should be formed,
coagulated, and put on the shape of an Oak, Ash, etc. that is wholly ascribable
to the intrinsic agents or intestine principles of Acid and Sulphur, set in
the seedling into a Fermentative motion, displayed into that figure by the
manuduction and evolution of the contracted and shut up Seed, carried up and
conveyed by their proper Vessels, whether by the names of veins, arteries, etc.
with their accompanied Air Vessels, according to the ingenuous Malpigius, and
our Countryman Dr. Grew. What we have said of an Oak is compatible suo modo
to all other vegetables.

Then as to the other consideration Acids fall under, in order to the fabric
of bodies, whether in the form of natural or artificial concretions, viz. as it
is passive, or becomes consistent, so it stands in opposition to fluidity, or
rather is the complement thereof, determining it into solid bodies: For we see
no other cause to which natural concretions, coagulations, incrustations,
consolidations, congelations, etc. comprised under the notion of binders up of
bodies, can or ought to be more genuinely referred then to Acids, under this
consideration: what I pray are Stalks, Leaves, Husks, Grains, etc. of Plants or
lesser vegetables, but the Acidum woven and condenc'd (with some Sulphurous
parts) into those forms by the access of Air? what are the bole, bark, and
branches of Trees, or larger sized vegetables, but the concretions and
hardenings of the native Acid juices, together with the enclosure of some
Sulphurous parts, by the cooperation of external Air? what the Fruits of
Trees, but the coagulations of Acids, sweetened by their Sulphurs, thereby
brought on to maturity, and thence made fit for other Fermentations, in order
to potable Liquors?

What, amongst animals, is flesh and musculous parts, but the coagulation of
the blood and other humors, to whose constitution a genuine Acidum in a due
proportion is essentially requisite? What the Bones, but parts consolidated
from implanted Acids, in whose coagulation or condensation, some Sulphurous
parts are also taken in? And as in the natural constitution of the body, and
eucrasie of the humors, Acids are chiefly concerned in the concretions,
coagulations and consolidations of the parts; so likewise in the dycrasie of
animal juices, and preternatural concretions and indurations, etc. of the body,
Acids are primarily concerned: Thus what are Fistula's, but callosity and
obdurate hardness of the inward parts, viz. the veins, arteries, etc. being
hardened by a spurious Acidum lodged in those particular parts? What are the
podagrical Tophi and Nodi, but the Synovia of the Joints, hardened and
congealed by a gouty Acidum, fixing it self by coagulation upon those parts?
What are hard tumors, but swellings from Scorbutic Acids, or from Acids of
some badly cured Disease, lurking in its Acid seminary for a time, till other
concurring causes sets the spurious Ferment more a work, and by the predominant
Acidum (the general faber of pains and dolours) the Vessels are obstructed, and
the humors of some particular parts coagulated into those obdurate swellings.
Lastly, What is the Stone in the Gaul, Bladder, or other parts of a humane, or
other animal body, but chiefly an Acidum fixed upon a petrifick Earth, and
urinous Alcali or volatile Salt, taking in some Sulphurous parts, but
espcially, as I say, bound up, or knit together by the vinculum of an Acid: Of
which, further in our Lithologia Physica.

Amongst Minerals, What are all fossil and other mineral Salts, but concretions
chiefly performed by the power of Acids in the bowels of the Earth? In
particular, what are Sal marine, Vitriol, Alom and Nitre, but concretions of
acid juices? And indeed what are the generality of artificial Salts, or such as
are made by mixture, but such in whose texture Acids are chiefly and primarily
concerned, and without which scarce any saline concretion at all does appear?
What are Stones made in the bowels of the Earth, but liquid subterraneal juices
of alcalizate, or other proper matter, arrested by acid steams, arising from
some Fermentation of mineral juices, which together pass into those petrifick
concretions; as we sufficiently (and that de industria) demonstrate in our
Lithologia Physica and Halologia Chymica.

What are Minerals themselves (being immature Metals, having the principles of
Metals but after a crude, volatile, imperfect manner) such as Brimstone,
Antimony, Pyrites, Auripigmentum, etc. but Sulphurous concretions, bound up by
their intrinsic acids, taking into their compage other Heterogenities, as we
have in short above declared, and may more at large, God willing, in another
place. Yea, to go higher, what are the Metals, but a metallic Sulphur, bound
up by a peculiar implanted Acidum, in the mercurial juices, whose mixture being
not perfect, through a complication of some heterogenities, makes the
imperfect, but those being removed by a closer bond of the metallic
principles, gives the perfect Metals, unseparable and unalterable by the power
of the strongest culinary Fire.

We might go yet further, and ask what is the Philosophers Elixir, (if such
there be in rerum natura) but such a close weaving of metallic principles,
(whose Acidum is intimately and inseparably united) all so highly graduated, as
to become a fixed coagulated tincture, of so extensive a nature, as to be able
to make quick transits through, and thereby to hinge into its own fixity and
purity, other imperfect metallic bodies?

So that upon a serious inquiry with our Eye directly levelled into the works
of nature, we cannot but conclude; First, That all manner of coagulations,
congelations, condensations, salifications, petrifications, yea all sorts of
concretions of bodies (or of juices into bodies) are primarily ascribable to
Acids, as their grand faber, of which we discourse largely, and demonstrate (we
think) clearly in our two foresaid Tracts. Secondly, That by these foresaid
coagulations, salifications, petrifications, and other concretions, the connate
Acidum does so combine with the Sulphurous parts it closes with, as that both
pass into a quid tertium, or neutral result, partaking of both, and yet
distinguishable by neither: insomuch as the Acidum by such sort of coagulations
and concretions, loses its Sting, and becomes thereby altogether
unperceptable: And hence is the reason why although Acids be the very
foundation of all coagulations and other concretions of bodies, yet are
themselves, as to our gust, in many things the least discoverable; which
because we cannot easily get to the insides of bodies in their natural
productions, shall therefore endeavor to demonstrate and ellustrate by
artificial mixtures, resembling the natural.

Thus in mixing the Runnet or usual Ferment to New-Milk upon heat, or while
warm after Milking, the acidity of the Runnet, not only makes the Milk split
into Curds and Whey, but is it self so coagulated with the Curds, as not to
become perceptable at all: so that Cheese is nothing else but a neutrum, or
neutral result from an Acid, and curdling parts of Milk, coagulated together,
while Cream is the Sulphurous parts of Milk; and Butter is the coagulum of that
Cream, separated by a slender Fermentation procured by the motion of Churming;
which very coagulation of Butter is from a combination of some small quantity
of Acidum with the Sulphurous parts.

Thus also from the Acidum in Wines (of all sorts) in Ale, Beer, Syder, etc.
being poured upon warm or boiled Milk; from the Acidum, I say, in any of the
foresaid Liquors it is, that the Milk separateth into Curds and Whey, or
posset drink; the former of which are made lighter or stiffer, according to the
difference of the Acids, and various manner of application of the ingredients;
in which Curds, the acidum of the Fermentable Liquor is wholly coagulated,
which is a good way of mortifying or correcting all sorts of fretting Acids,
whether in bad Wines, or other Liquors, which all fix (if there be Milk enough)
in the Curd: and yet that Curd is a neutral, and the Acid not at all
perceptable therein; yea in case of bad Wines or other Drinks, where the Acedum
is too eager and fretting, to those who do not care for Posset Drink, and yet
would not loose their Wines, or other Liquors, I would (being prompted from the
foresaid cause) propound as an expedient, to put a spoonful or two of boiling
Milk upon a Pint or Quart of such sort of Liquors, stir it about, if the Curd
rise to the top to skim it off, if not to run it through a filter, whereby it
will become clear: and so you have corrected your Wines, etc. and made them fit
for drinking, or in lieu of that to put a tossed of old Wheat bread therein,
which will imbibe much of the superfluous Acidum, and make the Drink thereby
more wholesome.

From the foresaid cause of Acids it is also, that Fat congeals in animals,
which is but the Sulphur of the blood congealed by its own, or at least
acquired Acidum of the Air: which after melting by heat, (whereby the Acid
becomes fluid) congeals again in cold, into that consistence called Saem or
Tallow; and from the facile congelation of the Sulphurous parts of the blood in
some animals, from the acidum under either or both considerations, viz. of
native, or acquired from the Air, it is, that for instance Conies and
Field-fare, become Fatter in Frosty weather: and from the like cause, the Fat
of Land-animals is hard (as the ingenuous Dr. Grew notes in his discourse of
mixture) while that of Fish is very soft, and in great part runs to Oil, viz.
because the first sort are exposed to the acidum floating in the Air, and
thereby continually (to proper ends) inspired: and the latter, being always
immersed in water, is much what deprived of that congealing acreal acidum.

And as Acids are remarkable in the various concretions of animals, viz. in the
coagulations into Flesh, consolidations into Bones, congelations into Fat, etc.
whereby they show their different operations upon various juices of animal
bodies; and thereby also combine into neutral results as aforesaid: so
likewise, the same is evident amongst vegetables: Thus expressed Oils,
especially when the innate acidum so prevails by some acquirements from the
aereal, do by keeping, grow rancid and thick; as also is further apparent in
the mixture of acid Spirit of Nitre, with Oil Olive; whereby the vegetable
Oil is coagulated, and made consistent, being congealed thereby into a white
Fat or Butter (as Dr. Grew observes.)

And as nature produces Rosins and Gums in Plants and Trees, congealing the
juices of wounded Stems, Boles, Stalks, Heads, etc. by the acidum of the Air,
according to the disposition and genius of the Plants, whence Rosins, as of
Turpentine Scamony, etc. Gums, as Camphire, Opium, etc. so in like manner Art
in imitation of Nature, and from the same principles, can produce somewhat
equivalent thereto: Thus if the acid Oil of Vitriol be mixed with the Oil of
Anise-seeds, the vegetable Oil is immediately (by the acidum in the mineral
distilled Liquor) congealed into a perfect Rosin.

Yea, and by the addition of Acids to some vegetable Oils, may be resembled
the production of Turpentines: Thus Oil of Vitriol added to the distilled
Oils of Turpentine, Nutmegs, Juniper, etc. after Fermentation become of a
consistence altogether emulating usual Turpentine, without the least appearance
of Oil swiming on them; nay, although Spirit of Wine be afterward added, yet
will it cause no separation of any of the Oil: But the contrary happens, if
you add Spirit of Wine to an essential Oil, before mixture with the Oil of
Vitriol; for then the Spirit of Wine and Oil of Vitriol unite, and reject the
essential Oil to the superficies: So that the reason why distilled Oils by
the foresaid artifice, subside in the form of a liquid Turpentine, is because,
that upon Fermentation from the foresaid mixture, the Oils receive such an
alteration, by suffering their volatile parts to go off, as that what remains,
combining with the Acidum of the Vitriol, becomes thence more a Turpentine then
an Oil, and consequently, as heavier, must subside, although Spirit of Wine be
put thereto, which otherwise would swim above it.

So that from the premises it will naturally follow, that Turpentines are
indeed but liquid Rosins; and Rosins, no other then concrete Turpentines, and
further, that Turpentines are Oils incrassated or condenced by addition of
Acids: yea all, but several disguises of Sulphur, altered according to
different degrees of Acids, and their various assaults upon Sulphurs.

Its worth (by the by) our observation, that even from the mixture of some
Acids and Sulphurs, sanguification (I mean as to its tincture) may as well be
imitated and shadowed forth unto us, as from those of volatile Alcalies and
Sulphurs: Thus the acid Oil of Vitriol, mixed with the essential Oils, either
of Turpentine, Juniper, Nutmegs, or Amber, Strikes (besides the Fermentation
and intense heat they cause) a deep blood red color, as I have tried; And I do
not know yet, but that even Alcalies, whether fixed or volatile, may from the
same reason of their hidden and shut up Acids, intend the colors of Sulphurous
vegetables: concerning which Acids we elsewhere touch: yea, and from the same
operation of the genuine Acids upon their proper Sulphurs, in the great work of
vegetative Fermentation, are struck those various, and no less admirable
colors, in the great field of vegetables, as we have hinted before.

And to conclude, as we have showed water to be the material principle of all
concretions: so the distinction and specification thereof, depends upon Fires
or Ferments, lodged and hid in the inwards of Seeds: which Fires or Ferments
are differenced from the great variety, chiefly of Acids, not only in
Fermentation, but Concretion, in Fluidity but Solidity, and consistency of
bodies: For what is the tapestrey of vegetables, in their peculiar verdure,
spangled with an amicable luster, but so many central Fires or Ferments, at
first hid in their seminals, and afterward by the cooperation of other
conspiring causes, displayed into almost infinitely variety of Plants,
branching themselves in their different, delicate, and beautiful colors? And
what are animals, but vital Lamps burning in bodies; and yet those bodies no
otherwise consumed, but by the glowing, dwindling, and at last extinguishing of
those vital tapers? whereby not only animals, but also vegetables are apt
(besides their common putrilage from plenty of moisture) to spend themselves
(by the declining of the foresaid Ferments) in hecticks and wearing marasmes,
which vital Ferments are more noble then the vegetable, because working in
greater varieties of Vessels, and therefore the more highly by circulation,
sublimed and graduated into animal Spirits, the ultimate product of vital
Ferments, yea in humane bodies is the very vinculum of the rational Soul (that
Heaven born Creature) to the body, being its vehicle: here a large Field is
open, where I could freely let my thoughts and pen run; but shall at present
set up my staft, and content my self (although unwilling) in drawing the
Curtain over the rest, and indeed at length, after many conclusions, make an
End.

FINIS.
This following Paragraph is to be inserted instead of that in page 11. line 29.
HEnce it is, that some of those Sulphuroushot-waters, may with good success,
in order to the Cure of some Diseases, be taken inwardly, others not; Those
that may, are generally such, whose Sulphurs are either from Common Brimstone,
Vitriol, or Antimony, or from Marcasites and Pyrites bordering thereon: of
which sort (among the rest) are those of the Bath in Somersetshire, which take
their original from such kind of Minerals, or Mineral juices, lodged in the
bowels of those great Mountains, at the foot or center whereof those Baths
break forth; which although of late are found to be successful in the Cure of
ome Diseases; yet its very suspicious, they injure other persons, who, without
good advice, drink those waters; so that as to a universally medicinal water,
they come far short of the Sulphur-water at Knarsbrough in Yorkshire. And
indeed these hot-Sulphur-Bath-waters, ought to be drunk with a great deal of
caution, and but by some persons, and that too in extraordinary cases, yea in
no wise to be drunk as a general healing water. Those Sulphurous hot-waters,
which are altogether improper for inward use, are such as are impregnate with
the Sulphurs of Bitumen, Arsneck, Risogalla, etc. or with the Minera's thereof,
or at least with such Marcasites as participate therewith, they are such as we
elsewhere name. Now the acidum which necessarily concurs to those
Fermentations, as an indispensible Sulphur, opens the bodies of those Sulphurs,
and thereby either detains them while in fieri, in succis solutis, or from
concretions reduce them to such; by either way, renders some wholesome and
healing, others noxious for inward use, according to the difference of the
foresaid Sulphurs.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
THere is now published a Second Part of the Catalogue of Chemical Books in
English, to be added to the First Part, formerly Printed with the Philosophical
Epitaph, together with a Third Part of the Chemical Catalogue, or a Collection
of such things published in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society, as belong any way to Chemistry, or the study of Nature by Art in the
Animal, Vegetal and Mineral Kingdoms; which Catalogues, with most of the Books
contained in them, (with many others of that Subject in Latin, a large account
of which Borellus has given in his Bibliotheca Chymica) are to be Sold by
William Cooper at the Pelican in Little-Britain, London.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Sulphur-Bath AT KNARSBROUGH IN YORKSHIRE.

BY WILL. SIMPSON, M. D.

LONDON, Printed for Will. Cooper at the Pelican in Little-Britain, 1675.

A Discourse of the Sulphur-Bath at Knarsbrough, concerning its Causes and
Virtues.
THat I may not be injurious to what I have already writ in my two former
Books, entitled Hydrologia Chymica and Hydrological Essays, concerning the
Sulphur-Well at Knarsbrough, as a mineral water of great use in its virtues
inwardly taken. But now designing an account thereof, as a Bath for outward
use, shall therefore, in order to the better understanding of what I aim at,
here resume so much of my former discourse, concerning the Essential
ingredients, and necessary principles of that Water; together with an addition
of some more recent observations, as may serve to illustrate what I now intend
to be my present task: Our method will be as follows.

1. To lay down the constitutive ingredients or mineral principles of that
Water. 2. To show the process (as near as we can apprehend) Nature uses in the
preparing this excellent water. 3. To show the difference betwixt this and
other natnral Hot-Baths, as in their original and inbred principles; so also in
some sort as to their virtues. 4. To show how, and by what means, the Sulphur
(as the chief mineral ingredient in this water) is so opened, as to become, not
only so subtle, as thence to be solvable odore tenus therein; but also so
volatile, as to pass off in a continual steame, and insensible effluvium. 5.
How this Sulphur-water comes not much short, as to its original principles, nor
is much (if at all) inferior in its efficacy, to some other Sulphur-waters,
which are Hot-Baths; inasmuch as this is lately found to be successful for
outward applications, as well as those by late observation are remarked for
inward use. 6. To show, that the artificial heating of the Sulphur-water, bears
some analogy to the inbred heat of other Baths, as they come hot out of the
Earth. 7. To show, how Art may imitate Nature. (but yet from the same
principles) in the resemblance of most Baths, viz. how to prepare such Baths
artificially, as are natural.
Lastly, To inquire how and after what manner this Sulphur-water performs those
expected helps, as a Bath: where, in short, will be illustrated its various
virtues in order to the help of several Maladies.

First, As to the constituent ingredients or mineral principles of this water?
We say they are comprised in these three, viz. 1. A marine or fossil Salt. 2. A
Sulphurous Apporrhea or steam of Sulphur. Lastly, A little aluminous acidity.
As to the first, viz. Salt, is apparent both from its brackish taste, as also
from what remains upon its distillation or evaporation; of which we find
betwixt one and two drams in a quart thereof: as we further show in our
Hydrologia Chymica, etc.

2. As to the Sulphrous principle, that's manifest, 1. From its Taste and Smell;
as also from its hogo upon the riflings and regurgitations of the Stomach,
after taking thereof. 2. From its coloring of Silver dipped therein; which it
does as readily as the solution or washings of crocus metallorum from the
Sulphur of the Antimony; or as the solution of common Brimstone in the
preparing Lac Sulphuris, both being made from the Acids of alcalizate Salts, as
will appear (although a paradox) more clearly anon.

And lastly, from its coloring of Silver by its very Steams, as we shall show
more afterward.

Now the question may be asked, whence this mineral water has its Sulphur? I
answer, that there are plenty of vitriolin Marcasites well saturate with
Sulphur, out of which I have, by an artifice (taught in my Hydrological Essays)
separated perfect Brimstone, which melted into magdalions or rolls, are not
distinguishable any manner of way from the common: besides which Marcasites
(found not far off this Spring) the very adjacent Earth is full of Brimstone.

Lastly, As to the ingredient of Alom, its discoverable these ways following,
first from the Alom-Bed through which this water at last passes, or at least
touches upon, as is obvious to any eye that will look at it, being close
adjoining to the exit of the water.

2. By its acidity in the water, as is evident from its curdling of Milk: for
the Salt separated from the Sulphur-water, being put into boiling Milk, will
make it shil into Curds and Whey, as if some acidum was poured thereto, which
common Salt will not do; for we tried both, and that in the same proportion,
and found the Sulphur Salt to cause a speedy separation, and that in great
quantity; and the common Salt made a little separation, of a lighter coagulum,
but did not make it shil, or alter the seeming color or consistence of the
Milk: And lastly, if the powder of Coral or Crab's-eyes be put thereto, they
imbibe or mortify the acidity of the Alom, and cause a Milkieness from the
volatile Sulphur.

And as the three aforesaid ingredients are found to be the constitutive
principles of this water, so that neither vitriol nor nitre (however some
imagine the contrary) are contained therein, is evident, first as to vitriol
(which gives the most suspicion from the plenty of its Marcasites, found not
far from the Well) because it will strike no tincture with Galls, as we shall
shortly further evince: And as to Nitre, there is not the least suspicion,
either from what is separable from the water, nor from any mineral glebe
adjacent thereto, that we have yet discovered.

Secondly, As to the process Nature uses in the preparing this excellent
mineral water, or the manner of her mixing the foresaid ingredients, by her
Chemistry in the bowels of the Earth, in order to the making up the forenamed
Sulphur-Bath: In short thus, a water Spring, suppose, passing through or by a
minera of fossil Salt, part of which it dissolves, and afterward in its
current either meeting with some acid juice, whether of vitriol or of other
mineral glebes, becomes impregnate therewith, and obviating, or rather
supervening a Sulphurous Mineral, from the concourse of which two, happens a
Fermentation: or else, this Saline Solution comes upon a minera, whether that
of vitriol, or what other soever it be, in the meanders of the Earth, whose
principles are yet crude, and only embrionative; whereupon it sets those
native and congenit principles awork, into a Fermentation, either way, I say,
it becomes capable of raising that intestine motion, we call Fermentation, and
thence of so subtilizing and volatizing the Sulphur, as to make it solvable in
water, (as we have illustrated more demonstrably above in our Doctrine of
Hot-Baths.) But not staying here, because of the continual afflux and pressure
of water, at length it passes through an Alom-bed, whose acidity precipitates
in great part the body of the dissolved Sulphur; in which very precipitation
happens its fatid smell, and Sulphurous hogo, which only passing through a
slender Colander of Sand, retains its lately contracted odor; where it filters
off from the more gross precipitated body, and so makes its exit.

Which gives great probability of heat in the source of its original mixture,
and that if the Spring did immediately after that Solution and Fermentation
break forth, it would be hot, at least warm, after the manner of other
Hot-Baths; but being carried on in a longer line, in its subterraneal current,
before it breaks forth, loses that heat contracted upon the Fermentation of
the aforesaid mineral juices.

And this is likewise remarkable concerning Alom interested in the fabric of
this water, viz. that I have (as often as I pleased to make the experiment)
taken some of the succulent Alom slate or stone (found close by the Well) which
has had the Salt discernably extraverted, which when I scraped into simple
water, would with Galls forthwith strike a deep Purple: after the manner which
the succulent Alom-stone does, which is got upon the Scarbrough Bank, near that
Spaw [about which our great controversy, concerning that waters being
aluminous, and not vitriolin, did chiefly depend] which experiment I have
several times showed to persons no less ingenious then inquisitive.

I also ordered an infusion to be made of some of the same Alom-stones in above
a Gallon of fresh water, then to be evaporated to about half a Pint, which
filtred, I evaporated further in Balnco M. to try if it would shoot per se, but
it would not, only came to a soft sort of matter or mellago.

3. As to the third thing propounded, viz. the difference betwixt this and
other natural Hot-Baths in their original principles, and primary causes: We
think that from what has already been said, and especially what yet remains to
be discoursed of, in the next, and other succeeding proposals, that the
difference of these from other Sulphurous waters, both as to their origin and
virtues, will sufficiently be declared: And that Sulphur (of one sort or other)
is chiefly concerned in the fabric of all Hot-Baths, and other Sulphurous
waters, completing with other concurring juices, the essence of them both.

4. As to the fourth proposal, viz. how, and by what means, the Sulphur (as the
chief mineral ingredient in this water) is so opened, as to become, not only
so subtle, as thence to be solvable odore tenus, but also so volatile, as to
pass off in a continual steam, and insensible effluvium; For the great query
is, how Sulphur may be so opened, as to make the Sulphur-well, and other
Sulphurous waters of the like nature.

While I was therefore seriously ruminating upon this matter, viz. what it was
that might truly be said to open the body of crude Sulphur, whether it was an
Acid or an Alcali, I began to consider how many ways, and by what means, it was
usually so opened, as to make a solution in any Liquor: First I considered it
was solvable for the most part in all Oils, by the help of Fire: and that I
imagined happened from the analogy of parts, betwixt Oils and Sulphurs; both
of them being chiefly Sulphurs under a disguise, the one in a concrete, the
other in a liquid form; both of them also in their bellies hiding their
intrinsic Acids, the Oily or Sulphurous parts of both by Fire melting
together, in the fluid form of a Balsome, while the acidum, chiefly of the
Sulphur, being thereby in part separated, does concrescere into a saline form,
under the appearance of crystals, as is obvious in the preparing the Balsome of
mineral Sulphur or Brimstone.

And as vinous Spirits are vegetable Sulphurs, comminuted and subtiliz'd by
Fermentation; so these are also succedaneous to Oils, in the solutions of
Brimstone, yet need previous preparations by fixed Alcalies, (as they are
called) for being so spiritualized, are not such apt menstrua for solutions of
crude Minerals, as Oils are, although either of them are powerful enough for
making very strong and furious Fermentations with the aforesaid mineral
Sulphurs, once by their congenial Acids, brought, by help of Fire, into a
fluor, in the form of corrosive menstrua: witness the high ebullitions betwixt
vinous Spirits or Oils, and Spirit of Nitre, Aquafortis, Oil of Vitriol,
etc. some of them so very furious in their Fermentation, as to arise to an
actual flagration (as we elsewhere demonstrate.)

So that crude Sulphurs, unopened by the acuations of the acidum of Fire,
(which also sharpen the implanted Acids of such Minerals) do dissolve quietly
without any tumult, (if done leasurely) and melt together into one Balsamic
Liquor, (though if hastily done with a pretty smart Fire, they make a crackling
noise) whereas the foresaid mineral Sulphurs being subtiliz'd by their own
Acid^ fortified by the acidum of Fire, in their distillation, are brought
thereby into a fluor of both principles, and if then mixed with the foresaid
vegetable Sulphurs, contract a furious Fermentation, from the fresh collisions,
betwixt Acids and Sulphurs, and if close shut up, would break in pieces the
strongest Vessels art could contrive.

And as the foresaid solutions of mineral Sulphurs, are performed by Oils and
vinous Spirits, from analogy of parts; I considered whether other sorts of
solutions of crude Brimstone, or the like Sulphurous Minerals, might not also
be done, by the like analogy, and then I pondered upon the alterations made
upon Brimstone, etc. by fixed alcalies (which how properly called, we show in
our Halologia) and quicklime, and by well weighing the matter, found, that as
Brimstone was dissolvable in Oil and Spirit of Wine, as aforesaid, so fixed
alcalies work upon Sulphurs, no otherwise then as they are acido-sulphurous
Salts.

For I considered that volatile Alcalies, such as are all urinous Spirits, work
not at all upon not cause any alteration in Sulphurs: therefore it must needs
follow, that wherein fixed and volatile alcalies do agree, or in that property,
which is common to them both, I mean, their precipitating faculty, neither of
them is concerned in the solutions of Brimstone, and that is common, both to
fixed and volatile Alcalies, to precipitate, what Acids have dissolved. Now the
reason why urinous Spirits, I mean volatile Alcalies (as they are call d) do
not at all work upon Brimstone, is, because they contain so very slender a
texture of Acids, and no Sulphurs (if highly rectified) and therefore are
incapable by analogy of working upon the aforesaid bodies: how fixed Alcalies
are a new compage of their own native Acids and Sulphurs, together with the
intertexture of urinous Spirits, (from whence proceeds its precipitating
faculty) all bound up by the acidum of the Fire, (which is their vinculum) and
not a simple Salt, we elsewhere in our History of Tartar, declare more at large.

While I was pondering upon this matter at length methought I espied a great
harmony in natures works; I saw that she performed the fa e solutions of
mineral Sulphurs, in some parts of the bowels of the Earth, by her own menstrua
of Acids, prepared by her dextrous Art of Chemistry (the very foundation and
exemplar of all we call Artificial) as she did in other actions, reputed
(amongst most Authors) Heteroclites; and was the same in the latter, as the
former; and from hence I saw, that reputed causticks, I mean fixed lixivial
Alcalies, were no other then Acids, viz. of the Fire, fixed upon bodies: so that
I found nature symbolical in all her actions, and always consonant to her own
principles.

And that I might improve this notion the better, (not taken notice of by any
other Author I know) I began to make a strict scrutiny into the nature of fixed
Alcalies; I considered, First, That the more Fire they endured, and the higher
they were calcined, and the sooner used after calcination, the stronger and
more fiery Causticks they were.

2. That they would never calcine to a strong Salt, unless performed in open
Vessels or Crucibles, where the Fire might more immediately touch upon them,
and concentre its own acidum.

3. That if after they were cold, and kept from the Air, and then Spirit of
Wine or Water was put thereto, thence a heat was presently produced, which as I
conceive, was from no other cause then this, viz. That either of those Liquors,
sets the acidum, contracted from the Fire, and the Sulphur or volatile Alcaly
in the Salt, into a sudden Fermentation, dissolving, and so putting them into
an intestine collision.

4. And fourthly I considered, That the longer these Salts were exposed to the
Air, even to a solution per deliquium, the more mild and soft in operation they
become; loosing thereby gradually their Acids imbibed from the Fire; insomuch
as by often solution per deliquium, the compage of that Salt, from the vinculum
of the fiery Acid, is taken off, as that the whole may thence be reduced into
an insipid Water and Earth (and no Arcauum neither.)

Lastly, That although these fixed lixivial Salts, do make strong Ebullitions
with Acids put to them, yet that happens, either betwixt the additional acid,
and the Sulphur in the Salt, or betwixt it, and the volatile alcaly, bound up
in the artificial concretion: That there are Sulphurs in those Salts, or new
textures of Plants, appears from their lixivial or saponary property: and that
there are also volatile alcalies, is evident from their precipitating faculty,
and from their intestine struggling with acids.

To which may be added this observation, that after fixed alcalies have lost the
acidum contracted from Fire, (which they do by keeping, and sometimes exposing
to the air, together with the addition of somewhat which dints the foresaid
Acidum) may then by Art, be made to split into Oil and urinous Spirit, or
volatile Salt.

As to that great objection against the acidity of fixed lixivial Alcalies, viz.
the precipitation of such solutions made with Alcalies by Acids, inasmuch as it
is generally observed, that what solutions Alcalies make, are most promptly
precipitated by Acids. I answer, First, That although what more simple, I mean,
volatile Alcalies do dissolve, are precipitated very readily by Acids, and vice
versa, yet where Alcalies are more complicated, and interwoven with other
essential parts, there the precipitation by Acids, of what those already have
dissolved, are in no wise wholly ascribable to them as alcalies, but equally
compitible to other parts in the concretion.

And in the next place I answer, that even some acids are capable of
precipitating what others have dissolved; to prove and illustrate which, I
tried this following instance, viz. I took a clear solution of saccharum
Saturni, which I had prepared with distilled Vinegar, which no man will deny to
be an Acid; upon which I poured a pretty smart Spirit of Vitriol, whereupon it
presently became Milkie, and caused a precipitation of a pure white calx of
Saturn, which precipitation may also be done with Spirit of Salt.

The same likewise will Spirit of Salt do, poured upon a solution of refined
Silver, made in double its weight of Aqua fortis, in preparing that admirable
anomolous neutral concretion, called Luna Cornea, mentioned by the honorable
Boil in his origin of forms: and not only Spirit of Salt but also Oil of
Vitriol will cause the like precipitation.

Whence its obvious to any eye, that what some Acids dissolve, others may
precipitate from the congenealness of the solvend, to one solvend more then
another: For both those wherein the solutions of the metals were made, viz.
Spirit of Vinegar and Aquafortis, are as undoubtedly acids, as those which
cause the precipitations, viz. Spirit of Vitriol, and Spirit of Salt.

So that the precipitation of bodies depend not upon acid or alcalizate
Liquors, as such; but upon the consanguinity (if I may so say) of bodies or
solvends, to liquors or solvents, viz. whilst an acid having dissolved one
body, meeting with another akin thereto, lets the former fall, and from an
abstruce affinity of parts, dissolves the latter.

From whence it need not seem heterodox, (although to the most it may, as yet,
a paradox) to say, that fixed Alcalies open the bodies of mineral Sulphurs, as
they are acido-Sulphurous Salts; and that chiefly as they partake of the acidum
of Fire, assumed by calcination: and that precipitations of the same folutions
may be performed (and that too without the least absurdity in Philosophy) by
other supervening Acids, as we have even now demonstrated.

As I observed all fixed Alcalies made out of Vegetables, to work upon Mineral
Sulphurs, on the account of their being Acido-Sulphurous-Salts; so I could not
otherwise (whilst I looked upon the matter with a very intent eye) judge of
calx vive; whose manner of operation, in opening the bodies of Brimstone, and
other Mineral Sulphurs, I could not charge to any other then its Acid, which it
had contracted from the Fire, in the very calcination of that sort of Stone,
called Lapis calcarius, ( viz. Freestone or Limestone) which that it chiefly
partakes of the Acidum of Fire, and thereby performs not only that, but various
other effects, we have already in short demonstrated, and shall further in
Lithologia Physica.

From the premises it will easily appear, in eonfirmation of our former
Doctrine, that all solutions of Mineral Sulphurs in the bowels of the Earth,
are made by their peculiar Acids; and that other solutions made by Art, are but
from the same principles under other disguises; Therefore that which opens the
body of Sulphur in these Mineral Marcasites, through which this water (we treat
of) runs, must of necessity be an Acidum, which afterward is precipitated by
another Acid of the Alom-bed, through which at last it passes.

As to that experiment we gave to illustrate the cause and manner of making
that water, by opening those vitriolin Marcasites with quicklime, in our
Hydrological Essays, although we there imputed it to the alcali; yet now from
second and more mature thoughts, grounded upon experiment, as aforesaid, find
it otherwise; where we profess such an avowed proselyteship to truth
(sufficiently amiable and worthy in it self) as upon nearer apprehensions
thereof, grounded upon better weighed principles, to decline what we have
formerly at greater distance in any matter opiniated, and in this particular,
have thence reason to wave the former, and to ascribe the solution of this
great Phoenomenon to the latter, viz. to the Acid in calx vive, which, in some
measure, bears an analogy with that Acidum, nature uses by her own Chemistry,
in the intrails of the Earth, for the solutions and extractions of Sulphurs.

As to the 5th thing proposed to discourse of in this our method, viz. how this
water comes not much short, as to its original principles, nor is much
inferior in its efficacy, to some other Sulphurous waters, which are
Hot-Baths, which is evident (besides what has already been said) by the sequel
thereof, viz. because the manner of use of both, in respect of what they have
been, are now reciprocal; those of Hot-Baths being formerly chiefly known for
outward, and these for inward use. But now of late are found, the former in
some cases to be successful for inward use; the latter by observation, are now
eminently remarkable for outward application: so that the manner of use of them
per se considered, is inverted, and in a mutual respect, is reciprocal.

As to the virtues of those Hot-Baths (which are lately found remarkable for
inward as well as out ward use) I mean especially those of our own Country, the
Reader may consult Dr. Jorden his dis^ourse of Natural Baths, and of late the
Physicians, who have and yet do attend those waters.

As to the virtues of this Sulphur-water (our present Theme) as to the use
thereof as an inward Medicine, the Reader may consult Dr. French his Book, and
the patient the Physicians there. It remains now to speak of it in relation to
outward use, as a Bath, and this leads me to the next considerable, viz.

6. That artificial heating of the water, bears some analogy to the inbred heat
of those other Baths, as they come hot out of the Earth.

To the illustrating of which we are to consider Sulphur or Brimstone
(according to our former Doctrine, that it may become solvable in water, is
either to be comminuted and volatiz'd by the native or superinduced Acids, and
that by a brisk Fermentation from the mutual collisions of the two principles,
whence the heat of natural Baths, as aforesaid, or else the Sulphur, by
sleighter touches, and slenderer vibrations from congenial Acids, becomes
solvable in a preterlabent water, whose heat therefore (if any) in the source
of Fermentation, is but gentle: yet by that slight solution of Sulphur, it
becomes capable of precipitation by another Acid, (viz. of Alom) as happens in
this water we treat of: That a body of Brimstone is precipitated is evident
from Dr. Neals observation, concerning a crust of Brimstone which he found
under the Stones of the Old-Well at the removing them, through whose crevices
the water sprang: and that the Acidity by which the precipitation is made, is
from the Alom, does as clearly appear from the Aluminous black Stones, found in
the further digging for a better Spring. Now what remains in the water after
the foresaid precipitation, is no other then the apporrhea, or subtle
affluvium of Sulphur, which being dispersed through the whole body of the
water, is always upon the wing, flying off continually.

This effluvium of Sulphur complicated with Salt in the body of the water,
although it be very volatile, (as I said) yet that it may the better permeate
our bodies, in order to the performing those expected helps, its necessary (as
to outward use) that the waters should be heated, by which the volatile parts
are put into a more vigorous motion, and made capable of penetrating our juices
the better: For although in frigido, the Sulphurous parts are by a volatility
continually winding off, yet by heating, its put into a more lively action, and
made more readily Fermentable with the humors of our bodies.

Now that the Sulphur in this water consists of tenuous parts, and very
volatile, is evident (besides what already has been said) by this following
observation, viz. that during the time I Bathed therein, and afterward went to
Bed, having laid my Silver-studded Watch upon the Table, thereby to observe the
time of Bathing and Sweating, I found the steam of the heated water had gilded
it at such a distance; and is so conspicuous, as to change the color, (as I
have observed) of the Brass-Candlesticks which stood in the next room to the
Bath: Yea, although this be very volatile, yet that it does not suddenly take
wing, is hence evident, because after three hours time, that the water had been
heated, when I got up, I dipped a Sixpence therein, which it still gilded very
readily.

7. As to the artificial resemblance of Sulphur Baths by imitation of Nature:
First as to Hot-Baths, that indeed we fall short in, because its the work of
Nature in the great Fermentation of Mineral juices, in order to the production
of Mineral concretes: And seeing Art does of necessity always petere principia
from Nature, and that those principles are seminal, therefore not to be
imitated by Art; But inasmuch as all Fermentation amongst Minerals, (as we have
formerly showed) consists in the inward conflicts of Mineral Acids and
Sulphurs, and that according to the different assaults of the said Acids, upon
varieties of Sulphurs, depend the specification or formal difference of Mineral
Waters; so in particular this Water being chiefly composed of a Sulphur,
wrought upon by an Acid, and afterward precipitated by another; the
resemblance by Art must be from the same sort of principles, grounded upon the
natural: Thus what an Acid, (native or superinduced) performs upon Mineral
Sulphur, in order to the making that Mineral Solution, required for the natural
composure of this Water; The same will the Acidum of calx vive, or of fixed
Alcalies do suo modo to Common Brimstone, or other Mineral Sulphurous
Concretions, as aforesaid.

And lastly, As to the virtues hereof: This Water being gradually heated (as is
said) becomes a Bath, whose Sulphur hereby first penetrates the better into our
Fermental juices, exciting them, if languid through Hydropick Acids, or
spurious, through Scorbutic Acids, in the one by helping (with other
concurring Medicaments) to remove obstructions from coagulated Acids; in the
other, by precipitating, altering and sweetening Scorbutic Acids, the cause of
pains and particular tumors.

2. Hereby it the better reaches to dint that Fermental Acor of the Gout,
impressed upon the Synovia of the Joints, so easily communicable to the
adjacent Nerves; hence is the reason why its found so effectual for the
Scurvey, Gout, etc. viz. because these forenamed Diseases are chiefly
determined and specificated by Acids, coagulated upon different humors and
parts: For its the Essential efficacy (if I may so say) of a subtiliz'd Sulphur
to dint Acids, and thereby to resolve such as are coagulated; so that to me the
discussion of all tumors, whether Scorbutic or others, depend upon the
resolving those coagulated Acids, the intimate and real efficients thereof; No
sooner does a Spurious predominant Acid coagulate any portion of the blood, or
other juice in any part of the body, but presently an obstruction of those
parts happen, more or less, according to the intense or remiss degree of the
prevalent Acid, which as it falls out in Vessels or Bowels reputed more or less
noble, viz. intensely or remissly concerned in the fabric and circulation of
vital juices, and animal Spirits, so it becomes the patron of different sorts
of Diseases; some whereof easily bending to more facile methods of Cure; others
more stubborn (of which are the last mentioned) not yielding but to more
volatile, subtiliz'd, and penetrative Sulphurs, such as are in this and other
Sulphureus Baths.

By which (I mean our Sulphur-Bath) Scorbutic and Podagrick Patients have
received considerable relief: for which cause, many persons, finding thereby so
much alleviation of the otherwise grievous Symptoms, and such a mittigation of
the severity of future fits of the Gout, (I mean as to what they might have
expected, without such a previous help) do voluntarily make their annual
returns to the Bath: of which I could give several instances, but that it does
not suit my present defign.

3. By the use of this Bath, the blood and humors are purified, whence it
becomes proper for Bl^^ches, Scabs, Itches, Elephantiasis, or Bastard Leprosy,
and other Scorbutic impurities of the Blood; For it procures most excellent
Sweats, whereby the other impure Acids, (which are precipitated or cast off
from the Blood in its circulation, and topically fixed upon this or the other
external part) are loosened, dissolved, or mortified; which depraved Acids
lodge in the habit of the body, having their very Roots fixed in the ultimate
digestion, vitiating the Blood and Latex, sent thither for the ordinary
nutriment of the body, in the common circulation thereof; yea, they are
sometimes so fixed upon their own Roots, as to transmute the otherwise
alimentary juice, by their Ferments, into those external impurities: which they
do as really as a Crab-tree-scions, or Bud, ingraffed into a good Apple-stock,
does (from its own seminal Ferment) turn the juice of the Stock, into the
nature and property of a Crab: So that in such external vitiating of the
humors, which are only skin deep, the applications in order to Cure or
Abstorsion, must be such as can mortify, dissolve, alter or correct the
foresaid externally situated Acids, which may be, and is, most aptly performed
by this Sulphur-Bath.

So that in many the like cases, where those Acids are most pertinacious, and
the Maladies thence have taken deepest root, viz. in the Elephantasis, Psora,
Leprosy, etc. the most common and usual Purges and Diaphoreticks, are
altogether insignificant, because they reach not those deeply impressed Acids,
nor correct those spurious Ferments, seated, yea rooted in the habit of the
body; which such subtiliz'd Sulphurs, as are in this Bath skilfully applied
(with other assisting Medicines) are apt chiefly to perform.

Amongst which external impurities, the Lues Venerea (being made by carnal
contract) may not improperly be reckoned; which consists in a peculiar sort (in
its kind) of a contagious Fermental Acid, thence communicable to the juices of
the body, especially where the contagious Ferment, by the first contract,
entered; which by its corroding acor, as a caustic, fretting and inflaming
those tender parts, or coagulating the juices of some particular parts (brought
thither by an afflux of humors) into venereal tumors, whose restless Ferments
yet lodge in their Bellies, or inwards, in both become the Authors of Noctunal
pains, polutions, etc. to the dinting of which spurious Fermental acor, (the
cause of the aforesaid dolours) the just mulct of that Sin must be chiefly
aimed at, in the curing thereof: which besides other Diaphoreticks, may very
well be performed by the help of this Bath: And that too, because Sulphurs,
(especially such as are prepared and volatiz'd by the admirable Chemistry of
Nature in the body or bowels of the Earth) do sweeten and mortisie all such
sort of Acids: For which purpose, in order to the Cure thereof not only
Bathing, (and some other assisting Diaphoreticks) but also the drinking the
same water is requisite.

4. By the use of this Bath, the nervous maladies are also much helped, of
which sort are Cramps, Convulsions, Palsies, Apoplexies, being caused from the
various seisures upon these juices, also from the contorsions and disablements
of the Vessels or Conduit-pipes, (the Nerves) those juices are circulated, or
at least carried in, being the Organs wherein the animal Spirits move in order
to sense, motion, and other vital functions, proper thereto, whose tone are
altered, contorted, contracted, or relaxed by several sorts of supervening
Acids, sent up in flatulent steams, resulting from some spurious subordinate
Fermentation, whose Acids being strong, have prevailed, and by a sort of
sublimation are at length fixed upon those animal Cords, causing obstructions,
contractions, relaxations, etc. (according to the morbid Acids) the causes of
Diseases relating to the genus nervosum.

Now as Acids are the cause why Nerves undergo those various alterations in
their tone or texture, by contractions, relaxations, etc. and in their juices
by coagulations, and thence obstructions, or other debilitudes, whereby the
volatile nimble animal Spirits become interrupted in their motion, being
blocked up by such sort of coagulations: so in order to the Cure of these
Diseases, such Medicaments and Methods are to be inquired into, as may dint,
alter, and dulcifie such kinds of Acids, and thence may loosen the contracted,
smooth and make even the contorted, may strengthen the relaxed Cords, yea and
may every way answer the indications of the depraved tones of those animal
pendula's or vital strings, whereby the imprisoned Spirits, (the immediate
product of vital Fermentation may again be set at liberty, and all the animal
functions be restored to their pristine state: of which sort are our
Sulphur-Bath, which by correcting the Acids, supple and soften the contracted,
strengthen and bind up the weak, and very much repair, in the maine, the
depraved tone of the genus Nervosum.

Lastly, By the use of this Bath, the contraction of the tendons, and musculous
parts, I mean stiffness of the Limbs, Joints, etc. (where the contraction is
not too fixed) are often remedied: For these outward maladies being caused
through some rejected Acids, which wanting a due Fermentative motion to give
them wing by perspiration, are coagulated or hardened (partly by the assistance
of the Air) in the external parts; but by the Sulphur in the Bath, the pores
being opened, and they dissolved, and put into motion, are either sweetened or
carried off.

Also its proper for alleviating Aches, Old pains, Strains, Sciatica's, (which
is a sort of Gout in those parts) Rheumatisms, and other griefs now too tedious
to relate: concerning most of which we might have given some particular
instances, but that it does not suit with our present design, undertaking
chiefly a rational account of its causes, and in general of its virtues: As to
the particular cases themselves, which may confirm what we have already
deposited as to the medicinal efficacy thereof, we shall refer to another
opportunity.

The END.

