Hydrologia Chymica: OR, THE CHEMICAL ANATOMY OF THE SCARBROVGH, And other
SPAWS in YORKSHIRE.

Wherein are Interspersed, Some ANIMADVERSIONS upon Dr. WITTIE'S lately
Published Treatise of the SCARBROUGH-SPAW.

Also, a short Description of the SPAWS at Malton and Knarsbrough.

And a Discourse concerning the Original of Hot-Springs and other Fountains:
With the Causes and Cures of most of the stubbornest DISEASES (either Chronical
or Acute) incident to the Body of Man.

Also, a Vindication of CHYMICAL-PHYSICK; where a probable way is propounded
for the Improvement of Experimental Philosophy: With a Digression concerning an
Universal Character. Likewise a short Account of the Principles of all
Concretes, whether Vegetable, Animal or Mineral.

Lastly, is subjoyned an Appendix of the ORIGINAL of SPRINGS; with the Author's
Ternary of Medicines: And the Epilogue to the whole, of the Essence of the
SCARBROUGH-SPAW.

By W. Simpson, Philo-Chymico-Medicus.

Ex Aqua Omnia.

London, Printed by W. G. for Richard Chiswel at the Two Angels and Crown in
Little-Britain. 1669.

To the READER.
Candid, Friendly Reader,
HAving made to my self, some experimental essays of the Mineral Ingredients
of the Spaw^ of York shire, amongst which that of Scarborough I found to be
most eminent, being better Saturated, and more impregnated with Mineral Salts,
than the rest; and meeting with Dr. Wittie's Book, being a description,
chiefly of that Spaw, did not a little wonder to see a draught of such Mineral
ingredients, most of which I had not observed to be therein. I say, not being
satisfied here with, it put me upon bringing his constituent Principles of the
Spaw, to the Test; and to make a further scrutiny into the natural ingredients
of that Spring, that upon more thoroughly made experiments, I might the better
be convinced, whether I was in an error or no; or whether indeed, those five
Mineral Ingredients, that Dr. Witty had ascribed to that Spaw, were the
Essential Principles thereof: To which purpose I made some Animadversions upon
his deposited Principles.

The first sheets whereof, I showed to some ingenuous acquaintance of mine,
(who longed to see some Experimental Trial of the Minerals of this Spring) with
which they seemed to be taken, and gave me encouragements to go on, and to
complete (if I could) what I had begun. Those few first sheets I let lie
dormant by me all the Winter; in the Spring I revived them, and set down some
Experiments I had made the last Summer; also I made some fresh Experiments of
the Mineral Earth, found upon the Bank near the Spaw, etc. and after I had
finished the discourse of the Mineral Ingredients thereof, I saw a necessity of
treating of Diseases; (viz.) which were curable by the Spaw, which not: and
what observations I have made therein, whether they be consonant or not to
truth, and the late discoveries made, by the Experimental Practice of Physic,
is left to thee (Judicious Reader) to determine. I confess, I have not been so
large in my discourse of Diseases as I might have been, or as a matter of that
nature did require, not intending to swell this piece into a large volume; nor
indeed was I willing (at present) to put down all my Observations thereon,
reserving many of them to another seasonable opportunity, as occasion shall
offer and these find acceptance. I have, I confess, in this Treatise made some
large digressions, and have not wound my self back again by so uniform a clew,
as I could have wished: And indeed upon a review I epsy some discernable
flaws, and chinks in the junctures thereof; which are now too late to amend,
nor could it be performed, unless it were by taking some parts thereof in
pieces, and cementing them afresh, which now cannot be done: yet they are such
as a running eye will not easily discover. As to that digression, of the
improvement of Philosophy by a Universal Character, it was (I confess) done
before I had seen any thing of Dr. Wilkins's Book to the same purpose; who
certainly has designed such a clear Methodical draught thereof, as that
without doubt, he has outdone all that ever we heard of, that went before him:
Which if it take, and get footing in the world, will (without a peradventure)
prove the most facil direct road, to the improvement of the natural parts of
man, in the true outward Scientifical knowledge of things, by this Universal
Character. For by this invention, Children (and others) will be trained up, not
in the knowledge of letters, or words alone; but in the true Characteristical
knowledge of things themselves, according to their most External
distinguishable. Signatures: which if it take, will save posterity a great deal
of time, which we have with little fruit spent at the Schools.

As to the Appendix concerning the Original of Springs, when I sent my papers
to the press, I had then no thoughts to have discoursed thereof at this
impression; but finding that I had an opportunity given by the necessary
delays of the Press (taking more time to do it in, than I at first expected) I
set upon it: but coming too late to be inserted in its right place, viz.
immediately before the discourse of Hot-Springs, the Press being gone beyond
that part, was fore'd to bring it in as an Appendix

To which are annexed other little additions, which before were omitted, and
therefore refer to the Page, and line of the book, where they should follow. As
to our Ternary of Medicines, which answer the general Indications in Physic,
for the cure of most Diseases; as also our Epilogue, of the Essence of
Scarborough Spaw, I shall refer what I have said therein, to matter of
Experiment it self. If any reflections have happened, they are more then I wish
had been, but I hope, they will not be found immodest; for he that writes
concerns of this nature, had need lay a good foundation of Experiments, so that
being thereby backed (as I may say) or strengthened, he need not much fear the
Counterassaults of others. And in as much as it is truth evinced by matter of
Experiment, that I contend for, therein I find satisfaction, in what I have
done; and truly I have meted no other measure than I would expect in case any
Writings of mine should be found as equally naked and fenceless, and
consequently as exposable to future Criticisms: For any other has the liberty
of disproving what I have wrote, and that by good reason too, so he do it
fairly, by more demonstrable matter of Experiment. The same liberty has Dr.
Witty, if he please but to grant himself it, in vindication of what he has
Wrote; yea, and in defense of his Methodical Art too. As to this Chemical
Practice of Physic, of whose vindication I have succinctly wrote, many
Physicians now at this time (and more and more daily) do make it their way of
administrating help to the Sick; so that (doubtless) in a little time, it will
gain much ground, upon the World, and will at length naturally worm out the
Galenical Method. For an active plodding Genius is now at work, which is
bringing all former received opinions to the Test, and examines them by matter
of Fact, in Experiments; and what is found consonant to Truth, made forth by
collateral Observations, is approved, the rest (as frivolous and uncertain) is
rejected. And as to what I have propounded, in order to the raising a Structure
of Natural Philosophy, by the Collection of Experiments of all sorts, etc.
though it may seem to be but an Vtopian Product, better discoursed of then
performed; yet may it probably, and not unaptly, be looked upon as a direct,
even Road, toward a real Science of Experimental Physiology: to the promoting
and perfecting of which, the Pyrotechnical Art is of no small use, by
Anatomizing and taking in pieces the Bodies of Concretes; thereby not only
viewing their primitive constituent Principles, but also the great variety of
new Products, resulting therefrom, by the mediation of Fire and Ferments: so
that no small insight is got hereby, into the hidden Secrets of Nature, which
is seen to display her self wonderfully, in the great variety of Productions in
the Mundane System, amongst which, the Medicinal Concretes, whether Vegetable,
Animal or Mineral, are not of the least concern. All which (by this noble Art
of Chemistry) are laid open to view, their Insides turned outward, their
Feculencies separated, their Heterogeneities composed or removed, their
Virulencies corrected, their Crudities maturated, and their Medicinal Virtues
exalted and enobled; either into specifical Medicines; or into such as
generally absterse the Primary Digestions and Sanguineous Vessels; or lastly,
into Chatholick Medicines (such I mean) whose virtues are of a larger extent,
reaching not only to the abstersion of the Vessels, and removing the
Heterogeneities, which set the Blood and other Juyces of the Body (in their
several parts) into a spurious Fermentation: but also does illuminate (if I may
so say) the Aura vitalis, with a balsamic Ray, which puts a new Spring into
the Digestive Powers, which have been enfeebled by the strong assaults of a
powerful Disease: For the Ferments I look upon as the Springy Powers, that
contribute to the Fabric of the Sanguineous and Nervous Juyces, with the
Inhabitants thereof, the Vital and Animal Spirits. As to Chemical Authors,
there are not many that I much value; Those who give Recipes Verbatim, with
large Encomiums thereon, are most to be suspected, Such are Amynsicht,
Crollius, Beguinus, Lybavius, etc. Some of which admire Petit Preparations like
Panacea's, and give of them such large Descriptions, as if they were Arcana's
in earnest; Others take Processes out of Paracelsus, who leaving (perhaps) the
Menstruum undiscovered, wherewith the Preparation should be made, make their
own conjectural additions of Menstruums, never thought on by the first Author
of the Invention; the most Candid and Experienced of whom is Hartman, Rhenanus
and Quercetane: But of all that write Chemical Recipes, the very best and most
solid Writer, that I meet with, is (in my judgment) the ingenuous ZVELFER;
witness his ANIMADVERSIONS upon the Augustane DISPENSATORY, and his MANTISSA
HERMETICA, and his APPENDIX; though indeed they do not altogether so much
respect a through enumeration of most Chemical Experiments, as a rational and
judicious Correction of the Pharmacopaean Preparations. Not much inferior to
him is the ingenuous Le Febure in his Compendious Body of Chemistry, who has
wrought pretty much; yet has therein put down more than he has wrought. The
best of them, for a general Collection of Recipes, out of the farraginous mass
of Writers, is Schroder: But in order to the more noble Chemical Arcana,
Essences, Maturated Magisteries, and complete Medicinal Elixirs, none that I
meet with out strips Paracelsus and the profound Helmont. As for Paracelsus, he
was, no doubt, Master of great Chemical Secrets, witness the Liquor Alkahest,
or Circulatum Majus, his Mercurius fixus Diaphoreticus, otherwise called Aurum
Horizontale; also the Arcanum Corallium, Tinctura Lilii, Mercurius Vitae, and
the fixed tinging Oils of Metals. The last of which (I find) he has much
borrowed out of Isaac Holland, and probably had the knowledge of the rest, from
some Arabian Philosophers themselves, or their Books; for amongst them was the
Liquor Alkahest most known: which was the Medium by which, most of his Mineral
and Metalline Arcana's were performed; as his Preparation of the Ludus, his
Tinctura Lilii, his Sulphur Veneris, etc. yea, and of Vegetables too, witness
his Preparation of the true Elixir Proprietatis, which was (as Helmont says)
made by the help of the Alkahest; and so Prepared, did cure the Asthma,
Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Palsy, Atrophy, Tabes, etc. And as for Helmont, he goes
so far out of the road of vulgar Chemists, as that he scarce gives any Recipes;
what he gives is Sparsim, and wrapped up occasionally amongst his Writings,
without any formal Processes; his best Arcana's are but darkly set down, his
choice Preparations are only cursorily inserted, and the very Basis of his
Grand Solvent, but barely hinted: so that a Physician (if he expect any help by
him) ought to read him often, and to compare his Writings, and thereby he will
find no small Light to guide him in his Chemical Researches. And though Helmont
be accused, for defacing the Galenical Structure of Physic; and not setting up
a better in its place, by giving (as it were) a Chemical Dispensatory: yet he
is not much to be blamed herein, if we consider, first, That he not only pulls
down the Galenical Theory, but rears up a better, whereby Diseases may the
better be known, from their Essential Causes, and by their natural Symptoms and
Products; but also gives considerable hints of more noble Preparations, whereby
Diseases may probably be Cured, much more effectually than by the common
Methodical Practice of Physic; for it would have been accounted no less then
Imprudence in him, to have communicated to the World, the process of (suppose)
the Alkahest, in a few lines plainly, and that in a quarter of an hour, which
had cost him the Pains and Study of most part of Thirty Years: This would have
made ingenuous Persons idle, by putting that into their hands of a sudden,
which should have been the result of many Years Trials. But he (like a
Philosopher) acts more wisely, obscures his expressions, and vails his hints
to such noble Arcana's, thereby inciting Ingenuity putting an edge and vigor
on the, otherwise satiated, and therefore dull desire, to further seize.
Besides, such forestalling of Ingenuity, would prevent the Invention of other
intermediate Menstruums and curious Preparations, that might be, and are
occasionally found out, by search, and unwearied Trials. Therefore our profound
Author is not at all to be disliked, that he has not reduced his Medicinal
Arcana's into a Methodical Dispensatory. It Is enough that he has given us such
fair hints, which may be sufficient spurs to our Ingenuity, to set us to work;
that when we find out any thing of real worth, by our own industry, we shall be
able to put a value thereon.

But to conclude, No flattering Encomiasticks shall usher in this work, nor
pedantick Rapsodists attend these lines; nor need we Casta Napaearum, to adorn
our Water-Nymphs; nor let the Reader expect our contemplation upon our
Waterworks; nor yet any Chronogram or Anagram to sound abroad our fame; nor
shall we court great Patronages to cast a favorable aspect upon it: Praevalet
ipsa veritas, imo in aeternum praevalebit. For if the substance of the
Discourse, and what the Piece it self offers, give not matter of entertanimet
for the Reader, whose Genius bends that way, without such previous antic
Stage Plays: Or if it sound not Harmoniously in the Readers Ear, without such
prattling Schoolboy- Preludes, let it be thrown by, and for ever buried in
Oblivion.

If I have writ any thing in this following Tractate (Judicious Reader) worth
thy while, it is well: If thou have but as much pleasure in reading, as I had
in writing, it is enough: If it find any encouragement abroad, it may probably
brood again. Peruse and censure not, till thou have run it through; and then do
as thou see cause.

Farewell, Thine W. S.

HYDROLOGIA-CHYMICA: OR The ANATOMY OF SCARBROVGH SPAW. BEING Some
Animadversions upon Dr. WITTIE's Discourse of SCARBROVGH SPAW.
Pars Prima.
SECT. 1.
HAving lately seen a Tractate, Entitled, Scarbrough Spaw, or the Description
of the Natures and Virtues of the Scarbrough Spaw, Written by Dr. Witty, being
the second Edition by the same Author; who therein undertakes to Discourse of
the Nature of that, and other Mineral Waters; to omit all prolixity, we will
examine his deposited Principles of that Mineral Spring.

2. He tells us of five Ingredients of which this water partakes, and has its
Virtues from, which are the Constitutive principles of this Spring as he
supposes, and those are, Vitriol, Iron, Allom, Nitre, and Salt; with these he
currently passes along through his book, where he has occasion to elucidate
the Virtues of the Well, and make all the five Volens nolens, contribute to
this Spring.

3. First, as for Vitriol, the Doctor might have distinguished whether he
understood it to be Vitridelum martis, or veneris, viz. the Vitrio^ of Iron or
of Copper; for if it be of Iron, then is one of the principles, viz. Iron
Superfluous, because the Iron would be the Metalline part of the Vitriol, in as
much as every Vitriol is made of an Essurine Salt, dissolved in the
Subterraneal veins of a Spring, which passing along the Minera of a Metal, does
lambere venam, licks upon that Vein of Metal, whether Iron or Copper, which it
partly dissolves into it self, and carries it (as I may say, in its belly to
the visible appearance of a Spring; which evaporated, gives a Vitriol, either
of Iron or Copper, according as the Metal was that it passed through.

4. But if the Vitriol in Scarbrough Spaw be of Copper, then would the
operation of the water be most what Emetick, or Vomitive, because the body of
Copper being dissolved by an Essurine liquor (save that of the primum ens
Salium, or liquor Alkahest of Paracelsus and Helmont) becomes desperately
Emetick, and can but with very great difficulty, by the Chemical Art, be
separated from that Essurine Salt, which has coagulated it self thereon.

5. Again, If it was such a Vitriol, the other ingredient of Iron, would by
their mutual embraces be tinged, and almost transmuted into Copper, which I
have found by a strong decoction of Iron in Vitriolin Water; but to omit that,
Let us suppose that there were a Vitriol of Venus dissolved in this Spring, and
in so small a proportion, as being mixed in a great quantity of water, viz. of
3 or 4 Quarts, which is the quantity Patients frequently drink, as not to work
frequently by Vomit, but most what by Stool; and that the Purgatives property
was from the mixture of this Vitriol and other Ingredients, named by the Doctor.

6. This being granted in favor of his Ingredients or Mineral Principles; then
let us see what will be the sequel, viz. whether or no, we may not lay by as
useless, one of his Principles I am now discoursing of, viz. Iron, as an
impertinent and insignificant Ingredient, I mean, as to the body of it.

7. For if the Essurine salt dissolved in the Water-Spring, meet with a Vein of
Copper in the bowels of the Earth (which Essurine Salt is always required for
the making a Vitriol, of what sort soever) fretting thereon dissolves it, and
at the same time that acidity is coagulated upon the metalline dissolved parts
[solutio and coagulatio fiunt unico instanti; una edeamque res solvit ac a
solventi coagulatur] and so both together become dissolved in the solitary
Spring Water, in an almost indissolvable nexure; then, and not till then, is
the action of that Essurine acidity terminated, so as it can act no more; and
though it should, in the secret meanders of the Earth in its incircling
perambulation, meet with a Vein of Iron, yet could it take nothing thence,
because it had already lost its sting, I mean, its fretting Salt had satiated
it self in coro metallico, in the embraces of an already espoused Metal.

8. Mars cannot be dissolved and appear in the form of a liquor, without a
dissolvent; but this dissolvent, viz. the Essurine acidity, being already
satiated and turned into a Vitriol, to make up one of Dr. Witties precanious
Principles, is not at leisure to make another of them, unless we grant such an
indulgence to Nature, which she never was yet so kind to her self as to take, I
mean to dissolve Mineral or Metalline Body, without an agent proper for that
purpose.

9. So that indeed we find a flaw in the main Timber of his Building; an
inconsistency of two of his chief Principles of this Mineral Water, Vitriol and
Iron; that which makes the one, disannuls the other; so that certainly they are
not of the Fraternity of this Spaw, however we come to find them thus thrust in
by head and shoulders.

SECT. 2.
1. THe Doctor undertakes to discourse of Vitriol, and first he gives us an
account of the several sorts, not such as he had seen, but such as he says (
Sect. 12.) late Writers name, viz. three sorts viz. Roman Vitriol or Copperas;
which two I do not understand to be Synonima's, for Romas Vitriol is
factitious, and adulterated with other mixtures, to make it shoot into curious
figures, and to heighten the color for pleasing the Eye, having, great
quantity of the sluggish body of Copper is it, which is the main Ingredient,
but very languid as to Spirits, wherewith natural Vitriol is more replete, as
by distillation of both we have found; and Helmont (mentioning a distillation
of it) says, dedit parum spiritus ignavi acidi: cessavity mox infra pauca hor
as omnis spiritus, etc. as for Copperas, it is a name most proper to most sorts
of natural Vitriols, cupirosum i. e. cuprum erosum: The second sort is Cipryan
Vitriol, partaking of the nature of Brass, Copper I suppose he means; for Brass
is an artificial Metal from Copper, by the addition of lapis calaminaris. The
third sort, he says, is found in Liguria somewhat black, by which Iron may be
turned into Brass or Copper called Colcotar; where by the way take notice, that
the Mineral Salt, being separated from the Vitriol either of Mars or Venus, the
remaining crocus or calx of both may be and is called by the name of Colcotar,
the one being a red color, viz. that of the Vitriol of Iron, the other a
yellow color like Occar, viz. that of the Vitriol of Venus, when both their
Mineral Salts are separated by an artificial menstruum known to us, and that
without any force or violence of fire; both of which sorts I have by me.

2. To me all natural Vitriols seem to be reducible indeed to three, viz. to
that of Iron, Copper, and Vitriolum album; that of Copper admits of great
variety according to the degrees of plenty and purity of the Essurine Salt,
which is (Sulphuris embrionati partus innaturus) an unripe birth of a Sulphur
in fieri; being far removed (as Helmont says) from a Metallic nature, and
nearer to the primum ens, which indeed gives the medicinal virtue to Vitriols;
I say, according as Mineral Vitriols or Metallic Solutions, are enriched more
or less with this Essurine Salt, propria sponte illi innatum, so are they
reckoned to be better or worse, as to Medicinal use. The best of which are
accounted the Cyprian, Hungarian, or Goslarick, or Dane Vitriol, being pretty
well saturate, with plenty of this Essurine acidity.

4. Natural Vitriols I said, because many artificial sorts may be made; among
which Roman Vitriol, and viride eris may be numbered; which last being
cristaliz'd by Solution, Filtration and Evaporation, may be brought to fine
Cristals by the addition of Allom, etc. which may much resemble the Roman
Vitriol.

SECT. 3.
FIrst, He is pleased to reckon up four ways, whereby Water may imbibe the
nature and virtue of a Mineral or Metal.

1. By receiving its Vapor; his instance is, Water standing somewhile in a
brass or iron Kettle; will taste of the brass or iron: to which I say, viz.
That no metallic body, as such, does or can give a Vapor to a simple
elementary Water, as long as the Water is homogeneal in its parts. Minerals
indeed, being Metals in solutis principiis, may, whilst such, give an dour (for
so I had rather, and think more properly call it, than a Vapor) to Elementary
Water; as for instance, Antimony and its Preparations, viz. either the crocus
metallorum or reguline part, can give an emitick property to Water or Wine.

So natural Vitriols, which are but their Metals in fieri, or in primo ente
reserato, can communicate the like emetick odor (though indeed there is some
small Solution) in Water.

2. But take the complete perfect Metals of these Minerals, and we shall find
them such compact bodies, as they have no Vapors, nay scarce any odor, to any
simple Elementary Water; for instance, take Lead, which is the Metal of its
Mineral Antimony, being the complete Metalline Body of that Mineral, boil Water
ad aevum in it, so as it be simple Water, and has not undergone the least
degree of putrefaction (for then begins an analytical resolution, set a work
from a spurious acidity) and you shall find the Water to have contracted no
saturnine impression at all; but if the least acioity either from the Air, or
admixture of any acid liquor whatever, impregnate this Water, it shall make a
Solution of the Metal, and turn it self sweet, more or less; according to the
degree of the sharpness of that acidity, till at last it come to a Saccharum
Saturm, or Sugar of Lead.

After the same manner, the perfect Metals (perfect I mean in specie) of Iron
or Copper, being by frequent fusions brought to their highest degree of
Metallin compaction, do no longer give any solution of parts, odor, or vapor
to simple Water, as they did whilst in principiis solutis, viz. in their
Minerals or Vitriols; the which, daily experience evinceth. Do we not
frequently boil our Water for Broth, and most of our potable Liquors, in Iron,
Copper or Brass Vessels, and that without the least taste of any of the Metals?
which Metalline Vessels as such, may, though made of Silver or Gold, give no
more virtue, sapour or vapor, than the Metals of Glass would do to the same
Liquors boiled therein; if any taste happens, it is from some adust soods burnt
to the bottom, or sides of the Vessel, or the like sluttish uncleanness.

3. In vain therefore are all our decoctions of Silver or Gold in Water, Milk,
or Broth; the Cordial help thence expected as frivolous; for all compact
Metalline bodies, must have proper and peculiar Menstruums to unlock them, if
any medicinal Arcanum be thence expected.

4. The Doctor tells us, That by this way of vapor, the Sc rbrough Spaw
partakes of Vitriol, and of Iron: That Vitriol may dissolve in simple Water, we
have before granted; but that it should give a vapor to the Water, I
understand not. To make a Body resolve it self into vapors, or minute parts of
the like nature with the whole, is required, as I apprehend, either an
intrinsic or extrinsick heat, or fire; which or these two, the Vitriol of Spaw
water has, the Doctor would have done well to have assigned: If he intend an
intrinsic, Ubi iste focus, ille vulcanus ubi; what Rule acts it by, that it
should so constantly and strongly resolve the Vitriol into minute vaporous
parts, which according to the nature of a vapor, should take wings, and
quickly fly from this Fountain, and yet the Carcass of Vitriol to remain, for
he says nothing to the contrary, but that it is actually and substantially
Vitriol still; if so, then the vapor is Vitriol, and the Vitriol a mere
vapor; for the way and means by which he makes the Water partake of Vitriol,
is by its vapor; and yet this vapor is Vitriol, being one of his assigned
principles: What to make of this, or how to make it hang together, really I
cannot tell.

5. If he understand an extrinsick heat, it must surely be from the Sun, which
it must either resolve the Vitriol into a vapor, where the spring appears
sub^dio; or if its heat penetrate the Superficies of the Earth, he must assign
how deep its Rays pierces; and that the Vitriol must of necessity be wrought
upon at such a depth within ground, which he may do well for satisfaction, and
strengthening his principles, (lest they run to ruin) assign its place, and
manner of conversion into vapor, otherwise one of his props will of necessity
fall under him.

6. As Vitriol (how true judge) so Iron, he says, gives it self by a vapor to
the Water; which that it does not as a compact body, of that Metal we have
already sufficiently asserted, inasmuch as Iron being a solid body, is not at
all apt to vapor; and if it should, whether or no that were yet Iron, which
according to his Thesis must of necessity be, because a constitutive principle;
so that consequently Iron, before it become an Ingredient of the Spaw must be
resolved into a vapor; but by what Agent, I wish the Doctor would signify:
And when it is a vapor, how comes it to reassume a body, which it must do to
make it a real principle? and what is it that bears up the body of the Iron in
the Water, that it falls not like other Iron, or a Calx to the bottom? What
makes the difference betwixt it and a Crocus, which, if put into Spring water,
sinks to the bottom like Sand, and gains no solution? These things he ought to
have been clear in, before he imposed that upon the World, as an Ingredient of
this Mineral Water.

7. But to make up the matter, he tells us, That not only by Vapor, those two
bodies, Vitriol and Iron become principles; but also something of the concrete
juyces, and substance of them both, are given to the Water. Here the Doctor
would almost make us believe, That he was inclinable to Philosophise; for he is
got as far as the concrete juyces, viz. the Metals in principiis solutis, or in
fieri; which indeed whilst such are communicable to any current vein of Water,
which glide along the Surface, or pervades the more soft body of the Mineral;
at leastwise to a current of Water that has but got the least actuation from
an Essurine Salt; but that he spoils all again, by bringing in Vitriol and Iron
as two distinct things, which, as we showed before, are but one in any
subterraneal Mineral solution.

8. Had the Doctor spoken of the Minera of Iron, and so to have been in its
concrete juice, and omitted that of Vitriol or had he spoke of Vitriol as the
Minera of Iron, and so have understood of its concrete juice, rejecting the
body of Iron as impertinent, we should then have thought he had Philosophis'd
in good earnest, as having thence some permanent principles, from whence he
might have raised a noble Structure of Theory.

9. From the vapors of Vitriol (he says) the Waters has its inky smell, and
acid taste; and here, methinks, his vapors flies at random, it is a thousand to
one but they may in a little time quit their paces from this Well, and leave it
to be possessed by some other more natural Native: I cannot pass the Notion
without a smile: But to be serious; First, What is it that gives an inky smell,
or rather makes-Ink? Is it not a solution of Vitriol precipitated, or made
opacous by the addition of Galls, whose stipticity makes the diaphaneous
texture of the Particles in the vitrioline solution desert their former
posture, and muster in a confused opacous manner, filling those interstices
with solid Particles, which before were kept transparent by the fluid parts of
Water equally contempered, and not a vapor from the Vitriol, lince there wants
an heat in either Agent which might procure a vapor.

10. From the concrete juyces of Vitriol, Iron and Allom (says the Doctor) I
think it has its azure sky color, by which it seems, as if precarious
Philosophy were in fashion with the Doctor; for in many places of his Book, you
will find his Assertions and Solutions of Phenomena's (if I may so call them)
to be merely precarious [I think] and all for want of a good apparatus of
Chemical, or other sorts of Experiments; the want of which does ever and anon
make him, inter multa vacillare, as not having Ariadnes clew of Experiments to
guide and extricate himself from Labyrinths, he is ever and anon falling foul
upon those two Rocks of Vitriol and Iron; and I wish he suffer not Shipwreck
upon them, and in the conclusion lose them too.

11. That it wants not the substance of Iron, is (he says) apparent, in that
after it has been boiled, and put into Oken Vessels for some while, there
appears a reddish Sand inclining to yellow, which he says is nothing else, but
Matter ferri, or Rubric.

12. If so, then what becomes of his other grand principle Vitriol? for every
Vitriol has a Colcotur, or Terra Metallica in it, which may be made either
yellow, red, or purple, according to the several ways of separating its connate
vitrioline Salt, as I have before hinted, how will he distinguish between the
Colcotar of his assigned Vitriol, and this Matter ferri, being according to his
Assertion both distinct Ingredients? surely all the Art he has, can scarce
hinder, but they will coincide, and forfeit their marks of distinction; and so
we may further Query, how came the Doctor to know that both Vitriol and Iron
were Ingredients, seeing the badges of distinction clash? but surely he took
them in, pitying to separate Kinsmen.

SECT. 4.
1. THe second way whereby water may imbibe the nature and virtue of a Mineral
or Metal, is (he said) when some of their juice is dissolved in the Water, and
that is while the Minerals are but young, in fieri, or in solutis principiis.
Here indeed the Doctor has spoke like a Philosopher, and has hit the nail
exactly on the head; for this is the most probable way of all for Minerals or
Metals, whilst in succo primitivo, in ente primo solubili, to communicate
themselves and virtues to current streams of subterraneal Channels of Water,
they are only then fit to propagate themselves for Medicinal help in Springs,
that thence become and are truly called Mineral Waters.

2. Nay, if the Metals themselves should be forced to open their treasures for
Medical Arcana's for the health of Man (with which they are doubtless nobly
enriched) it must be by a reduction of them, by some powerful Menstruums into
their prima entia, into their first liquid principles and juyces, whereby they
would notably penetrate our very constitutions, and therewith, quadam Symphonia
colludere, abstergendo penetrando ac illum inando Archeum vitalem ex morbis tum
acutis tum cronicis solvendo. But not nobis liceat esse tam dissert os.

3. The third way, he says, is by corrosion of the substances of the Minerals
mentioned by Gallen, and this is performed by the help of the concrete juyces,
which corrode and extract Mineral Substances; here we find a Galenical way of
solution of Minerals in Waters, and so indeed it seems; for as its out of their
road to discourse of these Mineral solutions, so their notions must be confused
because not grounded on true chemical experiments, which they are not at
leisure to take notice of.

4. For you see the Doctor says, that these concrete juyces, corrode and
extract Mineral Substances, which tacitly involves no less than a
contradiction; in as much as these concrete juyces are Minerals in fieri, or as
he says in principiis solutis, and yet he would have those Minerals to corrode
and extract Minerals, the same body extract the same body. In every extraction
is required a Menstruum or Solvent, and a body to be dissolved; but here,
according to his Theory, the Solvent and Solvable are both one, the Agent and
the Patient the same; which how he could solve from clashing, gladly would I
learn.

5. But he goes on further to illustrate this his implicit contradiction,
telling us, that this very way of extraction, is done by such as have imbibed
Vitriol at the first; for they do thereby (says he) become hungry and
corrosive, and so the fitter to take into them any other Mineral that lies in
their way: thus he thinks he carrys it away clearly; but stay, you may remember
we told you ( Sect. 1. No. 7.) that an Essurine Salt dissolved in a Water
Spring, meeting with the Minera of any Metal that it can work upon, turns it
into a Vitriol, and that either pertaking of Iron or Copper, according to the
nature of the Minera it meets with, which done, its dissolving property is
terminated, and can ask no more; therefore the Water having, according to the
Doctors supposition, imbibed Vitriol, is not at leisure to make any further
corrosions, or extractions, and so the Water would prove barren, as to any
other Minerals.

6. To confirm all, as he thinks, he seconds his Theory with an Example, which
deserves an exemplar remark upon it; it is thus, An Example whereof, says he,
we see in Aqua fortis, which will corrode the substance of another Metal, and
convert it into its own nature; and there methinks the Doctor was no great
Chemist, if he had, he would surely have blushed to have owned that Aqua fortis
having corroded a Metal, should convert the Metal into its own nature.

7. For dissolve either Copper or Iron, Silver or Gold, or any other Metal in
an Aqua fortis, and you shall have all the Metal again (idem numero and
pondere) either by precipitation with a Lixivium or Oil of Tartar per
deliquium, or by evaporating the corrosive Menstruum, then edultorating, and
firing strongly in a crusible until it flux, and you shall have it returned you
the same Metal as at first.

8. So that the Metal corroded by the Aqua fortis was not (according to the
Doctors fallacious assertion) converted into the nature of the Aqua fortis,
having its parts only forcibly severed by the freting corrosive, reunitable,
after the separation of the Menstruum.

9. But it seems the Doctor is willing to take principles upon trust, and
therefore his conclusions and examples (which should indeed be the most
demonstrative) prove invalid and unsatisfactory, to a judicious eye that takes
no notice of vulgar principles further than consonant to truth.

10. He supposes (as far as I can gather from his manner of writing) that
because when a Metal is dissolved in an Aqua fortis, it seems to the eye to be
all liquid, and as it were turned into the form of the very Menstruum, that
therefore it is converted into the nature of the Aqua fortis; which it is true a
vulgar judgment, instructed no otherwise than by natural Optics, would
apprehend as the Doctor does, that it, viz. the Metal, is converted into the
nature of the Aqua fortis; but let the same eye proceed, and view it when the
Menstruum is separated, and it is reduced statu quo prius by fire, being forced
thereby to deposit its corrosive mask, will confess it was but deceptio visus
all this while, viz. that the Metal howsoever corroded by the Aqua fortis, was
the same Metal still.

SECT. 5.
1. THe fourth and last way whereby water imbibes the nature and virtue of a
Mineral or Metal, is, as he says, by confusion, changing the substance of the
Mineral into Water: This solution I must needs confess is very confused,
jumping so narrowly with the precedent, as that it scarce misseth it an hairs
breadth, and therefore must needs bear the name of confusion, frustra fit per
plura quod fiat per pauciora; for here he is of the same judgment as before;
that a Mineral may be converted (to use his own term) into Water.

2. But it may be there is a mystery wrapped in it, perhaps Dr. Witty deeply
Phylosophiseth, and we are not aware of it; for now that I recollect my self, I
remember Paracelsus and Helmont tells us of their grand Liquor Alkahest, which
Helmont says, Cuncta naturae corpora penetrando subtilliandoque transmutat;
and further says, that by it, (viz. primum ens salium) omne corpus (puta
Saxum) lapidem, gemmam, silicem, arenam, marcasitam argillam, terram lapides
coctos, vitrum, calcem, Sulphur, etc. (much more Minerals, such as the Doctor
means) transmutari in salem actualem, aequiponderante suo corpori, unde factus
est. Et quod iste sal aliquoties cohobatus in sale circulato Paracelsi; suam
omnino fixitatem amittat tandem transmutetur in liquorem, qui etiam tandem in
aquam insipidam transit, and quod ista aqua aequiponderet sali suo, unde
manavit; by which Liquor transmuting all bodies, whether Stones, Metals or
Minerals into a Salt, which cohobated with Paracelsus, Sal circulatum (which by
the by, is primum ens Mercurii Liquidum cum primo ente salis factum) is at
length transmuted, or turned into an insipid Water.

3. Yet certainly if he had had such a Menstruum, we should have heard of it
ere this, but I see not the least foot-step yet in his Book that might give the
least hint thereof; by which I gather he is not so well versed amongst
Pyrotecnick Writers, as to insinuate so secret and Phylosophical transmutation
of Minerals into Water.

4. It is so far I fear from a Phylosophical, as that I doubt it may prove a
Rustical notion, viz. to judge a Mineral or Metal transmutable into Water,
because it so seems to be to a vulgar eye; the body of the Celestial Sun to be
no bigger than a Bushel, or a Cart Wheel at the most, because appearing no
bigger to the same common eye.

5. He would confirm this vulgar Doctrine (Vulgar I call it, because fited only
for Rusticks, whose reason outstrip not their sense; but for a professed
Physician, should methinks have the pole of his reason more elevated) I say he
would by the instances of Salt, Nitre and Allom confirm this his Doctrine (to
be found no where but amongst vulgar errors) instancing and saying, that Salt
and Nitre will both so perfectly turn into Water (and Allom also, although it
is not so fusible as the other) a little being put to them, as if they were
nothing else.

6. By which I perceive the Doctor does really believe that when Salt or Nitre
is dissolved in Water, that they are no longer Salt or Water, but really
transmuted, or (as his own term is) converted into Water. O facile
transmutation! what need we cast about, at such far distances to inquire after
the possibility and truth of transmutation of Metalline or Mineral substances,
when the Doctor has got them so near at hand, can turn Mineral substances into
Water, and every whit as easily reduce them into what they were before.

7. For he has given a positive resolve of the Quere of transmutation, having
absolutely determined, that these Salts do perfectly turn into Water, according
to his own words, a little Water being put to them; which through resolution of
the point, is totally exclusive of either his magis or minus, so that according
to his opinion, Salt put into Broth becomes Broth, and Sugar dissolved in
White Wind or Sack, becomes White Wind or Sack; whereas any of these Liquors
evaporated or distilled, he will find besides the whole body of the waterish
part saved in the receiver, the body of Salt or Sugar left entire in the
distilling vessel, the very same as before.

8. This peripatetick notion, I look upon no otherwise than that other
analogous to it; where in the same Sect. he says that Water would evaporate
into Air, supposing a transmutability of Elements, as if Water when evaporating
were not as really Water, though its parts undergo a large extension, as when
the parts are united in a fluid body, in that texture of parts which the body
of Water makes up; for save in a receiver, that which he imagines evaporates
into Air, and you shall find, and so shall he too, that it is no way
distinguishable from that it was before, Water still and not Air; so Salts,
Sugars, or what else dissolvable in Water, are the same as at the first, though
appearing under the form of Water.

9. For whatsoever is dissolved in Water, if upon the superfusion of any other
Liquor of a different property, the parts of the first dissolvable begin to
alter their position, they either precipitate speedily, or make the Liquor
opacous and in time precipitates, leaving the water either partly acuated with
the additional Liquor, or else insipid, having all the saline parts coagulated
one upon another, which being washed or dulcified, gives you the very same
dissolvable Concrete you first took in hand.

10. As for instance, Dissolve Vitriol in water, filter it so as it become a
clear solution, upon which pour a Lixivium of salt of Tartar, and you shall
find immediately the first dissolvable, viz. the vitrioline colcotar together
with part of both the salts, i. e. the acid connate salt of the vitriol and
lixivial salt precipitated; after precipitation, the supernatant Liquor
contains in it a neutrum, or tertium quid, from both the foresaid salts, which
it will make to appear by filtration and evaporation in the form of a Tartarum
vitriolatum; the Sediment which was precipitated gives the Terra vitrioli, or
metalline earth of vitriol; all which happen from a complication of
heterogeneous parts in the first dissolvable, viz. vitriol, having in it a
metalline earth (only to be made apparent, in the form of a metal by force of
fire) and an essurine acid salt, which salt, meeting with a lixivial salt, lets
go its first dissolvable, and coagulates it self upon the last.

11. But take a single salt, as suppose salt of Tartar, or the fixed salt of any
vegetable, dissolve it in water; upon which strong solution, pour distilled
Vinegar, Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of Nitre, or Spirit of Salt, or any of them, or
the like acid saline Liquors; and you shall find that after a strong ebullition
and boiling which they cause by fretting one upon another, causing a very
intense heat, that in the mutual, and as it were hostile action of the salt;
one upon another, they precipitate each other to the bottom, and leave the
supernatant Liquor in a manner insipid: But to return.

12. He concludes this last manner of solution in confusion, by an example of
the Spaw water; five quarts whereof being evaporated over the fire, there will
be found in the bottom of the Vessel, an ounce of an ash-colored blackish
Sediment, a considerable part whereof is Nitre, Allom, and Salt, the rest the
substance of Iron and Vitriol: This is, according to his last Hypothesis,
confusion in good earnest; for here all the Ingredients are confused, and
jumbled together: and by what Art the Doctor will learn to separate them, that
they may indeed appear to be so many as he speaks of, I know not, I think it
would puzzle all his method to extricate them.

13. One Argument more I shall produce against his two Ingredients in the body
of Iron and Vitriol, and this shall be instar omnium, as being demonstrative,
and confirmed by Autopsia; An ingenious Friend of mine, whom I shall not
otherwise name, than the Chemical Apothecary of York, had a parcel of this
ash-colored Powder, which remained in the bottom of the Vessel after the
distillation, or evaporation of the water of this Spaw, given him by Dr. WITTY
himself; This he put into a crucible, and gave a very strong calcining fire (as
strong as for the calcining of Vitriol into Colcotar) and that for the space of
almost three hours, and all this while without the least appearance of any red
color, or the least footstep of either Colcotar or Vitriol, or Crocus of Iron,
it became fixed and permanent in the fire, and lost little of its weight; it
also became whiter in color.

14. Now for certain, if there had been any thing of Vitriol or Iron in it, the
discovery would have been made, and it forced to confess its nature, by its
yellow, red, or purple color, with so great force of fire.

15. This fixed Powder having thus endured the highest degrees of heat, was
dissolved, filtred, and evaporated, which when dry, became a most pure white
clean Salt; that part of it which would not dissolve, and consequently not pass
the filter, being dried, was an almost insipid ash-colored Powder, somewhat
whiter than that which was first taken: Thus we discard these two Pillars of
his Spaw, viz. Vitriol and Iron, as to the body of them.

SECT. 6.
1. AFter the Doctor has declared these several ways, whereby Waters are
impregnated with Minerals; and we as closely followed him, to see whether it
were so or no: He proceeds to tell us the nature and virtue of these Minerals;
first of Vitriol, he says, it is eminently hot, of a biting and adustive
quality, and yet is also stiptick and astrictive, and therefore dries up
superfluous humidity, etc. according to the account that he receives from
Galen, Diascorides, Serapio, Paulus, Oribatius, Aelius, Actuarius, Fernelius.
(enough to tire one in the naming) it is a very short abreviary from so great a
number of Authors, concerning that Mineral, which well understood, and the
Remedies thereof neatly prepared, would make up, as Paracelsus says, a fourth
Column of Medicine.

2. But methinks the Doctor's long experience in re medica should ere this have
furnished him plenty of observations, of the worth and virtue of so noble a
Mineral (unless inopem se copia fecit) he has such store that he knows not
where to begin; These biting and adustive, stiptick, and astrictive qualities
of Vitriol, must surely belong to it, either as it is an entire body, of
Vitriol, or to the constitutive parts and principles of it.

3. If these his assigned qualities, as he calls them, belong to Vitriol
entirely as such, then he must needs mean the common Vitriol; if he mean any
other sort, why did not he for distinction sake name it? But what Physician
uses to prescribe common Vitriol unprepared for his Patient, being crudely
given, a very nauseating and violent cmetick to the stomach, and not a proper
Medicine for an honest man to use; and I believe the Doctor himself never gave
it, unless it was to try an experiment; and if he had given it, I am apt to
think it as difficult to have learned thence his forced qualities.

4. If these qualities are ascribed to it, as considered resolved into its
constitutive parts, then he would have done well to have anatomized it, and
told us to which parts, such and such virtues and qualities did belong; whether
it was to the Salt, to the Oil, to the Spirit or Phlegm, to the Colcotar, or to
any Arcana's singly or jointly, thence prepared, and then we should have had
some distinct knowledge of what he propounds.

5. It Is probable he takes Vitriol to be a simple Mineral Salt, not admitting
it to be compounded of those Ingredients, which must necessarily go to its
natural genesis, and hence depends all his grand mistakes concerning that
concrete; but why do I trouble my self or the Reader, in expostulating those
properties of which the Doctor is so barren, as what he gives us, is not from
himself, but from Gallen, Diascorides, Serapio, etc.

6. Iron is the next, which he says is dry in the third degree; here we see
that as the Gallenists have their degrees of the four qualities, by which they
feel and handle as it were the virtues and properties of Vegetables; so
likewise it seems they reach with them to fathom the nature of Metals: I would
only Query how they come to know that Iron is dry in the third degree? Is not
Iron as well as other Metals liquid or dry, fluid or permanent, according as
they undergo the force of fire in fusion? which while so in a crucible makes
them liquid and fluid like water, by actuating their Mercurial part, which
involving the Sulphur of the Metal, makes it flow together with it, as if it
were nothing else but Mercury, which when cool again, is in statu quo prius.

7. But what this third degree of dryness is, of which Iron is found to be, I
know not, I wish the Doctor knew himself, and if he could to certify these dry
notions; he says also that it is stiptick, drying up the superfluous
humidities of the body, somewhat like to Vitriol: This wonted discourse of
Gallenists ever and anon to these exotic qualities, make no solid satisfactory
Solutions of Philosophical Queries.

8. For if a man should ask them, how Iron, even the very body of Iron given in
filings sometimes, or any good Preparation of Iron, as for instance, Saccharum
Martis, viz. Sugar of Steel, become very frequently Medicines proper to Cure
(if rightly managed) the Dropsy, Scurvy, Cachexia, defectus Menstruorum, etc.
it is very probable their answer will be, That they do it by their drying
quality, by exiccating the superfluous humors of the body; now these notions
of qualities, are mostwhat grounded upon sense; as for instance, in this very
particular, the most superfluous humors in the Dropsy, are, in a Gallenical
sense, comparable to a mixture, suppose of Water and Meal in order to making of
Bread, if the Water out proportion the Meal, it is no way at present to be
corrected but by addition of more dry Meal, and that so much as will bring it
into a due consistence, so drying up the superfluous moisture.

9. Thus analogically the superfluous humors of hydropick and scorbutic
bodies are as we say to be dried up by those Medicines, which having drying
qualities be exiccating in such and such degrees, soke up these moist
Distempers, and so effect their Cures? which moist notion a few Queries will
easily pump dry: As,

10. First, how do these dry qualities act? are not the superfluous humors of
these moist Distempers most what in the blood, diluting and making it too
waterish? how must therefore these drying qualities reach the corrigible
moisture? are they not first to pass the stomach and its ferment, which no
doubt must have pretty store of moisture, proper for the absolving its own
peculiar functions? and does the Doctor think these drying qualities will not
bait and take a sup in the road? sure enough if they be dry they will: Does he
imagine they can pass the stomach, that culina humorum, without acting upon its
moisture, unless he grant they act electively, saying to themselves, This is
not the moisture the Doctor sent us to dry up, but we must pass into the blood
and other humors of the body, to dry up what is superfluous there.

11. But if he say that there are also superfluous moistures in the stomach,
which feed those of the blood and other parts, and therefore must also be dried
up; which suppose we grant, yet while these drying qualities are acting, drying
up the moisture they meet with, what should hinder but they should also dry up
the natural innate moisture of the stomach, and so cause by their stiptick
quality a clinging of the Membranes of the Oesophagus and Ventricle? seeing
moisture as such, whether in equilibrio humorum, or in exorbitancy, is the
proper object for these qualities to work upon, unless he will say they act
electively, which would be absurd enough.

12. So that by that time those qualities (if any such there be) had got
through the stomach, they would be so tempered with a competent moisture, as
that they would lose themselves, and become no qualities, and the expected Cure
to be done by them would be left to such as should come after.

13. Again, the Dose of such drying Medicines, how large should they be to
imbibe and dry up such great quantities of superfluous humors, as is
ordinarily to be found in dropsical bodies? surely if they should give Steel in
so great a quantity, as to dry up so great a bulk of spurious humidities; when
it had done its work, it would certainly restagnate in the vessels, and cause
greater obstructions then was before.

14. As for Saccharum Martis, it is commonly given in a Vehicle, either of Wine
or Water, and how this should dry is another Query; for methinks it were
enough to dash the drying quality of Steel with the very moisture of the
Vehicle it is given in, and for this Sugar of Steel thus given in a Vehicle, to
exiccate superfluous humidities, is as much as if they should say, a moist body
ought to dry up a moist body, which how contradictory, it is enough to name; so
likewise those decoctions of Sarsaparilla, China, and Guaiacum, which they so
much cant to to be drying decoctions, are altogether as irrational as the
former, for to call the decoctions of these Diaphoreticks forenamed drying
decoctions, implies no less than a palpable contradiction; for the operation of
these Diaphoreticks, are drying only a posteriori, by carrying through the
pores of the body, by insensible transpiration or sweat, that superfluous latex
which cumbers the blood, and not that they actually dry by a positive quality.

15. But that I may give you one slight hint, concerning the manner of the
operation of Iron in the Cures of the formerly named Diseases, and that without
taking cognizance of any drying or stiptick qualities; it is thus, First we
must presuppose there are several digestive ferments in the body, which if
regular and uninterupted in their functions, are the Authors of transmuting
edible food, from one manner of juice or liquor into another, until it
terminate in nutrition, coming for a supply of the continual wasting and
transpiring spirits, which so long keeps an occonomy and harmony of parts,
subservient to the health and vivacity of the body.

16. If these digestions by any occasional cause of inordinacy of living,
perturbations or passions of the mind, ex in equale partium robore ab origin
nato, or any other essential or accidental cause of Diseases, become irregular,
degenerating from their primitive intentions, perverting their original juyces,
thence a spurious acidity becomes exorbitant (although a chiliferous acid
ferment is peculiar to that digestion of the stomach) extra lares suos fertur
in alienam mensem reliquarum digestionum; fluctuates in the vessels, being too
much heightened or decocted in the stomach it self, causing Heart-burnings,
Pains and Gripings, and sometimes Vomiting, descending into the intestines,
causes the Colic and Illiack Passion; this getting into the veins and
arteries, becomes the intrinsic Minera of Fevers, and mortis inopinati.

17. The same vitiating the spirituous Liquor of the genus nervosum, gives the
seminary of Apoplexies, Palsies, Spasmes, and Convulsions; also coagulating it
self upon the bowels, causes obstructions, thence oedematous and scirrhous
tumors of the Spleen or Liver, and lays the groundwork for Aposthumations in
other parts; the same acting diversely upon different parts vitiates their
spermatick elementary Liquor, distends the fibers of the parts beyond their
natural tone; perverting their peristaltick motion, whereby the superfluous
watery parts, should be percolated from the Blood by Urine, Sweat, and
insensible transpiration; which distention (and sometimes flagging of the
fibers, having original often from the same) dilutes the Blood, by retaining
what should be separated thence, whence come Dropsies.

18. The same spurious acidity or Salresolutum, vitiating several digestions,
defedates the Blood, and floteing in diverse parts too and again, gives the
beginings to the Scurvy, causes also obstruction of the Menses, and having
vitiated the most of the digestions, produce a Cachexia, or a totally corrupted
and vitiated habit of body, concerning which the noble Helmont says, Cujus
(viz. salis excrementii) sive uterus, hepar, lien, renes panchreas, mesenterium
vel stomachus fodina sit, ingentes parere laborantibus molestias: Which
premiz'd,

19. We say that Steel sometimes given in filings, or in the form of Crocus
Martis, may precipitate and coagulate this Tartarum resolutum, or Sal
excrementitium; I mean this spurious acidity that had fastened it self in the
bowels of the Spleen and Liver, altering the tone of the Fibers, diluting the
Blood, letting forth the potulent part of the Blood, not by the natural way of
Urine, Sweat, and Transpiration, but either by an unnatural backdoor,
thrusting it between the Peritonium and Omentum, whereby restagnating in the
Abdomen, swells the belly of hydropical Persons, or running along the Vessels
with the Blood into the habit of the body, amongst the small capillary Veins,
which are subservient for the last digestion, viz. Nutrition or Assimilation,
restagnates there, being carried in greater Vessels, swells the legs, but being
amongst the lesser, cause that sort of Dropsy we call Ascites.

20. I say the manner of operation of Steel, whether filings, Crocus, or Sugar
of Steel, is by coagulating this excrementitious Salt, which because acid, is
therefore partly Mineral; for as soon as Steel aforesaid enters the stomach,
and so passes from the first to the second digestion in the intestines, as it
passes along, the spurious Salt runs headlong toward it to dissolve it, but
instead thereof is coagulated thereon, spending its activity upon the Steel,
loses its accuteness or sting, and so is carried away with the Steel by Stool;
hence the excrements of those that have taken Chalibeat Medicines are black,
and that for no other reason, but that the corrosive fretting Spirits, and
spurious acid juyces of the body (those grand authors of pains and torments)
are precipitated upon the Chalibeate body, which by coagulation thereon grows
black.

21. Hence it is that those corrosive fretting, pontick, and acid juyces, which
vellicate and prick the Nerves, in whatsoever part of the body they are found,
and twinge the Fibrous parts of the Membranes, throughout the whole body,
utpote patrones dolorum ac torminum, are I say dinted, softened, and sweetened,
by the taking in such fixed bodies of the Metalline compage of Steel, or of
animal or vegetable Stones, or petrefied concretions, in whose texture is wrapped
up a fixed Alkaly, viz. for instance, Crabs Eyes, Coral, and Pearl.

22. All which petrefied animal or vegetable concrete juyces, as also testacea
quaevis, together with the body of Steel, being taken into the humane body, do
coagulate the preternatural acid juyces upon themselves, and do so alter the
texture of the whole mass of humors, that whereas before by their fretting
nature, they caused the floting to and again through the body, diverse Pains,
Swellings, Indispositions, etc. they are now become sweet, and circulate in the
body in a due proportion, proper for the functions of the several digestions.

23. Even after the same manner as we sensibly perceive, that when they are put
into any sort of acid Liquors, as Vineager or the like, though their powders
fall to the bottom, yet they give not over working one upon another, until the
acid Liquor has become sweet, viz. insipid, robbing it thereby of its
sowrness; the like does almost any Metal dissolved in an Aqua fortis; which
thence separated by distillation or precipitation, becomes most what
debilitated; so that it shall not be able to make another the like solution.

24. Hence we may thoroughly resolve that seeming objection, which might stare
us in the face, at the very first proposal, of this Hypothesis; viz. that
seeing the Metalline body of Steel, or petrefied concretions of Coral, Pearl,
and Crabs Eyes, being yet in the stomach, or on their passage through the
second digestion, along the intestines, do even there sweeten the acid juyces
of the body, whereas they themselves (viz.) the acid juyces may be in more
remote parts, and at a great distance; how comes it therefore that these remote
corrosive pontick juyces, become dulcified at a distance?

25. Which we answer, first, by observing to you, that if you put the powders
of Pearl, Coral, etc. into a glass, upon which pour distilled Vineager or the
like, you may observe that though the powder lie in the bottom, and the Liquor
only touch it superficially (and therefore according to the form of the
Objection, should only alter and sweeten those very parts only which they
touch) yet in a little time we see it sweetens the whole mass of Liquor, and
that upon this reason, as I apprehend, viz. because the nature of water
consisting in fluidity, is always in motion, so that in a little time all the
parts of water, whirl and circle about so long, till they have all touched the
powder, and all thence received a like dulcification; so in like manner the
juyces of the body being liquid, do so circulate about by reason of their
fluidity, that in a little time there be few parts of the body, through which
the fluid juyces have not circulated, and so consequently meet with those
bodies (if any such thing be inwardly taken, as may rob them of their sowrish
sharpness) which being extra lares, prove hostile to the Nerves, Veins,
Arteries, etc.

26. Another instance, let Silver be dissolved in Aqua fortis, there the
corrosive Menstruum has totally (though not radically) dissolved the body of
the Metal, upon which it is also coagulated, although in a liquid form, if into
this, somewhat diluted with water, you put plates of Copper, as Refiners
sometimes do for the separating of Silver, you will find the Silver desert the
Aqua fortis, precipitating upon the cuprous plates, and will thereby be totally
separated from the Menstruum, and that too, notwithstanding the plates (as they
always do) lie constantly in the bottom of the Vessel.

27. You will ask, how comes the upper part of the restagnant Menstruum (which
has an equal proportion of Silver in it, as well as the lower part thereof) to
be acted upon by the plates at such a distance? to which as before I reply,
That the liquid parts of the Menstruum, being in a constant motion of fluidity,
and carrying the dissolved Metal in it, does in a little time circulate all the
parts of the Vessel, as far as the upper superficies thereof, one place
constantly changing places with another, till they have at length all glided
along the surface of the plates, which by a peculiar Metallic assimilation,
put a stop to its current in the Menstruum, and hooks it to it self; which is
one of the best and most thorough separations of Silver that is commonly known.

28. The like is done if Copper be dissolved in Aqua fortis, if plates of Iron
be put therein, separating the Copper from the Menstruum, and that by the great
affinity or likeness of texture of parts of those two Metals.

29. Thus in like manner, when any good preparation of Steel, of Pearl, of
Coral, and Crabs Eyes are given, though they themselves pass actually no
further than into the first and second digestion, and so proceed, yet being all
the juyces and liquors of the body are in a constant fluid motion, and always
circulating, therefore of course they must in time touch upon these forenamed
fixed concretes, which if they touch they lose their pontick sharpness, by
which they become hostile to nature, and have laid the foundation of many
Diseases; which thus being dulcified, the juyces do redire in gratiam, and
circulate as good companions as ever.

30. Steel, our now present subject, operates by separating this corrosive
acidity, which had coagulated it self upon the bowels, viz. the Spleen, Liver,
Matrix, etc. which spurious sowrness meeting with a body to which it claims
more affinity, then to the parts it had settled it self upon, joins with it and
becomes coagulated thereon; and so the bowels become set at liberty from their
former obstructions, and the circulation of the blood and humors become
thereby more florid, the exorbitant latex, which before was extravasated, runs
in its own channels again; and what was superfluous that would not redire in
gratiam, Nature finds some peculiar manner of exclusion or other, either of
Stool, Urine, Sweat, or insensible Transpiration.

31. Thus the Dropsy and Scurvy, Cachexia, defectus Menstruorum, etc. become
Cured; besides which, we might name many more Diseases, which by a skilful
managing and ordering of these Medicines, might by the blessing of God be
Cured, as the Hypocondriack Melancholy, which chiefly proceeds from a
coagulation of this Tartarum resolutum, this Sal excrementitium, we are now
treating of, upon the Spleen, whereby its proper digestion, or peculiar
function of separation of some heterogenious parts from the blood is vitiated,
which digestion of the Spleen so promoting the blood in its tincture, and
height of spirituosity, wherewith the Spleen enriched with that plenty and
complication of Arteries, seems to be destined to, being no doubt thereby
replete with a noble ferment, which should exalt and spiritualize the blood, by
a kind of Chemical separation, of some innate impurities, restagnant in the
blood, until it come to partake of the exalting digestive ferment of that part;
which to me seems to be the very proximate ferment of the blood, before the
converting thereof into those nimble spirituous parts; or animal spirits, which
flote along the Brain; cerebel, medulla spinalis, and so in the cavities of the
Nerves becomes Liquor Spermaticus nervorum, the agent of all operations,
attributable to the genus nervosum.

32. I say this fermental digestion of the Spleen becomes obstructed and
vitiated, by a coagulation of the foresaid spurious acidity, which consequently
vitiating its next product, the nimble animal spirits, the very immediate
corporeal Organ of the Soul; which spirits, if I may so call them, are the
immediate corporeal reflecting glass of the Soul, which it uses for the
receiving and contemplating all visible objects; and being vitiated by such an
obstructive coagulative Salt, in the Spleen, according to the strength and
degree of the obstruent, is the blood perverted in its prolifick offspring of
animal spirits, which become irregular and altogether erroneous, thence making
false representations of things to the Soul, whence strange fancyful
apprehensions arise; which excrementitious Salt, radicated in the Spleen, has
commonly a flatus concomitant, which therefore is called flatus hypochondraicus.

33. Not but that this Disease may be inserted in the very semnials of the
natural constitution, and (as also some others) become hereditary, in whom the
Ideae dementes cuduntur in ipso viscere splenis vitiato, those madeling
fancyful impressions, or erring apprehensions, being forged from the disturbed
economy of the Spleen, vitiating those animal spirits which lodge in the Brain
or genus nervosum, here these extravagant and erratick idea's, feign to
themselves strange pains, in a moment make quick and speedy transits, are
always upon the wheel of uncertainties.

34. But now at length returning to view the Doctors qualities, methinks they
begin to play least in sight, and probably may become occult; yea at length be
reckoned amongst non entia.

35. He tells us what Dioscordes will have Iron to do, viz. to loose the belly,
especially commending the flower or filings of Brass to that purpose, this is
like the rest, incongruous; for I believe neither Dioscordes, nor himself, ever
gave the flower or filing of Brass, if they did, at least never to have had
groundwork of observing a solutive property therefrom, for (if I mistake not)
should the Doctor give filings of Copper to any Patient of his, he would find
that by that time the filings had got into the stomach, and had become fret
upon, by the acid ferment thereof, it would presently become desperately
emetick, being by that time become as violent a Vomiter, as if so much viride
aris, or common Vitriol had been taken.

36. Now Iron (says he) being joined with Vitriol in this water, partakes of
the nature of Brass, and is therefore the more purging and opening, from which
conjunction I think it is, that most of our Vitrioline Waters in England do
loosen the belly; which if it be true that Iron joined with Vitriol in this
water, partakes of the nature of Brass, then must it of necessity, as I said
before, prove constantly emetick, which the Doctors long experience witnesses
to the contrary; what difference of operation would it have from so much viride
aeris or common Vitriol, dissolved in a large quantity of water? seeing that
both of them are made from the body of Copper or Brass, fretted by the acidity
of Vinegar, or other acid alumenous liquor; so that the water wherein this
nature of Brass is, becoming wrought upon by the acid ferment of the stomach,
would certainly become as powerfully emetick, as the other, and then this
Spring would lose its good report.

37. We have already sufficiently ravell'd into the nature of both Vitriol and
Iron, thoroughly discovering their inconsistency in a Water-spring, which we are
loath again to repeat; therefore what we have already said to that point being
premiz'd, his Thesis of the reason of Purgation of these Vitrioline Waters,
will naturally and of its own accord fall; in as much as any sort of Vitriol
made out of Copper or Brass, is, as I said before, dangerously emetick, and not
fit for an honest Physician to prescribe.

SECT. 7.
1. ALlom is another principle, of which, according to Gallen, he reckons up
three sorts, all of which are of gross parts, and very stiptick, abstersive,
heating and something corrosive, etc. as say Gallen, Oribasius, Aetius,
Serapio, Fernelius, etc.

2. Which of these sorts it is, that is the Ingredient of this Water, the
Doctor had done well to have put the World out of doubt, for otherwise he
leaves us in as great a Mist, nay greater than he found us; for the describing
the virtues thereof, he seems to mean no other than that artificial factitious
Allom used by Dyers, and Chyrurgeons, which as such is a Mineral compound Salt,
which no doubt if the Water have any such Ingredient, must be a simple Mineral
Salt, centred in the bowels of the Mineral Stone of Allom, without any
superadditionary additaments of Urine, Salt of Kelp, etc.

3. Nitre, another Ingredient, is (he says) of two sorts, natural and
artificial, the natural tends to a reddish color, as says Serapio, Gallen
says there is also a white sort, so that unless Serapio or Gallen tell us the
kinds of Nitre, we shall have little account thereof from Dr. WITTY; of which
white fort, he says it is plain that this of ours is; I suppose he means the
white natural sort, and yet goes on without distinction, describing the virtues
of the artificial sort, saying it is wont to be mixed in Medicines, when we
would attenuate and deterge; it is added (he says) to Cerats and Plasters in
Distempers of the Nerves.

4. By all which it should seem indeed by his discourse, as if this artificial
kind of Nitre used in Shops, were the Nitrous Ingredient of the Water; and then
we should consult, where those Salt-petermongers are, those subterraneal nimble
sons of Vulcan, who must furnish this Spring, with this artificial sort of
Saltpeter; and further query, whether (if the Troglodites knew the use of
Sulphur and Dust of Charcole) they might not (envying Mortals this happiness)
unfortunately (and to the great loss of the Doctor) blow up this Spring?

5. Salt is the fifth and last Principle or Ingredient of the Spaw, perhaps
because it is so near the Salt Water of the Sea; and indeed looking a little
further, I find he says he thinks it receives the Salt from the Sea, but how
demonstrable I know not; for if any such Marine Salt was in this Spring, it
would certainly upon distillation or evaporation be left in the sediment, and
then would as evidently be demonstrable by the taste, as we see the Sulphur
Well of Knarsbrough, having a body of Salt in it, upon evaporation leaves it
all behind in the bottom of the vessel; so here a little proportion of Sea
Salt, would make the sediment sufficiently brackish, and that distinguishable
enough, if it were there.

6. But we find not the least foot-step of any such Salt left after the
evaporation or distillation of the water, neither is any separable by any known
art of separation of Mineral Salts; for after the sediment of the Spaw is
further calcined by the force of fire, and another separation is made by
solution, filtration, and evaporation, yet is the separated Salt so far removed
from any such brackish taste, as that it is quite of another perceptible taste,
so that the presence of such a Marine Salt is no otherwise than merely
imaginary, and therefore to be taken up by praecarious Philosophers.

7. Thus you see I have run through his five Principles or Ingredients of the
Spaw, found him tripping at every turn, and very much inconsistent with
himself; for notwithstanding the latitude of his assumed Principles, wherein he
might have had scope enough to have sported himself inter thaumata Dei, amongst
the Wonders of God in the Mineral Kingdom, yet we find him ever and anon so,
and so narrowly pent up, as if he had not room to turn him, so straight laced
is the Aristoletick and Gallenical Philosophy in the whole triplicity of Nature.

Pars Secunda.
SECT. 1.
IT is now high-time, after the unhinging of Dr. WITTIES Principles, to come to
make a serious scrutiny into the real Principles of this Spaw; and though I
have made Animadversions upon all his five Ingredients, showing the
inconsonancy and inconsistency of them, as he has laid them down, yet without
any intention or thought of denying them all, but to hold to those which we
might find demonstrable by experiment.

2. For which intention, I went purposely to Scarbrough, and took along with me
several Liquors and Spirits, by which, I thought, I might best essay the native
Ingredients of the water; I took also along with me a solution of the five
Ingredients, according to the Doctors supposition, each of them being in
several glasses, viz. a solution of Nitre, Allom, Vitriol of Copper, Vitriol of
Iron, and common Salt, and desired him, for the evincing the truth of his
Principles, that he would please to mix these in such a proportion, in a glass
of fresh water, as might resemble the taste of the Spaw water, and would
equally with it answer the same coagulations and solutions.

3. So when we came to the Well, I desired an essay might be made of the
mixture of those five solutions in fresh water, to try if we could imitate the
Spaw thereby; he told the company that I expected from those Minerals which had
undergone the fire, to see the same as from those which had not passed the
fire; I answered, they were naked and bare solutions of the Mineral
Ingredients, made without any stress of fire, and therefore might well be taken
to make experiment withal; when he seemingly refused it, I called for a
porrenger of fresh water, and put some of each of these solutions in, tasting
it after each distinct Ingredient was put in.

4. The Vitriol of Iron made it taste very like the sweet Spaw at Knarsbrough;
a little of the solution of Nitre and Salt, did not much alter the taste
thereof; to which a solution of Mineral Allom was added, which did not yet
bring it any thing near the taste of that Spaw, comparing them both together,
nor did the addition of Vitriol mend the matter; upon this mixture we poured
the solution of Gauls, which presently, upon the account of the solution of
Allom and Vitriol, became thick and muddy like ink, and became clear from the
same reason, with the addition of some drops of the spirit of Vitriol; not that
the solution of Nitre or Salt, contributed any thing to this attrimentous
curdling, nor yet was alone from the solution of Vitriol, but also from the
solution of Allom, which as to changing colors by the addition of Gauls or
solution thereof, does equally answer the solution of Vitriol.

5. But to come a little closer to the matter, I took a little Spaw water in
one porrenger, and a little solution of the Calx of Allom in another, upon both
of which I poured the solution of Gauls (made in fair water and filtred) and
forthwith both waters, viz. the Spaw water, and the water of Allom, became
colored alike of a deep purple, and from thence (having a little more of
solution of Gauls added) became blackish and opacous almost like Ink; by which
I demonstrated to the Doctor, what he would not otherwise believe, had not his
eyes convinced him, viz. that a purple color, and from thence a dark opacity,
like lnk, might he made from another liquor than Vitriol or Iron; to which he
solely ascribes the changing of colors by a Gaul put thereinto, making that
one of his demonstrations, why Iron is an Ingredient in the Spaw; which by an
occuler testimony I convinced him, that the changing of color by a Gaul was
not any sufficient evidence, that Iron Vitriol must needs be an Ingredient
thereof, because the bare solution of the Calx of Allom, having nothing of Iron
or Vitriol in it, does give exactly the same alteration of color.

6. The strength of his Argument for Iron and Vitriol being placed in this,
viz. that the sediment which falls to the bottom, upon the alteration with
Gauls, which in his book, I take, says he, to be the Iron Mineral with a
little touch of the Vitriol; which certainly had been much more proper, if he
had spoke of the Minera of Iron, and left out Vitriol, or of the Vitriol of
Iron, and so discoursed only of one, for that both should be there, we have in
the first part denied, and held inconsistent; nor is this variation of color
by Gauls a sufficient argument of the presence of the Minera of Iron (though I
do not deny it to be an Ingredient) seeing a solution of the calcined stone of
Allom will do the same.

7. But to proceed upon both these colored Liquors, viz. of the Spaw, and of
the solution of Allom by the solution of Gauls; I poured a little spirit of
Vitriol, and presently by degrees, both of them became alike clear again; the
spirit of Vitriol working upon, and dissolving all those scattered, loose
confused atoms, which the Gaul shivered the waters into, till they had all
become dissolved again in the body of water, and became as clear as at first.

8. From whence I inferred a further similitude of parts between the Spaw
water, and the solution of Allom, being alike in their precipitation, and in
their reduction, to clear Liquors again.

9. To these clear solutions I poured some drops of Oleum Tartari per
deliquium, which caused them both to become alike colored, as deep almost as
Ink; for this Oil of Tartar precipitates what ever acid spirits, such as spirit
of Vitriol, of Salt, etc. dissolve, and bring clear solutions into confused
postures; by which it appears, that Mineral Bodies or Salts, may by the force
of acid Menstruums be resolved into clear Liquors, which Bodies are not
therefore converted into the nature of the Menstruum, and become the same with
it, as Dr. Witty would have Metals that are dissolved in Aqua fortis to be
converted into the nature of the Aqua fortis, whereas lixivial Salts evince the
contrary; for either a fixed or volatile Alkali, will presently precipitate, and
make it fall to the bottom; whatever acid corrosive Liquors have dissolved, by
which the Metal he thought lost, would once more become the object of his
Optics.

10. Then upon these Muddy Inky Liquors, I poured some more spirit of Vitriol,
and cleared them both again, upon which clear Liquors, I poured some volatile
spirit of Hartshorn, which, as the Oil of Tartar, made them both become
confused and Inky.

11. By all which it appeared that the solution of calcined stone of Allom,
admitted the same precipitations and resolutions with that of the Spaw, by acid
Liquors and alkalizate Salts.

12. Then we poured forth these Liquors, and took fresh Spaw water, and fresh
solution of Allom, upon both I poured some Oil of Tartar per deliquium, which
caused a whitish curdling separation much-what alike in both, which would again
become clear by the addition of some drops of the spirit or Vitriol.

13. Now the Query is, how comes Oil of Tartar or any lixivial Salt, or
volatile spirit, to cause this separation of parts in all Mineral or Metalline
solutions that are made by acid Menstruums? Whether they do it by coagulating
themselves upon the bodies of Minerals and Metals, or by uniting with the Salts
of the Menstruums, and so thrusting forth the other bodies of Minerals or
Metals?

14. For the solving of which doubt, we must first know that there are three
sorts of Salts or Spirits, out of which ordiarily Menstruums are made for the
dissolving of most bodies commonly dissolvable; commonly dissolvable I said,
because the Liquor Alkahest of Paracelsus and Helmont, that primum ens salium,
their grand Solvent, does, as Helmont says, dissolve all sorts of concretes
whatever into their primitive juyces. These Salts or Spirits out of which
common Menstruums are made, are either acid, and those either naturally so, as
the Essurine acidity which is to be found in Allom, and Vitriol Stones, also in
the sour juyces of Herbs and Fruits, amongst which that from Grains or Wines,
is most eminent; or are so made from Mineral Salts by force of fire, as spirit
of Vitriol, spirit of Nitre, Salt, etc.

15. Or secondly, from Alkalizate Salt, and those either fixed (as Salt of
Tartar, Wormwood, Broom, or any other vegetable fixed Salt) or volatile, as
spirit of Urine, Blood, Hartshorn, or the like volatile spirit from any
vegetable, as Sage, Wormwood, and the like; the Alkalizate Salts are used to
dissolve in water for the extraction of Brasil, Sena, etc. and the volatile
spirits mixed with a vinous spirit; helps to procure a stronger solution and
tincture of Mirrh, Aloes and Saffron, than spirit of Wine alone would for the
making Elixir Preprietatis.

16. Or lastly, Menstruums are made from vinous spirits, which is the frequent
Menstruum for extracting the subtle sulphurious Medicinal parts of many
vegetables, though I have seen and made a fourth sort of Salt in order to a
Menstruum, which was an artificial one, made by the fire, which indeed is a
kind of result from the three former Salts or Menstruums, and being dissolved
in water or spirit of Wine, makes no ebullition, with either alkalizate
solutions or acid spirits.

17. Now whatever it is that one of the two first dissolves, the other being
added precipitates; if any solution or extraction be made with alkalizate Salts
or volatile Spirits, upon the mixing a little acid spirits of Vitriol, Allom,
Nitre, or the like, a precipitation is presently made of the dissolved body; as
for instance, in the preparation of the Magistery of Chochineel or other
vegetables, as the primary Ingredient for the confection of Alkermes; which is
made by a decoction of the Berries in water, acuated with Oil of Tartar; when
by this means by itterated affusions of more of the same Menstruum all the
tincture is got, upon which filtred pour the solution of crude Allom, which is
alone as if so much spirit of Vitriol answerable was poured on, and what the
lixivial Salts had dissolved, the acid precipitates; which being washed both
from the taste of Oil of Tartar and Allom, is the Magistery of Kermes.

18. Where take notice that the ingenious Zuelfer says, That in the
preparation of this Lacca Florentina, as he calls it, he has got almost double
the quantity thereof respect of the Berries he first took in hand; that which
made up the bulk was an addition from the Menstruum and precipitating Salts.

19. So likewise in the solution of Minerals or Metals, as for instance in a
filtred solution of Vitriol made in fair water, into which if Oil of Tartar be
dropped, there is presently, as I said before, a separation and precipitation
of the Metalline parts of Copper or Iron, according as the Vitriol was made,
and with the Colcotarine parts, there does also fall some of the very salts
both of the Menstruum, viz. acid salts (for whose sake it is the Metalline
parts appear under a form of a Liquor) and also of the alkalizate salts, in as
much as to make the Colcotar appear, single and solitary, there is need of a
dulcification by warm water, which being filtred and evaporated, gives a
sediment or neutral salt of the same nature with that which is left after the
evaporation of the Liquor out of which the Metalline parts were separated, viz.
a Tartarum Vitriolatum.

20. By which it is evident, that when a Mineral body is dissolved by an
Essurine acid salt, acuating a quantity of water wherein the solution is made,
fretting upon, and subtillizing all the otherwise grosser parts of a Mineral in
minima, grinding them as I may say into the minutest particles, that then if
some of the contrary sort of salt, viz. fixed or volatile alkalies be poured on,
the salts immediately close with one another; but being of different textures
of parts (and thence apt to make different sorts of Menstruums) and so of a
contrary nature one to another, fret themselves into other shapes, in which
fretting they cause an heat, and sensible or insensible ebullition, according
to the intenseness or remisness of these hostile salts, in the Duel they thrust
forth the already dissolved Mineral or Metalline body, which, loosening the
salts that dissolved them, fall headlong to the bottom, whilst the salts have
turned themselves into a neutrum quid, and part are faller together with the
precipitated body.

21. So that the salt of Tartar immediately reaches the acid salts of the
Menstruum that has dissolved any Mineral body, and thereby precipitates and
lets fall to the bottom the dissolved body, and part of it with some of the
acid salts are carried along with them, which appears because the water wherein
the Mineral precipititate body is dulcified upon evaportion, gives, as I said
before, the same things as is made from the combining of the two salts in the
superstagnant water, viz. a Tartarum Vitriolatum.

22. Hence it is that Oil of Tartar being dropped into the Spaw water makes a
whitish coagulum or separation, because of the solution of the Minera of Iron,
which is dissolved in the Essurine acidity, either as it passes through Allom
stones or other proper matrixes in the bowels of the Earth, wherever its sound,
as to its simple primitive elemental acidity, it is all one, and therefore by
some called the primum ens of all natural Minerals, solutions, Spaw waters and
salts.

23. For this Mineral acidity is the very solvent in the water, which pervading
a Minera of Iron, makes a slight solution of it, and being equally contempered
together, makes up the body of the Spaw, upon which if spirit of Vitriol or any
other acid Liquor be poured, it makes no alteration in the water, because of
similariness of parts between the acid spirit of Vitriol, and the acid solvent
in the water, no more than fair water mixed with fair water, or spirit of wine
mixed with spirit of wine; but fixed and volatile alkalies, being of a contrary
temper, precipitate whatever Mineral solutions the other has made; for an
ingenious Friend of mine took a good quantity of the Spaw water, upon which he
poured some lixivium of Tartar, which caused a great curdling separation of a
white matter; by standing a while, a white sediment fell to the bottom, which
when the water was poured off, and the rest dried to a powder, became a white
and almost insipid calx; by which it was evident that both the salts, viz. the
acid salt of the Spaw, and the lixivial salt became dissolved together in the
restagnant water, and only let the aluminous calx, which the acidity of the
water had before dissolved into it self, fall to the bottom, and that without
the least perception either of Vitriol Iron or any other Ingredient.

SECT. 2.
1. THus far I assented to Dr. WITTY, viz. that an alluminous salt, from a
Mineral acidity had dissolved a slight touch of the Minera of Iron, and both
dissolved in the current spring of water makes up the Spaw; I asked him how he
would demonstrate his other three Principles? and first as to Vitriol, he said,
that in the carriage of the water from the spring to remote places, there was
found to be a loss of spirits, which he called Vitrioline spirits; first, that
these were Vitrioline spirits, and that they were lost, remained to be proved;
that there was an alteration in the water by carrying to distant places I
granted, but that I told him I apprehended was from a quassation of parts,
which a wooden vessels might easily admit of an incipient putrefaction, whence
might really proceed an inversion of parts, which would beget a great
alteration in the texture of the water, not to say what alteration may be made
from oken vessels, which by precipitation may make a great alteration.

2. But an ingenious person being by, asked the Doctor, whether suppose the
water was sealed up in a glass bottle hermetically, and so carried to a remote
place, whether it would be altered by carriage or no? he answered, he thought
it would; if so, th^^ it was not from any volatility of parts, because the
glass was supposed sealed up, therefore the alteration of the water, was not
from the loss of any volatile spirits, and consequently not from the loss of
the Vitrioline: But the foresaid ingenious person, put some of the Spaw water
into a glass bottle, and stopped it up from the air; into an other glass bottle
he also put of the same water, but let it stand open; the first he observed
that though it was kept until the water suffered a little putrefaction, did yet
give a tincture to Gauls; he tried another bottle after the very same manner,
which yet did not give the tincture as the other did; but the bottle that stood
open to the air, within two or three days lost its tincturing property; so that
though we should grant there are volatile parts which take wing in the air, yet
are they not Vitriol, because though kept in closely stopped vessels, yet in time
they lose themselves, which if a body of Vitriol was there, would be permanent;
it is therefore an apporrhea mineralis, whether Vitrioline or Alluminous.

3. But being he mentions this loss of Vitrioline spirits, which by agitation
of the water (in carrying it at distance) evaporates, I wonder seeing those are
so considerable according to his own supposal, making the water act more
lively, why, I say, in his experimenting the water he did not set upon the
distilling of it, and saving, by accurately closed joints, those Vitrioline
spirits, that he might have tasted them, or by other means have brought them
upon the test and examined their nature; but he very civilly, because they are
volatile, lets them go.

4. If you view the Doctors tools, by which he undertakes to hew out the
rudiments of this Spaw, they are indeed very rude, and of a low rank, viz. a
skellet, a culinary fire, but not a word of a glass Still, which an ingenious
Artist supposing volatile spirits, would rather have chosen for the
satisfaction of himself and the World, he tells us almost a wonder, viz. that
when the water was almost evaporated and spent, it rises up in billows making
a bubling noise, like the boiling of Allom in the Mines at Whithy, which he
might see very frequently in the evaporations of most Mineral, Metalline, nay
vegetable solutions, but that it may be it is the first he has seen, and
therefore excusable.

5. I arguing with him against Vitriol, as being inconsistent with that of Iron
in the Spaw, told him that I apprehended, that if there were any common Vitriol
in it, would be emetick or vomitive; that it had no such operation, constant
experience convinced, as also an example he produced of a man that every
morning drank Eighteen Quarts, for two weeks together without any vomiting at
all.

6. But the reason he blushed not to urge, why, though Vitriol be in the water,
yet it should not vomit, you will wonder at, it is this, viz. we frequently
give in our Cordials, says he, spirit of Vitriol as also to quench thirst, but
does not at all make the Patient vomit, says the Doctor.

7. As if, according to his account, the spirits of Vitriol were nothing else
but Vitriol it self, and then indeed it would hold good what he says, that
when the Vitrioline spirits were gone, the Vitriol it self would also take
wing; to which we returned, that the spirits were but one part or element of
Vitriol, and the caput mortum or Coltotar another, and that the chief vomitive
property, lay not singly and distinctly in either of these, for if the Colcotar
should cause vomit, yet it is because there remains still some salts or spirits
unseparated, which when thoroughly dulcified, has nothing near, if at all, that
emetick property it had when the salts were joined to it.

8. Copper amongst all the Metals, if resolved into a Viridaeris or Vitriol by
any acid salt is the most, if not the only emetick Metal (excepting Mercury,
which although matter metallorum, yet is reckoned one of the seven, which by
Aqua fortis or Oil of Vitriol, is brought in to precipitate or turbith Mineral,
either of which is desperately emetick) I say Copper or the Minera of Copper
being resolved by an acidity becomes emetick, these salts being separated
either by distillation, or otherwise by a Menstruum, the Metal or Minera
becomes what it was again.

9. Now the Quety is, whence the vomitive quality of this cuprous solution
should proceed? It is not surely singly from the Sulphur of that Metal, because
it being separated from that Metal by the Liquor Alkahest, becomes, as Helmont
says, a sweet, fixed, anodynous Sulphur, and therefore quite contrary to an
emetick property; nor is it alone from the Mercurial part, because then the
same would be had from Saturn, Jupiter, Luna, etc. inasmuch as they have as
great a proportion, if not a greater of Mercury, than Venus. Now the Saccharum
Saturni, nor the Sal Jovis, as far as I understand, has any thing near such,
if at all, Emetick qualities; and as for the Sal Lunae, or Salt of Silver, that
is chiefly purgative, witness the Pillulae Lunares.

10. It is therefore from the Salts preying both upon the mercurial and
sulphurous parts jointly considered, which together make up so hostile a
texture of parts, as that they become wholly inimical to nature, becoming
totally refrectary to the acid ferment of the stomach, which not admitting so
tyrannical an Enemy, gathers all its Forces together, rallies them, and
opposes with all its might this grand Antagonist.

11. But reduce again this Vitriol into its primitive Elements, viz. Sal
acidum, and terra Mineralis sive Colcotar veneris; or reduce viride eris into
the acid Salt, and cuprous body, and none of these singly and alone shall be
Emetick; for the Spirit of Vinegar, nor sour Juice of Grapes, nor the Spirit
of Verdigreese, is at all vomitive; nor yet is the Salt of Vitriol of Venus, if
totally by an artificial Menstruum it be separated, Emetick; nor is the Spirit
of the same Vitriol at all vomitive. So that it is very clear, that the hostile
property of vomiting, is jointly from the commixtion of the Menstruum, that
dissolves either the Minera of Copper, whence the Vitriolum cupri; or of that
acidity that coagulates upon the very body of Copper, for making of it viride
eris.

SECT. 3.
1. I Queried with the Doctor how he came to understand that Nitre was an
Ingredient, and that the chief in the Spaw water, being as he writes the most
predominant; his arguments for it were twofold, the first argument he urged was
this, which as he thought was grounded upon experiment: Take, says he, the
Spaw water, into which put some Gauls, which strikes a color, then after it
has stood awhile, give the vessel a shake, and somewhat like a blackish
sediment will fall to the bottom, then pour off the clear water, and set it
upon the fire, and in a little time there will be a separation of a whitish
curdling matter; take it off the fire, and let it stand to cool, and there will
be found another whiter precipitation than before, and pour off the clear water
again, and this precipitate, says he, tastes somewhat like to Nitre; the clear
remaining water being boiled up to a dryness give the rest of the Minerals.

2. To which I replied, that after the first precipitation was made, by the
addition of Gauls, the the clearly decanted water receiving an alteration from
the fire, begun to make a spontaneous separation of part of the contents
thereof, which I had no other cause, from any argument of his, to look upon
otherwise than of the very same nature with the sediment which remained after
the boiling up the rest of the water, as to the taste of it, which he thought
was somewhat Nitrous, I suppose might be spoke in favor of what he would
willingly it should have tasted.

3. Many solutions may upon the fire give a separation of parts, which are yet
but of the same nature, with those left after the evaporation or distillation
of the Liquor, so that this whitish separation severs no distinct Ingredient
from the Spaw water, neither does it evince any truth in favor of the
multiplicity of principles in that water.

4. His other argument, which indeed is the chief he insists upon, is twofold,
viz. first from the Nitre, which is frequently found upon the Cliff, at the
bottom whereof the Spring break out, this he thinks must needs (because so near
the Well) contribute its assistance to the water, and that which confirms him
in his judgment, as he imagines, is that when the Rain comes it washed off
this Nitre, and after that more sweats thorough the earth, as he supposes, and
fills the vacancy of the former.

5. To which we answer, that it is true there is Nitre found along the Cliff
near the Well, but that this Nitre should contribute any influence to the
water, I deny; by showing, first, that that Nitre is engendered chiefly from the
air, and next to that, that it is only superficially to be found.

6. First, that it is chiefly begotten from the air, is apparent because it is
to be found very plentifully on old Walls, either Brick or Free stone, upon the
Lime in the seams of the Walls, especially where the Rain comes not, but the
air has free access, for otherwise the Rain washes it off when it comes; this
is called Nitrum murarium or Nitrum aereum, being a volatile aereal Salt
coagulated upon Lime, Allom, Stone, or the Mineral Earth of Allom.

7. To the coagulation of which Salt, is required a competent body or subject,
which may answer the indication of a Magnet, upon which these Nitrous
particles, floting in the air, settle themselves; of which sort are the
forenamed bodies, viz. Lime, Allom, Stone, Mineral Earth of the same, as also
any fixed salt, penetrating the body of an earthen Pot, as likewise an Essurine
Colcotar, made barren of its imbred spirits by force of fire, all which center
upon themselves, the volatile Nitrous Atoms dispersed in the air.

8. So that this Nitre lies not in veins of the earth as a Mineral salt, as
Dr. Witty supposes, but is merely superficial, and therefore washed away by
every dash of Rain; for if a solution were made of the same Mineral earth where
this is found, it is very probable we should upon examination find nothing of
Nitre in it.

9. The other part of his argument, which he thinks is instar omnium, to
confirm his opinion of Nitre the chief Ingredient, is this experiment, viz.
that upon the exposing of the Minerals (as he calls the sediment left after
evaporation of the water) some while in a moist and cold air, that there have
been found stiries or little Icikles among them, which is the form of Nitre; as
to the veracity of the experiment we are not incredulous, but that this should
evince the preexistence of Nitre in that sediment, is the thing we contend and
very much question.

10. For we say that the alluminous body left behind, after evaporation of the
water, is of the same nature with the Mineral earth or stone of Allom found
upon the Cliff, and so the one as well as the other becomes equal magnetical,
and attract or center upon themselves the floting Nitrous particles dispersed
abroad in the air; so that it is not the moist air that extraverts any
preexistent nitrous parts from the body of the minerals; but the vollatile
nitrous salt fluctuating in the air, settles it self upon proper magnetical
bodies, among which, the sediment of the Spaw water (being chiefly an
Alluminous Salt) is most peculiar.

SECT. 4.
1. BUt that we may the better illustrate the truth of what we assert, viz.
That an acid alumenish mineral Salt, preying upon, and dissolving a slight
touch of the Minera of Iron, gives essence to this Spaw, consider this
following Experiment. Take a duskish yellow Earth, which lies much in veins,
as also interspersedly here and there upon the Cliff near the Well, which is
discernable enough in taste, being sweet and stiptick, like Vitriol, or Allom,
or both.

2. This I dissolved in simple distilled Water, and filtred, with which mixing
a little powder of Gauls, gave an alteration of color toward a purple, though
not speedily, which with Spirit of Vitriol became clear again, after the manner
of the Spaw water.

3. The same clear Solution of this Minera found upon the Bank under which the
Spaw runs, being mixed with Oil of Tartar, gives a white Coagulum of milky
separation, like the water of the Spaw it self, or the solution of Allom;
which, with addition of Spirit of Vitriol, or aqua fortis, becomes clear, and
with Oil of Tartar becomes white, which may be again restored to its pristine
Clarity, by adding Spirit of Vitriol, or aqua fortis, etc.

4. The fame Solution having some drops of Spirit of Hartshorn mixed
therewith, gives a white separation, and with Spirit of Salt becomes clear
again, answerable in every particular to the Spaw water it self.

5. Some of this clear Solution I distilled in a Glass retort, until what
remained was a bright styriate floscule, increasing the fire somewhat more, it
came to be a dry white Salt, of a stiptick allumenous taste.

6. The water which was distilled off from this Salt, being saved in a glass
Receiver, whose joints was close stopped, would not give any alteration of
color, either with solution of Gauls, or with lixivium of Tartar; which argued
that no heterogeneous volatile parts of the same nature with the Salts, came
over the helm.

7. All which put together, evince no less than a parity or likeness of
Principles between that Mineral earth, and the Spaw water; for from a parity of
Principles in an homogeneal process, results a likeness of products, so that
the Spaw is nothing else but this Essurine acid Salt in its Mineral earth (in
toro suo Metallico) being an allumenish terrestrial Globe, dissolved in the
current Spring of water.

8. For the specifical difference of all Mineral Salts, depend upon these
three, viz. a Sulphurious, acid, essurine spirit; water, and a Mineral Glebe;
from the various solutions and mixtures of which, arise the variety of Mineral
Salts, in the bowels of the earth.

9. Water impregnate with this acid sulphurious spirit, diffused thorough the
occult Meanders of the terraqueous Globe, according to the nature of the
Mineral Glebe it meets withal, it becomes coagulated into such and such a salt;
for if this acidulated water, find a salsuginous Glebe, it becomes coagulated,
according to the property of that Glebe, together with its connate salt in a
sal marine, which with greater dashes of water passing thorough the
subterraneal channels, becomes dissolved and carried into the Ocean, thence the
saltness of the Sea, which has its Minera from fossile salt, from which also
some Springs are fatturate, as the Sulphur Well at Knarsbrough, etc.

10. If the suphurious acidulate water meet with Nitrous Veins, it coagulates
into Nitre, which being by other current streams of water dissolved, very
probably become the original of intensely cold springs, viz. such as Magnus
Well, Cockroft Well, etc. which though to touch extremely cold, yet by an
intrinsic sulphurious warming property, does so notably open the pores of such
as are bathed therein, as that it resolves the congealed blood and latex,
settled about the joints and outward parts of the body, thence becoming the
cause of Pains, Aches, Stiffness, Numbness and Lameness of the joints, which by
the penetrating opening virtue of those Nitrous springs are resolved, and
thence a redintegration of the glyssent ferments of the blood and humors,
which give warmth and motion to all the parts again.

11. If the aforesaid essurine water find a Mineral Iron bed, it becomes
determined thereby, either into a Vitriol, or becomes the original of most acid
Spaws, called Fontes aciduli, sharp springs, such as Tunbridge, Epsom,
Knarsbrough, etc. amongst which this of Scarbrough is not the least.

12. The sweet Spaw of Knarsbrough, is but languid of Mineral principles,
having but a very slight touch of the Minera of Iron, and has the essurine
acidity but in a very remiss degree, thence it is that great quantities must be
gulped down, before any sensible operation by purgation.

13. As the Minera of Iron terminates the sulphurious acidity into vitrioline
sharp springs, so in like manner the Minera or primum ens of Copper, coagulates
this essurine salt into a cuprous Vitriol, and that either fossile to be dug
out of Mines, or i^ further dissolved in a water spring, which by exhaling the
moisture by the Sun, or by boiling it up over a fire, it shoots into Vitriol.
Or lastly, this acidity is coagulated in Mineral cuprous stones, which being
exposed to the air, become resolved by the falling of Rain water thereon, which
after filtration and boiling up, shoot in great troughs into common Vitriol.

14. But if this essurine sulphurious water find an allumenish Glebe or Rock,
it becomes thereby coagulated into natural Allom, receiving a specifical
difference, from that particular Mineral Glebe, whereby it becomes different
from the other coagulations of the same Mineral acidity, which by further
dissolution in the current of a water spring, give being to this of Scarbrough,
and other the like Spaws.

SECT. 5.
1. NOw whence the great variety of Mineral glebes should proceed, is a
Philosophical query, worthy our most choice consideration; especially seeing
that from the multiplicity hereof, the sulphurious acid spirit, becomes
determined to this or that particular specifical salt of sal marine, Nitre,
Vitriol and Allom.

2. For in these the Metals are in solutis principiis, in their primitive
juyces; their Mercuries, though volatile, crude, and undigested, yet are
spermatical and as such are the radical moisture of Metals, not to say the
Mercury of Philosophers; these are apt to be coagulated and maturated into
Metals, by the embryonate Sulphurs, which lurk in intimis Thalamis glebarum
metallicarum, which according to the purity or impurity of the terrestrial
Matrix, and degrees of the graduation of the Sulphurs, are determined and
specificated in imperfect and perfect Metals to the completing the septenary of
the Metallic order, besides their middle Minerals, which are in the Road to
Metalization.

3. That all Metals and Minerals have their innate seeds, shut up in
themselves, we shall not need to spend time to confirm, in auro semina sunt
auri quamvis abstrusas recedunt longius; seeing that their spermatick
principles, become prolifick suo more; whose seed operating in a volatile crude
Mercury, and an embrionate Sulphur, become deducible after the manner of a
natural genesis unto their state of maturation, accord to the process of their
concretes in the Vegetable kingdom.

4. We may therefore consider, that as God, the original Founder of all beings,
has implanted in the superficies of the earth, that great variety of vegetable
seeds, whence the diversity of Plants, not only sprung up at first, but by
their seminal beginings, or somewhat analogous thereto, have continued to
propagate themselves in their species.

5. Every Vegetable at its proper season by the instigation of the heavenly
influences, having its seminals set at work, in which it has its own specific
faber, or (if I may so call it) Archeus, which by its innate plastic power,
begins to hew forth it self a body, out of the elementary principle of water,
shaping it self in stalk, branches, leaves, flowers, seeds and fruits,
according to the platform laid in the seminal beginings thereof, every Plant in
its kind, to the great and wonderful variety, which we see upon the face of the
earth, so that presentem refert, qualibet herba Deum.

6. So in like manner the invisible Divine Power, has according to his own
beneplacit, dispersed variety of Mineral and Metaline seeds in hidden places of
the opake body of the earth, whence indeed the great and manifold difference of
Mineral Glebes or Earths, which Mineral seeds, as well as all others, whether
vegetable or animal, are indemonstrable a priori, taking at first their
immediate beginings from the very bosom of the Eternal Being.

7. And therefore only demonstrable to us a posteriori, viz. to our common
sense, by appearing in a visible garb upon the Stage of the World. Now these
dispersed Mineral Seminaries, wherewith several parcels of earth become
impregnate, being set at work by the primitive fiat, which is the same to this
day as ever, in their beginning to shape bodies for their ideal essences to
become manifest in, form to themselves a Mercurial volatile juice, and an
embrionate Sulphur, as the materia proxima and prima to Metalization.

8. With these two proximate principles, the Mineral Archeal faber operates,
ripens the elemental crudities, and in a linear process puts on a tincture and
weight, and at length terminates in the coagulation of a perfect Metal,
specificated according to the form of the innate seed; for the ripening
coagulating fire of the embrionate Sulphur, is as the Solterrae (id quod est
inferius, est sicut quod est superius) which kills the Python, viz. exiccates
and maturates the radical Mercurial moisture, and terminates it in a Metalick
species: But I digress, this being more fit for a Philosophic discourse upon
another subject.

9. We say therefore that these Mineral Glebes, have for the mostpart a Mercury
and a Sulphur in solutis principiis, and both dissolvable in an essurine salt
for salts are the keys that unlock the Mineral Kingdom.

These are those Menstrual Salts which teach Minerals and Metals how to
dissolve in water, by breaking them in minima, and thereby how to communicate
their medicinal virtues for the health of man's body.

10. Here the Chemistry of nature is most admirable, which by its own peculiar
Menstruums extracts the essential innate virtues of Mineral Glebes, and that by
an intrinsic invisible fire in the digesting vessels of the earth, yea and by
the help of Art, supplying the difficulties of Nature, by frequent solutions
and coagulations, may yet further graduate these mineral virtues into more
noble Arcana's, whose essential tinctures may the better penetrate the vital
ferments of the Microcosm.

11. But how this Sulphurious essurine Salt, becomes determined and
specificated, according to the difference of the Mineral Glebes it meets with,
into this or that fossile Salt or Mineral mixture, may perhaps not unaptly be
represented, by this following instance; as suppose several colors and salts
placed at a distance, one from another upon a large Marble, and common simple
water is conveyed to each of these, this water though the same to all, yet as
it comes to every of them, it becomes differently tincted and tasted, according
to the color and taste of those parcels it meets with.

12. So this essurine Sulphurous Spirit, meeting with variety of Mineral
Earths, though the same in it self to every one, yet becomes altered and
tinctured according to the different property of the Mineral Earth, and that
according to the degree of Sulphur, maturating the crude Mercurial juice.

Now to confirm this our Thesis, we must assume these two considerations,
first, that all the various specificated Mineral Salts, as Allom, Vicriol,
Nitre, etc. have aliquid commune, something in common amongst themselves; and
secondly, that thereby all these Salts become transmutable one into another.

13. For the first, that they have something in common among themselves,
besides confirmation by our previous discourse, is yet further demonstrable by
matter of fact upon our second consideration, viz. the transmutability of one
salt into another, by the Chemical Art we can out of sal marine or the spirit
thereof make a Vitriol of Iron or Copper, and by dissolving Quicksilver in Oil
of Vitriol, according to what is done in making turbith Mineral; as suppose
four Ounces of Oil of Vitriol to one of Mercury, after the phlegm is evaporated
and distilled, that there remains a white precipitate, which edulcorated by
washing gives a Citrine powder, and being revived (as by distilling it from
potashes it may) gives the same weight of current Quicksilver as it was at
first: This water which is impregnate with the Vitrioline Salts, by being
boiled up gives a true Allom; here Vitriol salts are transmuted into an
allumenish salt, and that without the addition of any thing but Quicksilver,
which is again totally separable, and yet salts by the very odor of the
Mercury is turned into an Allom.

14. And not only Oil of Vitriol with Mercury, but also Oil of Vitriol with
common sal marine gives Alumen; for if you put Oil of Vitriol, as we sometimes
have done upon common salt, and distill it in a glass body or retort, with a
gentle heat, you will find a very volatile spirit of salt will come over the
helm, which will fume exceedingly, the caput mort', or remaining salt being
dissolved, gives a salt exactly resembling Allom.

15. Also Allom in its Minera exposed to the air, is as a Magnet to Nitre,
attracting and centring it upon it self, and common salt is in the body of
Nitre. Thus you see a relation or circulation of salts one into another; and
all this, because they have in their Center that one common Essurine spirit of
salt, which according to various alterations in Mineral beds admits of
different coagulations.

16. In short, by way of recapitulation, it is thus, the Essurine acid salt,
having in its solution got a slight touch of a Vein or Minera of Iron, and
passing through a Rocky Mineral Glebe of Allom (of which along the shore of
Scarbrough and Whithy is found great plenty) becomes more specificated in an
allumenous than any other salt, with which the water of the Quick-spring (which
breaks forth at the foot of the Rock) is impregnate, which makes that Fountain,
viz. the Spaw, we discourse of.

SECT 7.
1. HAving thus run through the essential principles of this spring, which make
up this body of Mineral water, which is so frequently (and that for the most
part, not without the expected success) drunk for the health of men's bodies, I
think it not impertinent to speak somewhat of its virtues, and that the rather
because Dr. Witty gave forth, as I was informed, that I endeavored to defame
the Spaw, in that I held it to be an allumenous Spring.

2. Let him therefore and the World know, that in the Essurine salt of Allom,
as noble medicinal virtues are to be found, as in any other Mineral
specificated salt whatever, for this salt in its primum ens is volatile, and
therefore exquisitly penetrative, forcing its passage, thorough the otherwise
obstructed Meanders of the bowels, notably opening the obstructions of the
parts, and thereby restoring the blood, and other peculiar spirituous juyces of
the genus nervosum, to their primitive fermental vigor.

3. For the better understanding of which, we are to consider, first, the
natural fermental digestions of the body; next to that the depravations
thereof, by excrementitious parts; and thirdly the Diseases thence depending;
and lastly, the restoration of these digestions, by removing the interrupting
obstacles and redintegration of the blood and humors.

4. First by the digestive ferments of the body, I mean such alterative juyces
as are ab origin implanted in such various principal parts, as are adapted for
the transmuting of the nutritive juice of all aliment, from one consistence,
color, and taste, into another, until it has run the whole circuit of
alterations, giving a proportionable nourishment to every part, for growth of
children in the way to maturity, and for the supplying the deficiences
contracted, by constant transpiration in adult persons.

5. These ferments are (as the ingenious Helmont says) transmutationum
parents and a priori indemonstrabiles, the authors of all transmutations, and
cannot be demonstrated by any thing before them, because they are primitively
inserted ab ortu, and so become radical principles.

6. That of the stomach is certainly such a one as is scarsely to be paralleled
in rerum natura, excepting the prodigious effects Helmont tells us of the grand
Liquor Alkahest, which makes every concrete fatiscere in suam primam materiam,
resolving them into their primitive juyces. This acid ferment of the stomach is
so powerful, as no other extraneous acidity in the World, can (if in its native
vigor) resolve the hardest of aliments into a milky juice, and transmute
several sorts of food, as Beef, Mutton, Veal, etc. taken at the same time into
one similar cremor, which no other acidity (we yet know of) can do, though
assisted by as equal a digestive heat, as we can imagine to be in the stomach
or the parts adjacent.

7. I shall not enter upon a large discourse of the Ferments, being notably and
fully discussed, both by the noble Helmont, and the ingenious Dr. Willis; I
shall only assume so much of that Doctrine as to illustrate what I intend, viz.
that these vital ferments being strong and vigorous make such alterations,
separations, depurations, exaltations and assimilations of the nutritive juice,
as are convenient for health and the common functions of life.

8. But if they become alienated and depraved, by excrementitious parts,
accumulated through the inormities of living, as by excess of meats or drinks,
which burden by out-proportioning the digestions, as also by food which agrees
not with the ferment of the stomach, as also by unseasonable exercises, and by
passions of the mind; all which together with the inclemency of the air, etc.
have such an influence upon this and other parts of the body, as that by
perverting the ferment, or precipitating the fermented mass, does so alter the
function thereof, as that thereby no small foundation is laid for the
multiplicity of Diseases, both acute and chronical; but especially chronical,
whose deep roots are most what inserted in the seminals of the depraved ferment
of the stomach.

9. The Diseases thence proceeding, are generally the Scurvy, Dropsy, Asthma,
Vertigo, Nauseatings, Vomitings, Diarchea's, and sometimes Dysenteries, etc.
all which, though when in their full state of symptoms and products, indicate
a vitiating of other ferments of the body, and appear in other parts, yet have
their beginings from the perversions of the stomachical ferment.

10. For no sooner is the ferment of the stomach vitiated, by the foresaid or
any other occasional cause, but the nutritive juice receives such different
alterations (according to the degree of the error of the ferment) from what it
should be, as that either the crudeness or over acidness of the chile whilst
yet in the stomach, lays the beginning of the seminaries of the foresaid
Diseases, which being transmitted thus raw, or too pontick into the other
digestions, draw them likewise into consent, and so vitiate one digestion after
another, until the Diseases appear in their full dimension and latitude of
symptoms.

11. Now if the ferments become debilitated by the accumulation of excremental
impurities, which in persons of weak constitutions in tract of time, more
easily happen, than the alimental juice proves not well dissolved and digested,
which passing the first digestion thus crude, either before its transit through
the pilorus, causes a flatus, then a Nauseating Vomiting or Pain of the
Stomach, a Vertigo, or lays the foundation of a Fever, either continual or
intermitting; if it pass the pilorus, it vitiates the second digestion in the
intestines, and thence Worms, Jaundice, Obstructions of the Misentery, etc.

12. If this vitiated juice pass thus uncorrected from the thoraeical vessels,
into the vena cava, and so into the heart, which I suppose to be the third
digestion, taking the second and third of Helmont's digestions to be but one,
which is done in the intestines and lacteal vessels: The third, to begin with
sanguification, viz. when the chyle has passed the second digestion in the
intestines, and there receives a further depuration and separation into a more
refined milky juice, whose receptacle are the glandules of the Mesentery, and
the Lumbazes is further carried by the thoracical vessels into the jugular
veins, and there meeting with the blood, is dashed with a rubicund color, and
carried into the ventricles of the heart, and there undergoes the third
ferment, where it is elaborated into vital blood. I say if the foresaid
vitiated juice, come thus raw into this third digestion it terminates in Fevers
both continual and intermittent.

13. For the (otherwise) nutritive juice, coming so indigested to the vital
ferment of the heart, which is not able to master it, or make any good arterial
blood, subverts the vital digestion thereof, rouseth up a spurious febrile
fermentation, and intestine commotion of the blood; hence the burning heat in
Fevers, and coming from an impure digestion in the stomach, whose footsteps it
yet retains, thence the great thirst, and from the same, yet further vitiating
the other digestions of the genus nervosum (which is the Minera of animal
Spirits) proceeds Frenzies, Deliriums, etc. and therefore according to the
degrees of this vitiated juice, and consequenly of the intense or remiss
disturbance of this vital ferment it causes the paroxysmes of intermiting
Fevers, to come sooner and later, thence the variety of Quotidian, Tertian,
double Tertian, Quartan Agues, etc.

14. If this depraved juice arrive at the succus nervosus, ubi spiritus
animales cuduntur, which I take to be the fourth digestion, or depuration of
nutritive juice, in its road to absolving the function of sense and motion;
thence a perturbation of those animal Spirits, an inversion of their natural
crasis, whence Lethargies, Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Convulsions, Spasms, etc.
all which depend upon the depravation of the spermatick juice of the genus
nervosum.

15. But if it reach to, or be depraved, by the fifth or last digestion, viz.
the assimilative ferment of the solid parts of the body: thence Abscessus,
Aposthumations, Fistula's, Ulcers, Tumors, Prurigoes, etc. all which depend
upon the vitiating of the ultimate digestion in the habit of the body.

16. I look upon the alimental juice in its way to nutrition, to undergo many
alterations from specifical ferments, placed in different parts of the body; to
suffer many separations, and to pass through many Colanders or Streiners, where
it is percolated and depurated, each ferment after other (while a symmetrie in
the occonomy of parts) inricheth it with new and more balsamic tinctures,
enlivens it with more elaborate spirituous particles, adapted for the clarity
of sensual functions, as a more depurate diaphanous vehicle for the soul to act
in.

17. I say these Spirits (which are almost the ultimate result of all the
digestions) have their constitution and daily supply, from the succulent parts
of the aliment, which passes various fermentations, and are at last fabricated
out of the purest parts thereof; according therefore as the vigor of these
ferments are, and the depurations of the nutritive juice more or less: so are
these Spirits in their Crasis more pure and serene, or dull and opake, whence
the soul which sees and acts by these organical Spirits, either becomes
lightsome and cheerful in the outward fancy and portals of the external senses;
thence the sanguine and colerick complexion. Or becomes dark, dull, and heavy,
and as it were incarcerated in the dungeons of the senses and sensual fancy,
the cloudiness of those Spirits darkens the soul, and makes up the melancholy
complexion, which with a little variation makes the phlegmatic.

18. I look upon the Spleen and the ferment thereof, to contribute very much to
the Crasis of these Spirits; for if the ferment thereof be depraved, so as a
due separation of the blood is not made (which yet ought to be) and that which
should be separated is yet retained: thence obstructions in the very parenchym
of that bowel, a darkning and cloudiness of the Spirits, a melancholy vaporous
steam soyls the channels of the animal Spirits, and obscures the function of
those nimble agents, inverts their order, breaks their ranks, and brings a sad
catastrophe upon the animal powers.

19. The soul while in the body has these airy Spirits for its Vehicle, having
thereby an influence upon all and every part, is not determined to any
particular place, neither in the glandula pinealis of the brain according to
Des Carts, nor yet in the membranous tunicles of the stomach, according to
Helmont; though I do not deny but in the one it may have its peculiar residing
place for the regulating the culinary digestions, and in the other its turret
to take in the sensible impressions from outward objects, to look about it
through the casements of the senses, yet is essentially in every part: and
where ever it finds any hostile enemy, which impugneth the texture of those
Spirits, there the sensitive soul (by which I mean the vital and animal
Spirits, which yet are but one; and that the Vehicle of the immortal Soul) acts
ad nutum, rallies up all its forces, incounters the Disease, and at length, si
vires ferent, plucks out the morbid thorn, and all is well again.

20. So that all the digestions and ferments, the separations and depurations
thereunto belonging, are but to prepare and so elaborate the nutritive juice,
as thence a continual supply may come in for the preservation of these animal
Spirits, the Vehicle of the soul; whose different Crases make different
complexions; and whose different alterations, by various depravations of
intermediate ferments, cause no small off spring of Diseases.

21. Now as the crudity of the alimental juice, first made so, for want of a
due fermentation in the stomach, and passing on uncorrected from one digestion
to another, lays the foundation (as I said) of several Diseases: so in like
manner the over acidness or spurious ponticity of the stomachical ferment
(which is also a depravation of the ferment thereof) gives beginning to several
other Diseases.

22. For though the genuine ferment of the stomach, be specifically acid; and
as such, does so temper, dissolve and equally mix the meat and drink we take,
as to bring it to a chyliferous cremor, and that as a necessary preparation to
the succeeding digestions: yet if it become too exorbitant, even while in the
stomach working up to the upper mouth thereof, causes Cardialgia's,
Heart-burnings, and sour belchings. That a spurious acidity is the cause
thereof, appears by their Cure, which is done by such things as have power to
correct, by diluting and sweetning such superfluous acidities, viz. by any
fixed salt of Vegetables, or any concretes which contein a fixed Alkali in them,
as Crabs Eyes, Corals, Pearl, etc.

23. This spurious acidity transmitted into other digestions, cause other
Diseases, extra suos lares, says Helmont, in alienam messem transmissa, evadit
hostile venis and arteris, etc. for if it be sent into the second digestion, it
causes sometimes the Colic, Gripings, Iliack Passion, with Spasms, and
Convulsive motions of the Guts: and sometimes from an acid flatus or sowrish
gas, fretting upon the spermatick parts of the intestines, causes Gripings,
Disenteries, which grating upon the tender tunicles thereof, liquates the blood
from them, and the adjacent parts; at every tormenting liquation puts nature
upon the rack, makes the tender parts confess their weakness to so powerful a
fretting agent.

24. Where by the way take notice, that in a complete digestion of the stomach,
where there is no more than a proportionable acidity, the cremor comes somewhat
acidulate to the second digestion, which by the ferment of those parts, is
transmuted into another taste, viz. as Helmont says, it becomes of a saline
taste, I say though it come somewhat acidulate, yet is conquerable by the
ferment of the next digestion; so that unless the acidity be beyond the natural
proportion, it causes no alteration as to the foresaid Diseases.

25. If this exorbitant acidity be carried to the third digestion in the heart,
it becomes hostile to the arteries, subverts the Crasis of the blood, by
altering the sweet balsamic soft natural temper thereof, impressing an austere
sour property: sometimes causes Fevers, but mostwhat lays the foundation of a
depraved scorbutic ferment, by perverting the sweet temperature of the blood,
inclining it to a sour saltishness, which precipitating the balsamic parts,
and giving fluidity to the saltish and sulphurous parts of the blood, in the
same sowrish property, hinders the natural fermentation of the blood, and in
lieu thereof begets this scorbutic ferment.

26. This pervertion of the genuine ferment of the blood, proves a remora to
its circulation, making it at sometimes to restagnate, in some of the arterial
or venal channels in some parts of the body: where coagulating, causes Tumors,
Imposthumations, inward Ulcers, Pains, becomes a thorn in those parts, which
pricketh (if I may so say) the Archeus, incenseth the Spirits, inflames the
parts, brings on a Fever, which, if mortal, hurries all out of doors.

27. The scorbutic ferment prevailing, by degrees spreads it self, by
vitiating one digestion after another, until it appear clad in all its colors,
branched forth in all its symptoms and products, which are various, sometimes
in one dress, sometimes in another, viz. in erratick Pains, Dullness and
Heaviness of Spirits, Tumors, Ulcers of many sorts, Spots, Looseness of the
Teeth, Soreness of the Gooms, Foulness of the skin by Botches, Roughness and
other impurities of the outward parts.

For the blood is so corrupted by the vitiating ferment of the Scurvy, as that
it constantly breaths forth, staining Apporrhea's or impure steams, which
making their egress through the pores of the skin, are, by obstructions they
find there, coagulated upon the outward parts, and so make Spots, Botches,
Foulness, Roughness (as if nettled) and other impurities of the skin.

I cannot otherwise, at least not better, compare the skin of man's body, in
these and such like foul Diseases, than to a transparent glass; which if the
steams, rising from a spurious fermentation of the blood and humors, become
too gross to be pervious to the pores thereof, then they condense along the
sides, begeting Spots, Stains, foul Damps, etc. analogical to the dampy mists
of the Scurvy, which if it were possible to cover the body over with
transparent, white glass, we might easily discover the impure mists and dark
steams, arising from the bastardly fermentation of the blood, in Scurvies,
venereal Diseases, malignant Fevers, Plague, etc. which if the interception of
the circulation of the air (that necessary bellows of Life) would not prevent
the successfulness of the experiment of glass-Receivers, we might discern very
strange and unthoughtof Apporrhea's, cloudy mists, impure steams, circulate
within the atmosphere of the aforesaid diseased bodies, perhaps not much unlike
those foggy mists, cloudy vapors, and tempestuous confusions, which frequently
happen within the Orb of the Earths atmosphere, which gives that frequent
change of weather in the Macrocosm, as these cause alterations in the Microcosm.

These vaporous steams arising from the blood of persons infected with the
foresaid Diseases, are not simple distillations, or mere evaporations of the
blood; for then neither our glass-Receivers, or our skins would condense or
percolate any other than fair simple water, which would cause neither Spots nor
Stains: but the steams of spurious fermenting blood is quite otherwise; for
here nature endeavors an analysis of the morbid matter, in the resolution
whereof, it carrys of vapore tenus, the very seminal Miasmes, equivolent
(according to their proportion) to the relicts thereof, struggling in the
channels of the blood; for we see in all fermentations a separation of some
terrene faeces to the sides of the vessels, also of an incoercible flatus,
which carries along with it some slight touches of the radical principles in
the fermenting Liquor.

Whence first we see the reason of the infectiousness of the foresaid Diseases;
for in such spurious fermentations nature attempts a resolution and separation
of the peccant matter, which takes wing by those impure vaporous steams; in its
road it leaves its character of Spots, Stains, Blotches, Buboes, Ulcers, etc.
in the outward parts of the skin, and so goes on to the utmost extent of the
activity of its own Orb, which if (as I said) could be retained by
glass-Receivers, we should not only see the extent of its Orb, but also view
the corrupting soiling Apporrhea's, which issue from such infected bodies; now
what bodies come within the orb of their activity, if duly fitted for the
reception of those Miasmes, they become tainted with effluvia's thereof, which
retain the platform of the very seminal principles of the Disease in the body,
or at least carry along with them somewhat analogical to those very Diseases
they spring from, even so much as to be sufficient to propagate the like
Disease in the next infected body, as we see most frequently in malignant
Fevers; especially the Plague.

Whence also we see the reason why some precious stones, worn in Rings or
otherwise, per modum appensorum, will suffer a loss in their oriental splendour
and brightness, when near such bodies as have these soyling steams arise from
their fermental impurities, viz. in such bodies as have the Small Pox,
malignant Fevers, Plague, yea sometimes in such as have the French Disease and
Scurvy in an high degree, whence the Saphir or the Hyacinth, being so held to a
pained Member in suspicion of the Plague, as that it reflects the light upon
the affected part, does so collect and concentre those malignant steams which
arise from the infected blood, as that in a very small time (if the party be
really infected) it makes the part grow wan and black, and becomes the
insallible indication of the Plague, by which afterward, as Helmont says, the
virulency as through a tube or chimney is driven forth; that a piece of red
Coral should grow pale upon the touching of an hysterical (or I rather think
menstrual) woman is from the same cause; for upon the regurgitation of the
menstrues there happens an extrordinary defedation of the blood, which by a
kind of virulent fermentation, sets the blood into a venomous steaming; which
oftentimes is so powerful, as it not only soils the external parts, but also
passes forth, and meeting with any trannsparent or reflecting glass, or Gem
stains them, which is not so much from the breath of a menstruous woman, as
from other steams which pass through the pores of the body round, but
especially at the portals of the eyes.

In like manner appears the reason of the Evestrum vitae, been vel male
affectae; for amongst precious stones, some are diaphanous, others opake, as
Coral, Cornelian, Turcois, Jaspis, etc. but in pellucids, as Helmont says,
that Evestrumvitae reverberates it self; for as he says, gaudet vitaspeculo
lucido reflecti, and therefore he looks upon Gems as opake well polished
glasses.

And seeing as he further says, that something does constantly and necessarily
breath through the pores of our bodies, which participates with life it self,
and acts within the sphere of its orb; and this in the most sound bodies, which
if it find a polite body, reflects it self therein in the manner of a glass;
and hence it is that many periapta become effectual, by being such polite
bodies, wherein the evestrum vitae reflects it self in modum speculi; and from
this very root arises most of the arcana sympathetica; yea and from this
original by sigmental additions came the Ganiahen and Talis manica of the
Arabians, from whom Paracelsus was taught that sort of Magical Doctrine, viz.
his Archidoxis Magiea, etc.

28. This Dyserasia sanguinis is not only compatible to the Scurvy, but also to
other chronick Diseases, as the Quartan Ague and the Dropsy, in both which,
the peculiar natural ferment of the blood is much vitiated; in the first of
which, the blood losing its native balsamic sweetness, becomes acid and
pontick, even in an high measure; thence the great difficulty of its
redintegration to its former eucrasia: in the latter, the blood becomes too
much diluted, drowning its rubicund balsamic tincture, in a watery deluge,
having the latex regurgitated in too great a proportion into the vessels of the
blood or other receptacles, from an obstruction in the veins, which should (if
well disposed) separate from the blood an urinous latex, and by other more
abbreviate passages betwixt the stomach and it, a great deal of the potulent
parts taken in: but being obstructed makes both regurgitate, the one into the
vessels of the blood, thereby vitiating its ferment by too great a dilution,
which in the habit of the body causes an Anasarcosis, and the other in the
cavities of the abdomen, between the omentum and peritoncum swelling the belly
causes the Hydrops, which with a flatus extending the membranous parts, begets
a Tympany.

29. But if this spurious acidity reach the fourth digestion, where the animal
spirits are fabricated, and there afflict the genus nervosum, it causes, by
vitiating the ferment, scorbutic Palsies, Apoplexies, Spasms, Convulsions, and
Cephalalgia's, which prove inveterate, and sometimes Epilepsies; yet commonly
this hostile acidity as solitary is not sufficient to beget these scorbutic
Apoplexies, Palsies and Epilepsies: but also has quid cadaverosum spirituale,
and therefore virosum; some spirituous putrid and therefore poisonous matter to
accompany it. By which I mean such a portion of the nutritious juice as not
having received due fermentations in the several digestions, but become more
and more vitiated and putrid, and being circulated from one digestion to
another, grows more putrid and penetrative, and in continuance of time becomes
so spirituous, as to be able to insinuate into the more retired recesses of the
vital principles; for being by these rotations volatiz'd, has more easy
ingress into the inward retirements of the vital and animal functions: so that
it becomes gradually exalted to a kind of virulency, which joining issue with
this transmitted spurious acidity, insidiantur vitae, sits upon the skirts of
life, betrays it into the hands of these truculent Diseases. Hence it is that
the Palsy or Apoplexy prove suddenly mortal, if not at the first, yet
commonly at the second or third paroxysm, and from the same basis arises the
causes of other kinds of sudden deaths; for when this depraved, circulated
matter, has reached so far, and be wheeled so often, as to acquire a virulency
or cadaverousness, it then takes an occasion by the next exorbitancy of the
digestions, joins hands with it, and conspires the extinction of the vital
flame.

30. This fourth digestion, as I conceive, begins in the arteries and is
complete in the nerves; for when the alimentary juice, being dashed with blood
in the vena cava, receives a vital ferment in the heart, and becomes elaborate
in the tunicles thereof, into a rubicund balsamic liquor, which by the
perspiration of the lungs, in the bloods passage thorough the vena arteriosa,
and arteria venosa, receives a volatizing ferment from the air, conducing much
to its circulation, is thence by the systole of the left ventricle carried into
the aorta and other arteries: where the blood begins to be further elaborated
for the producing of spirits, which may be subservient for the animal functions
of sense and motion; where from the continual elixation of the blood in these
vessels, it begins to sublime, or distill into more pure refined spirits, which
pass directly into their proper Receivers or Conduits, the Nerves, to complete
their digestion and absolve their function of sense and motion, for as much as
every Artery has a vein and a nerve annexed to it, the one to carry away
these volatile spirits, the other to bring back the blood, after it has been
exhausted of these spirits, and spent its other balsamic parts, in nutrition
in the habit of the body, to recive a fresh impregnation, by the vital ferment
in the heart again, in its return out of the solid parts, by capillary veins
into larger vessels, until it come to the vena cava, it meets with fresh
nutritive juice, coming from the jugular and thoracical vessels which thence
pass along together into the heart to become freshly replenisht with the vital
balsam.

31. So that these animal spirits are made in every part of the body, while the
arterial blood is fraught with a vital ferment, out of which the Archeus by a
further volatization hews forth these spirits: here the hermetical adage is
most true, id quod inferius, est sicut id quod superius, and vice versa: for
the vital agents, if not interrupted, are always and in every part at work,
nunquam feriatur uatura; therefore sensation and motion are always and in
every part, except some interrupting cause break the links of this noble chain.

32. Now any disturbance in this digestion, such as by a conflux of the
foresaid spurious hostile acidity, cadaverous virulency, etc. may confound and
so blunder the texture of these spirits, as thence all the various exorbitances
and different anomalous products, with all the heteroclite symptoms of the
genus nervosum are reducible, which I shall not now take the time further to
illustrate. But pass on;

33. This exotic acidity coagulating the blood in the Matrix in women, is the
author of most of their uterine infirmities; for in women who are not with
child or give not suck, if all be well with them, the blood attempts to make a
lunar evacuation, which it does by separating a portion thereof at the critical
season, into the vessels of the Womb, which according to the intent of nature,
is for the nourishing of the Foetus after conception, being a precursory
provision for that end: if no conception be, as in Maids, Widows, etc. then
nature endevevours to separate, and carry away that superfluous blood by
vessels fitted for that purpose, where it receives a fetid menstrual virulent
ferment, which gives the uncleaness (not to say more) to that evacuation.

34. Now when the superfluous blood, is proscribed into the remote vessels
ready to be expelled, is there robbed of the vital balsam, its Crasis perverted,
and becomes infected with an acid virulent alumenish tincture, Nam lintcum
menstruo tinctum, ut Helmontius loquitur, si demergatur in aquam bullientem,
maculam contrahit inposterum indelibilem, quae tertia saltem elotione, excidit
e linteo foraminato, non secus ac si spiritu sulphuris acido aut tinctura
aluminosa corrosum foret; which depraved virulent acidity is not transmitted
from other digestions, but is innate and connatural to the place, like the
stercorary ferment to the cacum and rectum of the Guts.

35. If this virulent aerimony, with which the separated menstrual blood is
vitiated, becomes by a retrograde motion revulsed into the veins or arteries
where the vivid balsamic blood circulates, which is done sometimes by
unseasonable cold contracted at the crisis of evacuation, or by too much blood
spent in venesection, or by symptomatical enragements of that furibund animal
the Matrix, or by what other cause soever, is I say the effectful cause of
direful Diseases, proper to that soft sex, viz. Syncop's, Palpitations,
Convulsions, and horrible strangulations.

36. For this exotic revuls'd virulency assaulting the blood and vital spirits
therein, begins to ferment strongly, smites the heart, or at least those
balsamic spirits which received vitality from the heart; thence immediately
Swoonings, whereby for a time happens a suspension of the vital offices, the
pulse cease or is weak, the spirits flag, the circulation of the blood is
torpid, and all the vital powers shaken: sometimes it strikes the heart with a
palpitation or trembling, viz. the vital spirits stand amazed, as if imitten
with a thunderclap from the uterine toxicum; also it afflicts with
Convulsions, making the animal spirits run counter, whirling them in oblique
gyres to the contortion of the musculous parts.

37. And further by an influential manner, it causes terrible strangulations,
by suddenly stopping the pores of the Lungs; and that too, though the Lungs be
never so sound (whence all suspicion of any corrupt matter being there to cause
the obstructions, is taken away) as also the same is evident in that, after the
cessation of the strangulating paroxysm, many times no invisible evacuation
follows: and this it does I say by contracting the pores of the Lungs, whereby
all respiration is intercepted, and consequently no pulse, nor circulation of
blood during that time; sometimes this acrimonious virulency has access to the
hypochonders, and there (especially when it is acuated and grows more virulent
by circulation) it causes Frenzies and Madness, which sort Mania's prove
difficult to cure, because they are not generally right understood, what is the
true effective or efficient cause.

38. Thus in short, of the cause of these terrifying Diseases of the female
sex. Now there are other more common (but less if at all virulent) Diseases,
which happen frequently to women from the redundancy of blood, which not having
been brought so far as to be proscribed into the vessels where usually it
receives the foresaid menstrual virulency, but is, because superfluous, ready
to be transported into the common cloaca; yet by obstructions in the Matrix is
sent back into the mass of blood, where it stuffs the vessels, restagnates in
some parts, causes swellings, and coming too plentifully to the Heart, so as
not being sufficiently volatiz'd by the respiration of air, stuffs the Lungs,
causing short-windedness, heaviness of spirits, which in young women causes
the Green Sickness; in others indigestion of stomach, Pains, Gripings,
Headaches and other various symptoms: all which are curable by removing the
foresaid cause of obstructions, by aperient Medicines together with the
breathing of a vein, which in these Diseases of an inferior order, from the
bare obstructions and recursions of blood, as blood, is not impertinent but of
use, which in the other case of the revulsion of the virulent menstrual ferment
into the blood is dangerous, but especially at that time when the critical
evacuation happens; for then it becomes one of the chief causes of the
retrogradation thereof into the blood, and of all the symptoms issuing
thereupon.

39. Lastly if an exotic acidity be transmitted from the other previous
digestions into the fifth or last, or become actually engendered and fostered
therein, then it becomes the cause of many Diseases found in those parts, for
in the ultimate digestion all assimilation of the nutritive juice is made, so
that every part according to the innate ferment thereof turns the one similar
aliment into its own likeness; whence then utrition of all though different
parts from one and the same nourishment.

40. But if this ferment of any part become alienated from an inbred or
transmitted acidity or sowrish saltness, it forthwith depraves the nourishment
thereof, and causes Aposthumations, Fistula's, Ulcers, Tumors, the Evil,
Tetters, Inflammations, etc. and sometimes rouseth up the paroxysms of the
Gout, or Sciatica; for we see that in Fistula's, Ulcers, or any other running
Sores, if the Patient prove exorbitant in his Diet, either in eating saltish
meats, or drinking too much strong drink, or to petulant in venereal exercises,
is easily discernable by the flux of the wound, which argues that the almentary
juice, made from the food taken in, retains some footsteps of its primitive
nature, which it carries through all the digestions, and therewith vitiates the
very last; and according to the degree of the depravation of the ferment, and
rawness of the nutritive juice, the different sorts of Ulcers, etc. proceed.

41. That the paroxysm of the Gout may be roused up from the exorbitancy of a
spurious acid ferment in the ultimate digestion, is not uneasy to apprehend,
if we consider how some sorts of French Wines, Goose, salt Meats, etc. easily
excite a fit of the Gout, to those who are inclinable thereto, which they do
either by retaining a specifical ferment, through all the digestions until
they come to the synovia of the Joints, and there display their hostileness to
the parts by proritating the Gout; or rather they vitiate the alimentary Juice,
provoke a spurious ferment in the Stomach, incense the Archeus, at whose beck
all the digestions and ferments are subservient; who presently impresseth a
fermental acidity upon tender synovia of the joints, thence the Gout, and all
its attendants begin to keep court.

42. Now the Gout is a seminal or Ideal Disease inserted into the very initials
of life, and therefore hereditary, which can lie long rooted in the very vital
principles, ere it make it is first assault, and between one fit and another, is
as really present in its morbid character, as when clothed with all its
symptoms, only wants an acid ferment and a beck of the Archeus, to transmit it
into the proper Matrix, which it no sooner has, but is podagra omnibus numeris
absoluta, a complete Gout.

43. But an objection meets me, which is this, viz. That seeing this spurious
acidity in the alimentary juice, as it passes along from one digestion to
another, becomes the material cause of so many Diseases, how comes it, that the
Diseases it causes are not terminated in the first, second, or third
digestion: seeing that in those places by its action on the ferments, and their
reaction upon it, oftentimes it loses its acrimony, and assumes some other
property, which it carries into the subsequent digestions: and consequently if
it be carried into the last digestion to make Diseases there, it must first in
its passage through the primary digestions, cause Diseases belonging to those
parts, whereas experience evinceth the contrary?

44. To which I return, first by saying That all acidities, in subsequent
digestions of the chyliferous juice, are not always transmitted from that
spurious one of the stomach: but sometimes are new products hatched in the very
latter digestions, by the occasional and spontaneal depravations of their
ferments; and therefore must only cause Diseases where they are found. Next,
That these transmitted acidities are sometimes in other digestions transmuted
into other properties, no less hurtful than before; as for instance, may be
turned in the third digestion in the blood to a spurious saltishness or
styptickness, etc. as prejudicial to the balsam of the blood as the other would
have been.

45. And lastly, I answer by saying, That spurious acidities may be transferred
at distances, ad nutum Archei, at the beck of the Archeus, which is the
overseer of all the Engine-works of the digestions; as for instance, In those
erratick pains of the Gout, how suddenly will the Archeus (in whose aura
vitalis the morbid character of that Disease, is intimately impressed) transmit
an acid ferment from one part to another, from the left foot to the right
shoulder or arm, in a small moment of time: yea from one foot to the contrary
knee, and to the contrary foot in a little time: all which is done by an
Archeal transmission of an acrimonious ferment, skipping by an influential
manner the intermediate parts, and hitting upon this or the others Juncture,
sets the humors of those parts a working, which fretting the tender membranes
and periostium, like a Mole sometimes works underground, and otherwhiles
throws up its little hills, viz. Tumors, Tophous knots and coagulations.

SECT. 8.
1. NOw some may say, What Is all this to the virtue of the Spaw water? The
answering to which quaere, will give me liberty to prosecute what I aim at,
viz. The restoration of the digestions, and redintegration of the blood and
humors, by removing the interrupting obstacles, and how far the virtue of the
Spaw may reach in the cure of the foresaid Diseases. For having in the former
Section given a short account of the essences, and original causes of many if
not most Diseases, what they are, and whence they proceed; how they arise from
a vitiating of the several ferments, either causing a rawness or over-acidness,
or other hostile properties in the nutritive juice, having distinguished them
into the several classes of the digestions,

2. I shall therefore now signify what Diseases this Spaw is proper for what
not, Helmont tells us, Potae Spadanae non multum conferunt in epidemicis,
eudemicis, and astralibus morbis, ut sunt pestis, pleuritis, prunella, etc. nec
quibus venenum subest vel assumptum vel intus genitum vel contagio
participatum, ut neque in morbis tincturae, quales sunt lepra, lues Veneris,
Morphea, Cancer, Epilepsia, etc. viz. that the Spaw water avails nothing in
pestilential Diseases, Plurisies, Prunella's, Poisons taken in or inbred,
neither in the Leprosy, French Disease, Morphew, Cancer, Falling Sickness, nor
in the Apoplexy, Palsy, or Asthma.

3. And though in women's Diseases upon occasion of obstructions of the
Menstrual evacuations, there may happen Epileptick, Paralytick, Apoplectick,
and Asthmatick affections, which by frequent drinking of the Spaw, the
obstructions being thereby removed, the foresaid dreadful Diseases may cease;
yet does it not thence follow that they as such Diseases considered, as from
their own natural causes, or as they are found in the male Sex, are therefore
curable by drinking the Spaw water: so that, great distinction must be made
between those Diseases flowing from their natural seminaries in the body, and
those which proceed from the regimen of the Matrix, which Proteus like, puts on
the same vizard of such Diseases, as if sprung from their proper inbred causes
in the male kind.

4. So that to the curing of the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Palsy and Asthma, the
solitary drinking of the Spaw (though accompanied with all the rules
imaginable) is not sufficient, unless assisted by the efficacy of some noble
specificks, which yet without the Spaws might do their work, though it is not
amiss to absterse the sordes of the primary culinary digestion by the Spaw,
which may thereby somewhat contribute to the energy of specificks, whose work
is to dint and mortify that malignant-blass, which arising from the virulent
circulated recrement, suddenly surprizeth, stupifieth, and takes the animal
spirits.

5. For in the Epilepsie, the circulated cadaverous excrement, coming to its
maturity brings on a fit of that Disease, by impugning the aura vitalis of the
Archeus. From the antipathetical concourse of which two, arises a secret
incoercible flatus, which being pent up by obstructions in the ultimate
digestion, smites (quasi ictu oculi) the animal spirits, which ceasing to act,
the body falls down; or if they act, it is after a retrograde and irregular
manner, causing Convulsions, and Distortions, of the musculous parts; but the
flatus being after a while dispersed, the spirits return to their former
offices. Which happens otherwise in apoplectick and paralytick Diseases; for
though there be the same concurring causes; to these as to that of the
Epilepsie and a flatus, which at the second or third fit proves mortal, by
secretly stifling the spirits; yet the flatus inclines to one side of the body,
striking in with the peroledi (if I may so call them) or influential channels of
the Microcosm, settles the anodynous, cadaverous recrement in the organs of
Sense and Motion: and there lodges along time, to the great disinablement of
the animal spirits; hence the tediousness sometimes of apoplectick and
paralytick paroxysms.

6. The incoercible flatus which accompanies these Diseases, is no better
demonstrable, than by putting one ounce of sal-armoniack into four ounces of
Aquafortis, stop the glass up close, and in half an hour or less you will be
convinced of the power of an incoercible glass; for you will see the glass, and
that with a great noise, broken into many shivers: which happens from the
antipathy of those two, working one upon the other, exciting thereby a strong
flatus, which being pent up by the sealing or stopping of the glass, forces
its passage by breaking the glass, though never so strong.

7. So in the body of man, the incoercible flatus arising from the mutual
contact of the circulated cadaverous recrement, and the aura vitalis; though it
splits not the body; yet it either quite extinguisheth the vital taper, or at
least flattens and disinableth the animal spirits.

8. Now the remedy must either be equivalent to the cause or it effects
nothing. But the Spaw water comes short, and reaches not to those inward
recesses where the animal spirits lie on their deathbed, and therefore can
administer no help; especially if the Disease by graduated to the maturity of
one or two paroxysms. For though by abstersing the primary digestions, it may
help to prevent the plenteous ingendring of the excrements in the
after-digestions; and so consequently if timely taken might prevent the
occasional cause thereof: yet if the Disease have once become raised from its
seminaries to a full stature; then nothing but specificks will do: such I mean
as has power not only of correcting and preventing the enormous flatus, but
also of abstersing the subtle cadaverous sordes, reposed in the inward channels
of the animal spirits, by inclining them to a transpiration: sweetning also the
concomitant spurious acidities, which is particularly done by some noble
vitriolin Arcana's: The Elixir Prop^ietatis, and volatile tincture of Coral of
Paracelsus and Helmont, per spiritum sanguinis, per lac perlarum and per
appensa, etc.

9. The same circulated cadaverous recrement, sometimes settles upon the spongy
parenchyme of the Lungs, at which borret Archcus, and flatum suffocativum
extimulat; which suddenly obstructs the porosities thereof, and causes an
Asthma: which often intercepting the air, hinders the ventilation of the vital
fire in the Heart; if prevalent, suddenly puts out life's taper.

10. This is not curable by the Spaw, being too languid in its virtue to reach
the Lungs; especially when it is come on to the ripeness of an Asthma: is
curable by the former specificks, and that because an Asthma, Epilepsie,
Apoplexy and Palsy, are identical in their material and efficient causes,
viz. The same circulated, anodynous, cadaverous recrement, settling in
different places cause the foresaid Diseases; in the brain, the Epilepsie; in
the membranous and nervous parts, the Apoplexy and Palsy. If it only vitiate
the organs of motion salvo sensu, then it is the Palfie; but if both motion and
sense be depraved, and that with a vibration upon one side, or through the
whole body, then it is surely an Apoplexy.

11. But if by a transmigration of this peccant matter, it become coagulated in
the Lungs, then an Asthma; of which as also of the other syncritical Diseases,
I may say as formerly has been of the Quartain, That they are ludibria
Medicorum, and therefore to be found only in the Catalogue of Incurables. And,
what is the matter? Nothing but we want well prepared Medicines; which either
our idleness, or our ignorance, or both, will not suffer us to attain to.

12. These Disease being congenial in their causes, are the same in their
Cures; therefore none of them curable by the solitary assistance of the Spaws:
but by the power of abstersive and restorative Arcana's, such as the aforesaid
remedies and the like.

13. It is true Dr. Witty brings in two instances of the virtue of the water
in the Palsy: but if you observe, The Disease in both Patients was at the
declining hand; and probably nature by degrees might have wrought it forth,
without the help of the waters. It Is very probable the change of air, and the
exercise of the body by riding, might contribute as much to the Patients
assistance as the water. Besides it may be, The paroxysm of this Disease might
be hastened by the exorbitancy of the stomach and foulness thereof, which being
rectified by the abstersive property of the Spaw, might be alleviated thereby.

14. He gives one, and but one instance of help in the Epilepsie by the water.
He tells us of an excellent success he had seen in that one that was
Epileptick: but how or after what manner it appeared we must not know; though
he does indeed ingenuously confess, if the Diseases of the Palsy, Epilepsie,
Vertigo, be idiopathick, be radically in the head; or otherwise though the
malady arise from sympathy, if it be in the beginning of the paroxysm; or in its
state, the morbid humor being fixed, in such cases he acknowledges the
improperness of the water.

15. Where by the way take notice, that those three Diseases have not always
the head for their principal seat; for though in the Epilepsie and Virtigo, in
the one there be a vellication of the membranous and perhaps nervous parts of
the brain: and in the other a consternation of the animal spirits, lodged
there; and that either by a deuteropathy, being disturbed from other parts, or
by an idiopathy in the very membranous and nervous parts themselves: yet
notwithstanding the Palsy has not its original seat, in the head, but in the
genus nervosum, and the inhabitants thereof, viz. the animal spirits; and
therefore may be, and is in other parts of the body, salvo capitis regimine.
For it is the catastrophe of these spirits, that gives being to the paroxysm of
these Diseases, viz. of the Epilepsie and Palsy, etc. and when ever they are
found smitten with a flatus arising from the antipathy of the putredinous,
cadaverous recrement, and the aura vitalis, there to be sure is the Disease, in
what part soever of the body it is found.

To confirm which, viz. that the head is not the chief seat of the Palsy, I
shall bring in a considerable instance of a paralytick Patient, to whom I had
the hap to be called, after seven or eight other Physicians and pretenders to
Physic had been consulted, he lives in Fernedale belonging to the Duke of
Buckingham. This Patient had lingered most part of two years under his
Distemper; the occasional cause whereof was, as far as I could learn, either
from the damp of the earth, being employed to over-see, and sometimes did work
in an Hough (as the Country People call it) of Blacomoore, for some supposed
Mine of Plute, some treasure deeply lodged in the earth, but found none; or
else by going into the water in the Summer time to Fish, either of which might
occasionally give being to his Disease. He was gradually taken of all his
joints; and sometimes had neither sense nor motion in most parts of his body;
but most frequently, if not altogether, had little or no sense, especially from
the lower parts of his body downward: insomuch, as if any weight lay heavy on
those parts, or any great heat from the fire scorched them, he was not
sensible, nor at all complained. He could mostwhat move all his joints as he
sat or laid, and that pretty nimbly; but when he came to stand, his knees
shaked under him, his legs bended, and he glad to be held up from falling in
ones arms. His hands and arms he could move very well, but when he came to take
up any meat to put in his mouth, he always either left it or let it fall; so
was helped by another, both for his meat and drink taking. Yet all this while
salvoregimine capitis, had all his senses in his head; for saving a glimmering
of his eyes whereby he could not read distinctly, which might very probably be
from the weakness of the optic nerves, together with some alteration of the
texture of the vitreous and cristaline humors thereof: I say excepting this
weakness in his eyes, he had his memory as perfect as ever, could cast Account
as well as before; had his hearing, taste, and smelling in good order; could
eat his meat pretty well, without the least trembling or shaking of his head.

The Physicians he had consulted, had ordered him Vomits and Purges in great
plenty, Unguents not a few, and Baths too many; for he was always the worse
after them. They so much enfeebled him, as that he lost the use of his limbs
for a time after; and almost weakened him to death.

The Medicines I ordered him were chiefly volatile Spirits, viz. Spiritus Salis
Armoniaci to smell at, and Spiritus Sanguinis to take inwardly, together with a
Plaster of Mustard Seed and Vinegar, anointed over with the Balsam of
Antimony, Amber, Turpentine, etc. applied to the shaved crown of his head.

The volatile Spirits had a very remarkable operation, for so often as he held
the bottle to his nostrils (which he would do a long time together, having an
eager desire of receiving benefit by what was ordered him) he could after a
while feel it run sensibly down the vertcbrae of his back, disperse it self
into his loins, and upon those parts to bring a fine gentle warmth, which
before usually were very cold, and then run down to his very feet, also to run
along his arms to his very fingers ends, with a dindling and pricking as it run
along; but he had not this sense of this operation of the volatile Spirits (he
smelt to) at the first, till he had several times taken inwardly the Spiritus
Sanguinis, which usually brought him into a moist sweat, thereby opening
obstructions of the genus nervosum; after the use of these, for awhile, he
found a stiffness in the sinewy parts of his joints; then began the shaking and
trembling of his joints (upon endeavoring to stand, or to go a little which
before frequently troubled him) to go away, and that stiffness brought strength
from the sinews into the musculous parts; so that he could after the use of
these awhile, go a little alone upon the housefloor, and begun to get the sense
and use of his hands, so that he can now, not only serve himself, but cut his
own meat which he never could do before, since the Distemper seized upon him,
also can put on his own clothes.

From all which duly weighed, results these following considerations. First,
hence appears the reason why Patients do not usually reap that expected benefit
from volatile Spirits, in these and such like Diseases; for these Spirits,
whether inwardly or outwardly administered, or both, are neither palatable, nor
pleasant to the smell; but being nimble and quick, do ferire nares, after a
smart manner, which many people (too much indulging their sense and palate) will
not have the patience to undergo, but boggle and fly back at the first onset
of such penetrative Medicines, and consequently deny themselves the expected
efficacy thereof.

Secondly. That sense and motion are the products of life, and not the life it
self; for this Patient sometimes lay void of any visible sense or motion: and
that once or twice after he came out of his Baths, and yet life was present; so
that all vital functions, whether fermentations, heat, motion, sense, etc.
performed by organical parts, are but the sequels and posterior products of the
anima sensitiva.

Thirdly. That sense and motion are different modifications of the animal
Spirits in the genus nervosum, and membranous parts of the body. For it is not
enough that nervous vessels be replete with so many of the animal Spirits, as
to give motion to the muscles, and those to the joints; I say to have such
store of these Spirits in those vessels, as to cause motion, is not enough also
to cause sense, unless these Spirits retain their natural sting and acuteness,
by which they communicate that we call sense, to all the membranous parts of
the body, as happened to this Patient, and so vice versa.

The Spirits may be acute enough, and give their vibration to all the
membranous parts, so as to cause sense; and yet the motion of those Spirits,
may be so intercepted and dulled, in the nervous vessels of some parts of the
body, as to cause a defect of motion in the same parts, which happens in the
generality of paralytick and apoplectick persons; only with this difference,
that the virus cadaverosum, viz. the putredinous, anodynous, circulated
recrement, which is with the explosive incoercible flatus thence arising, the
efficient cause of all the Diseases of the genus nervasum, whether Palsies,
Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Convulsions, etc. The foresaid anodynous recrement, is
I say more or less according to whose graduated accumulation, the Disease
becomes more or less mortal. For if this recrement be ultimately carried and
settled in the membranous parts of the body; then becomes the sense depraved as
happened in this Patient: but if it seize upon the animal Spirits in their
current glidings along their own vessels, it becomes their remora, mortifies
them in some parts, thence comes the depravation of motion and all symptoms,
accompanying the common sort of Palsies, Apoplexies, etc.

Fourthly. Hence it also appears that the volatile Spirits in the blood, are of
the same family with those of the genus nervosum, and membranous parts; only in
their own vessels they receive a more natural determination to their proper
functions of sense and motion. For unless the blood give being to the animal
Spirits, they are not: and unless they were a kin to those saline Spirits in
the blood, the Patient could not upon the use thereof, I mean of the volatile
Spirits of blood, have perceived his joints to have become more stiff and
strong than before.

Fifthly. That there is a concatenation of the vessels of the genus nervosum,
and anastomosis of one into another, through the texture of the whole body, was
apparent; in that the Patient felt sensibly, the volatile Spirits which he
strongly smelt at, to pass through the processes of the medulla spinalis down
the vertebrae into his loins, and so down to his feet, also along his arms to
his hands, and to his very fingers ends. Whence also it is more than probable,
that the springy motion of the animal Spirits, in the nervous kind, have their
original in the brain; for as the heart is the spring of all the Arteries, the
liver of all the Veins: so likewise the brain of all the Nerves. Which yet does
not infringe our doctrine of the generation of the animal Spirits from the
Spirits of the blood; being the pure defecate essential parts thereof,
engendered from all parts of the Arterial blood, becomes exquisitely elaborated
in their own vessels: and at length receive a determination of motion in the
brain.

Sixthly. That the head is not the chief seat of the Palsy, was evident in
this Patient; for all the senses of his head were untouched, save a weakness as
I said of his eyes: so that the animal Spirits in what part soever of the body,
are the subject matter upon which the cadaverous recrement seizing, gives being
to the Diseases of the genus nervosum. And that without respect to the head,
unless the same efficient cause be there; and then indeed it gives original to
the Epilepsie, Catalepsie, Convulsions, etc. of that part. More observations I
could make, but am not willing to prosecute them to the full at this time, till
I am more confirmed by some collateral experiments.

16. The Doctor gives us two instances of the Cure of the Asthma by the Water,
viz. of an Alderman of Hull, and of a Gentlewoman. As to the first we answer,
that it is very (if not more than) probable, That the Asthma, wherewith the
Alderman labored was from a deuteropathy, from a stuffing of the stomach,
which might compress and streighten the Diaphragm, as also from some trivial
obstructions in the lungs, which together might very well produce a spurious
Asthma or Shortness of Breath; than which in ordinary foulness and oppressions
of uhe stomach, nothing is more frequent: and upon that account might easily
enough be cured by the Water, which does notably cleanse the sordes of the
stomach, etc. But that this was a real Asthma, I fear the Doctor mistakes in
his diagnosticks.

17. And as for the other Cure of the Gentlewoman, I cannot otherwise apprehend
from his enumeration of concomitant circumstances, but that it was from an
uterine cause, Asthma ex regimine matricis influentiali prognatum: and so was
not primarily in the Lungs, but only secondary and symptomatical, depending
upon the depraved occonomy of the Womb; and that from inordinate obstructions
therein, which was caused, as I suppose, from cold taken at an unseasonable
time, when Nature was about its critical evacuation. Now the Spaws, by reason
of the aperient Mineral Salt therein contained, was very proper for opening
those obstructions, sending away what ought to be by those inferior channels;
and so consequently the cause being removed, the symptomatical Asthma might by
degrees cease: in which judgment I am further confirmed, in that he says that
not long after she had a Child.

18. As for Rheumes or Catarrhs, He mentions one that received benefit thereby,
which Disease according to the Galenists, as I apprehend, proceeds from
vapors, ascending from the stomach, which being condensed by the coldness of
the brain, and obstructions in the head, distill per foramen palati, thorough
the small chanel of the palate, or by the nosthrils, which falling upon the
Lungs brings a Cough, and sometimes a Consumption, and descending in other
channels, cause other Diseases; all which may indeed be reckoned inter
deliramenta Catarrhi.

19. The essentials of which Disease we deny, viz. any vapors to arise from
the digestion of the meat in the stomach, after such a manner as vapore terus
to reach the head. Which suppose we should grant, let us see what absurdities
would follow; first, no sooner would the meat and drink be taken into the
stomach, but the heat and moisture therein would forthwith send up vapors, and
we should thereupon be constantly troubled with Catarrhs.

Also the most sound strong stomachs whose heat was lively, would certainly
always breed Catarrhs, because of sending up most powerful vapors, from the
liquid parts of food; also in cold Winters, from the forcible injury of the
cold air, working upon the brain, and causing a cold Distemper there, we should
never be kept free from a Catarrh; not to say what constant droppings there
would be at the pipe of the Alembick, the Nose, enough to fill a Receiver in a
little time; and to make every one go with one, hung at his Nose.

20. Also it would follow that all defluxions of Rheumes should have but one
taste, and that insipid too; because if the vapors, suppose in a pot, arise
from never so many sorts of meats, where there is a competent moisture: yet
that which is saved by condensing, will have but one taste, viz. an elemental
simple water; whence therefore according to their own doctrine, should the
variety of consistence, and tastes proceed; that one should be falt, another
sharp and fretting; one thin, and another more thick? So that difficulties and
absurdities on all hands, sit upon the skirts of this doctrine of a Catarrh.

21. To be positive, We say the stomach no sooner receives food into it, but it
closes the upper mouth, and the membranous oesophagus claps close together;
which also happens at every bit that is swallowed down, so that no vapors can
pass it; and though vapors should arise (which no doubt in small quantities
they do) from the lower concave of the stomach, where the food lies, to the
upper part thereof; yet they are carried up with so easy a digestive heat, as
that they circulate and fall back upon the digestive mass again, like a globe
of glass half filled, whose neck is close sealed up, and set in an easy heat
of digestion, the steams which arise, circulate back again upon the matter,
without any pressing thorough the neck of the glass, or any danger of breaking
the glass.

22. It is true that from the incongruity of the food in the stomach, and from
the reluctance thereof, and the indigestion thence following, a flatus,
spiritus sylvestris, or incoercible gas may arise, which not suddenly finding
vent, by the opening of the upper mouth of the stomach, stretches the
membranous parts thereof, makes one sick and faint; but at length getting
passage by the upper Portall, flaps open the Oesophagus, whisks forth with a
sudden noise of a ructure or belch. This flatin, or wind, carries with it the
odor or taste of that part of the food which is most difficultly digested; and
this is all the vapor which is carried up: which yet is not a vapor, but an
incoercible wind, never condensable (as all vapors are) into water.

23. But it may be objected, That if no steams or vapors, are carried up from
the stomach to the brain, as is usually and vulgarly supposed, how comes it to
pass, that after meat, we commonly find our selves dull and indisposed, and, as
it were, heavy to sleep many times, Is it not from the vapors which ascend
into the head, and incline to heaviness?

I Answer no. But we are then inclinable to an heaviness and sleepyness, from
the same cause we are inclinable to the same at any time; sleep follows waking,
as night the day; heaviness and dullness are as precursory to sleep, as the
evening to the night; waking is a vigilance and action of the spirits, each
standing sentinel in the Portalls of the senses; sleep is a quiescence of the
spirits from their action; the animal Spirits are after a time of working
wearied, and willingly give themselves up to a lassation, for a further
recruit: so that there is no need of vapors to arise into the head to cause
sleep. For though a man fast 24 hours, or longer, and consequently has small
matter left on his stomach to cause vapors; yet is he nevertheless inclinable
to sleep: and many can sleep as soundly upon an empty, as a foul stomach.
Employment either in mind or body, keeps the Spirits in action, and awake; once
give way by Idleness, or solitary sitting after meat, or at other times, and a
dullness begins, which is the Harbinger of sleep, and the Spirits fair and
easily fall to rest.

24. Another Objection offers it self, How comes it, That when we drink
plentifully of strong Drink, we become stupid and inebriate therewith, is it
not from the vapors of the strong Drink, ascending into the head, that makes a
man drunk?

The Answer is no. For strong Drink is no sooner taken (if in an excessive
quantity) but the subtle inebriating Sulphur thereof begins to act upon the
Spirits, whether animal or vital, communicable with the brain, by the nerves of
the sixth conjugation, and every where at work in all parts of the body; so
that there is neither need of ascending nor descending, the Spirits which are
overcome by the toxicum of strong Drink, are every where present, and as easily
oppressed in the stomach by the inebriating Sulphur of vinous Spirits, as in
any place.

25. But before I go from the figment of a Catarrh, I shall give you some
account how I apprehend that defluxion of Rheum to happen, which I have denied
to proceed from vapors ascending from the stomach. It is therefore a spurious
depravation of the Latex which runs along with the blood, and is every where
while in the channels of the veins and arteries, one with it under a ruby
color; but upon any injury inflicted upon any part, is almost at hand, at the
beck of the Archens, ready to be separated from its boon companion the blood:
and to assist toward a washing of that stain impressed upon the weakened part.

26. So that if any injury of Cold become as a Thorn, to prick or offend any
part (which is the same as is meant by taking of Cold) presently the Latex
(which upon all such occasions is ready at hand) is commanded away, to bring
what speedy help may be to the injured part; but not being able to perform that
work, by reason of the prevalency of the thorny impression (if I may so call
it) becomes rather tainted thereby, receiving an exotic ferment from the
injured part; becomes thereby the Patron of all those exorbitant defluxions,
which are accompanied with pains, inflammations, or the like. This falling upon
the Larynx already alienated from an injury of Cold, is sometimes turned into a
copious mucous matter, frequently expelled by a Coughing.

27. But if the Larynx happen to be debilitated through a continual defluxion
thereof, then it falls upon the Lungs, where it perverts the alimentary juice
of that part, turns it into a putrelaginous corrupt matter, which as worm'd up
by the force of a Cough, still increases as fast; so as at length fretting
upon the spungy substance of the Lungs, wears them away: hence Ulcers of the
Lungs, Tabes or Consumption.

28. If the Ossa Ithmoeida in the Nostrils, be the parts affected from an
injury of the cold Air, or smoke of Coals, or other bad offensive fumes; thence
a Coryza, viz. a Disease we should all be troubled with, in case that vapors
actually ascended from the stomach to the head. If the eyes be the parts
offended, thence an Ophthalmia, viz. a defluxion of Rheums, with an accompanied
inflammation. If the teeth, or nervous parts therein be offended, and that from
the injury of the Air reaching thither through the hollowness thereof, thence
an Odontalgia, viz. Toothache, with a defluxion of Rheum, or portion of Latex
showring down that way.

29. Besides the exotic quality the Latex gets from injured parts, to which it
is carried by the next adjacent glandules, to wash away the things offending,
or the impression it has left behind; as if a Mote injure the Eye, a great
quantity of Latex will presently flow to it, to wash it out; and that too from
the soundest of bodies. The like happens, if any volatile acrimonious Spirits,
as of vinous, Sal armoniack or Hartshorn, smite the Nostrils, presently an
insipid Latex runs to the affected part, and makes the Nose run. The like also,
if any unwonted taste offend the Palate, what a spitting does it cause, which
is nothing but an insipid Latex, which hasts away to wash off the impression
the offensive thing has left. so a thorn pricking any fleshy part, presently
the adjacent Latex is sent away, which endeavoring to wash off the impression
the Thorn has left, but cannot, thence upon a further conflux of more Latex,
comes a tumor, and a pulse, a pain and inflammation, etc. which being vitiated
by the perverted ferment of the part, turns sometimes to an Ulcer.

30. I say, besides the hurtful quality the Latex gets from the injured parts,
it also sometimes becomes depraved, and badly qualified, from some inbred
cause, even in the very vessels of the blood, or in the lympheducts, often
tinctured with an hostile, sharp, pontick, saltish acrimony; which upon that
very account is often proscribed from the economy of life, into some external
parts, quibus poenas luit, whom it punishes with its own crime, tainting them
with that they knew not before. If this by the motion of nature be thrown upon
any part, it actually weakens it, by impressing its own character thereon; Hinc
tincturae ac impressiones venenosae in vitam durabiles: if it be thrown upon
the Lungs, it certainly causes a phthisis, Tabes; or Consumption, wears away
the life insensibly.

31. If upon the menninges of the brain; hence inveterate and most obstinate
headaches, not bending unless to the best of Arcana's: If upon the Eyes, it
causes Opthalmia's of most difficult cure: If upon the Gums, it ulcerates
them, loosening the Teeth, together with intolerable pains: If upon the Palate,
it ulcerates and mortifies them; and in the French Disease, it is that spurious
Latex, which retains the venomous properties, for wherever it settles it
ulcerates, when tainted with the venom of that Disease. It is also the author
of Scorbutic, and other cacoethical Ulcers.

32. The waters of the Spaw may, I confess, at the long run, and with continual
use for a competent time, help to dint the acrimony of this spurious Latex if
it be not too much graduated, nor has not too immoderately weakened the parts;
for then nothing short of noble Chemical Arcana's, that are enriched with a
penetrative and restorative Balsom will effect the cure: such as are the Spirit
of Salt of Tartar, the prepared Sulphur of Vitriol, the tinctura lilii, etc.

33. Now as the forenamed Diseases are not curable by the Spaw; so neither are
Fevers, especially continued; for a Fever is a spurious fermentation of the
blood, from a depravation of the Elementary juice, coming too crudely into the
third digestion, where it should be elaborated into vital blood; but by reason
of its rawness, or other alienated properties, it perverts the natural ferment
of the heart, causes a preternatural working and boiling in the blood, by
reason of plenty of Heterogeneities that are heapt up with the nutritive juice.

34. Now whatever hinders the natural fermentation of the blood from purifying
it self by separation of Heterogeneities, that, I say, rather aggrayates, than
abates a Fever; but such is the coldness of the water, (Cold being the great
enemy to the ferments of the digestions) that it rather abates, and takes off
from the vital fermentation, than otherwise; and so consequently suffers the
blood to be stuffed with a greater plenitude of indigested Crudities, thereby
aggravating the febrile fermentation, and increasing all the Symptoms thereunto
belonging.

35. And as cold water increases a Fever, so also all cold or cool things do
more harm than good; yea, even the cooling Julips prescribed by the Galenists,
yield very small help, if they do not actually prejudice Nature, in the
purifying work of fermentations: so that whatever is administered in Fevers, if
it have not respect either to abstersion of the sordes, in the first, second,
or third digestion; or to promote the natural fermentation of the blood, where
Heterogeneities are present, and so move ad diaphoresin; or to stay the
overmuch fermenting, when it is spontaneous: Or lastly, to fortify the
digestions and vital spirits, against the assaults of the Disease. If it have
no respect to one of these three, it is, I say, altogether impertinent and
frivolous.

36. But neither cooling Julips, as I said before, nor the Shop Cordials,
compounded most what of Syrups, Confections, Strong Water, and the like, all
whick are cumbred with store of Sugar, that clog and oppress the stomach; which
thereupon can receive little benefit from the virtue of the Ingredients, and so
becomes tantaliz'd by the farraginous mixtures of Concretes, which taken
simply, might help Nature more effectually, and be less burdensome to the
digestions; I say, neither do these stuffing Cordials contribute any help to
the forenamed intentions. For what is truly Cordial, must have a power to allay
Wind; and if I affirm, That nothing is effectually Cordial, but such as does
compescere flatum, oppose, or take away Wind, I think I shall be able to make
it good: and that thus.

37. By Wind, I mean such a wild incoercible Spirit or Gas (whatever we may
call it) which arises from a reluctance of the nutritive juice, or relics,
or recrement thereof, to the ferment of the stomach, or other parts; which the
ferments not being able to master, either through their own debilitude, or
through some stubborn untameable parts of the alimentary juice, or recrement
thereof, begets this wild uncoagulable Spirit we call Wind; which being pent
up; not finding vent, stretches the tunicles of the stomach, or membranes of
other parts in other digestions, regurgitates upon the anastomasis of some
vessels into the stomach, and upon others adjacent, which contain blood and
vital Spirits, whom it almost stifles, put Nature thereby upon the
Tenter-hooks: Hence pains, yea, all sorts of faintness and sickness.

38. Now whatever takes away this cause, the effect, or flatus failing, is
truly Cordial; but all other contrived Cordials, which reach not this root of
Wind, are in vain. It is not enough to make one rift or belch, though that many
times gives much ease; but to strengthen the digestions, and to absterse the
occasional cause, thereby preventing a spurious fermentation, whose product is
a flatus. This, I say, is properly to allay Wind, and to become truly Cordial.

39. It we examine the Galenical Shop-Cordials, and their other Confectionary
Medicaments, we shall find the main pillar of them all to be Sugar, witness
their Electuaries, Looch's, Conserves, Syrups, Confections, Cordial waters,
etc. by which the Concretes are so clogged, as scarce one ray of a specific
can escape the clouds to illuminate the Archeus, when they pass the stomach
into other digestions; and through the prevalency of the Disease, wanting a
volatizing ferment, a great part of the Cordials, viz. the Sugar-part, turns
into a caput mortis: which rather increases a feverish fermentation, than
otherwise. Thus the very Cordials of the Galenists in the conclusion, prove
burdensome to Nature.

40. And as cooling Julips, nor Shop-Cordials: so neither Phlebotomy, after
that frequent manner it is used, avails any thing as to the three aforesaid
indications; not as to the first, viz. abstersion of sordes; for in opening of
a vein, both good and bad go together. If indeed the worst parts of the blood
could be singled out from the rest, then letting of blood would prove a
singular remedy; but the best way, the most balsamic parts of the blood, are
carried forth with other parts thereof: inasmuch as the very next blood to the
Orifice, is first carried forth, which perhaps is the most free from the morbid
impression.

41.. Nor secondly, does it promote the natural fermentation of the blood,
especially where the Disease has, through continuance of time, weakened the
digestions, impoverished the blood of Spirits by a solution of its compage,
exhausted the volatile balsamic parts thereof; for in such cases, the mass of
blood is so degenerated from its former eucrasia, as that an infusion of
well-spirited balsamic blood, according to late Experiments, would rationally
be more pertinent, than the taking away part of that, wherein that spark of
life yet remaining is lodged; for in the blood is the life, and the powers and
strength of life; how much of the blood is taken away, especially by reiterate
bloodings (as the custom of some; not to excuse the Doctor) so much is Nature
actually debilitated, the digestions perverted, and the fermentation of the
blood spoiled, at least so weakened, as to repair the loss of the volatile
balsamic spirits requires a long time. And as the blood has a fermentation
whereby it endeavors the separation of congested Heterogeneities, whose
presence cause some sort of Fevers, to which the use of Diaphoreticks are very
proper; so also the fermentation thereof may sometimes be spontaneously
spurious, set at work by attempting a new crasis, viz. intentionally to refine,
and make it self a more depurate and defecate liquor, which in Children being
set a working, occasionally from the inherent recrementa uteri, causes the
Small Pox, Measles, etc. and being once set a work, does sometimes ove-ferment,
thereby spending the volatile saline parts of the blood, and gives the Sulphur
thereof an empyrheuma, separating the essential principles of the blood,
subverting the crasis thereof, extinguisheth the vital flame; which
overfermenting of the blood, not only happens to Children, but also to more
grown persons, which requires some peculiar remedies, leasurely to put a stop
thereto; and that either by Phlebotomy, which may answer the drawing forth of
Wines out of the vessels, when they ferment too strongly: or by some proper
Emetick, for such fermentations are rarely performed without some relation to
the sordes of the stomach; which answers the taking away of the Tartar from the
sides of the Wine-vessels, from whose too great plenty, sometimes happens the
overworking of Wines: Or lastly, by some noble Arcanum, whether specific or
catholic, which does readily purify the blood, rejecting the feculencies: for
the blood may long ferment, and yet through an innate weakness, still retain
the first feculencies: and unless helped by some Arcanum, would keep on
fermenting, even unto the ruin of the balsamic principles thereof. These
refinning Arcana's, or purifying Medicines, answer that which some ingenuous
Wine-Coopers perform, by putting some peculiar thing into the Wines, which will
leasurely put a stop to the overworking of the Wines; but the skill of such
persons is showed herein, that what they put into the Wines, does so
specifically (if I may call it) stay the overworking of the Wines, as that no
prejudice succeeds upon the radical principles thereof, so as they are not
liable thereby to decay or degenerate: so likewise by the skill of the
Physician, such noble Arcana's, whether Specificks, or such as are more
universal in their depurating operation, are to be administered, as may not only
leasurely put a stop to the overfermenting of the blood, but restore it to its
equal temperature, and proportional poysure of principles, thereby renewing its
eucrasia, and fortifying the balsam of life; But frequent Phlebotomizing, does
rob the blood of a great share of those remaining volatile balsamic Spirits,
and therefore not proper for the restoration of its eucrasia.

42. Hence those that recover under their hands, do it with much lingering and
tediousness, because of the great enfeebling of their Spirits by loss of blood,
the very Weapon in the hand of Nature to manage its encounters with Diseases;
which is strangely snatched out of its hands, by many of its pretended Friends,
the Physicians; who, without pity, see her bleeding upon the spot, and cry out
yet with flinty hearts, Blood, blood, yet more blood: Nay, after a ternary of
bleedings, and as often vomitings and purgings, in an obstinate Fever, which
would neither bend to this severe method, nor the life make its exit thereby.
One able Physician being asked, What he would now do after all this? To which
he ingenuously answered, That unless he run the same round again, he was at a
stand, what to do further. The Querying person returned, That he did believe,
if he run but the same round over again, from the beginning to the end, the
Patient would by that time be perfectly cured of all Diseases.

43. I grant, That the single breathing of a vein, or artery, or a moderate
Phlebotomy, may, and does sometimes help in a Fever, where nothing of Malignity
is suspected; and that chiefly upon the account of the ventilation of the
blood, by which I mean a setting at liberty that incoercible flatus, which is
the product of the febrile fermentation in the vessels of the blood; for this
uncoagulable Spirit, or wild Gas, which always results, and is the sequel of a
spurious fermentation, if it be not dinted, or let forth, either by breathing a
vein, or by Diaphoreticks (which opening the pores, let it go at so many minute
portals) then it runs too and again in the vessels of the blood, and causes
erratick pains, restlessness, and unquietness of Spirits.

44. Therefore we find upon the ventilation of the blood, by a moderate
Phlebotomy, that pains are abated, whether pluretick, or others; which the
Galenists observing, take encouragement of arguing a minori ad majorem, viz.
That if a little blood taking away, give some ease of pains, then surely the
taking away of a great deal, must give more ease; and so, if they would yet
hold on their argument, the taking away of all the blood, will give perfect
ease, not only from pains, but from all diseases. Would they go no further than
to argumentation, the Patient might very well bear with them; but they come to
put this into action; they bleed once, its very well, I wish they would second
it with a Specific; they stay not here, but go to it a second and a third
time, to the great loss of Spirits, and enfeebling of the Patient; and
oftentimes the disease as much, if not more to cure than ever, and the Patient
left less capable of it.

45. I confess I never order Phlebotomy oftener than once in a Fever; and that
too, with reluctance, bemoaning my self, That I have not yet attained to a
Medicine, that will answer all Indications thereof; for it is only our poverty
of noble Arcana's, which makes us stoop to so low and trite a method: and yet I
may be bold to affirm, That I have been instrumental to cure Fevers of that
nature, where the Galenists suppose most necessity of Blood-letting, even
Plurisies, by Specificks, without Phlebotomy. Nay, further, I have been with
some Patients, who in Pluresies have undergone a Galenical method of twice
blooding, etc. (ready for the third time) and the Fever yet as high as at
first; whom, after all this, I have, by the blessing of God, cured with a
diaphoretick Specific, once or twice repeated: and sometimes one single Dose
thereof, has so abated the pains, and allayed the feverishness, as that very
little more has been requisite to the cure, Dempta spina pleurae infixa per
diaphoreticum cessat ipsa pleuresis.

46. As for the third and last Indication, viz. the fortification of the
digestions and vital Spirits, Phlebotomy does diametrically oppose, and that
because it robs the blood of part of its treasure, surreptitiously stealing
away its balsam; and therefore as I said actually debilitates the vital
Spirits, making them loure their Topsails upon a fresh encounter of the
Disease: so that though seemingly the Disease may not assault so strongly as
before, it is not altogether through the abating the former force of the
Disease, as it is from the weakening of the vital powers, who are not able to
make as forcible an attempt, to expel the malady as before; and therefore flags
before its enemy.

47. As in acute so in Chronical Diseases, the frequent use of Plebotomy is not
commendable nor proper; and that because in long Diseases the digestions being
depraved, the blood (whose eucrasia depends upon the vigor thereof) becomes
degenerated from its sweet balsamic rubie essence, into an austere, sharp,
pontick or saltish liquor: which growing old for want of due fermentation and
circulation, restagnates in the vessels, makes hetrogeneous coagulations,
whence Pains, Tumors, Ulcers inward and outward, the common product of
Chronical Diseases.

48. So that what remains to be done in these chronick Diseases, is rather to
super-induce a new reviving ferment into these old decayed wines, the blood,
that thereby new volatile Spirits might be engendered, and the sweet balsamic
essence be restored; then yet further to weaken by Phlebotomy the sinking vital
Spirits: which if they could speak, it would be Vox querebunda, manibus
quorundum Medicorum tyrannicis gemens, Hinc lachrymae, viz. Faint cold sweats;
into which agony poor languishing Nature is often thrown, having both its
strength, first weakened by the continuance and prevalency of powerful Diseases,
and at last by the hand of its Physician (who should if rightly so, be its
helper) to have its little stock of vital balsamic Spirits, wasted by a
palpable weakner, Phlebotomy.

49. Amongst the most obvious symptoms, and to the Patient most urging, is
that of thirst; which because it is not natural, the more they drink the more
they would. This according to the Galenists, proceeds from an hot and dry
Distemper of the stomach; to answer which indication, they most frequently
order cool and moist things: which if the cause of thirst were as they suppose,
they would have a most facile ready way of Cure, in case that were true,
Contraria suis contrariis curantur; viz. That every distemperature were curable
by its contrary; for then supposing such and such degree of heat and dryness of
stomach in a Fever, it is but applying the same answerable degree of cooling
and moistning liquors, and the Cure would forthwith be effected. If so, Why are
not the thirst in Fevers presently quenched? That after great draughts of
cooling Julips, and the like are drunk down, they yet cry out Dry, Dry, as
thirsty after a while as ever.

50. What? Can the elementary properties of cold and moist, so much conspire
the Patients prejudice, as to forget their own natures of cooling and
moistning? Surely these qualities (if they may be so called) of heat and cold,
of dryness and moisture, must act one upon another upon the very contact; and
no sooner can heat be encountered with cold, but the heat must be abated; and if
the degree of cold be proportionable, must become quite extinct: so neither can
dryness meet with moisture in the like degree but the dryness will cease.

51. So that indeed a Feverish thirst has not these elementary qualities for
its efficient, and so is not curable by the contrary qualities; but has a more
abstruse cause, and that is from a depravation of the ferment of the stomach,
which not being able to digest after the wonted manner, what is upon the
stomach, turns it into recrement; which by the heat of the part (having lost
its curb the ferment) is burnt into a kind of Alkali or friable mass, which
being fast impacted in the tunicles of the stomach, becomes the efficient cause
of a febrile thirst.

52. These burnt Alkalizate sordes, parch the very membranous parts of the
stomach, oesophagus and tongue (which membrane, is but as one continued web
overspreading all those parts) thence the intolerable thirst, foulness,
roughness, and parchedness of the tongue, which by abstinence from drink (as is
the foolish custom of some Physicians, who understand not the Disease, too
strictly prohibit) the Fever becomes the more increased, the thirst the
stronger, and all the symptoms more exasperated. For there must be some liquid
thing of necessity to dilute and soften these burnt sordes, though it do not
satisfy and quench the thirst, or else all things go the worse; but if the
skill of the Physician be such, as to mingle with these diluting potable
liquids; something to absterse these sordes, and to satiate these Alkalizate
recrements, then he effects something as to the real quenching of thirst, which
otherwise proves obstinate and rebellious to all simple liquids.

53. For if all simple water, or fermentally married to a vegetable juice, viz.
Beer, Ale, or Wine, be thrown into the stomach, upon these friable sordes, they
do but (and that scarcely) for a moment quench the thirst, but by the
untameable heat of the stomach; are cast into vapors, and by sweat or
insensibly, are driven through the pores of the body: and in the conclusion
increase the heat, cause cold sweats, faintness, debilitudes and wasting
lassitudes, after the manner of water poured on an hot stone, is presently
dispersed vapore tenus; or as Spirit of Wine poured upon an Alkali of Tartar,
causes a great heat, more than was before.

54. But if these adust sordes be absters'd, by the well prepared Salt of
Vitriol, or other proper emeticks; or some proper solutive, that may cleanse
downward the recrement of the primary digestions, and be seconded with Spirit
of Salt, Sulphur or Vitriol, acuating the Patients common drink, together with
the use of some anodynous Diaphoreticks, not only the thirst will be abated and
quenched, but the Feverish fermentation, and consequently the Fever it self. I
have often wondered the Galenists should not more seriously take into
consideration the efficacy of Diaphoreticks, or sweating Medicines, in Fevers;
in as much as in the whole round of their Practice, they find not a more
effectual means to quench thirst, and to abate a Fever, than by Sudorificks,
which is most obvious both to them and to ordinary People, and yet there is
nothing they less frequent. If it were no more than observing the operation of
a Dose of Laudanum, methinks it might convince them of the excellency of
Diaphoreticks, and put them upon ingenuous enquiries, how they might promote,
and improve that stock of Diaphoreticks, they have in the Shops; might I say
put them upon enquiring, how a few grains of Laudanum should so quiet the
Spirits for a time, quench thirst, and allay pains, and all this as a
Diaphoretick; which surely if the narcotick Sulphur was castigated, and the
power of the volatile Diaphoretick Salt thereof exalted, would prove a much
more effectual Diaphoretick, than any Laudanum in the Shops.

55. As for Antimonium Diaphoreticum, because it is Chemical they are afraid of
it; and if they order any, it is in so inconsiderable a quantity, as the effect
cannot answer the Patients expectation. They will prescribe 3 grains, it may be
4, 5, 6, or 7 grains, and a great Dose too; and this forsooth must be clogged
with some other farraginous mixture, which together makes such a confused
jumble upon the stomach, that the Archeus or vital regent, knows not what to
make of it; for by their mixtures they miss the mark of Specificks, and thereby
of the best Diaphoreticks: In effect, do nothing sincerely, viz. without
mixtures in the whole course of their Practice. They will wonder perhaps if I
tell them that of this Antimonium Diaphoretick, which they scruple to give 6, 7
or 8 grains; I can and do with good success, give from one scruple to an whole
dragm, which is 60 grains, and that without scruple or danger, but with great
satisfaction to the Patient. Bezoardicum Minerale, another as dangerous
anti-febrile Diaphoretick (as they account it) as the former, of which, they
scarce dare give above 3, 4 or 5 grains; of which, I with the like success as
the former, give from half a scruple to 24 grains. Indeed they are both of my
own Preparation, and therefore dare more confide in them.

56. Now the conclusion of all this is, That Diaphoreticks whether Vegetable or
Mineral, after a previous abstersion of the primary digestions, are the only
quenchers of thirst, abaters of pains, allayers of Feverish fermentations,
composers of the Spirits; and in fine, the chief Curers of Fevers: and
therefore whether duly to be considered, let the World judge, seeing it
conserves thousands of Lives. Thus far as to particular Diaphoreticks. Besides
which, Helmont speaks of an universal Diaphoretick or Panacea, by the name of
Mercurius Precipitatus Diaphoreticus, which is a fixation of Precipitate, by
the cohobating the Elementum ignis, extracted out of the Vitriol of Venus, at
last being strongly fired, becomes fixed, and is edulcorated by repeated
distillations of rectified Spirit of Wine, from it to ten times, and then
becomes sweet; and is also called Aurum horizontale, of which he says, Omnem
san it febrem unica potione: Hecticam intra Lunae decursum; oretenus enim
sumptus, curat carcinoma, lupum and quodlibet est hominum cacoethes, ulcus sive
externum, sive internum, itemque hydropem, Asthma, and Morbum quemcumque
Chronicum; complet solus desideria medentum tam in Physicis quam Chirurgicis
defectibus; by all which it may certainly be concluded to be a Panacea, in as
much as (according to what he affirms) it cures all acute and Chronick
Diseases. Sed nobis non licet esse tam disertos.

57. I do not here pretend to it, but doubt not of the veracity of that noble
Philosopher, who wrought Thirty Years in the search of Natures choicest
Secrets, whose Masterpiece was the Liquor Alkahest, Precipitatus
Diaphoreticus, Arcannm Corallinum, Tinctura lilii, Sulphur Vitrioli, Metallus
masculus, Elementum, Lac perlarum, the Spirit of Salt of Tartar, Elixir
Proprietatis, etc. all which conspire the restitution of the integrity of
health, though disturbed from what occasional cause soever. For the Life, or
Spiritus impetum faciens, is but one, receives the influences of Diseases into
it self; which according to the variety of occasional causes becomes
differently affected and disturbed: whence the multiplicity of Diseases; which
by an highly graduated Medicine reaching the very radical principles of this
Archeus, or regent Spirit of Life, corrects the enormities and irregularities
thereof; and by abstersing the offending occasional causes, restores it to its
pristine integrity; Vita and vis ejus est unica and integra, nisi a caussis
alienis degeneretur, tum tanquam serpens saevit in seipsum, and Morborum evadit
Matrona; qua restituta eadem ut antea, est vitae integritas. What noble
effects, these generous and universal remedies may have upon the vital Archeus,
in order to its restitution from the burden of Maladies, may not uneasily be
apprehended, by those who do but see the efficacy of their substitures, whether
in Chronical or acute Diseases.

SECT. 9.
1. THus having run through the Diseases, or at least most of them, to the Cure
of which the Spaw contributes little help; Now come we to those Diseases where
the efficacy of the Spaw is most discernable, viz. the Scurvy, Dropsy, Stone
or Strangury, Jaundise, Hypocondriack Melancholy, Cachexia's, and Women's
Diseases proceeding from the obstructions of the Menses: all which (faving that
of the Stone and Women's Diseases) as they have their first Springs from the
irregularity of the ferment of the Stomach, Spleen, and some next succeeding
digestions; so they are thereby more capable of receiving the virtue of the
Spaw, which chiefly operates upon the stomach, abstersing the sordes thereof,
whence it becomes very proper, against frequent and immoderate Vomitings,
Heartburnings, from an over-acidity, grating upon the upper mouth thereof,
Pains of the Stomach from the like cause; etc.

2. First as to the Scurvy, which Disease at its full state, though it
ultimately vitiate the whole habit of the body and brings on a Cachexia; yet
the first seminaries thereof are found in the Stomach, where the nutritive
juice, being not well concocted by the ferment thereof (for no solitary heat,
but a ferment, is the agent of concoction) the first stone is there laid
toward the building of the Scruvy: this first alienation of the alimentary
juice, being not corrected nor amended in the subsequent digestions, comes
crudely into the third, into the mass of blood, ready to receive the vital
ferment in the heart, which finding many untameable hetrogeneities cannot sub
jugum trahere, bring it into conformity; whence the crasis of the blood becomes
perverted from its sweet balsamic essence, into a sourish, saltish, and (at
the height of the Disease) vapid liquor.

3. Now the essurine alumenish salt of this Spring, does notably absterse the
feculencies of the stomach, and thereby strengthens the ferment thereof; which
to Persons who have not or (if they have) but in a remiss degree, the Water may
be of use to prevent the Disease; and to those who have it in an intense
degree, it will abate the first spring or feeding cause thereof; and by the
penetrating Mineral Salt in the Water, may insinuate the limen of the third
digestion; where (especially if helped by the addition of some restorative
balsamic Medicines) it may in continuance of time, overcome that Dyscrasie of
the blood, by removing that which is superfluous, may replenish the blood with
its wonted vital ferment, and by dinting the spurious saltness thereof, may
restore it to its primitive sweet balsamic nature.

4. The Spaw Water, together with the change of air is pertinent to the
aforesaid purpose; especially, as I said, if seconded by other penetrating
Medicines, which has a power to dint the scorbutic ferment. Of which sort are
the tincture of Antimony, the right prepared Spirit of Salt, the Volatile Salt
of Hartshorn, the Spirit of Salt of Tartar, the Volatile Spirit of
Scurvy Grass, Ens Veneris; all which as a balsamic condiment, season the
nutritive juice, separate exotic heterogeneities therefrom, by their proper
emunctories, sweetens the blood by renewing its former volatile balsamic
Spirits, and restores it to its pristine Eucrasia: which done, the scorbutic
products, whether Pains, Tumors, Ulcers, sore and swelling of the Gooms,
looseness of Teeth and the like, cease; and the Scurvy is Cured.

5. Secondly, The Dropsy may be helped by the Spaw; which to affirm, though at
the first sight it may seem unreasonable and contradictory, because in this
Disease the blood is already too much diluted with a waterishness: yet if we
consider the efficient cause, which is chiefly an obstruction of the Reins, the
strangeness will be taken away; for although there be a real vitiating of the
ferment of the stomach, and an aedust Alkalizate sordes impacted in the
tunicles thereof, whence a Feverishness and a pressing thirst constantly
attends Dropsical Persons, which Fever is not primary but symptomatical.

6. I say though the groundwork of this, as of most Diseases, be in the
stomach; yet is the main cause an obstruction of the Reins, which being the
principal emunctory of the potable parts of the nutritive juice, whether being
separable from the mass of blood, by the emulgent veins, or by any other nearer
passage to the Reins, if through the congestion of some mucous recrement, the
small vessels are obstructed (as usually in this case happens) then is the
superfluous liquid latex (ready for separation) regurgitated, either back into
the mass of blood, and thence into the habit of the body, whence that species
of the Dropsy, called Anasarcasis, which by the Anastomasis of the vessels,
sometimes lets a part thereof fall into the legs, swelling them, especially
toward night; and at other times swallows them up again into the former
vessels, and the legs become unswell'd again.

7. Or else the liquid potables, coming by a shorter cut to the Reins by reason
of their obstructions, flows back and is heaped up between the Omentum and
Peritoneum; which stretching the membranes thereof, bears up strongly against
the Diaphragme, thereby contracting the cavity of the Lungs, makes the Patient
short-winded as commonly they are.

8. This congested potable latex, accompanied with a flatus, gives being to a
Tympany; and has no urinous Salt in it, as that had which was about separating
from the blood, and by the obstruction of the Veins flowed back again into the
mass: and therefore those who are tapp'd for the Dropsy, let forth an almost
insipid liquor; so that water which passes from those who drink plentifully
of the Spaw, has no urinous Salt, and so neither tincture nor sapour.

9. Now the Spaw water does notably cleanse the stomach, first by loosning and
dissolving the close sitting sordes; and that through the dissolving power of
the alumenish Mineral Salt, which gradually attenuates and thins the viscous
recrements of the stomach, after which solution of the otherwise fixed
feculencies of the stomach, the plentiful gulping of the water, does easily
wash it away by stool; besides which, a great quantity of the water acuated
with its Mineral Essurine Salt, passes the short way to the Reins, I mean by
those channels, that great drinkers of Wine, and Strong Drink, have to convey
away, suddenly, the potulent parts (of what they take in) to the Reins;
whereby the penetrative power of the Essurine Salt, which as a Solvent in the
water, dissolves the coagulated matter, opens the obstructions, and makes free
passage both for it self, and for the exit of the restagnating latex, which
before floted in the Abdomen and swelled the belly.

10. That obstruction of the Reins is the chief, if not the essential cause, of
the super-abundant floting of the potable parts in the Abdomen, is manifest;
because all Dropsical Persons piss very little, and that often with difficulty:
so that the most part of that which should pass forth by urine, through
obstructions regurgitates back upon the bowels, or else fills the bloody
vessels with a dilating overplus latex; whereas if the passages were open, and
the current kept clear, all the superfluous watery parts, would be dreined away
by their natural and proper channels, and so all would be well.

11. The Spaw therefore has its efficacy in Cure of the Dropsy two ways, viz.
by abstersing the sordes of the digestions, and by being a Diuretic; not to
say that in some obstinate Dropsies, there may be an extravasated blood about
the Reins, which may so irritate the innate Spirit of those parts, as to make a
spontaneous occlusion of the vessels, and resist all Medicines, except the
noblest of Chemical Arcana's.

12. Those Medicines which chiefly relate to the Cure of the Dropsy are, as I
said, such as are abstersive, and diuretic, together with such as have a
restorative astringency, communicable to the debilitated membranous parts; of
which sort are the lixivial Salts of Vegetables, whether of Broom, Juniper, the
Vine, Wormwood, or the like (among which there is small difference) wherewith
the ordinary drink of the Patient is to be acuated: also the Cinnabar of
Antimony often resublim'd, the Spirit of Salt of Tartar; the saccharum Martis
or Sugar of Steel; Bezoardicum Minerale, which is Riverius his Diaphoretick out
of the Butter of Antimony; the Pilulae lunares; of which last, I must confess,
I never found any considerable success, and for the sake of the corroding Aqua
fortial or nitrous Spirits, shall for the future rather advise against, than
otherwise; also the magistery of Wine, which is the fixed Salt of Tartar so
prepared, as to dissolve in the most rectified alcool Spirit of Wine; which
being often purified by reduction, is a noble Diuretic, essential Salt of
Tartar; also the Precipitatus Diaphorcticus, and Precipiolum Paracelsi; the
sappy liquor of the Birch, etc.

For most of which Medicines, if you consult the dispensatory, you will be
mistaken; they are not attained to by idleness, and mere speculation, but by
boldly handling the coals, and putting our fingers into fire.

13. The next Disease is the Stone and Strangury; upon which the Spaw has the
more efficacy, because a great part of the water glides through the Reins and
Bladder, the places where Gravel and the Stone have their nativity; so that
first by the abstersive virtue of the Essurine Salt in the water, it hinders
the increase of growth of the bulk of the Stone, by carrying away the
recremental sordes of those parts, also by often drinking and that too great
quantities of the water, it keeps the current open, dilates the passages, and
takes the opportunity of slipping a Stone now and then, with a stream of water,
through the sphincter of the Bladder.

14. But as to a resolution of the Stone, into a liquid juice, by a retrograde
Analysis, is not feasible either by this or any other Spring; but only (at
least chiefly competible to the Alkahestical Preparation of the Ludus
Paracelsi, calculosorum Solamen magnum; of which, is the Alkahest distilled
from the Ludus, by which the Ludus is reduced into a Salt, dissolvable in the
Air into a Liquor; this digested in a sealed glass, until the Salt swim upon
the top of the attracted moisture, in the form of a greenish Oil or Axungia, of
which Fourteen Grains sometimes repeated resolves the compage of the Stone, of
what magnitude soever; and upon the solution, is also expelled; and thereby the
Stone perfectly Cured, according to the process of Paracelsus and Helmont, who
both (as they say) had it: by which, as Helmont reports, not only the Stone was
reduced into a liquid form, and driven forth; but also the inclinatio petrifica
was taken away. I have by a succedaneal Preparation, so opened the body of the
Ludus, as that it would yield a deep saturate green tincture to Spirit of Salt,
as also to another liquor of Salt I have by me; but what that will effect, as
to the Stone, I have not yet tried. The well prepared Spirit of Salt, Helmont
highly commends for the Strangury, and the Tinctura Aroph Paracelsi.

15. The Jaundise if not too deeply graduated into that called the Black, is
also curable by the Spaw; and that because this Disease proceeds from an error
of Crudities in the second digestion, transmitted into the fifth or habit of
the body; where that which should of due have been separated by the right
fermentation in the second digestion, was carried into the last digestion, and
there discolored the blood in the ultimate fibers, through the whole habit of
the body: Now the Spaw, as I said, helps to separate, that which of due ought
to be separated; by opening the obstructions of the second digestion, and so
may prevent the feeding of the Disease, from its own original scource, and by
the help of specificks may thoroughly be Cured; of which sort, are Ens Veneris,
Spirit of Urine, Alkalies, mill pedes aliaeque insectae, quae abster gunt
secundam digestionem.

16. Now come we to Hypocondriack Melancholy, A Disease when deeply seated,
puzzles the Spaws, and the best method of usual Medicines. The place of its
nativity is probably the Spleen, whose ferment if vigorous, is not only to make
a separation of some impurities of the blood, not separable by any other part:
but also as a specifical ferment, to add some new and noble qualities to the
blood, making it more pure and spiritous by separating the feculencies thereof,
promoting the clarity of the Regimen of the animal Spirits, that Looking-glass
of the Soul, which if pure and polite, gives pleasure and solace to the Soul in
the Body, causing generous reflections, and shaping perspicacious Idea's,
helping acuteness of fancy, solidity of judgment, and tenaciousness of memory.

17. Whereas if the fermental elaboration of the blood in the Spleen be
deficient; and thereby the sordes become unseparated: thence a steam arises
which soyls the vessels and muds the animal Spirits, darkens the imaginative
part, and with a melancholy vapor clouds the fancy, Hence all the
irregularities and disturbed fancies of Hypochondriack Melancholy:

18. The Spleen and the regiment thereof, is Vulcan's Shop, where the materials
lie for forging of all Idea's; if the materials be good and artificially
handled, a sound structure of fancy may well be raised: but if a wrong cast
happen, either through the indisposition of the materials, I mean the blood, or
through the error of the workman, I mean the ferment, the structure will prove
accordingly, viz. the fancy will be inverted, and the Idea's thereof become
preposterous.

19. Now the meat and drink we commonly take, together with the exorbitancies
thereof, have no small influence upon the Spleen, and its economy, and
consequently upon the animal Spirits and the Soul, -- Corpus onustum
Hesternis vitiis, animum quoque praegravat una
Atque affigit humo Divinae particulam aurae.


For if a good orderly Diet be observed, of wholesome food, with much
temperance and moderation, Chronical Diseases cannot have power to exercise
that tyranny they usually do, nor can the irregularities of the digestions
prove so irreducible, as they do by excess of living; in as much as all the
digestions take their nutritive juice in order one from another, so as if the
first prove a glutton overcharging its ferment, the rest share with the excess,
and communicate it one to another, till it has gone the round, and in the
conclusion reach those Spirits, whose fine texture makes them nearer the Soul,
by which it also becomes affected.

20. The Spaw has power to help the carrying of the dreggy parts, left after
the digestion of the stomach is over; and thereby helps the refining of the
vessels, so as the nutritive juice, may not come replete with crudities to the
other subsequent digestions, and so subducts from the Disease by hindering the
affluent cause: for so far as the virtue of the Essurine Salt in the water can
reach, especially in the common passages toward the bladder, it does pretty
well cleanse and therefore proves effectual in those Diseases, native to those
parts; but does scarce thoroughly penetrate those more abstruse recesses, where
the main concerns of animal Spirits and the forging of Idea's are transacted.
This is left for the other more penetrating Medicines to perform, which perhaps
one with the other, may the better complete the Cure.

21. The Medicaments of use in this case, are such as are abstersive, of a
penetrating nature, oppose a flatus by allaying the spurious fermentation, and
can dulcifie the blood and humors, by all which composing the Spirits and
settling every thing in order; of which sort are a Tartarum vitriolatum, not
such a one as is vulgarly made in the Shops, with Oil of Vitriol: but with the
Essurine Salt of Vitriol, that has not undergone any force of fire, readily
dissolvable in any Vehicle, which the other will not. The Essential Salt of
Tartar, the Sal Chalybis, the Spirit of Salt of Tartar, the Spiritus Veneris,
Coral and Crab's-eyes; and probably above all the Aurum Horizontale, or fixed
Mercury, which being a Panacea answers all Indications.

22. Now come we to discourse of Women's Diseases, and of the virtue of the Spaw
in the Cure thereof; whose Diseases proceed chiefly from obstructions in the
Matrix, whereby the redundant blood flows back, or from a debilitude of the
Womb, whereby the blood becomes dreyn'd away in too great quantities; whence
Lypothymia's, Faintings and Swoonings, etc.

23. As to the obstructions of the superfluous blood, which should be carried
away by the vessels of the Matrix, in form of the Menses: We must know
therefore, that the Menstrua are a certain portion or efflorescence of the
blood, granted by God in nature for proper ends, viz. both for yielding matter
and corporeal bulk to the foetus or embryo in the Womb; as also for nourishment
of the same, until it come to the birth, It is I say a certain portion of the
blood remaining after a full refection of the body, engendered within a Lunar
Month, and sequestered from the rest of the mass to the foresaid end; this
matter destined to the generation and nutrition of the foetus, long foreseen of
Nature (which never acts in vain quoad intentionem) in the female, is the main
drift and aim of the Menstrues.

24. The manner of their generation is thus, viz. The blood in the intermitting
time, increases in its bulk in the Veins and Arteries, so that one part
thereof being supposed to supply the deficiency of what is daily spent by
transpiration, the superfluous part increases the mass of blood, and at length
stretches the containing vessels with its plenty, whence a tungescence and
plethory of the vessels.

25. Then Nature (not unmindful of its office) endeavors at the next critical
Lunar season, to employ a little the turgid vessels, by certain passages and
Anastomoses from the vessels they run in before, into the secundines or channels
of the Matrix. This nisus or endeavor is done two ways, viz. both by an
apertion of the Anastomosis from some vessels into others, as also by an innate
contraction of the fibers of the sanguinary vessels, by which they endeavor to
free themselves (annuente natura) from the oppressing Plethora; for there is a
certain contraction or compression, proper to the Veins and Arteries, by which
the circulation of the blood and nutrition of the solid parts succeeds the
better: so that those vessels have a kind of connate Systole, by which they
compress themselves, and after their wonted manner, become free from the
stifling plenty of blood.

26. That there is a Turgescence of the vessels about the time designed by
Nature, for the critical evacuation, is manifest in Virgins, Widows, etc. to
whom such a compression of the veins, and such an apertion of the Anastomoses
of the vessels are at the critical menstrual season denied; oculare praebent
testimonium defectuum naturalium; signaque in front gerunt aliquid amplius in
venis ac arteriis adesse; Whence sometimes Pustules in the Face, Redness of
Eyes, with a swelling of the circumjacent veins; whence also Tumors in several
parts of the body, Pain in the head and other parts; and many other Diseases,
which owe their original to no other than this essential cause.

27. All which indicate a Plethory or Turgescence through overmuch plenty of
blood, whence the mass of blood through a distention of the membranes of the
vessels; does as it were restagnate therein; especially in the Bronchy's of the
Lungs, where the blood setting (as the vulgar word is) and the motion of the
Diaphragme being unproportionable toward its agile transmission into other
parts, and that by reason of the Laxation and flagging of the membranes
thereof, overcharged with too great afflux of blood; Whence an Indisposition,
Dullness, and Sluggishness of the body, Shortness of Breath, an oppression of
the Praecordia or upper mouth of the stomach, etc, And in a further degree of
this restagnation or setting of the blood, proceeds sometimes Syncopes,
Palpitations and Suffocations; yea at length Death it self. And all this from a
bare solitary restagnation of the blood in the vessels, through a retention of
that which should naturally be separated at its due critical season.

28. Now further if the blood upon these retentions, restagnate about the
mouths of the vessels of the Matrix; especially if tainted with any virulency,
from the reflux of some corrupt Menstrual blood, whose current has been
stopped by cold passion, or the like, at the very time of Critical evacuation:
thence the Archeal Regimen of the Matrix, that Animal furibundum, becomes
roused up, which acts at a distance, viz. in other remote parts of the body, by
that manner of operation which Helmont calls a Blass alterativum, which I
cannot nearer compareto any other than to the spiritus sylvestris, or flatus
incoercibilis mentioned before, yet is not formally the same,

29. It is an influential manner of acting, which I judge to be Identical, with
that whereby the Soul acts upon the Body by passion, darting a Raye here or
there, upon this part or the other, ad lubitum; for this influential Blass (or
what other name we may give it, so it comprehend the nature of the thing) it
exercises its tyranny on remote parts, viz. the Hypochonders, Stomach, Lungs,
Brain, etc. as by violent forcible motions, and tensions of the Hypochonders
(enough to require the strength of two or three men sometimes to keep down) and
by causing the blood to restagnate in the Lungs and Heart; whence a cessation
of the Pulse, and circulation of the blood, also an instantaneous Asthma,
together with a cespitation of the animal Spirits, accompanied sometimes with a
contorsion of some musculous parts; whence Convulsions and the like: in the
conclusion it puts a stop to all the digestions and functions of the body, save
its own and that irregular.

30. These Hysterical paroxysms are often occasionally brought on by passions
in those women inclinable thereto; which like as a Feverish Delirium, imitates
the narcotick Sulphur of Opium, or rather as the animal Spirits, are
identically wrought upon by a Fever, as by a large Dose of Opium, both working
the same effect, perverting the imaginative faculty, causing wandering irregular
Phantasms, and sudden irrational Idea's, with preposterous glances, the
operation of the one scarce distinguishable from the other: So in like manner
the uterine Archeus or Spiritus impetum faciens, connatural to that part, is
equally irritated and provoked by a passion of the mind, as by a virulency from
regurgitated foetid Menstrual blood, recurring upon the innocent mass thereof,
in those I mean inclinable to these Hysterical Fits.

31. This uterine Faber takes a like occasion from both to become furious, and
to act by its alterative Blass upon other distant parts; and that a vi
regiminis as the noble Helmont calls it, whereby it equally, from the one cause
as from the other, stretches the Hypochonders, by a furious incoercible
flatus; which if it should proceed from a windiness of the Matrix, according to
the vulgar Galenical notion, the part had need to be charged with wind, like a
gun, yea and ramm'd too (which how they will be able to make forth I know not)
and after every discharging, the wind or air must be forcibly attracted by the
mouth or posteriors to make a fresh charge for a new fit; which forcible
attraction has never yet (that I ever heard of) been observed; only if the
Pa^ient get a rift, the incoercible flatus gets vent, and she is better until
the next arbitrary Blass or flatus stretch the parts again.

32. This flatulent Blass of the uterine Archeus, is far more prevalent than
the Elastick power of the air; for if the trite notion were true, That the Fits
of the Mother were from a bare windiness of the Womb, which rowls up the
Abdomen to the Hypochonders, puffs and swells up the parts; then must the Womb
be supposed as a Pneumatick Engine, out of which the air being exhausted (how
or by what means I know not) the air of the unequal part must of necessity have
a strong pressure or Elastick force to return into the concave thereof, to
supply the forced vacancy: so that the pressure would not be so much from the
Womb as toward it, unless at the time of the suction of the air. Which suppose
we grant, yet would the external pressure of the air be as strong to return
into its vacant and deserted cavity, and thereby force the membranous parts of
the Matrix to give way, flag and falk before it, till it came to an equal poyse
again; and so no forcible wind would thence press the adjacent parts to any
such injury, as ordinarily the uterine flatus does.

33. So that, let them contrive all the ways imaginable, how to solve all the
urgent Phoenomena's of this Hypothesis, grounded upon a solitary flatus; which
according to the ordinary acceptance, is only a latio or motus aeris, and we
shall find a flaw in them; for as such, though forced with Engines in the body
(which we know not how they can prove) yet cannot perform, neither with that
clerity nor force, what the otherwise violent operative Blass of the Matrix can
suddenly display, even ictu oculi. For as a blast or malignant influence in
the channels or peroledi of the air, does suddenly smite and wither branches of
Trees, or other Fruits of the earth, or Faces of People, where they hit; so
(quanquam hand passibus equis) where this malevolent influential Blass or
incoercible flatus of the Womb hits, those parts are afflicted with the raging
force thereof. But to return.

34. Now as obstructions and regurgitations of the Menstruals and passions of
the mind, are the Procatartick or occasional causes of Hysterical Fits, and
concomitant symptoms thereof: so, as I said, are debilitudes of the Placenta,
and laxation of the vessels thereof, the cause of great evacuations, which
sometimes happen to the great impoverishment of the blood and spirits, and much
enfeebling of the Patient, and the cause of Syncope's, Lypopsychia's,
Faintness, Swoonings, etc. and that merely by the loss of blood and scirits.

35. The Cure of these uterine Diseases is next to be confidered, where if the
Diseases be from obstructions making the blood flow back into the mass thereof,
before a menstrual defedation of the same, in such the Spaw, if in any
Diseases, is effectual; and that because the Essurine Salt thereof, is very
prevalent in opening of obstructions, walheth away the sordes which usually
cling to the osculations of the vessels of the Womb; and absterseth notably
every tartareous recrement fastened to the sides of the said vessels: in as
much as there is a Sal quoddam minerale excrementitium, or tartarum resolutum,
of which whether the Womb, Liver, Spleen, Reins, Pancreas, Mesentery or Stomach
be the minera thereof, it causes, as Helmont says, great trouble to the
Patient (insignes parere laborantibus mol^stias) which will not obey the
mandates of common solutives.

36. In order to which, if Sal Martis, viz. the Sugar of Steel, or the Crocus
Martis, or Powder of Steel it self, be given after a due manner; as soon as
they come into the stomach, the Salt of Steel being in a Vehicle, whether water
or wine, the Crocus therein contained precipitates, unto which the foresaid
spurious excrementitious Salt hasts, becomes coagulated thereon; and carried
away by seidge: whence the blackness of excrements in those who take chalibeate
Medicines. The same also happens if either the Crocus of Steel, and powder of
Steel be inwardly taken; and in some cases very proper and effectnal.

37. Now because in the Spaw water there is no Crocus Martis, no body of Iron
at all, but only a slight touch of the minera thereof, I should advise, for
helping the waters to work this effect, to dissolve therein at sometimes half a
scruple or more of rightly prepared Sugar of Steel, which no doubt would make
the water more effectual, for precipitating and carrying away this foresaid
Tartarum solutum, which otherwise often pertinaciously adheres to the vessels,
and proves rebellious to ordinary solutives or purging Medicines; to which
purpose some vitrioline waters, especially where a larger portion of the body
of Iron is dissolved, is of more efficacy in this case than, this: which as I
said before may easily be helped, by an artificial addition. For commonly in
the most obdurate obstructions and Diseases thence depending, this Sal
excrementitium clings closely to the osculations of the vessels, and is the
cause why the Green Sickness in some young women is so difficult to Cure. Which
sometimes bends not to the single help of this or other Spaws, where little or
no body of a Mineral is found: nor to a Galenical method of Blooding, Purging,
etc. but only or chiefly to chalibeate Medicines, and some resolving
penetrating Diaphoreticks.

38. In the defects of Critical evacuations in young women, the obstructions
may be so great, as to cause an uterine Asthma, Suffocation, Epilepsie, Palsy,
etc. Which obstructions being removed by the Spaws and chalibeate Medicines,
those Diseases because uterine, and depending thereon, are forthwith Cured; to
which the change of Air does not a little contribute, by adding a volatizing
ferment to the blood, whereby it becomes more capable of being absolved from
the tartareous recrement, to circulate the more freely in the vessels.

39. As the Spaw water and chalibeate Medicines, have an aperient virtue of
refolving the tartareous obstruent: so also they strengthen and constringe the
fibrous Systole of the Membranous parts, helping them to do their work which
before they flagged under; hence they are proper for Diarrhea's, Dysenteria's,
Lienteria's, Coeliaca's, etc. All which proceeding from a coagulation of the
foresaid tartareous recrement upon the fibers of the Membranous parts, which
makes them forget their functions, weakens and loosens the fibers, whereby they
cannot retain what they should, but carries all off with a preposterous
Diastole. The Fibers of the uterine Membranes are often very well constring'd
by the Spaws, as I said, and chalibeate Medicines, and reduced from being too
great prodigals, that before spent their own, and a great part of the stock of
the body.

40. But if the uterine Disease rise a note higher, by being graduated from a
virulency in the blood; so as thence to cause Hysterical Fits, Syncope's,
Lypopsychia's, etc. Then will Medicines of an higher rank be requisite, for the
Spaws and Chalibeats will not reach them: To which purpose I have seen Elixir
Proprietatis well Prepared, after a previous proper purgation, operate notably
in allaying these uterine furies, mitigating the acrimonious virulency of the
blood, and thereby composing the otherwise furibund Archeal Faber of the Womb.

41. Helmont in these cases commends the volatile tincture of Coral, and the
Arcanum ignis sive dulcedo Sulphuris e Vitriolo Veneris, which Ignis Veneris
does allay the ragings of that furious animal by the anodyne Sulphur thereof;
also his Electrum Minerale, which is a bright resplendent Mineral Marcasite of
Gold; also Asafoetida and Castor and the Oil of Amber. Paracelsus highly
extolls the fume of Horse-warts, taken ex infundibulo per infer^ora; sometimes
a draught of cold Spring Water; the smoke of burnt Feathers; also Amulet, as
Asafoetida hung about the neck: which two last save one, with the like of that
tribe, do only palliate the Disease.

42. A good Deoppilative Medicine together with a proper Diaphoretick and
suitable Anodynes are most requisite in these Diseases; such I mean as may
answer the indications thereof, both by aperient, Diaphoretick, and Nepenthine
Remedies.

A short Description of Malton Spaw.
1. THe like Ingredients of the Scarborough Spaw, has also the Spaw at Malton,
and consequently according to all probability the same operation; as to the
parity of Mineral Ingredients, will appear, if you put either the powder or
solution of Gauls thereto, it presently gives an opacity, first purple, then
black; after the manner as the same does to the Scarborough water, or to a
solution of Allom stone, into which if Spirit or Oil of Vitriol be dropped, that
water of the Malton Spaw as well as the rest will become clear again: If Oil of
Tartar be dropped into the same cleared water, it becomes troubled again, etc.

2. If Oil of Tartar be dropped into some fresh water of the Malton Spaw, it
makes a white Coagulum or milky separation, dispersed through the whole; if Oil
of Vitriol be dropped into that milk water, it clears it after a little
ebullition from the two contrary Salts. The same Spaw with the addition of the
volatile spirit of Hartshorn, etc. makes a white separation, and with Oil of
Vitriol becomes clear.

3. This water I have distilled in a glass-Retort, with a gentle fire; and
after the simple elementary water was come off, there remained a pale-coloured
Sediment, much the same with that which remains after the distillation of the
Scarborough Spaw, viz. an Esfurine alumenish Salt, which passing thorough or by
some Mineral Bed of Iron, licks upon it, carries some small touches thereof;
and also passing by some Stones in its current, raises some small portion
thereof, which being wrought off by the Essurine Salt, it hides it with it self
in the pores of the water; which is that as remains after the Salt is washed
from this Sediment, either simply or after calcination, which has no taste,
nor (after the separation of the Salt) is dissolvable.

4. To enumerate the virtues thereof, were but to repeat what I have said
already concerning the Scarborough Spaw; and therefore shall wave it, and wish
a stronger Spring, with a better current, were endeavored thereabout, for the
good of that part of the Country; in respect it has but a faint Spring, and
would easily be dreyned if many should drink thereat. This water is as deeply
saturate with Mineral Principles, and as thoroughly impregnate with Essurine
Alumenish Salt, as the other of Scarborough, only by reason of the restagnation
of the water about the mouth of the Spring, is somewhat more sluggish, and
unapt to give its virtue: All which may be mended to the great improvement
thereof, if a new Spring were found out.

The Sweet Spaw at Knarsborough.
1. I Shall not speak much of this water, because the ingenuous Dr. French has
writ thereof at large; only shall in short say, That this water has but a
small portion of an Essurine Acidity, which has a little preyed upon the
Minera of Iron, got a slight touch therefrom, and therein is as a Vitriol of
the Minera of Iron.

2. For if Gauls be put therein, it turns purple, and in the conclusion Inky,
upon which if Oil of Vitriol be dropped, it becomes clear again; and by Oil of
Tartar muddied, and cleared again with Oil of Vitriol, Aqua fortis, etc. But if
you pour Oil of Tartar on some of the fresh water, it gives a white milky
separation; which with Oil of Vitriol becomes, after ^bullition, clear again;
upon which if Oil of Tartar, Spirit of Hartshorn, or any volatile Saline
Spirit be again poured, it causes the same white Coagulum, reducible to a
clarity by fresh addition of the foresaid Oil of Vitriol, Aqua fortis, or the
like.

3. All which demonstrate, That Vitrioline Solutions may undergo the same
alterations, by the effusion; of various Liquors, as Alumenish Solutions will
do, and that in effect, as I at large showed in the former Discourse, are but
the same Mineral Essurine Salt, under various disguises from Mineral Beds,
where they become specificated into this or the other Salt, from the touching
upon various Mineral Glebes.

4. So that in effect, all Mineral Springs, whether vitrioline or aluminous,
are the same; only some waters are more strongly saturated with Mineral Salts
than others: in order to which, we find that the Scarborough and Malton water
are better fraught, and more richly laden with its Minerals than this of
Knarsborough, which is a more poor lean water, thin of Minerals, and therefore
greater quantities must be drunk.

5. I confess I like the Air of that place much better, being upon an high
heathy Common, than that of Scarborough, especially for weak and tender bodies;
and in the Cure of Chronical Diseases, the choiceness of the Air is of no small
value, nay indeed oftentimes instar omnium, above all the rest. For the change
of the Air, and the aptness and goodness thereof, does often volatize the
sluggish ferment of the blood, which in long continued Chronical Diseases, as
the Scurvy, Dropsy, Asthma, Consumption, Cachexia's, etc. is become flat,
feculent and restagnant in the vessels, through the depravation of the ferment
thereof; which causes the lamp of Life, only to glow in the coal, or Caput
mort of the blood: whence they commonly, who are afflicted with thoses
Diseases, go heavily and sadly.

6. Whereas when the ferment of the blood becomes restored (to which change of
Air does not a little contribute) that it separates the feculencies, volatizeth
the mass, and gives wings to that which should transpire, then the blood begins
to circulate freely, the Diseases become Cured, and the lamp of Life burns with
a bright flame. I say, the change of Air helping to volatize the blood, renders
it more capable of receiving some assistance by other Remedies, whether the
Spaw water or other Specificks.

7. That this Spaw is Vitrioline, and that only, is demonstrable by matter of
fact, viz. Take a Dram of Vitriol of Iron, otherwise called Salt of Steel,
which dissolve in a pint of Spring water; of which two or three spoonfuls mixed
with a glass of fresh Spring water, gives the exact taste of that Spaw.

8. I should advise the Drinkers of that Spaw, in order to make the waters more
effectual in less quantities, to take Salt of Steel dissolved therein
frequently; which I am confident, would add abundantly to its virtue, and make
it more readily answer their expectations. For thereby, first, they need not
drink such large quantities, which often overchargeth the digestions,
stretches the Hypochonders, and burdens nature, to the prejudice of the
expected future good; whereas a lesser quantity acuated, with an artificial
Vitriol or Salt of Steel, will make its way the more readily, open obstructions
more powerfully, constringe the loose flagging membranous parts more easily,
and answer all indications more generally.

9. Besides all which, the Crocus of the Steel in that Vitriol, when taken into
the Stomach etc. would precipitate; upon which the excrementitious Salt or
Tartarous recrement, the great obstructer in many Diseases, would be
coagulated, and by the peristaltick motion of the Intestines would be carried
off by siedge, giving blackness to the excrements, thereby sweetning the blood
and hurnours.

10. And therefore it is that those Mineral Springs, which are the most
impregnate with a natural Vitriol of Iron, are not only reputed but found to be
the most successful in Cures, witness the two German Spaws, Pawhont and
Sanvenir, or Savern, in which, though Dr. Heeres says, That by distillation he
found Rubric, Oker and a little Vitriol, I mean in the Pawhom; yet if we shall
credit Helmont he speaks thus, Distillari aliquando serio, Savenirium and
Pawhonteum; and sane non tantum Mineralium catalogum, imo nil quicquam in iis
offendi, pr^^^^ aquam Fontanam and Vitriolum ferri, ab aliis aute me
scriptorilue neglectum. Now whether of these two is to be credited? I rather
think that Hen. ab Heers might be mistaken, calling that Oker, which is nothing
but a sediment of the Mineral Earth of Iron, dissolved by the Essurine acidity,
which we see is separable from Vitriol it self, by a bare solution thereof in
Spring or common water, in the form of a yellow powder, which he might easily
mistake for Oker. As for Rubric I suppose it is nothing else but Matter ferri,
the body of Iron in the Vitriol; and so it will necessarily follow that what
Helmont says, as to matter of fact, is most true, viz. That he found by
distillation of those waters, nothing save clear water and a Vitriol of Iron.

11. By the Medium of which Vitriol of Iron those Springs effected their Cures:
Of which also this at Knarsborough, if assisted by the help of an artificial
Vitriol or Salt of Steel, would prove succedancous; though I confess if it were
saturate with the natural Vitriol, it would operate the better. Which, whether
natural or artificial, if the water be any thing considerably impregnate
therewith, it does its work in less quantities; the great bulk whereof, usually
taken to make it work, stretches too much the Fibers of the Membranous parts,
baffles their Systole or contractive motion; whence not being strengthened
afterward by some astringents, they flag, and the Patients sometimes, after
they have left drinking the waters, fall into Dropsies, Defluxions of Rheumes,
Cachexia's, and the like.

12. All which might easily be prevented by taking the Vitriol of Iron or Salt
of Steel, in a proportionable quantity dissolved in the water; for this
astringeth and keeps up the right tone of the Membranous parts, orderly
regulating the Systole and Diastole thereof; which very thing would be of no
small use to many Patients.

13. I should advise before the drinking of the water, a Dose or two of the
well prepared Salt of Vitriol, especially to such whose stomachs are furred
with a tartarous recrement, and viscous Sediment, fast impacted in the tunicles
thereof, which the solitary waters might slip over again and again, without any
remove, and consequently without any considerable effect; but being once
loosened by the strength of an Emetick, might be carried off the stomach,
partly upwards and the rest downwards, washed away by the force of the water.

14. The time of drinking the largest Dose of the waters, acuated with the Salt
of Steel, is the Mornings, walking as the usual course is, and no more all the
day, except two glasses in the Afternoon about four of the Clock; and that but
to some bodies neither, viz. to such as by experiment find it go well with
them: exercising themselves by Walking, Riding, Reading, Bowling, or any other
innocent divertisement; keeping an ordinary Diet of a few dishes, and those of
wholesome meat and well cooked, without too much variety of sauces, which
confounds the stomach; not to glut or overcharge the stomach, but to keep an
hanke over it.

15. The water thus drunk, together with the addition of some singular
Specificks, well ordered, according as the nature of the Disease requires, will
probably, consideratis considerandis, perform very considerable Cures, to the
comfort of the Patient and credit of the Physician; who as such, is a Minister
or helper of Nature. As to the particularity of the Diseases themselves, this
Spaw and other additional helps may be effectual in, I shall refer to what I
have already spoke in the former discourse of Searborough Spaw.

The Sulphur Well at Knarsborough.
1. THat this water has a strong body of Sal Marine in it, needs no further
evincement than its eminent saltish taste, and the copiousness of a black salt
left behind after the distillation, or evaporation of the water; which by
solution, filtration and evaporation becomes a clean white Sal Marine, no way
distinguishable from the Trencher-salt we use; that it has also a Sulphurous
foetidness, is apparent enough, both by the smell, and by the strong rifts or
belches upon the stomach, somewhat like to foetid rotten Eggs.

2. As I was trying an Experiment to another purpose, I found somewhat
unexpectedly, which did abundantly satisfy me, as to the cause and reason of
this Spring; and it was thus, I took three Ounces of thrice calcined Bay Salt,
dissolved it in about a pint of, Well water, which upon the Solution gave a
very foetid odor, most exactly resembling this Sulphur Well. It was very black
in respect of the terrestreity of the Salt that gave that blackness to the
otherwise clear water; this I filtred forthwith into a clear liquor, that
retained the perfect smell and taste of the Sulphur water.

3. Whence I concluded, first, That the Sal Marine is not a simple Salt, but a
Mineral Concrete, having an embryonate Sulphur close locked up in its concretion
or compage of its body, whereby the Primum Ens Salium becomes shut up in it, as
well as in other Mineral Salts; and therefore cannot be made to appear, unless
that which hinders be taken away, that is, unless the Hydropick moisture
wherewith it abounds be exhausted by flagration or decrepitation, and the
terrestrious feculency, or (as I would rather call it) the embryonated foetid
Sulphur be removed, which is done by a further, or reiterate calcination or
fusion by the fire, whereby its Mineral compage is unloos'd, and so comes
nearer its Primum Ens, than when it is clothed with Mineral Vestments.

4. For all Mineral Salts, whether Nitre, Allom, Vitriol, or Sal Marine, are
but the several specificated concretions of that Primum Ens Salium, the mother
of them, as also of other Mineral productions: So that the Primum Ens runs
through, and is in all those Salts, only receives a particular determination
into this or the other Salt, according to the predomination of the properties
of the nature and disposition of the place, at time of concretion; insomuch as
that by the addition of a Sulphur, every where (though differently) wrapped up in
the bosom of Nature, this Primum Ens becomes coagulated and determined into a
different Salt, or other concrete body (which yet to a common and unexperienced
eye, might easily pass for a simple and uncompounded Salt) the resolution of
which requires no less than a skilful Artist.

5. Secondly, I hence also conclude, What may be the constitutive principles of
Sulphurous Springs; and that is a Sal Marine, so digested in the bowels of the
Earth, as that its Mineral embryonated Sulphur becomes unloosed: which together
dissolving in the vein of a Spring, passing through the various Meanders or
Streiners of the Earth, called by Helmont Sabulum bulliens or Quellem, it
becomes purged from much of its terrestrial feculency it had contracted in its
solution.

6. By which embryonated Sulphur, I mean a Sulphur in suis principiis, in its
first appearance, whilst it is yet in the kernel (as I may say) and not brought
on so far as to become a real body, but only a volatile Gas, which contains the
beginnings and impressions of Sulphur in it, and yet is not imbodyed in a
Sulphur, but is as an Embryo before its imbodying in the Womb; from which, its
name of an Embryonate Sulphur.

7. And that it is such an embryonated Sulphur, which predominates in these
Sulphurous Springs, appears by evaporating some of that water, and you shall
find that before half of the moisture be gone it has lost all its Sulphurous
odor; because so volatile as not the least of it discernable in any body of
Sulphur or otherwise: nay, though one should distill it with never so much
curiosity of exactly fitting and joynting Receivers, yet would nothing of a
Sulphur become apparent, but would be gone insensibly; as happened to a
solution of above a pound of thrice calcined Salt, which upon the affusion of
water did exactly resemble the Sulphur Well, as I said, which filtred and
placed over the fire to evaporate, before one half was gone it had lost all its
embryonative Sulphur, being so volatile as it took wings, by the assistance of
so much heat, and left no footsteps of its presence.

8. Thirdly, I conclude that such a solution of the Sal Marine, together with
its embryonated Sulphur, in a sabulous Spring (having received that previous
digestion in the intrails of the Earth, as to make apparent its Embryo Sulphur)
may be nearer the Primum Ens Salium, then a coagulated Salt; and may be better
taken in order to the preparation of that great Solvent, the Sal circulatum.
And my reason is partly grounded upon a sentence of the grave and long
experienced Helmont, where he says, In Sulphur sunt fermenta, fracedines,
odores, sapores specifici seminum ad quasvis transmutationes, that is, In
Sulphur are ferments, hogo's, smells, specific tastes of seeds fit for all
transmutations; so that in the bosom of Sulphurs, lies the main wheel of all
transmutation: the beginnings to which are also putrefactions, which those
Embryo-Sulphurs may much promote. For all bodies that are capable of resolution
into Heterogeneities, their texture is subverted by the working of ferments
upon the Sulphurs of such bodies, whereby they may be readily analyz'd or taken
in pieces.

9. Lastly, That Spirits (such I call the Primum Ens salium) before they are
coagulated upon Minerals or other bodies, are but in Embryo, or in their
infancy (as I may call it) or nonage; and therefore coagulable upon bodies to
the impairing of their own activity, by locking themselves up in the textures
of bodies: and so require a resolution from their coagulation, before they can
be brought to that purity and simplicity they were in, when they found bodies
to dwell in, viz. before incorporation.

10. Hence it is that Paracelsus, giving an hint concerning the preparation of
his grand Liquor Alkahest (which I do not remember he calls by that name in all
his Writings, save De Viribus Membrorum. Cap. De Hepate; but by Sal circulatum,
Primum Ens salium, etc.) says, a coagulatione resolvatur and iterum coaguletur
in formam transmutatam; that is (as I apprehend) That seeing we can scarcely
find the Primum Ens salium in its pure spirituality, and naked simplicity, but
as it is infolded in the arms of a Mineral body, and so coagulated into many
shapes of Salts, as Marine, Vitriol, Allom, Nitre, etc. which are several
bodies, wherein this hidden Spirit or universal embryonative Solvent, appears
to our view in diverse corporeal dresses, putting on ( Proteus like) new shapes
according to the Mineral vestment, wherewith he is clothed, requires therefore
(if we would have him appear unmasked) to be resolved from his coagulation;
till then we cannot expect him capable of performing much in the way of a
penetrating Master-Solvent, but acts according to the freedom of his keepers.

11. And though this Spirit or Primum Ens salium, while it is in its infancy or
embryo, be so weak as to clasp hold of every body that comes near it, and
prostitute it self to every woer, in many strange Mineral bodies; so as to
dibilitate it self before it arrive to those more mature and masculine
functions of penetrating and dissolving bodies, without being contaminated with
their touches, or debilitated and baffled by their re-action: I say
notwithstanding this weakness of the Spirit before coagulation; yet if after
the the resolution, it becomes set at liberty from its bonds, divorced from its
first consort, and then exalted and fortified in its own purity by a gradual
process, becomes so noble and virile a liquor, as that it acts upon all
Mineral, Animal and Vegetable Concretes, dissolving them into their Primum ens
or seminal Crasis, whereby their medicinal virtues are at hand; and that
without the least re-actions of those bodies upon this universal Solvent
Liquor. But to return.

12. This Spaw as to medicinal use is not of much more efficacy than so much
Trencher-salt, dissolved in such a proportion of water, answerable to that of
the Sulphur-Well, which both alike would muchwhat have the same operation; only
the foetid embryonate Sulphur does somewhat provoke nature, and therefore
extimulate the expulsive faculty of the stomach, purging either upward or
(which the rather) downward.

13. The plenty of the Salt wherewith it is strongly saturate, preserves much
against Putrefaction and Diseases thence proceeding, viz. against worms, and
wormatick corrupt matter in the stomach and intestines, which so much common
Salt as I said dissolved in fair water would effect the same. The blackish Salt
which remains after the boiling up of the water, has no more virtue against
worms (for which it is frequently used) than a like quantity of common Salt;
for it has no specifical difference from common Salt, especially when
depurated by solution, filtration and evaporation: then it is exactly the same.

14. And though there be a Marcasite or stone of Vitriol to be found about
Sixscore yards from this Well, which will fall in the Air in a moist place; and
by solution, filtration, and evaporation, will become a transparent green
Vitriol, as an ingenuous Friend of mine for trial sake made: I say though this
be found near it, yet does not in the least partake thereof, neither in taste
nor virtue.

Concerning the Original of Hot Springs.
IT is not the least amongst Chemical Enquiries, to know the true original
cause of heat, whether in Vegetables, Animals or Minerals; amongst which, the
cause of hot Springs, is not inconsiderable, seeing that in them are found many
medicinable virtues, useful for the help of Man.

Where I shall proceed, first to show, That hot Springs or Baths are from
Mineral Salts; next, How Mineral Salts upon the contact of one another, or of
Mineral bodies, are the efficient causes of heat in those Springs; and thirdly,
How artificial Baths may be made analogical in virtue and operation to the
natural; and Lastly shall show the efficacy of hot Springs and Baths, whether
natural or artificial.

As to the first, That hot Springs or Baths are from Mineral Salts, is evident,
because no Mineral or Metalline body, is dissolvable or alterable in the bowels
of the earth, without the concourse of Salts; for in the Mineral and Metalline
Kingdom there are but two Agents, which makes the great alterations amongst
those bodies, and those are Fire and Salts. by Fire, I mean not only the
external and elementary fire, by whose force Metals and Minerals become
separated from their connate Heterogeneities, and brought to the best; but also
the inward inbred fire, viz. the Sulphur of those bodies which ripens and
maturates the Minerals and Metals, making them more or less pure, according to
the disposition of the place and graduation of the Sulphur.

By Salts I mean the Primum Ens salium, with its various coagulations into
specificated Salts; for without these Agents, all Mineral and Metalline bodies
are at rest. There are neither solutions nor coagulations.

Now there are few sorts of earth through which water in its current passes
(saving the Quellem or Arena bulliens) but they are impregnate with Mineral
juyces, of one sort or other, which by some slight touch of a Mineral Salt in
the water-Spring, becomes dissolved in some small proportion, enough to give
that great difference we find in Spring Water, both as to taste (which some
that have accurate palates, and have accustomed themselves to drink water, can
easily discern an eminent difference, in taste of one sort of Spring Water from
another) as also to the frequent use waters are put to, both for boiling meat,
washing and bleaching clothes, Dying, Tanning, Brewing, etc. All which
difference I say proceed some small solution of different Mineral juyces, by
the Medium of a little touch of Salt, dissolved in the subterraneal channels of
water. Here I might expatiate and show the reasons of the difference of waters,
both as to taste, and also in order to the foresaid uses; but least I make
these papers swell too much I shall wave it.

My next work is to show, How Mineral Salts upon the mutual contact of each
other, or of Mineral bodies, are the efficient cause of heat in those Springs I
am now speaking of. To which purpose, I shall propound several mechanical
experiments of the productions of heat; as first from the mixing acid and
alkalizate Liquors, as for instance of Oil of Vitriol, with Oil of Tartar,
which upon mixing give a great heat, making a strong ebullition, which when
over, the heat wastes; and that is either when the one by its greater
proportion, over-acts or overcomes the other: or when both proportionable, they
are reduced to an Equilibrium or neutral Salt, called Tartarum Vitriolatum.
Which heat is caused not only by Oil of Vitriol upon the Alkali of Tartar; but
also by any other acid Spirit, as Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of Salt, Aqua fortis,
Spirit of Vinegar or the like, which after the ebullition is over, give a
Tartarum nitrosum, salinum, acetosum, etc.

And as Salts, mutually acting upon each other, cause heat; so in like manner
do some Liquors or Spirits, affus'd upon Salts effect the same, as Spirit of
Wine poured upon dry Salt of Tartar, will make a great heat, so that in mixing
them, to rectify Spirit of Wine therefrom, we usually do it per vices or by
sprinkling the Salt leisurely therein, least we should endanger the glass by
heating it too much. The like heat happens by pouring the Spirit of Wine upon
Arsenick fixed upon Nitre, which as from the same cause, with that of Spirit of
Wine upon Salt of Tartar; for the Nitre by the open calcination with Arsenick,
is partly turned into a fixed Alkali: which that it is so, appears, because if
to the dulcified Arsenical powder (after the washing away the Salts) Spirit of
Wine be poured, no heat is contracted. So water poured upon Calx vive, gives a
considerable heat, which it does by resolving the acid and alkalizate Salts
contained therein; who by their mutual contest cause an heat.

As Salts acting one upon another, and the affusion of some Liquors also upon
them, cause heat; so also Salts acting upon Minerals or Metalline bodies by
corrosion and dissolution, are the efficients of heat. Thus any corrosive
Menstruum, fretting Mineral, or Metalline bodies cause the same; as for
instance, in the solution of any Metal in Aqua fortis, during the ebullition
there is an heat: so in making the Vitriolum Martis, upon the affusion of the
Menstrum, the heat is so very strong, as that I have not been able to hold the
glass in my hand. Which proceeds from the agile Spirits of Salts, fretting upon
the Metalline compage, taking it in pieces, and reducing it in minima; in whose
forcible (not natural) Analysis, through the agility of motion the heat is
caused.

But in the pouring Aqua Regia upon Antimony or Spirit of Nitre, upon Butyrum
Antimonii for the making Bezoardicum Minerale, there an heat is caused by an
actual humid calcination of the Sulphur of that Mineral; where the Sulphur by
those corrosive Spirits, almost takes flame, passes off with a strong stifling
Arsenical vapor.

Also the motion of bodies, one upon or against another, by concussion or
frication, cause heat; so fermentation gives quickness of motion, and that
produces heat: which is sensibly perceived in some fermenting liquors, in
others not.

Now the Query pertinent to my purpose is, Which of all these several causes of
heats, may probably be the efficient of hot Springs? To which I answer, That it
is most likely to proceed from Mineral Salts, one acting upon another; that is,
from the Essurine Salt (which alone with a slight touch of a Mineral, give
being to those Fontes Acidi, viz. Vitrioline Spaws) which meeting in the
channels of the Earth with some lixivial Marcasites, are by the current of a
water-Spring dissolved and set a boiling; one working and fretting upon
another, give that heat to the water, which dissolves them. Which two Salts,
viz. Acid and Alkalizate, are sometimes embryonative in the same Marcasite,
which may happen in some natural stone or middle Mineral of Calx Vive; into
which a current of water being opened, presently dissolves the two Salts, makes
them contest and struggle, by reason of the antipathy of their natures; and
thereby cause the heat in hot Baths.

So that in short, It is very probable that it is from a natural stone of Calx
Vive; which being plentiful in the Minera thereof, may give cause for the
perpetuation of heat. To confirm which, Some have found a white Marcasite about
the place of those hot oprings in Sommerset-shire, which put into water give;
an heat. Now that two such opposite Salts should be embryonate in the same
Mineral stone, is an argument, that the seminal principles of Nature are at
work in all places, according to the capacity and manner of the matters
reception, viz. ad modum recipientis.

Calx Vive distilled with fresh Urine, makes the Spirit thereof arise at the
first, with that difference also from soliary Spirit of Urine, as that it gives
cause to think, that some volatile Alkali of the Calx arises up with it, which
hinders the coagulation of the Spirit into an Offa with Spirit of Wine, usually
happening from simple Spirit of Urine, and Spirit of Wine mixed together. Which
very thing argues the difference of Salts of Calx Vive; That it has an Alkali
in it, is demonstrable enough from its enriching of grounds; for which purpose
it is frequently used in barren Soyls, which the Countryman chooses for some
grounds, rather than Manure. That there is an acid Salt therein, is somewhat
distinguishable by the taste.

Another sort of heat I have observed to proceed from the contact of Salts, and
the Calx of Metals; as for instance in the following experiment, I took of the
Caput mort, of Viride Eris, from whence the Spiritus Veneris had been
rectified, being a very subtle Calx of Venus, with which I mixed an Anatical
proportion of Sal Armoniack pulverized very well in a large brass Mortar; in
mixing, it came to such an impalpable powder, as the particles seemed to be as
minute, and almost as continuous as the particles of water are, for it was
almost as fluid as water: so that (by the by) it is plain, minuteness and
adaption of parts amongst themselves are mainly, if not solely, conducible to
fluidity; and fluidity the essential property of water.

When I had well incorporated them together, for so they should be; in as much
as when any suitable body or Spirit, is to penetrate and work an alteration in
another body, they then do it best when they touch each other per minima:
thence Contritions and Sublimations are the Pistilla Chymica, by which
alterations are made of one body by another. I say, when I had well
incorporated them, I put them into a paper, thinking the next day to have put
them into a Retort; but within less than one quarter of an hour I perceived
such a strong penetrating urinous smell, as made me admire whence it should
proceed, which put me in fear of some glass being broke in my Balneum. At
length I came near the paper, and presently found it to be that which sent
forth such a strong odor; which when I took up off the Table, was so hot as I
could scarce suffer to hold it. I made have to put it into a Retort, which
before I could do, it wellnigh burnt my hand.

By this experiment thus far, Two things considerable appeared; one, conducing
to illustrate, as I said, the nature of fluidity to consist in minuteness of
parts; the other is, That heat (and so consequently the rest of the qualities
so called) are a certain disposition and adaption of parts of bodies amongst
themselves after such and such a manner, as to work differently upon one and
the same body: so that a brisk motion of the constituent particles, either by
an innate fermentation or extrinsick excitation from another subtle body, is
sufficient to cause that we call heat.

Some other causes there are of hot Springs, viz. Subterraneal Fires, set on
work by the flagration of Bitumen or Sulphur; which being kindled in some parts
of the Earth, where being close pent up, not finding vent, causes Earthquakes:
but when it breaks forth, it sometimes forces with that violence, as that if
it break forth under the Sea, it throws up stones and earth in such abundance,
as that a new Island is thrown up of a sudden in the midst of the Sea; and
that for many Leagues together, the Sea is at that time covered over with the
spongy Pumice-stone, which is the Caput mort in the flagration of that Mineral.
Other places there are by which, as Chimneys or Flewes, the Subterraneal Fire
finds vent, as Aetna, Vesuvius, Strongilo, Vulcano, etc.

These Subterraneal Fires, the ingenuous Kircker in his Mundus Subterraneus
calls Pyrophylacia, which being conveyed by several Subterraneal Pipes or
Channels to those Cisterns or receptacles of water called Hydrophylacia, which
thereby become heated, and that in places not far from day, I mean the
superficies of the Earth, breaks forth in hot Springs. These Pyrophylacia it is
very probable are the cause of some hot Springs, as the kindling of Calx Vive
are of others. Of which last Fallopius tells us, In agro Volaterrano ad
castellum montis Cerbari vocatum, sunt lacus dicti vulgo, lagoni, quasi
lacunae, ubi est aqua ferventissima, and undique cinis; quinimo and mons qui
ibidem est, totus calce and cinere refertus est calido, adeo ut calceamenta
exurat, uti ipse sum (inquit) aliquando expertus. These Phyrophylacia heat the
waters, sometimes in ipsis cuniculis; otherwhile they heat Mineral stones
through which water passes: either way make hot Springs.

Thus having numbered up the several sorts of heats, and amongst them pitched
upon that which is the efficient of hot Springs; amongst which also (by the by)
the preparation of the body of Steel is performed; whereby it will the most
part of it readily dissolve in any Vehicle, and make a Mineral water like
Tunbridge, Epsom and Knarsborough Spaw, Let us now consider how artificial
Baths may be made; and those are either such as are more common, as the
decoctions of Vegetables and Salts in water and other liquors, wherein Diseased
Persons are frequently put, also to have the body (all but the head) enclosed
within the steams of hot water, or to sit under a frame of Pastboard with
Spirit of Wine flaming in a large Lamp-vessel, which is a kind of Stoving Bath
or Stoves, etc. or such Baths as are more rare, viz. Spirit of Wine with Salt
of Tartar, either for some particular parts of the body, or for the whole, if
some Patients upon extraordinary occasions would go to the charge thereof; also
Sulphur so artificially contrived, as that the flame thereof shall heat a large
vessel of water, in imitation of the terrestrial fires, wherewith some Baths or
Springs are made hot: which Bath might constantly be kept hot by the continual
supply of fresh Sulphur, in manner of the Fountain which the Romans made
constantly by art to flow hot; which was performed by some brass Pipes wound up
in Gyres, In spiras voluti instar Draconis, which were therefore called
Dracones, under which they made a fire, by which the first Spires were made
warm, the next more, the next again yet hotter, so that the water did
continually flow forth hot. After which sort with some little variation,
Physicians might keep hot baths with Medicinal waters, suited for the Patients
Disease, constantly at work with a small charge, after the vessels were once
artificially contrived. To which purpose I have had a Balneum Maria kept hot
for digestions, by Leaden Pipes placed in Gyres in a wooden vessel.

The advantage of such artificial contrived Baths, is this, That the Physician
may presently change his medicated waters, as occasion offers, can give what
degree of warmth he pleases, and keep them constantly in an equal heat, which
cannot easily be performed by the common sort of Baths; and therefore comes
nearer in efficacy to the natural hot Springs than the other, and so
consequently more effectual.

Now as to the virtues of Baths natural or artificial, they are of large
extent, and may be, if skillfully managed, of much use in helping many
Diseases, as the Palsy, Convulsions, etc. Which by opening the pores, and
thereby removing the obstructing or afflicting causes of the Genus Nervosum,
may probably be successful in all the Diseases thereof; also the Hypochondriack
Melancholy, by opening the external portals, alieviating of the Spirits, giving
vent for the flatus, and with the help of inward aperients; may dulcifie the
blood and humors from their feculent tartness, whereby the cohobations and
depurations of the blood, upon its Caput mort or rejection of its feces in its
passage through the Spleen, may succeed the better.

Also may be effectual in Atrophyes, Aridura, Witheredness of the parts, by
helping a fresh fermentation of the blood, which may force its passage into the
otherwise deserted parts; and thereby become capable of distributing an equal
nourishment to all parts.

Likewise Baths are of efficacy in all sorts of Stiffness, Pains, Numbness and
Lameness of the Joints, by opening the pores of the body, absolving the Nerves
from their obstruents, dinting the acrimonious sharpness of the Latex, giving
current to the blood; and at length reducing the nervous and membranous parts
to their due and proper order and tone: Also in other Diseases, as Rickets in
Children, Ulcers, Tumors, and Defedations of the skin in elder People; toward
the effecting of which, no small variety of the Chemical Apparatus or Mineral
Drugs, are in promptu for that purpose.

A short Vindication of Chemical Physic.
1. THe strange uncouthness of Chemical Physic, is such; yea the very name of
Chemistry has been so much a stranger in these Northern parts of England,
that, what through the Odium cast upon it by the Galenists, on purpose to keep
it under hatches; and what through the empty, fruitless, boasting pretenders
thereto, who not being Artists were its only disparagers: By both which it
has suffered severely, in the ears of the generality of People, in so much
that when they have heard of it, they have stood amazed. To venture the taking
of any Medicine preparable thereby, they durst not. Why? What was the matter?
They knew not, only they had heard strange reports, which frighted them. Their
Physicians told them, They were hot things, such as would burn their bowels;
and therefore very dangerous.

2. Yea, till within this ten or a dozen years, this Noble Science has
undergone much ignominy, or else mostwhat unknown in most parts of England; yes
and in Foreign Parts too, unless here and there one, who if he practiced by it
did it privately: so that he who has bent his endeavors that way, to find out
more effectual Remedies by the Spagyrical Art, has been looked upon in these,
as a Mathematician was in former days, who by the ignorant vulgar was esteemed
no better than a Conjurer; so that a Mathematician and a Conjurer were
accounted in the vulgar Idiom Synonima's, words of the same signification. For
if they dealt with Circles it was enough; they knew no difference between a
Mathematical Circle and demonstrations drawn therefrom (which still was as
strange to them) and a Conjuring Circle; like as a boy was once accused before
a Magistrate for being a Fortune Tellers or Astrologer. It happened he had a
little book in his pocket, wherein was some Schemes I suppose drawn by the help
of Lillie's Introduction; which no sooner did the Justice espy, but cries out,
Circles, Circles, Sirrah these are dangerous things, we'll take a course with
you: and so ordered the boy to be carried away. By which you may surely
conclude, that himself was no Conjurer, for he loved no Circles. Thus poor
Circles and Chemistry has been deeply accused.

3. It is not long since the genius of some pregnant wits began to set to work
to understand and rightly prepare Chemical Remedies; first, Duly considering
the nature of Ferments; and next, To search after the various Solvents, and
their manner of operation, without which nothing very considerable is
preparable in Chemical Physic: so that very good improvement of late has been
made therein, witness the elaborate Pieces of some ingenuous Persons.

4. We shall therefore, first, say what the Spagyrical Art or Chemical Science
is; next, endeavor to take off the reproach or calumny laid thereon, by
answering the objections against it; and lastly, signify the great help nature
has thereby, above ordinary Shop-preparations, in order to the Cure of
Diseases.

5. First, as to what it is. It is, in short, such a due Preparation of all
Medicinal Concretes, whether Animal, Vegetable or Mineral, as the pure
balsamic lively parts becomes separated from the impure feculencies; for we
see that in all Concretes there is a mixture of pure and impure, of gross and
tenuious parts; some feculent and dreggy; others refined and depurated, though
indeed the mixture of these together makes up a complete body, which has its
use and place in the creation: yet, as to Medicinable use, it is the pure,
nimble, spiritous parts of Vegetables or Animals; or the depurated fixed parts;
or lastly, the reunion of both after purification, which effects the work, in
assisting nature against the Malady.

6. Which Preparations are performed two ways, viz. either by digestion, or by
distillation; under that of digestion is comprehended fermentation, solution,
extraction and putrefaction, and that by agile Solvents, connatural with or
emergent from the bodies of the Concretes themselves, or by additional
Menstruums: all which does macerate, ferment and dissolve the texture of the
body, and fits it for separation by distillation. The additional Menstruums for
extractions, are either vinous, oleaginous, urinous or acetous Spirits; or a
product from their commixtures: all which do prepare toward the separation of
the Crasis of the Concrete.

7. All Vegetables or Animals, or at least the most, by bare distillation yield
a Phlegm, a volatile Salt, an Oil, and in the Caput mort a fit Salt, separable
from the remaining useless Faeces; but by a previous fermentation; if the
juyces of Vegetables, they first yield a vinous Spirit, then a Phlegm, leaving
their Tartar behind, out of which by distillation with a stronger fire, is got
a Phlegm, an acid Spirit, an Oil, out of whose Faeces again is a fixed Salt,
separable: but if the Vegetable undergo a more natural spontaneous
fermentation, then that, which otherwise is an Oil, separates it self by
distillation, mostwhat in a volatile Spirit, or volatile Salt. All sorts of
Wood or Plants, by naked force of fire are distillable into an acid Spirit,
Phlegm, Oil and Salt; as we see in burning of Wood, by the bare fire, the
Chimneys become the Receivers to which the Soot cleaves: and that again
distilled, yields a Phlegm, an Oil, and a volatile Salt, which last, by
rectification becomes pure and of a lovely white color. A very penetrative
Medicine, useful in Diseases of the Genus nervosum; also a great preservative
against Putrefaction and Fevers thence ensuing. But I dare not prosecute
particulars, least I swell the volume too much.

8. But in general all Vegetable separations of the pure from the impure, are
made, as I said, by digestions and distillations, the two main hinges of
Chemical Preparations, by which their Spirits and Essences become separated,
which united with the extracted fixed Salt out of the Caput mort and further
digested together, especially if the fixed Salt be made so as to dissolve in
most rectified Spirit of Wine, give most noble abstersive and diuretic Salts,
Whose virtues, in my Practice, I have much admired.

9. Not that I deny the great blessing of the Most High, in those specifical
endowments he has pleased to enrich some Vegetables and other Concretes
withal; who perform their work to which by a Divine Hand they are destined, and
that without any Chemical Preparation: And yet some Specificks are not
altogether without some previous Preparations. An error in the due observation
of which, many times prevents or intercepts the full efficacy of the Remedy.

10. There are it may be about a Score of choice Plants, which well managed
with a skillful hand at due seasons, may by their singular virtues, produce
considerable effects; the rest are not (that we know) of much use, saving for
ornament, pleasant smells, and food to Cattle. What heaps of Plants by some
Physicians are ordered to stuff Diet-bags withal? whereas a few choice good
ones might probably be more effectual. Some Physicians being called to consult
about a Patient, who ordering a Diet-bag for him, having put in a sufficient
number of Plants, yet some of them would have heaped in more; one wiser than
the rest, very merrily bid them put in a Hay-cock, and then to be sure they
would have enough. And indeed it would have proved a very good Magistery for an
Horse.

11. As for Animals, or the parts of Animals, preparable by the Chemical Art
for the use of Man, are chiefly the Blood and Urine; the first of which, viz.
the Blood, is as an Elixir of all the parts of the body, where if any Spirits,
Life or Vigor be, it is there; the other, viz the Urine, is a Latex percolated
through the Reins from the Blood, and retains in it self much of the very same
principles the Blood has in it: so that both unfermented without any previous
preparation, only by bare distillation yields first a Phlegm, and that in a
great quantity, then a volatile Spirit and Oil, and volatile Salt; and in the
Caput mort of both, is some fixed Salt, somewhat resembling Sea Salt, if not
really the same, separable by solution from the remaining sordes. But if both
undergo a previous fermentation, then the volatile Spirits becomes loosened
from their bonds, and works themselves at liberty; and that whether in close or
open vessels: So that then distilled, yield at the very first, with a gentle
fire, their volatile Spirits, and the Phlegm after.

12. So that fermentation inverts the order of the parts, coming off by
distillation; and that whether in vinous or urinous liquors (by urinous, I also
include the blood) For take the juice of the Grape, or of any vegetable fruit,
whether Apples, Pears, Cherries, or the like, distill them, and you shall at
the first have nothing but a great quantity of phlegm, and at last a small
portion of the true genuine Spirit, together with a fetid Oil: even as is got
(though with some difference of Spirit) from blood and urine distilled crudely.

13. But if you ferment the juice of Grapes, Apples, Pears, Cherries, or the
like, then is the vinous Spirit set at liberty from the bonds of the compage of
the body, and in distillation with a gentle heat, comes up first, and the
phlegm after; and that which was an Oil before, is, partly by the volatizing
ferment transmuted into Spirit; and partly by refining in the vessels, after
fermentation, is settled to the sides thereof in form of Tartar, which distilled
with a stronger fire, gives, amongst other distillables, that fetid
empyreumatick Oil which we see it yields in plenty.

14. So that I say, Fermentation makes no small alteration, whether in
vegetable, or animal juyces, by setting the true genuine Spirit, whether vinous
or urinous, at liberty, from the fetters of the body thereof; which juyces, if
neither distilled, nor fermented, degenerate into acid, sour, vinegarish
Liquors, which if not kept from the Air by close stopped vessels, will very
shortly contract a mouldiness, and decay into vapid useless Liquors: even so
also the blood in its own vessels, if not volatized from its connatural
ferment, becomes sowrish, degenerates into a vinegar, or rather blood in
Chronical diseases, and by a further impoverishment of Spirits, becomes at
length vapid, whence death.

15. And as blood and urine are Animal parts, which receive also a separation
of their heterogeneous parts by distillation; and that differently, by being
fermented, or not: so also Hartshorn may well be accounted another, whose
parts are separable by the Chemical Art, and if well prepared, are of much
efficacy. I speak the rather of the Horns of that Creature, because no other
that I know of, renews his Horns yearly, as the Stag does; which being
vegetable, as well as animal (I mean the Horns) gives no small hopes of (yea,
we know gives) a good Medicine.

16. This Creature, when fresh Grass comes in the Spring, begins to have an
efflorescence in his blood, which becomes turgent with volatile active spirits;
and having more then can well be dispensed with in the vessels, begins from a
natural instinct peculiar to that Creature to attempt a new production, by
laying a foundation of new Horns: which increasing by the yet more turgidness
of the blood with those volatile Spirits, in the conclusion part of which
volatile Spirits, together with some succulent parts of the blood, become
animated into little vermicles, by an incipient putrefaction, which begets a
pruriency or Itching in the blood, and that makes the Stag run his Horns
against every thing in his way, and never quiet till he has knocked the old
Horns off.

17. And that is the reason Hartshorn, above all other Horns, is so replete
with volatile Spirits; which how to separate, requires the help of the Chemical
Art. Its not by reducing it into Gelly, by boiling it in water, that is not
enough; for in Gellies of Hartshorn, such as is made usually for weak persons
in Fevers, Consumptions, or other lingering Distempers, the volatile Spirit
wherein the real efficacy consists, is not at all set at liberty: but so
closely hedged in with other parts in the compage, that Nature can find very
little benefit therefrom. So that as a Gelly I look upon it as no better, than
any other Gelly from knuckles of Veal or the like; for all flesh and horns by
boiling in water are reducible into Broth: and that by further boiling into
Gelly. Which is indeed a good Kitchin-Preparation of meat for weak stomachs:
but as to matter of Medicine yields very small or none.

18. So that if we would share with its virtue, which lodges in its volatile
Spirit or Salt, we must distill it, which may be well done in a glass Retort;
and by degrees of fire, it yields first a Phlegm; then by a stronger fire, a
Spirit; and at last an Oil, and volatile Salt. These separated and purified by
reiterate rectification, gives the pure, nimble, volatile Spirit or Salt of
Hartshorn, very proper in Fevers, both to help the ferment of the stomach, as
also to absterse the sanguineous vessels, and to carry off a spurious tainted
Latex, from the blood by transpiration; also proper for Colical-gripings and
other pains from sharp fretting humors in other parts of the body: only it is
not very palatable, which makes some disgust it, before they receive the
expected benefit by it.

19. But how to make this volatile Spirit or Essence of Hartshorn come over
the helm before the Phlegm; and that with a gentle heat, whereby it may be
capable of insinuating the better, and more naturally into our digestions, that
is, I say, the difficulty, because it wants such a copious moisture as Blood
and Urine has, by which they easily ferment, and give their Spirit first: but
this is an hard dry solid body, and exposed never so long to the Air will nor
resolve or ferment.

20. To which purpose there is a way, which now occurs to my mind, though I
must confess I never tried it, because it is the first time I thought of it,
which though conjectural yet very probable; and it is thus. Take the simple
Gelly of Hartshorn, put a competent quantity thereof in a Mattress, lute it
exactly, set it in the heat of Horse dung or Balneo to putrefie, for Twenty or
Thirty days; then put it a Retort or glass-body and head, distill: which very
probably will yield its pure volatile essence with a gentle heat before the
Phlegm, because its volatile parts by fermentation will become extricated from
the other more sluggish constitutive parts.

21. As in Vegetables and Animals, so likewise in Minerals, the Chemical Art is
no less requisite; for all Mineral Salts, middle Minerals or Marcasites, and
Metals, are all either so crude, locked up, or actually poisonous, as that
without the help of the Pyrotecknical Art in opening, maturating, and
correcting by the fire, they deny us that innate hidden virtue, granted to them
by God for the help of Mankind. Mineral Salts unless they be distilled or
sublimed (with other additionals) they communicate little of their operative
virtue to us; whereas by fermentation, putrefaction or distillation, they prove
noble Solvents for Mineral and Metalline Solutions. Middle Minerals, as
Antimony, the Marcasite or Mineral stone of Vitriol, Bismuth, etc. have such
venomous properties, that unless corrected by the power of fire and good
Solvents, they do not only deny us the noble medicinal virtue;, those native
endowments, but actually impress their virulency, upon our vital principles.

22. Whereas if rightly prepared by the fire and proper Solvents, correcting
their virulency by mortifying and separating their malignant, Arsenical,
combustible Sulphurs, and thereby setting at liberty their genuine inbred
medicinable Arcana's, becomes noble Medicines for all curable Diseases. All
which is done by fire, or by that which is equivalent thereto (nay sometimes
more powerful than fire) viz. Solvents; which if rightly made, are only liquid
fires, or Ignis Aqua; by which Mineral bodies are calcined in humido, as by an
actual fire in sicco.

23. Also all Metals if not wrought upon by proper Solvents, are locked up, as
to communicating their virtues, and therefore need particular Solvents to open
their bodies; which if rightly done must be brought into an Oil, of the color
of the Sulphur of the Metal, which are the Hematina Metallorum Paracelsi,
irreducible to their pristine Metalline form, Whence the true Aurum and
Argentum potabile, etc.

24. Thus you see in short, How necessary, the Chemical Art is, to the
unfolding of the various Concretes, whether Vegetables, Animals, or Minerals:
How by that noble separating Art, we learn to take things in pieces, to resolve
them by a genuine natural Analysis into their native principles, to separate
superfluities, to reunite the volatile parts with the fixed, and thereby produce
generous essences; and all this without any great force of fire, except in
those bodies whose compage is more firm, and bends not to gentle ways of
resolution. Such bodies we examine with a stronger fire, till they yield and at
length confess their natures.

25. Now I shall answer what the Galenists are ready to object against this
Art. First, they say Chemical Remedies are dangerous because they are hot.
Where in the first place, they do petere principium, supposing all such
preparable Remedies to be hot; which yet we deny, according to the vulgar
acceptance of heat, viz. such as is actually so to the palate, witness
Antimonium Diaphor. Bezoardicum Minerale, Cinnabar of Antimony, etc. None of
which are actually hot to the taste.

26. But we will suppose with them, that they are actually hot in taste and
operation; and let us see what inconvenience will thence follow. First, we find
it certainly true, that cold is the greatest enemy to life, and to vital heat
the product of life; and therefore above all things care is taken against
unseasonable cold. Why do we wrap our bodies and make our houses as warm as we
can against the injury of the cold? Why have we our meat every day, yea in
Summer (excepting those who are not able to go to the charge) provided warm for
our stomachs? Why do we take our broths as hot as we can sup them? Is it not to
help the fostering and cherishing our vital heat, and to preserve the
digestions entire against the grand enemy of nature, cold? Which is not a mere
negative and privative quality of heat, but is a real positive Ens or actual
being; and therefore abhorred of nature, which she shuns and flies as the
Harbinger of Death.

27. You will say then, If cold be so great an enemy and so dangerous to the
vital heat, How comes Feverish Persons so much to desire cold things, viz. cold
drinks, or any cold thing to hold in their hand, or cold part of the bed to
reach their feet to? I answer, That they only desire cold things through a
depravation of their senses and appetite, which now not being competent judges,
requires things at random. It Is a mere juggle upon the senses and appetite,
being imposed upon by the irregularities of the Fever; for first the adust
Alkalizate recrement reunited in the tunicles of the Stomach of a Feverish
Person, begets that unquenchable thirst, and unsatisfied desire after cold
drink: which thirst that it is erroneous and deceitful appears, because if
great quantity of cold drinks be poured down, yet the thirst remains; whence,
through the depravation of the ferment, the appetite also becomes depraved. The
ground of the deceitfulness of the sense of Feeling, I presume, proceeds from
some sordes, which also are impacted upon the sides of the vessels of the
blood, together with some Heterogeneities in the mass of blood, which Nature
endeavoring to absterse and separate, rowseth up a strong fermentation in the
vessels of the blood; and the more the recremental Tartar, is fastened to the
sides of the tunicles of those vessels; and the more the Heterogeneities are,
the stronger is the Nisus, or endeavor to separate them; and consequently the
greater is the sensible heat, which thereby perverting the sense, makes it
irregular in its pressing after cold things.

28. That the coveting of cold drink and cold things in Fevers, is (as I said)
a deception of the sense, and a depravation of the appetite, further appears;
because notwithstanding the inordinate desire of cold things, yet if by any
cold drink taken into the stomach, or by any accidental uncovering of the body,
the Archeus or Regent Spirit of any part, becomes offended at its antagonist,
the cold, the Fever or other Distemper does certainly increase, the spurious
fermentation of the blood becomes stronger, and consequently the Feverish heat
(which is the constant product thereof) is more violent, and all symptoms grow
worse: And all this because cold (the great enemy of vital heat) makes its
onset upon the vital principles unawares, through some incautious accident, or
designedly, through the depravedness of the appetite, which is bent to require
that which is harmful to it, yea of which even in the very taking, it becomes
convinced of its folly, by finding it does not answer its expectation, viz. the
quenchiing its thirst.

29. That cold is a real positive quiddity, something really existent in
nature, and not a mere negative of heat (as some would suppose) which, if so,
would in effect be nothing: but vital heat and mortal cold, stand both
positives, counter, one opposing another, is, I say, demonstrable by matter of
fact. In cold Countries, in New England, Freezeland, Swethland, Russia, where
in the Winter time, the cold is actually so intense, as that if they do not by
some artifice defend themselves from the rigor thereof, it will freeze off
their very Noses; yea their fingers will become mortified, if they are too much
exposed to the injury of the cold. But we need not go so far; for we see in our
own Country in the Winter time in strong Frosts that some parts become
mortified; for instance, About three Years ago, a man was drunk at a Country
Town, and in returning home his partner left him upon a Bridge, where exposed
to the cold frost upon the hard stones, he had his lodging that night; the next
morning he was found alive, but his hands and feet (the most remote parts from
the fort of vital heat, the heart) were absolutely mortified, grew black as
Pitch, and never reducible to life or vital heat again, and therefore were cut
off. It Is very probable if the man had not been drunk, the cold would
absolutely have killed him; but the Spirits of the Liquor fortified the vital
Spirits against the total subversion thereof by cold.

30. And not only upon Animals but also upon Vegetables Cold exercises its
tyranny. How are tender Plants in the Spring nipt with cold frost? How do they
flag and as it were hang the wing after a sharp cold morning? Nay, How actually
are the blossoms of Fruit Trees mortified and killed by frosts, the grass nipt
and kept back from growing? And all this by the mortal enemy Cold. That it is
not a mere privation of heat, appears further, because though the Sun be got
into Taurus or Gemini, and thereby is in great force and very vigorous; yet we
see that frosts come in May, and prove then mortal to many tender Plants: yea,
as intense Cold will often happen in the latter end of May when the Sun is
approaching to the Tropic of Cancer; as when he is depressed as far below in
the Tropic of Capricorn, yea, and more too, it is sometimes warmer weather in
December, than in some parts of May: So that the height and nearness of Sun, is
not always the cause of heat; nor the lowness or remoteness thereof, of cold.

31. And though some suppose the cause of Cold and frosts in the Spring, to
happen from the approach of the Sun into the Northern Signs, whereby the frozen
Seas near the Pole become melted, and the cold being driven away by those winds
which comes over us, give us the cold and frosty air at that season of the
Year; which suppose it were so: yet would it nothing infringe our doctrine of
the positive essence of cold, but rather confirm it; yet we cannot imagine that
to be the cause of intense cold frosts in the Spring; and because, if it were
so, then when the Sun came to such a point, as that its heat begun to resolve
those frozen Northern Seas; as the heat, I say, of the Sun would be continually
resolving those frozen Seas: so answerably the cold frosts which should thereby
annoy us, would prove as constant, which we see to the contrary; for in March,
April, and May, the frosts and cold weather are very uncertain, some days and
nights together very warm, others again as cold, then warm again, etc.

32 I rather think that Winds, Heat and Cold, Rain, Snow and Drought, are the
Treasures of God in the deep; and that they are committed to tutelary
influences of the Stars, which have keys to let them out upon the face of the
Earth, at their due seasons appointed by God; and that by those Peroledi and
secret sluices or channels in the Air, over which the Stars are placed as
Vicegerents, which whether they receive their influences immediately from God,
or from some intermediate intelligences, or Angelical Powers, which are deeper
than themselves: yet certainly this Divine Chain of coordinate and subordinate
cause, reaches from the Earth (as the Poets feigned) to Jupiter's Chair, I
mean from the ultimate product, to the primitive original cause, God himself.
Although indeed its far otherwise, as to difference of weather in Islands, than
upon the Continent; for upon the main Continent, the temperature of the Air is
much at a certainty, according to the points of the Aphaelion or Perichaelion,
remoteness or neerness thereof to the Sun: and that according to the several
positions thereof in different Climates, which as the reverberation of the
beam; of the Sun is more or less in the lowest part of the Atmosphere, or along
the surface of the Earth; so is the heat or temperature of the Air answerable
in those places. Whereas in Islands it is far different; for those being
environed with Seas on all hands, and it may be some of them old thrown up, as
an Abortive Birth, out of the Womb of the Earth, by the great Demogorgon or
Subterraneal Vulcan; witness the Islands of Strongilo, Vulcano, etc. As well as
others have been swallowed up in the vast Caverns thereof, and drowned in the
Seas; witness the Terra Atlantica which was reputed bigger than Asia and
Africa, was swallowed up by the Atlantic Ocean, as the ingenuous Kircker
relates out of Plato: Of which great Island those called the Canary Islands and
others in the Atlantic Ocean are supposed to be the highest, and therefore
left after that Deluge. I say seeing many (and for ought we know, most of the
Islands have been belcht forth of the belly of the Earth, and also are
encompassed with the waters, are therefore more inclinable to Subterraneal
Belchings, Ructures, Vapors, Exhalations, etc. which in some Islands not
finding vent, is the cause of frequent Earthquakes; in others finding Flewes or
Chimnies belch forth fire, smoke, stones, etc. But in the third sort of
Islands, where there is neither those actual Vent-holes (nor indeed is in need
of them) nor is the Vapors so pent up as to force the Earth to a tremulation,
but finding passages or pores large enough, breaks forth, and being carried
according to the Lation of the Air, is the probable cause of those Storms,
Winds, Hurrycanes, and other alterations of weather within the Orb of the
Atmosphere, to which Islands and the adjacent Seas are more exposed than the
large Continent.

33. Cold, we see in Animals, is that which benumbs the Joints, stupifies the
parts, forces the vital heat to retreat into its inward and more strong forts;
which if assaulted there, and overcome, death's at hand, and the combat over.
Now if Cold be so great an enemy to vital heat, as is evident, not only from
what I have said, but from what every does or may experiment, than no Medicine
as a Medicine is or ought to be cold in its operation.

34. And therefore to talk of Curing a Fever with cooling Medicines (as the
Galenists frequently speak) is very improper (not to say absurd) and argues no
less than ignorance of the essential cause of a Fever; which because there is a
great heat, arising from the boiling and spurious fermenting of the Spirits,
therefore they think (according to their own maxim, Contraria contrariis
curantur) that it must surely be Cured by cold things; and to that purpose,
they follow a method of cooling to a purpose, both by frequent Phlebotomy,
robbing the blood of its vital treasure, whereby Cold (the great enemy of life)
may indeed have better access to the vitals and destroy the sooner, as also by
cooling Julips and cooling glisters. Why do not they give them cold water in
Glisters, or blow a little cold wind into their breech? surely that would cool
notably, and do the work more speedily.

35. It is very strange to me, that their own daily observation, does not
convince of the folly of administering cooling things; They cannot but observe
that no good effect follows thereon. It is much to me they should
notwithstanding the fruitlessness of such a method, yet again and again trace
the same trod; unless they be resolved never to go out of their pace ( Spaniard
like) though they be lashed for it, both in their Reputation and otherwise.

36. Next to which they cannot but observe (which also most old wives take
notice of) that the best and most hopeful Medicines in Fevers, are such as
cause sweat; and therefore ordinary people will frequently, without the advice
of a Physician, give Feverish Persons something to endeavor sweating: and that
often times with very good success. Which is a very fair admonition to
Physicians to be more serious and copious in Diaphoreticks; for therein indeed
lies the main hinge of Curing all sorts of Fevers, which very thing is the
least consulted of any other. They will Blood twice or thrice, and Purge as
often; and yet scarce will they order one good Diaphoretick: which if they do,
is commonly compounded with such a farraginous mixture, as Nature abhors, and
as soon sweats to see the folly of the mixture, as naturally inclined thereto,
by the virtue thereof.

37. Now no Diaphoretick was ever cold in its operation, but always of an
heating attenuating property; and therefore of power to promote, the natural
fermentation of the blood, and of abstersing the vessels of their recrements,
and of carrying away by transpiration, the superfluous tainted Latex together
with other Heterogeneities (before disturbing the economy of the blood) and
that through the pores of the body, though not always actually by sweat, but
sometimes by insensible transpiration; for there is no better way of taking
away the cause of excessive heat in Fevers, than by removing or allaying the
bastard fermentation in the blood, which is most aptly done by Diaphoreticks,
especially after a previous abstersion of the primary digestions, by some
generous Salts, or well prepared Solutives, together with an anodyne as an
additional auxiliary.

38 This and no way else according to the tenure of Nature, is (if we must
speak in the vulgar Idiom) to cool the immoderate heat in Fevers, or rather,
according to our own language, to reduce the blood and humors from their
spurious and Feverish, into their own natural, genuine, fermentation, where the
erratrick excentrick motions, becomes regular, and every thing falls into its
natural course again.

39. So that by this time I hope any ingenuous Person, will apprehend it to be
dissonant to the rules of Nature, and contrary to reason to administer cooling
things in order to the Cure of a Fever; and further that hot things (such I
mean as are actually Diaphoretick, with their previous preparatory abstersive
Salts) are the chief if not the only means to Cure burning Fevers, whether
intermittent or continual; and consequently, that the Galenical notion and
application of cooling things, is very flat and frigid.

40. They altogether prohibit the use of Wine in Fevers, as being (they say)
too hot; mistaking still upon the old Hypothesis, that heat is the efficient
essential cause of a Fever, and therefore must be abated, by the actual
presence of a proportionate cold: whereas sometimes I indulge the Feverish
Patient with a glass of the richest Sack he can procure, especially after the
use of some noble abstersive Salt, or as a Vehicle to give my Medicine in: and
that too, because I am satisfied, that heat is not the efficient cause of a
Fever, but only a supervening symptom, consequent to the Feverish fermentation.

41. To confirm the truth of what I have said, in order to the application of
hot things in Fevers, or acute distempers of Colicks, or the like, I have had
an experimental observation upon my self, in a Colical Distemper, together with
a Feverishness that accompanied it, which surpised me since the writing of the
last Section or numerical division; which, whether it proceeded from cold, or
the transmission of an acid juice into the intestines, or from both, as the
occasional cause thereof, or from what other concurring cause, I know not: but
however this I am sure of, and felt to my own great trouble, the tormina,
Pains, or Gripings of the Colic; which proceeding from a fermental acidity,
rouzed up an acrimonious flatus, that not finding passage per inferiera (that
vent-hole of intestine flatus or wind) returned upwards, oppressed the stomach
and vital Spirits; thence I became very sick, and was somewhat provoked to
vomit.

42. Whereupon, in order to my assistance, I took a Dose of a gentle Emetick;
but that nor reaching the Minera Morbi in the Intestines, I had little ease
thereby, but rather grew worse. Wherefore I ordered my Man to reach me a Dose
of an abstersive Diuretic Salt; which, within two or three hours, wrought
pretty plentifully by Urine, which gave me some ease: after which it began to
incline me towords a breathing sweat, and that I promoted by the advice of an
ingenuous Friend, who came to visit me, with a Dose of the Elixir Proprietatis,
a Medicine, than which (to taste) nothing is more actually hot; which if
ordered to another (who uses rather to consult his palace than his health) he
would have thought it, rather to increase his heat, and to burn his bowels (as
that whereof some of the Galenists accuse that Medicine) than otherwise.

43. But the success thereof was very considerable, for I had not taken it past
half an hour, but my sweat was very much increased, my pains and gripings
abated, and my thirst but small; after which I sweat very plentifully four or
five hours, during which time, I took nothing but hot burnt Wine. Enough, a
Galenist would have said (who makes heat to be the essential cause of a Fever)
to have procured a Fever, though I found the contrary effect; and have not only
taken it my self, but have ordered the same: yea sometimes accompanied with
volatile Spirits, as of Hartshorn or the like; and that with extraordinary
good success in Fevers, it allying the thirst (which nothing does better than
Diaphoreticks) asswaging the violence of pains, and abating most troublesome
symptoms, which accompany Fevers.

44. Not that I am strictly confined to this Remely, but I the rather mention
it, because it is one of those which the Galenists severely forbid their
Patients; and all their reason is, because it is hot: Whereas we have already
showed it to be not only safe, but also very necessary (I mean) that
Diaphoreticks, whether they be hot in the taking, or actually such in their
operation, are most likely to Gure Fevers, and other acute Distempers; and that
both by discussing the inbred flatus, as also by moving toward a separation of
Heterogeneities in the mass of blood, both which are most pertinent to be done
in Fevers.

The second part of the Solution of the first Objection.
ANd although Chemical Remedies are vulgarly accused of being Empyreumatick, or
smelling too strongly of the fire, as passing through the stress thereof; and
therefore not so sat as other more gentle Remedies: Yet to that I answer,
first, That although the Galenists do frequently whisper this in the ears of
their Patients, designedly to startle them at Chemical Physic, as at a
Bugbear: yet let them and their Patients know, that the fire is no less useful
for the preparation of Medicines, than for the Cooking of meats.

Now, How wholesome would it be for them to eat their meat, as it is brought
raw out of the Shambles, without any preparation of the fire, by boiling,
baking, roasting, or the like? To drink their Beer and Ale unboyled? To eat
their Bread unbaked? All which to which to make them wholesome and nutritive,
require the help of the fire, which prepares all our Food, and makes it more
readily submit to the ferments of the digestions.

And as we can do nothing without fire, even in our common Coockery of meats
and drinks; so can we do even as little without it, in the preparation of
Medicines: which if they be of Vegetables, they are most what as crude, even as
those Vegetables we eat, as in Sallads; which what riftings and belchings they
cause, especially to weak stomachs, such as eat them can best bear witness.

Besides which crudities, there does also an acrimonious virulency adhere to
many Vegetables, as well as Animals or Minerals, which are no way better tamed
than by fire or ferments; for if they contain the least footsteps, of
virulency, whereby they become actually hostile to the vital economy, they
then must undergo a correction by the fire, or by ferments (which are
equivalent to fire) before they can be made to fit to yield any Medicinal
virtue, lurking under the mask of that virulency.

And therefore the Adepti corrects all poisonous Plants, Animals or Minerals,
by that fiery Solvent, The Alkahest; by which those mixts forthwith lose their
venomous properties, and become exalted in their genuine (though before
dormant) falutiferous endowments: whose poisonous properties (I mean of
Vegetables) may not a little also be corrected by bare digestions, or the
addition of succedaneous Menstruums; as that of fixed Nitre, or strongly
calcined Salt of Tartar dissolved per deliquium, Spirit of Salt, Spirit of
Tartar, etc. which often invert the properties of venomous Vegetables or
Animals.

All which, together with distilled Vinegar, contribute not a little toward
the castigating the Arsenical malignity of Minerals. The latter, viz. distilled
Vinegar, is very requisite for the extractions of the Sulphurs, Tinctures, or
Souls (as Basil Valentine calls them) of the Metals or Minerals after their
reduction into a spongy Calx; which also does not a little correct Antimony,
whether in glass or flowers: yea if poured upon corrosive Mercury sublimate,
from which Aqua fortis has been distilled, and thereby sends forth a more
suffocating steam, I say, distilled Vinegar being poured thereon and thence
distilled, does so tame it, that no inoffensive smell does at all arise
therefrom.

Thus also Fire and Salts correct Antimony, as to its Arsenical Sulphur, making
it innocent and harmless, only Diaphoretick in its operation: So fire raises
up the flowers thereof, which (by a further strength of the fire) become only a
sweating Medicine.

The corrosive Oil of Antimony, as also another Menstruum, almost as strong as
it self, though they are both very corrosive, yet when mixed together, after
their mutual operation upon each other, the corrosive Oil (by distillation)
becomes a white powder, which by a slight dulcification proves to be an
innocent Diaphoretick: Of which, I have frequently given Twenty four Grains,
without any sensible operation at all, further then inclining to a breathing
sweat.

Some admire the reason of the strong ebullition of these two mixed together:
which are Liquors, as they suppose, much what of the same original; for take
(for instance) the Aqua fortis, which arises at first, in the making of
Mercury sublimate, only with this difference, that these Spirits arise at first
in a liquid form, whereas the other that come up with the particles of Mercury
are coagulated together in a dry form of sublimate; and therefore much what of
the same original: I say, take this Aqua fortis, pour it upon the butter of
Antimony, which is Mercury sublimate, distilled with Antimony, or Regulus of
Antimony, and a very strong ebullition happens with a dark red colored fume.
This ebullition is not from the contest of the Salts, for then the same would
happen upon the pouring of Aqua fortis upon Mercury sublimate (for the Salts in
both are the same) which I know, upon trial, it does not.

Therefore it is only thus (as I conceive) the Salts in the corrosive Oil of
Antimony, close with the Spirits of Aqua fortis, or of Nitre (for the same
happens to both) and thereby becomes a powerful corrosive, which presently set
upon the flowers of the Antimony contained in the butter, do in effect no more
than so much Aqua fortis, or Aqua Regia, poured upon crude Antimony (for in
both the combustible Sulphur is ready to take flame) which calcining, in a
humid way, the flagrable Sulphur, burns it off in a dark, thick, horrid fume,
even as Tartar and Nitre, by the help of fire, does burn away that Sulphur in a
dry way.

After the Sulphur is burnt away by the corrosive Salts, the flowers become
fixed into a Bezoardicum Antimoniale; which Menstruum being distilled off, is
somewhat yellow, and will dissolve Gold, which it does as an Aqua Regia of the
best sort, having some of the body of the Sea Salt which was carried over the
helm in a complicated form with Mercury, Vitriol, and Nitre: this distilled
over with the other Salts into a Butyrum, close with the Spirits of Aqua
fortis, or the Nitrous Spirits, calcines the Antimomony, and distill together
in the form of an Aqua Regia; and all this by the help of fire.

Thus you see a specimen of the power of fire, which raises up corrosives, and
those corrosives dulcifie one another, and correct Minerals of their Arsenical
Sulphurs; and that by the dry and moist way, which is still by fire. It fixes
things that are volatile, as for instance, Nitre and Arsenick, both which if
single are easily consumed, but jointly, and helped by the force of fire, the
one fixes the other, and becomes (by dulcification with Spirit of Wine)
Paracelsus his Balsamus Fuliginis, proper against cacoethical Ulcers.

It also volatizeth things that are fixed, separates things that are separable,
it sweetens four things, maturates crude things, and hastens all productions,
whether Fruits or Vegetables, to their perfection, or full state of ripeness;
and therefore unripe Berries, Apples, Apricocks, etc. are by Coddling or Baking
suddenly dulcified: and Sallads whether Lettuce or other herbs, are made more
wholesome by boiling.

By a digestive heat in close vessels, caustic acrimonious plants, as Flamula
Jovis, Urtica Romana, Persicaria, etc. become blunted and lose their sting;
yea, even the same happens by bare distillation of them, though no stinging or
pricking acrimony is at all perceptible in their distilled water.

These things duly considered, will necessarily evince the extensiveness of the
use of fire, both as to Food and Medicine. Vegetables are not only crude, but
many of them virulent too; and therefore need fire to ripen them, and by
correcting their venomous properties to make way for their intrinsic Medical
virtues to appear: Also Animals communicate not their virtue, which lodge
chiefly in the Blood and Urine, unless helped by fire, or ferments, or both,
whereby their parts become separable, and applicable to our mummial ferments.

And as for Minerals they are most what virulent, and locked up; and therefore
of necessity require a correction and opening of their virtues by the fire:
which must be done by such degrees of fire as are proportionable to the
strictness of the texture of their bodies, and to the prevalency of their
virulent properties, which cannot be done by such gentle sost fires, as
Vegetable separations are usually performed by.

It is for the sake of the unlocking these Minerals, that the great stress of
fire is so frequently used in the Chemical Analysis of them; which gives cause
to the Galenists to accuse Spagyrical Preparations, with being too much fired:
which how frivolously grounded, Let all that have skill therein, judge.

For a strong fire is as requisite, in some Mineral Preparations, as a mild
fire to some easy Vegetable separations; the one altogether as proper and
necessary as the other. Would not a Cook-Maid be accused of ignorance, if she
intending to Roast a joint of meat, should lay it down at a disproportionate
distance from an ordinary fire, thinking to take a longer time to do it in?
Surely if the distance from the fire was such as only to warm the meat gently,
it would not for many days, and (for ought I know) never Roast; but would dry
up, become insipid, and turn to a kind of mummial flesh.

For as I apprehend, Roasting of meat is performed thus, viz. When the meat is
placed at such a competent distance, as that the fire penetrating the midst
thereof, forces forth the crude blood and moisture from all parts; which
meeting with fresh assaults of fiery particles, are driven back again, and
search all cavities of the flesh, thereby maturating the rawness thereof: which
if the meat be taken whilst this moisture remains, and yet thoroughly
penetrated by the digesting particles of fire, it is then sapid, sweet, and
savory; but if this be spent, and the meat yet kept longer at the fire, then it
begins to be burnt, and thereby becomes tastless: but if it be performed by a
pretty quick fire, it is the soonest and best done. So in Baking of Bread, if
the Oven be not thoroughly heated, the bread will remain dough, and not wholesome
for food. Though these be homely Examples, yet are they sufficient to
demonstrate the necessity of degrees of fire, to be used according to the
strictness or remissness of the texture of the body, applicable thereto.
Besides I look upon my self here, as speaking to those who need familiar
comparisons, to convince them thereby of the necessity of strong fires in some
cases; for to those acquainted with Chemical Preparations, these are
superfluous.

Again, What Preparations are there in Shops, which have undergone the fire,
but are Chymically Prepared; and yet no less (notwithstanding) useful in order
to the removing of Diseases? What are all the Spirits and Cordial-waters, but
Chemical Separations of Urinous Spirits, married with the tinctures and odours
of Aromaticks: and that by distillation by the fire? What are the best of their
Purging Pills, viz. the Extractum Rudii, but a Chemical Extraction of the
tinctures of so many Vegetables (as is requisite thereto) by a good rectified
Spirit of Wine, which if neatly done, and drawn off in Balneo (as I do in the
making it for my own use upon occasion) and the fixed Salt of the species after
calcination and separation thereof, being reunited with its extract, is not
only Chemical, as being prepared by the fire, but the very best amongst the
Shop-Purges.

What are the best Emeticks or Vomitings in the Shops, but such as are
Chymically Prepared, and that by force of fire too? Witness the infusion of
Crocus Metalorum and Mercurius Vitae: The one is prepared by fire and Salts,
out of Antimony (which we call Hepar Antimonii from the Hepatick color
thereof) whereby the external malignant Sulphur of the Antimony, is mostwhat
consumed.

The other is prepared by fire and Salts out of Mercury and Antimony, but
consists chiefly (if not solely) of the flowers of Antimony incorporated with
the Salt in the Mercury sublimate, and carried over together in a glacial Oil:
For in an accurate observation of a distillation thereof, with sublimate and
Regulus of Antimony (which sublimate we also made, and so knew the quantity of
Mercury therein) we in a manner got all our Mercury current again, and of
Eighteen Ounces of Regulus, we had but six Ounces or scarce so much left in the
Caput mort. Which very Experiment makes me close with Barthius, who concludes
this gummous Liquor to be the Reguline parts of Antimony; and against
Gluckradius who would have it to be from Mercury, affirming that the Antimony
only by its addition helps the fusion and liquefaction of the Mercury in its
distillation; and against Bilichius too, who, with Gluckradius, would have it
to be nothing else but Mercury, brought over in a glacial Oil, by the help of
Salts, so as the Antimony only contributes toward the liquidness of the
Mercury, as bole, sand, earth, or the like does, toward the distillations of
Salts, with which they are used as a Retinaculum.

But our Experiment does wholly thwart this, for out of three Pound of sublimate
(in which, by compute, we find about Twelve Ounces of Quicksilver in each
Pound) and Eighteen Ounces of the Regulus Antimony, we had one Pound an half of
the Oil, two Pound and about four Ounces of current Mercury, and in the Caput
mort scarce six Ounces: here the whole weight of the matter we took, was four
Pounds two Ounces, answerable to which, we got one Pound and half of Oil, two
Pound four Ounces of Quicksilver, and six ounces in the Caput mort; in all four
Pounds two Ounces: so that we lost nothing.

Now how should Mercury make up the body of this Oil, when we got it in a
manner all current again, as it was at first before sublimation, with Salts?
And why should not the Regulus make up the body thereof with the Salts? Seeing
we lost Twelve Ounces of the Regulus which must needs make up this butter; for
that quantity of Regulus which we found defective in the bottom of the Retort,
together with as much of the Salts out of the Sublimate, made up the whole of
the butter (viz) one Pound and an half.

Again, Whence should proceed the strong Sulphurous fumes, upon the pouring of
Aqua fortis or Spirit of Nitre thereon, but from the Sulphur of the Antimony,
which it has in greater plenty than quick Mercury has. Besides if the white
powder, viz. Mercurius Vitae (so called) be put into a crucible, and tried
further by the fire; we have observed it to flow and fume; over which fume,
though we directly placed a Spatula, yet have we not discovered the least
minute particle of Mercury thereon: which from other vulgar Preparations of
Mercury, brought to the test of fire in a crucible, we found particles of
current Mercury, viz. from Mercury precipitate, Turbith Mineral, factitious
Cinnabar, Mercurius dulcis, Mercury sublimate, all which gave a specimen of the
body of Mercury, but this of Mercurius Vitae none, but melted into a kind of
Stibium or black glass, in the same manner as any common preparation of
Antimony will do.

As to the main argument Bilichius brings, which is, Ego quoque inquit
Mercurium vitae, pulvisculo Tartari purificati permixtum, and modico, attamen
diuturno calore in arena exercitum, vidi Liquoris aeterni guttulam unam atque
alteram sudasse: which I rather judge might be a particle or two of the Mercury
of Antimony, than of the vulgar Mercury, at first contained in the sublimate;
for it is the very way, at least analogous, to that which some propround,
toward the getting the Mercury of Antimony.

Yet we cannot but admire at that wonderful operation thereof, which Bilichius
(and besides him none that I know) takes notice. After he has given a large
Encomium of the virtues thereof, in order to the Cure of several Diseass, both
acute and Chronical, he subjoyns, Quin etiam mulierculis periculofissime
parturientibus felicissime obstetricantem vidi: and quum debitos puerperio
dolores crudelis Lu^^^^ ^^geret, jawque fere triduum irritis conatibus matro^s
fretamque defatigasset, ut tenuisilo amborum res ponderet, imo ommum opinione,
conclamatum utri^que videretur, in hoc discrimine non deseruit me pulvi^^
familiarissimus, sed pondusculo siliquae cum vini mom^^t^ propinatus, effecit
fortunante Deo, intra horulam, ut pro justis funebribus soteria usuvenirent,
and pro parentalibus celebrarentur Natalitia: Et quantum vitae studeat, non
sine miraculo, demonstravit: si venenata qualitate grassatur in corpus humanum,
non pe. percisset tenellae proli, non puerperae doloribus exhaustae
benefecisset, sed afflictas afflixisset, and pene morientibus accelerasset
mortem. Nunc secus accidit; utraemque juvit, neutram laesit; vimque omnem
expultricem non aliorsum atque in uterum convertit. I confess I never yet tried
the Experiment, though his authority is sufficient encouragement thereto.

So that both these foresaid Preparations, which are the chief Emeticks of the
Shops, are, I say, both out of Antimony, which very Mineral is that the
Galenists so deeply accuse, and tell their Patients how dangerous a thing it
is, and that they will order no such dangerous Ingredient; when perhaps the
next prescription will be infusion of Crocus Metallorum, or some few Grains of
Antimonium Diaphoreticum, or the like: not to mention here the Sal Vitrioli or
the Gilla Theophrasti, which they seldom prescribe, either because they have
them not, or know not their virtues.

What is their best Medicine for worms, which they also frequently use against
venereal Diseases, but a Chemical Preparation called Mercurius dulcis? Made out
of Mercury (another Mineral (or rather Metal) they inveigh against) and that
too out of the most corrosive sublimate, than which (save the Oil of Antimony)
nothing is more desperately corrosive, and yet out of this corroding product of
Salts, Mercury, and Fire, with the help of more Mercury and the further use of
Fire, is This innocent harmless Medicine, Chymically Prepared, which is so
safe, as is frequently given to Children against the Worms; and that (so the
Dose be duly ordered) without the least harm, as all those who use it can
testify, especially if the Preparation be rightly done.

What are the fixed Salts in the Shops, as of Tartar, Wormwood, Broom,
Scurvy Grass, etc. but Chemical products made by force of fire? For the fire,
especially the naked force thereof, separates all separable parts; and in the
actual flagration, the Vegetable Salt takes hold of the Sulphur, the one bears
down the other by force, to suffer all the injury the flames can do, and so
become fixed together, whence proceeds the saponaryness of all fixed Salts: and
that it is the Vegetable Salt (which while it is in the Concrete, before any
violence be done, is neither fixed nor volatile) which catching hold of the
Sulphur in the flagration of the Plant, that gives strength to the Salt, is
apparent, because in the burning of Vegetables for to get (or rather to make)
their fixed Salts, if it be done whilst the Plant is in its full strength,
before it begin to spend it self into seed, the more in quantity, and the
stronger, is the Salt found to be etc.

And therefore those who burn Brakes for their ashes to make Bale-soap of, do
it while they are green and strong, cutting them down, and then give fire to
them, and so let them burn in great heaps, with a smothering fire: Thus the
Vegetable Salt catches hold of the Sulphur, and both being in their full
strength, the one bears down the other, and gives a great quantity of Salt;
whereas if they should let them alone till they turn yellow, and then burn
them, they would not get (as they find by experience) half so much Salt.

The like should be observed in the burning of all Plants for their Salts, to
take them at such a maturity, as before they be impoverished by wasting their
strength in seed, for at the time of seeding of Plants, the essential Salt, by
a further digestive ferment, connatural to the Plant, becomes transmuted (for
the most part) into a Sulphur, which gives an Oil: and therefore Plants, during
the time of their seed, yield Oil most plentifully.

This Sulphur opens it self yet further, and spends its self in a flower, or
fruit (In Sulphuribus insunt saports, odores, etc.) and these decaying, the
Plant grows weaker and weaker every day, till it wither; which withering, is
nothing else but a spontaneal Analysis of the Plant, by the exit of the
Essential Salt, which gradually taking wing, or changing into Sulphur, and that
also taking flight, the body thereof (as to the form) marches off the Stage,
and is at last reducible into the Leffa^ Terrae, which begins the Wheel again
to a new circle of Vegetation: So that the several Stadiums of this Salt gives
the various apparencies of growth, maturity, and old age of Plants.

For this Essential Salt, in its circuit of Vegetation, assumes the form of
Sulphur, at due seasons; yea, is actually transmutable thereinto. Whence it is,
that the more Plants yield of an Essential Oil, the less they give of Salt,
either fixed or volatile; so that Salts and Sulphurs, are but the various
disguises of seed: and therefore may give hint to ingenuous searchers, how to
turn Salts into Oils, and by a further inspection, how to reduce Oils into
Salts, which thereby (as Helmont says) becomes noble, temperate, abstersive,
penetrative and balsamic Remedies.

What are all the Essential Oils of the Shops, such as of Rosemary, Sage,
Wormwood, Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Sassafras, Rudium, etc. but Chemical
Distillations; of the Sulphurs of Vegetables, and Aromaticks? One drop or two
of which, contain more virtue than is got from a whole handful or more, of the
Vegetable infused, decocted, or prepared any other ordinary way. These either
united with their fixed Salts, or made into an Oleo-Saccharum; and given in
convenient Vehicles, yield not a little of the Crasis of the Concrete; and
therefore are Medicines of no very inferior order.

So that, if we take a summary account of all the dispensatory Medicines, and
make a separation of all the Chemical Preparations, from the rest of the
farragmous compositions, we shall find (if any thing considerable be done in
the Cure of Diseases) it is chiefly effected by the Chemical Preparations,
though they themselves in respect of the more noble Chemical Arcana, are but
Preparations of a lower rank: The rest as Syrups, Conserves, Electuaries,
(...), etc. have little or no virtue.

If the Galenists would but in prove that shall stock they have of Chemical
Remedies, by endeavoring to graduate them further, by the help of fire and
ferments, they would nor only, not quarrel with the Chemical Practice of
Physic; but also find that whatever of excellency was performed, in order to
the Cure of Diseases, would really be mostwhat from such Preparations. A right
understanding whereof, would compose them in their heat, and swellings, against
Chemical Physic; and make them ingenuously confess their former ignorance: and
at length acknowledge the wrong they have done to that noble Science, by
accusing its Medical Preparations of Empyreumatism.

For by a little experience therein, they would learn to know, the degrees of
fire suitable to the texture of Concretes, brought to the test thereof; and that
no less alterations are made (in bodies adapted thereto) by gentle fires of
digestions, and easy distillations: than by more strong fires in operations
upon more robust bodies. For there are and may be found out, many more
excellent Chemical Preparations, which are performed by very gentle heats,
without any stress of fire, and yet powerful in a benign operation.

So that the fire, by a skilful Artist, may in its degrees, be adapted to those
bodies he takes in hand, according to the nature of the compaction thereof;
also those Concretes, especially Minerals, which mostly undergo the probation
of the fire, do thereby become depurated from Heterogeneal combustible sordes;
and losing all their dross, become approved Remedies by the fire, able to
penetrate the intimate Recesses, and to purify the digestions of our bodies,
and to cleanse our blood and other humor from their impurities, into these
primitive elixicated juyces, from whence by alienation of the digestions they
have degenerated.

The Solution of the second Objection.
45. AN other thing, wherewith they impeach Chemical Physicians, is, That they
are not methodical, but empirical in their practice. In answer therefore to
which, we first Query, Whether that be not the best method, which Cures
Diseases best, according to that ternary of eito, tuto, and jucunde? Whether
the Galenical or Chemical Physician does perform this the best, is the dispute.
The next Query is, Whether to be so accurate, in the punctual observation, of
all the injunctions of the Schools, be altogether, or at all necessary to make
a Physician cure Diseases the more successfully?

As to the first. I say, The Methodists, I mean the Galenists, do pretend to a
method in the curing of Diseases, according to the level of which, they pretend
also to answer all indications, which gives yet further to Query, Whether this
method they so much admire, be not more directed to the mitigating of the
Luxuriant Symptoms, viz. the lopping off the branches, than to the immediate
encountering with the essential cause of the Disease, viz. the stubbing it up by
the roots? I mean, Whether (suppose in any particular Disease; for instance a
Fever) their method does not more aim at the suppression of the Symptoms, viz.
the heat, thirst, want of rest, pains, etc. by Phlebotomy, cooling Juleps,
Emulsions, frequent Purgations, Laudanum, and the like; than, I say, at the
essential cause, which lies in the initials of the spurious fermentation of the
blood, etc. so consequently level their Medicines in their methodical rank and
file, against the posterior products and branches of the Disease, rather than
against the Disease it self.

For unless the Theory of the Diseases were certain and infallible, the method
of practice grounded thereon cannot be satisfactory to any ingenuous man; for
if he espy a flaw in the method, by observing it, for the most part, not
answering his expectation in the cure of Diseases, it will give him just cause
to suspect an error in the Theory: and by that time begin to question both;
yea, and lay them aside too, if he can but discern another more probable
Theory, whose consequent practice, does more certainly enable him to cure
Diseases more happily.

Now to be better convinced of the inefficacy of the Galenical method in the
curing Diseases, Let us consider how often, in most Chronical Diseases (for in
acute they have not that time) is their method baffled. How frequently do they
run over the same course of Physic, even till the Patient is tired out and
out, having their vital Principles more really weakened, and linger in an
hopeless manner, under the tyranny of the Disease; and after all this, that the
Methodists have spun out, their longest thread and left them, some honest
Countryman or good old woman has a specific Remedy, which they have known,
by experience, to have done good in the like case: and the Patient is now
(though not before) at leisure to try it, takes it, and though his or her skill
is not so good as to give it with such advantage, as some congruous
circumstances might second it withal, yet (I say) often succeeds; and cures the
lingering Patient of his Disease, made worse by a method.

Now because he which gave this Remedy, did it without the formality of a
method, if by the good success thereof, he be encouraged to give it frequently,
he gains the name of an Empirick, viz one who gives a Remedy at random, without
a method, or without being able to give a reason for the operation of his
Medicine. Whereas indeed if we make a scrutiny into the essential reasons of
the operation of Medicines, I am apt to question whether any Methodist, can
give a solid satisfactory reason, of the operation of any one Medicine he
gives, in his whole method; and that, because the reasons and causes of things
are so very abstruse, as Jurare in verba Magistri, to subscribe to the placets
of other men, is not enough, to any ingenuous man, to satisfy himself in the
reasons of things, attainable thereby.

And if I should Query, why the infusion of Stibium or of Crocus Metallorum
should operate by Vomit and Stool? And why the same if further prepared by the
fire and salts, should operate by Sweat?

And to the first it be answered, That it provokes Vomit because it has an
antipathy to, and disagrees with the stomach. This would be no sufficient
reason, because many other things may have an antipathy to the stomach, and yet
not cause Vomit; but may either rouse up an incoercible flatus, or may march
off by Stool. So that for things to disagree with the stomach, is neither the
real cause of Vomiting or Purging; though it is true, there must of necessity
be a concomitant disagreement of the thing with the stomach: But what that is
that makes the antipathy, is the thing in question.

To say that a Vomiting meeting with vicious humors upon the stomach,
dissolves them; and provoking the expulsive faculty of the Stomach, forces
them up by Vomit, is still no sufficient reason or answer to the Question: For,
What can one Ounce of Wine, only impregnate with a Mineral odor, do, as to the
dissolving of corrupt humors upon the Stomach, and to provoke the expulsive
faculty with such violence, as by the convulsive motions of the stomach, to
throw up what is in the concave thereof? What are the humors of the stomach to
it? It Is in taste and color, almost the same, with so much simple Wine. How
should the expulsive faculty become thereby concerned, unless we have recourse
to what we said before, viz. the antipathy thereof with the stomach or Regent
powers thereof; And so be at as great a loss still, as to a true Solution of
the Query, as before.

As to what the Atomical Philosophers say in this case, I am not satisfied,
that they give a resolve to the Point; who would have all such actions of
Vomiting and Purging, to be performed by the concourse of various sized
particles, acted by different motions: which impressing the like motions upon
the nervous and membranous parts, cause that Systole or convulsive motion of
the stomach; which by compressing and contracting it self, throws up what is
contained therein. Who though they go on slily and cunningly, in the weaving
their Atomical texture of bodies, and make all Creatures to be but as so many
Automaton's; who like a Clock, or Watch-work, being once wound up, keep going
from their Springie power of motion: Methinks, they do as much petere
principium, as the former, in that they take it for granted, that what we call
Life, is nothing else but a result of motion and figure, in all bodies. For
though all bodies as to the whole, and to every seperable part, are constituted
of form or shape, and acted by motion, as the body stands inclined to its
Genesis or Analysis whereby all things are in a perpetual Flux, and constant
transmutation: Yet this evinceth not motion and figure to be the cause of that
we call Life, or, as they say, that there is no other existence of any Anima
sensitiva than that, but rather that motion and figure, are the sequels of
Life: Besides, methinks, the niceties of vital function, are too curious to be
solved by so slight an Hypothesis.

Again if we endeavor to answer the Query, according to the Chemists, viz. That
it is the odor of the combustible Sulphur of the Antimony, wherewith the Wine
being impregnated, becomes hostile to the Archeus or Anima sensitiva, which
has its chief residence in the stomach; which being provoked, cease not by
opposition to that which offends, not only to through it off, but also the
depraved humors, which lie fast impacted in the tunicles of the stomach. Which
indeed is a fine notion, and very probable to be near the truth, yet, to me,
the same Query remains as indemonstrated as in the former, viz. How rationally
it gives a satisfactory account, Why the infusion of Stibium should act as an
Emetick rather than any other way? What do we know, what this odor of the
Sulphur of Antimony is? And why the Anima sensitiva should rather be offended
than pleased thereat?

I say, how difficult a thing would it have been, to have given a rational
account of the manner of its operation, so as to have said, so and so,
according to reason, will it work, and this before an experiment thereof had
been made; for when we see a Medicine to work by Vomit or Stool or Sweat, we
then presently fall to conjecture the reason thereof.

But for one to have according to rational Prognostics, predicted that
Scamony, Colocynthis, Sena, etc. would Purge; and that before ever they had
been found so to do, by experiment, would have been a satisfactory evincement
of the reason of the thing: but this is more competible to the intuitive
cognition of the immortal Soul, whose outgoings is pure reason; And therefore
while we converse in these mists of the body, we must descend to a lower order
of reason. Whereas in the Mathematics, in that part thereof called Algebra,
there are some Petita that so the Quaesita may the easylier be found out: So
likewise in the ratiocination, about apparent Phaenomena's, there is a
necessity of laying down some Petita, which ought to be few, yet fruitful
principles, which are indemonstrable a priori, to which all apparencies are
ultimately reducible; and by which the Quaesita, things inquired after, may be
found out.

These pregnant Principles ought to be grounded on solid experiments, toward
which, the Virtuosi are performing a considerable work; in gathering
experiments of all sorts; out of which, in tract of time, a noble demonstrative
Science may be raised up.

Now, That sense and motion are the product and sequel of Life, and not the
Life it self, nor cause thereof, the Life only should (as I apprehend) be that
one primary Principle to which all the Phaenomena's, or apparencies thereof are
reducible; which being simple, and simple in it self, has all fermentations,
digestions, motions, sense and heat, etc. as subservient thereunto: All which
as instruments, perform the various functions thereof.

Now, that sense and motion, are but the sequel of the Anima sensitiva (that
Regent Spirit, unto which the whole economy of the body is subservient) is
obvious in a Paralytick and Apoplectick Distemper; where sometimes sense
remains, and motion is depraved; otherwhiles there is motion and no sense, and
yet Life is present; yea sometimes in Hysterical Diseases, both sense and
motion are abolisht for a season, and the body lies as dead: and yet Life
lying as it were in its embers, or in a crude smoke, by a Ray, from the
immortal, which has wrapped up the mortal Soul, darting from the heart, becomes
inkindled, takes flame, and lives again, to the astonishment of the beholders.

Yea, sense and motion in violent Hysterical Passions, has been so much
depraved, as able Physicians have sometimes given them over for dead; insomuch
that a great Physician and skilful Anatomist, coming to a Woman, who was
supposed to be dead, and being desirous to inform himself of the cause of so
sudden a death, attempts to Anatomize her, who upon the very first touch of
his dissecting knife, suddenly started up; which so terrified this Master of
Anatomy, that he could scarce recover-himself to consider how after all his
skill and diligence in that Art, he should be so deceived, as to offer at the
dissecting of a living woman: which struck him with discontent, and taking it
to heart, despaired, and died.

And as sense and motion, so also fermentation and heat; also choosing, and
eschewing that which is agreeable and disagreeable, are the products of Life:
Whence also to raise a structure of reason, why some things work by Vomit,
other things by Purge; though it may be plausible to some, yet wilk not be
satisfactory to others.

That three or four Grains of Mercurius vitae, should work so strongly by
Vomit, and as many Grains, of the extract of Colocynthis, should work so
forcibly by Stool, cannot rationally be imputed to any other efficient, but
that Spiritus impetum faclens of Hippoorates, upon which these violent Emeticks
and Catharticks seizing, by the disgust the Archous or Anima sensitiva, takes
at that which is hostile thereto which yet how to describe we cannot tell)
rouzeth up a spurious fermentation of the humors of the stomach and
Intestines, which if strong, works up by Vomit, as is apparent in the
administering of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum, viz. That, while the Regent
Spirit of the Stomach, is most provoked by the force of the Emetick, it causes
such an hostile fermentation, which reaches even to the bottom and round the
sides of the stomach, till it forces up the Emetick Wine, and with it the
humors into which, it, as a ferment, has wrought it self, and so nature
disburdens it self of two Enemies at once; after the violence of this emetick
fermentation is over; that which remains, gliding through the Pylorus into the
Intestines, does there cause a further fermentation in the juyces therein
contained, and so passes off by siedge.

Now all Solutives operate one of these three ways, either as they are
absterswes, which raze off the sordes from the sides of the primary vessels; of
which sort are all abstersive Salts, such as have a saponary Alkali, wash off
the adherent sordes: and these are the essential Salt of Tartar, and sometimes
the volatile Salts of Urine or Hartshorn, as also the Elixir Proprietatis
acuated or extracted with the Solution of the essential Salt of Tartar, in the
alcool of Spirit of Wine, and chiefly the volatile Spirit of Salt of Tartar.

Or secondly, Solutives operate as they remind the digestions of their offices,
of which sort are Pilulae Ruffi, Pilulae Aloephanginae, the Scotch Pills, etc.
taken in a small Dose; which, though they are not properly such Solutives, yet
are pretty innocent Succedavea's: but above all, the Arcanum Corallinum of
Helmont, is one of the true Solutives, which only puts the digestions in mind
of their office, and as Helmont says, only Purges what is corrupt in the
body, not purging at all a sound body.

Or lastly, Solutives operate by exciting an exotic fermentation in the
humors, or fluids of the first vessels, and circumjacent parts; and that
either by the virulency of some Vegetables seated in the resinous parts
thereof, as of Scamony, Colocynthis, Jalap, Agarick, Elebor, etc. or by the
odor of the Arsenical Sulphur in Minerals, promoted by the operation of Salts,
as of Mercurius vitae, Crocui Metallorum, Sulphur Antimonii auratum, etc. All
which become fermental in their operation, and if the Dose and strength of the
Patient, be not duly proportioned by the skill of the Physician, they become
too fermental; not only carrying off all good, and bad humors from the
stomach, and other common passages, but also by an Hypercatharsis colliquate
the very blood, yea, and solid parts too, into a putrilaginous excrement
carried away by Stool.

Hence it is, that by the fermental venom of these Drugs badly prepared, and as
unskilfully administered, that incredible number of Vomits and Stools, or only
of Stools, happen sometimes to Patients, giving them Thirty, Forty, Fifty or
Sixty Stools, even almost to an exhausting of the very strength of the body;
which is done by an impressing, the almost indeleble venenous Character of the
virulent Drug upon the Pylorus, which at first, working forth all the contained
humors of the first passages, and still retaining the same fermental
impression, to which as a virulent thorn in the part, all the other humors
whether blood or other liquids, have their conflux, endeavoring thereby to wash
off the venomous stain; but not being able to perform that work, by reason of
the prevalency thereof, are forthwith transmuted into a slimy putrilage, with
griping pangs at every solution, and so carried away by Stool, to the great
impoverishment of the Spirits and strength of the body: Which sometimes brings
on a sudden Tabes preying upon the very solid parts, and thence too hastens on
Death it self.

Thus you have a reasonable account of the manner of the operation of Emeticks
and Catharticks; though I dare not be positive therein, but only give fair and
probable hints, which may perhaps incite some others to a further prosecution
thereof. Yet how these malignant properties in some Concretes, and benevolence
in others are found out, is better discernable by the eye and sense of the
Regent Spirit of the stomach, then that of reason; for all are not alike
virulent to all: so things which are very wholesome and useful to most, yet are
disgusted as poisons to others. How far custom may prevail, as to cause some to
take that quantity of a Toxicum, which would inebriate, stupefie, or kill
another, may hence appear. I have known a man so accustom himself to Opium, as
that every night he would take Ten, Twelve, or Fifteen Grains thereof; without
any previous preparation, which if he neglected to take, he was commonly dull
and stupifyed the next day; whereas the taking thereof made him cheerful and
lively, which given to another, would have stupefied, brought a Delirium, or
perhaps by the prevalency of the Toxicum might have proved mortal: all which
are scarce solvable by the common Principles of the Schools, but are better
reducible to that common Adage, It was the nature of the Beast.

Why Vegetables are found to have such virulent properties, we shall not long
dispute. The ingenuous Kircher in his Mundus Subterraneus tells us that they
proceed from Mineral Arsenical juyces, fermenting in the earth, where such
Vegetable feeds are; which incorporating themselves therewith, become thereby
the Authors of such virulent fermental poisons, or Toxicums, whence Napellus,
Hyoscyamus, Cicuta, etc. take their virulency: but I shall wave that, least I
too much lose my method.

If the reasons of things be so abstruse, as I have before showed, I mean, the
true cause of the operation of Medicines, be so difficult to understand; and
that the very best knowledge we attain to therein, is taken from and grounded
upon experiments or trials: and that these experiments are as likely to fall
into the observation of those who are ignorant of a method, as of those who are
skilful therein, What advantage there has a Methodist, whose very grounds and
Principles are either found unsuccessful in practice, or muchwhat contradicted
by Experience the grand Mistress of Knowledge?

For the order of our knowledge is inverted, since it was intuitive, since now
we only know a posteriori from the products and effects of things; whereas then
we know from the very essential causes themselves. So that now experiment is
the road to knowledge; all other (except that which is Divine) being mostwhat
conjectural, and therefore fallacious.

In this sense if we were more Empirical, viz. adhered more to trials and
observations of other persons (though under a mean form) about Concretes of
this nature, we should probably be more successful in Curing of Diseases, be
better Physicians', though perhaps less methodical; and that, because nature in
the Phenomenon of Diseases, and Cures thereof, is not tied to any of our
prescribed methods, though never so specious: but our method or manner of
ordering due applications for natures help, ought rather to be confined to the
laws and possibility of nature, and to good collateral observations from
successful experiments.

To which purpose it does not at all mis-become a Physician to enquire into
experiments of all sorts of this nature, even from circumforaneous, Empiricks,
Quacks, Barber-Chyrurgeons, old Wives, Farryers, Midwives, or from any other
persons, to whom experiments of this kind may happen: By whose ingenuous
observation from such like ordinary Peoples experiments, no small light happens
to the more ready Curing of Diseases.

For from such Persons (if credible) you have nothing but naked matter of
experimenty unassisted by Art; which often, because simple, and therefore more
singly co-operative with nature, proves more efficacious in performing Cures,
than the splendid Recipes of most famed Physicians: and that because these are
so learned, as that it would seem (as they suppose) ridiculous to insist upon
one, two, or three Ingredients (and perhaps those but of ordinary account
neither) for them to prescribe to a Patient.

And probably one reason, why great Physicians are often so unsuccessful in
their Cures, though they attempt them by some such Concretes, as they hear a
fortunate report of, is, because they are not content with the simple Remedy
they heard of, but adding this and the other, and a third, etc. of such as they
think have the like qualities (according to that saying, Vis unita fortior) do
so confound the mixtures with their additionals, as they quite spoil the
operation of its genuine efficacy.

So that one may certainly conclude, that that manner, way, or method, which
Cures Diseases most happily, sooner, and with less trouble, and debilitation of
Spirits, is the best; which must be such as is mostwhat grounded upon
collateral observations of successful experiments, and not from farraginons
Recipes in Books: and whether Chemical Physicians are the most likely to
perform this, I shall refer to the judicious Reader. And this brings me to the
other Query, viz.

Whether to be so accurate, in the punctual observations, of all the
injunctions of the Schools be altogether or at all necessary to make a
Physician cure Diseases the more successfully?

When I consider the tedious and almost inextricable Labyrinth, wherein young
Physicians are commonly involved. How many great Volumes of Galen, Hippocrates,
Dioscorides, Actuarius, Rasis, Serapio, Aetius, Averrhoes, Heurnius, Fernelius,
Senertus, Riverius, cum multis aliis, they revolve? What tedious pieces of
Anatomy of Velsingius, Riolanus, Bartholinus, Spigelius, Pareus, etc. do they
peruse? How many unprofitable Discourses, for argumentation sake, in the Theory
of Physic, are they engaged in? How many hundreds of Plants do they burden
their Memory withal? And that both as to their form, which must be, as well
when the Vegetables are young, as when come to maturity, together with some
slight touch of their Virtues, according to the superficial description of the
Herbals? What a confused jumble of the varieties of Pulses, do they puzzle
their heads withal? What a multitude of Symptoms, good and bad? What long
Discourses of differences of Urine? And to confirm all this, What long
Pilgrimages into Italy and to the Universities there, must they make? And
returning home after all this, cannot (as some of them have ingenuously
confessed, and the Country People brought to the test) certainly Cure one poor
Disease.

I say, when I consider all these things, I cannot but wonder and say Quorsum
haec omnia? What Is the meaning of all this noise, and yet so little Wool? I
mean, such a deal of do to inform our judgments, and yet nothing the nearer to
cure Diseases; being only enabled hereby, to discourse learnedly with other
Physicians, and with a great deal of elegancy, read a Lecture to the Patient of
his Disease, that it is in this, and the other part, and proceeds from
Phlegmatic, Choleric, or Adust humors, or the complications thereof; whilst
the poor languishing Patient cries, Give a Remedy, or else I dye. Thus they
prove too eloquent to a languishing Patient, who had much rather hear of a good
suitable Medicine, than to be tantaliz'd with learned Discourses.

Young Students in other Countries, commonly go along with a learned Professor,
to whom he frequently reads Lectures, upon the sick Patients he visits; and
does it with such a grave method of Discourse, pointing out the Symptoms,
answerable to the predominancy of such and such humors; and that in so learned
a style, measuring out the lineaments and dimensions of the Disease in its
rise, state, and declension, as that the young Students do verily believe (if
their method of Medicine be but answerable to that of their Theory) that none
of these Diseases can come amiss to them, but they shall surely cure them all.

But alas! When they come to matter of experiment in their Practice, they find,
they are mistaken, they are puzzled at every turn; and some of them, that are
most ingenuously inclined, begin to be convinced of the emptiness of their
learned Theory, and of the barrenness of their fruitless method: and that in
truth and good earnest, they are not certainly able to perform the cure of any
Disease, not so much (as some of them have acknowledged) as a Paronychia or
Whitlow.

To what purpose are the various Discourses of Physic, and that in a
methodical way pro and con? asserting this and denying the other, troubling the
heads of Practitioners with empty speculations, which are no sooner conceived,
but before they are well brought forth, are ready to be strangled, even in the
birth, with other equally, or more rational apprehensions, and all this but in
a putationary; and consequently deceitful Philosophy, whose principles not
being grounded upon experiment, prove themselves merely fictitious, and at the
best uncertain.

What satisfaction can an ingenuous man take, from the manifold Doctrine of
Pulses? Which are altogether irregular and uncertain. What great number of
their difference is set down? Enough to fright a man, at the first sight, from
vexing himself therewith. How cumbersome to the Memory, are the very terms of
Art? Which alone were enough to make up a Science, sufficiently troublesome to
retain in the Memory, yea and sometimes put it upon the rack too.

How do young Students trifle a great part of their time away at the
Universities, in the froathy Study of Logicks, Ethics, Physics, and
Metaphysics? And all this in order (to those who bend their Studies that way)
to Medicks? From which besides the empty speculations and verbal janglings,
little of worth does thence proceed; And what is the reason? Only this, That
they have not sufficient matter of experiment in their Physics, to ground a
true Science upon; and as to Ethics, they more consult the sayings and
moralities of the Heathen, than the Life of CHRIST and Christians: The other
two are merely verbal, conjectural, and mostwhat chymerical.

If they would more listen to a grand collection of experiments of all sorts,
according to the Lord Verulam's advice, and totally cease from all manner of
disputations; improving all other parts of Learning to the utmost, It would be
the only way in tract of time, to establish a true solid Science of Philosophy;
till then, we may expect no considerable improvement, in those places, of real
Science.

How uncertain are Physicians in their diagnosticks of Diseases? In so much, as
so many Physicians, so many several judgments of the same numerical Disease;
and all this for want of some pregnant Principles, grounded upon solid
experiment, which in time would beget a demonstrable Science; without which,
they err in uncertainties, are mostwhat eccentrical to the truth, and having
no firm footing for want of a true basis of experiments, slide too and again
amongst slippery notions.

To be so accurately skilful in Anatomy, as to be able to read a Lecture upon a
cut finger, is not very necessary; to know the Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Muscles
and Bones by name, that are cut, is more burdensome then useful to stretch our
memories, with a great catalogue of simples, and to know so many hundreds or
perhaps a thousand by their heads, both in their Infancy and Maturity, brings a
Physician no nearer to know specificks, in order to the cure of Diseases.

To be deeply versed in the knowledge of the Diagnosticks of diseases, of all
good and bad Symptoms, reckoned, by Galen, Hippocrates, etc. only enable a
man to be confident, and thereby to commit folly, by being too positive in his
determinations of Life and Death; and so expose himself, and all that profess
Physic, to an ignominious report amongst the vulgar.

The confidence of some Physicians herein, I have much admired, who trusting
too much to their own skill, and being too credulous of the smiles of some
flattering, though uncertain, symptoms, do constantly (at least frequently)
predict Life and Recovery, with such like expressions as these, I wish I had a
Lease of the Patients Life. My Life for his, He or she will recover. He may
live many Years. He is safe, etc. when the very next news we hear, is, The
Patient's dead, the Lease is out, the Years are expired in one or two days
time, and the Physician's Life and Credit is forfeited: Nay, and which is worse
than all this, the Physician will keep the same share of confidence still, and
be as forward in his predictions of Life and Health, and to the next Patient as
before, though perhaps, yea frequently with as bad success.

I do think, that they esteem it below them, for the vulgar not to judge, but
that they have all the dimensions of the Disease, or not to think, but that
they know the height, depth, and length, and know the limits of its exit. And
to settle this opinion in the vulgar, that they may be reputed Masters of their
Profession, they put it to a venture, predict very confidently of Life or
Death, which like a Lottery sometimes hits, and then their fame becomes winged
amongst the ignorant sort of People, but if it miss, as it is very probable it
may, yea frequently does; then they huddle it up, and a little time wears it
off, that it is forgot both by themselves and others: yet this confidence being
so obvious cannot easily be sinothered in all breasts, especially in those who
are somewhat deeper sighted than the rest, to whom such vain confidence gives
occasion to suspect, that either the Physician predicts Life to please the
Patient and Friends about him, or that through a confident ignorance, he rapps
at the prediction, and at a venture, because he would have it so, says
assuredly, his Life for his, he will Live and Recover: after all which, with
many other circumstantials of his confidence, nothing is more frequent, than
that the Patient dies. This makes Physicians a byword amongst the vulgar, and
gives occasion to other understanding Persons to conclude that Physic, as it
is generally practiced, is nothing but a mere quacking, and a grand juggle,
imposed upon the vulgar, and others of inferior capacities; which gave occasion
to one ingenious Person to say, That three grand Imposters of the World, in
that Art, died in one Year; which was Riverius, Sir Theodore Mayhern, who the
third was I know not.

Thus we see how injurious confident Physicians are to their own Art; how two
or three days sometimes puts a period to their boasting in particular Patients;
brings a Catastrophe upon all their fair predictions; blasts the deceitful
hopes, they have lulled the Patient and his Friends withal; and they live to
prove themselves false Diviners: And all because they are too short-witted to
consult the Oracles of Heaven, have not the right Jacob's staff, to take the
true altitude of the Disease, nor what degrees it wants of the Horizon of Life;
they are too short-sighted to view the Records of Heaven, and too inferior to
know the Counsels of the most High; and therefore it is just with him ^o baffle
them in their judgments, and confute them in their predictions.

How uncertain are the predictions by Urines, which are as readily changeable
as any liquid juice in the body. It has indeed most what the same constituent
principles as the Blood, viz. a Phlegm, a Sulphur, volatile Spirit or Salt, and
a Salt Marine, with some resident Faeces; so that sometimes the Crasis of the
Blood, is indicated thereby. For as from a due proportionable mixture, of the
constitutive Principles thereof, the Sulphur well tempering and tincturing the
volatile Salt in the Phlegm, gives that curious citrine color to healthful
Urines; yet are they not always sound, because so colored, for we see that in
any languishing Distempers, where some principal parts are much vitiated both
in their native ferment, as also in the Parenchyma thereof, and yet the Urine
keeps its natural color: whence springs, as from one root, much deceitfulness
in Urines, as to predict any thing of truth, as to the form of the Disease
thereby; and any slight disorder of the last passages it runs through, will
easily pervert the indication of all other primary parts, and this gives an
other ground of mistakes, in the judgment upon Urines.

Some indications in some Diseases, may be had from the Urine, but they are
incondesirable, if compared with those, we either have from conference with the
Patient, or the Patient's Messenger. The truth of it is, the World is so
generally trained up, with the custom of bringing their Waters, and expecting a
large Lecture of their Disease to be read thereon, which many Physicians make a
shift to do, pumping with a few considerable previous Queries; Insomuch that
the People look not upon him as a Physician of skill, who cannot read to them
the Disease out of the Water: which if he can do, though it be but from what he
has already gathered from them, by the by, yet he then passes for a man of
judgment, though he is wiser than to think himself so upon that account.

Many People are so credulous, that they verily believe, he whom they repute a
skilful Physician, does certainly know the Disease and every punctilio thereof
from the Water, and look upon his conjectures as Oracles from the Urinal, which
they firmly believe he speaks, from his depth of judgment therein, thus the
People are willingly deceived. And some Physicians, of this opinion, Si Populus
vult decipi, decipiatur, as the Learned Abbot, riding through a Country-Town,
the vulgar People whom he passed by, desired his Blessing, to whom he replied
very gravely, as if he had uttered a form of Benediction, Si Populus vult
decipi, decipiatur, streching forth his hands after a solemn manner; which they
received very thankfully, and perhaps did them as much good, as his Blessing
would.

The gross mistakes that some are apt to commit, either accidentally or
designedly, might methinks startle Physicians from being too positive in their
predictions therefrom; as (for instance) a Maid mistook the Vinegar-bottle for
her Mistresses water, carried it very orderly to a Physician; who upon previous
Queries gave his judgment very methodically, upon her Mistresses Infirmities:
thus far all was pretty well, but the Maid returning, found her Mistresses
water in the Urinal, in the same Window she had accidentally taken the
Vinegar-bottle, away she carried it to the Doctor, told him her mistake; but
it is no matter, the Diseases he saw in the Vinegar-bottle, were somewhat alike
with those in the Urinal-glass, and therefore the judgment he passed upon the
Vinegar-bottle, was, for ought I know, as skilfully done as that upon the water
it self: and perhaps more, for every ordinary Physician can make a shift, to
discover some Maladies by the Patient's water, but to read a Lecture thereof
out of a Vinegar-bottle, was indeed extraordinary.

But really, I could wish, Physicians were more serious and would deal more
fairly above board, that in time they might unhinge the World from of this
accustomed folly they have been by consent trained up in, that the people may
no longer be nuzzled up in the expectation of a Physicians looking at the
Physiognomy of Diseases; or staring them in the Faces, through the Glass of the
Water, that henceforward they may not look upon them as Oracles, to divine Life
and Death therefrom.

Also, I could heartily wish, they would consult, a more facil way of practice;
such as by the efficacy thereof might prove more delightful to themselves, and
more grateful to their Patients: which certainly cannot be better attempted,
then by a serious Scrutiny into the natures of Concrets, into the ferments of
the Blood, and humors, and Depravations thereof; also into the Sympathy and
Antipathy of all medicinal ingredients, how the Vital or Animal spirits stand
in agreement, or dissonance therewith. All which, and the rest, necessary to be
known by a Physician, and best illustrated and confirmed by demonstrable
experiments, which are the only satisfactory Criterions in all solid
knowledge, the want of which makes Physicians too erratick, and inconstant in
their Judgments.

A probable way propounded for the improvement of Experimental Philosophy.
Toward a promoting an Hypothesis of experimental Philosophy (one large branch
whereof would be this of Physic,) I think it would not be impertinent, yea
perhaps necessary, to lay aside all or most of our Books, excepting such, as by
some Judicious persons, might be reputed faithful, in their communication of
experiments.

For they are the fancies and conceits, that are found in books, which makes
the Readers err, by determining their Judgments to this, or the other
apprehension, which before was unbyassed, and might as well be informed of the
truth, through matter of experiment, as not; whereas commonly in books Men have
learned nothing more then to err, to which they are, by natural propensity
inclined, besides to see what large Volumes a man turns over, before he can
reap even but a small Harvest, of satifactory knowledge; and that chiefly,
because few there are, who busy themselves to write, but they have some
Novelty, either in History, Theory, or Practice, to present the world with, yet
they commonly do so wire-draw, and spin it out at length, with so many
circumstantial, and often impertinent notions, that they fill up a volum, with
that that they might have comprised in half a dozen pages: all the rest are
mere Flourishes, and Appendices, which being tedious, few men will cumber their
heads therewithal, and therefore in effect they signify nothing.

Now to avoid all this, and to lay a groundwork for a more facile, unprejudiced
understanding of things, whereby, at length, a solid body of natural Philosophy
might be raised up, I would propound to the Judicious, this following Method.

First, That so many understanding persons, as might be judged meet for the
purpose, should be employed, to the reviewing of most books, which promise any
thing toward the improvement of natural Philosophy, and the large stem
thereof, Physic; laying aside all the rest, though under specious titles, as
useless: out of which books they should make a collection of all experiments;
and that faithfully, and nakedly, as to matter of fact, waving all the Authors
reflections, observations and disputations thereabout, excepting some choice
compendious observations, and natural Principles, which might genuinely result
therefrom, and should be noted in an Appendix with reference to the book and
page.

These choice experiments, being sequestered from the impertinent Farraginous
matter, which most books are stuffed with, should be Methodically digested into
a book, which might be entitled, Clavis Scientifica, or Clavis Philosophica;
and that to have an Alphabetical Index to point out the place of experiments,
belonging to any remarkable thing, together with the author and page of his
book.

For many books are like the Indies, where there are indeed real treasures, but
you must dig very deep and run over a great deal of wast barren ground, before
you can find it: so that in these searches into the rich Mines of books, a man
had need carry his Virga Divinatoria, (viz.) his Pensil to point out the most
choice observables.

This Clavis Philosophica, (consisting of the most select experiments compiled
together, with reference to the Author and page, where if any pleased they
might readily view the Author's observations thereon) would spare the learned
afterward, abundance of labor and toil; for it should consist of several
Volums, to which a daily addition should be made, either of experiments
confirming and seconding, the first already set down; or of collateral
experiments, or lastly of such new experiments, as might constantly succeed
upon Marrying actives upon passives.

To the supplying of which Clavis Philosophica that it might be well fraught
with serviceable experiments of all sorts, there should some large Laboratory
or Laboratories be erected, filled with all manner of furnaces, for all kinds
of purposes, in which many ingenious persons, with their under-operators,
should be employed, to prosecute experiments of every kind, in Vegetables,
Animals, and Minerals; who conserring one with another and comparing each
others trials, should daily place them down in the Clavis, with much
accuratenes in every circumstance: and after that to epitomize the experiment:
so that he, who list may read it at large in all its dimensions, or view it in
short.

As an additional to which, some other persons, whose genius bends that way,
should improve a large piece of ground consisting of many Acres, with all
manner of Trees, Shrubs, Plants, Flowers, Fruits etc. employing skilful
Gardiners to plant, transplant, and dress them, keeping them in good order; in
which garden should be Aviaries of several sorts, for all manner of Birds,
foraign and domestic; also ponds for all sorts of Fish, Glass Bee-hives, and
garden houses built at convenient distances, according to the best
Architectonical Art, with all manner of glasses placed therein at
proportionable distances, for reflections, refractions, and transmissions of
species, and that for the improvement of dioptricks; also all manner of Dials,
placed according to the several declinations of the Sun.

To which Garden, should adjoyn a large Forest with all manner of Cattle, with
Herdsmen, Shepherds etc. Who should look to them and be able to give an account
of the various occurrences.

From all which, should the most observables be collected, both from the sundry
graftings, and inocculations, inarchings of one sort of fruit into another,
whence are the great variety of fruits and flowers, many of which (perhaps) are
such, as we never yet saw; out of which fruits, various sorts of potable
liquors by fermentation, might be made, both pleasant and useful. Also
observing the time and Method, of nurturing tender plant, both by hot beds, and
several preparations of earths, for that purpose; also their time of gathering
at their full vigor and maturity, and the seasonable drying of all or most
remarkable plants, together with the observation of their efficacy, as simple
Specificks, upon diseased persons; to which purpose, one house therein should
be dessign'd for all infirm people to come to and that freely, only for
experiment sake, some ingenuous persons being employed, for making diligent
search into the peculiar operations of Specifical plants, upon the diseased;
whilst others in the Laboratories are employed, to make Essences, Tinctures,
Spirits, Extracts, Magisteries etc. therefrom; having the same liberty of
making experiments thereof upon Sick Persons.

And in the Aviaries to observe the variety of Colors, Tones, and Food of
Birds, with their manner of Propagations, observing the various process of
nature, in the several stages thereof, from the Punctum Saliens, to the perfect
formation; also by the dissection of many of them, to inquire which parts are
the most essential and necessary Organs, for Vital functions; and in Ponds to
observe the several sorts of the food of Fishes, and the manner of their
increase, together with the various dissections of them, and also to make
trials of the use of some of their select parts, in order to Medicinal use.

Also, observing the great variety of Cattle, their Food, Diseases and Cures,
by Plants and the like: The manifold dissections whereof, would not a little
inform Anatomists; also noting their remarkable excressences inward and
outward, the stony concretions engendered in any of their parts; the trial of
the Medicinal use, of which parts, would very much add to the further inabling
Physicians to cure Diseases more readily; as that the blood of an He-Goat
should certainly cure a Pleurisy, taken after such a manner as Helmont
prescribes, which would be no small encouragement to a further prosecuting
experiments of this nature; seeing that so much blood of a Bull would strangle
the Patient.

From all these, I say, such remarkable experiments should be noted down in the
Clavis, as might be thought meet by the ingenuous Overseers and Contrivers; and
that in one Copy at large, with all additional circumstances, very faithfully
set down; in another more short Epitome barely describing the Essentials of the
experiments.

This Clavis, thus furnished, and well fraught with Experiments of all sorts,
would be as a Treasury or Storehouse; out of which afterward (in tract of
time) another Book should be writ, of the body of Natural Philosophy, Entitled
Philosophia Naturalis, which should be wholly grounded upon the Clavis, and
have all its observations, demonstrable from experiments, therein contained:
this Book of Natural Philosophy, should be the genuine result and product of
that of the Clavis.

A Digression
BUt here I shall take leave to digress a little to the advantage of the last
recited end or purpose. Whilst therefore some are employed as abovesaid, other
ingenious Scholars, maintained either in the same College, belonging to the
Physical Garden, or in the Colleges of the Universities (such I mean as have
Fellowships to live upon) should in lieu of reading Logic, and Metaphysick
Lectures to their Pupils, be employed in clubbing together their wits about the
invention of an Universal Character; which, if rightly contrived, would be of
general use in all Nations throughout the whole known World.

By the Universal Character, I mean such a Compendious Character, as being
known in all parts abroad, should signify the same thing amongst all
Countries; so that all People that are skilled therein, should in several parts
of the World, read it, every one in their own Language. As for instance, The
numerical Figures which are same in most Nations, are a Character of Numbers,
which signify the same thing, to all those foreign places they are used in,
and every Nation reads them in their own Language. Thus 1.2.3. etc. are
numerical Characters, which we, in English, read in these words, one, two,
three, etc. the Latins read, unus, duo tres, etc. the Greeks, (...), etc. the
French, vns, deux, trois, the Low- Dutch, even, twee, dry; The German, ein,
zwey, drey; The Spaniard, uno, dos, tres; The Italian, uno, due, tree; and
Portugals read it, hum, dous, trez; and so all other Nations read them in their
own Tongue, and that with difference of Dialects in the same Language, so that
all these several, and many more sorts of People, understand the same thing, by
these numerical Characters, though they read and express them, in their several
Languages: Thus, Suppose this were the Character for a Stone, viz.; The Latins
would read it Lapis; The Greeks, (...); The French, Pierre; The Low- Dutch,
Steene; The German, Stein; The Italian, Pietra; The Spaniard, Piedra; The
Portugues, Pedra; and so others differently, according to the varieties of
Languages, though they all mean the same thing as we do by that we call a
Stone, viz. a hard, compact, gritty body: So L we in English might read
Crab's-eyes; The Latins, Oculi or Lapides Cancrorum; and so differently in other
Languages.

We see the Chemists partly for vailing their Art from the ignorant, but
chiefly for contracting the terms, have given forth a form of Characters,
thereby expressing many terms and things of frequent use, in a short but
general Character, which is read indifferently, but understood the same in all
or most Languages, every Country reading them in their own Dialect, yet
apprehend the same thing; though some few words are of a large extent, and
pronounced muchwhat alike in most Languages, as for instance, Elixir is
originally an Arabic word, but is muchwhat expressed the same both amongst the
Greeks, Latins, French, English, etc. So Amen, is a word that runs through
several Languages, the same, without any, or with little variation.

We find a great deal of facility, both in writing or reading of Recipes by
this short way of Characters, for much may be expressed by Pen, or read not in
a few words, but in a few Characters, which are less than words; yea, and which
are as easily impressed in the mind (perhaps more) then words at length. Thus
{salt}, {sulphur} and, are more easily understood and more readily expressed by
Pen, than Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, or than Sal, Sulphur and Mercurius, or the
(...), or (...), or than the words writ at length of any other Languages: So
the Planets or Erratick Stars, are known by these single Characters, viz., The
Astronomers with the vulgar, read them thus, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol or Sun,
Venus, Mercury, Luna or the Moon; and thereby understand the Erratick Stars, in
their Planetary Orbs: The Chemists reads them in the same words, but thereby
understands the seven Metals, viz. Lead, Tin, Iron, Gold, Copper, Quicksilver,
and Silver; and that because each Metal possesses the predominancy of some one
of the Planetary Orders, in the properties of Nature, to which they are
ascribed by the cooperation of the septenary properties at Metallification,
both as to Pondus and Tincture, Id quod est inferius, est sicut id quod est
superius. The Greeks read the Planetary hours thus, (...), other Nations read
them in their own Language, and yet all intend, and mean one and the same: So
that they are a sort of Universal Characters of the Planets, and thereby are of
general use to most Nations. So if the terms of any Art or Science, more
generally expressed by a particular Character, would not a little both
facilitate the understanding thereof, but also make it of more general use for
other People of different Languages; the want of which, debars many other
Nations from the knowledge of several Sciences, and ingenuous Arts; for words
writ at length, are a platform of things, the Interpreters of and to the mind,
the same are Characters, but in a more compendious form, and yet as significant
of and to the mind (if not more) than written words.

The mind which receives the impressions of things is the same, and informs it
self of the Signature of things, after the same manner as to it self; and that,
whether in words (and those whether varied according to all Languages of the
World) in figures, in Characters, Hieroglyphics, or the like; for before the
Building of Babel, all Languages were as one. What the Character of that
Language was, if written we do no know: but surely as the Language so the
Character was but one upon the whole face of the Earth.

And though this primitive Language has lost its unity, by being involved in
the Confusion; and multiplicity of Tongues; yet we see, that the humane mind,
in the Apprehension of things, understands the same in all, the whole variety
of Languages, yea and the various changes, of the different Idioms of each of
those Languages: Only the manner of expressing them and making them
significant to others causes the great difference, and that since the
Confusion of Tongues.

Now only the Primitive Christians, were again taught this Original Language
in the School of Pentecost, when they were filled with the Spirit at the
appearance of Cloven Tongues; for it is said they began to speak with other
Tongues, and every man heard them speak in his own Language: (viz.) the
Parthians, Medes, Elamites, Mesopotamians, those also in India, Cappadocia,
Pontus, and Asia, Phrygians, Pamphilians, Egyptians, Romans, Cretes, Arabians,
and out of every Nation under Heaven; All which every man in his own Language,
heard them speak the wonderful Works of God.

Here was the greatest opening of the Universal I anguage of nature, that ever
was since the Division of tongues, at the Rearing of Babel: For they were all
(it is said) with one accord, in one Place, in one House. Now it is very probable
that for avoiding of Confusion, one did but speak at once, when he had done
then another etc. But every man heard them speak in his own Language: So that
it is more then probable, they spoke in such an Universal Language, as was
Significant to all; and that the minds of the people of all Nations, were so
opened, as they understood what was said: Even as if it had been spoken in
their own Language, much what like an Universal Character, which every one
might read in his own Language; only with this difference, that the tones of
the Language of nature, was so opened at that time, in the mouths of the
Apostles, as that they reached the minds of all people, in their several
Languages.

Now if we would set our faces toward the building up of real Physiological
knowledge, we should lay our heads together, to consult a more facile, and
general way, of understanding one another, in several Languages, without that
vast trouble of Learning the various Tongues themselves: Which to do, is in our
power as God has given us a Rational understanding, whereby we may improve a
more general way, in signifying our minds, and intentions one to another. But
to speak again the Original Language of nature, is beyond our power; and
therefore we are to let that alone, until the time of the Restoration of all
things.

In order therefore to the contriving of this Universal Character, those
ingenious persons, or fellows of Colleges, who are set a part for this
purpose, having no other Study, or Employment to divert or hinder them, To whom
I would propound these following Queries: First whether they (laying their
heads together) could not (I say) consult the best and most Extensive
Character, that might have no dependence, upon any particular manner of
writing, peculiar to any particular Country, least thereby it should seem too
much biased by that Language and so be somewhat estranged from the intended
Universality; and thereby give cause to some people, to complain of Inequality
and Injustice in the distribution thereof?

Secondly. Whether they should not search out so many Roots, or Radical
Characters, as might express the most known and useful things in the world; as,
Man, Book, House, Stone, etc. which should be orderly placed down in a
Vocabulary: Which Radical Characters, should be writ pretty fair, and large, for
a Reason, I shall afterward speak of.

Thirdly. Whether these Characters should not be so contrived, (as to their
form) as that they might indicate to the mind, the things they represent; which
(perhaps) might not better be done, then by making (where occasion offers) the
Character to Signaturize the thing represented, thereby becoming a short
Hieroglyphick of the things understood: which kind of Hieroglyphick (how much
it is to be used and improved) is to be left to the judicious contrivance of
the Students herein: For all Hieroglyphics, Emblems, Words etc. whether writ
or expressed, are but Characters of intelligible things: Therefore those of
them which carry a Signature of the things repre ented, are the soonest caught
hold of by the mind, and the easilyest apprehended; the reason is, because of
their approximation to the Identity which is in the Idea of the things
understood.

Fourthly. Whether, for the better understanding this Universal Character, the
Syntax or Coherence thereof, could better be expressed, than by points in
various places, and little dashes or strokes of different shapes, interwoven
amongst the Characters? Whence proceeds the reason of the fairness and
largeness (I hinted) the Character should be (viz.) That the Additional points,
and dashes, which represent the the Syntax of the Character, might also be
discernable enough, though much less, than the Character it self. For which
purpose, some few General and pithy Rules should be contrived for the
institution of the Syntax thereof, which should be taught in all Languages for
the education of Children therein, and that at the first, without any
exceptions at all; because the giving many exceptions to Children too soon, in
learning of any Language, has proved no small Remora thereto, by burthening
their Memories too soon, with Grammar-Rules.

Fifthly. What this universal Character should be? whether to be framed
according to any known Character? Therefore whether the Hebrew or Arabic
Character would not be of most general use, in the Fabric hereof? Or, whether
some new invented Character, might not be of a more universal extent? In the
composure of which (in my apprehension) it should not be Alphabetical at all;
and that for two reasons, first, Because there is no general concurrence of any
of the Languages in an Alphabetical order, in as much as the denomination of
the same thing, in several Languages, begins with different letters, according
to their several Alphabets, Thus, that which we in English call a Church, the
Latins call Templum, (...) the Greeks, the French Eglise, the Low- Dutch
Kercke, the German Kirche, the Spaniard Yglesia, the Italian Chiesa, the
Portugal Ygroyla, etc. Most of which begin with different Alphabetical Letters;
so that it would be impossible to reconcile the universal to particular
Alphabets.

The other reason, Why the universal Character should not be Alphabetical, is,
because it would not otherwise, be a Character, but a Language; which is a
thing quite different from what I aim at: not to mention the tediousness of
such an Alphabetical Character; seeing it is only required to be writ, and not
to be spoken.

Sixthly. Also whether this Character, may not be performed by the Ten
numerical Figures, and the various transposition of them; which would give
variety enough, for many thousand words: for suppose the Alphabet of ours, or
any other Language, to consist (as they do) of Twenty four Letters, there might
out of the various transposition of those Letters be framed (if need were) ten
thousand times ten thousand other words, besides those we frequently use; and
that without any interfeering or coincidence of words, whose great variety
would, indeed, be indefinite (not to say infinite) and puzzle the greatest
Arithmeticians in the World.

Now, if we did but consider the great variety the number seven does produce,
by the various transposition of its unites, would perhaps facilitate our
understanding, how the various transposition of the Decade, might produce
sufficient variety, to signify all things in the World.

In order to which, Let us consider the seven Tones or Notes in Music, whether
vocal or instrumental; it is all one, though they be numbered eight, yet in
reality, they are but seven; and that because two of them are found to be flat,
and therefore make up but one Note. These seven contain all the varieties of
Tones in Music; for these in three Cliffs ( viz. in F C and G) make up the
whole Scale of Music, in as much as the Cliffs are but a repetition of the
same Notes in different Keys, high or low: so that an Octave is but a Unite
again, and therefore makes no alteration to the seven radical Notes.

Now suppose a Monochord, to be the Diameter of a Circle; That to be divided
into seven parts, in the Semidiameter of which, one way is produced a
Diatessaron or fourth; the other Semidiameter upward, a Diapente or Fifth;
which Fifth is again divided into a Ditone, or Third major, and a Third minor.
From the beginning of the Diameter to the end of the lesser Third, is a
Hexachordon or Sixth: but from Unison, or the beginning of the supposed
Diameter, to the end or Octave thereof, is made a Diapason or Eighth: all which
are reckoned Concords, so they be not Seconds or Sevenths to the immediately
preceding Note in the order of the Scale.

So that all Tones, whether Concords or Discords, are wrapped up in those seven
Notes, which are expressed by these almost Universal Characters, viz. Sol, La,
Mi, Fa, etc. or by a more facile way, of the first seven Alphabetical Letters:
Which Notes, though in number but seven, yet (I say) the transpositions thereof
are so various, as that all the Composed Pieces of Music, of Voice or
Instrument, in the whole World, has not yet fathomed the depth of them; yea,
and though a Hundred Masters in Music, were set a part, to Compose all the
variety they could in an Hundred Years, would still find a plus ultra, and some
varieties they never hit on before; so indefinite is this Septenary Number. For
it is a complete number, comprehending both the Creation, as also the Rest or
Cessation from Creation; in it is contained the wrestling Wheel of the
properties of Nature, and the Systeme of the Planetary Orbs, which are the
bodies of those properties; the number of the Metals are therein comprised;
also the number of the days of the Week, the Jubilee and the Clymacterick are
from it, multiplied into its self: And Lastly, All Harmony is therein
contained; though the chief Concords therein are the Diatessaron, Diapente, and
Diapason; whence is the truth of that saying, Tria sunt omnia, yet the whole
Scale of Music is wrapped up therein, as aforesaid.

Now if the Septenary, give this great variety, how much more shall the Decade,
or number Ten give by the various transpositions thereof? Which number was
called by the Pythagoreans, (...), The World, Heaven, and all Perfectness,
thereby representing the large extensiveness thereof: it comprehends all
number, for when we have numbered the Digits, if we could go further, we must
begin again. This number (as the ingenious) Dr. More, in his Philosophical
Cabbala observes, from the Pythogorean Doctrine) is made by scattering of the
parts of four: Thus 1, 2, 3, 4, put together make Ten, (...), The Universe;
which was reputed such a secret amongst Pythagoras his Scholars, that it became
a solemn Oath with them to swear by him that delivered to them the mysteries of
the Tetractys, Tetrade, or number Four.

But besides the extensiveness of the Decade, in various transpositions
thereof, it would also be more readily understood, by other Nations, in as much
as it is generally known to most other People; for (if I mistake not) the
Chi^enses have the same Characters, for their Numbers, as we have now for
distinction of them (as an Universal Character) from themselves, as
representing numbers should be, by writing the one larger than the other.

Seventhly. Whether Children should not be trained up in the learning this
Character from their infancy. For let the Character it self be what the
Contrivers please, whether in Figures or other formed Characters of Lines,
circular or angular, as they shall agree; yet this, whatever it be, is to be
delivered to all Schoolmasters, to whom the instruction of Youth is committed,
who are to teach them every day the signification of so many Characters as they
find they are capable of; not burdening their memories with too many at a time,
and those, of things most familiar, and of greatest use: so skilfully ordering
their Method in teaching them, as that it may beget a kind of delight and
pleasure in Children to read them.

And instead of asking them, What letter is that? to ask them What word is
that? Which (in a while) by being accustomed thereto, they will readily answer
(as they usually do,) to the name of such and such a letter: so that in time
these Characters will easily be learnt, and take such deep impression, as they
(in a while) will find a facile promptness to read them without hesitation.

Now for the promoting the understanding of which, they should neither learn to
read, nor write any other Language whatsoever: not so much as their Mother
Tongue. For, as to their own Language, we see, Children get it fast enough, by
hearing others talk to them: Where if we observe, we may perceive a Notable
method, hinted to us, in Childrens beginning to speak that Language, that is
first taught them (viz.) That, though we speak to them, according to the Syntax
and Connexure of our Language, yet they only (at first) admit of Vocabulary
words, and of those Monosyllables, the easiest, laying hold of those words
where the most stress, and greatest Emphasis of a sentence appears, waving all
Connective and Concomitant terms, which we call by the name of Adverbs,
Prepositions, Conjunctions and Intejections; singling out the significant
words, without respect to Case, gender, or Number in Nouns: or Mood, Tense,
Number or Person in Verbs. Which observation is no small hint to a method, both
in the teaching of this Universal Character, as also for a Compendious
instruction, in the teaching of Latin, or any other Language. For first, as to
the Universal Character, it hints, that a bare Character is at first to be
taught, without any variation, or respect whatever to the Syntax; or without
the observation of any Rule whatsoever: Nakedly decipering the Characters of
the most usual words, and things, which most frequently occurr in a Vocabulary,
reserving others of less use till afterward. And when Children are grown up,
and fraught with a plentiful knowledge of these Characters; then to teach them
to write nothing else, and withal to give them a few Rules, how to understand
the Connection, and Syntax thereof, which (as I hinted before) should be by some
Additional points, and small dashes Variously placed: So that all the
Declensions of Nouns in Case, Gender, Number, and Person, should be noted with
a great deal of Succinctness.

For in the Character it self, there can be no Declension at all; only it may
by Additional Strokes, represent the differences of the Case, Gender, and
Number, of Nouns. The Genders are to be but three, Masculine, Feminine, Neuter.
Here all Conjugations of Verbs and special Rules of Nouns are to be omitted;
the Moods of Verbs to be but three, (viz.) Indicative which is the Verb it
self; the Imperative, and Infinitive, which should be noted distinctly; and
Tenses to be but three, viz. Present, Preterperfect and Future Tense, Noted
also with their distinct marks. The three Concords to be chiefly-noted; the
Pronoune to be set down in a smaller Character; the Adverb, Conjunction,
Preposition, Interjection to be marked with different pricks. And some few
pithy Rules should be given for the better construction of the Character, which
might be comprised in short, without those tedious Ambages of the multitude of
Grammatical Rules, ordinarily given for the teaching Latin, Greek etc. And as
the aforesaid observation gives a hint, as to the method of the Universal
Character: so likewise is it as a compendious instruction, for the teaching the
Latin, or any other Language, where the first thing considerable, is a
Vocabulary or Dictionary of most usual words; with a great number of which
Children, or others (that intend the Learning the Language) are first to be
well fraught, keeping as many of them in their menory, as they can well bear,
before any Grammatical Rules of Construction be given.

Here I cannot but wonder, that the usual tedious Methods of teaching the
Latin and other Tongues, have keept footing so long in these Northern parts,
without further improvements, by more Compendious ways: That we should be Six,
Eight, or Ten Years in the Schools, to learn the Latin, and after that perhaps
5 6 or 7 Years at the Universities; at the end of which, many cannot manage a
current discourse in Latin. They can make an Extraordinary good piece of
Latin, can adorn it with all the trops, figures, and floscul's of Elegance
imaginable: They can correct the least mistake in any Latin Author, they meet
with; and yet, let them come to make a familiar discourse in Latin (which is
the noblest and most useful part thereof) there they find themselves at a loss;
and what they do upon these occasions, is with such a deal of force, and
racking of their parts, as that, because they do it not glibly, in a current
Style, therefore (whilst engaged in such discourses) they seem to have no
small trouble upon them: Why, what is the Reason hereof? The main cause (as I
apprehend) is this, that they are too much Grammatical: Attend more to Rules,
then to a plenty of words, and Genuine propriety of speech, which to perform in
a familiar Idiom, is certainly the most Noble and useful part of a Language,
especially for a Traveller. For by beginning with, and dwelling long upon
Grammar Rules, the true Method is inverted, as I shall show afterward.

The next Reason is, because we here in England, do not (no not in the
Universities themselves) frequently manage familiar discourse in Latin; which
without doubt is one great Remora in the way to a current Glibness, in the
utterance of any Language: For we attain not to the knowledge of any Science,
without a frequent accustoming, and familiarizing our selves with the Maxims
thereof; nor to any degree of perfection, in any Manual artifice, without
reiterate attempts, whereby at length, we make it become Habitual, and in a
manner natural to us: So that nothing sooner begets a fluency in speech, then
frequent familiar discourses therein.

The true Method of teaching the Latin, or other Languages in Schools, is
mostwhat inverted (as I said) and that thus we usually in Schools begin to
teach Children in the Accedence, and after that in Grammar Rules, only
learning them some few words by heart: and by this means, Children spend a long
time in Learning the Rudiments of the Latin Tongue; which Rudiments so long as
we begin with them, are properly called Rudiments, but in reallity of a true
method, they are not Rudiments: But rather a complete treasury of words in the
memory: I should much sooner call them Rudiments, and that because they are
first to be learnt. And therefore a true method, would indicate instead, of
teaching Accedence and Grammar Rules, to begin only with words, teaching
Children every day so many words, and those at first such as are most
frequently used; and that without any toil of the master further then asking
them (after he has taught them) what is Latin for such a word, and what is
English for such a Latin word, and then making Children one to examine another,
and to show them the way of finding out the Latin for English words, and
English for Latin words in Vocabularies, or Dictionaries: And thus, by a kind
of sport, to bring them on till they have got a competent number of words;
which words they should always be useing (as occasion offers) one with
another, though they know nothing at all as to the Syntax thereof; how to make
them agree one with another: I say, a true method should proceed after the
aforesaidmanner.

Now, That I call a true Method, which is hinted most what in the natural
instinct of Children, in the learning their native tongue, or any Language they
are first taught; but we see plainly, that Children begin with words, which are
significant to express what they mean, or what they would have, though they
know nothing at all of the Syntax of those words, or of putting them into a
form of speech. Thus if a Child want Beer, he cries beer (as well as he can)
which we understand as well almost, as if he should have said, give me some
beer; I want some beer; pray help me to some beer: so, if he say, Garden, or go
Garden, we understand him, as well as if he had said, I would go into the
Garden, or carry me into the Garden: though I say, the Child understands
nothing of the Connection, or Congruence of words; yet he minds the significant
words, while we in our minds make it into a sentence, and presently understand
it as if he had spoken at large.

And although he only singles out significant simple words, and knows no
method of Congruence or applying them one to another, so as to make a sentence
of them; yet is he never at all the further of from a right method of Learning
that Language, but comes on forward, and Learns the Syntax, and congruence of
words, amongst themselves afterward; and that without any Rules, but
familiarity of speech, which in continuance of time, begets a current glib
Language, so as he is able to express himself (when he comes to that ripeness
of years) readily at a pretty round rate, and that without the cumber of any
Grammatical Rules: Which are indeed the greatest (if not the Sole) obstacle of
Learning a Language so as to speak it fluently.

As this Method is hinted secretly (though to an observing eye openly enough)
from the natural instinct of Children, in Learning the first Language put to
them: so in our instruction in the knowledge of any other Language, as Latin,
or the like, we should in these secondary or artificial Languages, attend the
same Method, as is (I say) hinted from the Natural: And that to begin with
words, and to lay by (for a time) all the supposed Rudiments of Accidence and
Grammar, stocking the Memory of the Scholars only with words, which he may use
to speak to other Boys, as Children use their words to us, without any
cognizance of the coherence of them; and that afterward, when he comes to
suitable Years, its requisite he should know the Syutax of the Language, and
then he should have some few pithy Rules given him; but such as should not be
writ in Latin, but in his own familiar Language. For it has been no small
hinderance to Children, in their ready attaining to the knowledge of the Latin
Tongue, to have their Rules in Latin, and those (many of them) frivolous and
unnecessary, burdening their Memories with impertinencies, which (while they
are getting their Rules by heart, and before they can understand them) a great
part of their time is spent, wherein they might (if proceeded in, with a right
Method) have arrived to a great degree of knowledge, in the expressing and
ready speaking of the Language. So that the Rules thereof, has been no less
tedious, and perhaps more than the Language it self, if taught by a facile,
natural, genuine way.

For by right, the Master that teaches Latin, or any other Language, should
(for the most part) speak nothing else but that Language he teaches, and
should suffer his Scholars to speak nothing else to him, or to each other, but
Latin; and that though they be only such words, as whereby they can guess at
each others meanings, as we guess at the meaning of Children, when they in
short pronounce only a word (and that the most significant one) for a sentence:
And thus they should do, though they speak false Latin very frequently; so as
the Master speaking altogether or mostwhat to them in Latin, will in time (and
that not long if compared with that time which is spent in the common way) so
familiarize the Language to them, that they will need very few Rules. For by
how much the more natural any Language becomes to us, the less cognizance we
have of Grammar-Rules.

And therefore it is, that Children Twelve Years old in other Countries, shall,
and do speak Latin more familiarly and with abundance more facility, than we do
at Twenty or above, though we have been trained up in Latin-Schools, most of
our young time. And all this proceeds from the wrong Method we take in the
Learning the Latin, and that too chiefly from the puzzling intricacies of our
Latin Grammars, which if we had never known, but followed the foresaid Method,
we had not lost so much of our precious time in hunting after that Language.
For they in other Countries, by the use of Vocabularies and Dictionaries,
together with the frequent custom of speaking the Language, become furnished
with a great stock of significant words, which being composed by some few
general Rules, inables them in a little time both to understand and speak the
Latin Tongue very fluently.

Thus also the Universal-Character (we are speaking of) should be placed down
in Vocabularies or Dictionaries, with the signification thereof in every
particular Language, which should be taught in all Schools, in every Nation,
viz first to be read chiefly and particularly in the native Language of the
place; and if any after the through understanding it in their own Language,
should be desirous thereof, may be taught to read it into Latin, Greek, or what
Tongue they please.

And for the making it Universal, it should be so ordered, as that no other
form of Writing be at all followed, not so much as to Write their own Native
Language, any other ways than by this Character, and that least any other
manner of Writing should gain ground, and thereby cause a deficiency in the
general Character; so that let a man learn as many Languages as he pleases,
yet if he would express any thing in any of these Languages he should do it by
the Character, and by that he may as well express what he has of experiment or
observation to communicate to the World, from his own native Language, as from
any other whatever.

Also all Books of public use, and of general instruction, should be writ or
translated in this Character, and Children should be trained up in no other
from their Childhood. Thus (in a few years) the whole Sceen of Writings, I
mean such as are most proper for the use of Mankind, would be transposed, and
put into a new form of this Universal Character; so that one Nation may read
the various Transactions, and rare Inventions of each other, in their own
Language, without an Interpreter or Translator of one Language into another,
which would beget a community of correspondence, even betwixt the remotest of
Kingdoms.

And by the foresaid Method, generally observed, and that by public Edict of
all Princes within their Dominions, Children and others, would make such a
proficiency in this new way of understanding each other by one simple Universal
Character, as that the World, once in a Dozen or Twenty Years, would grow weary
of writing their own Language, in letters and words at length, and finding such
a facile ready way of writing by this Character, would readily close therewith,
and willingly make it their sole form of writing.

The benefit and profit of this Universal Character to Mankind, would be no
less Universal than the Character it self; for by this means, Princes might
readily understand the Policies of foreign States, and if good, make them
presidents to themselves: Philosophers (hereby) might have a ready intelligence
of the most remarkable occurrences and Philosophic Transactions throughout the
World, to the great improvement of experimental Physiology. Also Mechanics
might improve their ingenuity, by having fair hints of ingenious contrivances
from abroad. Mathematics might also receive no less advantage hereby both by
observing from abroad shorter Rules in the two Pillars thereof, viz.
Arithmetic and Geometry; as also in the branches thereon depending, viz.
Astronomy, Dialling, Geography, Navigation, Architecture, Mensuration, etc.
Physicians also might improve their skill, by having new Methods and rare
observations communicated to them from all parts of the World; in order to the
more successful Cure of Diseases. Merchants (hereby) might Traffic more
readily, in all foreign parts of the known World, and that without having
their Letters of Advice or Bills of Exchange Translated, by an Interpreter, out
of one Language into another, or of being confined to have one of their own
Language employed as their Factor.

And (to conclude) all liberal Sciences, Ingenuous Arts, and thriving
Manufactures, with Mechanical inventions, would receive no small improvement by
this way of communication, through the help of the Universal Character; and by
observations in Physiological Essays, from all parts abroad, the Structure of a
body of true Genuine Philosophy, might (in a little time) be raised, to the
great use, and benefit of mankind in all sorts of useful learning, both
speculative, and practick. So that (thereby) in a few years, more might be
done, as to the Completing thereof, then has been in whole Centuries of years
before.

And here concluding this Digression, I re-asume my first intended matter, and
further assert, That --



THus would Physiology be advanced in every part and branch thereof, becoming
more facile, certain, and grateful, by being grounded upon experiments, then by
any other conjectural Hypothesis; though as I said, it is but Scientia
naturalis a posteriori, being as far (or more) short of that intuitive
knowledge which Adam had in Paradise, as conjectural Hypothesis is of it; yet
is this very acceptable, because it joins issue with our Senses, whence we now,
after a Preposterous manner, assume most of our knowledge of natural things.

A considerable part of this Book of Philosophia Naturalis, would be spent in
the Physical or Medical Science: By which we should know, what concrets, how
used, and by what means they become helpful for the relief of our infirm and
diseased Bodies; in which that improvement made in the Laboratories by various
preparations and trials thereof upon sick persons, would be of great importance.

And this brings me to the third and last thing, I propounded to my self, to
discourse of, viz. to signify the use and efficacy of Chemical remedies; I
mean, how much more assistance nature has by the help of Chemical Medicines in
order to the cure of diseases, then by the vulgar Shop-preparations; and here,
me thinks, the Cabinets of natures rarities are opened and by this noble Art we
are let into the grand Mysteries, and choice Secrets of medicinal Preparations,
which, being separated from their terrene Faeces, and corrected from their
annexed virulencies, penetrate into the very intimate recesses and secret
Meanders of the Body, helping nature at every turn, both to manifest what is
useful by solution, incision and abstersion of the peccant Sordes; as also by
fortifying the vital powers and functions, and that corroboration; and
restoration of the vital Principals.

No Ingenious Person, can longer satisfy himself, in the common practice of
the Galenical Physic; when he once begins to reflect upon the uncertainty of
the Method, and unsuccesfulness of his Curing Diseases; especially when he
comes to consider the reasons thereof, viz. the rawness, and incongruity of the
dispensatory Preparations; the Farraginous mixtures whereof, render them less
effectual, then if they were more simple; and puts the young practitioner to a
great loss (whilst the elder, (and therefore accounted the more experienced
Physician) jogs on right or wrong, according to his methodical rules of Art)
for when he expects, as well for his credit sake, as his desire of doing good,
some great Cures, he finds nothing considerable done.

And this gives cause to many Industrious searching Physicians, now of late, to
begin to throw off this Galenical yoke, and fall to work themselves, making
some neat Preparations according to the Chemical Art, for their own practice;
by the efficacy of which, they are encouraged to proceed further, to the
Preparation of more noble Arcana: which they must do, whilst they are young,
other wise when they grow old, they either become too lazy, to begin to work,
or too much settled upon their Lees; then they think themselves to old, to
enter into the Chmycal Matrix, to be born Philosophers by the fire,

The Chemical Preparations have these following advantages of the
Shop-Medicines; first, they are commonly much less in bulk than the other are,
and therefore they less offend the Patient in taking them. What nauseating
Potions are frequently prescribed (not to say that they are in their taste,
inferior to Horse-Drenches) which are apt to make the stomachs of some, who
have taken thereof, even at the sight of the next Potion to Vomit; whereas a
few drops of a Spagyrical Liquor, given in a proper Vehicle: or a Mineral
Powder given in a few grains (which in some Preparations has some taste, in
others none) operates effectually enough, according to the intention of the
Physician.

2. Chemical Medicines (if rightly prepared) are less dangerous than the
Galenical. I shall not here vindicate the confident boastings of some quacking
Pretenders to Chemistry, who presume to cure all Diseases with some secret
Powder, Oil, or the like; which (when known) is but a mere trifle, and scarce
worthy the name of a genuine Chemical Preparation: and yet (forsooth) these
Medicasters boast themselves (though you shall scarce hear it from any of their
Patients) what great wonders they can do; vilifying all others that are more
modest than themselves, and yet are Possessors of more noble Medicines.

I am not ignorant, how the Galenists have designedly insinuated into the
Vulgar, the great danger (as I said before) of Chemical Medicines, which has
been no small Remora to the progress of Chemical Physicians; till their
unwearied diligence has, with time, mostwhat worn off that apprehension of
danger: and they now begin to observe by ocular demonstration, the great
efficacy, together with the safety of Spagyrical Remedies.

For where the Galenists in their Dispensatories, ends, there the Chemical
Physician begins, both to correct what they have done, by making their
compositions more homogeneal; and to proceed further to what they have not
done: witness the elaborate Chemical Animadversions on the Augustane
Dispensatory, by the ingenious Swelfer; who undoubtedly does correct most
demonstrably the errors of the vulgar Galenical Preparations, showing very
evidently their incongruous and farraginous mixtures; and besides adds other
dexterous Preparations, both Vegetable, Animal and Mineral, which they have
not. In whose Book of Animadversions, with his Mantissa Hermetica, and Appendix
thereto, the Reader may view plainly (as in a glass) the errors of the received
opinions of the vulgar Practice of Physic.

3. The Chemical Remedies are more purified and refined from their terrene
feculencies, than the Galenical; for in Decoctions, Syrups, Conserves,
Electuaries, Lohochs, and some other Shop-Preparations, there are but very
small separations of the terrestrial Faeces, little depurations made: as for
Decoctions, either the Menstruum, which commonly is water (perhaps with the
addition of some Wine) is not proper for extracting the virtues of the
Ingredients, or by too much boiling, they let the volatile (and therefore most
effectual) parts fly away, so that the virtues of the Concretes, are not
sufficiently hereby extricated from their bodily Compage; nor by pounding
Vegetables, to make Conserves thereof, with the addition of Sugar; nor the like
addition of Sugar to the juyces thereof, to make Syrups; nor the additions of
several Species together, with Sugar and Honey for Lohochs and Electuaries; I
say, None of these do suffer any considerable separation, of the pure from the
impure: but the Sanguis, cruor and stercus of Vegetables, the good and bad are
all jumbled together; and therefore Noble Helmont says, in his Pharmacopoeia,
Error Scholarum fuit, succos Herbarum, cum suo Parenchymate, Fermento prius non
subigere, antequam optimarum partium selectio sit possibilis; Who (observing
the frequent Preparations of Vegetables into Syrups, Conserves, and the like,
without any separation of parts) tells us, That the error thereof, is for want
of the knowledge of Fermentations, and thereby of due separations of the pure
from the impure; and therefore also he says (in another place to the same
purpose) Discant Tyrenes, sanguinem a cruore and parenchymate plantarum
distinguere, and separare, si quicquam laud dignum egisse per simplicia
meditentur: so that, unless there be some peculiar separations of earthly
feculencies, and other impurities (which must be done by previous Fermentations
in the Preparations of Vegetables) we can scarce reap the Essential virtues
thereof. Now in Syrups, Conserves, Electuaries, etc. there are made no previous
Fermentations, or putrefactions; and so consequently no separations of pure
from impure, Absque reseratione clausarum virium five vitae radice, ac
participatione, emendatione defectuum, cruditatum, excrementorum, and
potestatum violentarum.

Indeed Syrups and Conserves, do by keeping, work and ferment; as we see that
Syrups (whilst working) being close shut up in glass-bottles, frequently break
them, though never so strong; Conserves especially, if made with powdered
Sugar, and kept one or two years (not with Loaf-Sugar which is commonly boiled
up, with a Lixivium of Calx vive) do Ferment, whereby the Compage of the
Vegetable becomes opened, out of which (by a slight artifice) I sometimes
prepare a curious Spirit, as of Roses, or Rosemary Flowers, which retains the
taste and virtue of the Species, whence they were extracted.

4. Chemical Remedies are frequently more effectual in their operation than the
Galenical. By Chemical Medicines, I do not mean such, as every ordinary
bragging Chemist exposes to Sale, who themselves are (through their vain empty
boasts) no otherwise than a reproach to the noble Art of Chemistry; and their
Preparations spurious, in comparison to the genuine products of the Spagyrical
Art: but such I call Chemical Medicines (whose efficacy I am treating of) as
are made by a skilful Artist, who by continued experience, knows how to correct
things corrigible; and how, by every succeeding Preparation, to further enrich
his Medicines, with more noble virtues, by making exquisite depurations and
gradual seperations. These will therefore more readily penetrate in intimos
naturae thalamos, into the more inward recesses of the Digestions, and Fabric
of the vital and animal Spirits; and thereby become more capable of rectifying
the enormities of those nimble Agents, who sit at the stern of the Digestions,
and govern the vital and animal functions, much more than those clogging
Medicines of Syrups, Conserves, Electuaries, Lohochs, Potions, etc. Which
commonly are either rejected as nauseating to the Digestions; or carried off by
seidge as cumbersom, by reason of the unseparated Heterogeneities; or else
stuff and clog the vessels, causing obstructions, and thence enormous
Flatulencies.

Concerning the constitutive Principles of all Coneretes, whether Vegitable,
Animal, or Mineral.
BEsides all which, the Preparation of Chemical Medicines, gives a diligent
Searcher much insight into the Principles of Natural Philosophy; which first
insinuated the Tria prima of the Philosophers, viz. Sal, Sulphur, and
Mercurius, to be Principles of all things; and that because they found in the
Analysis of Bodies by the fire, that they were reducible to some, or all of
those three: for in reduction of Metals and Minerals to their first Principles,
as they supposed, they found by this Art, that they were separable into a
Sulphur or Oil, which was the Hematina Metallorum, retaining the true tincture
of the Metal; and into a Mercury, which in the Mineral Kingdom is current
Quicksilver; and the key to this separation they found to be in a Mineral Salt,
which also needed reduction by Art, to its primitive simplicity and graduation
to its greatest activity.

They find also that Vegetables and Animals were, by the Pyrotecnical Art
separable into a Sulphur, viz. into an Oil, or in Vegetables (by Fermentation)
into a vinous Spirit; which is the same thing with an Essential Oil, saving the
different determination it receives from Fermentation: also into a Salt, and
that either fixed or volatile; for in the Concrete they are the same, owing
their difference to no other than to the force of fire; and lastly, into a
Mercury, which is their Phlegm, or watery parts, separable by fire, or
otherwise, by the exiccating Blass of the Air.

Now some of our modern Chemical Philosophers (as the ingenious Dr. Willis)
multiply these three into five Principles, which in effect are but the three
first still; the five, which he reckons Bodies, are mostwhat separable into
rare Spirit, Oil, Salt, Water and Earth; if by Spirit he means the vinous, got
by Fermentation, What difference is there, for both are Sulphurs, both take
flame and burn alike, only the one is made by Fermentation, the other not; and
being they have both the same Essential properties of Flamability, What should
hinder them from being Sulphurs? But if he mean by Spirit, the volatile saline
Spirit, which is not combustible: This volatile Spirit, by frequent
rectification, may be brought into the form of a volatile Salt, whose Vehicle
was water, Phlegm or Mercury; but the body of volatile Salt is Salt and
therefore should not be accounted as another Principle. As for that Principle
which he calls Earth, if a Concrete may be volatiz'd and brought over the helm,
without any resident Caput mort, as the Chemical Adepti can perform, Then (I
pray) what becomes of his fixed Principles, he calls Earth? So that in the
conclusion, we shall find his five to be reducible into the first three.

These three Principles of Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, into which many Concretes
are reducible, by the Analysis of the fire, are again reducible into two, and
those are Aqua and Semen, Water and Seed; which are the primitive constituent
Principles of all Bodies in the Mundane Systeme, to which two, the Sal,
Sulphur, and Mercury are but posteriour products, or offsprings of that double
Original: Yea, whatever parts, or supposed simple Principles, any sort of
Bodies are reducible into, they are but the sequels or after-products
(variously extorted by force of fire) of those two real Principles, Water and
Seed.

Water we suppose (and perhaps may prove) to be the first matter of all visible
Bodies. It is the true subject matter of all Concretes, which we thus prove,
viz. That is the first material Principle of all Bodies, into which they are
ultimately, by a natural or artificial Analysis reducible; but all Bodies are
ultimately, by a natural or artificial Analysis reducible into Water; Ergo,
Water is the first material Principle of all Bodies. The Major is plain, and
granted on all hands; for the Aristotelians (who placed the Principles of all
things, to be in the quaternary of Elements) did it, because they supposed (but
could not prove) that all Bodies were reducible into those four Elements, viz.
of Fire, Air, Water and Farth: so in like manner the Hermetical Philosophers,
in their weaving all Concretes, out of their Tria prima of Sal, Sulphur, and
Mercury, did suppose them to be the first Principles; because many Bodies by
the artifice of the fire, were reducible into some what analogous thereto. And
so those who increase those three into five Principles, do it because some
Concretes are resolvable by fire into those five distinguishable parts; which
indeed are rather new products of the fire, than genuine resolutions into their
first Principles.

The Minor thereof rests to be proved, viz. That all Bodies are ultimately
reducible into Water, by Art or Nature. That it may be done by Art, I shall
demonstrate from an infallible Experiment of the most profound Chemical
Philosopher, Van Helmont, who in his Tractate, Entitled Elementa, says thus,
Nostra Mechanica mihi patefecit, omne corpus (puta saxum) Lapidem, Gemmam,
Silicem, Arenam, Marcasitam, etc. transmutari in Salem actualem, aequi
ponderantem suo corpori; unde factus est; and quod iste Sal aliquoties,
cohobatus, cum Sale circulato Paracelsi, suam omnino fixitatem amittat, tandem
transmutetur in liquorem, qui etiam tandem in aquam insipidam transit: and quod
ista aqua aequiponderet, Sali suo, unde manavit, viz. That by his liquor
Alkahest (for so I understand his words Mechanica nostra) every Body, whether
Stones, Gems, Flints, Sand, Marcasites, Earth, Brick, Glass, Calx, Sulphur,
etc. might be transmuted into an actual Salt, of the same weight with the body
it was derived from, or was made from; and that Salt being cohobated sometimes
with Paracelsus his Sal cironlatum, would lose all its fixity, and be
transmuted into a liquor, which at length would be turned into an insipid
water, of equal weight with the Salt whence it came.

He says further, Plantam, carnes, ossa, pisces and quicquid similium est,
novi redigere in mera sua Tria, unde postmodum aquam insipidam confeci;
motallum autem preptor sui seminis anaticam commistionem, et arena (quellem)
difficilime in salem reducuntur; vix. by the same grand Solvent liquor, he knew
how to reduce any plant, Flesh, Bones, Fish, and the like into their three
first Principles, which also were further reducible, yea actually (by him)
reduced into an insipid water: but the reduction of a Metal was difficult, by
reason of the equal mixture of its Seed, and so also of the reduction of Sand.

Further he says; Terrae originalis sive arma, tam arti quam naturae resistat,
nec queat ullis adminiculis a primaeva sui constantia recedere (unico duntaxat
Grheunae drtificialis igni excepto,) quo arena sal fit, ac tandem aqua; quia
vim habet agendi super sublunaria quaevis absque reactione; viz: that the
original Earth or Sand (arena, Quellem) resists both art and nature, as to its
reduction; nor can it, by any means recede from it Primitive constancy, unless
by the only artificial fire of the Alkahest, called by the name of Gehenna: by
which Sand, is made Salt, and at length converted into water, because this
solvent has power to act upon all sublunary bodies, and that without any
reaction of bodies upon it.

By all which, we may see, that all bodies whatsoever, are by art so
transmutable, as that at length they may be reduced into their simple Element
of water; which if it were not their first material Pricipic, they could not
ultimately be resolved thereinto; for both Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals,
are by the natural Analysis of the alkahest, at last reducible into common
water. Concerning Vegetables he says, novi aquam, cujus medio omnia
vegetabilia in succum distillabilem sine ulla sui in fundo vitri residentia
commutantur, qui succus adjuncto alkali totus in aquam transit insipidam. This
is performed by the same Solvent liquor as the other was; so that Vegetables by
the powerful operation of this liquor are changed into a distillable Juice,
which will pass over the helm, without any Faeces or Caput mort left behind:
which distilled Juice being re-distilled from Alkalies, becomes totally reduced
into a simple Elemental water.

As to Animals, he says, he reduced Flesh, Bones, Fish and the like into an
insipid water; and as to Minerals or Metals the same is done, though with more
difficulty. Paracelsus tells us that his Circulatum majus, which he also calls
acetum acerrimum metallicum, and primum ens liquidum Mercurii, if digested upon
any of the Metals, does reduce them to any oil, or supernatant fat, tinctured
according to the property of the Metal; by which, Metals are deducable into a
magistery. Now Helmont says; Olea and pinguedines per ignem separata; adjecto
pauco sale Alkali, saponis naturam assumunt, atque in aquam elementalem abeant
viz. That oils or fats, separated by fire, by the addition of a little Alkali
becomes Saponary, and afterward passes into a simple Elemental water. So that
whether minerals and metals be by the grand liquor resolvable into a salt or
into an oil, they are either way (at length) reducible into a water.

He tells us, that the most rectified spirit of wine (which is totus
cremabilis) by the intimate touch of salt of Tartar, may be transmuted into an
incombustible salt, to the quantity of the sixteenth part of the whole; the
rest ( viz. 15 parts) becomes a simple Elementary water: and further, that
every distilled Oil is changeable into a salt, Deposito semine pinguedinis, and
that salt per adjuncta, is convertible into water.

Carboquercus (inquit Helmontius) aqua quadam, tepore balnei, spatio tridui,
versus est in duos liquores diaphanos, fundo and color varios: Quibus
distillatis nil faecum remansit; at ambo aequiponderabant massae carbonis;
liquor dissolvens manet in fundo paris ponderis, sibi and virium; by which, the
excellency of the Menstruum, and the reducibility of Compound bodies in to
clear liquors, and those again (by other additions) into simple water, is
evident; viz. that a charr'd coal of Oak should (by being digested with this
solvent, in the heat of a Balneum for the space of three days) be turned into
two diaphanous clear liquors, distinguishable in color and consistence, which
being distilled, should leave no Faeces behind, but should be equal in weight
to the Coal it self; I say, this is very remarkable toward the evincing the
truth of the simplicity of the material Elementaryness of Concrets.

For as it is in this, so also is it in other reductions, by the same solvent;
What becomes of the Salt, Sulphur, Spirit, and earth? If these were real
Principles, they would not be convertible one into another; neither would they
be reducible into something more simple then themselves: in as much, as it is
essential for Principles to be Primary, and to be the last in reduction. What
becomes of the Spirit, one of the Principals of the Modern Chemical
Philosophers? which whether it be Vinous, got by Fermentation; or Saline, got
by distillation, yet is it really convertible into Salt: witness the Offa from
Spirit of Wine, and Spirit of Urine; the Sal Alkali made out of spirit of Wine
which before was Flagrable, but being changed into a Salt has lost that; and
lastly the rectification of Volatile Urinous Spirits, whether of plants or
Animals, until they distill or Coagulate into the very body of Salt.

What becomes of Sulphur, or Oil another supposed Principle; for Sulphurs are
convertible into Salts, as I have seen in an experimental process, too redious
here to be related; and Helmont says Salia aromatum ex eorum oleis facta,
primi entis illorum vices subeunt; and that Oil of Cinnamon if united to its
own Alkali, by an artificial and secret circulation for the space of three
months, without any water, will be totally changed into a volatile Salt.

Also what becomes of Salt, another main Principle of both ancient, and Modern
Chemists? For whether it be fixed, or Volatile, neither of them is an ultimate,
and so consequently no primary Principle; in the concrete it is neither
volatile, nor fixed, but made so by Fermentations or force of Fire; for in all
simple distillations of Vegetables, without previous putrefaction, there
always remains an Alkali or Salt, besides the Volatile Salt which arises by
distillation: So in the actual Flagration or Calcination of Vegetables, the
Salt catches hold of the Sulphur, and both become fixed together into an
Alkali; which Assertion viz. that part of the Sulphur in the actual force of
the Fire, is fixed with the Salt into an Alkali is apparent from the
Saponariness of every Alkali, whether of Tartar or any dried Vegetable.

So that Salts, as they lie woven up with the Sulphur, in the Texture of the
Concrete, are (as I said,) neither fixed, nor volatile; but in the mutual
embraces of each other, become pregnant with the Medicinal Virtues, Odours,
Sapours, etc. proper to the Plant: and from different operations of fire, and
ferments thereon, does proceed both the Volatility and fixity of the Salt,
their mutability of one into another, and Separation each from other.

Now both these are ultimately reducible into Mercury, or water, (which I look
upon as Synonyma; for Helmont says, Omze oleum distillatum, in salem est
mutabile, and in aquam per adjuncta; so that, into neither of them are bodies,
by a genuine Analysis, ultimately reducible, and therefore they are
constitutive Principles of things.

Lastly, what will become of earth, that first Principle of the Modern
Chemists, and fourth of the Aristotelians? And although those who contend for
five Principles, because Vegetables and Animals, are by a common Analysis of
the fire, separable into so many distinguishable parts viz. an Oil, Spirit,
Salt, Phlegm, and Earth (I say) though they do find, after the separation of
the first four, an other part, as a feculent dross of all the rest, which they
call earth; yet do we deny the Separation of these parts from a concret by
force of fire, to be any true Analysis, or proper way of taking bodies in
pieces. And therefore it is no genuine reduction thereof, into their primary
Principles; but only a forcing the parts asunder, by violence of fire: so
that, being put upon the Rack, if they make any confession of their first
parents, its only extorsive. Also the basis of Aristotle's Elements falls, imo
ruit totum quaternarium elementorum, praeter aquam; for if we strictly examine
what earth is, we shall find, that it enters not the composition of any body as
a primary constitutive Ingredient thereof: and that, because if we search into
the great variety of Earths, we may observe them all to be but fruits, or
products of the primitive Principle (Water;) except hence that Arena (Quellem,
terra virginalis) which never enters into the composition of any body, quoad
generatonem; indeed artificially it enters the composition of Glass, of Brick,
cement etc. but that is sine semine praevio.

And that the several sorts of Earth, are various coagulations of water,
according to the difference of the Fracedinous seeds, dispersed, and implanted
therein; and that they are no less products of water, then Mineral Salts,
middle Minerals, Stones, and Metalline Bodies are, all which receive a
Specifical determination from the difference of the Fermental Seeds, Is (I say
demonstable by granting the veracity of Helmont's experiment aforesaid, viz.
that all these Earths, Stones, Marcasites, Minerals etc. are ultimately
reducible into water, by his grand Solvent, the Alkahest; and that without any
residence or Faeces at all: so that, if earth were a permanent Principle, it
would be so as long as bodies are bodies and would always remain earth after
the reduction of the concrete into Elements.

As earth is no Element, so neither does air enter, as such, into the
composition of Bodies; and though its true, that air is both useful, and
necessary for Vegetation, and Animation, without which neither do plants grow,
nor Animals live: yet is it only respiraculum vitae, promoting in Animals,
both circulation and volatization of the Blood, and helps every part to perform
the motion proper thereunto, inasmuch as we cannot go to stool without the
help thereof, compressing the muscles of the Abdomen, and so of Urine, and the
like; but still it enters not the composition of any body, as an Elementary
Ingredient thereof. Nor is any body ultimately resolvable thereinto; for though
there be a flatus arising usually from the Enormities of the digestions, yet
that is quite another thing then air.

And as neither earth nor air, so neither fire enters the composition of any
concrete; for though there be heat, and consequently a kind of fire, in the
body of Animals: yet that is no other than a product of Vital Fermentation, and
no radical Principle; and therefore Paracelsus was to be laughed at, who in his
Tractate De separatione Elementorum, teaches the separation of the Element of
fire, and out of it again a new separation of Elements. For if I should, with
him, suppose an Element of fire; yet if that be further reducible, it forthwith
loses both the name and nature of an Element: and although he, and other
Hermetical Philosophers, tell us of the separation of Elementum iguis de
vitriolo Veneris, yet by that we must only understand, the Sulphur separated
from the Vitriol of Copper, which Sulphur, as well as that of Antimony etc.
they call fires, because, they have a power of maturating, and digesting the
Mercurial Crudities, into a penetrative tinging Elixir.

Thus we see, that neither the Ternary of Principles, of Hermetical
Philosophers, nor the quaternary of the Peripateticks, nor yet quinary of the
Modern Philosophers, are sufficient to be accounted real radical Principles,
into which all Concretes should ultimately be reducible; because they
themselves are yet remigrable into a more simple Element: and therefore (ipso
facto) forfeit the Prerogative of primary Principles.

The very hinge of the matter now is, Wh^^^^^ we believe the truth of Helmont's
Experiments or no. As for my own particular, I do not pretend the possession of
that great Liquor, though I have several Preparations (I hope) in the way
toward it; but methinks I cannot suspect the veracity of so Noble and Grave a
Philosopher, in matter of fact, as to the Experiments he has made by that
Solvent, though I should never live to enjoy it. I cannot but think it
dissonant to reason, that he who wrought Thirty Years with his own hands in
Chemical Experiments, that he might not take things upon trust, nor Jurare in
verba Magistri, should (whilst on the verge of the Grave, in his old Age)
leave figments and palpable Lies, in matter of fact to the World.

Besides, he seems to be consistent with himself, in matter of Experiments; in
which he is abundantly more plentiful than ever Paracelsus was, though he also
had the knowledge of that Liquor, from some of the Arabian Philosophers: but, I
am apt to believe he did not know half the extent of its use. Geber and others
of the Arabian Philosophers, so also Lully, was possessors of this secret
Menstruum, as may be seen in his Theorica; where he tells us that he coagulated
Quicksilver into a fixed Powder, Et nemo scivit modum, salva Regia Majestate.
Also a Countryman of our own, an Anonymus, who (if yet living) has it. It Is
not many years since he was in England; some of whose Manuscripts I have by me,
who certainly gives more light to the Writings of another of our Countrymen,
viz. Riply; also to Count Trevisan, and other Hermetical Philosophers, than
ever yet was done.

The greatest light Helmont gives, in order to the Fa^^ick of this Liquor, is
as follows, viz. Chymia (...) ^ando sollicitae est corpori, quod tantae
puritatis ^^^iphonia colluderet nobiscum, ut a corrumpente nequiret dissipari,
tandem stupefactaest religio, reperto latice, qui ad minimas reductus atomos,
naturae possibiles, coelebs omnis fermenti connubia spernit. Desperata est ejus
transmutatio, digniue se corpus non reperiens, cui nuberet. Sed labor Sophiae
anomalum in natura fecit, quod absque fermento commiscibili, a se diverso
surrexit: Serpens seipsum iste momordit, a veneno revixit, ac mori deinceps
nescit. Of which he says, Unus and idem Liquor Alkahest omnia totius universi
corpora tangibilia perfect reducit in vitam eorundem primam, absque ulla sui
mutatione aut virium diminutione, Mundat etiam nauram virtute sui ignis: Nam ut
ignis omnes perimit insectas, ita Alkahest consumit Morbos, etc.

Now as by the highest Preparation in the Chemical Art, Concretes become
reducible into water; so likewise we see in a natural circulation, out of one
shape into another, that water is found most what to be the last: For all
Vegetables are distillable into a great proportion of water, also all juyces of
Vegetables, are by Fermentation brought into potable Liquors, and those again
into Vinegar, and that into a vapid Liquor, which at length is nothing but
simple water. The Vine we see, which is the noblest of Vegetables, according to
the nature of its Seed, specificates the water or Succus (leffas) Terrae into
its own shape, attracting like a Siphon the Elementary Water in great plenty,
out of the Earth, into its leaves and clusters. This innate Seed which makes
the difference of water, coagulated in this Vegetable, from that coagulated in
other Vegetables, by the concurrence of the influence of the Sun, and Season of
the Year, begets a Salt and a Sulphur; these mutually acting upon each other in
the Mercurial part, beget a Fermentation; in which Fermentation, there happens
a separation and rejection of a feculent part, to the sides of the vessels,
which is called Tartar, from which Tartar, by force of fire, is separable a
Sulphur, Salt, Mercury, Spirit and feculent Earth; all which are not really
pre-existent in the Tartar, but are new products by the fire, whereof the Salt
and Empyreumatick Sulphur digested together, do by Distillation give a water;
and the Spirit at length degenerate into water.

Now by Fermentation, and while the feculent Tartar is separating the Sulphur,
by working upon the Salt, become united, and so graduated as they both combine
in the Fabric of a vinous combustible Spirit, which is promoted by a secret
Fermentation, after the actual working is over; which is nothing else but a
more firm and closely riveted union of the Sulphur and Salt, maturating the
Mercurial part into a generous Wine.

This Wine, either distilled, is the most part of it left, as an insipid Phlegm
or water; yea and the very flammable vinous Spirit, is by the touch of Salt of
Tartar in Fifteen or Sixteen parts thereof (according to Helmont) reducible
into simple water: or if the Salt thereof become too much exalted, by letting
go its Sulphur, then it degenerates into Vinegar; which Vinegar (if dulcified
by making Saccharum Saturni, or the Sal Sennerti) is totally reducible into an
insipid water. The like happens in all Vegetables, for Water is the material
Principle of Vegetables; and therefore they ultimately resolvable thereinto.

That Water is the material Principle of Vegetables, is apparent, both because
without water, whether distilled down upon the earth, in the circulation
thereof in Dews or Rain; or by the overflowing of Rivers upon the grounds,
whence the fertility of Egypt from Nilus his overflowing the banks; or by any
other sort of watering grounds, because (I say) without water, from some of the
foresaid ways, neither do Plants take nor increase, nor is any Vegetation
performed: also because in water many Vegetables grow, shoot forth roots, and
spread very largely, witness Mint, and several other Plants, whose tops being
only nipt off, and put into a glass-viol, full of water, they begin in a few
days, as I have seen, to shoot forth spriggy roots; and from thence to grow up
to a great height, even as if they were actually planted or set in earth; whose
growth and increase is from nothing else but simple water. So also many
Vegetables (as I said) grow in water, and have no roots at all fastened in the
earth.

To confirm which further, that remarkable Experiment of Helmont is very
considerable, viz. He planted the Trunk of a Willow Tree, of five pound weight,
in Two hundred pound of earth dried in an Oven: having put them in earthen
vessel, he moistened it with Rainwater; after five years the Tree weighed One
Hundred Sixty nine pound, three Ounces: and the earth being dried was of the
same weight as at first. Now, Whence should proceed the great addition of
weight to the Tree, of no less than One Hundred Sixty four pounds, unless from
water, than which it had no other additional? The wood of which Tree I suppose
no man will deny to be different from any other wood of the same species; and
therefore upon Distillation must yield a sour Spirit, an Oil, Phlegm, and
Salt; if burnt and separated into soot and ashes, that soot again would yield a
velatile Salt, Oil, Spirit, Phlegm and Earth: all which are but the products of
water, as by the Experiment is demonstrable.

To the like purpose the most ingenuous Robers Boil Esquire has an Experiment
which was thus. In a weighed quantity of dug earth, baked in an Oven, and
put into an earthen pot, he set the seed of a Squash; this he ordered to be
watered only, with Rain or Spring Water, I did not (says he) without much
delight behold how fast it grew, though unseasonably sown, which was about the
middle of May; the hastening Winter hindered it from coming to its wonted
magnitude: About the middle of October it was taken up, whose weight, with the
stalk and leaves, was two Pound twelve ounces; the earth he baked as formerly,
and found it the same weight. The like Experiment he had of Cucumbers, he had
two fair ones, the weight of which were ten pounds and an half; the branches
with the roots weighed three pounds, fourteen ounces: then baking the earth
twice, and its weight was decreased one pound and an half; which twice baking
might somewhat minorate the weight of the earth.

Now, Whence should proceed that great bulk, both in the Squash and Cucumbers,
unless from water, which was the only matter additional thereto? And what
happens to these planted in earth, and fed with water, whose increase is found
to be simply from water, The same (I say) does, more than probably, happen to
all other Vegetables, springing up from their innate Seeds, or transplanted
into other Soyls; and that the Earth is only a receptacle or Matrix, where the
variety of Seeds conceive in the common Mercury, Water (or Leffas Terrae) and
bring forth a Salt and Sulphur, from whose acting one upon another in the
source of corruption, arises the Vegetation; and in that the formation of the
Plant, according to the Idea wrapped up in the bosom of the Seed: for these two
active secondary Principles, being hewed out from the seminal Archeus, work
themselves extensively downward, but chiefly upwards, cloth themselves with a
body from the primary Element of Water, and shoot forth into stalks, leaves,
flowers, fruits, seeds, etc. shapes the body according to the platform of the
seminal Idea, extraverteth the properties thereof, whence the variety of
colors, odours, sapours and other specifical qualities, flowing from the
essence thereof, better known to the humane Archeus, by assisting it against
many Diseases, than apparent to the reason of man.

As we have demonstrated Vegetables to have their original material Principles
from water, so also Animals have water for their constitutive Element.

For all Animals (I mean superterrestrial) have their nourishment, either
immediately or mediately from Vegetables and Water; immediately as all manner
of Cattle, proper for the food of Man; mediately as Man, who feeds upon the
flesh of Beasts, and sometimes immediately upon Herbs themselves: so that in
Beasts that feed of Grass and Corn, Water becomes once more removed from its
primitive simplicity, undergoes a further transmutation by an Animal Ferment,
that whereas before it had received a simple transmutation, or coagulation into
plants and fruits of the earth, it now (by Beasts feeding thereon) suffers a
second alteration; and by the Ferment of an Animal, is turned into a Chyle,
Chyme, Milk, Blood, Urine, Flesh, Bones, etc. and all these different one from
another, according to the difference of the Species.

Now these Creatures, or parts thereof, are further transmutable by the Ferment
of other Animals that feed upon them; as for instance, the flesh of Beasts, or
milk therefrom (which is water twice removed by the Medium of Ferments) is by
the Ferment of an humane stomach, altered again into a Chyle, Chyme, Milk,
Blood, Flesh, Bones, Urines, etc. wherein the specifical Salt and Sulphur, do
act variously upon each other; which in sound persons by the assistance of the
Ferment of the heart, work each other into a ruby balsamic Animal Elixir: and
that coagulated in the capillary vessels, becomes Flesh.

And we see, if Blood be distilled, the greatest portion thereof is Phlegm or
Water, so that, above two thirds thereof is an Elementary water; in like
manner, Urine is most part of it separable into a waterish Phlegm; and Milk
distilled arises, the most of it, in an insipid water: in the distillation of
the flesh of an Animal, a great part thereof arises into water; amongst which
the flesh of Eeles, if distilled (as that great Naturalist Squire Boil
witnesses) yield a very great proportion of water, in which (while distilling)
they seem to boil as in a pot of water, or like Dantz Vitriol in an earthen
pot, placed in the fire, seemed to be nothing else but water, so these to be
nothing else but Phlegm coneal'd.

To which purpose Helmont tells us, Anguium Carnes, pisces, Mucilago semel
glaciata, eo ipso mucaginem amittunt, and in aquam redeunt; itam emnis Terrae
Mucilago, qua alias facile in vermes vertitur; for that Izinglass, Flesh, Fish,
etc. should by being frozen lose their form, and thereby be reducible into
water, is no less than an evident Argument of what I am proving, viz. That
water is the primary subjective Principle of all Vegetable and Mineral
Concretes. And that Seed together with the potential Ferments thereof, are the
Authors of all transmutations; by the operation of which, Water becomes
differently coagulated and specificated, according to the variety of the Seed,
and the innate Ferments thereof, into this or the other formal Concrete or part
thereof: which Ferments being connatural with the Seed, is more powerful than
fire, and therefore fitter Agents for transmutation than fire; and that
because, fire can only burn Stones into a Calx (as the most profound
Philosopher Helmont says) and wood or Vegetables are thereby turned into
ashes, than which (unless by addition of Sand, it may further make glass) the
solitary fire can operate no further, and yet these very Calx-stones and ashes,
may, by a Ferment in the earth, be transmuted into the Succus (or Leffas)
Terrae; and thereby fertilize barren grounds, and so assume the shape of Grass
and Corn, which a while before was in the form of Stones, Dung, Ashes, etc. and
that which was lately Grass and Corn, presently by the Ferment of an Animal,
becomes Blood, Milk, and Flesh, of a Beast; these again by a putrid solution of
the Compage, are transmuted into Worms, Flies, and other Insects, which often
retain some shape of the Animal whence they proceed; and that which even now
was in the shape of a Beast, as Beef, Mutton, etc. is forthwith by the Ferment
of an humane stomach, transmuted into Man's Blood, Flesh, etc. and these again
degenerate into Worms or other Insects in Fevers, and being let out of their
vessels, they undergo any other Analytical putrefaction, they become animated
in strange different shapes; all which is but Water, ^or^eus-like, under
various disguises, transmuted by Seed and Ferments out of one shape into
another, according to the great round of Circulations: And all as they have
their beginning and subsistence, so are also reducible into Water. Yea further,
as Vegetables and Animals have their original from and are reducible in water,
so also Minerals and Metals. And though this is not so demonstrable as the
former, because we have not that occasion usually to converse with the
Subterraneal Products, as with Vegetables and Animals; yet I find to this
purpose, what the Learned Squire Boil cites out of a French Author, Monsieur
De Rochas, who, as a Chemist, speaking what he could perform by water, Having
(says he) discerned such great wonders, by the natural operation of water, I
would know what may be done with it by Art, imitating Nature; wherefore I took
water, which I well knew, not to be compounded nor mixed with any other thing,
than the Spirit of Life; and with an heat artificial, continual and
proportionate, I prepared and disposed it by graduations, of coagulation,
congelation, and fixation, until it was turned into earth; which earth produced
Animals, Vegetables and Minerals; the Animals did move of themselves, eat, etc.
and by the true Anatomy I made of them, I found they were composed of much
Sulphur, little Mercury, and less Salt: The Minerals began to grow and
increase, by converting into their own Nature one part of the earth; they were
solid and heavy, and by this truly demonstrative Science, namely Chemistry, I
found they were composed of much Salt, little Sulphur, and less Mercury.

By which Experiment, according to the relation of the Author, Minerals were
generated out of water, which I suppose was done by some Mineral Seeds, or the
Analysis of some Mineral Concretes, into their secondary Principles, which by
due digestions assumed Water for their bodies. For Mineral Seeds in their due
Matrixes, concenter water more or less according to the nature of the Seed, and
fitness of the place; and accordingly give more or less pondus, as the purity
of the Seed and disposition of the place is; whence are lighter and heavier
Minerals and Metals.

Also Metals are reducible into water, witness what the foresaid Author says,
That by a certain artificial way of handling Mercury, without any addition, may
be separated therefrom, a fourth, or fifth part of water, or clear liquor,
which for ought I have heard, or seen (says he) is not reducible into Mercury
again, and so is more then a disguise.

That Mercury, or rather Quicksilver, should in its weight to the like bulk of
Water, be as fourteen to one, is from the Seed of the Quicksilver, concentring
the body of water, according to that proportion; toward whose reduction, two
credible Persons told the foresaid Ingenuous Author, That after (as he says)
many trials which they made, to reduce Mercury into Water, in order to
Philosophical work, they did once by diverse Cohobations, reduce a pound of
Mercury into almost a pound of water; and this without the addition of any
other thing, but only by pressing the Quicksilver by a skilful managed Fire,
in purposely-contriv'd vessels. To the like purpose Isaac Holland and some
others, speak of separating a water from Quicksilver, which they call Aqua
Nubis, qua tanquam Hydrops, Mercurius turget.

Not to mention the experiment of increasing the bulk of a stone, by the single
addition of fountainwater, till it swell to the bigness, and figure of the
glass it is put into; for we see, that water needs no more then a petrefying
Seed, to compress it self, or other things it meets with, whether Vegetables or
the like, into a stony concretion; as for instance, the petrefying well at
Knarsborough, which has, in continuance of time, wrought the earth, and grass
thereabouts, into a rocky Compages, with petrefied Isicles hanging down, where
the very Streams of water, as they run along, are actually congealed into
stones, which (I say) can be from nothing else, save a petrefying Seed,
connatural to that sort of water.

This Succus lapidificus, may have its Seminals (I say) from a petrefying
Nitre, according to the experiment of the learned Kircher, Si saxum inquit,
quodcunque in tennissimum pollinem resolveris; et aqua perfect commixtum,
permanicam Hippocratis colaveris, illa nil prorsus saxcum, sed praeter
arenaceum solummodo sedimentum nil relinquet; si vero Nitrum, vel Tartarum
aquae perfect commixtum addideris, illa, quaecunque tetigerunt intra subjectam
concham posita, sive frondes similiaque post exiguum temporis curriculum aeri
exposita, vel in Saxum ejusdem generis conversum, si non totum, saltem cortice
Saxeo vestient; So that the petrefying Seed, whether in Water, or in Nitre, or
in the Stone it self, is, in effect, all one.

So that understanding the nature of a petrefying Seed, and the extent of
subterraneall Channels, from the Sea at great distances upon the Land, we need
not wonder, that some fish is dug up in some places petrified; several of
which was to be seen amongst John Tradescan's Rarityes. That there are
Subterraneal Channels, not only from one sea to another, but from the seas, at
very great distances upon the land, the Ingenuous Kircher does fully
demonstrate. The first by a Dolphin, which was taken in the Red Sea; which by
the command of the Bassa of the place, was put into the water again cum laminis
in bronchia insertis with these words in Arabic Characters engraven Amed
Abdalla Bassa Sues tibi vitam, una cum hoc munere donavit, anno Hegira, 720:
which Dolphin was, the very same year, taken in the Mediterranean Sea, prope
Damiatam, which could not possibly be, that the Dolohin should swim that vast
compass, round Africa, and take in at the Streits, and so up to the furthest
part of the Mediterranean Sea: whereas from the Mare rubrum to Damiata, is but
a small neck of land, little above 30 Miles; and therefore must pass along
those subterraneal channels, whereby one Sea communicates with another.

As there are Subterraneal passages, from one sea to another; so (as I said)
from the seas, to great distances upon the land; whence all Fountains, Springs,
and Rivers, have their Original, and return again into the sea, contrary to the
opinion of Dr. Witty.

In which Subterraneal currents, the things carried along with the water,
whether fish or the like, may (when they come in places, pregnant with a
petrefying seed) become congealed into a stone, from which lapidifying Juice,
all Stones, whether Rocks, Quarryes, Marcasites, or what Stones soever, within,
or upon the surface of the earth, had their concretion originally.

Hence is the reason, why some Animals are found enclosed in some Stones, or
other Mineral concretions; as for instance, that a Toad should be found alive
in the midst of a Stone: or that a Spider, or other Insect should be found in a
piece of Amber. It is (I say) because these Animals are there, whilst these
Stony, or other Mineral Concretions are in Succo; for Amber is of late, found
to be a Mineral, and no product of the Sea, as it was usually supposed. There
is lately a Mine thereof found in Germany, which brings in a great profit, to
the Duke of Brandenburg It consists chiefly, of a sulphur, and a Salt, as we
find by the distillation, and rectification thereof.

Now all Minerals are, or have been, at some time or other, in suis Principiis,
in their first Succulencies; in which at the time of Concretion, if any other
thing happen to be there, it is wrapped up together with it; which keeping the
enclosed bodies from the air, and consequently from any Analytical putridness,
are as a constant defensive Balsam, preserving them perpetually from corruption.

All Mineral Seed is invisible, and to make themselves visible, according to
the appointment of God in nature, having got suitable Matrixes, begin, by a
Subterraneal heat, peculiar to the place, to work upon the Element of water,
which it impregnates, and transmutes into a Mineral Juice; in which Juice, the
Seed begins to work it self into a Mineral Mercury, and Sulphur, and in some
places, into a Mineral Salt.

Now according to the purity or impurity, Volatility or fixity of the Sulphur,
so becomes the Mineral, more or less pure, retaining a Specifical difference,
from the first Ens of the Seed: Amongst which, some have their Mercurial parts
stained with a malignant Arsenical Sulphur, viz. Realgar, auripigmentum,
Antimony etc. but if the Sulphur be so strong, as in its union with the
Mercury, it rejects the most Heterogeneities, which usually in Mineral
productions, adhere thereto, then does this combination of the Sulphur, and
Mercury, arise to a Metalline Compages.

For, The first specification of the Mineral Spermatick Mercury, is into
Quicksilver, or Metalline Mercury; the next coagulation of Mercury, after the
rejection of some Heterogeneal Sordes by Sulphur, is Saturnine, where the
Mineral Seed, first puts on a Metalline form, which is called Saturn, or Lead,
whose Mineral is Antimony; when or where this Sulphur becomes more depurated,
it coagulates the Metalline Mercury, into Jupiter, or Tinn: But if the sulphur
attain a Solar tincture, and yet retain many permiscible Heterogeneities, it
coagulates the Metalline Mercury, into Mars, or Iron; If this Sulphur, in its
Solar tincture, receive a depuration of some of the aforesaid Heterogeneities,
it coagulates into Venus, or Copper, which comes nigh in tincture, but is far
short in Pondus, of Sol or Gold; for as Basil ius Valentinus says, that in
Mars and Venus, lodge Solar tinctures, which, graduated by Nature, or Art, are
deducible into Sol: and that, because the soul or seed of Sol, is found
therein, and not only in them, but in their Minerals where they are nearer to
their Primum ens; in which also (by the way) does lodge the Sulphur
Philosophorum.

But if this Sulphur be so far graduated, as that there is a through-separation
of all Heterogeneities; and that the Sulphur has almost inseparably united it
Self with the Mercury, then they are coagulated into Luna or Silver: which
though it come short both in Tincture, and Pondus of Sol, yet because there is
a total separation of Heterogeneities, it lies in the direct road, by further
maturation to both, and thereby to become Sol it self, which is Apex
Metallorum, the prefectest of Metals: whose Sulphur and Mercury are inseperably
united, and by maturation graduated in tincture and pondus, to this unary
perfection of the best of Metals.

Thus we see how Water the primary Element, by the spermatick efflorescence of
a Mineral Seed, becomes wrought into a Mineral Juice; and that, by a peculiar
fermentation, is turned into a Mercury, and Sulphur: and those again by
maturating or ripening, each other, according to the degrees of the purity of
the Sulphur, rejection of Heterogeneities, and union together, become
transmuted, or rather, exalted into metalline Bodies, where at length, water by
the concentration of the metalline Seed, puts on the Pondus and tincture of
Metals.

As the Seeds of Minerals are invisible, so likewise are the Seeds of
Vegetables and Animals; as for Vegetables, indeed the grain, or husk (which is
improperly called Seed) we see; but the prolifique part thereof, which is
truly the Seed, cannot be discerned, by the most acurate artificially
contrived Mieroscropes; being as the Cosmopolite says (his manner of
computation I know not,) but the 820th. part of the visible grain: however they
are so minute, as not to fall under the sense of our Optics, though helped
with the best contrived glasses; and although some plants are propagable
otherwise then by Seed (I mean, then by the husk (where usually the Seed works)
as Rosemary, Mint, Sage etc. whose tops, or slips set in the ground, take from
whence they grow, and increase) yet in such as also in the Scions, Imps, and
Grafts of fruit Trees, the seed or prolifique part is dispersed, almost though
the whole body of the Plants, and Trees; whose manner of assuming a body from
the leffas terrae; and of that from the Element of Water, I have already
described.

And as I have showed the progress of Vegetable, and Mineral Seed from Water,
into all the visible clothings of their bodies; so now I would observe to my
self, how the Animal Seed, works upon that, which originally is Water: and from
that, does shape it self, according to the appointment of God, into a body
consisting of Blood, Flesh, Bones, Sinews, Nerves, Arteryes, Head, Stomach,
Heart, Spleen, etc.

First then, the Sperme it self is nothing else originally, but Water altered
by the several Ferments of the body, and circulated in the Seminal vesels, till
it becomes impregnate, with an efflorescence of the whole body, which indeed is
the Seed, or prolifique part thereof; for the Sperm is only the receptacle, or
vehicle of that Seed. Now when the efflorescence becomes maturated (For a Child
Chicken etc. whilst such, are not capable of prapagating their like) and that
the Spermatick liquor is thoroughly digested, in the vessels adapted for that
purpose; then begins that Titillatio (that sixth sense according to Scaliger)
or Prurigo Venerea, by which, being conveyed into a proper capacitated
Matrix, the efflorescence of the Masculine Seed, does impregnate, or breath
upon (for I know not how better to express it, then by a kind of occult
breathing) the Female passive Seed, which is a Juice, preparable from all the
Ferments of the Female body, and also circulated in their proper Spermatick
vessels, which conveyed into the Matrix, receives that prolifique Halitus or
breath of the Male's efflorescence; and that oftentimes, with the reception of
a very small part of the Sperme, the body of which, is mostwhat rejected, and
the very prolifique odor or breath thereof retained, which does become Succum
foemininum, qui complet (secundum Dei Opt. Max. beneplacitum illud, Crescite,
and Multiplicamini; For the Matrix never opens its foldings (utpote pars
membranosa, complicata, semini virili nutriendo a deo ordinata,) but at the
time of Conception; Nulla unquam fit (inquit Helmontius) plicati uteri
Expansio, in congressibus ut voluptuosis, nisi in ipso conceptus instanti; hinc
brutorum fere infallibilis conceptus. Therefore the opening of the Womb, is the
gift of God, in as much as it has a Regimen of its own, which, as to
conception, consists in a peculiar Magnetic Blass, not to be opened, or set at
work, at the will or pleasure, either of Male or Female; whence proceeds the
very cause of sterility, or barrenness; that though the parents have never so
eager a desire, to have Children, yet because the Expansio Vteri or opening of
the Womb, is not at their beck, nor subject to their will, we see many are
denied the blessing thereof; others, though they have no desire to Children,
yet often have many: so that the Magnetism of the womb, is not at the beck of
the humane will. Another cause of sterility, or barrenness is, Quum uterus
semen male imbutum, semel recipiens, illud rejecit, nec deinceps se aperit, ut
intro sugat invitum istius viri semen; for many times, a woman conceives by the
second husband, though she had been (as it were) barren to the first.

Now, as soon as the Matrix opens it self, by its proper Magnetism, and
receives the prolifique breath, of the Male efflorescence, contained in the
Sperme, the Feminine Seed, or circulated Succus becoming impregnate therewith,
then forthwith is the Matrix closed up; and deinceps nullus patet aditus semini
virili in intimos uteri thalamos, quanquam iteratis conatibus congressus
irritatur: The Seeds then begin to act upon each other, I mean the
efflorescence of the Male, to act upon the Feminine Sperme, and to make
intimate commixture, each with other.

Now in different Animals, the Formation of the Embryo, is somewhat different;
for in all Ov^parous creatures, the first alterative motion in generation, is
the Punctum saliens (according to the experienced Naturalist, Dr. Harvey, which
sends forth little streams of blood, which are coagulated into the vessels,
and parts of the body of the Animal out of the Albumen, which is nothing else,
but water congealed, by the Seed of the Cock, and the Hen: But in the humane
Feminine Matrix the conceived seed Per occultam Syngamiam, becomes an opace
liquor, being in puncto putrefactionis; of which mortification of the seed, the
anguish of sickness, faint fits, vomiting, provocation and nauseating of the
Stomach, gripings in the body, pains in the back etc. are sufficient Symptoms:
without two or three days, after the Turbines of this Seminal Juice, it
assumes (as Helmont observes) the similitude of a transparent Albumen.

The sixth day appears the Archeus utpote seminum Incola, tanquam vapor nubilus,
which after the thirteenth day, shapes the Seminal liquor, into the form of an
humane Embryo, which is then very minute, and, as yet, without Sexual
discrimination, being only an Vmbratilous figuration of the Microcosme.

Then does this Aura figurata, hide it self for a while in its own Chaos, and
soon after cloths it self with a visible Secundine, and then becomes impressed
with the Signature of the Sex, in which all the essential Organs of the body,
with their Topical Fermeats depending wholly upon the Specifical Seminal
Principles, become formed, and made manifest; which receive their increase from
the maternal blood, separated from the whole mass thereof by vessels fitted for
that purpose.

This Embryon Anchorite, in its first rudiments, is very small, and yet has
the exact proportion of all the parts belonging to the humane body; as I have
seen it, in an abortion, scarce half so big as my little finger, at about ten
weeks after Conception, which yet has had an uniform Symetry of parts, with a
visible difference of the Sex; whose constituent Principles has been so tender
and near to its primary Spermatick liquor, as that it has, sua spoute,
liquated, or melted into its primitive Juice, or Liquor it swam in; and that
because the tender Embryo is very near, to its Succus solutus or Primum Ens (if
I may so call it) and therefore, easily reducible thereinto.

The Plastic spirit which is in the Seed, and forms the Embryo, is that which
we call the Archeus, or Faber Plasticus, which by degrees (all other necessary
causes cooperating) awaken the Powers, depending essentially upon the seminal
Principles, forms the parts, brings forth the Ferments, strikes the Vital fire
in the heart, whence springs up the Anima sensitiva, illuminates the blood, and
Animal functions, with the Aura vitalis; and so out of one thing, gradually
brings forth another, whilst on the wheel of formation, until all the Parts,
Organs, Ferments, Animal and Vital Functions, be brought forth, belonging to
the formation and animation of the humane Embryo.

And as this Archeal Faber is concerned in the formation o^ the parts etc.
before the appearance of the Anima sensitiva, so also the Regimen of the
ferments, and management of the Vital concerns, is committed thereunto, after
the Vitality of the Embryo is performed, both as to the nourishment, and
increase thereof from the Arterial Blood, brought into the Matrix.

Now, the reason why women (during the time of Conception, and Maturation of
the Foetus) are frequently sick by fits, and have many troublesome Symptoms
upon them, even many times, till after the birth, is, because after the
nourishment of the Foetus which only takes the purest parts, and most defecate
Juice of the Mothers blood, for its refection; the remaining Sordes are many,
especially the Womb being the Cloaca Humorum, which now not being carried away
by the usual Emunctories of the Womb, do regurgitate into other parts, vitiates
their Ferments, alters the tone of the membranous parts, disturbs the Economy
of the blood, whence arise Gripings, Vomitings, Nauseatings, Pains in the Head,
Pains and Weakness in the Back, Febricula's yea sometimes Fevers in an high
degree etc. which also happen, many times, to women who have not conceived,
having aliquid amplius, and are denied the benefit of natural evacuation, by
that Emunctory; and therefore are subject to the like passions, and disorders
of health, as those with Child are; who are many times apt to romitings, though
indeed, there is another cause of the frequent illness of women with Child,
which now I have not time to mention, but it has relation to what was
mentioned in the foregoing Page.

And therefore to use gentle purgations, even in the first months after
Conception, is not so dangerous as Physicians usually suppose; and not only
harmless, but also of great use for preventing bad fits, and making them more
healthful, during the time of being with child: Nay I have known pretty strong
purges given, soon after conception, which has wrought pretty smartly, and yet
no prejudice at all to the Foetus; so that Physicians need not be so curious,
nor women at that time so cautious as by denying them the benefit of gentle
purges, to prevent them of that healthfulness, which otherwise they might much
more happily enjoy, then otherwise they do.

That there is a Sympathetical combination betwixt the Matrix, and the Stomach,
is evident; both because, if a good Uterine medicine be given, in cases of
Uterine discomposures, that many times, whilst the Medicine is yet in the
stomach, has an influence upon the Matrix composing the disturbances thereof,
and allaying the Furibund inragements of that unquiet Animal; as also in cases
of difficulty of birth, I know a certain Specific, of whose efficacy I have
had frequent experience, even to admiration: Which while it is yet in the
Stomach (especially if the birth be brought to Maturity) it opens the mouth of
the womb, enlarges the passages, unhingeth the Os sacrum and making the throws
effectual, expels the Foetus whether dead, or alive, which I have
experienced upon several Women, that have labored, one, two, or sometimes
three days in vain, and within half, or a whole hour, have been very safely
delivered; with the same and some other additions, I have known a Mola expelled
out of the womb, almost as big as my head; and to expel the afterbirth (those
Quisquiliae Matricis) nothing is more effectual; and all this, from the
influential virtue of a Medicine (whilst in the stomach) upon the Womb. But to
return:

All the Nutriment which the Foetus has, is either from the blood, which in
young women, or such as do not conceive, gives matter for the Natural
evacuations; or from the Succus Spermaticus digested, by a peculiar Ferment of
the parts it is circulated in: both which, saving that they receive a
particular and determinate difference by Ferments, are materially nothing else,
but water; out of which by the power of the Plastic Spirit, is the Foetus
formed, both as to the parts containing and contained, viz. both as to the
solid parts and vessels, as Juyces etc. but the specifical Ferments, are
peculiarly inherent, in the Syngamical Spermatick Liquor, which being gradually
transmuted into blood, by a further maturation of the Spermatick Principles,
becomes fettled in several parts of the body, after the following manner.

The Plastic Faber lurking in the Spermatick Juice, begins to hew forth the
form of an humane Embryo, out of that Albuminous liquor which is brought in,
together with the blood, from the Mass thereof, as Materials for this Animal
Fabric; ou^ of these two, by the Energy of its own power, it shapes the body,
gives a current to the newly engendered Juyces, in their own pellicles or
membranes, and begins to make these Juyces circulate, which as they circulate,
are coagulated upon the Solid parts, whence the Accretion thereof, and upon
some particular parts they impress a tincture, which retains a seminal
Character, being some separable parts of the circulating juyces which by
further maturation become radicated and essential Ferments, but are not yet
vital, till they are inspired with the Aura vitalis: thus one rises up after
another in the wheel of Formation; and thus all the powers and seminal
Characters of the prolifick Sperme, become awakened one after another, until
the Foetus become complete. Now, I say, the Ferments are nothing but levened
parts, separable from the primary Spermatick Juyces, with a seminal impression,
which makes them Essential agents, especially after their illumination by the
Aura vitalis; till then; they act not; and after that cease, their operation
also is at an end; for all the Art we have, cannot make them perform the wonted
Transmutations, after, as before death; and therefore as to their seminal
impressions, they are (as Helmont says) indemonstrable a priori, because they
owe their specifical Energy of Transmutation immediately to the Seed and
Plastic power thereof.

Now the Elementary Juyces, and blood brought into the Matrix, are nothing else
but a Carva of water, and so also the blood and succulent parts of the Embryo
are the same, yet further removed by additional Ferments; for the Plastic
Spirit awakeneth the Ferments and Anima sensitiva out of its own bosom; and by
the mediation of the Ferments, makes all those Transmutations, requisite for
the nourishment and growth of the Foetus. The subject matter that the Ferments
work upon is water; from this by the alteration thereof (as I said) by
Ferments, our bodies are shaped, nourished, and increased in the womb; and
after that, when we are brought forth, we feed upon Milk generally, and that
either of Woman's Milk, which is nothing but water or the succulent parts of
Meat and Drink, altered first by the Ferment of the Concrete we feed upon, and
next by the Ferment of the stomach and Intestines, and lastly by the Ferments
of the Breasts themselves, which perfects the Lucteous Cremor, or Milky Juice,
passing from the Intestines, by the Venae lactae, glandutes, and Thoraical
vessels, through the Mammilary Conduits into the breasts themselves; or of Cows
milk, which is nothing else but water, first altered by Seed out of the Leffas
terrae into Vegetables, and then again altered by the Ferment of the Cows
stomach, and lastly is complered by the Ferment of the duggs.

When we grow up to feed upon stronger meat, as flesh and the like, this is
nothing but the foresaid Cremor or milky Juice, transmuted, by other Ferments,
into flesh: For we see that when Cows are dried of their Milk, and have good
Pastures, that they then fatten a pace; because that which otherwise passes
into milk, and by the plenty thereof keeps them poor, is now, by other Ferments
coagulated into flesh, so that flesh is but water, yet further removed by
Ferments. And as for bread, which is the staff of Life, that, I mean Corn, may
be reckoned amongst Vegetables, which (with them) has its Original from the
Leffas, and that from water, and is only altered in its shape, from the seed
thereof, which gives difference to all things.

And for our Drink (as I showed before) it is nothing but water, which, whether
it appear under the form of Wine, Sider, Perry, Ale, Beer, etc. is nothing but
the disguises of water, altered only by Seed and Ferments. Thus like Plants we
grow from water, as if indeed we had taken rooting therefrom, and like
Amphibions we live, and walk upon the face of the Earth, whilst we feed upon
water.

Also we grow and increase in bulk, from water, until we come to our full
stature, and then the Ferments are most vigorous and active; for in the
beginnings of Animals, the Ferments are very languid, especially (I say) in the
Matrix, and therefore the Transmutations they make, are but very slender and
tennious; whence is the facil reduction of the minute Embryo into its first
Spermatick Juice or Elementary Liquor. In Children the Ferments grow stronger,
but yet is very weak; whence is their aptness to breed worms, which proceed
from a debilitude of the embalming Ferments: as Children grow up in years, the
Ferments grow more strong, and therefore they require stronger meat, and the
Transmutations of the Ferments are more vigorous; whence the bones and flesh of
young Men, become more solid and firm; and that increases till the body come
to its full stature: so that it is the vigor of the Ferments that gives flower
and strength to the body, and their defects give being to Diseases, make the
Spirits flag, the sinews shrink, and the flesh wast away, by a lingering Tabes;
and that too, oftentimes in the very spring of Youth; even, many times, whilst
we are upon the Meridian of our days, occasionally from the assaults of many
Diseases.

When we are once arrived to the Zenith of our Years, that the florid strength
of our bodies, are demonstrable Indexes of the agil vigor of our Ferments and
vital Functions, we stay not long here, but then begin to decline and to go
down the hill; our strength begins gradually to be impaired, and that, because
our Ferments and Vital Powers (when once mounted to their (...)) are labil and
in continual Flux (for so all mortal powers are, they begin, grow, come to
their full state, decline and come to a Period, either by a further
transmutation, or reduction into the first Hyle or primitive Chaos) therefore
they spontaneously decay, and with them the Fabric of the solid parts of the
body; so that old Men that live out the full number of days, do but spin forth
a longer consumptive thread, than others; they wear away with an insensible
Tabes, having their succulent parts dried up by the exiccating Blass of the
Air, and that through the deficiencies of the vital Ferments.

And thus Old Age performs that, at the long run, which a lingering Disease,
whose Seminals are deeply seated in any principal part, as stomach, lungs,
liver, veins, etc. vitiating the Ferment thereof, does in a less time, as
perhaps in a year, half a year, three months or less, viz. wear away the body
by a continual wasting or Consumption until the parts are reduced to a
Skeleton, which being after entombed in the earth, does (as all other bodies)
by the fracedinous odor thereof, Fatiscere in succum suum primitivum, legesque
aquae subire, turns into a sort of Leffas, and that, by a further reduction is
nothing else but water; not to say, what a great quantity of effluvia or
vapors (which for the most part are materially water) pass continually through
the pores of our bodies; perhaps, if duly computed, not much less than the one
half of the weight of the food we take in, and yet is nothing but water
circulated in our bodies, through various Fermentations, and at length reduced
to its primitive simplicity.

Thus we begin, we grow, we come to our full stature, from the operation of
Seed and Ferments upon water, whose degrees of vigor upon the material stage
thereof, gives the various Stadiums of Life: Then we bend to Diseases, we
decline, we die; when the vital Powers and formal Ferments march off the stage,
and have their exit into their primitive Hyle, and the body then, ultimately
reducible into water by the Fracedo of the Grave. Hence I conclude all bodies
in the Mundane System, whether Vegetable, Animal or Mineral, from water as the
material Element, and by Seed as the efficient Agent, have not only the
Beginning, But

THE END.
AN APPENDIX Concerning the ORIGINAL of SPRINGS.
1. IT is not the least part of Dr. Wittie's Book, to Discourse of the Original
of Springs, and therein to assert their original to be from Rain and
Snow-water; from the confluence of which two, he supposes all Springs to flow:
and that after this manner, viz. the Snow and Rain, falling from the Clouds in
great abundance upon the Earth, do by moistening the Superficies, cause it to
bring forth Vegetables; which we grant, viz. That the moisture exhaled from the
Sea and Earth, carried up into the Clouds, becomes impregnated with an
influential Nitrous Salt, or Sal Hermeticum (floting to and again in the
Atmosphere) And circulated or cohobated upon its Caput mortuum, the Earth gives
fertility to the ground, and makes it apt to bring forth Vegetables.

2. The remaining part, says he (except what suddenly runs into Rivers) sinks
down by secret passages into the earth, with which the Superficies does abound;
and in rocky ground it runs through the clefts, and by them is conveyed to the
Subterraneal Channels more or less deep, in the earth, where it is concocted by
the earth, and moves as blood in the veins, etc. We shall indeed admit thus far
of what he says, viz. That Rain and Snow-water are the proximate cause of all
Land-Springs and sudden Floods, silling the Porosities and Channels of the
Superficies of the Earth, the remaining part restagnates, till it find declive
Currents out of Brooks and Ditches into other Rivulets, and those again, by
further passages, swell into Rivers, and thereby cause inundations of low
grounds, till those Rivers empty themselves, by other intermediate ones, into
the Sea it self: But that the same should be the cause of the Fontes perennes,
viz. of Living Springs, I altogether deny, as shall afterward be evinced more
clearly.

3. This Water (says he) at length, in its passage through the veins of the
Earth, finds vent, and runs forth; which place of eruption we call a Spring or
Fountain: And this springing forth or eruption of the water, I conceive (says
he) to be made from its own natural inclination and tendency toward its proper
place, assigned to it by the Creator, which is the unequal part of the earth, it
not resting till it meets with its natural correspondent, the Air; under which
it must needs lie, because of its greater gravity, as above the Earth, by
reason of its levity: And this I think (says he) to be the natural reason of
its ebullition out of the Earth,

4. Here the Doctor has at once conceived and brought forth the causes (as he
supposes) of all manner of Springs, and their manner of issuing out of the
Earth, viz. from rain and Snow-Water, and their tendency in the Channels of the
Earth, to their proper place the unequal part thereof, For he having numbered
three general Opinions, concerning the Original of Springs, viz. first by
percolation of the Sea. secondly by transmutation of Earth, or Air into Water,
within the Bowels of the Earth. Or lastly by Rain or Snow, with the last of
which he closes. As for the second viz. the Opinion of the transmutation of
Earth into Water for the supply of Springs, it is so absurd, that its enough to
name it although the Dr. is too credulous, in telling us, he can easily
believe, That the thinner part of the Earth, may be turned into Water, as also
the grosser parts of Water, into Earth: So the thinner and more subtle parts
of Water, into Air, and the grosser parts of Air, into Water, arguing a
Transmutability of the Quaternary of Elements amongst themselves: which I wish,
he could make me believe too, by any ocular demonstration.

5. As for that Transmutation of Air into Water, for the supposed supply of
Springs, it is Aristotle's opinion; and Dr. Witty denying this Thesis, yet
says, that reason tells us, that more then ten parts of Air, will not serve
for the making but of one part of Water, I think (says he by Parenthesis)
twenty would be to little. But if I should be heard to speak in this case, it
should be Paradoxical; and that thus (viz.) that five parts of Air, would be
too much, and five thousand parts thereof, would be too little, for the making
one part of Water.

6. I shall therefore first, endeavor to impugn his Thesis of Snow, and
Rainwater, to be the Original of all Springs, by being Negative therein: Next
to which, I shall, assume a positive Thesis, from the Circulation of Water in
the Terraqueous Globe, by the mediation of Subterraneal Channels, from Sea, to
Sea: yea and from the Sea, to the Heads of Springs, from them into Rivulets,
and those again into Rivers, and those into the Ocean, and so circulate round.

7. First therefore that Snow, and Rainwater, should give Original to living
Springs (as we call them) cannot be, because then upon deficiency of Snow and
Rainwater, as usually happens, in long droughts, these Springs would certainly
fail: But we find the contrary, viz. that in long continued droughts, when all
Land-Springs are thereby dried, that yet the true Quick Springs are as fluent
as ever. Ergo, they are not fed by Snow or Rainwater. I cannot indeed, deny
but that Quick-springs, are not without their additional supplies, from
Land-Springs which are fed by Snow or Rainwater; and thereupon may, in long
droughts (having those auxiliaries drawn off) become less able to manage that
strong current they had before: yet does it not therefore follow, but that
these Springs, when solitary, fetch their Original deeper then Rain Water can
sink.

8. Yea, suppose we should grant, that some few of these Quick-Springs, should
(for the generality of them do not) prove deficient through long continued
droughts: yet this may very probably happen upon a double account. First,
because the Quick-Spring it self may be lengthened, by the additional supply of
a Land-spring, being (suppose) but an arm of that larger Channel, which is
carried under ground, at a greater distance, to another Spring, of a more
strong current; and therefore a drought, taking away its Auxiliaries, may
thereby break off an arm, and make it run in its strong single Channel, along
the Sabulum bulliens, to an other Springhead, where it glides currently away.

9. The next reason, why some few Quick-Springs (as I said) may in long
droughts prove dried up, is, because the Superficies of the earth, is so
exhausted of that Natural moisture, which should supple it for Vegetation, and
the like; as that it imbibes it into its self like a Spung, and the Spring
spends its stock, to moysten the thirsty earth about it, and so proves
deficient in its current, But when the earth becomes again satiated, by
irrigating showers, then, that which before was diverted to moysten the Earth,
finds its Channel again, and runs as fluently as ever.

10. The second reason, why Springs have not their Original from Snow and
Rainwater, is, because we find Springs break forth upon the tops of Hills, or
Mountains, which flow, even in the greatest droughts: Now if Rainwater should
at that season, only supply them, then of necessity, upon want of Rain, and
continuance of long droughts, these must be dried up; yea, and that very
speedily too, because they want a supply, from their essential constituent
Cause, which according to his Thesis is Snow or Rainwater: But, by experience,
we find the contrary, (viz) that Quick-Springs, even in long droughts, do keep
their current; therefore Snow and Rainwater are not the constituent, or
efficient Cause of Quick-Springs.

11. The third reason, that makes me scruple the Veracity of this Hypothesis,
is, because neither the Dr. nor the rest of the Assertors thereof, have duly
assigned the manner, or Method, the Pipes, Channels, or Conduits, how Springs,
having their Original from Snow, or Rain, should ascend and mount the tops of
Hills, and spring forth in the uppermost parts of high Heaths: And why upon the
truth of the assertion, they should not rather always be thrust down into
Valleys, and confined to low, declive places, as being more proper for the
heavy body of Water (according to their own supposition, of its being next in
weight to Earth) to descend then contrary (as they say) to the nature thereof
to ascend: To make Water climb a Hill, forcing it volens nolens up the inside,
when all the contrivance they have cannot do the same upon the outside thereof.
Methinks they should have endeavored to have extricated themselves, and the
world from these suspicious doubts, before they had imposed their Thesis.

12. For, by this supposition, a great part of Rainwater, falling (for the
supply of Springs) sinks down, by secret passages, into the Earth; What then
must force this Water, contrary to its natural inclination up the bank, to make
it spring forth out of the tops of Hills, and high places? Surely the
contrivers of this Hypothesis, had not their eyes every way, did not cast
about, to salve all the incident Phenomenon of this Doctrine. All the reason I
find Dr. Witty, gives, for its Ebullition out of the Earth, is a tendency
toward its proper place, which is the unequal part of the Earth: By which, it
should seem, that the Water (while in the Bowels of the Earth) is out of its
place, and therefore must by a certain force, ab extra as to its self, be
reduced to its natural place. What this should be, that may make the Water
recoyle, or drive upward, contrary to it: own Nature, the Doctor would have
done well to have assigned; For no body can be supposed to have a natural
tendency, in that where a force is imposed; but here is a natural tendency to
the proper place, viz. the unequal part of the Earth; and yet this is carried
upwards, a contrary motion to that that is proper to water: so that, in good
earnest, it implies no less then a tacit contradiction.

13. For he expressly says, That the Springing forth, or Eruption of the Water,
is not made by any forcible agitation, compulsion, or violence that is put upon
it, ab extra, within the Earth etc. but from its own natural inclination, and
tendency toward its proper place, viz. the unequal part of the Earth: and yet
these Springs sometimes break forth, in the top of high Hills, and in the
uppermost part of high Heaths, as (to go no further) that of Knarsborough Spaw
(the vitrioline I mean) is a pretty strong Spring, and yet is upon the
uppermost part of that high Heath, which in the greatest droughts, cease not
to spring: so that He and the followers of this opinion, must of necessity
grant, that either it is not improper, for water to ascend, and then they must
assign the true efficient causes thereof, that forces Water, after it has
fallen from the Clouds, and sinks into the cavityes of the earth, up again to
the Superficies thereof; and that too, to the tops of many high Hills: Or else
they must retrive their Opinion, that the unequal part of the Earth, is the
proper place of the Water: For if water (as in many Springs it is found)
ascends, and breaks forth above the level of Plains, (and that too without any
compulsive force) is a more firm argument, that the Water (whilst there) is
rather in its proper place, then when thrust forth into declive Places, along
the unequal part of the earth, where it does forthwith undergo Hydraulick Laws,
is ponderous, and runs down any Declive Current.

14. The arguments, Dr. Witty urges, for the confirming his Opinion of Rain,
and Snow-Water, to be the Original of Springs, are Three. The first of which
is, because it is found by experience (says he) that Fountains, and
consequently Rivers, are greater, and do abound more with Water in Winter, and
moist weather, than in Summer. To which I answer, That it is granted, that they
do (indeed) abound more in Winter, and moist weather, but yet I deny, that
therefore it should follow, That Fountains, and Rivers shuuld have their
Original therefrom: For it is only Land-Springs, or (at the most) a
Co-incidence of them with some few Quick-springs, that receive so great
increase from Rain, and Snow Water, as joined with declive Currents of Water,
that run down Hills, Mountains, and other steep Places; which fill Rivers, make
them overflow their banks, and drown the Fens, and other low grounds, in
Winter, and sometimes in Summer, by great sudden falls of Rainwater: whereas
Quick-Springs (saving their additionals, the Land-springs) are the same then,
as at other times: I mean as to their own Channels, from their proper source.

15. Secondly, In those years, when great floods of rain do fall in Summer, and
great store of Snow in winter we find (says he) Springs durable, whereas in
droughty Seasons, when there is but little, or no Rain, or Snow, the Springs
dry up. To which I answer, that first, as to the durablenes of those Fontes
perennes, the sudden falls of Rain contribute nothing; and that, because they
endure after the dreining away, and exhausting of the Land-Springs by continued
droughts: Whereas if the continuance of these Quick-Springs, did depend upon
those falls of rain; then would they, in great droughts (being denied of their
supply) also (as I said before) cease. The great plenty of water in wet
Seasons, do indeed (as I said) set the Land-Springs a-flote (yea and begets
other Springs that appear not at all in other Seasons, witness the Gypsies in
the Woulds in Yorkshire) which by the in-lets of Channels each into other, may,
for a time, increase the current of Quick-Springs, but adds nothing at all to
its durableness; for the earth is no sooner dreyned of the superfluous water,
which come by great falls of wet, but the living Springs (as they may not
improperly be called) are reduced in statu quo prius.

And, as to what he says, That in droughty Seasons, when there is but little
or no Rain or Snow, the Springs dry up. As to the truth thereof, I shall (I
say) appeal to the observations of all such Persons as have taken notice
thereof. A sure Proof of which, we had (he says) in England, in the Years,
1654, 55 and 56, when our Climate was dryer than ever any Stories mention, so
as, we had very little Rain in Summer, or Snow in Winter, most of our Springs
were dried up, even those sorts of Springs we call Fontes perennes: which (I
say) as to matter of fact, the Country People can testify was not so: and
though I grant, many Springs were, through the drought and penury of Rainwater
dried up, yet do I deny these to be Quick-Springs, excepting some few, which
(as I said before) might be diverted by the extreme dryness of the adjacent
thirsty ground, which might drink it up as it came, or by having its
Auxiliaries of a Land-Spring drawn off; or lastly, by having its current
intercepted and carried by longer stretched Subterraneal Channels into other
Springs. I must confess that it is more than probable that those Land-Springs,
which are ordinarily fed by Snow and water, and which supply many Draw-Wells,
were (indeed) dried up, for the most part, in those droughty Seasons: but that
the true Quick-Springs, those I mean which always run along the Sabulum
bulliens, or bubbling Sand, should be dried up in droughty Seasons (excepting
as aforesaid) is neither agreeable to reason, or observation.

17. A third reason, which (says he) persuades to this original from Snow and
Rain, is, Because in those Climates and Countries where little Rain falls, few
or no Springs and Rivers are seen, as in the Deserts of Aethiopia, and in most
parts of Africa near the Equinoctial, they have little water. To which I
answer, That though this seemingly be the most cogent Argument that Dr. Witty
urges for the vindication of this Opinion; yet I see no more that it evinceth,
than this (viz.) That in those places where there are but rare falls of
Rainwater, those Auxiliarie helps, and conveyances by Land-Springs (which in
other places by great dashes of Rain, fill other Rivers very plentifully) are
mostwhat cut off, and the simple Quick-Springs are left solitary, which as such
cannot make many Rivers, nor much swell those already made.

18. Hence in Egypt, where it Rains very seldom, they are supplied, instead
thereof, by the overflowing of Nilus; whose River begins to arise on the the
Seventeenth of June, swelling by degrees until it mounts to (sometimes) Twenty
four Cubits, though heretofore Sixteen was the most it attained to, represented
by that Image of Nilus, having Sixteen Children playing about it, brought from
thence and dedicated to the gods by Vespasian, in his Temple of Peace, and now
to be seen (as Sandys in his Travails faith) in the Vatican in Rome.

19. Which constant rising of Nilus at such a day (as aforesaid) is imputed by
Diodorus Siculus, unto the abundance of Rain falling on the Ethiopian
Mountains for Forty days together, at such time, as the Sun approaches Cancer;
which is affirmed to be true (says Sandys) by the Inhabitants of Egypt, who
receive it from Strangers, frequenting Cairo, from sundry parts of Aethiopia
and Libya, who come down with the flood, and bring with them Slaves, Monkies,
Parrots, and such like Commodities: Also before that time, for diverse days, the
Air is troubled, being full of black and ponderous Clouds, with a continual
rumbling, threatening (as it were) to drown the whole Country, yet seldom so
much as dropping, but are carried Southward by the Northern Winds, which
constantly blow at that Season.

20. Now these Clouds, being kept together by these Northern Winds, and not
suffered, by the force thereof, to be let down upon the Country of Egypt in
showers, are upon the reversion of the Peroledi, the soft Southern, or
South-East Winds, wheeling from an other point, make the hovering Clouds
discharge themselve; in great Rain for many days together, which falling upon
the Mountains of Aethiopia, are partly washed down from the Mountains,
immediately into Nilus, and partly (running into intermediate Channels and
Rivulets amongst the hills) are, at length, conveyed into Nilus, which together
make the River gradually to swell, from the Seventeenth of June, until the
beginning of August; at which time, they cut the banks, and let it overflow the
whole Country, for the enriching the Soil thereof.

21. Now that the overflowing of Nile, is from Rain let down near the head
thereof (which is found to be in the Province of Agaos, near the Kingdom of
Goia, in the Land called Sabala, in the top of a Mountain (whose Diameter is
not past one Foot and an half) is (I say) further apparent, because the
temperature of the Air, all over the Country is the same at that time as it is
in other places, where Rain falls in moist Seasons: For we see in our own
Island of Great Britain, where Rain happens frequently, that for some days
together the Air will be so cloudy and moist (and yet kept off from showers by
Winds that bear them up) as that it moistens the walls and floors of
Stone-buildings, and make the stones look wet and moist, as if it had actually
rained upon them, when not a shower has happened for many days together.

22. In like manner (I say) the temperature of the Air in Egypt at that Season
is very moist, yea so moist, as though we suppose it did rain, yet could it not
be much more moist; a Demonstration whereof, is this following Experiment, viz.
Take of the earth of Egypt, adjoining to the River; preserve it carefully,
that it neither come to be wet nor wasted; weigh it daily, and you shall find
it neither more nor less heavy, until the Seventeenth of June, at which day it
begins to grow more ponderous, and augmenteth with the augmentation of the
River: Whereby they have, amongst themselves, an infallible knowledge of the
State of the Deluge.

23. So that hence it clearly appears, that great falls of Rain upon the
Mountains near the head-Spring of Nilus, at such a Season, give increase to
that River; and that these Clouds, which contain that great quantity of water
(which well nigh would threaten the drowning of the Country) is carried over
the face of the Land by Northern Winds, which meeting with other Winds from
different quarters, are there stayed, and let down in great abundance upon the
Mountains of Aethiopia.

24. And whereas Dr. Witty says, That in Egypt there are no Springs at all,
I am very much apt to suspect the truth thereof; For how should the Inhabitants
and Travelers in that Country, be supplied with water (who Live and Travel at
remote distances from Nile) both for themselves and Cattle, their Camels,
Asses, etc. The waters they find, must needs be from Springs, and those
Quick-Springs too, because no Rain falls on the Country, to cause any
Land-Springs or Rivulets therefrom.

25. And although he seems to himself, to give a solution to that objection
made by Seneca, viz. That the greatest Rain that can fall, never sinks above
Ten Foot into the ground; by alleging that though into the solid earth the
Rain sinks not above Ten Foot: yet, What becomes (says he) of that immense
quantity of Rain which continues for many Weeks together, nay often times for
some Months, beside the infinite quantity of wet and Snow that is falling all
Winter long, causing inundations of water over all the Country round about? Can
it be supposed (says he) that Ten Foot of earth will drink up all this water?
To which I answer,

26. That in those great and long continued falls of Rain, which cause
inundations of water, the greater part thereof falling upon hills, champion and
high grounds, runs down into Rivulets, and from thence is conveyed into Rivers,
which coming suddenly overflow their banks, drown Marshes and adjacent low
grounds, but presently after are discharged into the Ocean. Now that Rain,
which falls upon low Fenny grounds, where the water has not that usual current
into Rivers, either restagnates upon the Superficies, and causes Marshes,
Lakes, Ditches, Bogs, etc. or sinks into the earth, especially where the crust
or course of earthy Clay, is but thin, before an other Fundus of Gravel or Sand
appear; for in some low moorish grounds, the outward Fundus or crust, is a
bituminous spongy earth, such are the Turf-Moors into which Rainwater sinks
deep; others are of a more stiff Clay or Marle (and those both high and low
grounds) which cause Rainwater to restagnate or lie long upon them.

27. So that, It Is the difference of Soyls, which makes Rainwater either sink
or lie above: where the Soil is sandy, the Rain sinks presently; and therefore
such Highways are the best to Travel in Summer or Winter-Now (I say) ten foot
is deep enough to contain all that which remains after the greatest part is
carried away by Runnels, and diverse Currents into Rivers, and those again into
the Sea; for I have observed that in two or three days Rain it has scarce sunk
a Graft-depth in our Garden-earth. But suppose we should say with Dr. Witty,
That by some secret passages into the caverns of the earth, it should sink much
deeper than ten foot: yet we shall meet with two difficulties, the solving of
which, will prove Ominous to the Doctor's Opinion of the Original of Springs.
The first is, How shall rainwater sink into the earth by empty crevises or
clefts, which I imagine he supposes to be at some distance from each other:
Now what is that that must bring the intermediate particles of water (which
fall between one crevise or cleft and another) into the distant crevises, He
should have done well, to have assigned those particular Conveyers before he
had determined these crevises. I am apt to think he has grounded his
supposition of these crevises and clefts, from those chinks and clefts in the
earth, which he has seen happen in a long drought; as if those were not forced
by the extreme dryness of its Superficies, and filled again upon the access of
Rain, when the earth being moistened, comes together, the Rain sinks no more
down those clefts or crevises, than down any other more solid part thereof.

28. Why might not he rather (and that more truly) suppose the earth to imbibe
Rainwater as a sponge: where it meeting with capillary veins (as I may call
them) or small pores (not clefts or crevises, which are scarce to be found but
amongst Rocks, and Rocky Soyls) sinks down by degrees into larger veins, and
those into Subterraneal Channels, where it makes Land-Springs, which supply many
Draw-wells; yea and many of them run into Rivers too, which help to keep Rivers
high in Winter time, above the ordinary pitch they are found to be upon
droughts.

29. The next difficulty that springs up (which indeed is the most
considerable) is, If Rainwater sink much deeper than ten foot into the caverns
of the earth (as he supposes) Then, what shall fetch it up again, to make it
supply Springs that are upon Hills or high Heaths, nay upon the very level of
Plains themselves? For it must be a retrograde motion of the same water, which
before descended into such low caverns of the earth -- Facilis descensus
Averni, Sed revocare gradum superasque ascendere ad auras, Hic labor, hoc opus
--

30. The next Objection he brings out of Seneca, and his solution, evince no
more than what we grant, viz. That there may be additional Land-Springs, and
that amongst Rocks, which receive their supply from Rain and Snow-water, which
upon droughts are dried up, and therefore are not Quick-Springs, whose
Original, I shall shortly hint to be otherwise; besides he acknowledges that
in solid Clay Soyls, it is very rare to find any eruption of water, because
such are sad earth, and have few or no caverns or channels in them: but our
Springs, Says he, break out ordinarily in rocky and gravelly ground,
especially the best and most lasting Springs, such as we call Fontes perennes;
which indeed is most certainly true, for they are not found but as accompanied
with a boiling gravel or sand, called by Helmont Quellem or Sabulum Bulliens,
which makes nothing at all toward the proving his Assertion.

31. The last Objection he brings out of Seneca, is, That in the dryest Soil,
where they dig Pits two or three hundred foot deep, there is often found great
plenty of water, which he calls Living-water, as not coming from the Clouds.
Dr. Wittie's Solution of which Objection is thus, From whence then should it
come? from the Sea? Perhaps (says he) the Sea is as many Miles from that
water, as the Superficies of the earth is feet from it. Suppose it were (say I)
What might hinder, but that water might be carried from the Sea, by
Subterraneal Channels, at far greater distances than so? If Seas communicate
with each other (as we shall shortly endeavor to prove) it must be by
Subterraneal Channels, many of which must be of far greater length.

32. Perhaps it may come, says the Doctor, from the Transmutation of Aer into
Water; for such a Transmutation, I cannot, says he, deny: so that (in short)
to me it seems as if he hovered between two, whether to ascribe the Original of
Spring Water, to the Transmutation of Air into Water, or to Snow and
Rainwater; Only he says indeed, It Is most probable to come from Rain; so
that, That at the hardest and at the long run carries it; yet that of the
Transmutation of Air into water, is not without its peradventure; and that he
thinks very well confirmed too, by an instance he brings in, which is, We see,
says he, Churches become wet, before Rain falls, from this cause. Why, What is
the cause? (viz) the transmutation of Air into Water: and truly, I am apt to
believe, that in moist weather, as sure as the Air is transmuted into water,
which moystens the Stone-Walls of buildings, so sure is Air in the Bowels of
the Earth, transmuted into Water; yea and so sure is the Original of Fountains
from Rain, and Snow Water.

33. I wonder the Doctor's Philosophy, in his second Edition, should not come
forth more maturate, then to adhere to this old, and long since exploded
transmutability of Elements, which has no true solid Basis to be grounded
upon: For if the watryness we find, in moist weather, upon stones of Walls, and
Floors of Buildings, be from the transmutability of Air into Water; and that he
informs us before, that reasons tells us that more then ten parts of Air, will
not serve for the making one of Water, I think, says he, twenty would be too
little: if so many parts (I say) of Air, be too little to make one of water,
and yet so much water is made (according to his own supposition) as serves to
moysten Stone-Walls, and Floors, in moist weather, before rain; then what must
supply the place, and fall into the rear, of so much transmuted Air: The water
thence made is but as onetoten, or twenty, which therefore cannot supply the
necessary vacancy, because one cannot make up nine, much less nineteen:
Wherefore a horrible vacancy would (if this Doctrine were true) long ere this,
have surprised the body of Air.

34. Yea and suppose we should, with him, admit of the possibility of the
transmutation of Air into Water, in the bowels of the Earth, for the furnishing
of Springs, [for such Transmutation (says he) I cannot deny], and keep our
proportion of twenty to one: What a vast Vacuum (long ere this) had the Mundane
Systeme groaned under? Which would have imposed one of these two grand
absurdities thereon, viz. either the circulation of bodies, one upon another,
(requisite for the maintaining the unity, and intirenes of the World) would be
intercepted, by the great contiguous Vacuums, which must follow, wanting other
bodies, so to tear themselves in pieces, as to supply the place of the
deficient Air; or else, those who live in the last Ages, or the longest, might
have cause to fear, least the same mishap might fall to their lot, as happens
to those poor Animals, that get into Squire Boyl's Airpump viz. to dye of
Spasmes, and Convulsions, through the thinness of the Air, which would be so
interspersed with contiguous Vacuums, made wider yet by the frequent
transmutation of Air into Water, as that we should not be able to live therein:
or lastly, we should constantly be exposed to the same injury, that those are,
who travail over the Mountains, called Andes in America, where the Air is so
thin, and rarefied, as they travayl not without danger of being stifled, for
want of Air: and therefore usually they carry Sponges moystened with Water, for
the condensing the Air, or the vapors therein; which Air is so disposed there
to Inflammations, as that Travelers (as the Ingenious Kircherus observes)
seem to belch forth flames, and being all in a sweat, appear as if incircl'ed
with Fire.

35. I must needs (indeed) grant, that the Air has its Vacuolums or little
Interstices, its texture being like a net, or spong, by which it becomes the
more capable of being as a vehicle, for transmitting rarifyed Water, and other
vapors of the Atmosphere, becoming thereby, the better Subservient to the
performing the great circulation of water, from the Sea, and Earth, up to the
Clouds, and from thence down again, to the Earth: but that the moisture in the
Air, should be reputed Air transmuted into Water, viz: That which falls upon
stone-walls in moist seasons, is so absurd, as it is enough to confute it to
name it: So that we may conclude, that the moisture in the Air, which settles
it self upon the Walls, and floors of Stone-buildings, neither is, nor ever was
Air: and that the transmutability of Air into Water, in the bowels of the
Earth, is impossible; and lastly that Springs, viz. the fontes perennes, have
not their Original from Rain, and Snow.

36. Thus I have run through the most considerable things which the Doctor
offers, in order to the confirming his opinion of Rain, and Snow Water, to be
the Original of Quick-springs, and all along (I think) have probably (if not
demonstratively) overturned his Opinion, together with the grounds, arguments,
and reasons thereof. I might (I confess) multiply more words, in prosecuting at
large, his whole discourse; but studying brevity, I have couched all he has to
say, that is any way pertinent to his purpose; saving the story he relates, out
of Dr. Heylin, concerning the Island of Cyprus, in the Mediterranean Sea, which
(without reflection on that worthy Author, who, as well as other Historians may
probably take many things upon trust) which I say, as to the verity of matter
of fact, I should very much scruple, viz. That a drought should continue so
long, as thirty six years, so as all the Springs, Torrents, or Rivers, were
dried up; and that in the days of Constantine the Great: It Is very probable,
he had it by Tradition, which many times to wing Fame, makes large plumes. That
an Island so near the Mediterranean Sea should want rain, for 36 years
together, would certainly put an ordinary credulity upon the Tenter-hooks, and
stretch a Thomas, beyond his ordinary pitch; for, of all places, Islands are
the most frequented with Showers: And that it should be done designedly by God,
upon a miraculous divine account, I do not well understand; because that has
its ends, and aims, for the punishing the Natives, where judgments are brought
forth, which done, they frequently cease; but here (according to the story)
they were forced to forsake the Island, and to seek for new habitations; so
that probably it may pass for a drought in Utopia.

37. And lastly, the two Rarities, he mentions, that are to be found; upon the
Castle-Hill in Scarborough. viz. the deep Well, which reaches to the bottom of
the rock, which has no water; and the spring-Well, which is within half a yard
of the edge of the rock, toward the Sea, which never wants water, which (he
says) does somewhat illustrate the point in hand: The first of which, seems
(to me) only to be a Well dug, within whose compass no Channels have
happened, and therefore it is dry; for so narrow a compass, as a Well is, may
sometimes happen to miss of subterraneal Channels. And as for the other, which
is so near the edge of the Rock, toward the Sea, which never wants Water, I
look upon it as supplied from the same cause, that other dug restagnant
Wells are, viz. from Land-springs, which are feed from Rain, or Snow-Water,
which yet makes nothing in reality, toward the confirming his Thesis; for it
is no current Spring, to the best of my remembrance: which yet suppose it were,
it will not be uneasy to conceive the manner, and way of its supply, when I
have propounded what I have to say, in order to the establishing a new Thesis,
which will be positive to the point in hand.

38. And that is (as I hinted before) from a circulation of Water, in the
Terraqueous Globe, by the mediation of Subterraneal Channels along the Sabulum
bulliens, from Sea to Sea; yea and from the Sea to the Heads of Springs, and
from them into Rivulets, and those into Rivers, and thence into the Ocean; and
so circulates round: which also includes an other circle of Rain, and Snow,
which first arising by exhalation from the Sea, and Earth, is carried down
again, upon the Earth, and Sea; joining Issue with rivulets from Springs, swell
Rivers, which again discharge themselves into the Sea.

39. So that a Circulation of water is as justly requisite (according to the
order, and appointment of the primitive Cause) for the upholding the Symmetry
of parts, and intirenes of the whole terraqueous Globe, as the Cirulation of
blood is necessary for the preservation of life, and vital functions in the
Microcosme or body of man: The earth can no more produce Vegetables, or
Minerals without this connatural circulation, of water replenished with
Celestial influences, than the blood in the body of man can produce Vital, or
Animal Spirits, requisite for absolving the functions of life, without its
inbred circulation: which concatenation of parts, in the circulation thereof,
gave cause to some Philosophers of old, to call the world, a great Animal;
either because that animarum omnia plena viz. that the Seeds of all things are
at hand, and at the beck of the primitive Fiat, always at work; or because of
the great Symmetry of parts, or coordinate circulations, of the constituent
Particles of the World, whose proportions were so exact, and actions upon each
other, in the circle of nature, so uniform, as if actuated by some Panspermion
or universal operative Spirit -- Spiritus intus alit, totumque infusa per orbem
men's agitat molem --

40. Not to say, how Analogous the Sea, and Hydrophylacia, those great Cisterns
of Water, and Springs of the Deep (that in Noah's Food, joined Issue with the
Cataracts of Haven, for drowning the World) are to the heart of the Microcosme:
nor how Analogous the Channels of the Quellem or Sabulum bulliens, which carry
the Waters into the uttermost circle of the Earth, for the supply of Mineral
Glebes, Minerals themselves, and Vegetables upon the Green Carpet thereof, are
to the Arteries, in the body of man; by which the blood circulates from the
Heart, for the nourishment of the whole: nor yet to determine the analogy of
these circulating Waters, further drawn up, by Solar exhalations, which clime
up the slender Threads of Aereal Siphons into the Capitol of the Air, to be
impregnate there with Celestial influences, or Animal spirits, (if I may so
call them) which cohobated upon their own body, promote vegetation, yea and
animation too, by becoming that cibus occultus in aere, of which, the
Cosmopolite, and other Hermetical Philosophers, discourse at large: I say, not
to determine the Analogy of these Waters, replenished in their circuit with
Heavenly influences, with those Animal spirits in the little World, Man, which
in the Head, receive a determination, for obsolving the functions of sense and
motion

41.. Nor lastly, to determine thoroughly the Analogy of water (whilst
circulating in the bowels of the Earth, along the Channels of the Sabulum) to
the blood, whilst circulating in the Veins and Ar^^ries of the humane body:
though (I confess) to illustrate this Point, will not a little conduce, to the
solving some Phaenomina, incident to our Thesis.

42. And first, we see that blood (whilst circulating in its proper vessels)
knows no such difference as either going up or down; For it to ascend the
Aorta, and from thence up into other Arteries, which are carried into the Head
and Arms, is the same, as to descend by other Vessels, into the lower parts.
The nourishment, the blood gives, in the habit of the body, whether carried
upwards, or downwards, is the same: yea it ascends (with as quick a motion) as
it descends, and that because it is carried in its own proper vessels, and moved
by the Systole of the heart, whose vibration to parts (whether upwards, or
downwards,) is equal.

43. Now in like manner, Water whilst circulating from Seas, and the
Hydrophylacia, and carried in its proper Subterraneal Channels, along the
Quellem, is in its proper place, and becomes the Mother of Mineral Earths,
Minerals, Metals, Stones, and Marcasites; and so long knows neither up, nor
down; and can as easily (whilst in these Channels) climb up the tops of Hills,
and Mountains, and there make Springs, as break forth in Valleys, and in the
Level of Plains: yea it can as well mount the tops of Hills, and high Heaths,
as the blood in the Arteries, can ascend into the head: and all by the natural
circulation of Water, set on work by the Original Fiat, for the upholding the
functions of the Terraqueous Globe, where (if such a thing be in rerum natura)
you may view the Perpetual motion.

44. Now that the Quellem, or Sabulum bulliens is the proper Conduit, and
Subterraneal Channel, for water to circulate in, whilst in the bowels of the
Earth, is hereby apparent, That a true Quick-Spring, never breaks forth, but
this sand also appears; yea where ever any dig in the Earth for the said
Springs, they are not found, but at the bottom or verge of the Fundus of
Mineral Earth, Clay, or marly ground, where sand is always seen to break up,
with the living Spring, which frequently breaks forth under the Channels, and
banks of Rivers (whence it is that plenty of sand is wrought up in Rivers) also
in Plains, Valleys, Heaths, Hills, and Mountains, or in any places thereof,
dug for Springs, are found, (as I said,) store of this Sand.

45. And that there are Subterraneal Channels, by which Sea's, at great
distance, communicate with each other, will appear, first, if we consider the
Ocean (which is the whole bulk of waters that compass the Globe of earth) is
but one, which receives different names according to various Regions it
washes; as Oceanus Atlanitcus, Germanicus, Deucalidonius, Septentrionalis,
Tartaricus, Aethiopicus, Mare Arabicum, Mar di India, Mar Del Nort, Mar Del
Zur, or, Mare Pacificum, Archipelagus, etc. And there is no Inland Sea, which
receive Rivers, and let none forth visibly, but they communicate with the Ocean.

Thus the Mediterranean Sea, is joined to the Atlantic Ocean, per Fretum
Herculeum, and to the Red Sea by occult Subterraneal Channels, as the Story
(related by Kircherus) of the Dolphin first taken in the Red, and soon after in
the Mediterranean Sea: So the Caspian by the mediation of Subterraneal Channels
is annexed to the Euxine, or black-Sea, and this to the Aegean, and that to the
Mediterranean. Thus these great Seas in Asia communicate with each other,
according to the mind of Scaliger, Wendeline, and Kircherus: So the Baltic
communicates with the German and Deucalidonian Seas by the two Arms, Bosnicum,
and Finicum, per Fretum Cymbricum.

46. In like manner the Asphaltick Sea or Mare Mortuum in Palestine,
communicates with the Red Sea, by the same Subterraneal Channels, and thereby
are conveyed into the Ocean: So the Lake Zaire in Aethiopia, by the same
manner, empties it self into the Ethiopian Ocean; And that great River in
Aethiopia called Fluvius Niger, flowing from the Lake of Nilus, and being shut
up, by a Chain of Mountains, in the Kingdom of Nubia, where privately breaking
forth of the Western part of the Mountains, empties it self by Subterraneal
Meanders; where, meeting with several other Rivers, increase them, and at
length is carried into the Atlantic Ocean: After the same manner the River
Tigris in Mesopotamia, being carried through the Lake Arethusa, meets with
resisting Caucasus, thrusts down its head, into a large den, and after a great
space of ground, peeps up again; where scarce passing the Lake Thospis, but it
is begirt again with other Mountains, and hides it self again in Subterraneal
Channels, and breaks forth 24 Miles, on the other side of the Mountains, then
continues to flow, and near Babylon is let into Euphrates.

47. Now I say, that these Inland Seas, Lakes, and great Rivers, do
communicate with each other, and at length, are carried into the main Ocean;
and that this is done by Subterraneal Channels, will be apparent as follows:
First that the Caspian has intercourse with the Euxine, or black Sea, by such
passages, is evident; because it receives into its bosom, a constant flux of
great Rivers, and lets none forth (visibly) by any arm into the Sea; and and
yet, notwithstanding, is not at all increased; and Kircher guesseth, that
before the deluge, it might be contiguous with the Ocean, overrunning all the
Sandy Deserts of Tartaria, and afterward was broke off by the Chain of the
Mountains of Caucasus. This is only conjectural, but however it appears, as if
it were a Lake shut up on all hands, having Rivers let into it, but none let
forth; and yet shows no footstep of inundation, and therefore, must of
necessity, have communication with other Seas by private Channels. The same is
also further confirmed by observation, That has been made upon that Sea (as
Kircher reports,) by Paradia Persa in Geograph. viz. that when ever the Eastern
Winds have ruled strongly over the Caspian, at the same time in the Euxine Sea,
the boylings has been observed greater then wonted, with a great agitation of
the whole Sea: And on the contrary when the Western Winds blew strongly, upon
the Euxine, the like perturbations have been seen, in the Caspian Sea; and when
the Caspian has by the agitation of winds, emptied it self into the Euxine, it
is again replenished by the like secret passages, from the Persian Sea, which
is done by a kind of Charybdis, or Vortex, along the shore of the Sinus
Persicus, whereby the Sea, seems to be (sometimes) drunk up with a notable
decrease, which, by a fresh flowing of the Sea, the Vortex is hid again: So
that the Caspian, by Subterraneal Channels, receives a supply, from the Persian
Sea, and by the like Channels communicates, with the Euxine Sea.

48. That the Asphaltick or Mare Mortuum communicates, by the same hidden
passages, with the Red Sea, is evident, because, upon the coasts of the
Red Sea, which looks toward the Deserts of Arabia, at the noted place, called
Eltor (as the inquisitive Kircher relates) where (not far from the shore, from
the bowels of the Sea) is found, at sometimes, great plenty of Naphtha and
Bitumen which comes from the Bituminous Sea, called Mortuum, from its Lentor or
toughness; it is called also Mare Asphalticum, from Bitumen, of which it has
great plenty; whose shores have great store of Bituminous Pits. Into this Sea
Jordan runs, which having no other way to empty it self, but by these
Subterraneal Channels, carries along with it its Bituminous offspring into the
Red Sea, and that by a Chanel of 62 Leagues, for so far is the Asphaltick, from
the Red Sea. The same happens to all Seas, Lakes, and great Rivers, which
receive others into themselves, but let none forth by visible arms, and
therefore do it by Subterraneal passages.

49. Other Lakes there are, whose Superficies lies level with that of the
Hydrophylacia, and therefore are as Springs of the deep, kept for a reserve,
for the furnishing (upon occasion) the grand Circulation: Many other Rivers,
besides what are named, do hide their Channels in the Earth, for many miles
together, and appear again, as the Rhine in Germany, Padus in the Alps: but
especially Guadiana, of old called Anas a River in Spain which runs under
ground, in a subterraneal Chanel, for 32 Miles together, and breaks up again;
which gave occasion to the Spaniards to boast of their great Bridge, which will
feed so many thousand Sheep: also the River Rye in Yorkshire (as Dr. Witty
acknowledges) runs under ground a quarter of a Mile, and then appears again.

50. And as by this Circulation of Water, all Inland Seas, Lakes etc.
communicate, by Subterraneal Channels, or by visible arms, one with another, and
at length with the common Ocean it self: So by the mediation of the same hidden
pipes, conveyed along the Sabulum, the Water circulates, from the Seas, and
Hydrophylacia unto the Spring-heads, which breaks forth at great distances,
either in Levels, Valleys, Hills, or Mountains.

51. Now to determine the cause of the Waters rising above the Level of the
Superficies of the Sea, up into the tops of Hills, and Mountains, a motion
seemingly (and indeeed really according to the Hydrostatick Laws of water,
considered as Extravasated) contrary to the nature of the weight of Water, will
be here very considerable, being the main thing, objected against the
Hypothesis of Springs taking their Original from the Sea. To the better
understanding of which, we shall propound.

52. First that this Thesis supposes, and has hitherto partly proved, a
Circulation of Waters, or a running round, from the Ocean into Inland Seas,
and Lakes, and those into each other, and back again into the Ocean; but whilst
running into each other, they also run along other Subterraneal Channels, at
great distances under the Earth, until they break up into Springs, Fountains
and Rivers, and those often (as I said) above the Level of the Sea: Now in
every Circulation or Circle, there is (strictly) neither beginning nor end,
because round as a wheel or ring; so that wherever you determine a beginning in
a Circle, there also is the end.

53. But that we may be the more demonstrative, I shall, for better
apprehension, determine a beginning of this Circulation; and that shall be from
the Sea, and from the efficient cause moving the Seas, which will be the last
again in the Circle: and this we suppose to be the Winds, Storms and pressure
of the Atmosphere upon the surface of the Seas, together with the influence and
Ellipsis of the Moon, which (probably) gives being to the Flux and Reflux of
the Sea, by causing a depression of the waters, at two opposite places in the
Terraqueous Globe, and an accumulation of the Seas, answerable thereto, in the
two other Quadrants of the Globous Circle; which swelling of the Sea, is always
opposite, each Tumor possessing a whole Quadrant of the vast Ocean: these
Tumors roll about the earthy Globe in Twenty four hours, thereby agitating the
whole bulk of the Seas, and driving up the waters by the Subterraneal Channels
into the Hydrophyl^cia, and from thence by Hydragogal Siphons, up Hills,
Mountains, and high Heaths, to the heads of Springs and Fountains.

54. That there is (besides the weight of Clouds, Storms, Winds, etc.) a
pressure of Water by Air, is evident in common Hydrostatick Experiments; for if
you put down a glass- Tube into a vessel of water, you will find the water in
the Tube to be above the level of the water in the vessel, and that for no
other cause than that the pressure of the Air upon the surface of the water in
the vessel, is stronger than the resistance of that Air that is pent up in the
Tube; and that it is so, is evident, because if you stop up the upper end of
the Tube with your thumb or the like, you will find that the Air in the Tube,
not having the liberty of recoyling, becomes strong, and presses so much upon
the water, as that it raises up the water in the vessel to such a height,
proportionable to the compass of the Tube; which I have thus tried, by taking a
pint-white-Viol, filled with water to about a fingers breadth of the mouth,
into which I let down a glass- Tube, stopping the upper end closely with my
thumb, the Air in the Tube would so press upon the water, as that the glass
would (in a manner) be quite full: but upon removing my thumb, the water would
immediately run up the Tube, two or three fingers breadth above the level of
the water in the Viol, and bubble up to and again, till it settled a little
above the surface of the water in the Viol: and that still because water
follows the strongest impulse of Air, which while the Tube is closely stopped,
bears down the water, and raises it on the surface thereof; whereas when the
Air in the Tube has liberty again, then the water being pressed by the Air upon
the Superficies thereof, mounts up speedily above the level of the water in the
Viol.

55. So in like manner we see in a Weather-glass which is (suppose) a Globe or
Egg-glass inverted into a vessel of water, which if you do, without altering
the tone of the Air in the glass, the water rises very little within the Tube;
and that because of the resistance that is made by the unaltered Air in the
glass: but if you heat the glass, and thereby thin the Air, you will find the
water to ascend gradually to a considerable height, above the level of the
water in the vessel, which suppose to be done in the foresaid pint-Viol, and
you shall see the water five or six fingers breadth above the surface of the
water in the Viol: which when cool, set it before the fire, or expose it to the
heat of the Sun (so the heat be proportionable) and you will find it descend as
fast, as it ascended before.

56. Which argues, That Air, when altered by heat, gives a different (and that
a less) pressure upon the body of water, than when it is in its natural
texture; and therefore, upon the attenuating of Air, by heat, in an inverted
oval glass, the water seems to be drawn up by a kind of Suction, as some would
have it, or to prevent a Vacuum, as others think: but most probably (if not
demonstratively) it ascends gradually, and sensibly, for this cause (viz) That
when the Air in the glass, which before by heat was attenuated, is either by
cold reduced into its pristine form, or having (as so thinn'd) but a languid
pressure, is therefore by a more strong Elastick force of Air, upon the surface
of the water, forced up, till it come to such a height as the pressure of Air
within, and that without the glass, are brought to an Aequilibrium or equal
poysure; I mean till the springy power of the Air, within and without the
glass, be of an equal force, and there it stands, till the springy power of the
Air within the glass, by heat, becomes dilated, and then it forces down the
water in the Tube, and makes the water in the Viol rise higher, proportionable
to the degree of the attenuation of the Air.

57. That the Air receives a considerable alteration by heat, is further
confirmed, by the experiment of inverting a glass Cucurbit, over a Candle,
fastened with tallow upon the bottom of a glass or earthen Basin (wherein water
is first poured, to the height of two or three fingers breadths) where the heat
of the Candle does so weaken the spring of the Air within the Glass, that it
wanting the help of the circulating Air (always requisite to the perpetuating
the motion of bodies) which is intercepted by the body of water, that in stead
thereof, the Water it self circulates, being forced thereto by the spring of
the Air, that presses upon it from without, and therefore it rises up to a
great height of the glass-body (as I have sometime seen upon trial thereof) and
puts out the Candle: which Experiment seems somewhat to contradict the former
of a Weather-glass, though in reality it does not; for although there heat
makes it descend, but here it makes it ascend: yet if we consider, that in that
of the Weather-glass, the Air in it is first thinn'd by heat, before the glass
be put into water, and therefore when it is condensed by cold, it draws up the
water, or rather, the water is forced by the outward Spring of the Air, and
follows it to an Aequilibrium; but in this last Experiment the glass is
inverted into water, without any previous alteration of the Air therein: which
being to supply the motion of a body, viz. the burning of the Candle, does it
for a while, but wanting a fresh supply from other Air without, to promote the
Circulation thereof (always necessary for the motion of bodies) the want
thereof makes the strong spring of the Air upon the surface of the water, to
force up the water it self, into the glassbody: From which Experiments, result
these following Corollaries, viz.

First. That a Circulation of Air, is requisite for the motion of all bodies;
the Candle in the glass we see extinguisheth for want thereof, by forcing up
the water in lieu of Air.

Secondly. That Air may be attenuated by the heat of the Sun, whereby the same
portion of Air may be made to extend it self over a larger space, witness the
heating the glass, in the first of the two last Experiments.

Thirdly. That this Air thus attenuated and extended by the heat of the Sun, is
the reason why culinary fire dies or goes out, when the Beams of the Sun are
cast upon it, because they thin the Air, and the Air is the natural Bellows of
Fire, which Fire burns according to the intenseness or remisness of the Air.

Fourthly. That the Air thus thinn'd, makes way for water to ascend up the
small veins thereof, which are like so many slender Siphons, by which it mounts
from Earth, Waters and Seas up into the Clouds, for the supply of Rain and
Snow; which Siphons, in droughty hot weather, are mostwhat at work, carrying it
upward, whereas in moist weather, the water descends by the same Siphons, and
moisten the Ground with Dew, and Walls or Floors of Stonebuildings, in wet
Seasons: so that the reputed Exhalations of moisture by the Sun, for the supply
of Rain, is no other than this gradual steaming up of slender Siphons, whereby
water mounts insensibly the uppermost part of the Atmosphere.

Fifthly. That in great heat of weather many Diseases happen through the
thinness of the Air; for the Air in the Lungs, is the Bellows of the vital Fire
in the Heart, which if it become attenuated, either through a general heat in
the Air (whence arises frequently some Epidemical Disease) or through the
obstructions of the Lungs themselves, whereby the Air, for want of foundness of
Organs, becomes thinn'd before it come to volatize the Blood, in its current
from the right to the left Ventricle of the Heart, causes Faintings,
Lassitudes, Candialgia's, Asthma's, Deliquiums, and (in Women) Swoonings,
Palpitations, rousing up the Spleen and Mother, etc. yea (in fine) makes the
Lamp of Life burn dark and dimly; whereas the Air, by cold, being reduced to
its pristine form, and the Lungs freed from obstructions, quickens the vital
Ferment, sharpens the appetite, makes the vital Fire burn clearly, and makes
evident, that the Ferments of the several Digestions are vital; for in cold
weather, we find our appetites more acuated, our Ferments more vigorous, and
the Digestions more powerful. But I will not (though I might) here further
enlarge to show how the Air in a due order, contributes to the invigorating the
Ferments, and how much it conduces in the change thereof, toward the curing
Diseases. But I proceed.

Sixthly. And (which chiefly concerns our present purpose) assert, That the
heat of the Sun, contributes (by thinning the Air) toward the circulation of
water, from Seas to Springs, and from water upon the earth, to Clouds; For the
Sun whilst he is (suppose) in the Northern Signs, especially toward the
Tropic of Cancer, casts his rays pretty powerfully upon those Places, which
are within the oblique position of the Sphere (though not perpendicularly, as
it happens to those Places, situated under the right position of the Sphere,
where the Equator cuts the Horizon at right Angles) whilst he is (I say) in
the Northern Signs, by his heat he thins the Air of those Regions; especially,
as those Places fall under the Meridians, as some Places must always do (the
Sun in his supposed Diurnal Circuit, making Twenty four Meridians) the Air
under these Meridians (especially in those places where the Sun is, or inclines
to be Vertical) being attenuated, makes the Air circulate the more strongly
toward the other Quadrants of the Terraqueous Globe, causing there a stronger
pressure upon the Surface of the Seas; and this must be constantly done,
because the Sun (really, or apparently) is always in motion about the Earth,
who in his Circuit thins the Air of those Places, which lie most directly under
his Beams, and so makes the Air (as I may say) split it self (I mean as to its
uniform texture) toward the Poles, where it causes a constant pressure upon
the Northern and Atlantic Ocean, and upon the Mare del Zur or Pacificum,
toward the South; as also driving the Clouds (whilst he is Northern) into the
South side of the Equator, enough almost alone to give Being to Springs, by
forcing the water along the Subterraneal Channels, up at great distances upon
the Continents.

Seventhly. That Air, attenuated in one place of the Atmosphere, is as much
condensed in an other part thereof; and what it is deficient of force in that
thinn'd part, so much more it is of force in the other; so as to give a
proportionable pressure, answerable to the weakness of its Spring elsewhere.

58. Now the natural pressure of Water by Air, and of the upper parts of water
upon those below, is by perpendicular lines; and that by Vorticles, as
Archimedes, and after him Des Carts and Kircher demonstrate: Natural (I said)
because accidentally by Winds or Storms, the motion may be oblique; so that
supposing the Seas to be at their bottom perforated in many places, with
Subterraneal Channels and secret Vortices, the surface of the Sea being pressed
with Winds, Clouds and Storms, the circulated and condensed Air (which recoyls
from the other thinner part of the Atmosphere, where the Sunbeams have
attenuated it) together with the oblique motion of the Flux and Re-flux of the
Sea, begins the motion toward the grand Circulation.

59. For the Superficies of the Ocean being pressed by the foresaid weight,
sends down its water by Subterraneal Channels into the Hydrophylacia or common
Cisterns of water, which are the Springs of the Deep, where it not only comes
to a level, with the surface of the Sea, keeping a Horizontal Parallel
therewith (which any water will do in a Siphon or duplicated Tube; though
unassisted by any considerable pressure of the Air) but also, by the force of
the pressure upon the surface of the Sea, it is easily carried up above the
level thereof, into Hills, Mountains and high Heaths, which breaking forth,
give Being to Springs and Fountains, which run into many Rivulets and from
those into larger Rivers; especially joining issue with Rain and Snow-water,
and from Rivers are again carried into the Seas.

60. That this is a Circulation, whereby water is carried in a round, is
apparent, because the Seas being pressed by the foresaid natural Causes, are
carried, by Subterraneal Channels, along the Sabulum bulliens, breaks forth at
Spring-heads, in Valleys, Hills or Mountains, runs along into Rivulets, which,
with showers, moisten the earth, and then carried up again by Aereal Siphons,
in droughty Seasons into the Clouds, makes the Atmosphere ponderous, which,
together with Winds out of Subterraneal Caverns, and the strong Spring of the
Air, recoyling from the rest, attenuated by the heat of the Sun, together with
the Current of all Rivers into the Sea: All these (I say) jointly together,
conspire the pressure of the Seas again, into the heads of Springs; and so
still more on in a circular motion: and that in order to the supplying the
grand Concerns of the Terraqueous Globe, both for Mineral and Vegetable
productions.

61. That the Air does press, is evident in Pneumatick Engines, as that of the
Wine-Coopers Bellows, which will by the mere pressure upon the surface of Wine
from Air, force forth the Liquor into other vessels; the same happens in Pumps,
which by forcing forth Air, carry up the water; as also if a pair of Bellows be
so contrived, as to be placed over a vessel of water, closed up on all sides,
with two Pipes going to the bottom of the vessel, so ordered as whilst the one
Bellows is drawn up, the other falls down with its flap, which, pressing upon
the surface of the water, makes it yield, which finding no other way, will
mount up (suppose two Pipes which are carried into a Cistern at a competent
distance) above the vessel, which again being let forth by an other Pipe at the
opposite side, falls into a chanel, which carries it upon a Water-wheel, and
gives motion (suppose) thereto; the Axis of which, turns about a square handle,
to which is fastened the handle or pole of the Bellows, poys'd upon a leaver,
placed equally betwixt the two Bellows: so that as the water runs out of the
Cistern it turns about the wheel, and that moves the Bellows, which pressing
the water in the vessel, forces it up again into the Cistern, and so in a
round; whereas if it could so be contrived, that this water which moves the
wheel about, should by an other chanel, be conveyed into the top of the
water-vessel, it might give a good probability of finding out (at least fairly
hinting) a Perpetual Motion: A Type of which may be seen in Kircherus his
Mundus Subterraneus.

62. So in like manner, the surface of the Seas, being pressed by the foresaid
causes, which jointly together conspire its pressure, as the bellows does the
water in the Vessel, they force it up along Pipes, or Subterraneal Channels, to
the Head of Springs, and Fountains: Which Pipes, by how much the more they are
oblique in their windings, by so much the more easily, the Water is carried up
to the tops of Hills, and high Grounds.

63. And as the Air, by its own innate Spring, does press, so sometimes it
becomes more weighty, by having the burden of Clouds lying and pressing upon
it, which also contributes to the former pressure upon the surface of the Sea;
For we see, that when the Clouds are about to discharge themselves in Showers,
and that in large drops, that they so compress the texture of the Air, as they
cause a Wind commonly to go before each Shower, which is nothing else, but a
Latio Aeris, or Motion of the Air, from the pressure of the Clouds, and the
greatness of the drops, which compress the Air, and bear it down, till it has
made its thorough passage to the Earth, whereas, when the Rain comes down in
small drops, and thin threads, it passes gently through the Vehicle and
Colander of the Air, without any considerable pressure thereof.

64. Now for further Demonstration, let this following experiment be observed,
where suppose (See Figure 1 in the Scheme at the end of this Book,) an Oval
Glass, with a long neck, reversed signified by a, b, c, and a Glass concha
annexed thereto, by k, k, k, with a little Pipe noted by e. Now let us imagine
the Oval Glass first to be heated, whereby the Air contained therein, becomes
thinn'd: then immediately let water be poured in at c, by a Glass-Funnel, ^^g:
i. page: 320
diagram Fig: ii. page: 321
diagram till the Tube is filled at the parallel F, G, where the Spring of the
Air in the Oval A, A, A, is so weakened, as that when the cold gradually comes,
the Air concentering it self thereby, the water in the Tube falls from F to N,
O, or H, and rises up as much from G to L L, or M M. But when the Spring of
the Air, in the same Oval, is set fresh a work again by heat, it gains a fresh
pressure, and forces down the Water from M M, L I, G to I, and raises up the
water answerably, in the other side of the Tube, from H to O, N, F; and thence
to K K K, and C, where it comes forth into the Concha, and thence runs out at
the Pipe C E.

65. So in like manner, the Air in the Atmosphere, preffeth by its Spring, set
on work by the foresaid causes, upon the Surface of the Sea, which lies in
Right-Lines with the Hydrophylacia, according to the Line F, G, which may
represent the level-surface, both of the Sea, and springs of the deep: Which
being pressed at G toward I, raises up the Water, from F toward C, which
represents high Hills, and Mountains, where Springs break forth, either at C,
or E. Hence we see, that as the Spring of the Air is invigorated, or weakened;
so its pressure upon water, is more or less.

66. The second Figure (See the 2 Figure of the Scheme) is the same, save the
Oval which it wants, having instead thereof, a small Concha, where the Air from
without has a free pressure; and that part of the Tube to be larger, and the
other part reversed, to be much smaller: which suppose to be filled with Water
at A, where by the Solitary pressure of the Air, contained within the cavity of
the Tabe, made by the Palm of the Hand laid thereon, forces the Water, which
is in the Pipe A B C. with a great sure, from F to C, and that too, a great
Height above C: in the same manner the Air in the Atmosphere being pressed with
Winds, Storms, Clouds, and condensation thereof, and the like causes aforesaid,
forces upon the surface of the Sea (which with the Hydrophylacia are always
at an Aequilibrium according to the Line F G) beyond the Aequilibrium F G, into
the Concha's of Mountains E, K, C, which are much higher then the Mathematical
Circle of Water (I mean then that circle of Water, from which all Lines drawn
to the Center, are equal): So that, supposing a constant pressure, upon A, or
G, which is certainly done at all times by some, or all of the foresaid causes,
the Water must as constantly be pressed from F, to K, and C; and there as
certainly make Springs to break forth: for from the same causes always at
work, the same effects are always produced.

67. Hence the great difficulty may easily be resolved, why Springs are
sometimes found upon the tops of the highest Mountains; and that because the
bulk of Waters, to be carried above the Aequilibrium F. G. is in a manner
insensible, in comparison of the great weight, and pressure of the Water in the
Ocean: and that thus (as the ingenious Kircher computes) that the Semidiameter
of the Earth is 3600 Miles, of which 60 answer to every Degree of the Aequater:
which Semidiameter is computed from the Superficies of the Sea, where the lines
(as I said) from any part thereof to the Center, are equal: and seeing that the
Basis of Mountains are level with the Mathematical globous earth, so that the
tops of these Mountains, must be very protuberant: Therefore it only remains
to be demonstrated, how much higher the Sea ought to mount be. yond its
Aequilibrium F, G, or Periphery of its globous circle, to make Springs break
forth on Mountains. 62.

Fig: iii. page: 323
diagram

68. To which purpose, suppose the line (See the 3 Figure in the Scheme) A B to
be the Semidiameter of the Earth, 3600 Miles long, which terminates in the
line, D, E, which cuts the Superficies of the Terraqueous Globe in the point B.
Now suppose the height of the tallest Mountain, to be C, which added to the
Semidiameter of the Earth, A, B, will produce the line A, C, which expresses
the top of the highest Mountain: Therefore as A, B, is to B, C, so is the
Semidiameter of the Earth, to the highest Mountain, so is 3600, to 30, with
which computing the immensness of the surface of the Ocean, pressed on all
hands with the foresaid causes, makes it very easy to apprehend, how readily
Water may be carried from the Seas and Hydrophylcacia, to the heads of Springs
in the highest Mountains.

69. For the proportion, betwixt the Semidiameter of the Earth 3600, (together
with the vastness of the immense Ocean, forced by the Spring of the Atmosphere)
to the Line, B, C, viz. the top of the highest Mountain 30, is in a manner
insensible; and the more insensible, by how much Hills, or Mountains are less
in height then 30 Miles: insomuch that (as the learned Kircher observes) the
Pick of Teneriff: Olympus in Asia: Aetna in Sicilia: Caucasus in Asia: Otho in
Macedonia, would as to their proportion, with the vast Ocean, disappear: whence
he concludes, (Unde infero (inquit Kircherus) Oceani aquas, sive fluxa
refluxuque, sive tempestatibus, ventorumque vi, sive nubium descensu pressas,
nullo negotio, etiam in altissimos vertices montium, ejaculari posse.

70. And as this pressure of the Sea, by the said causes, is constant, and as
constantly keeps Springs, and Fountains in flowing upon Mountains, and remore
places upon Continents, so also thereby the Hydrophylacia are always kept
filled, from whence, as from a Storehouse, the Alps comprehended by France,
Germany, and Italy, pour forth so many Torrents, and Rivers, which by a
perpetual current never have ceased, nor never will (as long as the Wheels, and
Springs of Nature, are kept at work, by the Great Master Mechanic of the
world) cease to flow: from which Springs of the deep, Danubius, Rhenus,
Mosella, Mosa, Rhodanus, Arar, Padus, Ticinus, together with other smaller
Rivers, have their supply.

71. Besides, Some Springs seem to emulate the Flux, and Reflux of the Sea, as
that which Pliny tells us of, in the Gades, which observes the motion of the
Sea, in ebbing, and flowing: and perhaps that in the Peake of Derby-shire, may
be from the same cause, which ebs, and flows every 12 hours: And how Dr. Witty
comes to be sure, that this last (together with the Spring at Giggleswick in
Yorkshire) has no correspondence with the Sea, he might have done well to
have informed us, that we might have been as sure as he.

72. As for the Spring at Gliggleswick, which ebs, and flows many times a day,
we may (perhaps not unaptly) attain to some Footsteps of the knowledge
thereof, if we remind (what I have already delivered above,) viz. that if a
glass Tube, stopped close at the one end with ones Thumb, and the other end let
down into a Vial, or other vessel full of Water: as soon as ever the air gets
liberty, by removing the thumb, the Spring of air from without presses up the
Water 2, or 3 Finger breadths above the Level of the Water, and bubbles up to
and again for a while, then settles to its ordinary pitch; which is an exact
resemblance of the Spring at Giggleswick and such like.

73, For in these Springs, the Air is so pent up, by the streightness of the
Channels near the Springhead, and by the denseness of some interposing Glebe of
earth: which may, and does probably for a time, very much, (though not totally)
intercepts the motion of the Air, which hinders the Spring from flowing always
to high, (as if the Air had liberty it would) therefore it only flows at that
time, when the pressure of the Water forces it through the dense Earth, and
gives thereby liberty for the Air, which before was pent up: for we see in all
Hydrostatick Experiments, that water follows Air, as well as Air circulates
after Water; and that Water always obeys the more strong impulse of Air,
though it be to ascend to a great height.

74. Now having run through all the causes, and demonstrated the reasons of
those causes, which promote the grand Circulation of Water: it is now time to
consider the final End, Aim, and Intention of the first Mover in Nature, who
sets all these Wheels, and Springs a going, in the great Clock-work of the
World, and who orders all things in Time, Weight, and Measure; and that to the
end, that one part, and Wheel, may mutually promote the motion of an other,
that all the parts, and motions thereof, may jointly conspire the good, and
intirenes of the whole. But that we may (in some few particulars) view the
Wisdom of God, in ordering this Circulation of Water; and that it is not done
in vain, but has its various uses, and those of larg extent, for the benefit
of man, and other Creatures, and that as follows.

75. First, Waters, by this great Circulation, are kept from putrefaction, and
corruption; motion being to Waters, as it is to the vapors in the Air, viz.
hinders them from corrupting, and as wind fan the Air from putrid vapors, so
motion keeps Water from Stagnating, and consequently from putridness: and
therefore a piece of raw flesh, laid in a constant current of Water, will keep
from corrupting a considerable time.

76 Secondly, In times of drought, when Land-Springs are mostwhat dried up,
These viz: the Springs, Rivulets etc. contained in the great Circulation, serve
for the use of Man, and Cattle; and that in places, at great distance from
large Rivers: for the Quick-Springs, constantly moving in the great Wheel, are
never dry, and that by reason that, where the cause does perpetuate, the effect
must do the same, but the causes as aforesaid are always at work; therefore
Springs (I mean Quick-Springs) must never fail, as long as the Fabric of the
World is upheld by the same Fiat, as at first.

77. Thirdly, By great Rivers, which are made of Rivulets, and Fountains, which
in the great Circulation, run thereinto, we can easily pass from one Place, and
Country, into an other; and that by Oaken vessels, which if the Water, whether
in Rivers, or Seas, were Stagnant, could not move thereon half so well: so that
in Ships, by the motion of the Sea, and Winds, we visit foreign Countries; and
the Merchants Traffic abroad, and that for a general good of Mankind.

78. Fourthly, By this grand Circulation, all Mineral Springs, for the health
of man, are produced; For the Water circulating in the bowels of the earth
(being pressed by the foresaid causes) as it meets with various Mineral Earths,
and Salts, becomes impregnated with the Tinctures, or tastes thereof, making
some slight solutions of the Mineral juyces into it self, passes on to the
head of the next Spring, where breaking forth, makes Spaws of different sorts,
as Vitrioline, Alluminous, Nitrous Salinous, Sulphurous etc, according to the
nature of the mineral Glebe, the Water passes through to the Springhead,
whence is the great variety of Waters

79. Fifthly, Water by this great Circulation in the bowels of the Earth, being
dispersed (as I may say) by capillary veins, into the whole habit of the earthy
body, is coagulated by various Ferments and Specific Mineral, or Metalline
Seeds, into such like Bodies: For (as we have else where demonstrated) Water is
the Material subject of all Minerals, and consequently of Metalline Bodies; and
that it needs only different Seeds, with their various Archeal Ferments, to
shape it into all sorts of bodies, found in Vulcan's shop, each according to
its Seminal difference. For from whence proceeds the great variety of all
Stones, Marcasites, Minerals, Mineral Earths, Metals etc. but from Water shaped
by Seeds, and Ferments into bodies under various disguises? Which here, by this
grand Circulation, is always at hand, and ready for the Seminal Faber or
Vulcan to work upon.

80. Sixthly, This circulation, joining Issue with that lesser one of Rain, and
Snow, Impregnated with Celestial influences, does make the ground fruitful,
and makes the Superficies thereof, bring forth all manner of Seed: Bearing
plants and Trees, according to the kinds of the first Seeds, or Seminal
Principles, implanted by God therein, at the first; and so being impregnated
with the Salt of the Earth; promotes vegetation upon the green carpet thereof:
For when when I view Plants, and Trees, in their Verdure in the Spring or
Summer times, methinks, I see nothing but Water altered by Seeds, and Ferments,
which thereupon ( Proteus like) puts on various Garbs, and appears in different
diesses: and to me its as easy to apprehend, how Water moved by the foresaid
causes, rises up into Hills, and Mountains, there breaking forth into Springs,
as to conceive, how Water rises up into the tops of the highest Trees, and
there to bud forth into leaves, Fruit, and Seed: or how between the Bark, and
bole of the Tree, Water should ascend up, like as in Siphons, and that in some
Trees, without any considerable alteration of taste, or consistence, from simple
distilled Water, save a slight touch of a Medicinal Odor; as for instance, cut
a Vine in January or February, but especially in March; and you shall find it
weep forth a deal of insipid Water, at the knots or joints where it is cut: so
if you wound a Branch of the Birch Tree, or lop the bole thereof, in March; if
it be done below, near the ground, the Latex thence issuing, is a mere insipid
Water; but if a Branch, of about 3 Fingers thickness, be wounded to the
Semidiameter thereof, and filled with Wool, it Weeps forth a Subacid Liquor in
great abundance, insomuch that in one day, such a wounded Branch, may give 8 or
10 pound of that Liquor: concerning the virtue whereof Helmont says, Qui in
ipso lithiasis tormento solatur afflictes, tribus quatuorve cochlearibus
assumptis, viz. that it gives help, in the torments of the Stone, being taken
to the quantity of three or four spoonfulls: which he says, is Balsumus
Lithioisis merus: which great quantity of Water, must come from the root, and
that must receive it by its Fibers, from the Capillary Veins of the earth,
carried thither by the grand Circulation of Water, with its included circle of
Rain and Snow, which (the one meeting with the other) becomes the material
subject of all Plants, Trees, and Fruits of the earth, which earth is only the
Matrix, where water becomes coagulated, by the Fracedinous Odor thereof, and by
the Fermental operation of Seed, into all sorts of Vegetable Concrets, which
spring up in the Superficies of the Earth. Now the Medicinal virtue that this
Liquor has, is from a Ferment which it receives from the Tree, as it passes
along the Channels thereof; for the same Liquor, weeping from a wound of the
bole, near the Earth, has not that virtue; Therefore it must be from a
Medicinal Ferment it receives from the Tree above that place: also if a Pompion
be cut (while it is growing) will (as a Friend of mine told me, upon his own
trial) run a great deal of a limpid Water, which by the heat of the Sun, will
be congealed into a pulpie substance: and that because the Water, which comes
for the nourishment thereof, has received a Specifical Ferment from the
Pompion, which if it were entire, would presently be coagulated for the growth
and increase thereof, but being let forth by a wound, is at last, by the heat
of the Sun, coagulated into somewhat Analogous thereto: so probably Melons,
Cucumers, Hollands Squash, etc. would, if wounded, do the like; for they have
great store of Water, which comes for their supply, which by the Ferment of the
Plants, is easily coagulated into the pulpous substance thereof: so the heads
of wounded Poppies, weep forth a considerable quantity of Liquor, which
condensed by the Sun, becomes Opium, or the heads of the same bruised, make
Meconium. In both which, Water is the material subject, which passing up the
secret Meanders of that Plant, is by the Ferment thereof (particularly
appropriate to that Plant, and its kinds in the same family) determined into
that coagulating juice, of which Opium and Meconium is made; and so of the rest
of Plants, Trees, and Fruits. Thus we see how Water (in the great Circulation,
taking in the lesser of Rain, and Snow, which is repleted with a volatile
Nitrous Salt, the one joining issue with the other) becomes the Material
subject of all Vegetable Fruits of the Earth.

81. Seventhly, And lastly, The Circulation of Water, passing through varieties
of Glebes, in the Meanders of the Earth, makes different Waters of various uses
for the service of man: as for instance some Waters will bear Soap, and Yeast,
viz. River-Water; and some River-Water better then others: also some Waters are
better, and more peculiar for Bleaching, dying, Washing, Brewing, salving,
boiling of Meat, etc. than others.

82. Now the great difference, as to the common use of Waters, is betwixt that
of Springs, and that of Rivers; for the Rivers are generally supplied from
Springs, in the round of our Circulation, yet passing along the Surface of the
Earth, and sometime running down Hills and steep places in torrents, and mixing
with Rainwater, as it runs along into Rivers, it both may and does give a
considerable difference to Waters in Rivers, from the same, as running
immediately from Springs: and that because it washes over several sorts, or
soyls of Earth, as Marle, Limestone, Manured ground, and the like, where it
licks up the Nitrous Salt, wherewith several Sorts of Earth, are repleted, and
by the help of this, becomes Saponary, viz. bears Soap well, bears Yeast,
bleacheth well etc.

83. Whereas simple Quick-Spring Water, passing through the Colander of the
Sabulum, is frequently drein'd of all the Salts, it had imbibed in other more
Patent places of the Earth, and perhaps only retains a small portion of a
minute Sabulum, inconspicuous in Water, but remains visible after distillation
thereof, or being little indiscernable Fragments of some Marcasites, or Stones,
which it razeth off, as it runs along: which water (I say) being percolated
from all Salts, through the strainer of the Sabulum, has not that Saponary
property, that River-Water has; and therefore will neither wash, bleach, nor
bear yeast. Besides, many Land-Springs, which drein through Nitrous Earth,
empty themselves, by their proper Channels, into Rivers: Which also frequently,
upon sudden falls of Rain, overflow low grounds, and so do wash from thence a
Nitrous, or Alkalizate Salt, which contributes much to the making River-Water
more useful, for the common intentions of Washing, Bleaching, Brewing, etc.

84. For, that which makes Soyls more fertile, makes Waters also more useful,
which is an Alkalizate or Nitrous Salt; For what does Limestone, Manure, Marle
etc. add to the enriching of Soyls, but either by impregnating the ground with
a Nitrous Salt, or making the Earth to become more Magnetical, to center upon
it self the Volatile Nitrous Aereal Salt, which floats to and again, in the
Atmosphere: whence it is, that the Countryman lets some part of his tillage or
arable ground, ly fallow every year, on purpose that this Nitrous Salt which
circulates in the Air, and is the main wheel of Vegetation, may coagulate it
self upon the ground, made fit thereto, by the addition of Limestone, Marle, or
Manure, and thereby become fitter to bring forth many fold: which if the ground
be exhausted of this Salt, as in a few years, by bringing forth much Corn, it
will, then it becomes barren, until it be manured by dung, ashes, limestone, or
marle, and is laid fough or fallow (as the Countryman calls it,) which in the
conclusion, impregnates the Soil again, with a fresh Salt, or spirit, whereby
it is made fruitful. You are the Salt of the Earth (says our Savior to his
Disciples) which, if it has lost it is savor, wherewith shall it be salted: So
that the Earth has a Salt which makes it fruitful, and the loss of that Salt
makes it barren and useless.

85. As for Limestone, that contributes to the manuring, and enriching of
ground, after a double manner; and that first by communicating its Alkalizate
Salt (which it has in it) to the ground, and next (which indeed I think is the
chief) that it becomes as a proper Magnet, to attract (if such there be) or
center upon it self, the volatile fructifying Nitrous Salt, which floats in the
Air: in which I am confirmed, because the Countryman observes, that though it
be quenched already with Water, or Rain, before it be thrown upon the ground,
(as most frequently it is) yet nevertheless, it makes the ground as fruitful,
as if it were not; yea Lime, that has laid long, and that one would think has
had all its Salt washed from it, if it be thrown upon impoverished ground, will
yet make it fruitful. The same will the Faeces of Soap-Ashes do, after all the
Salts are washed, both from the Ashes of Breccans or Brogg (as they call it)
and from the Lime: which is much used (where it is to be had) to lay up grounds
to fertilize them. And that certainly for no other cause, but that it helps, as
a proper Magnet, the Nitrous Salt to settle upon that soil: whence it is, that
they plow that ground often, thereby exposing new parts of the Earth to the
Air, to become impregnate with the Salt thereof: so dung, and ashes have Salts
in them, the one a volatile, the other a fixed, but are both much altered by a
Ferment both from the Air, and Earth, before they become transmuted into the
Leffas terrae, or are turned into the true fructifying Nitrous Salt: Also Marle
does enrich Soyls two manner of ways; the one is by having a Nitrous Salt
inherent in it self, as I have found, by imbibing it in distilled Water,
Filtering, and Evaporating, where I have had actually a Nitrous Salt: The next
way is, by being as a Magnet to the Nitre in the Air, to make it settle upon
that Soil, where Marle is most found; therefore that Soil which is naturally a
Marle, or is (at least) well manured therewith; keeps in heart as the
Countryman says) the longest, and will need little, or no other assistance,
for many years, because its a proper sort of earth for the fructifying salt in
the air to settle upon, which makes that soil hold fruitful the longer. And
from the different dispositions of ground, in order to the degrees of reception
of this salt in the air, the great variety of soyls proceed.

86. And from the same cause, it is very probable that the fertility of Egypt
is promoted, by the overflowing of Nilus, for Rainwater does contain of this
Salt, which (as I said before) being carried over the Country by Winds, are not
let down, (save what moisture drills down by the Siphons of the Air) till the
clouds come to the Mountains of Aethiopia, where being let forth in great
abundance, they wash down along with them a Nitrous Salt from the Earth of the
Mountains, which still adds to the fertility of the ground; and that the Air,
at that time, has plenty of this Nitre in it, is found, because if a turfe be
dug up from the ground (as they usually do, to know the height of the flood)
and weighed, they do find it to increase considerably, as the Water does in
height, with a moisture, which is impregnate with a Nitrous Salt: For the Earth
of that Country is very Magnetical, and therefore is fertile, without showers
falling immediately thereon and in lieu thereof, has plenty of dews (which
commonly has the greatest quantity of the fructifying Salt in them) and the
flowing of Nilus, which River is strongly impregnated with this Nitrous Salt,
from which much Nitre is made, and brought into these Northern parts.

87. Yea, all the great difference of natural Soyls, (for some far exceed
others in fruitfulness) seems to depend upom this very hing, viz. that some are
naturally more replete with, or at least, are more magnetical of the Nitrous
Salt, then others.

88. Thus we see, that it is a Nitrous Salt, that both fertilizeth Earth, as
also makes River-Water serviceable for the foresaid uses: for as it
distinguishes Earths, as to their fruitfulness, so likewise it makes the
difference betwixt River and Spring Water: and that it does so, I am confirmed
by an experiment I tried, for my better information therein viz. I took of a
Well-Water in my own ground, which is supplied by a true Quick-Spring (though
it never runs over, because in our greatest droughts, it is never nere dry) I
took (I say) a gallon or more of this Water (which alone never bears Soap,) in
which I caused two dragmes of Nitre to be put, over night: which heated the
next morning, I ordered the Maid to put some of the usual Soap thereto, and to
wash me some linen therein, which she did, and it made a very good Lather (as
they call it) and was as fit for the purpose (and perhaps better) then if she
had taken so much River-Water: The like (I suppose) Spring Water would do, if
it were suffered to run through a Tub filled with Earth: especially if that
Earth has not been too much exhausted of its Nitre, by previous Vegetation.

89. So that we see that Water in its great Circulation, with its included
circle of Rain, does (in its passage through, or over such Earths, pregnant
with this Nitrous Salt) become so much salturate therewith, as to make
River-Water useful for the foresaid purposes, toward which, as also to
Vegetation, Rainwater does not a little contribute, by carrying along with it
the influence of this Acreal Salt: for it will bear Soap, and Yeast, and I
suppose, Bleach as well (if not better) then River-Water: not here to say, how
much dew, especially May-dew, is replenished with this volatile Nitrous Salt,
which contributes not a little to the Vegetation of the fruits of the Earth;
nor to say what key to a Philosophic Menstruum is hereby hinted: concerning
which, consult Sendivogius and the Tractate de sale Philosophorum, Tilemannus
his Appendix and other Hermetical Philosophers.

90. Now to conclude, as Water in the grand Circulation, in the Bowels of the
Earth, meets with different Salts, and Mineral Earths, it becomes the subject
matter, wherein these work upon each other, and make Mineral, or hot Springs:
and that from a nitrous, or volatile Hermetick Salt, floating as well in the
Air of the Caverns, as above the Earth, which being condensed upon a proper
Magnetic, or Virgin-Earth, which the Water, in its passage, runs thorough,
dissolves the Salt, and after meeting with a Mineral Earth of Sulphur or
Sulphur vive, makes an ebullition therewith, and not being carried far, breaks
forth in a hot Spring, witness the experiment of Monsieur de Rochas in his
Tractate, De Aquis Sulphureis, which I find placed at the latter end of the
Sixth Volum of the Theatrum Chymicum who tells us, that finding a hot Spring,
near that Mountain, whence the River Padus in the Alps takes its Original, and
desirous to search out the cause thereof, dug along its Chanel, with
Laborers for 15 days together, who found as they came nearer to the source, the
hotter was the current, and that too, though the Mountain was covered with
Snow. [But first he evaporated 40 Ounces of the Hot Spring Water, and 5 was
left of a slimy matter, which being further examined, gave three Ounces of a
Sweet, and fusil Salt; the rest was a slimy fat matter, which by Fire, shows
it self to be of a Sulphurous Nature] after digging as aforesaid, he found the
Original of the hot Spring, by observing a very great ebullition with much
froth: who, to search yet further, dug on for three hours along the Chanel
of the same Spring, and found the Water beyond it to be very cold, which was
the Current of the same Spring, and had lost both it is taste, and heat.

wherefore he took a part of that hot Earth, which seemed to give heat to that
Spring, and also some of the Water, in the very source, tried them both, found
the Earth to be a pure simple Minera of Sulphur, and found the water to be
impregnated with a Salt, which he calls (for want of an other name) Sal
Hermeticum, by which, it was manifest that the spirit or salt contained in that
water, by penetrating the substance of that sulphurous earth, was the cause of
the great Ebullition: which is the same as in pouring Water upon calx vive, or
in making Tartaruns vitriolatum. But, to be further satisfied, he ordered the
Laborers to dig 12 days longer; and found the current to be clear, and sweet,
like ordinary Fountain Water: but the Earth to be Salt in taste, with which the
current of water was impregnated; and therefore he examined the Earth, by
infusing it in Rainwater, decauting off the clear as it was settled: the one
half whereof he boiled up in a Copper Vessel, the other part he distilled in a
Glass- Alembick, to try whether way would yield the more Salt: and found much
less, both as to quantity, and quality, in that done in the Copper-Vessel, than
in that distilled in the Glass-body. Then he infused this Earth again in the
same Rainwater, and found a Salt of the same nature as before, but less in
quantity: which extraction he repeated a third time, but found no Salt at the
last. The earth therefore he exposed to the Air, and found after a time, it was
impregnated with the same Salt; which Salt being separated, and the Earth
become insipid, upon being exposed to the Air again, was freshly impregnated
with the same Salt; which he did also a third time etc. with the like effect:
by which he gathered, that, that which renewed the Terra mortua (as he calls
it) was the Spiritus Universalis or Anima Mundi, or, as I said, the volatile
nitrous Salt, which is to be found both in the Earth, and the Atmosphere. Which
experiment, though it should have been inserted in our discourse of hot
Springs: yet is not very impertinent in this place; because after all this
digging they found no bottom, or beginning of the Spring it self: and was the
same current whether cold, or hot; whether saturate with that Hermetick Salt,
or insipid; and therefore might probably, by its Channel, come from the Seas,
in the great Circulation, set on work by causes aforesaid.

A TERNARY OF Medicines, FOR Curing most DISEASES.
HAving, in the foregoing discourses of my Hydrologia Chymica, had occasion to
treat of the Essential, and efficient causes of many Diseases, as the Palsy,
Apoplexy, Asthma or Shortness of Breath, Scurvy, Dropsy, Hypochondriack
Melancholy, Fevers, etc. and there, only in a cursory manner, hinted the most
effectual Spagyrical remedies, as the Treatise it self will show, I shall,
here, in order to the practical part, comprize most of them in three Catholic
Medicines, whose use are of large extent, and may (with a little Latitude) be
called, Universal Remedies, answering the three grand Indications or Requirings
of Physic. Those be 1. Cathartick, or solutive: 2. Cordial or expelling of
Wind: 3. Diaphoretick or Sweating. The first I call Scorbutic Pills, or Pills
proper against the Scurvy 2. The second is called Elixir Proprietatis or
Cordial Elixir 3. The third I call Diaphoretick or Sweating Pills.

These three Preparations are composed of the best, and most useful Vegetables.
The Menstruums, and Salts, wherewith they are extracted, are graduated to the
highest pitch they are well capable of, viz. by Digestions, Circulations, and
Distillations, being exquisitely depurated from all Phlegms, and Heterogene
Faeces: The very Salts, and Meustrnums, given alone, are Midicines of no
inferior order, being abstersive, and aperient of the Vessels: but further,
They also open the bodies of Noble Vegetals; and being impregnate with their
additional virtues, become very considerable helps to nature, to proscribe what
is noxious, and combersome to the digestions (which is the cause of
flatulencies, or Winds) and to fortify, and strengthen the vital Ferments, in
their functions for the health of the body.

The operation of these three Medicines are innocent, safe and harmless, as I
have found them, by frequent, and constant experience; and not only so, but
also I have found them very succesful, in order to the cure of diseases: with
which three, rightly prepared, I had rather choose to manage a practice, than
with so many score of the vulgarly prepared shop-Medicines, whose larg
portions, and Farraginous mixtures, rather oppress, and nauseate the
digestions, than give any laudable help, in the proscribing that which is
noxious, or strengthening to the vital powers.

And first, as to the Scorbutic, or Cathartick Pills which are proper against
the Scurvy: That being a disease which though at its full state, it vitiates
the ultimate digestion, and whole habit of the body, with its various Symptoms;
yet (as you may see further, in our discourse of Diseases) the first Seminaries
thereof are laid in the Stomach (viz) in the error of its Ferment, which by
some recremental Faeces being clogged, and hindered from making a thorough
digestion of the alimentary Juice, lays a foundation for the vitiating the
subsequent digestions. For as the Ferment becomes clogged, and thereby weak,
the more Sordes are every day heaped up in the Tunicles of the Stomach, which
does still add to the debilitating the Specifical Ferment thereof; toward
which, conduces the plentiful drinking of Ale: and that often not thoroughly
fermented, or wrought but thick, and muddy, which leaves abundance of dreggs
upon the Stomach, dinting and dulling the Ferment thereof. Also the great use,
of late, of Sugar, both in Sweet meats, Drinks, and Sauces, do not a little
clog the Ferment, and add to this disease; so the eating of Salt-meat, and
Rye-bread, by reason of an Aliennted sourish Ferment therein, which not being
Similar, to the Acid Ferment of the Stomach, begets flatulencies, and leaves
much Sordes, especially to weak Stomachs to which disease, also the plentiful
feeding upon varieties of Dishes, and the too often eating, and drinking,
between meals, before one part be digested, and carried off, an other part is
freshly thrown down: which sometimes, makes that part of the nutritive Juice,
which should have passed forth, stay longer than of right it should, and
thereby become too much Fermented, which over-acidness thereof passes
uncorrected into the second or third digestion, and so vitiates the blood
therewith: which also, in the Fabric of the Animal Spirits, vitiates that
prolifique offspring: whence proceed Scorbutic Palsies, and Apoplexies etc.

And we frequently find, that those who indulge their appetites too much (as
many do, who make it most of their business to eat, and drink at all times of
the day) as also those who foster, and debauch their Stomachs with strong
cawdles, are the most apt to have this disease of the Scurvy, and it various
Symptoms, creep upon them; and after all this indulging of their appetites,
with plentiful variety of food, many add to that, idleness, or want of
exercise: the want of which, in the midst of plentiful feeding is the speedy
way to bring this disease, and that accompanied with Asthma's or shortness of
breath, with which we see many (who are addicted to sedentary lives, and yet
feed high) are very much troubled, which I may properly call, a Scorbutic
Asthma. Upon this account of the depravation of the Ferment of the Stomach,
whose error is continued down to the following digestions, thereby levening it
self with the whole mass of humors of the body, this disease of the Scurvy
(with an inseparable Flatus, or wind of the Stomach, and blood) disguiseth it
self under the mask of most diseases, and appears complicated therewith: so
that, there are few diseases, whose Seminals are not Identical, with that of
the Scurvy. Therefore, that which is proper for the curing or preventing the
Scurvy is also proper for the curing or preventing other diseases, that depend
thereon, whose Bases are much what the same, viz. the depravation of the
Stomachical Ferment.

In order therefore to the assistance against the prevalency of so Epidemical a
disease as the Scurvy, which creeps insensibly from the foresaid causes, upon
most men, and women, I compose these Scorbutic Pills, whose operation is to
purge gently, thereby to carry off from the Stomach, and other Officines of the
digestions, the Stagnant Recremental Sordes, which are apt to settle, as
residences of the Food we take in; and that, many times, for want of a
penetrating volatizing Ferment, which should, after digestion, leave no Faeces
or Caput Mort behind: for with such volatizing Ferments, strong constitutions
are endued; the constitution being most what to be computed from the natural
vigor, or weakness of the Ferments (which are the Authors of all
Transmutations of Food from one taste and consistence to an other, in the whole
circuit of the body.)

These Pills (I say) taken at due seasons, help nature to carry off that, which
is every day precipitated to the bottom and sides of the Stomach, which is a
kind of Tartar or slimy sediment of our meat and drink, not volatiz'd by the
Ferment, which daily increasing, does still more, and more, dull, and dead the
foresaid Ferment: But if by such help, as these Pills, or other direct courses,
the digestions be reminded of their due separations, then these preposterous
precipitations, may probably be prevented, and the diseases, thence springing,
(whether solitary Scurvy, or others complicated therewith) be anticipated: for
these Scorbutic Pills are so prepared with noble vegetal Extractions, by a
depurated Menstruum and generous Salt, as that they not only are gently
solutive and abstersive of the Inherent Sordes, but also are (withal)
restaurative (by their Balsamic Ingredients) of the lapsing Ferments; and that
first by taking off the weights that oppress, and load, and next by inciting
them to a vigorous activity; especially if seconded by perance in meat, drink,
and exercise; together with a Dose (sometimes) of our Cordial Elixir: which,
taken after a previous abstersion, by the Scorbutic Pills, proves the more
effectual in rectifying the Ferment of the Stomach, and in discussing of Wind,
which proceeds from the reluctance of the Ferment to the recremental Sordes,
and therein proves a great Cordial, if rightly prepared. For indeed, to speak
properly, nothing can truly be called Cordial, which does not allay this
Flatus, or wind, by taking away the cause thereof (at least mitigating).

These Pills also are proper for Dropsical bodies, by making gentle
evacuations: for such remedies as are abstersive, and diuretic, and withal
have a restaurative astringency, communicable to the debilitated Membranous
Parts, reducing them to their proper tone, are the most proper in Dropsical
maladies: Of which sort are these Pills; for they are not only abstersive, but
also by their included essential Salt of Tartar, are not a little Diuretical,
and by its restaurative Ingredients, gives a gentle astringency to the
Membranous Parts, promoting the proper tone thereof in their due Systole and
Diastole. To which also should be added the use of our Elixir Proprietatis, to
strengthen the bowels, and Ferments thereof; not that I say, these will cure a
confirmed Dropsye, where the very Omentum, or kel, and Peritonaeum, are become
putrid, and rotten, through the long Stagnation of the extravasated liquor: in
which case I question whether the noblest Chemical Arcana, viz. the Mercurius
Diaphoreticus Fixus, or Precipiolum Paracelsi, would effect the Cure.

In Hectic Fevers, and incipient consumptions, these Scorbutic Pills are also
effectual (being taken in a somewhat less quantity than in the other Cases) for
besides their moderate abstersion (by Vegetable Salts) of excremental Sordes
(which otherwise oppress the digestions) they hinder the resolution of the
compage of the blood, which frequently, in those cases, is apt to show it self
by faint sweatings, arguing thereby a Solution of the Vinculum of the blood:
But by some Balsamic, and gently astringent Ingredients therein, the Retrograd
Analysis of the mass of blood is prevented: in which case these Pills are well
seconded, by some Doses of the Elixir Propietatis, taken every other Morning,
fasting, two hours after, and the Pills also to be taken every other Morning,
two or three at a time, according to directions given afterward.

These Pills are also proper against Hypochondriack Melancholy, by keeping the
body soluble, removing some Sordes, whose reluctance (as I said) with the
Ferments either of the Stomach, or Spleen, begets that Hypochondriack Wind,
which frisks to and again, and floats round all, or most parts of the body: and
such persons, commonly feel themselves most at ease, and free from the cumber
of the wandering Flatus, when their bodies are most soluble. To a further
assistance wherein, the frequent taking of Elixir Proprietatis contributes not
a little, by helping to compose the otherwise irregular Flatus.

Yea, in all diseases that are Symptomatical, or secondary to the Scurvy, these
Pills are helpful, as in Scorbutical Palsies, Apoplexies, Asthma's etc. which
depend upon the prevalency of the Scorbutic Ferment, and Flatus thence
issuing. The like success they have also upon Colicks, Diarrhea's or
Loosnesses, and Dysenteries or bloody Fluxes; especially if seconded with some
Doses of the Elixir Proprietatis, and sweating Pills.

Further as to Fevers, whether intermitting, or continued (so they be not
malignant,) viz. whether Quotidians, Tertians, Quartanes, or Acute continued
Fevers, these Pills are very helpful; first by abstersing the recremental
Sordes, which adhere to the vessels, and while they are there, they promote the
feverish fermentation of the blood, and humors: for that the Crasis of the
blood, and humors, have an immediate dependence, upon the Regimen of the
Stomach, and Regent Spirit thereof, is apparent in the Febris Ephemeris, or
sudden Febricula, which happens from a disorder of the Ferment of the Stomach,
not being able to subjugate the in taken food, which causes a perfect Fever,
in all its Symptoms, till the digestion be either complete, or the depraved
mass be thrown up out of the Stomach by vomit; which done, that sort of Fever
cease: so that the Minera of a Fever, whether intermittent, or continued, yea
even of all, or most diseases, is radically in the Stomach, after whose pipe
(as I may say) all the rest of the Ferments of other parts, dance, and are
really subject to the beck, and influence thereof. And that Fevers do much
depend upon the Regimen of the Stomach, is evident from the frequent vomitings,
pains in the head, and back, thence proceeding; as also from the strong
pressing thrist therein: and is more manifest, because, if while the blood
boyls strongly, by a Feverish Fermentation, a good medicine be given, while it
is yet in the Stomach, the blood cease from its spurious Fermentation, and
perhaps only breaths forth in a gentle moisture, the Pains cease, the thirst
is quenched, and all is at ease and quiet for a while. So that in truth, Fevers
are but secondary in the blood, and humors, but primarily in the Stomach; to
which also, all Medicines primarily are to be levelled. I say therefore, as
these Pills work upon some of the depraved matter (which lies heavily, as long
as it is unvolatiz'd by the Ferment) of the Stomach, by their solutive
property, and irritating the Systole, or compression thereof, (vulgarly called
the Expulsive Faculty) together with the orderly Systole and Diastole of the
Pylorus, carries of part of that recrement, which otherwise yields fuel to the
feverish fire, and promotes the Febrile Fermentation in the whole mass of
Liquids in the body: so that these, by their gently purging quality, lessen the
Alkalizate Sordes which cause thirst, and feverish burnings, and boylings in
the blood; and besides by their Menstrual Salts, blunt the acrimony of the
spurious fermentation of the Stomach, and with the help of Elixir Proprietatis
(which I call the Cordial Elixir) taken as I shall show afterward, the cause
of the feverish Flatus, will be much abated, which Flatus is the necessary
concomitant, and result of the spurious feverish fermentation in the Stomach,
from which incoercible Flatus, or Spiritus Sylvestris, all those usual sick and
faint fits, proceed.

And if, upon a previous vomit, which, skilfully ordered, lessons these
Alkalizate burnt Sordes, which sometimes lie fast riveted in the tunicles and
fouldings of the Stomach, these Pills be afterward given, two or three days
together, and a Dose of the Cordial Elixir, be given in the afternoon, about 3
or 4 by the Clock, as also last at Night; one of our Diaphoretick Pills, with a
glass of burnt Wine after it, will so blunt the acrimony of those burnt
recrementall Sordes (the Minera of the Fever) as that the feverish Fermentation
will be abated, the cause of the Flatus (whence sick fits) will be mitigated,
the boiling Spirits will be settled: The Archeus, or regent spirit of the
digestions (that Spiritus impetum faciens) will be composed, and all the
clutter will be hushed into a silent calmness, with a gentle breathing sweat:
which Diaphoretick, or sweating Pills are but to be taken every other, or every
third night; and that too after a previous evacuation either by our Scorbutic
Pills, or at least by a Clyster ordered that afternoon, before they be taken.

Thus the causes being removed, the Fever will begin to decline (nisi mors sit
in olla) unless death be at hand, not but that the disease will rally up again,
but with less force: then you must still repeat the Method of your solutive
pills in the morning, and Cordial Elixir in the afternoon, and sweating Pill at
night, which last (when repeated) let always be done that night, after the
solutive Pills has been before taken in the morning. Thus you will, by the
Blessing of God, find a considerable abatement of the violent Symptoms of a
Fever, in a very small time.

And as in continued, so also in intermitting Fevers, whether Quotidians,
Tertians, or Quartans, the same Ternary of Medicines, are of great use and
benefit: and that thus (viz) by taking (the day before the fit) 2 or 3 of the
Scorbutic or Cathartick Pills, and the night after, a Dose of the Cordial
Elixir at bedtime, and then (that day the fit comes) to take one or two of the
Diaphoretick, or sweating Pills, two or three hours before the usually expected
time, drinking a draught of hot drink after, as of Mace-ale, Posset Drink, or
Burnt-Wine, and to endeavor, with one covering more than ordinary, to fall
into a gentle breathing Sweat, which these will readily procure: And during the
time of the Patients sweating, he or she is to take nothing but hot drink as
aforesaid, and to lie in bed (if the fit come on the day time) till the next
morning; and then to renew the taking of the Cathartick Pills, and Elixir, as
also an other of the sweating Pills, before the next expected fit, according to
former directions: and by this means, the Patient will find ready help, sooner
in a Quotidian or Tertian, than in a Quartaine, that being seated more deeply,
in the radical Ferment of the Stomach, and Spleen. These as well as continued
Fevers (if not all diseases) are radically begotten in the Stomach: primarily
there, and secondarily, or Symptomatically in other remote parts, to whose
Regimen this Ternary of Medicines is chiefly made to correspond.

For the general Indication of most diseases, are reducible to three; and those
are, first, a Recremental Faeces or depraved humor, from the error of the
Ferments, both of the Stomach, and other digestions: I say, the abstersion of
these degenerate Faeces in the several digestions, is the first, and chief
Indication in most diseases: The second is a Flatus, or Wind engendered between
the reluctance of the Ferment, and the foresaid Sordes, which constantly begets
(according to the degrees thereof) a fresh supply of an inbred Flatus, or Wind,
the Author of many Pains, disturbances, in the vital occonomy, and thence
Sicknesses. I say, the quieting, or allaying the Wind, by curing, or preventing
the the true cause thereof, is the second main Indication requisite, in the
Cure of most diseases.

The third and last is an acrimonious acidity, with a spurious. Latex, in the
intermediate Juyces, and Liquor of the Blood, and Genus Nervosvm, whose
Seminals are desum'd, from an error of the Ferment of the Stomachical
digestion. The correcting which acrimony, and reduction of the blood to its
genuine, Sweet, Balsamic Eucrasia, is the third Indication requisite to be
performed, in the Cure of many diseases.

The general ignorance of this Ternary of Indications among some Physicians,
doting (in lien thereof) on the quaternary of fictitious humors and the like
number of external barren qualities, by which they groap'd (as in the dark)
after the heat and cold, dryness, and moisture of diseases, and ordering their
medicines accordingly, has been no small Remora, in the improvement of this
noble science of Physic: which (through the Tacit Subscriptions, to the
Galenical prescripts, by most Physicians) has thereby long been kept in
obscurity; but now at length (by the sons of art) become more manifest, and are
exposed to open view.

To which triplicity of Indications, this Ternary of Medicines are chiefly, and
primarily adapted: For first, the Scorbutic or Cathartick Pills are ordered
for the carrying off those Recremental Faeces, which are begotten through the
depravation of the Ferment of the Stomach, and other digestions, which give
Beginning, and lays the foundation of most diseases: Secondly, the Cordial
Elixir appeaseth, and quieteth the Flatus, or wind, begotten from the
reluctance of the Ferment, and corrupt matter oppressing it; and therefore it
is proper for those diseases, where Wind is most predominant, viz. in those
diseases where the Ferments are most weakened; for where the Stomach in its
Ferment is most debilitated, there Wind is most prevalent: And thirdly; the
Diaaphoretick, or sweating Pills, dint, and correct the acrimonious acidity of
the secondary digestions, and liquor of the blood, and of the Genus Nervosum,
and carry it off, with the spurious Latex, in gentle breathing sweats; and
therefore it is proper in all diseases which depend thereon, as in Fevers,
Colicks, Defluxions of rheum, dysenteries or bloody Fluxes, and pains of all
sorts, in all places of the body.

Now as to the Cordial Elixir, whose preparation is with a Menstruum
impregnated with vegetable essential Salts, and is either red or white
according to Helmont's process: (and not with Mineral acidities (according to
Crollius) who falsely reports Paracelsus his Elixir Proprietatis to be made,
with the addition of Oil of Sulphur) besides its uses aforesaid, as an
auxiliary to the Scorbutic Pills in the cure of many diseases: it is also
exquisitely proper for most diseases in women; and that whether the disease be
from the Spleen, Matrix or mother, or Genus Nervosum: yea, if I should comprize
all these in one, and say from the Stomach, and its Regimen upon all the parts
at the remotest distance, I should not (I think) much say amiss: For otherwise,
why does a proper remedy while yet in the Stomach, give help to other parts, as
for example to the Spleen, Matrix, Genus Nervosum etc. not, but that the Matrix
has a proper Regimen of its own, which being discomposed, puts the Stomach,
and other parts (by the Links of the Animal Chain) out of order.

The Elixir (I say) gives help to most diseases incident to women, whether with
Child, or not; for it appeaseth Wind very much, which accompanies most
diseases women are troubled with: It is a very good remedy against fits of the
mother, which is an incoercible Flatus, or Wind, arising from a reluctance
between the recremental Faeces of the Matrix, and Archeus, (or Spiritus impetum
faciens) thereof, especially if taken after a gentle evacuation made by our
Scorbutic Pills, which may be done very safely to women breeding or with
Child, as I have further treated, in my Hydrologia Chymica. To both, (viz) to
women breeding; and to others with Child, I have given the like, yea stronger
purges, and that did its work not only innocently, but also with good success,
both to the woman, and Child; and that too, not without very good reason: For
whence is it, that women frequently (during the whole time of their breeding,
and being with Child) are so tormented with Pains, Vomitings, Gripings,
Faintness, Sickness, and the like; but chiefly from a great foulness of the
Stomach, and plenty of recremental Sordes heaped in the Womb (and that from
causes not pertinent here to speak of) which often procure feverish
Fermentations, in the Blood, gripings, weakness of the Back, illness, faintness
of the Stomach: and by any sudden passion of the mind, rouseth up the Spleen,
and Mother, to the great discomposure of the whole fabric of the body.

Now what is more pitiful, than to see miserable women, groaning under the
weight of these real diseases, while they are with Child; and under that color
of being so, they fancy to themselves, they are to take nothing of Physic for
their assistance, least they harm the Child: and so willingly languish under
distempers that might easily be helped, and they themselves live more
cheerfuly, and bring forth the Child more livelily; For if they take sometimes
1 or 2 of these gently purging pills, over night, or ^n the morning (only
taking some broth at noon, and eat a little warm meat, without any further
trouble) to keep their body open, carrying off thereby, the dross which
oppresses the Stomach, causing wind, sickness, and faintness, and withal if
they take often of the Cordial Elixir, according to following directions, they
would (I say) find them selves more healthful, and cheerful, and might thereby
be enabled (through the blessing of God) to bring forth with more strength; and
that, not only for their own good, but also thus doing (together with an
orderly diet) it helps to make the constitution of the Child, to be more sound,
and healthful. For if the blood and humors, wherewith the Embryo is nourished,
be tainted with impurities, and distempers, may easily thereby lay the
foundation of a weak constitution; and make the Child prove sickly, and
diseased, and all for want of help; in curing the Mothers infirmities.

That these pills, and Cordial Elixir, are safe and harmless, in this case; yea
and stronger Medicines than they (not to say vomits themselves, which I have
sometimes ordered to women in that condition and that with good success) is
evident; First from the mildeness of the vegetable Ingredients (having not a
grain of a Mineral in it) and next from the experimental good effects thereof:
so that if women at length would admit of taking some thing for their own, and
Child's good, they might live more comfortably, and cheerfully, during that
time, than otherwise they do.

Also these Pills, and Cordial Elixir are proper for the infirmities of young
women, as the Green Sickness, Asthmatical Cachexies and other diseases
depending upon the Aliquid amplius, (viz.) upon the obstructions of the Menses:
For those obstructions are (originally) from a rejected Sordes of the blood,
which furs up the Orifices of the vessels of the Matrix, whereby the blood,
being prevented of its natural critical evacuation, flows back, and causes a
Plethory, and sometimes Fevers, and Stagnation of the Blood in the Lungs, and
other parts: whence short-windedness, stuffing, and stopping of the Stomach,
want of appetite, indisposition to action, with other Symptoms, pains,
swellings, and the like, which are the sequels of this obstruction of the
uterine vessels. Toward the correcting of which Enormities, these Scorbutic
Pills, and Cordial Elixir avail much; For the essential Salts, wherewith these
preparations are impregnated, are aperient of the vessels: and with the other
Ingredients, are abstersive with all, thereby answering the chief Indications
of these diseases.

And as to the Diaphoretick or sweating Pills, their use is of pretty large
extent, as an auxiliary to the other two: and that chiefly, in all Fevers,
whether continued, or intermittent, in all colds, and coughs, (which require
(to the cure thereof) sweatings, and breathings, of the blood) also in all
Colicks Loosenesses, Vomittings, bloody Fluxes, Defluxions of Rheum,
Headaches, and generally of most pains, to which they certainly give ease;
especially if they are taken after an opening of the body by the Scorbutic
Pills, for so taken, they frequently give ease in the greatest torments, and
gripings, as also stay violent vomitings, and purgings, by composing the
inragements of the Archeus, or regent spirit of the Stomach; and putting the
Pylorus in good order, makes it observe the due seasons of its opening, and
shutting.

Now as to the directions for the manner of use of these three Medicines take
as follows: and first, as to the Scorbutic or Cathartick Pills, the Dose is
from one, to four, or five, but two or three is the common ordinary Dose,
swallowing them down, in a spoonful or two of Posset Drink, or any other
liquor, always beginning with a less number, as one, or two; and as they work,
so accordingly to keep to that number, or to take more, to four or five,
according as the body is more difficult to work on, or the disease more
radicated. If you take but one, that may be done over night, last to bed-ward,
which will give one stool, or perhaps two, the morning following: if you do so,
you may go about your occasions the day following: But if you take two or
three, then you are to take them betime in the morning, in bed, or up: if you
take them in bed, you may lie two, or three hours after: and when you get up,
take one draught of hot Posset Drink, which let commonly be three hours after
the taking of them, and sometimes to take nothing after them till noon, and
then take a porringer of broth, and eat a little warm meat, airing the drink at
dinner, and for that day, (if it be cold) not to stir abroad. They may be taken
two days together, and rest the third; or may be taken every other day, or
every third, fourth, or fifth day, or once a week, as the necessity of the
disease requires, and opportunity gives leave. For diseases of long
continuance, will require frequent takings thereof: while you take them, eat
but sparingly, but especially at Suppers. You may with safety take often of
them, for they do not work, by any fretting corrosion of the Liquids and Solids
of the body, but by gentle reminding the digestions, of their due separations;
and by their Balsamic Ingredients, make the patient more cheerful and lively,
by adding vigor to the ferment of the stomach: and that in all the Diseases
aforesaid. They may be taken at any Season of the Year.

Secondly. As to the Cordial Elixir, the dose is from a thimblefull to a
spoonful; and that either taken alone, to those who can so take it, putting a
piece of Sugar or Sugar Candy into their mouths, which dissolving, takes away
the bitterness, and heat of the mouth and Larynx, which the Elixir taken alone,
leaves behind it; or else those who cannot take it so, are to take it in a
glass of Sack or White Wind: but the other way of taking it alone is the
better, for though it be more bitter and hot, while it is going down, yet as
soon as it comes into the stomach, it becomes grateful, and thereupon
acceptable thereto, doing its work more really, by becoming a more effectual
Cordial^ for discussing Wind and Diseases thereon depending. The Patient is to
Fast two or three hours after the taking thereof, and to take it those mornings
they take not the Scorbutic Pills; and sometimes (as before directed) to take
thereof, about three or four by the Clock in the afternoon, of that day the
Pills are taken, or at going to bed, according to former direction; and that in
all the Diseases before named.

And Lastly, As to the Diaphoretick or Sweating Pills, The Dose thereof, is
one, two, or three Pills, but two is the ordinary Dose, which are to be
swallowed down in a spoonful of Burnt-Wine, Mace-Ale or Posset Drink, taking a
draught of the same hot-drink after them: But those who cannot swallow them as
Pills, may dissolve them in any of the foresaid Liquors, and wash it down with
a little of the same clear drink. These are to be taken last at night, at
bedtime, which, without laying many more cloths than ordinary, will bring the
Patient into a pleasant, gentle, breathing Sweat, more than any other Medicine
I ever yet met with, and will allay the greatest thirst, and bring the Patient
into a desired calmness and quietness of Spirits, abating the most rigorous
Symptoms of most Diseases, whether Acute or Chronical. The next morning after
the taking the Sweating Pills, the Patient is to take, either a Dose of the
Cordial Elixir, with a glass of Burnt-Wine, or a draught of other hot drink
after it; or only so much clear Burnt-Wine, Mace-Ale or Posset Drink, while he
is in bed, and to lie two or three hours after; which will bring the Patient
again into an easy breathing Sweat; which (if he please) he may help forward,
with the addition of one Covering more than ordinary. But these are generally
to be taken after a gentle evacuation by the Scorbutic Pills, in Chronick
Diseases; or by them, or Clysters in Fevers.

Lastly. To number the varieties of Cures, that have, by the Blessing of God,
been performed by the help of this Ternary of Medicines, would but prove
tedious, and therefore I shall purposely wave it.

THE Epilogue: OR, The ESSENCE OF SCARBOROVGH-SPAW.
THat I might inform my self more satisfactorily of the true Constituent Parts
of the water of the Scarborough-Spaw, without any other additionals, I took
three Gallons and three Pints thereof, which I let stand a while to settle;
whose first Precipitation was a reddish Sediment, from which I filtred the
water, and this, dried in the Sun, proved to be a red Earth or a kind of Ocre,
or rather Terra Vitrioli, being that which falls to the bottom of the Channels
of all, or most Mineral Springs, whether Sowes or others, and tingeth the
Earth, it runs along, red. Then I placed the water in great glasses, upon a
sand-Furnace, with a gentle heat, and in a days time a thin crust or film swom
upon the top thereof, which I took off with a silver spoon, and dried it in the
Sun, and it was a white scaly light Floscule; after a while longer, some more
of the same separated it self by heat in the water, some of which swom, and
other parts precipitated to the bottom; therefore I filtred all the water
therefrom, which dried in the Sun (as the former) was much what the same: Then
I evaporated the clear filtred water (in glasses) to a dryness, which I found
to have an Alumino-nitrous taste, or rather indeed more nitrous, and would
relent in the Air. This I took, and dissolved it in simple distilled
Rainwater, and filtred it; which left an other insipid, gritty powder, with a
sparkling luster. The clear filtred water (which with Oil of Tartar poured
thereto, I found, gave a milky separation, as if taken fresh from the Spring,
but with Gauls it gave no purple Tincture, after the precipitation of the red
earth, but became pale-coloured thereby) This filtred water (I say) being again
evaporated to a dryness, was dissolved, filtred, and evaporated again, and so a
third time, separating still, what would be separated, by frequent filtration.

Of the foresaid quantity of Spaw-water, I took about two quarts; which having
filtred, I put it in a skillet, and boiled away two thirds; then I let it cool,
and a sediment of an insipid Calx fell to the bottom, from which I filtred the
water, dried up the Calx; and then boiled up the water to the dryness of a
Salt, which was pretty white. This I dissolved in simple distilled Rainwater,
and then filtred, and the Calx being dried in the Sun, was a bright sparkling
powder: The filtred water I evaporated in glasses with a gentle heat, to almost
a dryness, then I filtred it again, and so on.

Thus I can separate from the limpid Spaw, as it is taken out of the Fountain,
eleven or twelve distinguishable Earths or Sabulums, somewhat different in
color, shape, and consistence one from an other; which the Alumino-nitrous
Salt in the water razeth off from several Rocks or Quarries of Stone, which it
passes through, as I can show at any time, to those whose curiosity prompts
them to see Rarities of this nature; I being the first (I think) that has made
so many several Separations therefrom. All these Earths or Sabulums were
equally dried in the Sun, or a gentle heat Analogous thereto; and therefore
could not have different colors from different degrees of heat; none of them
underwent any Calcination or stress of fire, nor received any alterations from
any additionals (being simply done, without mixture, save of distilled
Rainwater) all these sabulous separations were insipid; for the Salt, where
the taste was, became concentred in a small room.

Now if the water be drunk, while these stony concretions are in it, as it is
in all that is drunk at the Spring, or elsewhere; if any harm (I say) happen
to any Patients that drink of it, for want of other good Medicines to carry
away the feculent dregs thereof, it is chiefly from these sabulous concretions,
which precipitate upon the bowels, sides, and Orifices of the Vessels, which
preventing, or obstructing the wonted fluidness of the blood and intermediate
juyces, occasionally in some bodies (apt thereto) may cause Fevers, Dropsies,
Defluxions of Rheum, and the like; It may also increase the Sabulous Duelech,
and thereby become improper for those afflicted with the Stone. For the Spirit
of Urine (that Calculorum Architeccus) meeting with these Earths or Sabulous
Concretions, becomes coagulated thereon (in bodies prone thereto) and by its
petrefying Coagulation gives beginning (at least) increases the Duelech. The
same Sabulums may also contribute to the Torments, or Gripings of the Guts, by
clinging to the Tunicles thereof; and further may vitiate the Systole of the
Membranous parts of the vessels, and thereby may suffer the (otherwise current)
Latex to stagnate in the vessels; and thence produce swellings in the belly,
legs, or elsewhere, as some, after returning from the Spaws, find themselves
troubled with.

For we are to consider, That the several Digestions first have a concomitant
heat, by which the water may be inclined to a sabulous Precipitation upon the
bowels themselves, unless it be carried off by some other good Abstersives
(which ought of right to be given upon the drinking of the Waters) and next to
that we are also to consider, the Anastom^sis of the vessels, each into other,
in the whole circuit of the body, to be as so many Colanders, Streiners or
Filters, by which the recremental Sabulum may (suppose) as to the courser part,
be left upon some of the bowels; and the finer part, by closer Colanders, may
be left upon other more remote vessels, and in both cause obstructions,
sufficient sometimes to procure trouble enough.

Not unlike to these stony Concretions, is the Tartareous Sediments of our meat
and drink; and though Helmont laughs at Paracelsus for his bringing in a
Clessis of Tartareous Diseases: yet after that, rectifying the Notion, tells
us, That there may be a Tartarum resolutum in prima vel materia ultima
existens. I say, the better Kitching-Preparations and Fermentations our meat
and drink undergo, and the stronger the fermental Digestions are, the less of a
Tartar, or rejected Sediment, is thrown upon the parts; and consequently, the
more raw our meat and drink is taken, and the weaker the ferment of the stomach
is, not thoroughly volatizing the nutritive Juice, the more of this tartareous
Sediment is, by the Streiners and Filters of the several parts of the body,
left behind, which increases the Duelech, gives beginning to Obstructions,
Dropsies, Imposthumations, etc.

Now from what stones these Sabulous Ramenta are, I know not, and at present
have not a Microscope by me, to make Observation of the various shapes thereof;
and though Masons tell us, That the same stone differently cut, nay, though
with the same Tools, does by various reflections, give several, and somewhat
distinguishable colors: yet here the water only (as we may suppose) running
over, or along the superficies of a Quarry, or other Stones, cannot penetrate
into the inward parts thereof, and so cannot make several colors from one
stone. Therefore it is more probable, That these Concretions are from several
stones, sands, or earths. And if it were water turned into earth, according to
the Experiment of an ingenious Friend of mine, communicated to that great
Naturalist, Squire Boil, it would retain muchwhat the same color and
figuration of parts, but here the parts separated, seem to the unassisted eye,
to be very dissimular, some gritty and hard, others soft and impalpable, some
bright and glittering, as if from Talk, scales of Venice-glass, or other
bright Mineral stones, and others are more dull.

The last of these stony Concretions, which was separated, and which one would
have expected to have been the most subtle and impalpable powder, I found to
consist of larger sized particles, and those bright and sparkling, as if they
had been razings of Crystals: And that these should lie dormant, and
inconspicuous in the water, after so many previous separations of powders much
more impalpable than it self, gives cause to suspect that there is a variety of
pores in the body of water, and those two of different sizes and angularities,
wherein sabulous Bodies and Salts of various shapes, may lie undiscovered to
the bare eye, in the texture of water. Therefore if Microscopes were so
contrived, as to take a view of Liquors, we might discover many considerable
things, pertinent to the solving diverse Philosophical Phaenomena's, whereof we
are yet ignorant.

Now as to that which remains, after all these sabulous separations, I mean the
esurine Salt, which I call the Essence of Scarborough-Spaw, is a kind of
alumino-nitrous Salt, or Sal Hermeticum; and therefore where you meet in our
Hydrological Discourse, with the word [Aluminous Salt] you are to read it,
Alumino-nitrous Salt, or Nitro-hermetical Salt. This Salt, if duly ordered, is
Crystalline, shoots into long Stiria's, and brancheth it self forth in curious
shapes, upon the bottom of the glass, which I cause to be crystaliz'd in Balneo
Mariae.

Its taste is more discernably nitrous than otherwise, yet is a such a sort of
a Nitro-hermetical Salt, as being exactly dried, and cast upon hot coals or a
glowing Spatula, takes no flame; nor does it melt, nor boil in a Crucible, as
that Nitre Dr. Witty speaks of does: for he means the common Nitre, to be had
in Shops ( viz. Such as is added to Cerots and Plasters, as his own words
testify.) Now this Hermetical Salt in the Spaw, flows not in a Crucible, in a
strong fire, but keeps in a dry white body, and loses some of its taste by the
force of fire. Therefore what we have said against Nitre, in our foregoing
Discourse, is to be understood the common inflammable Nitre, which is vulgarly
used. And it is very probable, that there may be a Magnetical earth, not far
from the breaking forth of this Spring, upon which, the Aereal Nitre (whether
in the Atmosphere upon the surface, or in Caverns of the earth) does center it
self, which joining issue with a Mineral acidity, may become a competent cause,
for the production of all Mineral Springs: For (to my knowledge) there are some
Bodies to be found in the World, that are truly Magnetical of the Universal
Spirit, or Nitro-hermetical Salt, which flotes otherwise indiscernably in the
Air; which very thing, rightly understood, is no small Key to the Hermetick
Philosophy, which I shall, at present, purposely wave further to discourse upon.

Now the Proportion of this Nitrous Salt, to the whole bulk of the water, after
the separation of all these stony Concretions, is no less (according to my
compute) than as one is to one hundred twenty eight: so that it is at least but
the one hundred twenty eighth part of the whole. This pure Salt (which as to
taste is somewhat bitter) dissolved, is that I call the Essence of the
Scarborough-Spaw; a little of which, taken in a glass of White or Rhenish Wine,
or in a glass of simple Spring Water, will (as I have tried) purge gently by
Stool: and without doubt is that, by whose efficacy, whatever the Spaw-water
drunk alone effects, is performed, and that too with a triple advantage.

First, In that the sabulous Concretions are separated by Art (which sometimes
precipitating otherwise (as I said before) upon the bowels, may do harm.) And
secondly, the smallness of its quantity prevents that hazard to some bodies,
which the gulping down great draughts of water may produce. For such large
quantities of Spaw-water, as are usually drunk, does in some Constitutions too
much dilute the Ferment, debilitate the Digestions, and vitiate the tone of the
Membranous parts, both of the stomach and other bowels, and so cause Fevers,
Dropsies, defluxions of Rheum, etc.

And lastly, The fitness of it to be taken at any Season of the Year, whether
Winter, Spring, Summer, or Autumn; whereas the waters from the Spaw it self,
are only to be drunk in the Summer-Season. But this Essence may not only be
drunk then, which at that time of the year, may be taken in three, four or five
glasses of any good simple Spring Water; especially to those who cannot come to
the Spaws: but also may conveniently enough be taken in the Winter, and in the
Spring (when the Spaw-water it self cannot with efficacy be drunk, because too
much diluted with Rain or Snow-water) in a glass of White or Rhenish-Wine, as I
said; which though it be taken in such a proportion, as not to work sensibly by
stool, yet will it have a safe and innocent, though an insensible, Operation.

Yea, What Diseases the Spaw-water is found proper for, being taken from the
Fountain, for the same the Essence thereof is also as proper, and according to
all reason most effectual, as in the Scurvy, Scorbutical. Asthma's, Dropsy,
Hypocondriack Melancholy, Fevers, Obstructions of the Vessels in Women, and
Diseases thence depending, together with several other Distempers, as may be
further seen in the Discourse it self.

The Essence of the Spaw has this privilege in the Cure (at least in the
assistance of the Cure) of Fevers, above that of the whole body of the
Spaw-water, viz. That it may be administered in a glass of Wine, and so may
readily be carried to absterse the vessels of the blood, and other spurious
fermenting liquors, from their Heterogeneities and recremental Tartar; which,
if taken in the whole bulk of water, would be prejudicial and dangerous on all
hands, as hazarding too sudden a stop to the Fermentation, and thereby occasion
a preposterous stifling of the volatile Spirits, before they can work
themselves into a new state, by separating Heterogene parts, which they
constantly attempt in most Fevers.

Also if this Spaw-water contribute (as it is highly extolled to that purpose)
to the making Women fruitful (by removing Obstructions of the Womb, the
frequent concurring cause of Barrenness) it does it (I say) by virtue of this
Nitro-hermetick Salt, viz. That which I call the Essence of the Spaw; which
indeed, is muchwhat of the same nature with that Salt which fructifies all
Plants and Fruits of the Earth, makes all Soyls multiply in great plenty, and
may give probability of fruitfulness to Women, by opening those Obstructions
which frequently hinder Conception.

By the help of this concentred Essence, every simple Current-Spring may be
made a Spaw, by dissolving a competent quantity hereof, in four, five, six or
seven glasses of any Spring Water in the Summertime, which may also not a
little increase its purgative quality, in as much as the Spaw-waters often
Purge downward by their very weight, witness the Vitrioline-Spaw at
Knarsborough, which rarely purges any other way, than downwards by its very
weight, either by Stool or Urine. So that this very Essence, might very
properly be taken in the same Sweet Spaw, at the Season of the Year; and so you
might have the virtue of both Spaws in one, which would probably thereby answer
more general Indications.

And lastly, By the help of our aforesaid Ternary of Medicines, together with
some other good Specificks, joining issue (at the Season of the Year) with the
use of the Scarborough-Spaw-water, might effect very considerable Cures in most
Chronick Diseases; or the same, with the Essence of the same Spaw, to be taken
in the Winter, Spring, or any other Season of the Year, might not improbably
effect the like Cures.

FINIS.
FRAGMENT I.
Insert this first Fragment between the 29th Section [ ending with these words,
the extinction of the vital flame] and the beginning of the 30th Section [
thus, 30. This fourth Digestion, as I conceive, etc.] in Page 75. Part II.
NOw this regurgitated Latex or separated Serum of the Blood, let forth of the
Abdomen, by tapping the Bellies of such are afflicted with that sort of Dropsy
called Ascites, is a limpid liquor; whose Tabes (whereby it depraves and
corrupts the membranous parts where it restagnates) is not originally from the
Liver, that part so generally accused by the Galenists for being the grand
Patron of Dropsies, is apparent by matter of Fact, both by the observation of
the profound Inquisitor into Nature, Baptista Van Helmont, who upon the
dissection of Bodies, whose Diseases were Dropsies, has found the Liver firm
and sound, both in color and solidness of Parenchyme: The same, an ingenious
and skilful Physician, an Acquaintance of mine, told me, that upon his cutting
up a Dropsical Body, which Dropsy had worn away the Patient with an Atrophy of
all the parts like a Tabes, The limpid Liquor that he took forth of his Belly
was near two Gallons, the Liver was sound and good as any could be, so likewise
his Heart; but the Spleen was discolored and vitiated, the Omentum was black,
rotten and foetid. Some of this Liquor he caused to be placed over a fire, to
evaporate some of the moisture; the remaining part thickened; and was as stiff
as a gelly, and that of a very green color. It was of so stiff a consistence
as that a spoon might have stood in it. Which Experiment evinceth the truth of
these following Considerations.

First, That the Liver is innocent in the genesis of Dropsies, In Hydrope
insons est hepar, says Helmont; and therefore all Medicines that are directed
in the Galenical road, to the opening Obstructions in the Liver, or to any
other Indication thereof, in order to the Cure of Dropsies, is shot at random,
yea quite by the mark: and so to be rejected as frivolous.

Secondly, That the Spleen is a part somewhat concerned in the Fabric of
Dropsies (to which I may without doubt add the Stomach) the Blood does not
undergo those wonted Circulations or Cohobations upon its own fixed body or
Caput mort in the Spleen; and so consequently does not receive those due
Separations, nor is enriched with the indowments of that noble Ferment, which
does not a little contribute to the Eucrasia of the Blood: Hence the Blood in
part becomes too much diluted and waterish.

Thirdly, That that, which completes the waterishness of the Blood is
Obstructions of the Reins, which has a double indication; and that is, first
the small quantity of Urine that Dropsical Persons make, and next, the
restagnation of a great quantity of this rejected Latex into the Abdomon, which
actually swells the Belly.

Fourthly, That in tract of Time, when this restagnating Serum begins to
putrefie (as it will in no long time do, both because it is extravasated, as
also because it wants a volatizing and embalming Ferment) it corrupts also and
perishes the Omentum, turns it black and foetid; then the whole Mass falls
upon the Bowels, spoils their Tone, and brings Death. Hence the Rot in Sheep,
is nothing else but, if I may so call it, a Dropsical Ascites, from a
restagnating Latex, which by moistness of waterish Ground, or continuance of
wet Weather, putrefies and corrupts the Kell and so other Bowels, thence Death.
For in continuance of time it Rots the principal Bowels of the Body.

Lastly, That if this restagnating Serum have continued so long without a
genuine reduction, or at least a separation by the proper Conduits, viz. the
Vreters, Pores, Siedge, etc. as to begin to undergo a putridness, by whose
foetid sulphurous Odor, or corrosive Saltness, the Omentum becomes corrupt
and mortified; that then all hopes of Cure is over, because of the perishing of
the Bowels, by the Analytical putridness of the Spurious Latex, which suffering
all the thin parts to be evaporated by the natural heat of the adjacent parts,
retains only a depraved Sulphur and Salt, which by a retrograde Analysis
corrupts the Bowels, hinders the Circulation of the Blood, perverts the tone of
all the Membranous parts, and in the conclusion stifles all the Spirits, both
Vital and Animal, whence Death. But if this be taken before the corruption of
the Omentum, or any other Bowels, it may then more readily be cured, I mean
sent away by passages and channels adapted as proper Emunctories for that
purpose. But to return. But if this spurious Acidity, etc.

FRAGMENT II.
Between the ending of the second Section and the beginning of the third, in
Page 136. read this second Fragment.
BUt if you pour Oil of Tartar upon some of the fresh water, it makes a
frisking spawny motion, which with a little Gaul turning Purple, i^ thereto a
few drops of Oil of Vitriol be poured, it instantly boyls, and immediately
becomes clear again; upon which if Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, Spirit of
Hartshorn, and any other volatile saline Spirit, either simple or aromatiz'd
with Essences, be again poured, it causes a frisking motion with a sudden dash
of Purple upon the middle of the glass, which no sooner appears, but
vanishes, and becomes clear; which, with a little Oil of Vitriol, makes a
fresh boiling, heaving up some Particles of the water above the glass, from the
Intestine Ebullition of the Salts, each contending with other. Which water I
have, after this was done, drunk off in the presence of some Gentlemen and
others, before whom I made the Experiment; which left such a pleasant relish
upon the Palate and Larynx, as that all the water I drunk after, for that
Morning, went down with much more delightfulness and sweetness then was wonted.

FRAGMENT III.
In the third Section of Page 136. between the words [as alumenish Solutions
will do] and the following words, viz. [and that in effect, etc.] read this
third Fragment as in a Parenthesis.
(Saving that they do not admit of a Milky Coagulation by the addition of Oil
of Tartar, Spirit of Hartshorn, or the like, as those of Allom Springs do)

FRAGMENT IIII.
In Page 157. Part II. line the second, ending with these words [to all parts]
between them and the beginning of the third line, in these words [ likewise
Baths are of efficacy, etc.] read this fourth Fragment.
ALso against Dropsies, especially cold Springs or Baths: and that because it is
found by Experiment, that Bathing promotes both Urine and Sweat. For a Man
shall scarce well get out of the water but he shall be inclinable to Urine, and
then Sweating does most frequently follow; which, if promoted by some inward
Diaphoretick, will help notably to transpire the superfluous Latex, especially
in that son of Dropsy called Anasarcasis, where the Blood is too much diluted,
and the Limpheducts obstructed in the habit of the body. So that two grand
Indications of Dropsies, and perhaps a third (and tria sunt omnia) are hereby
answered (viz.) Stopping or difficulty of Urine; secondly, Obstructions of the
Pores; and lastly, Debilitude of Ferments in their separative Functions, by the
intense coldness of the waters, which reminds the Reins, Ureters and Sphincter
of the Bladder, of their Duty, opens the Pores, making both (especially by the
concurring help of inward Diaphoreticks) the inward and outward parts
perspirable; and lastly, so fortifies the Digestive Ferments, as that it begets
a very good Appetite to Meat, by whetting the Ferment of the Stomach, and by
promoting the Systole of all the Membranous parts, thereby separating the
accumulated Sordes.

Likewise Baths, etc.

FINIS.

