portrait of King Charles II CAROLUS II DEI GRATIA ANGLIAE SCOTIAE FRANCIAE ET
HIBERNIA REX ETC.


An Impartial and Brief DESCRIPTION OF THE PLAZA, Or Sumptuous Marketplace OF
MADRID, AND THE Bull-Baiting THERE: Together with the History of the Famous and
much Admired Placidus. As also a large Scheme, being the Lively Representation
of the Order and Ornament of this Solemnity.

By James Salgado a Spaniard.

LONDON, Printed by Francis Clark for the Author, Anno Dom. 1683.

TO THE MOST SERENE and MIGHTY CHARLES II.
By the Grace of God of Great Britain, France and Ireland King, Defender of
the Faith, etc.
May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty,
YOur Royal Name was prefixed to this other Manual of mine the last year, but I
had not the Confidence to present Your Sacred Majesty with the same: It was not
that I judged the Subject matter altogether despicable, and unworthy of
Acceptance; but because my Timorous and Bashful Disposition induced me to
believe that it was every way sufficient, to be Honored with the Name of such
an Inestimable and Noble Patron: But yet for all that, my Pinching want has,
now at length, prevailed with me to shake off these Thoughts; in regard that so
great an Honor, attended with something else (Your Majesty conceives my
meaning) would, beyond all peradventure, contribute the more to my present
Straightened condition. Wherefore I Prostrate my Self and Labors at Your Royal
Feet; looking upon it as my greatest Happiness, if Your Majesty may be pleased
to spend some few Minutes for a Recreation, in the perusal of this short
Description of the Bull-Baiting at Madrid: But if good Fortune deny me this
Honor, I must Patiently share in the Lot of my Countrymen, who now adays are
generally Unfortunate. However, Your Majesty's long Life, Prosperous Reign, and
Eternal Happiness, shall in all Circumstances, be the most Earnest Prayer of

Your Majesty's most Devoted Supplicant, James Salgado a Spaniard.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Have taken a view of Spain, France, Italy, and the United Netherlands, but I
must confess, I did never see (except here in England) such a crowd of Authors,
Printers, Book-binders, Stationers, Gazetts, Observators, Pacquets, Mercuries,
Intelligences, and Bills of Chyrurgions, calling themselves Doctors forsooth:
Whileas, in very deed, they ought to be styled Mountebanks. In a word, I don't
remember to have seen a People so much bus^^d with, and Fond upon Novelties.
While therefore I stood amazed, behold pinching Want, and simple Bashfulness
(by way of a Dialogue) made their address unto me; the former in these
following words. I see you are a Stranger, and ought to be encouraged by, and
sheltered under the Protection of the Generous English Nation: For that cause,
I judge it your near concernment to come with a full hand, if you look for any
gracious acceptance. On the other side Shame replied, Mr. Salgado believe my
undissembled Simplicity; The English are most Ingenuous, and of a Pregnant Wit:
What then can you expect by publishing any thing but Scorn and Contempt? For
many will be apt to say, what means this Ugly Pale Spaniard, who with his
Whimseys and Trifles busies our Printers, and creates us much trouble? What
(answered Necessity) Hunger constrains him to take such a course: For, Mr.
Salgado (I Am confident) by all Laudable means endeavors to eschew hard
Straits, not hunting after Airy Praise, and a great Name. Which the one saying
stopped the mouth of Blushing Shame.

Thus being past Shame, I do set this Treatise on the Pillory, i.e. I stick not
to expose it to the Censures of Carping Critics. But methinks I hear a great
many entertaining a Discourse to this purpose. It Is not worth our while to take
strict notice of a Poor Distressed man past Shame, seeing Necessity has no Law.

Wherefore, most Noble, Puissant, Ancient and Generous English, or rather
Angelical Nation (for you are my Tutelar Angels, in regard that these five
years, and above, I have enjoyed Life and Sanctuary by your Protection and
Benign Generosity) I present you with this Solemnity of the Bulls at Madrid,
my Native Soil. If any thing therein be amiss, I claim an interest in the
clemency of your Promise; but if otherwise, look upon it as a Testimony of my
undissembled Gratitude.

Farewell.
a bullfight The Bull a Hunting The Place there: of in Madrid 1 The King and
Queen 2 The Kings Counsel 3 The Ambassadors 4 The Gentlemen with their
Lackeys hunting ye Bull 5 The Young Placito 6 The Bulls Stablls




An Impartial and Brief Description of the Plaza, or Sumptuous Marketplace of
Madrid, and the Bull-baiting there.
SIR,
I Am certisied by your Letter, that a commendable Curiosity has induced you to
Travel through France, Italy and Germany; adding further, that, had you not
been persuaded to the contrary by a certain person, (one who, I Am apt to
believe, has no good will to my Country) the Pleasures and Rarities of Spain
had not escaped your Impartial and Diligent Consideration: Assure your self,
none could be more concerned to enjoy your Fellowship there; nor readier to do
you good Offices, than I, upon consideration of the manifold, and signal
Obligations laid upon me by a person of your worth. But seeing it is to no
purpose to repent what is past, I shall forbear to enlarge on this Subject: Yet
because you seem to be not a little dissatisfied that you had not the good
Fortune of seeing Spain, and more especially the Es^urial, and the yearly
Festival at Madrid; I shall endeavor, according to my Bounden Duty, to
satisfy your Curiosity in this point; insomuch, that from your Closet you may
receive a full view of the Spanish Court, and its Magnificence, as also the
goodly and large Fields of Madrid, without expending much, or exposing your
Person to danger after the manner of most Travelers who repair thither; and
for your greater clearness in the matter, I send you this large Scheme.

In describing the matter in hand, my Style shall be plain, and the Relation
Impartial; in regard that I bear no liking to disingenuity, or the forging of
Romantic Novelties and Fictions.

As for the Escurial, we shall have a fairer opportunity to treat on it at
another occasion: This in the general you may know, that, (according to the
unanimous consent of all who have traveled thither) it is a thing very well
worth the while. Our present Discourse then shall be wholly confined to the
Bull-baiting (as it is called) at Madrid.

It has been the Fate of Spain, as that of other Puissant Nations, not to have
escaped Scot-free of the frequent, and noisome In-roads of many Cruel
Adversaries of different Languages, Laws and Constitutions; so that some
Vestigias of the one must be supposed to remain, as well as the other. Those
who did bear chief sway there, were the Romans, Vandals, Goths and Saracens;
insomuch that the Spanish Tongue appears to be an Aggregate of the Latin,
German and Arabic. The Saracens obtaining the latest Conquest, their Laws and
Language leave the deeper Impression. Among other their Constitutions, this
Festival which we are about to describe was one.

You may easily object that it is a Cruel and Barbarous Recreation, which I am
ready to grant, and so much the rather, that its Original is derived from such
a Barbarous Rabble as the Turks were, and are to this day: Nevertheless, an
uncontroull'd Custom of long continuance has given it the force and validity of
a Law, and the most Honorable designation of a Royal Festival, which if any
person of what Quality soever, once endeavored to Rectify, he should
inevitably incur the risque of Reproach and Shame, if not a more sad Fate. It
being therefore altogether extrinsick to any purpose and concernment, as a
private man to determine any thing against the Lawfulness and Unlawfulness of
this Solemnity; I shall content my self by making a clear discovery thereof,
for your greater satisfaction.

Lincolns-Inn-Fields are neither so large, nor spacious, as this place of
public resort at Madrid, which is exactly Square, being surrounded with Houses
Uniform all along in all their Dimensions, erected to the Altitude of five pair
of Stairs, with a great many most Curious Windows, and Balconies over laid with
the purest Gold. Moreover the Square is Level, to the end that the Foming
Bulls, and Prancing Horses may run their Courses with the greater easiness and
celerity. From the ground to the first pair of Stairs are reared up Theaters
made of Timber for the People: The Thirty Balconies set apart for the King and
Court, are Sumptuously Furnished with the Richest Tapestry and choicest Velvet
that Money or Art can purchase. Here it is observable that all Noblemen, whose
lot it is not to attend the Court for that present Quarter, are denied the
privilege of these Balconies; wherefore such persons may possess whatever
other places they judge most convenient. In Spain there are diverse kinds of
Councels, as the King's Council, that of the Inquisition, War, India, Italy,
the Low Countries, and Arragonia, and consequently Counselors of different
degrees and qualities; for which cause it is appointed, that each of those have
their Balconies apart, Beautified with Silks and Tapestry of Colors differing,
according to the diversity of those Offices and Officers.

All Ambassadors from Foraign Kings and Potentates are Treated after the same
Fashion, except the Pope's Legate, whose Modesty and Piety (forsooth, lays
such a restraint upon him, that that Profane Festival, not being of the
Churches appointment) must not be Honored with his Presence. All other ranks
of persons Assembled thither, may possess what Seats they are able to purchase:
This I say, because the general Confluence to this Common Play from all
Corners, makes such a Crowd, that notwithstanding the great number of Theaters,
Balconies, and Windows, mentioned elsewhere, none can purchase a Room in the
first pair of Stairs, at a lower rate than 200. Crowns, yea and those places
which are not exposed to the Scorching Heat of the Sun after four a Clock, must
be supposed to amount to a greater sum of Money: Above the first Row of
Windows, places may be got more easily. Seeing this Festival falls out yearly
in the Months of June and July, any person may imagine that a Refreshing Shadow
cannot be enjoved without much Money and great Moyan, because of the then
extraordinary Heat of this place, which ordinarily is known to be a most Hot
Climate. In the Cool of the Evening, (a most dangerous Season I confess) all
persons promiscuously Throng thither, but chiefly about Ten of the Clock at
Night, when the Affections are much delighted with a most Sweet Melody and
Consort of Instrumental and Vocal Music, and all occasions of that nature, the
Guitar and Harp are most frequently used; because generally the Spaniards can
Dexterously Play on those Instruments. Where it is observable, that all Musicians
are had in great account at such a time, not respecting what persons they be,
which is hardly discernable, in regard that all are disguised by most Gorgeous
Apparel. It is further to be observed, that if the Jealous Spaniard can espy
any man Complementing his Wife with Jocose Words or Kisses, without any
consideration, he will Furiously Assault such a person with Sword and Cudgel,
whence arise many most lamentable Tragedies; for the preventing of which, the
Law has wisely appointed a considerable number of Allquaciles, whom we here
call Constables, whose proper and sole Office it is, to mediate betwixt those
persons, rewarding them with Bonds and Fetters for the commission of such
Horrid Outrages.

The ensuing day about eight of the Clock in the Morning, no place can be found
empty, whileas none of the Members of the Court are present, but the Mayor and
Aldermen.

This Morning Game or Recreation (called Encierro, or the bringing forth of the
Bull) is thus performed. There is a Gate in Madrid, De la vega by name, nigh to
which a large Room is appointed for the Reception of the Bulls the day
precedeing this Solemn Feast, where they are Gently Fed, rather to render them
the more Furious, than in the least to strengthen the miserable Creatures. It Is
certain that for the most part, Bulls are more Furious in Spain than any other
part of the World; and there more especially, such as Feed by the Rivers Tago
and Jarama flowing betwixt Toledo and Madrid. But to return to our purpose;
There is a long and straight Street or Lane adjoining to the House in which the
Bulls are shut up, and terminating in the place of public resort, where all
Passages are carefully stopped, only over against the foresaid Street there is
another large Room left wide open, whether the Mad Animals do Throng, finding
no other place of refuge left them; by which means a most easy course is
contrived for leading them forth to the Slaughter. I shall not detain you
longer by relating other Passiges of the Encierro; for its a matter scarce
worth our while, as being destitute of Order and Ornament, by reason of the
Courts Absence. About two of the Clock in the Afternoon twelve Gladiators
repair to the place, where all are permitted to Fight whom Magnanimity, or
Boldness shall excite thereto; which Liberty would unquestionably produce Sad
Tragedies, if full Goals and Empty Purses were not sufficient means to stop
such Disorders. Two hours after, there appear the Nobility in their Stately
Coaches, all the ground being Sprinkled over with Water, because of the Burning
Heat of the Sun.

Which while its a Setting, the King and Court, with the Counselors and
Ambassadors are to be seen to the great satisfaction of all persons. Upon the
back of this the Royal Constables, being twelve in number, in good Equipage,
and mounted on Horses with the Richest Harness imaginable, drive away all
persons and Disorders; insomuch, that in a very short time the Constables are
to be seen and none else in the plain Square. Afterward twenty and four
Hogsheads of Water are carried in Wagons, resembling so many green Mountains,
because of their bigness, and being covered over with most Fragrant Herbs;
those large Vessels are the Seats of twenty four men, who, upon demand, open
the Bung-Holes, so that in an Instant the whole Plain is Besprinkled with
Water. In the next place, the Kings Lifeguard consisting of 100. Spaniards,
and as many Germans, attend His Majesty all along, being Armed with Halberts;
whom Coats of Red and Yellow Silk, and Caps of the choicest Black Velvet, adorn
exceedingly.

By this time methinks you have got a pretty clear Idea of what is
Antecedaneous to the main thing in hand: So that, if the most Stately Balconies
and Theaters, if the vast number of People, if the Nobility Gorgeously (I had
said wonderfully) Arrayed, if the Kings Constables maintaining good Order, if
in the last place His Majesty's Lifeguard: I say, if each, and all of those be
Impartially Canvassed by such a Considerative person as you are; I doubt not
but you will be constrained upon the most solid grounds and reasons imaginable to
join with me in the commendation of this Festival beyond any Recreation in the
World. I confess France and Italy Vaunt very much of their Splended Games, (as
they call them) and the English upon more just grounds extol the Costliness of
their Prizes, and the Stateliness of their Coursing-Horses: But in my humble
Opinion, what I Am a describing, may claim right to the Pre-eminence. Yet, if
what has been hitherto said cannot sufficiently evince the Truth of this point,
I shall endeavor to drive out one Foming Bull, that by seeing the result of
such an Enterprise, your Curiosity may receive the greater satisfaction.

We told you that the Bull was shut up in a large Room, therefore the person,
whose undaunted Courage or Boldness sets him a work to Encounter with this
Raging Creature, stands to his Posture at the Door of the said House with a
long and sharp-pointed Lance in his Hand, having one of his Knees set to the
ground: Immediately after the Sound of a Trumpet, a Constable runs with all
possible speed, and sets the Door of the Room, where the Furious Animal is
enclosed, wide open. Way being thus made, and all persons Attentively looking
on, the man is by and by Assaulted with great Violence, which onset, if by
Dexterity or good luck, he can evade; there is a fair occasion presented him
for Killing or Wounding the Bull to purpose; which if he miss to do, his Life
or Members are in Jeopardy. It Is a thirsting desire after some imaginary Honor
that sets such Bold Fellows upon the exposing of themselves to those dangerous
circumstances, rather than the advantage of getting the Beasts which they have
Killed, or Wounded to purpose.

That the next Bull may be rendered the more Furious, they set up a quantity of
Wool, in Figure representing a man, with a considerable weight at his Legs;
which while the Beast pusheth in a most formidable manner, the weight keeps it
in a straight Position, by which means the Bull is wonderfully enraged.
Sometimes a very despicable Peasant is set upon a Lean Deformed Horse, and
exposed very often to a Violent Death, because of his Antagonists Strength and
Rage. For dragging out the Bulls once Killed, six Mules of diverse Colors are
appointed, which, by the conduct of four men, accomplish this work with all
possible Velocity and Artifice. Six Footmen are ordained to Encounter with the
four Beasts yet remaining, to whom no other Weapon is granted, but a Dagger
with some few Rexones in a Bagg, which in length exceed not six or seven
Inches, having Hafts well ordered with Bunches of Garlands, and Points
exceeding sharp for the more ready carrying on of the Intendment. Such as be
thus Stated are commonly most dextrous, whom it behooves to Fight with the Bull
Face to Face; he who does otherwise, will undoubtedly incur the risque of
Imprisonment, with most abashing Reproaches, and the loss of a considerable
Prize. Some men are so Nimble, that by a Gentle motion they can easily evade
the Bulls Fury, and attain their design. Thus matters go on until such time as
the Trumpet Sound; then Butchers-Dogs, and men Armed with Broad-Swords quickly
dispatch the Strength and Violence of those formidable Animals.

Some years ago I remember upon an occasion of this kind to have seen a thing
admirable indeed, viz.

A Young man of Twenty years Encountering with a big Bull, escaped all his
Comminations by the Nimble and Dextrous motion of his Leg; afterward he did
spring upon his Back, and catching hold of his Left Horn, Wounded him in
several places with the Rexones: In which Posture he continued until the
Trumpet was about to Sound, then (and not till then) he dispatched the Foaming
Bull with his Dagger, having sustained no prejudice imaginable. All persons
present were possessed with a wonderful Opinion of the Youth, because of his
surpassing Agility, Courage, Dexterity and Boldness. But seeing this example is
remarkable, we shall insist on it at greater length hereafter.

It will not be amiss here to mention what fell out upon such an occasion as
this in the presence of Charles the first, of Blessed Memory: Who, while Prince
of Wales, repaired to the Court of Spain, whether to be Married to the Infanta,
or upon what other design, I cannot well determine: However all Comedies,
Plays and Festivals, (this of the Bulls at Madrid being included, were
appointed to be as decently and Manificently gone about, as possible, for the
more Sumptuous and Stately Entertainment of such a Splended Prince. Therefore
after three Bulls had been Killed, and the fourth a coming forth, there
appeared four Gentlemen in good Equipage; not long after a Brisk Lady in most
Gorgeous Apparel, attended with persons of Quality, and some three or four
Grooms walked all along the Square a Foot. Astonishment Seized upon the
Beholders that one of the Female Sex could assume the unheard Boldness of
exposing her self to the violence of the most Furious Beast yet seen, which had
overcome, yea almost Killed two men of great Strength, Courage and Dexterity.
Incontinently the Bull rushed toward the Corner where the Lady and her
Attendants stood, she (after all had fled) drew forth her Dagger very
unconcernedly, and thrust it most dexterously into the Bulls Neck, having
catched hold of his Horn; by which stroke, without any more trouble, her design
was brought to Perfection; after which, turning about toward the King's
Balcony, she made her Obeisance, and withdrew her self in suitable State and
Gravity. Sir, did you ever see or hear, any example to parallel this? Wonderful
indeed! that a Faint-hearted feeble Woman (one would think) should stand in the
Fields Undauntedly, after her Attendants had quickly made their escape, yea and
have overcome such a Furious Creature as that Bull was. This being a matter of
Fact, which I thus branch forth into diverse circumstances; I hope my Fate shall
not be so bad, as to be called a Liar: Nevertheless, in regard that I judge you
one of my best Friends. I will not conceal the Mystery of the matter from you.
This person was a man, though in the Habit of a Woman, of great Experience,
Agility, and Resolution, who had been well inured to this hard Labor at
several other occasions, whom they appointed to be disguised so much the
rather, that the Prince of Wales might be the more taken with the thing. But
not insisting further on this, I shall proceed to the remaining part of my
Relation with all Brevity and Perspicuity possible.

Noblemen of singular Magnanimity, being mounted on Horses, incomparable Nimble
and Pretty, with costly Harness beseeming the Dignity of their Riders, and the
Splendour of the Festival; appear in great State and Pomp. Whose Grooms in a
most decent manner carry the Lances with which their Masters intend to
dispatch the Bulls. (Their Province and Charge is to irritate the Rage and Fury
of the formidable beast) Those Heroic minds managing their Lances most
Dexterously, accomplish their Noble purposes very often by Killing or Wounding
the Foaming Animals: Which if they fail to do, then the Horses sustain great
prejudice, in so much that their Riders are Dismounted, whom it behooves in
that case to Encounter with the Bulls a Foot, Lashing them with Broad-Swords;
which if any decline to do, he is Baffled, and Branded with the Character of
Pusillanimity and Cowardice. You may easily imagine that Generous Spirits will
prefer Death to such an Ignomy and Repr^ach. Thus three or four persons of
Quality continue until it be pretty late, at which time they drive out a Bull
covered all over with Artificial Fire, by which he is rendered most Furious and
Hurtful: For Curiosity and want of further order, induces the Rabble to approach
so near unto him, that by his most dreadful pushings many sustain Mutilation,
yea and Death it self; in so much that a Tragedy is often times the Conclusion
of this Solemnity.

In the last place of this Relation it may be worth the while to give a brief
Account of a notable instance of Folly in a Young Lady, and Passionate Temerity
in three Gallants, while the King and Nobility were present. Three Gentlemen,
Marcus Antonius, Charles and Lodovicus fell over Head and Ears in Love with a
certain Lady of good Extract and Education, being the only Child of her
Parents, and then about the Age of Twenty Years, whose Name was Margareta.
Those Rivals could hardly look upon one another without Menaces and blows, of
whom while any one endeavored, after the Spanish Custom, to make a Sweet
Pleasant Melody in the Hearing of the Lady, then the other two disturbed him;
which did breed many and great Quarrellings in the Streets each Night, insomuch
that the Ladies Parents and all others dwelling nigh that place, were highly
offended; which when Margareta had Espied, having (it seems) very little
Affection for any of them; directed Letters to them severally, for preventing
of all such Disorders for the future; of which Epistles the sum and Tenor
follows.

Gentlemen,
I Cannot be induced to believe that Music accompanied with scandalous
Disturbances, can be termed a Testimony of sincere Affection; yea, it seems
that you aim more by such a course to disgrace and baffle my Name; than to
testify any real respect to my Person: Therefore I earnestly entreat you may be
pleased to desist from such a Foolish, Unmannerly and Scandalous Action. But if
all this cannot be sufficient to put a stop to the Folly of your Exorbitant
Affections, I shall pose you with this experiment. Whoever resolves to express
his Dexterity, Courage and Agility to all Beholders sufficiently, and his
Ardent Love toward me, let him Buckle with the Bull to Morrow in presence of
all the Assembly, and he who shall be so Fortunate as to cut off his Neck, and
present me with his Horns, may be assured by my Subscription, that I shall not
decline to own him for my Husband: Which if any or all of you refuse to do, get
you gone; for Effeminate men are none of those I aim at, or desire to be joined
unto.

Farewell from Margareta.


This pertinent and smart Letter Non plus'd all the Rivals, seeing thereby a
Province was prescribed them, which they never dreamed of, nor judged any ways
Honorable; because Noblemen (such as those were) how dextrous soever they be,
are never desired to Grasp with the Bull a Foot, and very seldom on Horseback;
yet notwithstanding all opposition and Reluctance, lest they should be branded
with the detestable Character of Pufillanimity, they unanimously consented to
the Proposition, each of them signifying a part by a most Passionate Letter,
that he was absolutely determined to satisfy her demand, or die. Wherefore,
till the time appointed, they remained with the Rabble, that more easy and
speedy Access might be attained to appear in the performance of a thing in
which their Credit was so nearly concerned, where they composed themselves,
until the Noblemen well Mounted were about to Encounter with the fifth Bull;
at which time Marcus Antonius steping down, got most Nimbly on the Bull's back,
intending by that means to dispatch him quickly with his Broad Sword. Next to
him appeared Charles, whose business and work it was to Catch hold of the
Peasts Horns, which fell out so Fortunately, according to his desire and
design, that the Bull stumbled by the first Assault; so that Antonius fell to
the ground. Lodovicus, espying Charles sticking fast to the Horns, and Antonius
Dismounted, with a Dexterous and Seasonable stroke, cut off the Bulls Neck.
Charles immediately got to the Lady with the Head, signifying that the condition
of the Compact was fulfilled, and therefore he claimed an Interest in her for
his Wife. Lodovicus did take it very ill to be thus Trapan'd by Subtle Charles,
seeing he it was who cut off the Neck, and therefore concluded the Prize to be
his in all Justice. Antonius moreover being the person who gave first proof of
his Magnanimity, (making way for the other two) concluded it highly reasonable
that he should be preferred before either of them. Which did breed such a
wrangling among them, that had not the Alquaciles or Constables interposed,
they would have committed a most lamentable Tragedy; being now led to the King,
they give an Account of the matter, which when His Majesty heard, he commended,
in some respect, their Valor, but could not approve of their
Inconsiderateness; seeing therefore he understood it to be Vanity, if not
Cruelty, in the Foolish Lady, rather than any sincere Love, to demand such a
dangerous attempt; strict Orders were given that none of the Rivals should
persist or proceed in a course so very Foolish. Thus the debate ended.

We have now Impartially described what is considerable in the yearly Festival
at Madrid. I grant indeed, (as before) that it is a recreation scarcely
beseeming Christians, whose meekness and Gentleness should not admit of such
Barbarous Diversions. Nevertheless, (to speak no more of that) it is generally
concluded, that persons appointed for such an Exercise, ought to be furnished,
not only with suitable Courage, but also with Agility and Dexterity, to evade
the Assaults of a Violent Brute, by which means many become Famous.

Here we may observe how much the Roman Plays come short of this Game: For
Criminals were th^re compelled to Graple with Boars and Lions most Truculent
Creatures, of which few can promise themselves the Victory; and thus poor
Convicted Pannals suffered a most Cruel Death: To which it may be added, that
those Games were chiefly designed to satisfy the Bloody and Vindictive Humors
of the people, who rejoiced in such lamentable experiments. It is otherwise
here, in regard that no man is constrained to undergo this hard labor; neither
are Criminals punished with such a Death; but Masculine and Noble Minds desire
an occasion of this kind, whereby proof may be given of their Agility and
Undaunted Courage. However (as I told in the beginning) it is not my work to
praise or condemn this most Ancient and Uncontrolled Custom. All I aimed at
was, to satisfy your commendable Curiosity by describing this Festival, which
is judged in Spain a most Noble Recreation. Our next businss shall be to
enlarge a little on the History of Placidus, of whom mention was made elsewhere.

The History of Placidus.
THis Placidus (a youth very much admired and praised because of his Valiant
Exploits) was the Son of Fadrique who played the Merchant with one Antonius in
Sevil, a City in Spain well known, and much commended by Travelers of all
Nations and Languages who resort thither.

Undaunted Courage set our Placidus a work to Graple with a most Violent Brute,
after he had remained sometime in Madrid, whether he repaired without the
knowledge and Consent of his Indulgent Parents for this very end, that in the
Flower of his Age, all persons from the King to the Peasant, might receive a
sufficient (I may say wonderful) Specimen of his surpassing Fortitude and
Magnanimity.

Here its observable, that Fadrique and his Hopeful Son seemed rather to be one
Person, than two; for in Nature, Demeanor, Stature, Speech and Countenance,
they resembled one another so much, that a quick-sighted man could hardly
distinguish betwixt them: Yea, although the Father was a man of 50. and the Son
but of 20 years, yet any who looked upon their Pictures, affirmed stiffly that
the one was an exact Pattern to the other: And had not the Eyes of men been a
demonstration to the contrary, I am apt to believe that the possibility of such
an universal similitude (so to call it) would be thought a Chymaera. Yet if we
consult Authors of good Note and great worth, many instances of this kind may
be found.

Valor. Max. with great Confidence affirms that Pompey the Great, Vrelius and
Publeius Libertinus differed in nothing, but their Vestments; so that if two of
them were Arrayed after the same Fashion, a quick-sighted person could not
assign a difference betwixt them. It is also written by Pliny, that two Boys
(the one being a Syrian, and the other a French) were so very like to one
another in every point, that a certain person sold them to Marcus Antonius
under the notion of Brethren. Antonius perceiving their Language to differ,
Threatened the person who had thus imposed on him, to whom the other replied, If
they had been Brethren, I would not require so great a sum of Money, because in
that case Nature could not be said to bring forth so great a wonder, as now you
see.

If it be true in any respect, that (according to the Philosopher) similitude
begets Affection, how much more in this instance of Fadrique and Placidus,
whose mutual love was wonderful beyond that of most persons in such a Relation.
Yet by the Interposition of Agnes, a Young Lady of singular Endowments and
Education, the Brightness of this Splendid Passion suffered in some measure an
Eclipse. This Beautiful Object became the Center of their Desires and
incontaminate Love, which could not be smothered long: Wherefore they
discovered their Maladies to one another in a most Friendly manner, and
determined (after a Serious and Mature consultation) to submit the event of the
matter in hands to the Young Ladies and her Mothers Arbitrament; insomuch that
the person excluded, should remove from his Native Country, lest by his
Presence way might be made for Jealousy, whose effects are more dangerous no
where, than in Spain. After this both of them met with bad Entertainment, and
small Encouragement at the hands of Agnes and her Mother: Yet in Process of
time Fadriques Riches and Constancy, had great influence on the Matron. It is
true the Youth of Placidus was no small motive to obtain the respect of the
Pretty Lady: Nevertheless Baggs of Money were an Argument a fortiore. After
both Parties had pondered sedately the Circumstances most remarkable, the
Mother speaks to her Daughter after this manner.

My Dear Child, you see there is no Solid Objection which can be brought
against those Worthy Persons who have set their Affections on you; and
therefore, I judge it most reasonable, that you freely declare your own
Sentiments in this Affair. I know the Neatness and Youth of Placidus, will have
great weight with you; and on the other hand Fadrique 's declining Age will in
some measure alienate your Affections from him: But hearken diligently my
Daughter to the Dictates of right Reason, rather than fond Fancy, which
misleads many in your Circumstances; and you shall find Riches, and Experience
more eligible, than undaunted Youth, or any other imaginary foundation, on
which the Superstructure of your Desires and Designs are fixed. That this may
yet have the greater weight in your estimation, consider how much Riches
contribute to beget Esteem and Honor in this City where we live; So that
Persons of Noble Extract, lose their Dignity frequently with their Wealth. What
is Beauty but a Fading Flower, which Nature in a short time, or some unexpected
Accident will prey upon, and reduce to nothing? Let a Brisk Gallant discharge
to admiration all the Punctilio's of Court-Education and Activity; will that
purchase Food and Raiment? Whereas Money Answers all things; without which
Trading and Commerce should die. I judge it superfluous to make an enumeration
of the qualities of Gold which we Eat, and with which we are clothed: Hence
arose the Proverb, That is Gold which is purchased by Gold; which saying
renders it most universal, seeing all things are valued at some rate or other.
It is true, I confess, Placidus is inferior to few Gentlemen in Probity and
Reputation; but its as true, his Father, (though Rich) has many Children, and
may in all probability beget many more; what then will the Riches amount to,
which must be divided among so many? You know if it were possible to divide the
Ocean into many Rivulets, this vast Collection of Waters would appear very
inconsiderable, in respect of what it now is. But I pass by this Topic; lest
that you may suspect Interest prevails with me. In the next place therefore,
let us consider whether or no you can promise your self as great satisfaction
in the one, as the other: Not at all; for, whoever is Married to Placidus, must
necessarily be in a Slavish subjection to his Father, his Brethren, Sisters and
Relations; whereas the Wife of Fadrique will enjoy Immunity from such a bitter
lot, as being above and beyond the reach of all those Censurers.

Alas! alas! Woeful experience the School-mistriss of Fools, has furnished me
with this Observation; as witness those Gray-Hairs, brought forth untimously by
Excessive Grief and Sorrow. Shall you deck your self with the Finest
Needle Work, and most Gorgeous Raiment possible; then Black-mouthed Back-biters
will readily misconstrue your Neatness. If on the other hand, such a decorum be
neglected, why (say they) she is not content with her Lot and Condition. You
cannot frequent Divine Worship without the Character of Levity or Hypocrisy,
nor forbear such a Religious Observance; but immediately occasion will be taken
of branding you with the stigma of an Irreligious wretch. In fine, the Eyes of
all Relations will be sixed upon you, that you cannot promise your self
Satisfaction and Tranquillity in the most minute circumstance. And it may be
added further, that such an uncharitable multitude may so influence your
Husband with prejudice, that in a very short time, the greatest of all your
Miseries shall arise from his Jealousy or unbeseeming carriage toward you.

If so be then, that by being Espoused to Fadrique, no such Inconveniences can
in reason be suspected; what remains, but that in obedience to those pressing
Arguments of your Loving Mother, and in relation to your own future
Contentment, you cheerfully assent to the Proposals of the Father without the
least Reluctance imaginable.

Those Pithy motives founded on Reason and Experience, wrought a sensible and
sudden change upon Agnes; insomuch, that in a thundering manner, she decided
the whole matter in Favors of Fadrique; which conclusion produced no less
Sorrow to Placidus, than Contentment and Joy to Fadrique. Whereupon dejected
Placidus, (according to his Passion) without any more delay, forsook his Native
Country, having got from his Father about 1000 Guinies, who left it to his
choice to suspend his time in India, Italy, or the Low Countries, being to
receive Money upon Bill according to the Custom and Necessity of Gentlemen
while Abroad.

When he had come to Naples in Italy, his Genius inclined him to play the
Soldier, as being an Employment, by which Honor and lasting Renown is most
attainable. After a few Months there, he enjoined his Trustee to certify
Fadrique and all Relations of Placidus Death, that Intercourse of Letters might
be stopped, which he judged the fittest course and method to free him from
Pensive Melancholy; but all this could not Eradicate a Passion so deeply
rooted.

Fadrique by Successful Traffic attained quickly to vast Possessions, which
with a Virtuous Wife, might be supposed a Pleasant Condition. Yet,
notwithstanding all this, the want of Children was matter of great Grief to
him: Wherefore, (that his Memory might not die with himself) he resolves,
without delay, to distribute his Riches among his Nephews, Charles and Bernard,
who are brought to him for that purpose. Their Uncle and his Lady Entertain the
Boys with all the Expressions of Joy and Kindness possible. In a very short
time their good Behavior and Affability did procure unto them a great many
Friends and Acquaintances in Sevil, where they pass under the Notion of
Fadriques Sons. The Old man's love to his Nephews rose to so much the greater
height, that he perceived himself decaying more sensibly than could be expected
by the course of Nature, not being as yet 60 years, whereas Agnes appeared more
Brisk than ever.

Thus Charles and Bernard discerning that their Uncle had in a manner centered
the Comfort and Tranquillity of his Decript Old Age on them, waxed Insolent and
Disrespectful toward Agnes, whose Prudence taught her to obviat the very
beginning of this evil, by representing such Enormities to her Indulgent
Husband, The Old man complying with his Wife, appointed a Lodging elsewhere for
his Nephews, with all things necessary, and suitable to their Condition: which
course no ways abated the Insolence of the Young men, but rather increased the
same; insomuch that they branded Agnes with Incontinency, and many other
Vicious qualities.

At this time Placidus (having Traveled all Italy over) came to Bononia, where
his Life was in Jeopardy: For happening to be late out of his Lodging, the
second or third night after he came to Town, he wandered in the Streets by
reason of Darkness, and his Unacquaintedness with the several Corners of the
City; at length espied in a place, some what remote, a Glimmering Light,
whether when he had approached, three Cutthroats are found Assaulting one
Gentleman with all possible Fury. The Compassionate Placidus thinking that a
fit season for Charity and Fortitude, became the Oppressed Gentleman's
Assistant, by which means two of the Rogues were Grievously Wounded, the third
being Smote with the Edge of the Sword.

Having thus Rescued the Italian from Eminent Death, not without some danger
(for he sustained the prejudice of 2 or 3 Wounds) he calls his Servant to bring
his Horse. James Viteli, in whose behalf he had Seasonably appeared: Answered,
saying, Sir, Your Ineffable Kindness and Courage calls for my Attendance as a
Servant, who am ready and willing to wait upon all opportunities, whereby I may
express my Gratitude. I know diligent search will be made for us by and by;
therefore (seeing I take you to be a Stranger unacquainted with this City) I
entreat you may be pleased to accept of my Company; and by the Grace of God, we
shall escape the Rage and Fury of our Adversaries; and I promise to Dress and
Cure your Wounds in a very short time. Placidus concluded it highly Reasonable
to lay hold on such a good motion: Wherefore James Viteli conducted him from
one Street to another, until at last he came to an House, where, it is probable,
he had been known; upon which consideration, he knocks hard at the door, until
such time as a comely Youth had given him access; forthwith, (according to his
duty and promise) he dressed the wounds of Placidus, which were not deep nor
deadly; enjoining withal that the Student should go in all have to such a
Street by name, and return with one exact account of all emergents: whether
when the young man had come, he sees all things in a hurly-burly, one man being
dead, on whom a great number of Citizens are gazing; and orders given to
apprehend such as could be suspected any way accessory to such an
Assassination. Where also he heard a certain person imprisoned, confessing that
he was the Servant of one Placidus, a Spaniard, who had killed the man. When
the Youth returned, he gave an impartial account of all occurrences observed by
him. The Gentlemen perceiving what might be the result of such a commotion,
slipped away quietly, in regard that they concluded it most dangerous to stay so
near the place of Justice, where a strict search was to be made.

Having thus escaped hazard, Placidus is curious to know the original of his
companions misfortune, in being assaulted by three men in such a place. To whom
Viteli answered thus:

My dearest Placidus, I determine to disclose this secret to no man living, yet
considering you to be my greatest friend upon earth, who in my cause exposed
your Noble Person to danger; (and neglecting all the important affairs which
induced you to see Bononia) has continued my companion in affliction (though a
Stranger) I say upon these, and many other weighty considerations (which my
shallow brain cannot comprehend, nor my stammering tongue express) I will with
the greatest candor and ingenuity imaginable, discover this matter to you.

I was born at Rome, the Queen and Mistress of the World, where (when I was
very young) my Honorable Parents gave up the Ghost. After that I had sucked in
the first and common principles of Learning, my good Friends and Relations sent
me to the famous University of Bononia, where I made no despicable proficiency
in Philosophy, and all the Languages professed there, which are the Spanish,
German, French, Hebrew and Greek: All which could not satiate my thirsting
desires after Knowledge, until the study of Physic became my work and
business. But a Lady of singular Endowments and Quality, being pleased to
honor me with the strongest Testimonies of sincere affection, diverted my
thoughts from prosecuting the most pleasant of all Studies. How secret soever
this matter was kept, the Ladies Brother understood it; which prompted him,
with two other Conspirators, to lie in wait for my Life: and undoubtedly had
become a prey to their Fury, if (by the Divine Providence) one of the three had
not signified to me the method of this most horrid Plot.

Then I determined to travel through Spain and other Countries, but (being
driven from Genoa by a most violent Tempest) I was enslaved to the Turks, who
first brought me to Argiers, and then to Constantinople, where I was sold very
often under the notion of a Slave. At length I am presented to one of Mahomet's
Physicians, who finding me pretty expert in the principles of Medicine, was
pleased to encourage me with his Fellowship and Instruction, to my great
advantage (I must confess) in some respects; whose gentleness was such, that he
would not thwart my inclinations of returning to Italy, but rather encouraged
me by the Gift of 2000 Guinies.

After a tedious and dangerous Voyage, I came to Venice, where (being unknown)
the People looked upon many of my Operations and Experiments as Miracles,
rather than the product of natural Knowledge; for which cause the Magistrates
encouraged me with promises of a very considerable Salary. But all this could
not induce me to stay, seeing my thoughts and desires were much cencerned with
returning to Bononia, where I had enjoyed so many pleasant days. I could not
imagine that it was possible for any in that place to know me after the absence
of six complete years; which time also might quench the ardour of Camilla's
passion (Ah! her name cannot be concealed, nor my love toward her suppressed.)
Upon those considerations I came to Bononia, where I was entertained with great
Courtesy by all persons of knowledge, to whom I discovered my various
misfortunes and difficulties; by which means the noise of my being in Town came
to the hearing of Camilla; who incontinently saluted me by a most pathetical
Letter, as you may easily imagine. Thus our love was renewed; and so much the
more, because she came the ensuing day disguised to my Chamber, where we
entertained a most comfortable Dialogue founded on the solid hopes of obtaining
our longed for desires. I seemed to decline and reject the profession of
Medicine in the University of Bononia, merely, that Camilla's Brother, and his
Associates, might not in the least suspect me whom they hated with an
inveterate hatred, which time nor dignity could not eradicate. Nevertheless, by
debating, I obtained the honor of that place. Then Engines of Cruelty are set
a work to dispatch me some way or another: and (I must confess) the Rogues had
accomplished their corrupt design, if by the Divine Providence, your seasonable
Charity and Magnanimity had not rescued my Life from their malice. In Testimony
therefore of my gratitude, I protest to remain your most faithful friend and
Servant while I breath, declaring to that end a willingness of accompanying you
to Spain, or any where else.

Placidus was very much taken with the grateful acknowledgments, and
protestations of lasting kindness, so pitifully expressed by Viteli: Yet,
(being unwilling to divulge or disclose the hidden sorrow which burdened his
spirit) he answered the other in a most courtly and complementing strain. Sir,
you may confidently assure your self of my unalterable good will, wherever
you be, or however stated. The pregnant Viteli, by a groan attending those
words, perceived Placidus to be a little discomposed: wherefore he resolved to
know the cause of so great grief at a more seasonable occasion. In the
meanwhile, they entered into a strict League of Amity, having all things common;
in which real kindness consists (if we hear the Philosopher). A few days after
they come to Genoa where (as all along their Perigrination) their thoughts were
alleviated, by giving an impartial and free account to one another of their
diverse misfortunes, and so much the more, in regard that Viteli, by his
superlative knowledge, and jocose brisk disposition, was a Physician no less
capable to remove the sorrows of the mind, than the Distempes of the body. Yet
Placidus, in some measure, continues dumpish and pensive; so that Viteli
intended to expiscate and extort from him the original and cause of so lasting
a Grief, and did carry all things on in order to his conclusion so wittily,
that Placidus is allured to discover the perplexity of his mind, after this
manner. Your probity and gentleness extracteth from me a secret which I never
purposed to disclose. After which he makes mention of Fadrique's compact with
him, (while both of them had a longing desire to enjoy the virtuous and
beautiful Agnes) who, by the instigation and persuasion of her covetous Mother,
rejected him, embracing Fadirque. In a word, he did not omit the least
Punctilio, which could satisfy the curiosity of Viteli; who replying, answered
thus:

My dear Placidus, Be of good cheer: for there is no Malady so great, which
admits not of a Remedy applied with so much the better success, that the
Patient can discover his Distemper distinctly, as you have done, and therefore
I constantly promise (being taught by experience, what such a case means) to
remove your trouble and grief, by an experiment at first (its probable) strange
in your eyes; though, after mature deliberation, most obvious. All I crave is,
that you condescend yet once more, to walk with me in the Streets of Sevil.

Having thus Embarked at Genoa, they arrived at Barcelona; from whence they
sailed by Tarragona, Valentia, Alicant, Cartagena, and the borders of Granada,
until they came to Malaga, and at length to Cadiz, the Haven of St. Mary and
St. Luke, and sailed thence all along the River Betis to Sevill; where (being
in strangers apparel) they search for a convenient Lodging; in which Placidus
abode, while the intelligent Veteli went abroad, informing himself, the best
way he could, about the state of Affairs in Fadrique's House; which he
understood exactly, and returned to Placidus, signifying how indulgent dying
Fadrique was toward his insolent Nephews, Charles and Bernard; as also that
Agnes looked as brisk as ever. In a word, he answered the most particular
questions so fully, that Placidus's Grief was in a great measure assuaged.

The learned Viteli gave such proof of his knowledge in Physic by sundry
wonderful Experiments, that in an instant his Name spread abroad. Agnes
therefore hearing of such an expert Physician, thought it her near concernment
and duty to consult with him concerning the nature of Fadrique's disease which
was concluded mortal by all other Physicians in Sevill. Viteli, having visited
the old man, discerned Nature shrinking, and Death approaching: Nevertheless,
to encourage the Lady, he confidently affirmed, in the presence of many Learned
and Judicious men, that his Disease was not mortal; which assertion he
confirmed with reasons and arguments founded upon the most solid and genuine
Philosophy, so that no place was left for cavils, all Physicians there present,
being persuaded of the truth of his Discourse. Which comforted Agnes so much,
that with great intimacy in private Conferences, she searched into Viteli's
sentiments in this affair. The expert Physician failed not at such a time, to
make mention of Placidus, whose valiant exploits he praised with such Eloquence
and admiration, that the Ladies pristine love revived, and prompted her to
enquire very concernedly where he lived, and whether there was any truth in the
noise of his Death. The smart Viteli by such questions, perceiving much
affection to center in the Ladies breast toward Placidus, answered her thus:

Madam, I am obliged to declare the truth, and cannot sufficiently declare what
is true concerning his lasting renown abroad; nor how constant and Christian
his love has been to you: otherways, the excessive grief of his spirit, had
undoubtedly rendered him desperate, and accessory to his own death. The rumor
of his Death, implied that his love might be termed dead, because without the
hope of enjoying its object.

God knows (said Agnes) how much I desired to be married to him: but Fortune
has so ordered, that I should be the Wife of Fadrique, though much against my
inclinations. Yea, I must add (seeing this Subject is pleasant) that the love
of Placidus is of great force with me to this hour. It is true, I am obliged
every way to bear a suitable respect to Fadrique, who has continued all along a
kind Husband, never believing the odd aspersions with which his insolent
Nephews Charles and Bernard endeavored to brand me.

I know (said Viteli) that many Waters cannot quench Love, but it must break
forth after some manner or other. And methinks, the Divine Providence has
conducted me hither in a good season; therefore, seeing that I am persuaded
that (according to the course of nature) Fadrique cannot live fifteen days.
Madam, (if you be pleased) I shall, in the mean time, contrive and carry on
matters so dexterously, that by your Husbands last Will, and without the lest
opposition, you may enjoy your beloved Placidus instead of his Father. I have
heard Fadrique (replied the Lady) at sundry times, in a most pathetical and
passionate manner expressing sorrow and grief for the Death of his great, and
real friend Placidus (as he called him) For (said he) if my Son were alive, I
would dispose of my substance to him and you; ordering withal your
co-habitation under the notion of Husband and Wife. But (supposing Placidus be
yet alive) our union will meet with great opposition from Fadrique's insolent
Nephews. Nay, Madam (said he) leave that to me: for I am willing to lose the
reputation of a Gentleman, yea, and life it self, if I do not carry on the
matter so wittily, that in great peace, without the least shadow of fear or
danger, you shall enjoy Placidus for your loving Husband. Thus Agnes went to
her Closet with great Joy. Placidus could not easily be persuaded of the
possibility of the matter; yet hi companions pregnant wit and knowledge, added
some confidence to him, for Viteli had undertaken, not only to remove
Fadrique's present Distemper, but also to renew his Youth and strength, chiefly
that by such means (a sophism indeed) Placidus might attain to the enjoyment of
his longed for Agnes: For which cause (said the ingenious Viteli in the
presence of learned Physicians) you shall in a very short time perceive,
Fadrique brisk and vigorous, with Teeth, Hair, and Color suitable to the age of
thirty or forty years. Those learned men laughed him to scorn; and the Lady
doubted of the matter greatly. But to put an end to doubting, and mocking, he
spoke to the Physicians in the presence of Agnes, Charles and Bernard after
this manner:

I must confess the opposition of such Judicious men might terrify Galen,
Hyppocrates, and Esculapius, of whom it is reported, That he raised himself from
the Dead. How much then may a Novice (such as I am) tremble when I consider
that I have undertaken in your presence to demonstrate, how the radical
moisture may be restored; insomuch that decrepit old Age shall be constrained
to Cloth it self with the Color, Vigor, and other qualities of brisk Youth:
Nevertheless, the strength which attends truth reduced to practice, revives my
fainting Spirits; so that with confidence I affirm the certainty (as well as
the possibility) of my demonstration, which I shall endeavor to evince in the
Spanish Tongue (though with the greater difficulty) for the satisfaction of
Agnes, Charles and Bernard, the Parties mostly concerned.

Gentlemen,
You know very well, Experience, Authority and Reason, are the surest
foundations by which any truth can be supported; From all which my Proposition
shall be made evident.

The Learned Arnaldus, Villa Nova, Tully, Paracelsus, Cardanus, and others,
whom we need not mention, favor us in this point; as also the Alchymists Arbor
vitae: so that Authorities abound with us.

In the next place, Blaicus de Taranto affirms that in Saguntum in the Kingdom
of Valentia, there was a Nunn of sixty years, whose age was renewed, having
Teeth, Hair, Color and Vigor, as if she had been but thirty years old.

And Antonius Torquemada in his Dialogues, gives us an account of an Old Man
who was restored to strength, being one hundred years old; after which
wonderful change he lived fifty years. From which Author and common Tradition,
we hear of such an instance in Toledo. All learned men know that passage
related by Ferdinandus de Castaneda, lib. 8. And by Petrus Malfeus, lib. 3.
Hist. Ind. how that a Noble Man of India lived Three hundred and forty years,
in which time his Age was renewed thrice.

If we consult reason, we shall find her no less favorable than Authority or
experience: For what is Youth, but an equality or proportion of natural heat
and radical moisture? Yea, according to Galen and all other learned Physicians,
the difference of the Ages is deduced from the different operations of the
natural heat. And Aristotle affirms, that the nature of Old Age consists in
Frigidity and Siccity; from whose Explication, Lib. de Long. and brev. vitae we
learn, that such men wax old soonest, whose Life has been attended with
greatest labors and cares, which cause a dispendium of the natural heat.
Therefore (if this be true) it seems that Humid Medicaments, with hot Potions
and Applications may restore decaying Age, by reducing the radical moisture,
and natural heat to such a proportion as they enjoy in Youth. And it is
observed, that the Divine Providence has furnished diverse Stones, Herbs and
Waters with qualities, which, (if known) would silence all cavillings in this
matter. It is reported by Cardanus, Langius, and Petrus Chieza that in Bonica
and Lucaya Wells are extant whose Waters are more delicious than the choicest
Wines, having in them virtue to renew a man's Age; this is testified by Aris.
lib 3. Hist. Animal. Cap. 12. and other Authors of good note. Homer also
mentions the like of Herbs. And methinks although the Simples requisite for
producing such strange effects be not commonly known, yet it is a male Sequitur
to infer, therefore no man knows them: Yea, no man in sober reason can deny,
that Spirits are contained in Herbs, Waters and Stones; which being once
granted, it necessarily follows that these, when well extracted and applied,
may serve to carry on such a rare work, as I now mention, and am about to
demonstrate. Further, it is observable that I have been traveling many years,
by which I had occasion to discourse with Mahomet's Physicians, as also with
Arabians, Persians, and Phenicians; upon which consideration it may be
suspected that I know things not discovered as yet in this place: Wherefore, I
shall, (with God's Grace) restore Fadrique to strength and health, seeing I
perfectly understand his malady and Complexion. But you may ask, if in such a
case he may be called young? I answer, not at all; but that he is in a better
disposition for life according to his nature. Now if this Theory suffice not to
stop the Mouths of Wranglers; the matter shall be put beyond all doubt by
practice. Thus ended Viteli his pertinent Discourse. Who (after the dying Old
Man had been committed to him) made a paction, that none should disturb him by
coming into the room where he was to tarry with the sick Person, except such as
he called; and that Apothecaries should grant him what Simples he pleased to
ask; all persons consented to those demands: but none more cordially and
cheerfully than Agnes, who was privy to Viteli's design. The next day was
appointed for the work. Viteli having repaired to his Lodging, discovered to
Placidus how much he was applauded by the Physicians; and also that Agnes was
exceeding glad, the young men Charles and Bernard being much dejected: and he
persisted in the former confidence that all things would succeed aright, and be
brought to an happy issue. He strictly charged Placidus to eschew all Society,
considering that the Non-observance of that Rule, had a necessary tendency to
mar the curious contrivance. Then he returned to the Patient, to whom he gave
a portion, which being mingled with a little Poison, set the Old Man's Tongue
at work, giving vigor and Agility to his body in a short time, to the
admiration of all Beholders.

After which Viteli spoke privately to Agnes, saying, Madam, Fadrique will not
in all probability live nine days: therefore it is convenient to call Placidus,
seeing the Old Man in his last Will has made you his heir, appointing a
thousand pounds for each of his Nephews, to either of which if you be married,
the Possessions set apart for you are lost. But, if you choose Placidus for
your Husband, he must in all reason receive the half of his Fathers substance.
Now you see how nearly you are concerned to hearken to my Propositions, seeing
matters shall be so dexterously carried on, that all persons will conclude
Fadrique yet alive. This I hope will prove acceptable and comfortable to you
and Placidus, whom I ought to serve according to my capacity while I live.

The Old Man, will go down to the Grave with Joy, by this course, which will
create affliction to his insolent Nephews. Not long after Fadrique dies, and
is buried after a most clandestine manner; in whose place they substitute
Placidus, whom all persons affirmed to have been Fadrique restored to Health
and Vigor. Which business being fully concluded to the satisfaction of the
Parties mostly concerned; Viteli prosecuted his design of Traveling. This
Relation discovers much of the Worlds Deceitfulness, which is frequently
defended by great Authorities improved with disingenuity.

Sir, I shall add no more concerning the Solemnity at Madrid, and the History
of Placidus, wishing that your pleasure in reading may correspond to the desire
I entertained to satisfy your curiosity in writing the same.

Farewell.

FINIS.

