Sir Arthur Hasilrig's MEDITATIONS. OR, The Devil looking over Durham.
WHere am I? what shall I be? -- where shall I meet my good fellows? -- By the
figure of 5 -- at the Devil -- will they meet me? What, all Traitors! no body
resenting these Grand Privileges of Our Parliament, so infringed and violated
by the consent of the whole Nation? Wherefore did I purchase such a vast Estate
of Deans and Chapters Lands? Why have I merited a great name in the ruin of
three Kingdoms, if it must be in the power of any body to question it? Did not
I bid defiance to old Oliver, whom I knew as much concerned in this lamentable
Account as my self, because I knew there was no sheathing of the Sword?

Well, what I want in wisdom and courage, I will supply in Perjury and
impudence, but yet that will not serve the turn; is there no remaining ill
qualities which the Kingdoms have not talled of? Had Sir Henry Vene again, for
all our former dissentions, and the irremediable distractions among Atheistical
Logger-heads, I would introduce any Gallimaufry of Government, but I would
disappoint the longing and just Expectation of a Settlement.

Do you hear me! I am quarrelled at for several things, viz. Why should the
Bishopric of Durham be conferred on a Manslayer? Beloved, I ran away from the
Devizes with all the celerity and speed imaginable, which Sir William Waller
will bear witness to; if I killed any man, it was in Effigy, or when I lately
stabbed a Picture at Wimbleton; I am heartily sorry I can do that poor Girl no
more favor: Oh I could with! But however, I will marry my Son and Heir to
Frances Rich, because I am sure of a strong party upon old Cromwell's score, and
now Lambert and they are all one; and by the assurance of all these Interests,
shall not I be Sir Arthur?

As for the increase of my Temporal estate, I refer you to Mr. Collingwoods
case, whom I ruined in despite of Olivers Nose, upon the consciousnesse of his
Arbitrary Usurpation; There was Verdict upon Verdict against me, but that
signifies nothing against a R -- P Resolve. I hope I have so disabled him, that
I shall never hear more of that injustice.

I must now begin to exercise a virtue (which a moderate Fortune could not
teach me) called Patience; would I were again in Portsmouth. I did not near Mr.
Burgess speak a word or it there, no nor at the House: my Honesty and his
Divinity are alike compensable; He must not be longer an Eaton-Colledge-Fellow,
nor I any longer of the Council of State, and can you blame me to be angry at
this disaster?

Who will take the pains to innumerate my Virtues? though I cannot assure him
now the thanks of the House, be shall have a Royalists Estate, gratis, upon
the sale of Sir George Booth's Lands, What shall I say? Would any man have
believed such a thing as divine Justice, that has lived 18 years uncontrollable
and unquestionable to the Laws? Must I that pulled down the Gates of the City
of London, commanded their Walls to be broken down, that several breaches
might be made, and put that violence upon them, which no English Prince in his
utmost fury ever offered the City, forgo that kind of Omnipotency? I will
rather run after Lambert and own the Commitee of Safety, and three or four
times abjure the Covenant.

I am so vexed, that in short, if cannot be revenged on you all, i will be
suddenly revenged on my self.

Arthur Hasilrig.


