Critical Enquiries INTO THE Various Editions OF THE BIBLE: PRINTED In Diverse
PLACES and at several TIMES.

Together with ANIMADVERSIONS UPON A Small Treatise OF Dr. ISAAC VOSSIVS;
Concerning the ORACLES of the SIBYLLS. And an ANSWER to the OBJECTIONS of the
late CRITICA SACRA.

Written Originally in Latin, by Father Simon of the Oratory: Translated into
English, by N. S.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Braddyll. MDCLXXXIV.

Robert Denison TO THE Most Worthy and Learned J. H.
THis little Gift, which, being not long since at Paris, I received from a most
Eminent Divine of that City, I bequeath, most worthy Sir, to You, as knowing
well how successfully for many Years you have bent your Studies to this sort of
Learning.

The ensuing Treatise was taken out of the Large Critical History of the Old
Testament, Written Originally in the Latin Tongue; which Original the F. Simmon.
Author was lately thinking to have published himself. For the French Edition,
which is common in every bodies Hand, is only a Compendium of the Latin, that
has not yet seen the Light; and was indeed designed for Persons accustomed to
that Language, who as they are more Nice and Curious, so they are soon tired
with what is long and tedious. Nevertheless I could wish that Work had been
communicated entire to us, who are not so scrupulous and delicate; for we do
not easily reject those Things that are good; but tho it could not be obtained
from that most laborious Author of the Critical Animadversions: Yet a Parisian
Divine, both Doctor and Canon, who had then some thoughts of setting forth a
Bible completely furnished, bestowed it in pure Friendship upon Us, whatever it
be, which he assured me he received from the Author of the Critics, to be
inserted among the rest of those Additions designed for the Bible, which he was
then intending to publish: For, most worthy Sir, the Study of Critical
Animadversion is not yet grown so cold among the Parisian Divines, but that in
our Age, there are yet some most Learned Persons among them, who contemning the
Trifles and Idle Subtleties of the Schools, handle that Art with singular
Success, as being eminently skilled both in the Greek and Hebrew Languages. In
the number of these is He, who willingly Communicated to me these Critical
Enquiries, into the various fortune that has befallen the Bible, through the
diversity of Times and Places. Perhaps most learned Sir, that Parisian Divine
may seem to you to have fallen somewhat too severely upon our most Excellent
Vossius. But if those Monsters of Opinions, which he lays to the Charge of our
most Learned Vossius, be but attentively considered, you shall not find him to
have exceeded the Laws of Moderation and Equity. But I need say no more to
recommend to you, so Knowing and Judicious in this kind of Learning, the
Reading of this little Treatise: For I remember how highly you valued, residing
in Paris, the Wit, the Learning and Judgment of the Author of the Critica
Sacra, tho otherwise little known to you at that time, then by his Writings.
And indeed such is the Genius, worthy Sir, with which you came into the World,
that what is good you approve, what is right and true you applaud, even in Men
who differ from us in their Religion and Forms of Worship. Therefore if there
be any thing too sharply uttered in that same Author, or which may seem not to
comply with the General Doctrine of the Protestants, you know him to be one of
those who professes the Faith of the Romish Church. In the mean time accept
this little Present, whatever it be, and believe that I am always ready to
serve you in greater things.

Oxford, the middle of April. 1683.
The TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
Candid Reader.
THE former Critic of Mr. Richard Simon, one of the Fathers of the Oratory,
lately published, first in French, and then in English, having suffered the fate
of all other Books (of this nature especially,) and undergone the Censures of
the various Capacities of Readers; the Author has since thought fit to take
the work a second time in hand, and having revised, and abridged it, he put it
into the Latin Tongue, from whence we have made this Version, intending (as I
believe) that fewer of the ignorant, and injudicious part of his Countrymen
should hereafter busy their heads about it: Adding to it an Appendix, by way of
answer to certain objections raised against it, by the incomparably, and
famously Learned Dr. Isaac Vossius in his late Tract, Entitled, De Sybillinis
Oraculis. As for the few passages that in the former Edition were any way
obnoxious to the cavils of some, they are here mostly omitted: so that there is
very little to be found that is like to prove offensive to any sort of men or
persuasion in Religion, if but moderately Ingenuous. This great and excellent
Scholar is, (it must be confessed) one who lives in the Communion of the Roman
Church, but it must be withal remembered, that so was the great Erasmus also,
who nevertheless is highly valued by all sorts of sober Protestants, and
equalled in a manner with the very prime, and best of their Authors, insomuch
that his learned Commentaries upon the Holy Scriptures were rendered into our
own Tongue, and chained up to the Pillars of our Churches in the very heat of
the Reformation. As to the Book itself, I shall not be so importune as to
forestal either the judgments or satisfaction of its Readers, but only
adventure in the general to say thus much; that as it savours neither of the
Raveries of the Bigot, nor of the insolence of the Profane, so in it the
learned Man and Scholar will find what will content him, and the common man,
when he sees how many, and abstruse things must be first known before a man can
arrive to a competent judgment of Scripture difficulties, will find great
reason for modesty and humility, and not over pragmatically to oppose his own
private spirit to the wisdom of his Directors. As for those to whom either the
Name, or Profession of our Author may create an insuperable Prejudice, let them
but peruse the learned Prolegomena of Bishop Walton, premised to his Poly-glot
Bible, and they will find that that Learned, and Reverend Prelate was (I had
almost said) exactly, but I may safely say upon the main of the same sentiments
with our Author. For my own part I doubt not but that the Candor of his
Spirit, the justness of his Judgment, and impartiality of his Censures, will
unquestionably support his Reputation, with all the Ingenuous and Wise, and as
for the rest, their very commendation would be a Calumny. Adieu.

M. R.

A COLLECTION OF THE CHAPTERS Contained in this TREATISE.
Chap. 1. OF the Bibles in general, as well among the Jews, as Christians. page
1. Chap. 2. Of the Hebrew Manuscripts of the context of the Bible. page 6.
Chap. 3. Several of the Manuscript Copies of the Bibles are examined: Their
various readings are approved by the Testimony of the learned Jews. page 12.
Chap. 4. Of the published Exemplars of the Hebrew Context, which are Masoretick.
Of the Art of the Masorites. Of its Original, and what Opinion we are to have
of it. page 22. Chap. 5. The parts of the Masora, in relation to the Manuscript
Copies, are weighed, and illustrated. The true Original of the Masora. page 28.
Chap. 6. Other parts of the Manuscripts, in reference to the Manuscript Bible,
are examined. Their true Original, and the Masoretick Lection confirmed. page
35 Chap. 7. Some things unprofitably, and superstitiously noted by the
Masoreticks, are illustrated out of the Manuscript Copies of the Bibles. page
44. Chap. 8. Some Examples of different Writings, are produced from the
Manuscripts, which vary from the Masoretick Versions. page 48. Chap. 9. Whether
the Jews corrupted their Bibles of set purpose. The Opinion of the Fathers
concerning this matter examined. page 56. Chap. 10. The Opinion of Isaac
Vossius, concerning the Hebrew Manuscripts, is examined, and refuted. page 71.
Chap. 11. Of the Samaritan Bibles, their Targumim, or Paraphrases. page 81.
Chap. 12. Of the Bibles of the Sadduces, and Karraeans. page 92. Chap. 13. Of
the Targumim of the Jews, or the Translations of Sacred Scripture, and first of
the Chaldee Paraphrases. page 98. Chap. 14. An Appendix of the other
Translations of the Bible in use among the Jews. page 137. Chap. 15. Of the
Translations of the Bible of greatest Authority with the Christians, and first
of the Septuagint. page 140. Chap. 16. A more particular examination of the
Greek Septuagint Translation. page 150. Chap. 17. The Opinion of Isaac Vossius
concerning the seventy Interpreters, is examined. The Vindication of St. Jerome.
page 157. Chap. 18. Of the rest of the Greek Translations of Sacred Scripture,
and the Hexaples of Origin. The Opinion of Isaac Vossius concerning the
disposition of the Hexaples, refuted, page 172. Chap. 19. Of the Ancient
Versions of the Latin Church. page 186. Chap. 20. Concerning the Authority of
the Ancient Versions of the Latin Church, and first of the Vulgar. In what
sense it may be said to be Authentic. page 193. Chap. 21. Of the Translations
of Scripture used by the Eastern Church: and first of the Arabic, Coptic,
Aethiopic, Armenian, etc. page 201. Chap. 22. Of the later Versions of the
Bible, and first of all, of Latin Versions, done by Catholic Divines. page
209. Chap. 23. Of the Latin Translation of the Bible, made by Protestants. page
215. Chap. 24. Of the Translations of the Bible in the Vulgar Tongues, and
first of all of those made by Catholics. page 221. Chap. 25. Of the Bible,
done into the Vulgar Tongue, by Heterodox Translators. page 226. Chap. 26. Of
the Translations of the Bible, which were writ in the Vulgar Tongue, and their
rise from the Geneva Schools. page 233. Chap. 27. Of the Polyglot Bibles. page
240. Animadversions upon a small Treatise of Dr. Isaac Vossius, concerning the
Oracles of the Sybils, and his answer to the objections in a late Treatise,
Entitled, Critica Sacra. page 249
CRITICAL ENQUIRIES Into the Various EDITIONS of the BIBLES at several Places
and Times.
CHAP. I. Of the Bibles in general, as well among the Jews, as Christians.
THE whole Context of Sacred Scripture is remarkably known among the Christians
by the name of The Books, that is to say, The Books so called for their
Excellency above all others; and these Books contain both the Old and New
Testament. The Jews however allow of no more than only the Books of the Old
Covenant, Of the Old Testament.
and those only written in the Hebrew Language; for as for those which the
Church has receiv d from the Hellenist Jews in the Greek Language, they deny
them to be Canonical, and therefore will not admit them into their Synagogues.
Whereas the Church inspired with the Holy Ghost, admits them likewise to be of
Divine Authority. As to which difference, they who among Christians assume to
themselves the Name of Protestants and Reformed, rather choose to take the
Synagogues part, than to join with either of the Churches, that is, the Eastern
or Western. And therefore the Christians have only admitted into the Church
those Books of the Old Testament, which they received from the Jews. As for the
New Testament, Christ the first Author of it, committed nothing of it to
writing, but his Disciples after his Passion made public those Books which we
call the Books of the New Testament. The New Testament.
Now who were the real Authors of those Books, some there are who very much
doubt, as if the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, were not assuredly
theirs. For, say they, they would not then be entitled the Gospels according to
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, but the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
had they been wrote by them; and thus we generally say, the Books of Moses, and
not according to Moses. But the Titles of the Gospels and other Books are
plainly different. For that the Gospel which Matthew published, was not
Matthews, but Christ's; and therefore it is rightly inscribed, According to St.
Matthew; that is to say, the Gospel of Christ according to the Testimony of St.
Matthew, upon which the Christians ground their Faith.

Paul's Epist. to the Romans.
But now to return to the Jews, with whom the Oracles of God were first
entrusted, as the Apostle speaks it, the Holy Bible among them is called by
several Names. For sometimes they call it Mickra, The names of the Scripture
among the Jews.
or Reading; in which sense those words of Nehemiah are to be taken, where he
says, c. 8. v. 8. And caused them to understand the Reading. For though it be
true that Nehemiah in that place discourses particularly of the Levites reading
the Law of Moses, yet afterward that name was not unfitly attributed by the
Jews to all the rest of the Books of Holy Scripture.

Sometimes they denote the Scripture by these words G^esrim ve Arbang, or
Twenty four; under which name they comprehend the number of the Books of Sacred
Writ. To which St. Jerome seems to have alluded, where he says, Which are not of
the Twenty four Ancient, Praelections upon Nehem. and Esdr.
have not equal Authority with Divine Writ. Now what is to be understood by the
Twenty four Ancient, the same St. Jerome more manifestly declares in Prolog
Galeat. Neither is there any thing to be more frequently found than this name
of the Sacred Writings, which they generally affix to the beginning of their
Manuscript Bibles; intimating thereby the whole Context of the Old Testament:
Although Josephus, a notable Witness in this Argument, affirms the Sacred Books
allowed by his Nation to be no more than Twenty Two. Which seems to have been
so concluded, to the end the number of the Books might be the more readidily
and steadfastly retained in the memory, by the numbers of the Letters of the
Hebrew Alphabet, which are also twenty two. Nevertheless it is not a thing
looked upon by the Jews as much material whether they reckon twenty four, or
twenty two Books, only they divide them after another manner. This was well
known to St. Jerome, who informs us, that they who numbered twenty four Books of
Holy Writ, separated the Book of Ruth from the History of the Judges, and the
Lamentations of Jeremy, from the Prophecy it self; which is not contradicted
by the Jews in our time, who attribute these two Books to the number of the
Sacred Writers, but not of the Prophets.

But they who seemed to have had the choicest Opinion of the Bible, were the
Sect of the Carraitans among the Jews, who gave it the name of a Prophecy. 2
Epist. c. 1.19.
Under which name St. Peter seems to comprehend it: and indeed it may be
thought to have been the Ancient and Genuine name of the Scripture, which was
not understood by the more Modern Jews, who have invented many Subtilties
concerning the Books which are inscribed Hanbiim, or the Prophets; and I admire
to find that some Christians also listen to these acute Doctors. The Ancient
Division likewise of the Sacred Writings into the Law, the Prophets and
Cetuvim, Writings, or according to the Vulgar expression, Holy Writings, The
Division of Scripture.
is a thing which is well known to all people. Which Division wonderfully
tormented the Brains of the Jews, who have been very laboriously inquisitive
about it, and what was easy before have strangely perplexed with their
Niceties. Isaac Abravanel a most acute person, complains, that none of his
Rabbis have come near the mark, unless one Ephodaeus. But as to what that
Rabby at large discourses concerning that matter, we thought fit to pass over
in silence, as having more of wit than solidity. Taking therefore our leaves of
these lighter Fancies, we may have some reason to believe that the name of the
Prophets was given to the Books of Joshua, Judges, and other Historians, which
were written before the Jews were carried out of their Country into Babylon,
because at that time the Jews called them Prophets, who undertook to write the
Annals of the Age wherein they lived. Thus in the Holy Writings of the Books of
Samuel, frequent mention is made of Gad, Nathan, and other Prophets, because
they carefully collected the public Transactions of their own Time, and then
with no less diligence transcribed them into the public Register. Which is the
meaning of Josephus, where he affirms, that it was not for every one among the
Jews, to write the Public Annals, but only for the Prophets. This Theodoret
more largely explains, L. 1. advers. Apo. Theod. in Praefat. in lib Reg. Id. 2
Reg.
where he boldly asserts, That there were several Prophets among the Jews, of
which every one wrote the Story of their own Times, and that the greatest part
of the Books by them written, are past recovery lost. And therefore he affirms
it to be past all doubt, that the Books of the Kings were taken out of several
Books of the Prophets. With Theodoret, Diodorus, Procopius, and others not a
few, eminent for their Learning, agree. Which seems to be the True Reason, why
the Books of Sacred Scripture, which were written after the death of Moses,
before the Captivity were called by the name of the Prophets; but that after
that time they were only known by the single name of Cetuvim, or Writings. Not
that thereby they deprived them of the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; for the
Jews no less than the Christians, willingly admit their Divine Authority, but
only content themselves with the single name of Cetuvim, or Writings, as we
generally call the whole Scripture by the name of the Bible. To say truth, it
is for men that have little to do, more accurately to enquire into these names,
and to hunt these Mysteries, of which the Ancient Hebrew Writers never so much
as thought.

For this reason the Christians, who in the Infancy of the Church, borrowed the
Books of the Old Testament out of the Synagogues of the Jewish Hellenists,
neither separated the Book of Ruth from the Judges, nor the Lamentations from
the Prophecy of Jeremiah, as the rest of the Jews do, who refer those little
Treatises to the third Classis of Sacred Writings, which are called Cetuvim.
Nor is it a little to be wondered at what cruel pains that most subtle Doctor
Abravanel takes, where he very angrily enquires, for what reason it was, that
the Book of Ruth was not joined to the History of the Judges, to which it seems
to belong more especially, acknowledging Samuel to be the Author of both. But
the Christians, according to the Example of the Hellenist Jews, have reduced
the Books of Sacred Scripture into much better order, which seems to be the
first order and disposition of the Holy Writings, which was allowed by the
Ancient Jews, and approved by the public use of the Synagogues. Therefore the
Jews commit a great folly, who as well in their Manuscripts, as in their
Printed Copies, separate the Prophecy of Daniel from the body of the rest; as
if the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, which was present with Daniel, when he
prophesied, were not the same in all, as that wherewith the other Prophets were
inspired. The same absurdities they run into concerning David, whom they refuse
to number in the List of the Prophets, though they confess him to have uttered
many Prophecies. So true it is, that those Rabbis, who so highly value their
Paternal Traditions, invented many things unknown to their Forefathers, and
which it seems much more rational to take out of the Books of the Christians,
than the Works, especially of the more Modern Jews. For the former imitated the
Ancient Custom of the Synagogues, which does not seem to have descended entire
to the Jews of later Ages. And therefore that Order of the Books of Sacred
Scripture is to be retained, which is observed in the Greek and Latin Bibles
of the Christians.

Neither are we to listen to those, who following the Example of the Jewish
Rabbis, pervert that Ancient Order in the Greek and Latin Copies of the Bible
which they put forth. And yet I do not believe that Order to be so exactly
necessary in smaller Editions, in regard that as to those things, neither the
Jews agree among themselves, nor the Christians neither Cassiodorus divides his
Work of Divine Readings into these three Heads; The Division of Scripture
according to St. Jerome; The Division of Scripture according to St. Austin; The
Division of Scripture according to the Septuagint. The Jews also, though most
passionately devoted to their own Traditions, and wholly governed by the
Talmudick Rabbis, observe, in the Disposal of the Books of Holy Writ, another
Method than that which is approved by the Talmudists. Also the very Order of
their Manuscript Copies varies in that particular.

CHAP. II. Of the Hebrew Manuscripts of the Context of the Bible.
WE may divide the Hebrew Manuscripts of the Jews into two sorts, of which the
one serves for the public use of the Synagogues, the other for the particular
use of private persons. Neither do they read in their Synagogues every
particular Book of Holy Writ, but only such and such selected Books, The Books
of Scripture read in the Synagogues.
which are adapted and accommodated to the Mysteries of their Religion, such as
are the Books of Moses, from whence they derive the Precepts of their Law, and
those which they comprehend under the name of the five Megilloth or Volumes.
That is to say, the Canticles, Ruth, the Lamentations, Ecclesiastes and Esther.
For these are the Volumes that are read in their Synagogues upon certain
prefixed days; the Canticles upon Easter day, Ruth upon the Feast of Seven
days, the Lamentations upon the ninth of the Month Ab. Ecclesiastes upon the
Feast of the Tabernacles, and Esther upon the 14th and 15th of the Month Adar.
And as for the Law, it is divided into so many Sections as there are Sabbaths
in the year; so that they read a Section every year, with an addition of
something taken out of the Prophets.

The Superstition of the Jews in writing their Service-Books.
It Is a wonderful thing to see how ridiculously devout, and idly superstitious
the Jews are in writing out the Copies which are for the use of the Synagogue.
For in the first place, not content with the bare and naked Letter according as
is to be seen in other Printed and Written Copies, they adorn the several
Letters with little Coronets which they call Tagin. Neither are they ashamed to
make God the Author of those flourishes, which they say, Moses learnt of God in
Mount Sinai. R. Moses Scem Tob in his Book, where after the manner of the
Cabbalists, he seeks for the Reason of the Letters of the Alphabet; tells ye
many stories concerning those Coronets, complaining that they were known to few
of the Jews. Thou shall understand and hear, says he, the Discourse which was
drawn by our Ancestors of blessed memory, in the Treatise Hagiga, and shall
make Aleph, wherein are seven Coronets: There are seven also of the same nature
in the Law; Beth, wherein are three Coronets, they are four in the Law; Gimel,
which has four flourishes, three in the Law; Daleth, which has four flourishes,
six in the Law. After the same manner does the same Rabby run over all the rest
of the Letters; he also has been so punctual to give us a Copy of the following
Flourishes, with Instruction how to make them, and how often they are to be met
with in the Books of Moses. He also observed their differences; some of these
Flourishes being fixed close to the Letter; others set a small distance from
the Letter, either over the Letter, or underneath it. But these were only the
Dreams and Fancies of Jewish Brains, about which nevertheless those Rabbis
trifle away their time very seriously. Thus Bal Masius makes Coronets for the
Letters Zain and Heth, quite different from those which R. Scem Tob delineates
from the Tradition of his Fathers. Farther, these Jewish Rabbis show an
extreme Superstition and Diligence in the choice of their Parchment; for Paper
they utterly reject as a new Invention. This Parchment must be very clean; nor
can it be prepared by an Infidel or Ethnic, but by a Jew, and he neither an
Apostate or a Heretic. Therefore the Samaritan Copies are altogether renounced
by the Jews, as vile and impure. Moreover, they do not write as we do in folded
Sheets, but in large Volumes, after the Custom of the Ancients, which they
divide into Columes or Pages, observing as it were a Geometrical Proportion,
and making use of a Ruler to draw the Lines straight; for they have the vanity
to affirm, that Moses ordered that no Copy of the Law should be written without
a Ruler; and they also pretend that Moses taught them what sort of Ink they
should use. In writing careful in the first place, not to join their Letters
close together; observing this proportion between the Letters and the Words, to
leave the space of a Silk Thread between every Letter, and of a small Letter
between every Word; that the Lines be distant one from another the measure of
one Line, and every Line to hold thirty Letters. To these may be added the
Distinctions of the Sections; of which some are larger, and some lesser: And
then again some of these Sections are said to be close, others open. Those are
called close, which are so enclosed on both sides with Letters, that the space
of four Letters be only left, in open Sections the space of nine Letters.
Besides these, there are also other larger Sections, which are also to be seen
in the public Exemplars of their Bibles. But those Jewish Rabbis are mainly
deceived, who believe that Moses was the Inventer of those Divisions or
Sections, which are made in the Modern Copies. For those Distinctions were
found out by the late sort of Critics, The Ancient Form of the Bibles.
especially those who call themselves Mosorethae; for that in the Ancient times
there were no mark of Distinctions to be found either in the Hebrew, Greek, or
Latin Copies: For that was the business of the Grammarians; and as Elias the
Levite rightly observes, the whole Law was anciently Pasuck Echad, without any
distinction of Letters or Words; which as the Learned know was also observed by
the Grecian Critics, in reference to Homers works. Neither do the words of
Nehemiah contradict what is here said, Neh. 8.8.
And they read in the Book, in the Law of God distinctly, as if the distinction
of Verses had been brought into the Context of the Law ever since the times of
Esdras: Which Opinion the Talmudick Doctors seem to favor very much. T^l.
Tract. Nedarim.
At least it could not be later than the Talmud, when the Talmudick Writers
make mention of it; Baal Hatturim in compend. Talm. de lect. lib. legis.
and as R. Jacob, Ben Ascer Baal Hatturim testifies, It was the Custom of the
Antient-Talmudick-Doctors, to interpret the Law in another Language, to the end
the people might understand it, because the Language of the Law was Aramean.
Now the Reader could not read above one Verse to the Interpreter; for he first
read one Verse, then followed the Interpretation. Then he read another Verse*
nor could the Interpreter proceed till the Reader was got to the end of a
Verse; nor could the Reader read another Verse, till the Interpreter had made
an end of his Interpretation. Whence it may be collected that the Exemplars of
the Mosaic Law were distinguished into Verses before the Talmudists were in
Being.

But all these things might well enough be observed as well by the Reader, as
by the Expositor, from the times of Esdras, without any note of Distinction
between the Context of the Verses, which the Ancient Translations of the
Bibles, which were published in Greek before St. Jerome lived, apparently
demonstrate; and St. Jerome himself, who frequently distinguishes those Verses
after another manner from that which is now made use of, in the Masoretick
Editions generally published in these days. But this seems chiefly most worthy
observation as to our present business, that there appears nothing at all of
the Points of Vowels, which as it were, confine the Modern Reading of the
Hebrew Context within certain bounds, nor in like manner, any thing of those
Accents which are now in the room of Points, Titles, and other late invented
strokes of the Pen. Then again, that there was formerly no division of Sections
in the Manuscript Copies, the Samaritan Exemplars sufficiently testify,
wherein such kind of Sections are marked after a distinct manner: Which had
they been added to the Law by Moses himself, as the Jewish Rabbis falsely
imagine, there would follow the greatest consent that could be, as to this
matter, between the Jews and the Samaritans. Falsely therefore the Talmudists
pronounce, that no Verse ought to be distinguished that was not distinguished
by Moses. For if it were so, why do the Talmudists differ in this particular
from the Masorethites, who are said to have put a hedge about the Law, Sig Le
Torah? Was it impossible that the Jews, such resolute observers of their own
Traditions, should not be able to retain the same Tradition received from
Moses, and to preserve it entire in their several Copies? R. Moses.
Nor is there any other judgment to be made concerning the Divisions of the
Sections, whenas the same Masorethites, as R. Moses attests, by reason of the
difference of the Copies to which they trusted, could not agree among
themselves; and Moses himself acknowledges, that he found a very great
Confusion in all the Copies that came to his hands; insomuch that rejecting all
the other Exemplars, he stuck only to one which was thought to have been
corrected by R. Ascer, and followed it in every thing for the making out a Copy
for his own use.

As for the Time when these Marks of Sections, Comma's, and other Distinctions
first crept into the Context of the Bible, it will be needless to make any
overcurious enquiry. For these things being only the Fancies of Critics, will
obtain no greater Authority than what it can win from the consent and public
practice of the Rabbis; for that according to the variation of Times, and
succession of Ages, they were subject to various Alterations, as being things
that depended merely upon the Judgments and Conceits of men. One of the great
Critics among the Jews, Elias the Levite, that all these things had their
birth in the School Rabbis of Tiberias, vulgarly called the Masorites, after
the Decease of St. Jerome and the Talmudists: so that whatever was published
afterward concerning the Antiquity of those Distinctions, were but the fancies
and conceits of idle people, as if any other Opinion were to be conceived in
this particular of the Holy Writings, than of the Greek and Latin Books. For
it was not necessary that Books, because they are holy, should not be permitted
to come into the World without their Points and Interpunctions: as if, for
Example, the pointing of the Modern Latin Version, which the Holy See has
approved by her consent, and has thought only fit to be retained in all the
Latin Editions of the Bible, were necessarily to be derived from the Times of
the Apostles. But we have said enough upon this Subject; now to the Copies in
use among private persons.

These also may be said to be of two sorts; of which some were written out by
the Vulgar Jews, and some of the common people; others by men that were skilful
in their Language, and for the use of those who were eminent in Authority; such
as were those who took upon them the Title of Nassi, or Prince. The first being
written in a lesser Character and Bulk, and not so carefully corrected as they
ought to have been, are found to be full of Errors. And several such Copies as
these are found in several Libraries of the Christians. But the latter being
done with great labor and cost, and from Copies the most Ancient and best
corrected, are far to be preferred before all others. They are written in large
and most elegant Capital Letters, and which is a certain sign of a good Copy,
none of those words appear to be omitted in these, which are added down in
lesser Characters upon the Margin of the Leaf, as in the Books of the common
Jews, which abound with those kind of faults. For they being deceived by the
similitude of words and sentences following one another, set down the maimed
and curtailed words of the Context, hardly minding what they write.

Moreover, it is of great consequence from whence, and from what hands these
Manuscript Copies are taken. More corrected Bibles.
For the Spanish are much better corrected than the German, French, or Italian.
For the Spanish Jews have been much more careful to correct their Copies, than
any of the other Jews besides, that they are more curious in the neatness of
Writing. Which was the reason that Elias the Levite, not a little practiced in
this sort of Study, after a recital of several Copies of Bibles, adds this
concerning the Spanish Exemplars, The Book Aspamia, Elias. Lev. Siphre Lu (...)
Choth.
is a Book that contains all the Spanish Exemplars, for that they are much
better corrected than others. R. David Kimchi also makes frequent mention of
these Exemplars in his Works, and calls them Sepharim Madrigum, or Books well
corrected. By which means the Spanish Jews have not a little polished their
Language, in imitation of the Arabians, from whom they borrowed all the Grammar
which they have, lend in all their study and industry to the correction of the
Bible. The same Kimchi, who was also born in Spain, is much applauded by Aben
Melech, for the great pains he took in searching after the choicest and best
corrected Spanish Copies, Who, says he, Aben Mel. in Michlol Jophi.
ever took so much care as he did, in searching after the best corrected Copies
that were in Spain? Now, how those Copies are to be distinguished and known
from others, is easily apprehended. For the Spanish Characters are apiece,
and of an extraordinary cut, like those in the Royal Bibles set forth by
Plantin at Antwerp, and those other of Robert Stephens, which were certainly
transcribed from some Spanish Copies. The Italian and French Characters are
somewhat rounder. The German imitate the Gothic rudeness, and may be seen in
the Hebrew Books, which were first Printed in Germany, and the Hebrew Bibles
that were Printed at Munster. Those Copies are very frequent in Europe, which
are written in a larger form, and bigger Letters, with the Masora in the
Margin, Leusden Praefa^. in Bibl. Hebraic. Amstel. Octavo.
adorned with several Figures, and small Imagery. Some such Exemplar is highly
extolled by John Leusden, Hebrew Professor at Vtrecht, from whence the Hebrew
Bible in Octavo was lately Printed at Amsterdam. And he commends it chiefly for
this, that it has a large Masora in the Margin, under the several shapes of
Bears, Dogs and Bulls, and sundry other creatures: But indeed more fit to be
exposed for Children to play with, for the sake of the Pictures. The Spanish
Copies, which are of best repute, show the Masora barely and plainly written,
neither are there any Lines therein that are drawn into the shapes of living
creatures, as in the last mentioned. And therefore the plainer the Copies of
the Hebrew Bibles appear so much the chaster from Errors, and more corrected
thy are. For under these shapes of Beasts and Plants, the Writer concealed his
own Errors and Imperfections, neither are they more accurate in the Text it
self, than they are in the Masora.

CHAP. III. Several of the Manuscript Copies of the Bibles are examined: Their
various Readings are approved by the Testimony of the Learned Jews.
Supposititious Copies of the Bible.
What the Jews have invented concerning some Copies of the Bible wrote by the
hand of Esdras, there is no man surely in this Age, but believes to be all mere
stories: As also what is related of other Copies preserved at Bononia,
according to Tinus of Ferrara, or at Cabilo, if we may credit others. No less
supposititious may we imagine that Chimerical Piece of Antiquity to be, which
the Samaritans attributed to the Copy of the Mosaic Law found at Sichem.
Several other Copies have been also found among the Christians, who to defend
the Latin Interpreter, have very much commended erroneous and counterfeit
Copies. Thus Lindanus extolled the Copy of an Hebrew Psalter, which was
preserved in England, and agreed exactly well with the Latin Edition. But that
it was plainly an adulterate piece, Isaac the Levite sagaciously discovered,
merely by his knowledge of the Hebrew Language. Lindanus stiffly maintained,
that many things were corrupted by the Jews of set purpose, and out of their
hatred of the Christians; and this he endeavors to make out from the credit of
that English Copy, which he did not scruple to affirm, did formerly belong to
Austin the Archbishop. But Arias Montanus, after he had long sought, and at
last found out that Copy, expresses his grief to find that a person so
judicious and learned, should write and teach such Stories upon Foreign trust.
Neither, Ar. Montan. ad appar. B. 6. reg.
says he, is the Copy Ancient, nor writ by one that understood the Hebrew
Language, but by some Latin Scribe, that knew how by the command of his men,
to make a well-shap'd Hebrew Character; and this not above fourscore or a
hundred years ago. A short Book in a short Hebrew Character, commendable rather
for imitation and neatness of Writing, than the knowledge of the Writer, where
every word was so corrupted, that scarcely one could be said to be true. Whence
we may collect, that there is no credit to be given, not only to the Jewish
Rabbis, while they vaunt the Antiquity and Integrity of their Sacred Books;
but also neither to the Christians, though eminent otherwise for their Piety
and Learning, while they go about to obtrude false and counterfeit Copies upon
the World instead of true.

The feigned Antiquities of some Copies. Lib. Juchasin, seu Fanul.
Among the Jews also there were some true and real Manuscripts of the Bible,
which were not of that Antiquity to which they pretended. Such was that famous
and highly reputed Copy of Hillel, concerning which there are these expressions
in the Book Juchasin. In the year 584. there was a great Persecution in the
Kingdom of Leon; at what time they brought away thence a Copy of the Books of
Scripture, which Hillel had wrote out; by that they corrected all other Copies;
I saw a part of it which was sold in Africa, many years after it seemed to have
been written. R. D. Kimchi makes mention of this Exemplar, as well in his
Grammatical Discourse, as in his Commentaries upon the Scripture; and in his
time he affirms, that there was a Pentateuch drawn from that Copy, which was
kept at Toledo. Also R. David Ganz, and several other Jews, applaud that Copy,
as being a piece of great Antiquity and Exactness. And that same celebrated
Name of Hillel, imposed upon persons of great knowledge in the Hebrew Language,
and Sacred Criticism; R. David Ganz in Tjenach David, p. 56. Cun. l. 1. de Rep.
Heb.
insomuch that Cunaeus calls Hillel's Copy a Book of Venerable Antiquity, which
R. Hillel Chief Priest or Governor rather of the Jews, wrote with his own
hand; who came from Babylon into Syria 60 years before the Birth of our Lord
Christ. Schickardus also wonderfully extols the Antiquity and Exactness of that
Copy, and brings Elias the Levite for his Witness; as if it had been the
Opinion of that same Learned Jew, that Hillel returning from the Captivity of
Babylon, had written that Copy with his own hand. Yet for all this, Elias the
Levite was of a contrary Judgment in this particular, who had slain himself
with his own Sword, had he pronounced that Judgment concerning Hillels Copy
which Schickard would falsely make him guilty of. For in that Exemplar of
Hillel, there are several Vowel Points, Accents, and other things, of which
Elias makes the Rabbis of the School of Tiberias to be the Inventors, whom he
believes to have lived after the Talmudists and St. Jerome. As vain and idle
also are all those things which Buxtorf crowds into his Book concerning the
Antiquity of Points, to prove that Hillel was Contemporary with Epiphanius, and
before the Masorites of Tiberias. As little to the purpose also does the
sharp-witted Capellus teaze himself with sundry conjectures concerning Hillels
Exemplar. But these men, through the want of Manuscripts, seem incapable to
determine any thing concerning Hillel and his Bible; though, had they consulted
the Books of only one David Kimchi, who is universally read, they might easily
have apprehended, that Hillel was after the Rabbis of Tiberias. For that the
chiefest differences of Hillels Copy from the rest lie in the variety of Point
Vowels, Mapphick and Dagesh, and other niceties of the same nature, which no
person conversant among the Monuments of the Ancients, will affirm to have been
invented in the time of Epiphanius. And indeed both Cappellus and Buxtorf might
have consulted the Comments of John Mercer, who sometimes also commends the
Hillelian Exemplar.

Nor would it be a difficult thing to produce many readings of the Hillelian
Codex different from the Masoretick, collected out of five Manuscript Bibles,
and those Spanish besides, and of the best repute: But in regard they are for
the most part of little moment, I shall pass them over in silence. Only some
few I shall select from the Book of Joshuah, placed in the Margin, of a very
fair Spanish Copy, written about five hundred years since, though the
Annotations, or rather Variations seem to be of a later date. Joshuah, chap. 6.
in the Masoretick Copies (...) is written at large, Classicum, or the warlike
noise of the Ramshorns.
in the Hellelian more contracted, the Vau being left out (...). C. 10. of the
same, the Hillelian Copy reads, v. 2. (...), without a Schurec. In the same
chapter for (...), with the Vowel Segol under He, it is written (...), with a
Camets under He. The rest are more trivial, excepting one place of the Book of
Joshuah, C. 21. where in the Masoretick Copies two whole Verses are wanting,
which that venerable Exemplar written for the use of Nassi, or the Prince, has
supplied again. But in the Margin of the said Copy, these words are to be read,
as being added by him who corrected that Exemplar in many places according to
the Masoretick. Lo Matzinou Elau Hashenin Pasikim Be Hilleli. We cannot find
those two Verses in the Hillelian; by which the Masoretick Lection is
confirmed, though it seems to be faulty enough.

We have some reason to suspect Hillel to be a Spaniard by Nation, and a famous
Rector of some Academy, who reformed the Masoretick Edition in sundry places
according to the Ancient Copies. After his death his Copies, as being more
corrected than the Vulgar, became to be high in esteem, especially among his
Countrymen; and as Antiquity swells Molehills into Mountains after Death: Thus
the Name of Hillel being become famous, was soon made use of to gull the more
ignorant; afterward also his Name seduced the more Learned Jews, less wary
than they ought to have been. And why I should thus think, the very nature of
the Hillelian Codex, which varies in very few things, and those very slight,
from the Masoretick, which at that time was approved by the public Practice
and Authority of all Schools; which seems to be confirmed from hence, for that
then several of the Rabbis, especially in Spain, even after that tedious
Labor which the Masorites undertook, scrupled not to write down in their own
Books, the Variations of Scripture taken out of Ancient Copies. And hither
ought we to refer the Animadversions of R. R. Judas, Jonas, Kimchi, and others,
who have often recourse to the Sepharim Midvikim, or corrected Copies; and hither
also belongs that note frequent in the Margin, most especially of the Spanish
Manuscripts, B' Sepher Achar, in the other Copy. But that Hillel was a
Spaniard, is not only to be proved from hence, that his Biblick Copy was found
in Spain, and first extolled by the Spanish Jews; but because I find several of
the Spanish Lections quoted in the Spanish Exemplars, quite otherwise than in
the German and others.

In like manner we may affirm, that the Exemplars of the Bibles, which the Jews
extol under the names of Ben Ascer, and Ben Narthali, were written out by such
persons, who being Presidents of Public Academys, made it their business to
reform Erroneous Copies. But in what time they lived, is a thing not well known
to the Jews themselves, very little curious of their own Chronology. However
common fame reports them to have lived about the year 1034. long after the
Tyberian Masorites. R. Moses Tephil. c. 8.
And this was the Opinion of R. Gedalia, R. David Gans, and several others
among the Christians. It cannot be unknown what R. Moses has written concerning
Ben Ascer's Manuscript, which, as he asserts, was very well known in Egypt, by
which the Hierosolymitan Jews corrected their own Books. That is the Examplar,
says he, which they all use, because Ben Ascer corrected it; laboring at it
for many years, and correcting it many times quite thorough. For the Governors
or Presidents of the Academies, formerly according to the Custom of the Jews,
wrote out Copies, which afterward were made use of by the Provinces, of which
they were Chief Rulers and Princes; especially if they were in any esteem for
being Learned; whence seems to have risen that variety of Readings which is
found among the Manuscript Copies of several Provinces, and distinct Ages. Nor
do the Rabbis themselves seem to deny it, who believe that the Western Jews
followed R. Ascer; and the Oriental R. Naphtali in the Transcription of their
Copies. Now, they call the Western Jews those that dwell in and about
Jerusalem, and the Eastern Jews those that live in and about Babylon. The
Hierosolymitan Codex, says Elias the Levite, R. Elias Levita.
is that which Rabbi Jonas the Grammarian found, by the Testimony of R. David
Kimchi, and perhaps may be that Exemplar which R. Ascer corrected, who lived a
long time at Jerusalem.

But the Lections, about which the Rabbis themselves are at variance, are very
slight and trivial, as they are in the Hillelian: Nor will it be worth while to
repeat them here, in regard there is a Catalogue of them annexed to the large
Venetian, as also the Basil and English Bibles. Let it suffice to observe that
the Catalogue of the same Varieties in Manuscript which are fixed at the end of
some Manuscript Bibles, and to which they might have recourse, do not exactly
agree with those that are Printed at London, Basil or Venice, For some, which
in the Vulgar Editions claim Ben Ascer for their Author, belong to those
Catalogues, which indeed owe their publication to R. Naphtali. Such is that
which is reckoned the sixth in number, and those which follow. Those Manuscript
Catalogues also add some, and other Variations they omit, besides those already
Printed. For where the Modern Lection makes use of the Accent Maccaph, the more
recent Manuscripts make use of the Point Dagesh, or of some such thing. Nor
could there be any other way to knit together the series of those slight
niceties, because they are of little or no use. For should we observe all the
Variances of this kind, which might be found in turning over those Manuscripts,
with an intention to embody them in one heap; such a Collection would certainly
swell into a large Volume. For I must needs say, they had leisure to spare, who
looked after the Edition of the English Polyglottons, who have not only
published those Lections every one in their order, as they found them in the
Basil and Venetian Editions, but have also added the several places of
Scripture, of which there was hither never any Index before. So that I wonder
that men otherwise Learned, should have no better thought than to employ
themselves about such trifles: But as to those differences of Readings, which
before the Times of the Tiberian Rabbis commaculated the holy Text, and are of
greater moment, should be so sluggishly careless: And, which is worse, having
little knowledge of the Books of the Ancient Writers, but only accustomed to
the Varieties in those Manuscripts of later date already mentioned; yet they
affirm a wonderful agreement of the Hebrew Copies among themselves. Here might
be added also those Varieties which are, Ben Magnarabei ou Madnachei, between
the Eastern and Western Jews: But in regard they are already public, and very
few that are of moment, that I may not seem to be an Amplifier of
Scripture-Variances, I shall forbear to repeat them, especially they being
published at the end of the Basil Bibles. However, from hence we may collect,
that the Hebrew Exemplars do not so easily agree among themselves, that there
should be no variance, as most of the Jews, and the Christians their Hebrew
followers, would make us believe; whenas some of those Lections, though not so
many, Various Lections among the Rabbis.
produce a different sense.

Now let us come to the Testimonies of the Rabbis, which confirm the same
Opinion concerning the Discrepancy of Scripture Copies. R. Jacob Haim Praef. in
Mas. Mag. Buxtorf. in Antior.
There are not wanting Examples of various Readings among the Talmudick
Doctors, drawn from the published or Masoretick Transcriptions. Of which some
are cited by R. Jacob Haim, which Buxtorf, a strenuous Champion for the
Masoretick Exemplar, though unwillingly acknowledges; nor will he have to be
other than a very few, and those of no great weight, not contradictory to the
truth of Sense; and yet they spend the greatest part of their time in writing
out the words either fully, or defectively, as they term it. However, among
those few which R. Jacob Haim brings by way of Example, it may be plainly
demonstrated, that there are some which alter the sense of Scripture. But I may
say, that we should in vain go about to find out those various Lections in the
Talmudick Work now extant, which formerly might more easily be gathered from
it. For that for many Ages together, the Jews have made it their business to
reform all their Bibles, both Printed and Manuscript, by the Masoreticks, as in
the Reading those Books I have often observed. However, care must be that you
do not mistake that form of speech frequently made use of in the Talmud, Read
not so, but so, for a various Lection. For it is a kind of Allegorical sport,
very familiar with those Rabbis, who reserving to themselves the substance, as
I may so say of the word, have childishly invented several ways of Reading one
and the same word. If any one has so much leisure to animadvert upon those
places of Scripture, which are extant in the Talmudick Work, there is no
necessity for him to turn over those immense Volumes, so inaccessible to many
men; for we have a Table which is entitled, (...), wherein all the places of
Scripture which are extolled in the Talmud, are digested in their order, with
the place and the page where they may be found in the Talmud. But what profit
or advantage a man shall reap from such a tedious piece of labor, I cannot
apprehend, unless we could have recourse to the most Ancient Copies of the
Talmud, which have escaped the impure hands of the Jewish Criticasters.

Far more Varieties of this nature are found in the Books of the more Modern
Jews, although they pretend themselves most stout Asserters of the Masoretick
Reading. Thus R. David Kimchi, does not so devoutly adhere to the Masoretick
Copies, but that he sometimes forsakes them; and therefore upon those words of
Ezekiel the Prophet Le Mickdash Megnat, he makes this observation, R. Kimchi
Comment. in Ezekiel. 11.
the word Mickdash is a word marked with a Pathack underneath the Daleth:
Neither is Megnat a Noun Adjective, but a Substantive, as I have found in some
corrected Copies; in others I have met with Camots, and so it may be an
Adjective. Where we read in our Modern Copies the Earth was filled with blood
Damim, Kimchi reads it in his Copy Chamas, or Violence; yet he observes the
other Lection to be extant in some other Versions. Concerning the word Elgavis,
in the 12th chap. of the same Ezekiel, he thus discourses; The stones Elgavis,
are stones like hailstones; for in some corrected Editions the word El and
Gavis are divided, in others it is all one. But I make too long a stay upon
these things, when there is nothing more frequent in that Rabbis Dictionary,
and his Comment upon the Scripture, than such kind of Expressions, in the
corrected Book; in some corrected Books, and the like. For, more frequent are
those which you meet with in the Commentaries of R. Aben Melech, who
acknowledges that he compiled his Treatise out of the Works R. R. Judas, Jonas
Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and other Grammarians. He in the 24th chapter of the same
Prophet Ezekiel upon the word Harkach, which in the Masoretick Editions is read
with the Vowel Pathack under the Letter He; Harkach is the Infinitive or
Imperative of the Conjugation Hiphil. R. Jonas writes that he found the same
word in the Hierosolymitan Copy noted with a Camets under the Letter He; Aben
Mlech ad cap. 24. Ezekiel. v. 10.
and so it will be the Infinitive of the Conjugation Hophal. He also writes,
that he met with the same word in the Babylonick Copy, noted with a Pathack,
and R. D. Kimchi testifies that he found it so transcribed in the corrected
Copies.

From this variety of Reading may those words of Isaiah be illustrated, Hashmen
Leb Hagnam Hazzeh, which the LXX. Interpreters have translated one way, St.
Jerome another. For they reading the word (...) with a Camets under the Letter
He, read and translated the words thus, Isa. c. 6.
(...), The heart of this people was hardened. Whom the Writers of the New
Testament have imitated. But St. Jerome, as being addicted to the Reading of the
Jews in his Time, translates the same words thus, Blind the heart of this
people; Hier. ad c. 6. Isa.
and with much anxiety demands why St. Paul in the New Testament spoke not
according to the Hebrew, which he knew to be true, but according to the
Septuagint. Wherein he shows himself a more tenacious observer of the Reading
which he had been taught by his Masters. For the various Interpretations of
that place might have been easily reconciled, and in the same manner as Kimchi
and other Rabbis have referred the various Interpretations of the word Harkach
to the difference of Reading. For the LXX Interpreters read the word Hoshman in
Hophal, whereas St. Jerome read it Hashmen in the Imperative of the Conjugation
Hiphil.

I might here add several other passages out of the Works of the Eben Esra,
surnamed by the Jews, the Wise; who as he was a very skilful Critic, so would
he not altogether depend upon the Copies and Readings of the Masorites; but he
rather minds the sense, than the Letters of his Copy. For which reason, to omit
all others, he believes that the Letters Aleph, Vau, Jod, which are vulgarly
called the Mothers of Reading, were added or neglected by the Transcribers at
their own pleasures. Aben Esr. Praefat. Comment. in teg.
Nevertheless it is a wonder to see how carefully those Letters were observed
by the Tiberian Doctors; that is to say, how often they were, how often they
were not to be made use of. But that most Learned Rabbi did not deem himself so
religiously bound to follow the Decrees of the Masorites and their Exemplars,
that he thought it a crime to depart from them. Therefore at the end of his
Book Jesed Mora he thus writes; Id. in lib. Jesed Mora.
There is no necessity at all to observe, that those Letters Jod, He, Vau,
Aleph, being changed one into another, are sometimes added, sometimes left out,
etc. Wherefore in his Writings he does not so much regard the manner, as the
reason of the Transcription. Thus in his Commentary upon Psalm. 5. he believes
the word Nasah written with a Samech and He, Id. in Psa. 5.
to be the same with (...), Nasa, written with a Sin and an Aleph. It was not
from the purpose, says he, that He should be the same with Aleph, and Samech
the same with Sin. In like manner, expounding the 2d Chapter of Joel, after he
has observed that the word (...) proceeds from the Root Peer, he presently
tells ye, that R. Japhet derived the same word from another Root. As if the
Letter Aleph were in the number of those Letters that are superfluous, as the
Masorites term them, and unprofitable, as if the word were to be read (...),
without an Aleph, and were Lashon Shachoth, or the signification of shining
Blackness. In which sense this word is taken by most of the Interpreters; and
this Reading is confirmed by Judaeus, who compiled the Masoreth, with this
Marginal Note added to the Hebrew Text; This word is of the number of those
which are written with an Aleph in the middle that is never expressed.

Lastly, There seem not to have been wanting among the Jews certain Critics,
who have employed all their time in noting the Readings of the various Copies.
Of whom the principal are Rabbi Menahem de Lonzano in a Treatise entitled
Schethe Jadoth, and the Author of a certain other Treatise entitled Minchath
Cohen. He divides his whole work into two parts; and every part or hand
contains five fingers, of which the first illustrates all the various Lections
which he could find in the several Manuscripts of the Mosaical Law, by the help
of ten written Copies; which he thinks to have been written within this five or
six hundred years; and he compares them with the second Edition of Bomberg in
Folio, which is the most accurate of all; he also strictly examines the Words,
the Letters, Points and Accents of this Edition. But all this indefatigable
labor and diligence of R. Menahem, tends no farther than to demonstrate, that
the various Readings of Scripture, which are found in the several Copies of the
Bibles, ought to be tried by the Masora, as the most certain Rule of Reason and
Writing. Of the same Opinion is the Author of the Little Treatise called
Minchath Cohen, who there most acutely discourses of what words are to be
written fully, and which defectively: And studies to reduce several Lections to
their natural exactness by the help of the Masora, and the corrected Books. Of
necessity therefore those Masoretick Copies are to be examined, whose sincerity
is so highly applauded by the Jews; whether they are so pure and correct, that
it may be thought a point of Faith to swerve from them.

CHAP. IV. Of the Published Exemplars of the Hebrew Context which are
Masoretick. Of the Art of the Masorites. Of its Original, and what Opinion we
are to have of it.
Of the Modern Copies of the Bible.
IN the latter times the Exemplars of the Biblick Contest are no other, than
what are vulgarly called Masoretick. For the Jews for many Ages together have
acknowledged no other, and from them they came into the hands of the
Christians. Whence arose that general Agreement between so many Copies of
several Places and Times; excepting those few and trivial Niceties, which are
rather the slips of negligent Transcribers, than various Lections. For how
could it otherwise be, whenas the Jews, who look upon the Masora to be as it
were descended from Heaven, scruple not to make that their Rule for the
Reformation of all Bibles, rasing out of all other Manuscript Copies, Letters,
Words, and whole Sentences, to make them conformable to the Masora? And this is
easy to be observed by those that run over all the Manuscript Copies that have
been written for these four or five hundred years last past; and hence it is
that there is such a wonderful concurrence among the Printed Bibles. To which,
while not only the Jews, but also the most Learned among the Jews, do not give
a sufficient respect, admiring overmuch the Exactness of the Hebrew Copy, they
show themselves the Promoters of the latter, with a more than needful Zeal.
Therefore Arias Montanus boldly affirms, that the Hebrew Context has been
preserved with so much care by the help of the Masora, that it never could be
discerned by the most diligent and piercing Wit or Judgment to have admitted
the least variance in several Exemplars. In like manner. Buxtorf, a person that
had very much, and long turmoil'd in these studies, extols the Masora even to
excess in these words, as if it had been sent from Heaven. Herein as far as the
East and West extend, the Word of God is to be read in one Language, and after
one manner. Here is to be seen a general Consent of all the Books that are in
Asia, Africa, or Europe, without any variance. (...) never happened that we
find such a felicity has befallen any Books either of the Chaldeans, Greeks,
Romans, or any other People.

However, this egregious Applauder of the Masorites speaks rather out of a
preconceiv'd Opinion of the Jews, than according to the verity of the Thing. He
has seemed to translate into his Commentary upon the Masoreth, all the Fables
of those his Masters, to whom he wholly dedicated himself. And by that means he
has drawn in most of the Protestant Divines, especially the Northern, to his
own, or rather the Jews Opinion of the Exactness of the Hebrew Context, being
as it were overwhelmed under the Testimonies of the Rabbis. They who have been
conversant among the Monuments of the Ancients, especially in the Commentaries
of St. Jerome, and are therefore better experienced in Critic Learning, think
far otherwise of that Work: Nor do they presently swallow those things for
Truth, with which the Jews, half asleep, are illiterately contented. Rather
Elias the Levite is to be listened to in this particular, who alone among the
Jews, applied himself to the study of the Masora, then to the Rout of the Jews,
who were altogether ignorant of it. That most Learned Rabbi, being requested in
a Letter by Munster, Elias Levit. in Epist. ad Sebast. Munster.
to tell him what sort of persons the Masorites were, especially those of
Tyberias, thus answered in the Jewish Language: R. Jonas writes, that the Jews
of Tyberias were well versed in the holy Language. R. Aben Ezra also writes,
that from them the Authors of the Masora, pointing, and accenting, took their
Original, contrary to the common Sentiments of our Fathers of blessed memory,
who affirm that Ezra the Scribe was the first that ordered and appointed those
Reformations. Thus what Elias reports concerning the Learning and Skill of the
Jews of Tyberias in the Hebrew Language, agrees with what has been written by
Origin, Epiphanius, and Jerome upon the same Subject. He testifies that he sent
for an Hebrew Master from the School at Tyberias, who assisted him in
translating the Chronicles out of the Hebrew into Latin. Toward the end of the
fifth Action of the 2d Council of Nice, mention is made of a certain Jew of
Tyberias, who in the Reign of Leo Isauricus, was the Author of the Decree
against the Images of the Christians. Whence it is apparent, that the Jewish
School at Tyberias, to whom the Masoretick Work, or the Emendation of the
Biblick Exemplar now in use among the Jews and Christians is attributed, was
the most famous in the time of our Forefathers, and was in great Authority,
especially among the Jews. Whence it came to pass, that their Critical
Animadversions upon several Exemplars of the Bibles then publicly dispersed,
were the more readily received by the rest of the Jewish Nation.

They are Trifles therefore, and the Delirium's of the Feverish Jews, which the
most of them, and by their seducement many of the Christians vainly chatter
concerning the Original and Antiquity of their Masora; as if Moses himself had
been partly the Author of it, and partly Esdras, with the Senators of the
Sanedrim. For the thing it self demonstrates that the Masora was invented long
after the LXX Interpreters, and St. Jerome, who made use of Rabbis of Tyberias,
but never makes mention of the Masora. There were indeed among the Jews, as
among other all other People, persons addicted to Criticism, who had reformed
their Language, and corrected their Works, by the help of Critical Learning,
and the assistance of Manuscript Copies. And the Variations of Scripture which
those Critics observe, and which they place in the Margin of the Hebrew
Context, manifestly prove that several Exemplars of Manuscript Bibles were by
them reviewed and corrected. But what Divinity or Inspiration could be asserted
from hence? What was not performed with much more success in the Greek and
Latin Copies? But the Jews, who were born rather to Superstition than
Religion, being altogether ignorant of the Critical Science, which was
afterward brought to a greater perfection by the Greeks and Latins, feigned a
thousand monstrous Opinions, which some of the Christians afterward too
greedily embraced. Elias the Levite, who had frequented the company of Learned
Men at Rome, Venice, and other parts of the World, neglecting the Traditions of
his Fathers, rightly observes that there is no other Judgment to be given of
the Jewish Bibles, than of the Greek and Latin; and for Adherers to his
Opinion, among the Christians, he had all those who had any knowledge of the
Greek, Latin, or Critical Learning. Yet I think the Treatises of Cappellus,
and John Morinus, are to be cautiously read, who showing themselves somewhat so
eagerly incensed against the Jews and Hebraists in the heat of Disputation, do
not rightly apprehend what is profitable, and what of no use in the Masora; as
if it were therefore wholly to be rejected, because it was first communicated
to us by the Jews. Rather it ought to be received by us for that very reason,
as being derived to us from persons skilful in the Language, and versed in the
Manuscripts. For from whence could the Tradition of the Hebrew Pronunciation be
better communicated to us, than from those who had retained it in their
Synagogues and Schools. However, we are not to adhere to the Decrees of that
Tradition, as being humane, and subject to Error; though the several
Emendations may be admitted, as being the Labor of the Doctors of a most
famous Academy.

The number of the Masorites is hardly to be reckoned up, as Elias the Levite
affirms; and to use his own words, Hundreds and Thousands there were succeeding
one another for many years; nor is the time certain when they began, nor when
they completed their work; that is, the prefixed time. For he constantly
affirms, that it was since the Talmud, and he refers the beginning of it to the
year of Christ 506. So that I believe it might have its first beginning about
the year 600. at what time the Arabians took it into their hands, to whom the
Jews are beholding for all that they have of Grammar and Critics. They have a
Masora belonging to their Alcoran, not much unlike that of the Jews: The
Letters, Words and Verses of that Book being numbered, which they seem to have
borrowed from the Greek and Latin Bibles, which they translated into their own
Language. At first I am apt to think that the Masora was transcribed apart into
particular Books, by the Doctors of Tyberias, for exercise of their Scholars
within the walls of the School. For that they durst not presume to introduce
their Vowel Points, and other marks of Masoretick Ingenuity into the Hebrew
Text, is something probable from hence, because the pointed Vowels, Accents,
and the like, were not in our time to be seen in the Manuscripts which were
publicly used in the Synagogues. And the most approved Copies of Manuscripts
for the use of private persons, wanted those Innovations, as I have observed by
their reading; but were added afterward by the Jewish Criticasters. But then
the Transcribers, understanding the benefit of Points and Accents for the
reading and distinction of the Hebrew Context, made no scruple to insert those
New Additions. Thus by degrees from those Masoretick Notes, which nevertheless
were grown to an immense bulk, the more choice, or at least those which were
contained in the distinct Copies of the Masora, were collected for the benefit
of those Copies which they had daily occasion to transcribe, as may be seen in
most of the Manuscript Copies of the Jewish Bibles; but chiefly in the Venetian
Bibles of the second and third Edition, which being collected from sundry
Books, were first published by R. Jacob Ben Hajim, who reduced the scattered
parts of the Masora into the Form which now they observe. From whence it was
introduced, and added to those Bibles which Buxtorf procured to be Printed at
Basil.

Now from what has been said, who can believe that the Jews could ever be able,
by the help of their Masora, to preserve their Bibles from all manner of
Errors, when those Critics, who lent their healing hands to the Copies of
their Times, were neither Prophets, nor inspired by the Holy Ghost, but only
men, who being the Governors of a most famous Academy, reviewed the whole
Context of Sacred Scripture, and sought as far as in them lay, to bring it to a
compliance with its most Ancient and uncorrupted Exemplars, as the Doctors of
Lovain undertook St. Austin's Works. So that we may rightly compare the
Masoretick Labor to the Toil of Lucas Brugensis, about the Latin Interpreter.
For he, so soon as the Latin Edition by the command of Sixtus Quintus, and
Clement the VIII. was compared with the most Ancient and best Esteemed
Translations, and thereby refined from its Errors, Bibles should be afterward
Printed with their Errors. Nevertheless, no man of Judgment will say, that
that same Latin Version is free from all mistake, when Baronius, Bellarmin,
Lucas Brugensis, and others, some of whom assisted at this Correction, make no
dispute that many Errors remain very necessary to be amended. Some of the
Jewish Rabbis indeed there are, who highly commend the Diligence and Industry
of the Masorites, for that with so much Labor and Industry they took an
account of the Letters, Words, and Verses of the Hebrew Context, to prevent the
future depravation of Holy Writ. But who can thence think it possible to be
proved, that the Sacred Books were thereby restored to to their Ancient Form?
True it is, that the Doctors of Tyberias might number the Letters, Words and
Verses of the Books extant in their Time: However, those Books were only
Copies, and not Originals. I will also grant that they were most perfect in the
Hebrew Language, and that they made use of the most corrected Exemplars of the
Bible, which by diligent search they could find out for the carrying on their
Critical Design: But yet their Materials were still deficient, when they could
have no recourse either to the Greek Interpreters, nor to the Latin Version,
who in their Translations made use of Copies differing from the Masoretick.
Then again Tradition combats for the friends of the Masorites, which the
signification of the word insinuates, as if by the assistance of Points and
other Characters, they had rendered the Reading and Pronunciation of the Hebrew
Context received into use for many Ages certain and indubitable. The Sect of
the Carraeans also became strenuous Champions for the Masora of the Jews, and
the Exemplars set forth, who though they reject the most of the Jewish
Traditions as old Women's Fables, yet admit of the Biblick Context in the same
manner as it was reformed by the Masorites of Tyberias, together with the
Titles, Vowels, Accents, and other marks of the Masorites.

But though these, and many other Arguments of the same nature may be brought
in defense of the Masora, and the Modern Context of the Bible, and to prove
that the Copies reformed by the Doctors of Tyberias are no way to be despised,
because the correction was performed by persons well skilled in the Language,
who determined the manner of reading the Hebr. Context not according to their
own pleasures, but the received Tradition; nevertheless, no man ought thence to
collect, that all other Exemplars of the Bible are to be reformed and corrected
after the Emendations of the Masorites, as most of the Jews would obstinately
maintain. For the Greek Interpreters, and St. Jerome, had also their Masora, or
Tradition, for the Reading and Pronunciation of the Hebrew Context, who
nevertheless very frequently vary from the Reading of the Masorites. And which
is worthy observation, the most Learned Rabbis of the Jews, R. Juda, Jona,
Aben Esra, Kimchi, and others not a few, while they illustrate the Scripture
with their Commentaries, are not so devoted to the Masoretick Lection, but that
sometimes they correct it, and commend other Manuscripts which they call
corrected, though they differ from the Masoreticks. Therefore as I do not think
they are altogether to be favored, who being offended with the Jews, detract
from their Copies, so neither are they to be imitated, who dote upon the
Masoretick Structure, and look upon it as a piece of Divinity. For those
upholders of Jewish Superstition, show themselves unskilful in Criticism.
Therefore the Modern Masoretick Lection of the Context of the Bible, is not
altogether to be contemned, because it was not done by the Authority of men
that were Prophets, and inspired with the Holy Ghost; for by that reason the
Bibles of most of the Eastern Nations would be rejected, there being as much to
be said against the Chaldee, Syriack, and Arabic Exemplars, as against the
Hebrew. There is none of them that make use of Tittl'd Vowels, which confine
the Pronunciation and Reading within certain bounds, which were all invented by
the Critics; for that without their help the Reading not being ascertained,
was subject to a humor and fancy. By this means the followers of that famous
Impostor rendered the Reading of their Alcoran certain, which before was dubious
and uncertain. And from these it is very probable that the Jewish Rabbis had
their Points, and some other things which they introduced into the Hebrew
Manuscripts, to the end they might be read with more ease and readiness.

CHAP. V. The Parts of the Masora in relation to the Manuscript Copies, are
weighed and illustrated. The True Original of the Masora.
THE great pains and labor of the Masoreticks consists in numbering up the
Verses, Words and Letters of the Hebrew Context; for that by this means the
former Variances being observed, the Reading might be preserved more certain
and constant for the future, and the Holy Writings be free for the future from
all alteration. Of the Masoretick Art.
That the Words and Verses were numbered by the Masorites, there is no question
to be made. The greatest Dispute arises about the Letters, in regard that R.
Jacob Ben Hajim, Elias the Levite, and Buxtorf, who have with all imaginable
diligence perused the several parts of the Masora, deny that this part of it
was ever made public: By whose Authority Morinus being swayed, affirms that
that work was never undertaken by the Masorites; which seems the more probable,
in regard the Enumeration of the Letters of the Hebrew Text which is already
published, is very far from the Truth. But that there was an account taken of
them by the Jews before the Talmud was published, may be proved by those
Arguments, which are usually drawn from the Tractates Kidduschin, and the
Scribes, where the letter Vau in the word (...), or Gachon, the belly, Levit.
11.43. is said to be the middlemost letter of the Law. Nor do I believe that
part of the Masoreth to have been neglected by the Masorites: For I observed it
in turning over several Manuscript Bibles at the end of an Exemplar written
about some four hundred years ago, where among many other things collected out
of the Masora; there is the same account of the Letters, which I shall set down
in the same manner and words, as it is there delivered, that the Critics may
judge whether it be exact or no.

The Sections of the Book of Genesis called Parshoth, are reckoned to be
twelve; the other Sections called Sedarim 43. Verses 75 34. Vords 20713.
Letters 78100. and these words are in the middle of the Book Gnal Charbekah
Tihijeh. By thy Sword thou shall live. Genesis 27.40.
The Parshoth of Exodus are numbered to be 11. the Sedarim 33. Verses 1209.
Words 16513. Letters 63467. the middlemost words Elohim lo Tehallel, Exodus
22.28.
Thou shall not revile the Gods. The Parshoth of Leviticus are 10. the Sedarim
25. the Verses 859. the Words 11902. the Letters 44989 the middlemost words
Hannogeang Bibsar Hazab, Leviz 15.7.
He that touches the slesh of him that has a running Issue. In Numbers Parsheth
10. Sedarim 33. Verses 1388. Words 16707. Letters 62529. the middlemost words
Ve Hajah Haisch Asher Ebchar, And the man whom I shall choose. Deuteronomy has
Parshoth's 10. Sedarim 30. Verses 9055. Words 16394. Numb. 17.5.
Letters 54892. The middlemost words Ve Gnasitha Gnal Pi Haddabar. And thou
shall do according to the Sentences. Deuteronomy. 19.10.
As for the rest of the Hebrew Context, there is no number of the words.

But if we compare this Enumeration of the Letters of the Mosaical Law, with
that which is set forth in the Venetian and Basil Bibles, you will find this to
be very erroneous. For that allows to Genesis no more than 4395 Letters,
whereas the former reckons up 78100. and therefore seems to be farthest from
Truth. But why such an indefatigable diligence in numbering the Letters of the
Hebrew Letters with the Masorites, should be called the hedge of the Law, by
the benefit of which it is preserved entire and uncorrupted from Error or
Mistake, I cannot well apprehend: Whenas they who were so anxiously laborious,
numbered in other Letters than those of their own Books, which no wise man will
look upon to be so free from faults, or to be compared with the Original. Then,
as Aben Esra rightly observes, the Letters Aleph, He, Vau, and Jod, are
frequently added, frequently omitted, according to the fancy of the
Transcribers. Certainly no man that understands any thing of Critical Learning,
will from thence only, because the Masora observes such a word sometimes filled
up, sometimes defective, presently infer, that all other Biblick Exemplars are
not of that value, because they vary in their Lections; but embracing both
Lections as probable, will determine nothing certain in a thing of so much
incertainty, as being taught by the Examples of the LXX Interpreters, Aquilas,
Symmachus, Theodotion, and St. Jerome, who many times not only vary from the
Masoreth, but from one another. And therefore the Jews, and the Idolizers of
the Masorites, are miserably deceived, who believe that the Holy Writ was
restored to its Ancient Form by a bare Enumeration of the Words and Letters
made by the Doctors of Tyberias, and cry it up in the place of the Authentic
Original. Than which there could be nothing more fabulously invented,
especially after such a long succession of years, that the Hebrew Language has
been as it were buried, and the Traditions of the dead almost entombed, at
least most strangely interrupted. And therefore the more prudent Aben Esra
rightly compares the Masoreticks that have so carefully enumerated the Letters
and Words of the Hebrew Context to those who should number the Leaves and Pages
of a Physick-Book, which would nothing contribute to the health of a sick
Patient.

As for the Distinction of the Verses which appears in the Masoretick Editions,
I think the same sentence is to be pronounced, as concerning the numbering of
Letters and Words; in regard that the Authors of this Enumeration have observed
no other than the Rules of Criticism, in distinguishing the Verses after the
manner of the Grammarians. But if we listen to the Talmudists, they cry, Every
Verse which Moses does not distinguish, we never distinguish. But if that
Tradition were received From Moses, wherefore do not the Talmudists agree in
all things with the Masorists in this particular? Why also was not that
Tradition of which Moses is feigned to be the Author, known likewise to those
Jews, that lived in Time of the Greek Interpreters, and St. Jerome? For they
also differ in many things from the Masorites. The whole Context of Sacred Writ
was formerly in Ancient Times written in a continued series of words, as it had
been one entire Verse, as Elias Levita well observes: As also were the Books of
the Ancient Greeks and Latins; which may be collected from the Proem of
Eustathius to his Commentaries. Eustath. in Iliad. Hom.
The Poem of the Iliads was and continued a well compacted body of words; which
the Grammarians so continued by the command of Pisistratus King of Athens, and
fitted as they pleased themselves. The chief of which was Aristarchus, and
after him Zenodotus; But because it was prolix and intricate, and by that means
irksom to the Reader, they divided it into several parts, which Sections they
would not call the first, second and third Book, etc. as Quintus did in his
continuation of Homer: But in regard the Composition was large enough for
several Sections, they thought fit to divide them into Sections under the four
and twenty Letters. And Illatius commends one Comatas, who distinguished and
pointed the Sentences of Homer's Poem, Apud Leon. Allati animadvers. in Antiq.
Hetrus.
which never had any subdistinctions before; as appears by the following Verses.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Cernens Comatas hos Homericos Libros
Jam putrientes nullibi and scriptis notis
Punctis not atos Ordinans abscidit putredines
Ex quo Periti non errantibus viis,
Discant quod par est discere.
In Ancient times also the Verses of the Poets were not separated one from
another by any such notes of distinction, as we find in the Printed Editions:
Nor can the Grammarians themselves rightly distinguish the Odes of Pindar. But
why do I spend time? There Is no reason why the Jewish Books in this particular
should have better luck than the Greek Exemplars of the New Testament, which
it is well known were but lately distinguished into Verses; as is not only to be
seen in several of the Manuscript Copies, but also in many Editions that are
Printed according to the Ancient Copies. True it is, that ever since the time
of Ezra, the Verses of the Law were distinguished in Reading. But for all that
the Amanuenses never made any distinction in their Transcripts, as was
afterward done by the Critics of Tyberias; to whose Laws the Jews are no more
obliged, than we to the Decrees of the Apostolic See, which after the
Correction of the Latin Interpretation, decreed that no other Interpretation
should be Printed for the future, unless it were examined by the Vatican
Standard: Which Edict was for the procurement of Peace and Concord: And to this
as much as is possible, they who gave the Roman Church her Name, will adhere in
explaining the Latin Interpretation, if they be wise, observing the Points,
and all the marks of distinction in that Edition. Nevertheless, that a clearer
and more probable sense will rise from another manner of distinction, they do
not scruple to prefer it before the Vulgar Distinction in their Commentaries.
In which particular the Jews agree very well with the Catholic Divines, who do
not depend so much upon the Masoretick Distinctions, as to make it a point of
Conscience not to depart from them, when the received Distinctions will not
yield a sense so proper and consentaneous to the Context. To which we may add
the Infinite Variety of Manuscript Copies, which differ many times as to these
matters as well from themselves, as from the Masoreticks.

The Ancient use of the distinction of Verses.
There is also another sort of Verses, of Verses, of which they seem not to have
made mention, who have handled this Subject; from whence I am apt to believe,
that all the Masoretick Drudgery drew its Original. These the Greeks called
(...), Rows, the Latins Lineas, or Lines. These Verses were comprehended under
a certain number of words. And the setters forth of the Book were wont at the
end of their works, to add the number of the Verses therein contained, that
thereby they might prevent Additions or Diminutions, which might be obtruded
upon them. Thus Diogenes Laertius tells us the largeness or smalness of the
Books which he cites in his History, by giving an account of the number of the
Verses of which they consist. In the same manner were the Volumes of Origin
compiled, as St. Jerome seems to intimate, where he says, that there were seven
or eight hundred Verses wanting. In the Book of Job, according to the Ancient
Edition of the Latin Interpreter, the Verses are frequently reckoned up at the
end of the Samaritan, Syriack and Arabic Copies. So that it is probable that
the Jews derived this Custom from the Arabians, and they from the Greeks, which
afterward the subtle Rabbis enlarged according as their Fancies prompted
them. But there was a necessity for them to distinguish other Verses, by reason
of their Readings and Lessons in the Synagogues; to which they put a full stop,
not according to the number of words or letters, but according as the sense
guided them. For that from the time that the Hebrew Language began to fail the
Jews, they never read the Law without an Interpreter, who repeated it, as it
was read to the people, in the Language they understood. And thus the
Interpreter followed the Reader when he had read one Verse, which was such a
short Sentence as might easily be delivered to the People, without oppression
to the memory; which being read and interpreted, then the Reader read another,
and then another, till he came to some new matter; so that his Lessons for
Morning and Evening were therefore divided into Verses. Nor can there be
invented any other Original of those Verses which are pointed by the Doctors of
Tyberias in the Sacred Context, to be seen in the Editions of every Bible,
Although there were another sort of Verses well known to those of Tyberias,
because they do sometimes reckon up the Words and Letters of which the Verses
consist.

Another sort of Verses.
A third sort of Verses the Critics seem to acknowledge, which, the Doctors of
Tyberias, the Authors of the Masora seem not altogether to be ignorant of. The
word (...), which the Greeks borrowed from Military Discipline, does not only
signify a Line, but a certain Order or Rank of Lines, and consequently of
Verses. In which sense Hesychius composed a Tractate under this Title (...),
The distinction of the Twelve Prophets. To which the word Sita answers in the
Masora; and from the same Fountain the word Sedarim or Orders seems to have
proceeded; where it signifies the same with the Greek word (...), which
distinctions and subdistinctions were invented, Cassio. de Di^in. L^^t.
that the breath being tired by a long Sentence, might recover it self by the
means of allowed Pauses, as Cassiodorus rightly observes. Of the same nature
were those distinctions, which the Greeks call (...), the Latins Capitula, or
small heads differing from those which we now call Chapters. For these (...),
divided the whole Context of the Books into lesser Sections, and the Heads of
these were placed at the front of the Book. This is to be seen in the New Greek
Testament Printed at Venice, Anno 1538. and in the Greek Edition of the same,
by Robert Stephanus, which was copied from the Manuscripts preserved in the
most Christian King's Library. Had the Critics considered more seriously these
things, and some other things, which I pass over in silence, while they were
making their Animadversions upon the Original of the Masoretick Art, they would
not have wasted so much time and labor, in refuting the Jewish Miracles, who
talk of nothing but of Moses and Esdras.

To this I will add something concerning the Notes which the Jews call Taamin,
the Latins Accentus, or Accents, which serve in the room of Colons and Comma's
to distinguish the Hebrew Context; in the same manner as the Greeks make use of
points and strokes. However, in this the Rabbis seem to have exceeded the
Greeks and Latins, because they not only found out the marks of Accents for
the distinction of Sentences, and their Members, but also invented other
Accents for marks of continued speech, as if what was not distinguished was not
continued. The Original of those Accents they take from Esdras himself: But how
vainly, any man may judge by what has been already said concerning those other
sorts of Distinctions. For indeed they have no other Authors but the Doctors of
Tyberias, who in this particular acted the part of Grammarians. Neither are the
Jews so strict in observing them, as to make it an Article of their Belief,
that they are not to be departed from, especially where another Distinction
produces a better sense. In Lib. Tsachuth.
Thus Aben Esra makes mention of a certain Learned Rabbi, by name Moses Coheu,
who took little notice of those Masoretick marks in distinguishing the
Sentences of the Biblick Context. And yet I have the same Opinion of these, De
Divi^. Lect.
as Cassiodorus had of the Points that were added to the Edition of the Latin
Interpreter by the Critics. These Points, says he, are as it were certain
Paths of the Senses, and Lights of Sentences. But they must of necessity dote
as the Jews do, who look upon those Periods of the Hebrew Context, to be the
Effects of Divinity, and thereby show themselves absolute strangers to
Criticism. Nor do I wonder that the whole Nation of the Jews embraced those
marks as well in transcribing their Copies, as in the Explanation of the
Context; seeing all that profess the Faith of the Roman Church, so religiously
adhere to the Vatican Edition of the Latin Interpretation with points and
strokes, and never swerve from it, but when they play the Critics in their
Commentaries, which that it was also a thing much practiced by the Jewish
Rabbis, their Comments upon the Scripture abundantly declare.

CHAP. VI. Other parts of the Manuscripts in reference to the Manuscript
Bibles, are examined. Their True Original, and the Masoretick Lection confirmed.
MOst of the Jewish Rabbis not unwillingly acknowledge that the Sacred
Manuscripts of the Old Testament do not altogether retain that Form, The
Ancient disagreement of the Heb. Bibles according to the Rabbis.
which the most Authentic and Original Copies represented; and they believe
that this Alteration of their Bibles happened after they were carried into
Captivity, at what time they had no Rabbis, to read to them the Mosaic Law,
their Form of Worship being utterly abolished; and their Civil Affairs in that
deplorable condition, that they had no time to look after their Books.
Therefore D. Kimehi frequently asserts in his Works, R. D. Kim.
That they perished in the Babylonish Captivity, and they being destroyed,
nothing but confusion followed; with many other expressions of the same nature.
R. Ephod.
R. Ephodaeus is also of the same Opinion, who writes, That in those Seventy
years of the Babylonish Captivity, corruption and confusion began to overwhelm
the Sacred Writings: For that, as Kimchi says, the Doctors of the Law were
dead. From thence therefore, that before the time of Esdras, the Sacred
Writings varied in several places, they believe it may be made out, that
Esdras, who examined those Books, left several Lections which he met with in
the Copies of his Time unmedl'd withal in the Books which he himself examined;
and for this reason, they give great credit to the differing Scriptures, which
were marked by the Critics of Tyberias, as if they proceeded from Esdras, who
was inspired with the Holy Ghost; than which there is nothing more idle or
remote from Truth. Aben Mel. in li^. 1. Parali^.
This Aben Melech observes upon the words Diphath and Rodanim. Diphath in the
Book of Chronicles is written with a Daleth, and in the Book of Genesis with a
Resch. Rodanim is written with a Resch, and in Genesis with a double Daleth,
because Resch and Daleth are alike in their form; and they who ever viewed the
Books of Genealogies written in the Ancient Times, some write Daleth, others
Resch. Therefore in the Book of Genesis the word was written one way, in the
Chronicles after another, to show that the word was the same whether written
with a Daleth or a Resch. Thus Jod and Vau are written promiscuously, because
they are alike in their figure. And the same is to be said for the mute
Letters, Aleph and He in the end of a word, as in the word (...) with a He in
the end, which is the same as (...) with an Aleph in the end. For Aleph and He
are agreed to be both Aspirates, and every one makes use of them at his
pleasure.

Thus has Aben Melech written almost word for word, from the Commentaries of R.
D. Kimchi.

The same Aben Melech produces many other Examples of several other varieties
of the same nature, which he testifies to have collected out of the Tractates
of R. Judas, Jonas, Aben Esra, Kimchi, etc. Thus he observes Alin and Alevan to
be read in Scripture promiscuously, with a Jod sometimes, and sometimes with a
Vau. Hemeran and Hemdan with Resch or with Daleth. Jaakan and Vaakan with Jod
or with Vau; with many others, which I omit for brevities sake. They never
minded, says he, the change of a Letter or two, and he observes it to have
been frequently done. He also makes mention of the transposition of words, and
upon those words in Chronicles, Bathsceva the Daughter of Amiel, he makes this
observation, Bathsceva the Daughter of Amiel, she is Bathsceva the Daughter of
Eliam, (2 Samuel 11.) which some read Barsceba, Aben Mel. ad c. 3. Chron.
others Bathsceba, because they are near in pronunciation: In the same manner
Amiel and Eliam are the same, but that the Letters are transposed; which
transposition of Letters is to be observed in the first place, there being
several Examples to confirm it in the Hebrew Copies, of which the LXX
Interpreters made use. R. Levi Ben Gersom makes the same observation upon the
word Jabes. R. L. Ben Gersom.
I believe Jabes with an Ain to have been one of the Judges, and to have been
that person, who in the 12th of the Judges is called Abetson with an Aleph: For
Aleph and Ain are near in pronunciation, and often changed one into another.
Don Joseph also the Spaniard, R. Joseph Comment. in Chron.
in his Exposition of the Book of Chronicles, inquiring why there appears so
much difference in the Genealogies, between that Book and the Books of Moses,
Joshua, Samuel, and Kings, unfolds this question in these words; That Esdras
seemed to have found those words or hard names in some Compendium, and so wrote
them down as he found them. Then observing a vast difference of names and
things, he presently adds, Neither ought that to be a wonder, for that in the
Series of many Ages, great alterations happen both of names and things. But
Esdras wrote down those Families in the same manner as he found them scattered
in little Manuals, some out of one place, some out of another, and in words
abbreviated. And therefore the Family which he mentions is described in many
places without order and method.

Lastly, The same Rabbi believes that the Jews had forgot their Genealogies,
and that Esdras wrote what occurred to his memory, though it were written
without order, R. Jos. ad l. 1. Chron. c. 9.
and at several times.

And therefore most of the Jewish Rabbis rather choose to accuse the Books
which they believe Esdras made use of in digesting the Context of the Bible,
than the oscitancy and carelessness of the Scribes that came after. In this
indeed the Fathers of the Church agree with those Jews, that both ascribe to
Esdras the Title of Restorer of the Sacred Context at that time in great
confusion; only the Fathers believe that being inspired with a Prophetical
Spirit, he reformed it from many faults. In Pr^fat. in Psalm.
That most admirable Esdras, says Theodoret, transcribed those Sacred
Writings, which by the carelessness of the Jews, and the Impiety of the
Babylonians were entirely corrupted. And these are rather to be believed than
the hair-brained Jews, who will have Esdras to publish the Scriptures depraved
and corrupted as they were with all their faults; and so they attribute all
those various Lections which the Masorites denote under the terms of Keri and
Cetib, to the same Esdras; as if those various Readings, which the Critics
daily remark upon the Margins of their Books, were to be attributed to men
inspired by God. We must therefore conclude that the Masorites of Tyberias, by
the help of the Ancient Copies, and assistance of good Judgments, corrected
what Errors had crept into the Copies of their Times, through the Ignorance of
the Scribes. But bearing a Veneration too superstitious toward the Sacred
Writings, they durst not insert into the Context the various Lections, though
the truth of their Authority were past controversy, but placed them in the
Margin of their Bibles, with this mark Keri, The Original of the various
Lections in the Margins of the Heb. Bibles.
which is as much as in Greek (...), write; intimating thus the true Lection of
the word: For Keri is the same as in Latin, Lectio or Reading. And that this
is true, the Manuscript Exemplars of the Bibles prove, especially the Spanish,
which are Printed without the greatest part of those Alterations which are
marked Keri: So that by the help of those the Masoretick Bibles now extant
might easily be reduced to their former form. Nor will it be amiss here to
produce some Examples of those various Lections, compared with the Spanish
Exemplar, elegantly set forth about some 10 years since; to which purpose let
us make use of the Book of Joshuah. The Masorites have marked the word My
Sisters.
(...), Josh. 2.10. with a censorious mark, by putting Keri in the Margin to
(...), but erroneously; for that in several other places of the Law, as in the
plural Achoth, in the 16th chapter of Ezekiel it is written without any
Masoretick mark (...), thy Sisters; and so in Joshuah it is truly written
Achothai, my Sisters, and needs no emendation. For that way of writing is not
erroneous from the Masora it self. In the 4th verse of the 3d chapter of
Joshua, in the Context is written Between it.
(...), with a Keri in the Margin, (...), as if the Letter Jod had been omitted
in the latter end of the word; which is really read in the Spanish Copy; whence
we may manifestly perceive the Original of the Masoretick Annotation. In the
same chapter, v. 16. as well in the Manuscript as Masoretick Edition, it is
written in the Context, The proper name of a City.
(...), with a Keri in the Margin, (...), from the City Adam. In which manner
the sense teaches us it should be read; so that that fault might easily be
corrected without the help of other Copies, by reason of the similitude between
the Letters Mem and Beth, especially in some Manuscripts, where the Letters are
dotted at the top like the (...). In the 4th chap. v. 18. the word is in the
Context Bagnaloth, the Keri against it is Cagnaloth, as they ascended out, as
it is really written in the Spanish Bible, with the Letter Caph, and not with
the Letter Beth. But in other Spanish Exemplars, which I have consulted, I find
it written Bagnaloth with a Beth, though without the Masoretick note. Wherefore
in this place the Masorite Exemplars vary, which is evident by the absence of
the Keri upon this place in some of the Bibles extant. Chap. 5. v. 1. in the
Context it is Gnal Gnabranou; the Keri reads it Gnabram, till they passed over;
as it is without emendation in the Spanish Edition, Chap. 6. v. 8. the Context
reads the word Thok'gnau, the opposite Keri reads it Thok'gnei, as if Vau had
crept in instead of Jod, which Reading the Spanish admits without any more
trouble. Chap. 8. v. 16. the Context reads Ba Gnair, the Keri alters it, Ba
Gnai, in Ai, as if the Resch were to be cast away, which the Spanish Edition
does to their hands. Chap. 10. v. 8. the Context reads it (...), over against
which Jathir Jod, cast away Jod; which the Spanish Copy does without
intimation, which confirms the exactness of the Masoretick Corrections. Chap.
15. v. 47. the Context reads Hajam Hagabol, the Keri alters it Hagadol, the
Great Sea, as it is read in the Spanish Edition. So that the Doctors of
Tyberias did not make their Corrections out of their own brains, but took them
from the choicest Manuscript Exemplars. The rest I omit, for fear of being
tedious. For thus it is manifest what we may think of the Keri and Cetib, or
the written and read, being the marks of the Doctors of Tyberias. And that it
may be more manifest, we shall add some few more Examples, to show that they
made use of the most Ancient and most Authentic Copies they could get; and
these out of the Chronicles, with other Spanish Manuscripts.

Lib. 1. Chron. c. 1. v. 11. the Context read Ludiim with a double Jod;
therefore the Masora in the Margin adds Jathir Jod, leave out Jod, and reads it
Ludim, as it is in the Spanish Copy. V. 36. In some Copies, of which one was
accurately Printed at Amsterdam, by Judaeus Manasses, over against the name
Tsephi, the Keri reads Tsephu with a Vau, not with a Jod, as it is in the cited
Edition, which confirms the Masora. The same Edition also reads Dodanim, with a
Daleth, as in the Pentateuch, not Rodanim, with a Resch, as in the Vulgar
Editions. For Shephi, v. 40. with a Jod, this Edition read Shephiu with a Vau.
V. 46. the Context reads Gnaiuth with a Vau after the Jod, the Keri alters it
Gnavith, or Avith, as it is corrected in the Spanish Edition. Lastly, V. 51.
the Context reads Duo Gnaljah; the Masora corrects it Gnalvah, as it is in the
Spanish Copy. So that the Spanish Edition above recited, observes no other than
the Masoretick Emendations. In the last verse of the 3d chap. the Context reads
Hodijahu, the Keri Hodavaihu, as if the Jod and Vau had been transposed, which
Emendation of the Keri is observed in the Spanish Edition. Chap. 4. v. 7. The
Context reads Jetsochar, the Keri alters it Vetsochar, which the Manuscript
Copy follows. V. 41. the Context reads Hamgninim, their Habitations, the Keri
in the Margin writes Hamgnonim, as if the Jod had crept into the place of the
tittled Vau. Which Masoretick correction is observed by the Manuscript Copy.
Chap. 6. v. 26. the Context reads (...), with a Vau, instead of (...), with a
Jod; nor is it otherwise written in the Spanish Edition. In the same chapter
the Context reads Tsiph instead of Tsoph, corrected by the Masorak, and
confirmed by the Authority of four Manuscripts. In the 7th chap. v. 1. the
Context reads Jashib, the Keri Jashub, and in one Manuscript the Masoretick
Emendation is followed. But for these particulars let this suffice. For it may
seem superfluous to note the rest, seeing there is the same reason for the one
as for the other. For if those Lections which are added in the Margin of the
Hebrew Context in most Bibles under the Directions of Keri and Cetib, were but
compared with five or six of the Spanish Manuscripts, which are to be preferred
before the rest, we should find all the Masoretick Corrections to agree with
them. Whence it appears that the Critics of Tyberias, in imitation of the
other Critics, made no alterations, at least in this particular, without the
assistance of the Manuscript Copies. And first it is worthy observation, that
the more of Antiquity and Exactness those Manuscript Copies appear to have, the
more they agree with the Masoretick Emendations. Therefore as Eyewitnesses, we
may perceive the genuine Original of Keri and Cetib. But in vain do some
Learned men seem to labor, while they enumerate these varieties of Lections,
thence to make out that there are varieties of Readings to be also found in the
Hebrew Context. For that, no man of judgment ever denied, even among the Jews;
though they bring all variances of Scripture to the Masora as to a certain
standard. It would be much better therefore to examine the Masoretick
Corrections of Keri and Cetib, by the Manuscript Copies of the Bible, than to
extend them out into a long series, and multiply their number by all manner of
ways. Whenas it is apparent, that the greatest part of them are the manifest
Errors of the Transcribers, which might be easily reformed without the
Manuscript Copies. But in this the Doctors of Tyberias seemed to be more
devout, who durst not put their Emendations in the Context, though they were
certain they were only the manifest Errors of the Scribe; but either they
referred to them in the Margin, or put them apart in sheets by themselves.
Which Religion, if not rather Superstition of the Masorites, carried headlong
the Jews that followed them, into several Fictions concerning those Critical
Annotations. While they adventured to spend their judgments, not so much from
the truth of the thing, or the Rules of true Criticism, but out of their own
brains accustomed to imagine Miracles and Stories.

Besides those varieties of Lections already by us repeated, there are also
others that may be referred to Keri and Cetib; such as are those words, which
the Masorites mark under the directions of Keri and Cetil, or read, and not
written, in regard that really they are not inserted in the Text it self; only
there is a vacant space left, and the Vowels marked with Points, which are
erroneous in those words; and written whole in the Margin, with this note Keri
velo Cetib, read, but not written. But these things will be made much plainer
by Examples, and their Original will be the more easily found, if they be
examined by the Copies of the Manuscript Bibles.

In the 20th chapter of Judges, v. 13. the Text is thus Printed (...), to which
the Masora supplies Benei in the Margin with this note Keri velo Cetib, that is
the word (...) or sons were to be read, though it were not written. Though in a
Spanish Manuscript, and that of good Authority, the whole Sentence is writ at
length, without any interruption; which a Jewish Criticaster was so impatient
to see, that after he had added the Masoretick note in the Margin, he rased out
the word Benei out of a most lovely Copy, to make way for the void space and
the mark of the Masorites, which you shall often find done by those Idolizers
of the Masora, especially in the Spanish Manuscripts, which they strive to
reform according to the Masoretick Corrections. Thus in the 3d chapter of Ruth,
v. 4. (...), He shall tell, is read in the Text with a gap, and over against it
in the Margin Keri velo Cetib, to be read, but not written; because (...),
thee, is omitted, which the Spanish Exemplar supplies. 2 Samuel c. 18. v. 18.
(...), opposite to which stands Keri velo Cetib, which however is right in our
Manuscript. The same passages may be observed 1 Samuel c. 14. 2 Samuel c. 20. and
in other places, which nevertheless are written in the Manuscripts, as the
Masora directs them to be read. In 2 Kings 29.31. The Zeal of the Lord has
done this; Tsevaoth, of Hosts, is omitted; and therefore the Masora makes this
note in the Margin; The word Tsevaoth ought to be read, but let it not be
written; yet it is written down in the Manuscript Copy. Now what has been said
concerning Keri velo Cetib, to be read, and not written, is likewise to be said
of the quite contrary Masoretick note, Cetib velo Keri, to be written, not
read. Thus Ruth, c. 3. v. 12. The Text reads Chi 'im Goel Anoki, That I am thy
near Kinsman. Where the Masorites note that (...), Im, is not to be read,
though it be written. This is then the difference between Keri and Cetib, and
Cetib and Keri, that the one supplies the defect of words in the published
Editions, with words of more Authority out of the Manuscripts; the other cuts
off such as are deemed superfluous. So that there is nothing at all of Mystery,
as the Jews vainly dream in the Animadversions of the Doctors of Tyberias,
which in this m^tter has not been before performed by other Critics in the
Greek and Latin Bibles, and that with more success, and less Superstition.

The same is to be said of certain words, which the Masoretick Critics thought
fit to expunge out of the Text, as seeming to them to be somewhat obscene. For
as R. Moses testifies, the Hebrew is called the Holy Language, which will not
admit any words that carry any semblance of obscenity. But the falsehood of this
is easily proved. Besides, that alteration is not easily discerned in the
Manuscript Copies, and therefore is to be little regarded. And therefore I
would be a means, that what words are left out of the Text without any cause,
should be again restored to it. Now from what has been said, it may be
concluded, that many of the various Lections are unprofitably marked by the
Masoreths, which were the palpable Errors of the Scribes. In which thing
Cappellus and Morinus show themselves the more inveterate against the Jews,
while they multiply the number of the various Readings out of sundry Editions
of the Bible compared together; whereas the manifest Errors of the Scribes
ought not to be accounted various Readings. On the other side John Viccars
lessens their number more than he ought, affirming, that in several Manuscript
Bibles, which he found in sundry Libraries of Italy, he met with no such thing
as Keri and Cetib. True it is, there are much fewer in the Manuscript Copies,
especially the Spanish; but I never met with any Manuscript yet, where
diversity of Reading was altogether absent.

CHAP. VII. Some things unprofitably and superstitiously noted by the
Masoreticks, are illustrated out of the Manuscript Copies of the Bibles.
The Superstitious writing of the Hebrew Bible in some places.
IT IS a very strange thing how laboriously, if I may not say, superstitiously,
the Masorites have preserved in the Hebrew Context, certain Letters differing
in their shape from the rest, of which they have most sedulously formed an
Alphabet. The Jews vulgarly believe some Mystery lies concealed under these
things. And Buxtorf, who solely depends upon the Jewish Writings, thus delivers
himself concerning those Letters. There is no question, says he, but the causes
of those diversities seemed worthy and just to those wise and prudent persons
in former Ages, Buxt. Comment. Masor.
but the various Exilements, and grievous Calamities of their Posterity, have
buried them in oblivion, or altered them into various Figments and fond
Mysteries. Thus Buxtorf rather chooses to make himself a Patron of Masoretick
Superstition, than to enquire into the cause of that Superstitious Writing;
which Superstition shows it self in this, that the Modern Exemplars of the
Bibles, which were examined by the Doctors of Tyberias, are some lesser, some
bigger than others; some turned inward, others hanging downward. The cause of
which seems to be no other, than that the hands of the Scribes could not so
make the Letters of Lines extended in length, as to be every way equal one with
another; whence it happened that some varied in shape from the rest. It might
so fall out also, that some Letters at the beginning of the Volume, might be
made bigger of set purpose; as Aleph and Beth; of which the one is the first
Letter in the beginning of the Chronicles, the other of Genesis. But the Jews,
who knew how to fetch out a Mystery out of the least tittle of a Letter, began
to conceit new Fictions upon this Writing; which afterward by virtue of the
Authority of the Doctors that first invented these Fables, being received by
the rest of the Jews, were easily propagated to Posterity.

But though the use, or rather abuse of those Letters seems to be very ancient,
and long accustomed by the Masorites, yet have I found a vast difference in the
observance of those Delineations between the Exemplars of the Manuscript Bibles
and those: For in those there are fewer Examples of those Letters; or if you
meet with any, the form of the Letter is hardly discerned to differ from the
other. Thus the bigness of the Letter Aleph, which is the first in the Book of
Chronicles, and Beth in the beginning of Genesis, in many Spanish Copies, is
scarcely to be discerned; so small is the difference between them and the rest.
In one Spanish Copy written about some 10 years since those trifles are
altogether neglected. Thus Isaiah, c. 56.10. In the Masoretick Bibles the word
Tsophau, or Watchmen, is Printed with a great (...) Tsade; but in the
Manuscript Copy, the same word is written without any manner of distinction
from the rest; and so it is likewise written in another Manuscript. Thus in the
44th chapter of the same Prophet, where we read in the Text (...), He planted
an Ark, with a small Nun at the end of the word is writ as it should be with a
proportionable Nun. So vain and superstitious is that Masoretick Annotation
upon that place, There happen three small Nuns. In the 6th chapter of Daniel,
v. 20. (...), is written in the Masoretick Bibles with the latter Pe, very
large, whereas there is no such thing in the Spanish and other Manuscripts. In
other two Spanish Manuscripts there is a great Pe to be seen, but with this
difference, that the one enlarges the first Pe, the other the second. In the 3d
Chapter of the Prophet Malachi, according to the Hebrew, but the 4th in the
English Translation; and v. 4. (...), remember, is written with a large Zain,
but in the two Spanish Copies there is not the least appearance of any such
thing; nor in the Bibles of Menasseh Ben Israel Printed at Amsterdam.

The same account is to be given of Letters turned and raised above the rest,
as in the Hebrew Exemplar, as of Letters lesser or larger. Thus in the 18th of
Judges, v. 3. the word (...), or Manesses is written with a little Nun raised
above the rest, which is also advanced in the Manuscript Copies, but not in
that manner, for only the top of the Nun is raised a little above the other,
not the whole body of the Letter. Therefore the Jewish Grammarians erroneously
give these Letters the Title of Raised Letters, is it were separated and set
above the other, when it could be nothing but the fault of the Scribe, who was
not so steady at that time. There is one Spanish Copy also that will not own
the depressed Caph in the word (...), to weep for her, Genesis 23. v. 2. nor the
great Zain in the word (...), a Harlot, Genesis 34.31. Nor is the word Shilleshi M
so written in the Manuscript with a capital Mem, as in the Masoretick Editions.
Only one word of this Book, Genesis 2.4. (...), when they were created, is written
with a small (...). He, as the other Copies have it.

To search the Scriptures any farther for these trifles, will be a vanity,
since they are only the dreams of idle Fancies. And I could wish that custom
might be utterly rejected for the future. The same fond Superstition also was
the occasion of so many Figments about Aleph, Jod, He and Vau, which were the
Original Vowels of the Hebrew Language, especially omitted in the writing. For
Example, in 2 Samuel c. 9. you find the Negative (...) Lu, with a Kibbuts,
without the Letter Vau, which should otherwise have been writ thus (...), upon
which I found this Masoretick note in the Margin; Jerom^ quest in Genesis
Lo is twice defective, because Absalom did not overcome. And that this the
Jews observed ever since the time of St. Jerome, his own words sufficiently
testify. As we have here put it in the Hebrew his first name is written
Ephran; yet after he was overruled to take money for a Burial-place, though he
were pressed to it by Abraham the Letter Vau, which is read among them, was
taken out of his name; and instead of Ephron he was called Ephran; the
Scripture thereby intimating that he was not a person of true and perfect
generosity. Here, as frequently in other places, St. Jerome does not speak his
own, but the mind of the Jews. However, it is probable that this variety of
Character, which at first proceeded only from the careless and negligent humor
of the Scribes, as Aben Ezra observes, The method of writing the Heb. Text
uncertain.
gave the Jews an occasion to ground many Mysteries upon it, as being persons
that will spring a Miracle out of a Shoe-latchet. As for the writing of Aleph,
it was always uncertain from the very time that the Authentic Originals of the
Sacred Text were lost by the Jews: So that it solely depends upon the will of
the Jews, as may be easily proved by comparing the most Authentic Manuscripts
with the published Editions. For they differ in a thousand places, so that I
could number above six thousand of those Letters which are not extant in the
public Exemplars.

Therefore the Critics of Tyberias in vain turmoil'd and weari'd themselves in
counting how many times this or that word was full, and how many times
defective. For example, they diligently consider how many times the word Otham
is written at large in the Text; they observe that it was written in the Law
thirty nine times full, or with the Letter Vau; and thus they run through all
the Books of Scripture. But upon comparing the Manuscripts together, they could
never once agree among themselves after what manner the said word was to be
written. Moreover, this word (...) being fully thus written, does not only
signify them or those, which is its true and genuine signification, but
sometimes, with them, as if it were written Ittham; and were defective in the
writing. So true it is that in these words, the sense and not the Character is
to be regarded. But above all there is nothing like the Superstitious niceness
of the Jews in writing the word Ieruschalaim, while they diligently observe all
the places of Scripture, where it is to be writ at length with a Jod, and where
without. And yet neither the Hebrew Manuscripts, nor the Masoretick Examplars,
agree one among another. How many fictions have they raised about the word
(...) Meoroth or Lights, which in the Beginning of Genesis is written without a
Vau, contrary to the rules of Proportion; and because the Jewish Rabbis have
raised a thousand fictions from this manner of writing such a Notable word,
hence the Scribes have been very careful to observe that manner of spelling,

True it is that the Insertion or Omission of those letters, which depend upon
the pleasure of the Scribes, seldom prejudice the sense, and therefore in such
cases, neither the one nor the other, is of any moment. But sometimes it
happens, that they alter the sense. As 2 Samuel 20. In the third of Sophonia
where we read Nogue, Sad, as the Interpreters vulgarly render it from Jaga,
Rabbi Solomon expounds it remote or foreign as if it came from the Root Haga,
without any regard to the Masoretick reading. There are not wanting some
Rabbis, who derive the word Nechiloth in the Title of the 5. Psalm from
Chalal, as if it were to be written without a Jod; not much heeding the Rules
of the Masorites, for full and defective words. I omit above six hundred of
this nature frequently to be met with in the Commentaries of the Jews, by which
the Greek Translations of the LXX. Interpreters, and the Latin of St. Jerome
may be Illustrated in many places. Neither is St. Jerome to be commended for
this, that he blames the Greek Interpreters, for differing sometimes from him
in that sort of reading. For this reason he taxes those, who in the 14. Chapt
of Isaiah, for Angels, as it is in the Hebrew Exemplar, translate Kings,
because that in their Copies they find the word Malkim, without the Letter
Aleph, not (...) with the Letter Aleph, as St. Jerome had it. But the Greek
Interpreters were not to be governed so much by the reading of Copies, as by
the sense which was most proper to the place, especially when the Manuscripts
and printed Editions, do not agree about the Insertion of the Letter Aleph. As
in Jeremy the Seventh v. 18. Where the modern Exemplars read Limleketh, to the
Queen, without an Aleph, yet in a single Manuscript, it is written with an
Aleph (...). And hence arose those Masoretick observations, of Redundant
Letters.

CHAP. VIII. Some Examples of differing Writings; are produced from the
Manuscripts, which vary from the Masoretick Lections.
AFter that the Hebrew Language ceased to be familiarly spoken among the Jews,
and that the Chaldee Language became the Speech of the Country, the Writers
made many alterations in their Transcriptions, by reason of the Affinity of the
Languages. Nor were they so curious of neat Letters as they were before. From
whence without question it came to pass, that the Letter Aleph, so much in use
among the Chaldaeans, is many times mistaken for the Letter He, and added to
words without any reason. And from hence I suppose it happened, that there are
so many Chaldaeisms in the Hebrew Text; as Shelechebeth, Flame by the Addition
of the Letter Schin, according to the custom of the Chaldeans. Magnath abin and
Calabin instead of Magnathabim and Calabim, with several others of the same
nature, which I omit, that I may come to those other variations of writing,
frequent in the Manuscript Copies of most credit and Authority.

In the writing of these words El, Elohim, Jehovah, Col and the like, which are
frequently redundant with the Greek Interpreters, the Manuscript Copies do not
a little vary from the printed Masoreticks. Which, because they are more
frequent in speech, are sometimes inserted, sometimes omitted by the Scribes.
Thus in the beginning of the 16. Psalm, the word Jehovah, is thus repeated in
one Spanish Copy: Thou have said Jehovah, L' Jehovah, Jehovah, to Jehovah, thou
art my Lord; but in the modern exemplar only once. In the same exemplar, Ezech.
30. v. 3. The word Jehovah is thus, twice repeated, The day of the Lord, the
day of the Lord approaches. But the Masoretick Copy repeats the Lord but once;
nor does St. Jerome seem to have read it otherwise in his exemplars. Neither do
the Seventy Interpreters repeat the sentence, saying no more then once, the day
of the Lord approaches. On the other side, in the same Spanish Manuscript,
Judges 1.1. The word Col is omitted; and the Lection is thus: The Children of
Israel went forth, but in the printed Editions, Col Benei, All the Children of
Israel went forth. But it is needless to repeat any more examples of these
Variances, which nevertheless, St. Jerome writing to Sunias and Fretelas very
carefully enumerates, for the thing it self informs us, that those sorts of
words, might easily have been added or omitted in the transcribing of the
Copies.

Moreover in the Spanish Manuscript already recited, toward the end of the 2d.
Chap. of the 1 Book of Chronicles, the Lection is conformable to the Greek
Interpreters, and to what St. Jerome had read in his Copies. Maacha Calebs
Concubine; brought forth Seber and Thirana. The Spanish Copy reads, Jaldah
brought forth, in the Faeminine Gender, but in the Masoretick Editions, it is
written Jahad in the Masculine Gender, he begot, and so cannot be joined with
the Faeminine Concubina, or Concubine. Wherefore the modern Interpreters of the
sacred Text, who follow the Masorites over zealously, for fear of erring
against the rules of Grammar, make use of this Periphrasis, Maacha Caleb's
Concubine, of whom he begat Sebar and Thirana. In the 3d Chapter v. 19. of the
same Book, where we find in the Printed Books, Vben Zerubbabel with a
Masoretick marking the margent, denoting the Opinion of the Masorites, that it
should be read in the Plural Number Benei, and not in the singular Ben, in the
Spanish Copy, it appears to be Benei, in the Plural. In the 6 Chap. of the same
Book, instead of Michael, as it is in our Exemplars, the Manuscript Copy, reads
Malachie; and in another place, instead of Vzziah, another Manuscript reads
Azaria. In the eighth Chap. of Josuah. v. 22. The Manuscript Copy, reads Lo in
the singular Number, with this note in the Margent, Lahem in another Copy,
which Lection is now observed in the modern context: The Particle Lo, Not, and
Eth which is the sign of the accusative case, are not always written in the
same manner, in the Manuscripts, as in the Printed Exemplars.

Of far greater moment is that difference, which is found in 21. Chap of
Joshua, wherein there is a want of two verses, which are notwithstanding both
in the Greek and Latin Editions, which that they ought not to have been left
out, the thing it self declares, when in recounting the Cities allotted to the
Levites out of every Tribe; the Tribe of Reuben, could not have been omitted.
Besides these verses are supplied by five Spanish Manuscripts of best note, as
also by the Royal Parisian the English, the Venetian of Bemberg, and Bragand in
Quarto, the Plantinian in Quarto, Robert Stephanus's and that of Amsterdam and
other. Against all these the learned Masius opposes the Animadversions of the
Masora and R. D. Kimchi. From whence it is manifest, that none of those verses
were extant in the Ancient Manuscripts. And Masius farther observes, that none
of those Bibles wherein those verses are to be found, make any mention of
Jordan, Jericho, or the Cities of Refuge. Only in one Spanish Manuscript, there
is mention made of a City of Refuge, which none of the exemplars, hitherto
printed, allow: But there was no need of mentioning Jordan or Jericho, because
the number of the Cities is made up without them. Johannes Morinus, who has
commented more largely upon this place, believes these verses to have been
obliterated by the injury of time, and the negligence of th Jews; which seems
most probable: But in the same place, he erroneously observes, that the two
Comma's which were in the Manuscript by him cited, were afterward eras'd by
him that transcribed it, this annotation being added in the Margin, we found
not these two verses in the Hillelian Exemplar; for in perusing that
Manuscript, I perceived that note to be added by some Jewish Criticaster, long
after the transcribing of the Copy, who added to it some of the tittled Vowels
and some parts of the Masora beside. For that same Criticaster was desirous,
that his Exemplar should conform in all things, to the Masoretick, and to gain
the more credit to his Emendation, he cited the Hillelian Manuscript. Therefore
D. Kimchi, seems more addicted then was needful to the Lection of the
Masorites, while he affirms that he never saw those two verses, which are
wanting in the Masoretick Edition, in any ancient corrected Exemplar, but only
noted in. Neither does Grotius weigh those verses, with a sufficient
accuratness, suspecting them to have been added out of Chronicles, to the Book
of Josua; after Kimchi's time, and thence crept into the Greek and Latin
versions. On the other side Morinus believes them to have been translated out
of the Book of Josua, into the Chronicles by Esdras, and afterward left out
through the carelessness of the Scribes. Which mistake of the Scribes, might in
this particular more easily happen by reason of the frequent repetition of the
word, Vmematteh, and of the Tribe, etc. Whence it came to pass, that
afterward, the several Manuscripts did not constantly retain the same order of
sentences. In a manner not much unlike to this, the ancient Jewish Scribes made
many more mistakes, especially in the accounts of their families. For the same
words, and the same Phrases often occurring to their fancies, as they wrote,
great confusion by that means crept into the Books of sacred Scripture, as may
be easily apparent to any one that shall compare the Books of Chronicles, with
the other Historians. For tho it be not permitted, to correct the first from
the latter, yet is it most apparent, that there are many things wanting in
both, that might be restored from the ancient, especially the Greek
Interpretations; the authors of which had Copies differing from the public
Exemplars of the Bible: Whose different writings I pass over in silence, as
being obvious to all, and aiming only at those which may be taken out of the
Manuscript Copies of the Jews. And indeed those Errors have been in the Hebrew
Codex of an ancient standing. But when any Jewish Rabbi has got himself a name
for le^rning among his Countrymen, presently taking a preposterous course,
they reformed their own Manuscripts by such a ones Copy, rejecting the more
ancient Books. Such among the Jews, were the Doctors of Tyberias, R. R. Ben
Ascer, Ben Naphtali, Hillel, and several others to us unknown. By this means it
came to pass, that the Ancient Exemplars of the Bible being laid aside, the
differences of writing in things of greatest moment were likewise lost. All
which things may be demonstrated from other Books of the Jews. For if we
compare the written with the printed, and those which were published in several
times and at several places, it is a wonderful thing, to see how they differ one
from another. Thus the little Book entitled Jetsira, or, of the Creation, which
the Jews falsely attribute to Abraham the Patriarch, differs egregiously from
it self in several Editions, and still there is more disagreement between the
Printed Copies. Moreover the Latin version of this little treatise, in many
things disagrees as well from the Manuscripts as printed Editions. So that they
who looked after the Mantuan Edition, found the vast difficulty of publishing
that small. Tract, to consist as well in quantity as quality. The same
publishers also observed, that the Interpreters, who adorned it with their
commentaries, do very much differ in the reconciliation of the Text. And indeed
in the Mantuan Edition, there is extant another Copy of that Book, not much
different from the first. In like manner if you compare the Manuscript Copies
of that famous piece entitled Zohar, either with themselves or with the printed
Copies, you will find a very great discrepancy among them. Nor need you look
any further then the Edition of that Book printed at Cremona, wherein the
various Lections, which are almost infinite, are sedulously noted. The same may
be observed in the various Copies of the Book entitled Cozri, of which one was
written. But I shall insist no longer upon these things. Certainly the extreme
diligence and Industry of the Jews is highly to be applauded, who have so
studiously observed the readings of various Exemplars. On the other side they
were highly to be blamed, who making no mention of the Books from whence they
took their Editions, make corrections of them as they think fit themselves.

Therefore I would have it, that those places of sacred Text which bad
Connection tells us to be false or corrupted, should be restored by the
assistance of the most Ancient Interpreters, seeing in things of lesser
consequence, the Manuscripts may help. For the mistakes are very ancient, but
the Written Copies of a later age, and reformed according to the rule of the
Masora. So that although as well in the Manuscripts as in the printed Copies,
the 13. verse of the 145. Psalm be wanting, it might be easily supplied out of
the Ancient Interpreters, which have it in their translations. It is not to be
doubted, says Grotius, Grot. in Psalm. 145.
but that this verse was lost out of the Hebrew Copies through the negligence
of the Transcribers, for there wants a verse which should begin with the letter
Nun. And soon after he adds, How will they answer this, who would have us stand
to all the decrees of the Masorites? In which words he aims at our Masora
worshippers, by whom the Hebrew Text is looked upon to be the same with what it
was in the times of the Prophets. So obstinate are they in the defense of their
Masora. But in these and the like defects, the versions of the Ancient
Interpreters as well Greek as Latin, supply the place of the Hebrew Exemplar:
Nor is it unusual for the Critics who Translate Greek or Latin into any other
Language, to have recourse to more Ancient Translations, to Illustrate the
Lections of those books which they translate: Which was successfully observed
by some in the Translation of the N. Testament, who called the Latin Interp. to
their ash stance.

Lastly, That the plenty of Jewish Exemplars of the Hebrew context, fell very
short toward the assistance of the Jews of Tyberias, is proved, not only by the
Testimonies of R. R. Judas, Jonas, Aben Esra, Kimchi and others, who sometimes
quote the Manuscript Copies, and those the most corrected; but also by the
Annotations of Ben Hajim, who first collected into one Body, the dispersed
parts of the Masora, and set them forth in Print. For he has added other
Lections besides the Masoretick to the Margent of the Venetian Bible, which he
assures us he had gathered from most approved Manuscripts. Thus upon the word
Chesoos, as a crane, Isaiah. 38.14. He has made this extraordinary annotation
in the margent; In some Copies it is written ch'sis with a Jod, and the notes
direct it to be read Ch'soos, but I found not this in the Catalogue of those
words which having Jod in the middle, are to be read with the Letter Vau. In
like manner the same Rabbi, upon the word ch' Ari, makes this observation,
which egregiously confirms the Translations of the Greeks, and St. Jerome of
the 22. Psalm. v. 13. In some corrected Copies I have seen the word spelt with a
Vau, with a note in the Margent, that it was to be read with a Jod. I searched
the Catologue of words which are written with a Vau at the end and read with a
Jod; but I could not find this word in the Number, nor in the Catalogue of
different Writings between the Eastern and the Western Copies. Genebrard
Comment. in Psalm. 22.
Therefore Genebrard mistook in this place, who attributes this Critical
Animadversion of R. Jacob Hajim, restorer of the Masora, to the Authors of the
great or final Masora.

There are also many other Examples of such like Discrepancies, which that
Rabbi produces out of several approved Copies of the Bible, which were never
taken notice of by the Masorites. I will here only add, to make the business
more plain, what offered it self to his observation in perusing the
Manuscripts, concerning the Pronoun (...), ille, or He. Now the Critics of
Tyberias were very accurate in their observations, how many times, and in what
places (...) in the Feminine Gender was made use of instead of (...) in the
Masculine. But that laborious toil seemed to be very unprofitable, seeing that
the Manuscript Copies so frequently differ from the Printed in that particular,
no less than the Ancient Interpreters of Sacred Writ. Thus Judges 14.4. (...),
That it was of the Lord, is read in the Text without any Marginal Note of the
Masorites, yet in one Spanish Copy it is written (...). In the 21th chap. of
the same Book, the Masoretick Editions constantly read (...), without any
Marginal Annotation, yet in one Manuscript it is written (...). In like manner
Dan. 2. one Manuscript Copy reads (...), whereas in the Printed Exemplars it is
written (...). Now if these things, and many others of the same nature, which
at present I pass by, had been rightly known to most of the Protestants, they
had not blam^d the Latin Interpreter, whom we have read for these many Ages,
rendering the words in Genesis 5.15. She shall bruise thy head, for that only
reason, because the word is not (...) in the Text, but (...). Sixtim. Anam. in
Antibarb.
Here, says Sixtinus Amama, it is written (...), not (...), nor is the place
corrected by the Masora; as if the Masorites had examined all the Copies in the
World. The Masoretick Lection seems so much the more probable indeed, because
that in many Copies of the Latin Interpreter and those in good esteem, in
other places we find Ipse, He, and not Ipsa, She, as in the modern version: So
that that version Ipsa, She, was not presently to be condemned, because it
differed from the Masoretick context. For it might be that the Latin
Interpreter found it (...) in his own Copy, for that in the writing of this
Pronoun the Transcribers might easily mistake, is apparent from the Manuscript
Exemplars.

Now from what has been produced concerning the Masoretick Exemplars, there is
no man but will easily determine what judgment to pass of the Hebrew Bible, now
so generally made use of by the Christians as well as Jews. But here it may not
be improper to add a few words more concerning the most select Editions of
those Bibles. The Hebrew Bibles, The most Select Editions of the Hebrew Bibles.
whose Editions were over-lookt by the Jews, are far more corrected than those
which were published by the Christians. Wherefore Elias Levita rejected the
Bible which was set forth by Bomberg in Folio at Venice, Anno 1518. Felix
Pratensis leading the way, as not being well corrected, especially in the
Masora, which Pratensis seems not to have well understood. Therefore that Bible
was of much more credit, which was published by R. Jacob Hajim, Restorer of the
Masora at the cost and charges of the same Bomberg. For in this there is not
only Printed the Hebrew Text, but the Targum, or Chaldee Paraphrase, with
Commentaries of the most Learned Jews, both upon the Scripture, and both the
Masora's, as well the larger as the less. The same Bibles were again Printed at
Venice Anno 1618. But this Edition was much inferior to the rest, there being
many things reformed and amended, or rather spoiled by the Inquisitors,
especially in the Commentaries of the Rabbis. Another Bible was also set forth
at Venice by Daniel Bomberg, but less exact. Nevertheless, those are not to be
contemned which the Jews caused to be put forth for their own use at Pisaurum,
Sabionesa, Mantua, Frankfort, and other places. Buxtorf also published a new
Edition of Bomberg's Bible, which was overlooked by R. Jacob Ben Hajim, which
he believes to be corrected in many things by himself, especially in reference
to the Tittl'd Vowel of the Chaldee Text. But as for the Edition Printed at
Basil 1608. it seems much inferior to that of Bomberg, out of which it was
taken, and is contemned by the Jews. Imperfect also are the Bibles Printed by
Robert Stephens in Quarto and Decimo Sexto, and by Plantin in Quarto, and in
other Volumes, compared with that which R. Menasseh Ben Israel and other Jews
caused to be Printed at Amsterdam in Quarto 1635. and in Octavo 1661. Moreover,
the Jews, especially they who inhabit the Eastern parts, highly commend an
Edition set forth at Venice in Quarto, in a large Paper by Lombrosus, which
contains the Literal Notes. The Rabbi also himself explains the most difficult
places of the Text in the Spanish Tongue. To these might be added other
Editions of the Bible, and those a great many published by the Jews, not only
in Italy and Germany, but at Constantinople, Thessalonica, and Hadrianople, but
it suffices to have given an account of the most remarkable. We have also said,
that the Christian Bibles are not so accurate as those set forth by the Jews,
but the Christian Characters are far superior to those of the Jews. The Five
Books of Moses also are set forth apart by themselves, with a threefold Targum
and the Commentaries of Solomon Isaac. Thus was the Pentateuch printed at
Hanovia 1611. with verses distinguished by Number according to the Latin
Editions.

CHAP. IX. Whether the Jews corrupled their Bibles of set purpose. The Opinion
of the Fathers concerning this matter examined.
ALthough there be a very great difference between the Exemplars of the Hebrew
Context, which are now extant, and those which the Seventy Interpreters and St.
Jerome made use of, and that in our days they very much vary one from another;
yet we ought not thence to conclude, that the Jewish Bibles were by themselves
corrupted, in hatred of the Christians, as some Divines bearing no good will to
the Jews, Leo Castro.
have been pleased to report. Leo Castro, a Spanish Divine, urges highly for
this the common opinion of the Fathers, and produces a great train of their
Testimonies. After the same manner Johannes Morinus shows himself somewhat too
severe against the Jews, for though he adjudge this Opinion not altogether so
probable, yet he musters up a long Catalogue of the maintainers of it, to
impose upon the more ignorant. And what seems to exceed all belief, Isaac
Vossius, among the Heterodox, has uttered many bitter reproaches against the
Jews as adulterators of sacred Writ. But if the weight of their reasons be
considered, rather than the number of their reasons, we shall find their
accusations to have quite another face. True it is, that they condemn under the
name of the Jews, the versions of Aquilas, Theodotion and Symmachus, in regard
that the Jews continually set them up in opposition to the Septuagint.
Therefore as often as the Fathers question the Jews for corrupting the sacred
Scripture, they only speak of those versions, or of something like them, as
hereafter we shall make it appear. Upon which account St. Jerome laboring to
excuse himself, for having translated the Scripture out of Hebrew into Latin,
gives this reason: Epist. 89.
I have not so much endeavored to abolish the Ancient, as to produce those
Testimonies, which by the Jews are either omitted or corrupted, that ours might
understand what the Hebrew truth contains. In which words he sharply taxes
Aquilas, Symmachus and other Interpreters, whom he frequently calls by the
title of Semi-Christians. For when the Fathers in their disputes with the Jews,
concerning the truth of the Christian Religion, made use against them, of no
other Scripture but the Septuagint; on the other side, the Jews still had
recourse to the Hebrew Books, that is, to Aquila and other Interpreters, who
had made new translations out of the Hebrew; for this reason chiefly was St.
Jerome induced, to make a new translation from the same fountains: And for the
same reason Origin before him had composed his Hexapla with wonderful Art.

Justin Martyrs Opinion explained.
The first that comes into the field is Justin Martyr, who disputing against
Tryphon accuses the Jews, of false and crafty exposition of the Scripture: As
when he objects to them, their ignorant and malicous applying the words of the
Psalm, Psalm. 110.
The Lord said to my Lord, to Ezechiah, which are only to be understood of
Christ: As also their misapplication of the words of Isaiah, Before a child
knows to call his Father and his Mother, etc. To the same Ezechiah; which as he
demonstrates, ought to be interpreted concerning Christ. Then he affirms many
things to have been taken out of Scripture, by the perverseness of the Jews,
because they favored the Christian Religion; and then that some words were
changed into others. However in all this there is nothing argued against, but
the perverse exposition of the context, or misinterpretation, not against the
text it self; in regard Justin could give no Judgment concerning the Integrity
or falsehood of that, as being one that was utterly Ignorant of the Hebrew
Language, which is palpable from the Etymology, which he gives of the word
Israel. This name Israel says he, signifies a man overcoming Power; For Isra
is a man, and El Power. But this above all the rest is most worthy observation,
that Justin by the word Scripture understands nothing but the Translation of
the seventy Interpreters. So that when he accuses the Jews for depraving the
Scripture, he also taxes the version of Aquila, which in many things differs
from the Septuagint. Which led several learned men into mistake, not heeding
what Justin meant by the name of sacred Scripture. And thus he condemns the
Jewish Rabbis for rashly asserting that there was never any such thing wrote
by Isaiah, as, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, but Behold a young Woman shall
conceive. The whole controversy lies about the Translation of the word
Gnalmah, which the Seventy Interpreters Translate (...), virgo, a virgin: But
Aquila (...), puella, and after Aquila, the Jews of that Age. Which
Interpretation nothing alters the Hebrew Text. But Justin allowing no Scripture
but that which was publicly received for the use of the Church, that is, the
Septuagint, opposes the Authority of that Translation against the Jews. But
you, says he, in these things presume to alter the expositions of your
Forefathers, who lived with Ptolomy King of Egypt, saying, that it is not so
in the Scripture, as they translated it, but behold a young Woman shall
conceive, etc. Now there, by Scripture is meant nothing but the version of
Aquila, to which the Jews always adhered in their disputes with the Christians.
In like manner Justin accuses the Jews to have eras'd out of their. Bibles
these words, (...), a ligno, from the wood, Psalm. 95. But if we consider the
matter more attentively, those words seem rather to have been obtruded upon the
place, then omitted. And therefore they must of necessity be deceived, who too
unwarily follow Justin Martyrs opinion, too peremptorily giving his Judgment
upon things which he did not altogether so well understand. I should for my
part rather hearken to Trypho the Jew, whom Justin brings in answering his
Dialogue concerning the mutilation of the Scripture, done by the Princes of the
Jews. The thing seems incredible; I say it seems to be incredible: it is more
horrible then casting the Molten Calf, or Children offered to Devils, or the
killing of the Prophets themselves. Certainly the Jews had such a Reverence for
their Holy Bibles, which would not permit them to corrupt them on set purpose.
Moreover by the answers of Trypho, which Justin supplies, it is apparent that
the Jews at that time so zealously devoted to the letter of the Scriptures, and
the subtleties of Allegories, adhered the more closely to the Hebrew Text, that
they might the more vigorously enforce them upon the Christians. For which
reason they made Greek Translations, which might more truly correspond with the
Hebrew Text, then the Septuagint. For which reason Justin also many times
praises as well the Jewish as Christian Version, to the end that disputing with
the Jews, he might convince them out of their own Books. Lastly, there is no
reason why the Jews should be called in Question for depraving the Copies of
their Bibles, if they have translated one and the same Hebrew word in that
signification, which was most proper for their business; as when Justin in the
same Dialogue objects against Trypho, that the Jews read the 49th of Genesis
amiss, (...) donec veniant quae reposita sunt ei, Till those things shall come
which are laid up for him. Whereas the words in the Greek version of the
Septuagint are, (...), until he shall come for whom this is laid up. For the
Hebrew Word Shilo, may be rightly rendered in either sense, neither is it
certain whether the version, which Justin so confidently avers to be that of
the LXX Interpreters, was really theirs or no, whereas the Roman Edition owns
that for the true one, which Justin attributes to the Jews, where the Scholiast
observes that it is the same in Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius, Chrysostom,
Cyrill, Cyprian and Austin among the Latin Fathers.

The next in order is Irenaeus, who accuses the Jewish Rabbis, L. 4. c. 25.
for setting up their Law contrary to the Law of Moses; wherein they add some
things, take away others, The Opinion of Irenaeus.
and other places they interpret as they please. But the blessed Irenaeus there
explains himself, and professes himself only to speak of the Constitutions of
the Rabbis, who, as he says, make a mixture of Traditions with the Precepts of
God; and confirms his meaning out of the words of St. Matthew; Why transgress
ye the Precepts of God through your Traditions? In which place Christ never
thought in the least of the depravation of the Bible. Nor is there any more
weight in any other of the Testimonies of the Fathers, which are commonly
brought to destroy the Jewish Exemplars; Morinus taxed.
and I wonder that John Morinus, a most Learned person, who in reckoning up the
Fathers, that thought the Hebrew Bibles to be corrupted, numbers Irenaeus, and
affirms it from these words of his; Which Jews, had they thought there would
have been Christians, Ire^l. 32.5.
and that they would have made use of Testimonies out of their Scriptures,
would never have scrupled to have burnt their Bibles, which make it evident,
that all other Nations participate of Salvation; whereas the contrary may be
rather asserted from thence. For there by the Scriptures Irenaeus means the
Translation of the LXX Interpreters, which was made use of in the Synagogues;
which Translation being before the Nativity of Christ, and made by the Jews, he
blames from thence the Version of Aquila as naught and deceitful, and infers
the propensity of the Jews to destroy the Bible from that Translation which
they allowed in hatred of the Christian Faith, forsaking the Version of the
Septuagint, which was compiled by their own Countrymen. So far was Irenaeus
from asserting the Jews to have maimed the Bible, that he rather confirms their
entireness, and denies them to be really depraved, only adding a conjecture of
his own, of what might have been probable. Only this depravation of the Holy
Scriptures Irenaeus acknowledges with the rest of the Fathers, which got
footing in the Hebrew Manuscripts, when the Jews remained in Captivity, and
which afterward was reformed by Esdras, Prince of the Great Sanhedrim, the
Hebrew Exemplars being restored to their former Purity by his Industry.

The third in order is Tertullian, but the Arguments which he brings against
the Jewish Manuscripts are so frigid, Tertul. lib. de. habit. mul. c. 3.
that they scarce deserve a Refutation. First, these words of his are produced.
We read that the Scripture being proper for Edification, was inspired from
Heaven; that afterward it was therefore rejected by the Jews, as all other
things that savor of Christianity: Neither is it any wonder, that they
rejected any Scriptures speaking concerning him, The Judgment of Tertullian.
when they would not receive him speaking to them. However, there is not a word
of the Corruptions of the Text in this Testimony of Tertullian. Only Tertullian
endeavors to vindicate a Book of Enoch's, which most men deservedly suspected
to be an Imposture, and they correspond with the proof which was taken from the
Authority of those Jews, who did not reckon that Book among the Canonical; and
therefore he says, those Doctors condemned many things as Apocryphal, which
afterward the Church received as inspired. I know, says he, that this
Treatise of Enoch, which attributes this Order to the Angels, is not received
by some, because it is not admitted into the Jewish Magazine. Nor did
Tertullian say, as his words are cited by Morinus, that the Scripture was
resected, or mangled, but rejected by the Jews. For there is no mention there
made of the Scripture mutilated, but of whole Volumes, which the Jews,
suspicious of their credit, rejected. And this is confirmed out of the Editions
of Tertullian's Works by Rhenanus, Pamelius, and others. Nor is there any more
strength in those other words of Tertullian. This Heresy will not admit of
certain Scriptures, Tertul. de Praescrip. adv. her. c. 17.
or if she receive any, she perverts them to her own purposes by Additions and
Omissions; or if she receive them, she does not receive them whole; or if she
do that, nevertheless she perverts them by feigned Expositions; Adulterated
Sense being an equal Enemy to Truth, with a corrupted and mutilated Text. But
here Tertullian plainly taxes the Heretics, not the Jews. Now from these words
you may give a shrewd ghess, whether that Learned person had just reason to
break forth into these passionate expressions, after he had produced the
Testimonies of Justin, Irenaeus, and Tertullian, against the Jewish Bibles.
From hence then, says he, Morin. Exercit. Bib.
that Principle or Foundation is apparent, that the Jews corrupted both their
own, and our Bibles in hatred of Christ and the Christians, and rased some
Books out of the Canon, was taken for granted by our most holy Fathers, and
upon the confidence of that Foundation, they did sometimes unfold several
occurring difficulties, and answered the Objections of the Heretics and Jews.
But with the good leave of that most learned Man, I must needs say that he
never consulted the Fathers in this matter, but only made use of what he had
read in other Authors, and in the works of Leo Castro, a mortal Enemy of the
Jews, and inserted their words verbatim into his Exercitations: Nor am I one
who believe an obligation of standing to the Opinion of the Fathers in this
matter. Their Authority is of great moment in matters of Faith, but in Critic
Learning it is then to be esteemed, when it agrees with Truth; and for this we
have the Authority of the Prince of the Latin Divines St. Austin, who as he
was a man of a most acute Wit, and piercing Judgment, was not afraid to recede
from the Opinion of other Fathers upon that Argument, which is now the Subject
of the Controversy, because he thought it less probable. So that when he came
to consider the difference of the Greek and Hebrew Copies, in the years of
Methusalem's Age, he could not favor their Opinion, who preferred the Greek
before the Hebrew Copies. Though St. Austin readily acknowledges with the rest
of the Fathers, that work to be the work of the Prophets. He relates the
Opinion of some persons of his Age in these words. They admit not that here
might be a greater mistake of the Interpreters, De Civit. Dei, l. 15. c. 11.
rather than that it should be false in that Language, from whence the
Scripture was translated into our Language by the Greek; but they say it was
not likely that the LXX Interpreters, who at one and the same time agreed in
sense, could err, or would impose a falsehood, where no Interest could sway
them. But the Jews, while they bear us ill will, because the Law and the
Prophets are become common with us by Interpretation, have made some
alterations in their Copies to lessen the Authority of ours. This Opinion, or
rather Suspicion, let every one accept as he thinks good; but certain it is
that Methuselah lived after the Flood. Here St. Austin seems to be guided
rather by the weight of reason, than a cloud of Writers, who, as he well knew,
did not make a right computation of Methuselah's Years. Wherefore handling the
same Argument again, he openly affirms that he cannot agree with them who
believed that the Jews had corrupted their Scripture of set purpose. He denies
that the Jews, being a People scattered into all parts of the World, could join
in such an Universal Conspiracy to a Falsehood that should be never discovered.
At length he adds; I could never doubt but that it would be well done, that
when there is any thing of variance found in both Copies, when there cannot be
Truth in both, let the Truth be judged by that Language out of which the
Translation was made by the Interpreter. And that St. Austin should be of this
Opinion contrary to the Judgments of almost all the Doctors of his Age, nothing
but the Truth overruled him. I wish that other with St. Austin would rather
consider the things themselves, then the Authority of others. For this
Diversity in Opinion might easily be reconciled. I pass by the Testimony of
other Fathers, of whose names Leo Castro gives us a long scroll to little
purpose: for it will be sufficient to produce them who understood the Hebrew
Language. For it would be an idle thing to produce Witnesses that know nothing
of the business.

Among the Greeks, only Origin, among the Latins, only Jerome applied himself
to the understanding of the Hebrew Language. For to omit all the rest,
Epiphanius, whom Jerome cries up for his knowledge of five Languages, having a
smattering of Hebrew, understood nothing of the Critical Learning. St. Jerome
scrupled not to call Origin, next after the Apostles, Master of the Church, by
reason of his singular Learning, especially in the Scriptures; but if we
seriously consider Origens Hebraick Industry, we shall find him but meanly
versed in that Language. But for that he is to be pardoned; that grasping at
many things, he sometimes speaks not so exactly, imitating Philo, and such kind
of Authors. But he was furnished with Hebrew Learning sufficient to understand
the discrepancies of various Editions, Origens Opinion concerning the Jewish
Manuscr. explained.
though he were inferior to St. Jerome in that particular. Therefore his
Judgment concerning the Purity of the Hebrew Text, is not to be despised. These
Writers that promote the Jewish Copies, bring many Quotations out of Origin, by
which they seem to traduce the Jews for being Corrupters of the Sacred
Writings. Thus in reference to the words of Jeremy; The Sin of Juda is written
with an iron Pen, he argues the Jews to have plainly falsify'd, who translate
the words their Sin, instead of the Sin of Judah. Again in the Epistle which he
wrote to African, concerning the History of Susanna, he asserts that the Jews
have cut off many passages from their Bibles, lest they should be read by the
Plebeians. We must say, that as to those things which contained the Reproach of
Elders, Magistrates, and Judges, they took away as much as they could from the
knowledge of the people, which are kept among their Arcana. And as an example
of that Corruption, he brings what the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
relates of Isaiah; and affirms that the words there written concerning the
Prophets, they were stoned, they were sawed, and put to several deaths, are not
in the published Bibles: but that the words concerning Isaiah's being cut in
two with a Saw, were taken by Tradition, and preserved in some secret place.
Which, says he, was craftily, and of set purpose done perhaps by the Jews,
some undecent words being inserted into Scripture, to abrogate the belief of
the whole. Other Examples he adds, but of the same kind, in the same place, and
all to prove the same thing; which Christ in the New Testament objects to the
Jews, as being taken out of the Old, yet are not there to be found. Such are
the words, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who slewest the Prophets, and stonedst them
who were sent unto thee, etc. The same story is related of Zecharia, slain
between the Temple and the Altar, which because they do not appear in
Scripture, he therefore suspects to have been taken out by the Rabbis.
Wherefore, says he, there was nothing more which the Seers, and Princes, and
Elders of the People more desired, then to blot out those passages which
contained their misdeeds among the People. And therefore it is no wonder, that
they who were not much unlike those Elders in their practices, should steal,
and remove out of the Scriptures the true Story of Susanna, against whom the
lascivious Elders laid their unjust Accusations

Many other Examples might be heaped together out of Origens Works, to prove
the same thing; which many Writers abuse, to subvert the Hebrew Text; not
understanding Origens genius, and his proper method of writing. Which
Eustathius was not ignorant of, Eustath. dissert. de Engastr. adv. Origin.
Hieron. Apol. adv. Ruffin.
who reproves Origin, for every where inserting Opinions contrary to his
Writings. And this, Jerome long before had observed not only of Origin, but of
Eusebius, Methodius, and Appollinarius, who sometimes speak not what they
think, but what is necessary. That too much liberty of Origin was the reason,
that when he prattl'd without judgment whatever he had drawn out of other
Authors, he was looked upon as a Heretic for delivering the Opinions of others
as his own thoughts. These things are therefore diligently to be observed, if
you would reconcile Origin to Origin, never to obtrude for Origens what he
wrote only upon probability, proper for the Times and the Persons to whom he
applied himself. Otherwise Origin, unconstant to himself, will be thought to
speak always contrary to himself, as by the example of the present controversy
concerning the purity of the Hebrew Text, it is no difficult thing to make out:
For the same Origin, who never speaks well of the Jews, as corrupters of the
Sacred Scripture, is cited by Jerome for a most eager defender of the Hebrew
truth. But if any one shall say, says Jerome, that the Hebrew Bibles were
afterward falsified by the Jews, Comment. in c. 6. Isai.
let him hear what Origin, in his eight volume of Explanations of Isaiah,
answers to this Question, that the Lord Christ, and his Apostles, who severely
reprove the Scribes and Pharisees for the rest of their sins, never made the
least mention of this, which was the greatest. But if they shall say that the
Bibles were falsified after the coming of our Lord and Savior, and the
preaching of the Apostles, I cannot but laugh that our Savior, the Evangelists
and the Apostles, should produce Testimonies, how the Jews would afterward
falsify. Here Origin does not play fast and loose, but freely and plainly
delivers his opinion what he thinks of the Jews. But why the same Origin
sometimes affirms the Contrary, the same St. Jerome, who well understood his
humor, teaches us in these words. Prooem. Quest. Heb. in Genes.
I pass by Adamantius whose name, if we may compare little with great things,
is the more envyed for my sake, who in his homilies which he speaks to the
people, following the Common Edition in his larger Disputation surrounded with
Hebraick verity and troops of his own followers, sometimes seeks the aid of a
foreign Language. Thus Origin proceeded one way with the learned, and made use
of another method with the common sort, and as they say, wise with a few, what
he had gathered from many, made those things public. Agreeable to this are
those things which Origin writes against Celsus. For after he had produced some
things concerning the Circumcision of Eleazar the Son of Moses, according to
the Edition published at that time, he presently adds the Text it self with
this note; But these things which seem more nice, L. 5. ad^. Cells.
and not fit for vulgar ears, etc. That is, when Origin had observed many
things concerning the power of names in various Languages, according to the
principle of the Magi and Cabbalists, and had noted something superstitiously
concerning the circumcision upon the eighth day, the words of Scripture being
cited both Greek and Hebrew, as it were correcting himself, he omits many
things which he thought too far remote from the knowledge of the vulgar, acting
the part of a Doctor, whose business it was to teach the multitude according to
the principles of Christian Religion, not of Judaism.

Were these and other things, which in prudence I omit, but rightly observed,
in reference to Origens Genius and manner of writing, it might be easily
discerned, how he came to be induced to tax the Jews of falsifying Scripture.
For in his Homilies to the people he was bound to act the part of a vulgar
person, and so in his epistle which he wrote to Africanus, he followed the
opinion of the Ancient Fathers, concerning the Hebrew and Greek Copies; not
daring to depart from it, lest he might seem to join with the Jews, as by the
words in the same Epistle he plainly intimates: Take care therefore lest
through imprudence and ignorance we abrogate those exemplars, which are
received in the Churches, and give an ill example to the Fraternity, to lay
aside those sacred books which are frequent among them, and give credit to the
Hebrew Copies, as those wherein there is nothing of mistake. Then he calls to
mind what a damage it would be to Christianity, to favor the Opinion of the
Jews concerning the Translation of the Septuagint. Upon which occasion he
farther adds; Consider whether it be not good to remember what is written, Thou
shall not remove the Eternal bounds, which thy Ancestors have appointed. These
things I say, not that I fear to search the Jewish Scriptures, and to compare
theirs with ours, and to see where they differ; for if it be not arrogance to
say so much, we have done to the utmost of our power, to exercise our studies
in all Editions and their differences, at what time we more sedulously examined
the Interpretation of the Septuagint, lest we might seem to have introduced any
thing of false and Adulterate, into the Churches under Heaven, and should give
an occasion to those who seek a pretense to calumniate those which are in the
middle between both, and to accuse those which are commonly used. By which it
is manifest that Origin did not entirely approve the Opinion then vulgarly
received concerning the Jewish Copies, but only for Government and convenience
sake; in regard that among the Learned he taught the quite contrary, nor does
he seem much to value the Reasons which he produces in his Epistle. For he adds
a conjectural expression, as it were doubting. Which perhaps, says he, was
done by craft on set purpose by the Jews. To all which we may add that the
probations of these things, which he produces, are very shallow, and full of
themselves; neither do I believe him to be the Author of them. But as he was a
man of unexhausted reading, he only quoted what he had read in other Authors.
For how highly he valued the Jews, Origin openly testifies, when he made use of
them as his instructors in the Hebrew Language, and by frequent discourse and
conversation with them, far exceeded all the other Doctors of the Church in the
knowledge of the Scriptures.

The Opinion of Jerome touching the Jewish Bibles.
In like manner Jerome seems to have a different Opinion of the Jewish Bibles, so
that the Learned men of his Age scrupled not to tax him of inconstancy as well
in this as other Arguments: And in our times Ribera, who was very industrious
upon St. Jerome's Works, perceiving the difficulty of reaching his sense,
affirms, that Jerome was not to be read by a droanish and illiterate Reader. Yet
you shall observe many, who though they hardly ever saw Jerome, will pretend to
make him their Patron, who of necessity must be often deceived, who rashly cite
not so much his Opinion, or why he thinks so, as what he speaks. Therefore that
we may not appear like to them, it will be expedient to explain the Genius of
St. Jerome, and what his method of Writing is, that by this means we may
understand what he wrote steadfastly as his own Opinion, what upon probability,
and from the dictates of others.

Jerome in his Youth was a great declaimer in the Schools, and one that used to
bandy Arguments on both sides, well read in the Books of the Grammarians,
Rhetoricians and Philosophers, especially the Peripateticks and Stoics, as
being the most skilful in Logic. He had made Aristotle and his Interpreter
Alexander the Aphrodisian his Familiars, whose Commentaries he had made free of
the Roman Language. L. 2. Apoi ad. verse. Russin.
Almost from our Cradle, says he, we conversed with Grammarians, Rhetoricians
and Philosophers. Which made him frequently deride his Antagonists, as ignorant
of Logic, and such as had never read (...) Aristotelis, the Predicaments of
Aristotle, nor his Treatise (...), or concerning Interpretation, nor his
Topics. How much he profited in Aristotle's School he abundantly shows, and
tells us what leaden Adversaries he had in point of Logical Defenses. We have
read, most Learned men, says he, those Aristotelian Principles as well in the
Schools, as flowing from the Fountains of Gorgias. We have read that there are
several sorts of Elocution, and that it is one thing to write (...) for
exercise sake, and another (...) for positive Instruction. The first is only a
Vagous way of Disputation, propounding now one thing, now another, arguing at
pleasure, speaking one thing, and thinking another, etc. By this means Hierom
wiped off the accusation of childish Inconstancy, as if he maintained Paradoxes
for his own pleasure. What he seemed to affirm (...), or singularly, those
things he makes out to be only said (...), and (...), or secundum quid, that
is, for Governments sake, and accidentally. And thus in one place he calls
Origin Master of the Church, in another Heretic; declaring that he only
praised him for what he was praise worthy. I call him our Origin for his great
Learning, not for the Truth of his Assertions. The same things he speaks of
Eusebius, and upon the same account he calls Aquila sometimes a most diligent
and acurate Interpreter, sometimes contentious and idle: Yet Jerome cannot be
said to differ from himself, who according to the variety of the Argument, has
a different Opinion of one and the same Interpreter.

Having thus displayed St. Jerome's Genius, and his method of Writing, let us
come to our purpose. Johannes Morinus, who not unfrequently contradicts
himself, seems to reproach the Inconstancy of St. Jerome in reference to the
present Argument in these words. in Exercitat. Bib.
Jerome in his Youth looked upon the Translation of the LXX Interpreters as
approved by Christ and his Apostles -- at length he accused the Jews of envious
corrupting the Bible in hatred of the Christians. But being grown in years, and
using the company of several Rabbis, for the attaining the Hebrew Language, he
so changed his Opinion, that he not only asserted the Hebrew Copies to be free
from all Mutilation, but showed himself most violent in defending his
Assertion. But Jerome himself makes answer to Ruffinus and others, who objected
the same things against him, that he was no such fool to forget in his Old Age
what he had learnt in his Youth; nor do we so invent Novelties as to destroy
old things. We are therefore first to consider what has been already observed
concerning St. Jerome's method of Writing.

First, St. Jerome being bred up in the Church, had the Bible in great honor,
and translated the Holy Writings corrected by most Ancient Copies into his own
Language, which was the Latin. Wherefore having embraced the vulgarly received
Opinion of their Authentickness, he cried out their Authors, as others did, for
so many Prophets, that thereby he might persuade men to read them the more
diligently, and with the greater veneration. But whether they were to be in the
Catalogue of Prophets or Interpreters, that he minded not, as not making for
his purpose, being satisfied with reporting what was in every bodies mouth, for
the promotion of his labor. But being grown older, after he had studied the
Hebrew Language, acting the Critic, he no longer spoke from other men's mouths,
but confidently asserted his own Opinions. At length when he had brought upon
himself the ill will of many, he again embraced the common Opinion concerning
the Greek and Hebrew Copies, only for orders sake, and with respect to his own
Interest.

Therefore I had rather adhere to St. Jerome in his riper years, and now grown a
skilful Critic, than when he was young, and only spoke the thoughts of other
men. Nor is it of any moment what Morinus Objects, that in these places St.
Jerome seems to speak his own Sentiments, and not the Opinion of others. For it
is familiar with St. Jerome to assert what he produces only upon probability,
and as the Opinion of others, as if he were affirming his own Judgment of the
matter. In which sense are to be understood the words of that Epistle to the
Galatians, where he testifies, 3 Epist.
that there are some things in the Hebrew Copies perversely obliterated by the
Jews. For there he speaks the Opinion of those Writers whom he had praised in
his Preface. Thus he answers Ruffinus in another place, loading his Doctrine
with reproaches. I in the Commentaries upon the Ephesians, have so followed
Origin, Dydimus, and Apollinarius, whose Opinions are certainly contrary one to
another, that I might not forego the Truth of my Faith. What labor has been
bestowed upon the Commentaries, the progress of what I have said will declare.
And soon after, since that he shall be thought guilty of differing
Interpretation, and contradictory Sense, who in one and the same Work inserts
down the Expositions of many. Upon the same account, in answer to a Letter of
St. Austins, after he had enumerated those Doctors, whose words he had made use
of in his own Works, he adds, Therefore, that I may ingeniously confess, I have
read all these Authors, and heaping together the most of their Sentences in my
mind, I called an Amanuensis, and dictated either my own, or other men's,
minding neither order nor words, nor sometimes the sense. In another place
writing to St. Austin again, If therefore you have thought any thing worthy
reproof in our Explanation, it became your Learning to examine whether those
things which we wrote were in the Greek Authors, that if they had not said
them, you might condemn my Opinion, especially having frankly confessed in my
Preface, that I followed the Commentaries of Origin, and dictated either my
own, or other men's. However, lest any one should object against him, that this
manner of Writing was peculiar to him, he informs us in another place whom he
proposed to himself to imitate. Read, says he, Demosthenes, read Tully, and
lest those Orators should displease, who speak things rather probable than
true, read Plato, Theophrastus, Xenophon, Aristotle, etc. Nay, he praises
Origin, Methodius, Eusebius, Apollinarius, Minutius, Victorinus Lactantius,
Hilarious, who imitated the same manner of writing, and at last after all he
adds St. Paul; read, says he, his Epistles chiefly to the Romans, the
Galathians, the Ephesians, wherein he seems to be Polemick altogether, and
there you shall see by his Testimonies, taken out of the New Testament, how
prudently he dissembles his Intention. Which passages I have the more prolixly
quoted out of St. Jerome, because I find many things attributed to St. Jerome,
which never came into his thoughts. First therefore the Economy of St. Jeroms
writing is to be observed, before Judgment be given of his meaning, or that any
thing which goes under his name and authority be opposed. For frequently he
writes not his own sentiments, but what he has collected from others. Which if
they be rightly understood, St. Jerome will never be found to differ from
himself, not so much as in this very subject which we handle at present.
Therefore in his Commentaries upon Michah, he durst not openly accuse the Jews,
as if they had obliterated the words Ephrata, or Bethlehem in hatred of the
Christian Religion, lest he should be thought to be born of the Tribe of Judah.
But this he declares to be the Opinion of some of the Doctors of his time,
affirming nothing, only reporting the repugnant Opinions of others. Yet Isaac
Vossius greedily lays hold upon this Opinion of Jerome, a person otherwise
learned, to show that St. Jerome durst not deny, but that the Jews had purposely
obliterated the word Ephrata out of their Copies. But it is no difficult thing
to apprehend what St. Jerome thought of this Argument, while he shows himself so
strenuous a Champion of the Hebrew Text, which he frequently calls the Hebrew
truth.

CHAP. X. The Opinion of Isaac Vossius, concerning the Hebrew Manuscripts is
examined and refuted.
THat the Scriptures of the Jews, are the only true and original Scriptures, is
the Common Opinion of all the Divines whom we call Protestants, who in their
disputes with the Catholic Doctors always have recourse to the Hebrew Roots,
if the Latin Interpreter will not serve their turn, who, as they believe has
mistaken in many things. Hence it comes to pass, that those Divines who call
themselves Reformed, make no reckoning of the Ancient Translations of the
Church; some very few excepted who have discerned certain Blemishes in the
Hebrew context, as well as in the Interpreters of it. But Isaac Vossius, taking
a farther leap, has departed at a greater distance from the received customs of
the Protestants, and openly accuses the Jews of Falsification, as if they had
expunged several things out of their Scriptures in hatred of the Christians of
set purpose, and that after the coming of Christ and the destruction of
Jerusalem. More than that, he sharply rebukes those that plead the Jews cause,
and as for the Doctors of their sect, who defend the modern reading of the
Hebrew Scripture, he calls them, Epist. ad Andr. Colvin.
Asses void of sight and understanding, clad with the Professors Gown, and
carrying for their shield the Masoretick Bible with all its points. Now who
would not think but that Vossius had most impregnable reason for such a bold
assertion and challenge? But how grossly he has imposed upon the World, shall
appear by that which follows. What place is there, says he, which treats of
the Messiah in sacred Scripture, which they have not endeavored either to
corrupt, or to enervate by sinister Interpretation? And a little after; When
they perceived that the time of the Messiah's coming was past; Dissertat. de
Sept. Praefat.
for it was then full six thousand years from the Creation of the World, that
they might gain 2000 years, they expunged the whole fourteen Ages out of their
Scriptures: And to obliterate the remaining five or six Ages, they curtailed
the Intervals of the Judges, omitting Anarchies, and contracting the spaces of
the Persian Kings. By which means they fined the measure of time full two
thousand years. Vossius blamed.
But these are the mere Inventions of Vossius, who not only accuses the Jews,
but impeaches the Samaritans for the same fact, tho upon another account:
Nevertheless the Ancient Fathers of the Church, Africanus, Origin, Eusebius,
Jerome, Austin and others, who took notice of this difference of the Jewish
Codex from the Hebrew Exemplars in Chronology, never thought of laying this
depravation to the Jews charge. Nay St. Austin in this very particular asserts
that the Hebrew Exemplar is to be preferred before the Greek, and is of that
Opinion, that credit should be given to that Language, out of which the
Interpretation is made into another. Justin Martyr, who, disputing against
Trypho, teazes the Jews in various manners to vindicate the Greek
Interpretation of the LXX, which was then of sole repute in the Church, speaks
not a word of any Chronology, by them altered to support their cause.

Besides, had the Jews bethought themselves of corrupting the Hebrew
Scriptures, lest the time of the Messiah's coming might seem to be elapsed,
with much more advantage they might have obliterated the Prophecy of Daniel,
which points out the time exactly, then the Books of Moses or Judges. But that
the Prophecy of Daniel, which for the most part refers to the time of the
Messiah, remains entire, is confessed by all; and Vossius cannot deny, but that
the Jews are hard put to it by this Prophecy. But to ward off the blow, he
affirms that the Ancient Jews did not only separate Daniel from the Chorus of
the Prophets, but also denied him to be a Prophet. But the learned person never
understood the reason why, or in what sense the Jews did separate him from the
rest of the Prophets. However concerning this matter the Christians in vain
dispute with the Jews. For both willingly acknowledge that in the Book of
Daniel there are many Prophesies of the Messiah to come, and that that Book was
written by divine inspiration, as the other Books of Scripture were. The Jews
also feign the same things of David as of Daniel; however they do not deprive
him of holy inspiration: Quite the contrary, they publicly assert that there
are many things in the Psalms, which foretell the coming of the Messiah; so that
if there be any difference in this particular between them and the Christians,
the controversy is merely about the name, as has been already proved, in
regard they otherwise methodize the Books of Scripture than the Christians. But
Vossius stabs himself with his own Sword, while he goes about to prove the Jews
guilty of falsifying their Chronology, in regard the modern Chronology of the
Hebrew Text presses harder upon the Jews, then that which is drawn out of the
version of the LXX Interpreters; nor do the Jews deny in their Talmudick Books
but that the time is fulfilled and past within which the Messiah was expected,
but they add, that their own sins retard his coming. These are the words of the
Talmudists. Talm. in Tract. Sanhed. and in Avoda Zara.
This is the Tradition of the House of Elia: The World shall consist of six
thousand years. Two thousand shall be of emptiness, that is, before the Law.
Two thousand shall be spent under the Law. And two thousand years the Messiah
shall reign. But by reason of our iniquities, those years are already elapsed.
Vossius endeavoring to draw this Tradition of Elias to his purpose, has erred
in many places. For first he seems to applaud it, as being delivered by Elia
the Prophet, or taken out of his Book, which formerly as he says, was numbered
among the Books of the New Testament. But this Elias was a Talmudick Doctor,
like Rabbi Hillell, R. Schammai, R. Johanan and several others whose names are
set down in the Talmud. Then it is a fiction to say that the 2000 years that
preceded the Law of Moses, ought not to be numbered from the beginning of the
Creation, but from the Flood, or from that time that God told Noah, that he
would destroy the World. For the Opinion of the Jews concerning the six
thousand years Duration of the World, according to the Tradition of R. Elias,
is in this place far different. For the Foundation of that Prophecy is derived
from the six days of the Creation; for that as God created the World in six
days, so the same World should endure six thousand years: So that the
computation of the years of the World must be taken from the first Creation of
all things. The Commentators upon the Talmud reckon two thousand years from the
first man created to the time that Abraham, abandoning the worship of Idols,
embraced the true Religion of one God. Dissertat. de Sept. Praefat.
At what time according to their computation, he was two and Fifty years of
Age. But those are frigid Arguments which Vossius produces to prove out of the
Epistle of St. Peter, that the beginning of the World is to be reckoned from
the Flood, because the Apostle called that the Old World which preceded; and
the Earth which we now inhabit the other World. I say these are very sorry
Arguments, and quite from the purpose. But enough of Elia's Prophecy concerning
the duration of the World: Nor is there any heed to be given to that Book of
the Prophecies of Elias, which Isaac Vossius, cajoll'd by the name of Elias the
Talmudist, believes to have been received into the number of Canonical Books.
Now let us examine his other proofs brought against the Jews, whether they be
of any more moment.

In the next place Vossius brings a load of Arguments to prove that the Jews
have mutilated not a few Texts of Scripture, and first he calls Justin Martyr
for a Witness, who writes that several Exemplars were corrupted by the Jews.
But as to what may be borrowed from Justin, we have already made a plenary
answer. Justin never consulted the Hebrew Text, neither could he; as being one
that understood not the Language, as is manifest out of his own Writings. But,
says Vossius, how bravely had the holy Martyr foiled Trypho, and the rest of
the Jews with whom he lived, had not those Crimes been true that were laid to
their charge? Vossius reproved.
But this way of arguing does not become a Learned man, who, in perusing
Justin's Books, might easily have perceived that he had mistaken in many
things. But Vossius goes on; The Prophecy of Christ which occurs Psalm. 22.16.
where instead of they dug, as a Lion is put in the room, most of the
Christians, except Phanaticks and Semi-Jews, acknowledge to have been depraved
by the Rabbis. True it is indeed, that the Jews are called in question by most
Divines, for having purposely corrupted this place. But, far be it from me to
pronounce those people Phanaticks or Semi-Jews, who clear the Jews of this
offense; when Rabbi Jacob Ben Hajim, Restorer of the Masora publicly
testifies, that in some Manuscripts of the Hebrews he has met with Caru, they
dug, or pierced, which is in favor of the Christians. Nor is it a wonder
that the Masorites chose that reading (...), as a Lion, which was most for
their purpose. I acknowledge the Translation of the Greeks and St. Jerome to be
the truer; yet the Jews are not to be accused of falsification for having made
choice, out of two Readings, of that which was most for their turn. In the
words Cari and Carou, all understanding Critics know there is but little
difference, and how easily and frequently the change of Jod for Vau, and Vau
for Jod happens. Besides that, there are several other Examples of the
redundancy of the Letter Aleph, which were not unknown to the Mazoreths; so
that the Letter Aleph may as well fall out to be superfluous in Carou, as
necessary in Cari. Wherefore the Greek Interpreters and St. Jerome past it by as
ridiculous, or else perhaps it might not be in their Copies; but the Masorites,
who acknowledge it, made use of it.

Vain are also those things which Vossius alleges out of Zachary, c. 12. v.
10. as if the Jews had purposely changed the Ancient Reading, which the Old
Interpreters found in their Copies. But there is no skilful Critic but will
discern that this diversity happened from the varaince in several Copies, while
in some it is read (...), they have pierced, in other (...), they have danced,
by reason of the easy transmutation of Resch into Daleth, and Daleth into
Resch: Nor do I see any reason why for that, or five hundred more of the same
sort, the Jews should be more accused of Falsification than the Greek or Latin
Scribes, or of whatsoever other Nation, who make frequent mistakes in their
Transcriptions. This change of Letters so alike in shape, cannot be avoided
sometimes in any Language, whence afterward arises that vast difference in
Manuscripts. In which particular let Scioppius's little Treatise of the Art of
Criticism be consulted, who perfectly illustrates all these difficulties. Leo
Allatius also a great peruser of Manuscripts, has cited several places to
confirm this Assertion.

Whose words it may not be amiss to quote from his Animadversions upon the
Fragments of Hetruscan Antiquities, P. 55.
which were published by Inghiramius. Moreover, says he, the Errors of so many
Transcripts, the changes of so many names of so many Letters in the Ancient
Monuments, proceed from nothing else but from the likeness of the Capital
Letters one to another: Let us only make use of a few Examples among others,
for fear of being taxed of too much curiosity by some idle person or other.
Joseph Scaliger upon Varro de re Rustica, l. 2. c. 3. Mediam non Meliam, by
reason of the change of L into D, familiar to the Ancients; as on the other
side those Hens were called Melicae, which ought to have been called Medicae.
Godescalcus Stevichius upon the first Book of Apuleius observes the frequent
interchange of the Letters D and T, and in the fifth Book he attributes the
mutilation of the sentence to the likeness of the Letters B and P, for that
both these and the Letter R frequently are mistaken one for another; for which
he brings Quintilian and Pliny as Witnesses, together with their admonitions
concerning the use of Capital and Small Letters. Johannes Isaac Pontanus in his
Ancient French Glossary calls the frequent change of B and P, the solemn
Metastasis. Scioppius of the Critical Art by several Examples proves C in G, D
in L, F in E, P in B, and R frequently interchanged by reason of the likeness
of the Letters.

In like manner the Greek Capitals have a great resemblance one to another, so
that the mistakes of B for P, G for T, and D for L are easily committed,
without a singular care, and such a one that it is almost impossible to take.
To which we may add, that many times a very great confusion happens by reason
of likeness of small Letters. Thus many times among the Greeks (...) is
mistaken for (...); and among the Latins Orbis for Vrbis. Chronologers,
Historians, and others object to one another the various Readings of their own
Manuscripts and Editions, as for one Example among many others; Hitherto it has
been commonly received, that Dagobert, by the Advice of his Council, took to
Wife Nanthild, a lovely Virgin, whom he forced out of a Monastery. But the most
famous Persons of our Age Jacob Sirmond, Adrian Valesius, and others lighted
upon certain Manuscripts, wherein it is not written. as Aimonius erroneously
cites the Text of Fredegardus, and taking Nanthild out of a Monastery to Wife,
he advanced her to the Throne, but taking Nantechild, one of the Virgins from
her attendance; de Ministerio, not de Monasterio. Such mistakes as these
arising not only from the likeness of the Letters, but from innumerable other
causes, are to be found in all written Manuscripts, of whatsoever Language or
Condition. Whence those Monsters of various Readings have sprung, that have so
tormented the Brains of the Critics, and caused most desperate Wars among the
Grammarians: So that they who boast themselves the true Imitators of Cicero
upbraid themselves with their own Ignorance of Ciceronianism, frequently for no
other reason, but because they made use of several Manuscripts, Castigat in
Cicer.
the nature of which Henry Steph^^s has wittily observed.

But not to stay upon those things which can be only unknown to the Ignorant, I
will only give an Example of one Edition of Cicero's Printed by Elz^vir 1661.
and over-lookt by Schrivelius. In which Edition the various Readings of other
Editions and Manuscripts are added in the Margin, to the great benefit of the
Reader. Were the same thing done in the Hebrew Exemplars, no man in his wits
would think the Jews had ever been guilty of corrupting their Bibles; but out
of those various Readings, every one might choose the best, as St. Jerome did,
who in his Commentaries upon the Prophets frequently recedes from the
Translation of the LXX Interpreters. Thus, most addicted to the Lection of his
Masters, he makes this observation in the second chapter of Hoseah, c. 12.
Instead of Forest in the Hebrew (...) Jagnar, the Septuagint had translated it
Testimony, mistaking Daleth for Resch; for taking away the Jod, and reading
Daleth for Resch, the word is (...), or Testimony. Again, upon the fifth
chapter of the same Prophet, v. 7. he blames the LXX Interpreters for reading
Chasil Rust, instead of Chodesch a Month. Again, upon the ninth chap. v. 12.
putting the Question why when the LXX Interpreters translated the words, My
flesh from them, he had rendered it, When I depart from them? He makes this
Answer, In the place mentioned, where we have translated it, Woe to you when I
depart from you, the Septuagint and Theodotius have translated it, Woe to them,
my flesh from them. And examining the reason of such a strange difference that
in the Hebrew Language Besari, signifies my flesh, but (...), Besuri, when I
departed from them. For the same cause there was no reason why St. Jerome should
depart from the received Version of the Septuagint, (...), where thy cause,
which St. Paul confirmed by his Authority, but that his Copies presented to him
another Reading, instead of (...), ubi, where, (...), I will be. The same
transposition it is better to observe in Dakeru, they pierced, and Rakedu, they
danced, as a thing accidental, than with Vossius to reproach the Jews, as if
they had introduced that change into the Text of set purpose.

Vossius indeed says true in saying that the Manuscripts of the Jews are
vitiated in several places, an unhappy fate as well to the Greek and Latin as
to those. So that George Hornius deserves to be hissed at, when he opposes to
the most Learned Vossius the Decrees of Kings, Princes and Magistrates,
forbidding all other Translations to be read in the Churches, which were not
corrected by the Hebrew Copies; as if such Decrees of Princes could preserve or
restore the Purity of the Ancient Originals. Only Vossius is to be condemned
for so stiffly asserting, that some of those Errors were introduced of set
purpose by the Jews, in hatred of the Christians. Thus upon the words of Genesis
49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between
his feet, till be come who is to be sent; he makes this observation. This place
the Jews have maimed not only in the Gr. Version, but also in all the Hebrew
Manuscripts, through the writing of (...), for (...), as is observed by
several, whose Opinion is confirmed by the Samaritan Copy. But who does not
well know, that before the invention of Points, the latter Jod served sometimes
instead of e, sometimes of i, which Letter, as well as those other Vowels
called Ehevi, were carelessly written, as the Scribes themselves thought fit.
And therefore whether it be read (...), as in the Modern Masoretick Editions,
or (...), as the Seventy Interpreters seem to have read it, the Jews are not
therefore to be accused of Falsification, because they retained Jod in their
Exemplars. And it may be probable also that the Greek Interpreters read it in
their Exemplar, when the sense is the same whether it be pronounced with a Jod,
or without one; for that Jod is as often pronounced like an e as an i. But the
Masorites, who conjectured that it was to be read Schilo, retained the Ancient
Jod, which does not hinder but that with the Greek Interpreters we may now read
Schelo, as some of the Rabbis do. These things Vossius ought not to have been
ignorant of, that so often impeaches the Jews, and farther writes, that they
who deny this place to have been corrupted by the Jews, obliterate same both
before and after the coming of Christ. Nor is there any reason, if there were
any depravations before the coming of Christ, why Vossius should attribute them
to the carelessness of the Scribes; and as for those which were intruded into
the Hebrew Exemplars after the coming of Christ, why he should ascribe them to
the wickedness and malice of the Jews. Vossius too much detracts from the
Masorites of Tyberias, when he calls them Barbarians and Strangers to their
Native Language, from whom nothing could proceed but what was vicious, and void
of reason. For with Vossius I readily grant them to have been no Prophets, nor
do I doubt but that they were the first Inventors of pointed Vowels and
Tittles. But from thence to infer that they were Barbarians, De Scriptur.
Interprit. c. 30.
and unskilled in the Hebrew Language, and that the Scriptures were burdened
rather than adorned with pointed Vowels and Tittles, was a piece of
extravagance. If those things are true which Vossius boasts of himself, that he
had seen above two thousand Hebrew Manuscripts, it is not probable that he was
altogether ignorant of the Masoretick Art. That was the Industry of the Jews of
Tyberias, who ascertained the Reading of the Hebrew Text, as it was then
publicly in practice by the assistance of Points. It was called the Masora,
because it contained the Tradition or Method of Reading the Hebrew Text
approved by long use. The same Judgment ought to be given concerning their
Critics, and of the Greek and Latin Books examined and corrected by Learned
men. The Doctors of Tyberias were the Masters of the most famous Academy among
the Jews, who collecting the Exemplars and Copies of the Bible from all parts,
published an Accurate Edition out of all together. Nothing was here done by
them that deserved to be blamed or upbraided. And besides, this correction of
theirs was no hindrance to others, but that they might examine the same
Exemplars again; and I believe the same Exemplars may be re-examin'd in our
Age, according to the Greek Version of the Septuagint, and the Latin
Translation of St. Jerome; in such places where it shall appear, that their
Copies differed from the Masoreticks. However, we will not accuse the Jews of
Falsification, as Vossius does, because their Manuscripts were not the same
with those, which the Greek Interpreters made use of in their Translation: But
we must say this, that various Readings are no less to be found in the Hebrew
Exemplars, than in the Copies of the Greeks and Latins, and other Nations.
Vossius believes there can be nothing of solidity in the Traditions of the
Rabbis, Respons. ad nuper. Critic.
that are only propagated by the Ear; And such Traditions, says he, which are
only propagated by the Ear, He is refuted.
seldom out-last above two or three Ages. But what does this concern that
Tradition, which is now in dispute? There is no Controversy about the Oral
Traditions of the Jews, which he acknowledges to be deservedly exploded by the
more prudent; but only about the Masora, which the verry Carraites, who condemn
the greatest part of the Jewish Traditions as Old Women's Fables, have however
cordially embraced. If Vossius rejects this, he must of necessity reject the
Lection of the Chaldee, Syriack, and Hebraick, which have nothing of Antiquity.
For to all these, in like manner as to the Hebrew, are added pointed Vowels,
which make their Lection certain. But that Text, says Vossius, is mute, which
no man knows how to read or understand, as being defective in one half part,
nor furnished with other Vowels than the Enemies of Christ have added. Was the
same Codex or Text less defective in the days of the LXX Interpreters, when
there appeared no pointed Vowels at all in it? Such is the nature of the Hebrew
Tongue, as of all the other Eastern Languages, that it makes a show of the
fewest Vowels. So that the Reading of those Books which are Printed in the
Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriack and Arabic, does not a little depend upon use, which
as the Jews do, we here call Tradition, or the Masora. Now from whom could that
use of Reading the Hebrew Text be borrowed but from the Jews? But, says
Vossius, They are Enemies of the Christian Faith. Have they therefore forgot to
read their own Books, because Jews? Certainly, unless they were Jews, they
would never read the Hebrew Text in their Synagogues. Neither could the Reading
of the Books be derived by any other means to the Christians. Besides, the
Seventy Interpreters were Jews, upon whom Vossius altogether depends, and they
followed no other Lection of the Hebrew Text, than what was received among the
Jews by the public practice of those times. So that all the obloquy that
Vossius throws upon the Hebrew Text, that it is defective in the half part, may
be affirmed of the Hebrew Codex, which the LXX Interpreters made use of: Nor
ought the Text so much to be accused, as the Idiom of the Hebrew Language; and
upon that account all the Eastern Languages may be accused for half Languages.
Nevertheless Vossius inculcates it over again, even to loathsomness, that the
Hebrew Text is mute, and by the acknowledgment of the Rabbis, a half Language,
as being destitute of true vowels. But what were the true ancient vowels of the
Hebrew Text, he confesses he does not understand, while he so confidently avers
the Language to be destitute of them. Yet as he himself makes no question, the
Ancient Hebrew Vowels are Aleph, He, Van, and Jod. To which St. Jerome makes an
Addition of others. But because the Eastern people rarely made use of them in
writing, the Critics invented pointed vowels, for the more quick and easy
reading of the Scriptures. But Vossius speaks very uncoheringly, not so much as
to the truth of the business, as out of a preconceived prejudice against the
Jews.

CHAP. XI. Of the Samaritan Bibles, their Targumim, or Paraphrases.
COncerning the Nation, Customs and Religion of the Samaritans, who by the Jews
are called Cutheans, the sacred Text relates many things in the Books of Kings,
Chronicles, and Esdras, which afterward Josephus explains more at large, an
ample Testimony in this affair. In our Age Johannes Morinus in his
exercitations with which he has adorned the Hebrew Pentateuch, Hortinger in his
Antimorinian, Exercitations, Walton in his Prolegomena to the Samaritan Text,
and other most learned men have illustrated the Samaritan affairs, and
therefore passing by those things in silence, I proceed to their Texts, of
which some of the Fathers as well Greek as Latin have made mention, together
with the Scholiast of the Roman and Frankfurt Editions of the Septuagint. That
the sect of the Samaritans, makes only use of the Pentateuch of Moses, I
suppose is known to all. For at what time they revolted from the Jews, there
was one Law among all the Hebrews, the other Books of Scripture, not being yet
composed, The Samaritan Texts.
or if they were, not yet made public. But what to think of that Samaritan
Copy, is a thing difficult to resolve. Morinus, who was the first that
published it, lashing out into the praise of it, after his Custom extols it to
the skies. For which reason he is much blamed by the learned: Especially by
Muisius, then Royal professor of Hebrew at Paris; who very severely Stigmatizes
Morinus's opinion of the Samaritan Pentateuch. After that Hottinger set forth
his exercitations upon the Samaritan Pentateuch in opposition to Morinus. And
both reprove a great many things in him, which he does not seem to assert, he
having only praised a little more than needed the Samaritan Text, which was
then the subject of his discourse, after which manner prefacing upon his
Edition of the Greek Bible, he wonderfully upbraids the Hebrew Text. The most
moderate of all are Ludovicus Capellus, and Brian Walton, who in many things do
not reject the credit of the Samaritan Pentateuch. But of all others Usher of
Armagh has the worst opinion of it, who affirms that the Samaritan Text was of
set purpose, and in many places new dressed and corrupted by one Dositheus, a
certain Samaritan Heretic.

Therefore the Samaritan Codex is one and the same with the Hebrew, only few
little variances excepted, as is observed as well by Eusebius in his
Chronicles, and by St. Jerome. The Samaritans, says St. Jerome, In Prol. Galeat.
De emendat. Temp.
write the Pentateuch of Moses, with just so many Letters, only varying in the
shape and in the points. Which words of St. Jerome Joseph Scaliger seems not to
have understood, when he affirms, that the Samaritans read the Pentateuch with
just as many Letters as the Jews, neither more or less. For St. Jerome himself
sometimes observes the various reading of both Codex's; as in his Hebrew
Questions upon Genesis, and his Commentaries upon the Epistle to the Galatians,
wherefore St. Jerome when he affirms the Jewish and Samaritan Exemplars to be
alike in all things, intended only by those Words to distinguish the Samaritan
Codex from the Greek and Latin Translations; In regard the first is the pure
and simple Hebrew context, which cannot be said of the Greek and Latin Bibles.
In the same manner speaks Eusebius, upon whom St. Jerome altogether depends.
That the Samaritan differs from the Hebrew Pentateuch, in some things, is past
all dispute, as may appear by the Parisian, and English Polyglottons in Print.
Which Copy the noble Peter a Valle, obtained from the Samaritans: And afterward
Achilles Harlay Sancy, the Kings Ambassador in Turkey, caused to be brought to
Paris, and laid up in the Library of the Fathers of the Congregation of the
Oratory near the Loure. And that there are other Copies of the same Pentateuch
in other Libraries of Europe, the Epistles of Perescius, Peter, a Valle,
Comberus, and Aleander to Morinus, apparently Testify. Jerome Aleander thus
wrote in the year 1628. I would have you to understand, that there is here in
the Vatican Library another Samaritan Copy of the Pentateuch, written in the
same Samaritan Letters, which Scipio, of Pious Memory, Cardinal of Susanna,
then Library Keeper bought for 300 Crowns. Which Copy, though it be written in
Hebrew Characters, yet is it in the Hebrew Language like to ours. Certain it is
that the Samaritans, though they were much inferior in number to the Jews, yet
after the Destruction of their Temple at Gerizim, retained the Customs and
Ceremonies of their Country, and read the Pentateuch of Moses in their
Synagogues, as they do at this day. The Samaritan Copy which is come to our
hands, being examined by the Fragments of the Ancient Exemplars, which are
extant in Eusebius, St. Jerome, and the rest of the Fathers, seems to be a true
and perfect Copy, and the same with those that were read in the Ancient Times
by the Samaritans. However, I will not deny but that it is degenerated in some
things from its Original Purity and Sincerity. But this is the fate of all
Books, which are not however to be therefore rejected for illegitimate Birth,
because they do not exactly agree with the Originals in all things. For then we
could not say that any one of the Ancient Authors were come perfect to our
hands; nor were Homer's Verses, so common nowadays, to be received for his,
because the most Critical of men Aristotle quotes somethings out of Homer,
which are not to be found in our Modern Copies. Nor were the Jewish Copies of
the Bibles now in use to be entertained, because they do not exactly agree with
those which the Seventy Interpreters made use of in their Translations. We must
therefore assert, that the Copies of the Samaritan and Jewish Pentateuch, are
real and authentic Copies, though there may be some difference between them;
Objections against the Purity of the Samaritan Context.
as Aristotle's Homer plainly appears to be the same Homer which was examined by
Aristarchus, although they do agree in all things.

However, there were not wanting some, especially among the Protestants, who
thought the Codex of the Samaritans to be rejected, led thereto chiefly by this
reason, because the true Worship of God, the Succession of the Priests and
Doctors remained only among the Hebrews, not among the Samaritans, and
therefore the Copies of the Law were to be taken from them alone, as being the
true People of God. But I wonder, that the Protestant Divines, who make so
slight of the Authority of the Church, and the Succession of Priests and
Doctors, should enforce these Arguments. For in this particular, the Authority
of the Church is not greater than of the Synagogue. Who can be ignorant that
the Authority of the Church has not been able to make good the Purity of its
own Exemplars, or to justify them from being clear from all manner of faults,
when the Version of the Seventy Interpreters, of which the Eastern and Western
Church made use, has not been entire from the very time of Origin? However, I
readily grant that the Hebrew Exemplar is to be chiefly preferred, for the
Christians borrow^d the Books of Scripture from the Jews, and not the
Samaritans. Only the Authority of any Assembly whatever does not make a Book to
be without Error or Fault, but only declares it to be received and fit for
practice.

There are also other faults with which the defenders of the Hebrew Text load
the Samaritan Copies: For first they enendeavour to prove it mutilated by the
Example of some few words, and then they say, that some words are foisted into
the place of others. They also object the differences of the Hebrew and
Samaritan Texts one with another; as also the carelessness of the Scribes, who
confound the Letters Aleph and Ain, He and Heth, and other Letters resembling
in form. But they kill themselves with their own weapons, when the same things
may be objected against the Hebrew Texts themselves. In this the Patrons of the
Jewish Text are deceived, The Samaritan text vindicated.
because that out of a preconceiv'd Opinion of some of the Jews, they think it
to be free from all Error; which is to be only affirmed of the Originals. We
have already showed you that the manner of writing of the Hebrew Context, was
very inconstant, and perhaps more free than among the Samaritans, who never
hunted after the Trifles of Jewish Allegories. Even in this the Samaritan
Codex's excel the Jewish, for that many things which Superstition foisted into
the one, are wanting in the other. To this we may add, that the Hand and
Character of the Samaritan Text plainly proves Antiquity. On the other side,
the Jewish Manuscripts being reformed by several Ages, at length obtained the
name of Masoreticks. Lastly, the Jewish Text may in many things be illustrated
by the Samaritan. Thus Genesis 2. we read in the Hebrew, that God finished his
work upon the Seventh Day, but in the other upon the Sixth Day; which seems to
be the more proper Lection, Genesis 4. This Sentence which is in the Samaritan,
Let us go into the field, v. 8. seems to be wanting in the Hebrew; and many of
the Jews mark this gap in the Margin of their Scriptures in these words, pausa
in medio versus, a rest in the middle of the Verse. I know that St. Jerome in
his Hebraick Questions upon Genesis has observed this Pericope for superfluous,
both in the Greek and Samaritan Exemplars; Superfluous, says he, is that in
the Samaritan and our Volume, Let us go into the field. But it appears that St.
Jerome in these Questions, where he professes himself an Assertor of the Jewish
Text, did not speak so much his own, as the Opinion of the Jews, Exodus 12.
where we read that the sojourning of the Children of Israel, who dwelt in
Egypt, was 430 years, the Samaritan Exemplar comprehends, Their Fathers with
the Children, or the sojourning of the Patriarchs in the same Egypt. Which
Lection agrees with the Truth, but is not Jewish. But it might have been, that
they supplied all these things in their Books, and that they might have been
glosses for the Explanation of the Hebrew Text, which is frequently very
obscure.

On the other side, there are several things written with more freedom in the
Samaritan Codex, which seem to have been added for Illustrations sake out of
other parts of the Pentateuch, by some of the Samaritan Doctors. Which
Supplements, without doubt, argue the Copy to be vicious. In like manner the
word Garizim, Deuteronomy. 17. which they have put in the place of Ebal, which was the
Ancient Reading, shows that the Samaritans were not over-religiously exact in
their Copies; whence it is manifestly evinced, that neither the Samaritan, nor
Jewish Exemplar, are free from all manner of Error; so that they are to be
looked upon as Copies of one and the same Book, which may be useful to one
another; yet so that the Jewish Copy, though it have its Imperfections, is to
be preferred before the Samaritan; not only because all Religion and the
Scripture descended from the Jews to the Christians, but because the Exemplars
seem to be less obnoxious to Errors. However, that ought to be no impediment,
but tha^ the Jewish Copy may be mended by the Samaritan, where a manifest
Error shall appear, and the Samaritan Lection preferred before the Jewish, if
it be more correspondent to Truth. For indeed the Reading of the Hebrew Text
among the Samaritans seems to be nothing near so strict, in regard their Copies
make no use of pointed Vowels, which confine the manner of Reading the Hebrew
Context. And it is certain, that Points were a Modern Invention of the Jews;
nor are they added to those Volumes which are made use of in the public
Synagogues. And there I think the Samaritans rather to be commended, than
blamed for retaining their Ancient form of Letters. The Excellen^y of the
Samaritan. Codex.
Besides, they have a Tradition for the Reading of the Text, as the Jews had
before the Points were invented by the Doctors of Tyberias. Lastly, The
Samaritans excel the Jews in this, that they have retained the Ancient or
Mosaic Characters of the Hebrew Language; whereas the Jews upon their return
from Babylon, devoted themselves wholly to the Babylonian or Chaldaean, to
which they had been accustomed; which was the reason why the Samaritans first
accused the Jews, especially Esdras, as a corrupter of the Sacred Text of
Scripture. But laying these Quarrels aside, let us in a few words examine what
may be thought of the first Hebrew Letters.

For the Samaritan Characters, the sounder sort of Critics, and the Ancient
Coins of the Samaritan Nation fairly plead, so that Joseph Scaliger gives them
the Title of Asses, who will not subscribe to the Opinion of St. Jerome, where
he says, That certain it is, Prolog. Galeat.
that Esdras the Scribe, Doctor of the Law, after the taking of Jerusalem, and
restoration of the Temple under Zerobabel, found out other Letters, which we
now make use of; whereas till that time the Hebrew and the Samaritan Characters
were the same. This Opinion of St. Jerome concerning the Samaritan Characters,
was renewed not long since by Guilielmus Postellus, Blancuccius, Villalpandus,
Morinus, Capellus, Mayerus, Perescius, and among the Jews by R. Azarias, and
several others. Postellus, who had long conversed with the Jews attributes the
cause of that change to the hatred which the Jews had to the Samaritans, as
being Schismatics. That Party, says he, who intermixed with the True Religion
the Worship of Idols, In Alph 12. Linguar. c. de Samar.
is adjudged by a grave and pious person to be Heretical, and unworthy of
converse, or the communication of the same Letters; and therefore after the
Captivity he applied himself to the Invention of new Characters. And a little
after he adds; When I disclosed these Conjectures of mine to the Jews, they
said they were most true, confirmed in writing by most of their own Rabbis.
However, it seems far more probable, that the Jews being restored to their
Country, preserved the Chaldee Letters, to which they had been accustomed in
their Exilement, having now forgotten the former. Then the same Postellus makes
mention of the Silver Coins, which seem to be of great Antiquity; and of which
he had seen not a few among the Jews, who valued them so highly, that he could
not purchase one under two Crowns in Gold, which they said was as ancient as
Solomon 's Reign, and but of a base Metal. Lastly, he adds these words, which
do not a little illustrate the present Argument; They affirm, that among the
deepest Ruins, and vastest heaps of Rubbish, these Coins are frequently dug
out, and are a most certain proof of Antiquity, as having this Inscription,
Holy Jerusalem, into which from Solomon's time the Samaritans never entered, nor
vouchsafed the City the name of Holy; as they adored without Jerusalem, and
worshipped Idols, half Gentiles, half Jews; so that it is not probable they
would have celebrated a City which was in Enmity with them. Concerning the
Samaritan Shekles, much more may be read in Villalpandus, Morinus, and others.
Villalpand. Appar. in Ezech. Morin. in exercitat. in Pentat. Samar. Altand. in
Epist. ad Morin. Buxtorf. Dissert. de Lit. Heb. Light. Hor. Heb. ad c. 5. Matt.
S^ick. in Jure Reg. Heb. sub. ^i^.
Perescius had several Samaritan Coins, and Jerome Aleander says, that he met
with several at Rome.

But notwithstanding all that has been said, John Buxtorf, a most obstinate
Asserter of the Jewish Context, defends the perpetuity of the Hebrew Letters,
by many Authorities taken out of the Rabbis Books. Lightfoot agrees with
Buxtorf, tho he acknowledges the Talmudick Doctors to be his opposers. Shickard
produces many things of the same nature, Hebrew Professor in the Academy of
Tubinghen, together with some other Hebricians. But Walton deserts this
Opinion, which he found to proceed rather from Rabbinical discourse, than from
sound Theology. For which reason that famous person is but hardly thought of
among some of the Rabbinists, especially Matthias Vasmut of Rastoch, who after
many severe expressions against him, Walton, says he, quoting the Pontificial
Authors against the Divine Authority of Scripture, ought not to be endured in a
Reformed Church. But for the same reason neither ought Drusius, Scaliger,
Casaubon, Vossius, Amama, Bochart, and several others to be suffer^d among
those that assume the Title of Reformed, seeing they have all the same Opinion
with Cappellus, and Walton concerning the Samaritan Letters. Moreover, Buxtorf
seems to have condescended to this Opinion concerning the Diuturnity of the
Hebrew Letters, not willingly, but by constraint, that he might refute
Cappellus's Book entitled Arcani punctationis Revelati; and there he proves the
Novelty of the Samaritan from the Antiquity of the Hebrew Characters. Buxtorf
drew many into his Opinion. But they are in the number of those whom Vossius
calls Asses clad in Professors Gowns, who having little either of Art or
Ingenuity, merely instructed by the Writings of single Buxtorf, make a great
noise with those Rabbis, whose Books they never so much as opened. But there
is no reason for the Critics to dispute so fiercely about the first Hebrew
Characters. For if you more heedfully consider and compare together the
Samaritan and Hebrew Characters, there is not such a vast difference between
them, but that they may be thought to have had one and the same Original: From
whence also the Greek and Latin Capital Letters seem to have derived their
first forms. Tho being subservient to Custom, they have undergone several
Alterations according to times and places. And thus the Eastern Jews form their
Characters after another manner than the Western: Post^l. in ^lphab. 12 Ling.
R. Azar. Inre Bin. c. 56. Blanc. in G^am Villal^. Appar. ^n Ezech. Kircher. O^
dip. Egypt. par. 2. Morin. Ex^^citat. in P^ntat. Sam Hortin. Ex^^citat. in
Morin.
Then the Western, as the Italian, French, Spanish, Germans, etc. differ one
among another, and from all these the Moors or Barbary Jews. Nor is there less
difference between the Forms of the Samaritan Characters, which have lately
been Printed in Europe, as any one may see, who diligently observes the
varieties of Letters in the Samaritan Alphabets, which have been put forth by
Postellus, R. Azarias, Blancuccius, Vill^lpandus, Kircher, Morinus, Hortinger,
and others. Those Letters which are Printed in the Parisian and English Bibles,
were transcribed from one Copy. Which things being granted, it is not at all to
be wondered at, that the Letter Tau, which Jerome notes to have formerly
resembl'd the form of a Cross, should now not bear the same figure in the
Vulgar Alphabets of the Samaritans, because in process of time the Letter was
altered. But Rabbi Azarias sets down in his Alphabet two sorts of this Letter
Tau, one of which resembles the form of a Cross. Jerome Aleander likewise
writing to Morinus concerning the Shekels of that Nation which he had seen in
Rome, has these expressions upon one piece of money; You shall see upon both
sides of the Coin the Letter Tau, in the form of a Cross, which being formerly
written thus X, degenerated at length into this Form Ae. To the same effect
Perescius wrote to Morinus. Therefore when one and the same Character at the
same time in diverse places, admits of various forms, what wonder is it that
this Letter, the most ancient of all, after so many Ages, especially among
several and different Nations, should vary from his first figure? Who so
ignorant, as not to know that the Roman Letters, after the Goths invading
Italy, lost their Original and Ancient Form, neither were they the same with
those Letters which were the true Ancient Letters, and were called Lombardick?
But of this sufficient has been said: Now let us come to the Samaritan Targumim
or Paraphrases.

The Scripture first wrote in the common Language of the Country.
Because, according to the Admonition of St. Paul, All things that are written,
are written for our instruction, in Ancient time both the Old and New Testament
were never written in any other than the Mother Tongue, to the end the
Scriptures might be read by the Vulgar People. And yet in our Age there is a
certain Parisian Divine, who has ventured to affirm, that the Books of Moses
Law seem to be composed in a Language which was not then familiar with the
People; Dr. Mallet.
and what is hardly to be credited, that most Learned Doctor has feigned a
hundred monstrous Stories of the Hebrew Language, of its Characters and
Grammar, of which Moses was the first Author. But the Paraphrases of the Sacred
Text, which the Jews and Samaritans compiled in their Mother Tongues, so soon
as the Hebrew Language ceased to be familiar, plainly demonstrate that the
Scriptures were written in the Language of the Country. Whence arose that
Version wrote in Syro-Chaldaick, not unelegant neither, which denotes its
Antiquity. This is put forth in the Parisian and English Versions, and seems to
have been composed by the Samaritan Doctors, to be read in the Schools, and to
the end that all the words of the Mosaic Law might be read, when the use of
the Hebrew Language it self was only among the Learned. The Samaritan
Paraphrase expresses almost verbatim the whole Hebrew Context; from which it
swerves in but few things, most especially in the names of Rivers, Cities and
Countries, which he accommodates for the most part to the time present. Nor
does he seem to be free from all praeconceiv'd Opinion, for which reason he
translates the word Elohim Angels. Thus where we read that man was translated
in the likeness of God, he renders it, in the likeness of Angels; and a little
before, instead of these words, Ye shall be as Gods, as it is in the Hebrew, he
renders the words, Ye shall be as Angels. Sometimes he confines the Hebrew
words to his own sense; as instead of those words in the Latin Edition, The
Spirit of God was carried upon the face of the Waters, he translates it, Blew
upon the Waters. But the Latin Interpreters of the Samaritan, seems not so
accurate in all things, especially in those places where he differs from the
Hebrew Samaritan, which in some places wants correction.

There was also a Greek Version of the Samaritan, for the use of the
Samaritans, that used the Greek Language. Of which Version the Ancient Fathers
have so frequently made mention in their works, In Exercitat. in Pent. Samar.
that Morinus affirms it to have been done by them. But in so saying, he is
extremely deceived. Isaac Vossius is also in an Error, who denies that there
ever was any Greek Version of the Pentateuch among the Samaritans; but that all
those Quotations by the Fathers of the Samaritan Codex, were taken out of
Origens Hexapla, illustrated with Scholiasts, where are various Lections of the
Samaritan Exemplars. I do not deny but that Origin has cited many things by way
of Comment in the Margin of his Hexapla. But the Fathers who make mention of
the Samaritan Codex, cite the Translation of the Pentateuch, which was read by
the Samaritans, to whom the Greek Tongue was more familiar. And indeed there is
no probability that it could otherwise be; just as the Samaritan that spoke
Arabic, had a Version of the Pentateuch into Arabic. Yet Masius suspects
there was no other Greek Version for the Greek Samaritans, than the Version of
the LXX Interpreters. Tho it is much more likely that the Samaritans after the
Example of the Hellenist Jews, made a new Version for themselves, that is to be
used in Schools and private Houses; the Hebrew Samaritan Context being always
reserved for the use of the Synagogue. To which we may add, that the Version
cited by the Fathers under the name of the Samaritan, differs in some things
from the Translation of the Seventy, as appears by the Chronicle of Eusebius.
Masius also testifies that Symmachus being an Ebionite, was for no other reason
induced to make a new Translation of the Sacred Text in the Greek, but out of
mere hatred to the Samaritans, whose Opinions he had deserted. This Greek
Translation agrees in some things with the former Samaritan Version, where it
differs from the Hebrew Samaritan Text, as if the Greek had been taken from
thence. But in regard they frequently differ among themselves, there can be
nothing certainly affirmed in reference to this particular. All which is easily
illustrated by Examples. Thus Genesis 49.23. where the Latin Interpreter rightly
expresses the words, both of the Hebrew, as of the Hebrew Samaritan, Having
Darts, the Author of the Greek Version of the Samaritans translates the same
words (...), which agrees with the Samaritan and the Chaldee Paraphrase. Soon
after we read, v. 24. as well in the Jewish as Samaritan Hebrew Context,
Beethan, which in the Latin Edition is rendered in Forti; in the Greek Version
of the Septuagint, cum Fortitudine; but the Interpreters of both the Samaritan
Versions, have rendered the word in profunditate. Which Interpretation does not
express the Grammatical sense, as they call it, yet it may so happen, that that
sense is commonly received by the Samaritans, Genesis 5.19. We read in the
Samaritan Version, and in both the Hebrew Texts, pro Deo, which the Greek
Interpreter of the Samaritans renders Timeo Deum, as if he had made use of a
Copy quite different from all the Modern Exemplars; and yet R. Saadias Gaon has
the same Interpretation in his Arabic Paraphrase, who nevertheless had no
other Exemplars than what we use at this day, Exodus 9.22. Instead of the word
Flies, which is read in the Latin Edition, in the Greek Samaritan Version the
word Crow is made use of, the Interpreter mistaking the word Oreb for Erob,
which signifies a confused multitude of Flies or little Insects. Which Error
may be imputed to the Interpreter, by reason of the various manner of reading,
because of the want of Points in the Hebrew Samaritan Copy.

The Samaritans have also an Arabic Version of the Pentateuch, which was
compiled for the use of them that spoke the Arabic as their Natural Language.
For tho the Samaritans, like the Jews, read no other than the Hebrew Text of
Moses Law, in their Synagogues, yet have they several Translations for the
several Provinces belonging to it. The famous Perescius had a third sort from
the Samaritans, but defective, wherein the Arabic Version was written in a
Samaritan Character, of which there are some Copies however written in a
Samaritan Character. Hottinger has inserted the 4th chap. of Genesis out of a
certain fragment of that Arabic Translation, both in Arabic and Latin, in
the third Book of his Bibliotheca Orientalis. The most Learned Walton makes
mention also of the same, which Usher of Armagh communicated to him. The
Samaritans have also other Arabic Books, written out however in a Samaritan
Character. Thus J. Scaliger makes mention of a Samaritan Chronicle, the Epitome
of which Hottinger has rendered into Latin with this Title, An Epitome of the
Chapters of the Book of Joshua. Because it begins from the Death of Moses, and
the Conduct of Joshuah, De Emendat. T^mp.
and extends, as Scaliger observes to the Reigns of the Antonines. Nor do the
Samaritans want the History or the Book of Joshua it self, which however does
not agree in all things with the Hebrew Text; nor do they look upon it as
Canonical Scripture, in regard they acknowledge no other for Authentic
Divinity, but the Law of Moses. I shall not trouble my self with the Lexicons
which are now in use for the Samaritan Language, of which Perescius testifies
himself to have one, in his Epistle to Morinus. Pestellus also makes mention of
their Grammar. Which Writings were they Printed, would give great Light into
the Samaritan Language, and how the Samaritans pronounce the Hebrew, and what
signification they give to some more difficult words.

CHAP. XII. Of the Bibles of the Sadduces and Karraeans.
Of the Bibles of the Sadduces.
CErtain it is that the Sect of the Sadduces in the time of Christ's being upon
Earth, was the most noble Sect, and one which had the chief management of the
Public Affairs among the Jews. But after the Destruction of Jerusalem, and
that the Jews were scattered into several parts of the World, that famous Sect
became so entirely extinct, that there is not the least footstep of it. There
only remained the Sect of the Pharisees, whose Room the Rabbanists and
Talmudists, vulgarly so called, in aftertimes usurped. For they are the same
with the Pharisees whose Traditions the Jews so greedily swallowed, and adored,
as if proceeding from the mouth of God. Therefore the Scriptures of the Old
Testament came to the Christians from the Pharisees, and not from the Sadduces.
Vossius de Septuagint. Interpret. c. 17.
But in this Isaac Vossius, and several others seem to have been deceived, St.
Jerome himself being their guide and directer, while they affirm that the
Sadduces in imitation of the Samaritans, translated no more than the five Books
of Moses. For what reason was there why the Sadduces, who were but a late Sect
among the Jews, after the Volumes of the Prophets were confirmed by the public
practice of Reading, should only believe in Moses. Therefore there is no
question to be made but the Sadduces received all the Books of Sacred Text, or
(...), all that was written, rejecting only the Traditions of the Pharisees,
which seemed to them to be only the Figments of idle persons. More notoriously
do they mistake, who believe the Carraeans to have followed the Samaritans in
this particular. And which seems almost incredible, Isaac Vossius, otherwise a
Learned Person, places the Carraeans among the Ebionites, Nazareans, and other
Sects of the Jews, who retaining the Ceremonies of the Mosaic Law, believed
the Gospel. Therefore it behooves us to relate in short what the Sect of the
Carraeans was, and what was their Opinion concerning the Sacred Scriptures.

The word Karrai, from whence the Carraeans derive their name, signifies a man
exercised in the Reading of Scripture. But that name, which was formerly
reverenced, became to be hated, by reason of the Sect of the Carraeans, that
first began to spread it self toward the beginning of the 10th Century. They
like the Rabbanists allow of twenty four Books of Scripture with the Tittl'd
Vowels, and other Masoretick Marks. In expounding the Sacred Scriptures they
follow the Masoretick Lection every where, esteeming it no less than Aben Ezra,
Kimchi, or any other of the Jewish Grammarians; and in imitation of them are
great searchers after Grammatick Quirks. Therefore was Buxtorf horribly
mistaken where he writes, We have read of the Carraeans, who rejecting all the
Traditions, only adhere to the Text, that they not only differ extremely one
with another, De p^nctor. Antiquitat.
as to the understanding and Exposition of things, but also in the Reading of
Scripture, as refusing points which they look upon as a piece of Oral Law, or
Tradition. Buxtorf had had a quite contrary Opinion concerning the Carraeans,
if he had lighted upon those Books, which he seems not to have been furnished
withal. For they do not altogether reject the Talmud and Traditions of the
Jews, but they presume not to compare them with the Sacred Scriptures, as the
Rabbanists. And therefore laying those aside, they endeavor after the manner
of the Critics, who are free from all prejudice, to draw forth that which
seems to them to be the truest sense of Scripture, by comparing one place with
another, taking little notice of the Talmudick Expositions, which many times
make large Excursions far from the matter. And therefore if the Jewish
Rabbanists speak ill at any time of the Carraeans, as Corrupters of the Biblick
Context, it proceeds out of mere Envy and Malice, not from heat of Dispute. All
which things may be more perspicuously seen in the Books of the Carraeans
themselves.

Aaron the Son of Joseph, of the Sect of the Carraeans, who wrote the
Commentaries upon the Law, An. 1294. at the beginning of his Book, deplores the
lamentable state of the Jews, and their being scattered into all parts of the
World, asserting that Vision and Prophecy was taken from them, and that they
had almost forgotten the Hebrew Language. But, says he, several Doctors
appeared among the Israelites, who searched out the Scripture, which contains
the 24 Books in use among us. Therefore the Carraeans do not agree with the
Samaritans upon this point, but with the Rabbanists allow the whole Scripture
to be Canonical and Regular. And they also frequently call it a Prophecy,
thereby to distinguish it from those other Traditions, which the rest of the
Jews are not afraid to obtrude upon us. In the same place he rebukes the
Cabbalick Doctors, who many times propound for Scripture the Figments and
Fables of their own Brains, and, to use his own expressions, depend upon the
Cabbala, and tattle idle stories, and boast their Cabbala or Tradition to be
above the Scripture. However, the Carraeans do not reject all manner of
Tradition, but they separate the ridiculous and uncertain from that which has
some appearance of Truth; as the same Carraean openly testifies in these words;
Nor let any one object to us, that we are Enemies to the Writing, Reason and
Doctrine delivered to us by our Ancestors. For this Tradition which we make use
of was not lost, and is comprehended in true Scripture, not seated in variety;
concerning which the Israelites in all things agree. This is that Tradition
which caused them to approve by their Authority the Masoretick Scripture
received by all the rest of the Jews, with the Points and Accents; which will
be still more apparent from the above quoted Commentary of the Carraean.

It is a wonderful thing how studious this Carraean was of Modern Lection and
Grammar, when they appear useful to the Explication of Scripture. Sometimes he
appeals to the most celebrated Masters of the Jewish Rabbanists, to confirm his
Opinion by their Testimonies; sometimes he refutes them, especially the
Cabbalistick, and Allegorical Doctors. But much oftener he has recourse to the
Analogy of Grammar, than to the Testimonies of others. Thus at the beginning of
his Exposition of Genesis, he has these words; Bereschith is of the same form
as Scherith, only that Aleph is not pronounced. Now it is known that the word
Reschith is a word that signifies time, and that it denotes the time that
precedes, or that which is first of all; as Exodus c. 23. The first of the
Fruits of thy Land; he adds in this place, that Reschith is a name of time;
then he reproves a certain Rabby by the name of R. Jesua, who believes that the
Angels were from the beginning; and opposes to him the Opinion of the Misnick
Doctors, that the Angels were not created the first day; and makes it out from
the words of Scripture, that there was nothing that day created; and that this
was the common Opinion of the Interpreters. Upon the word (...), PLACE="marg"
Genesis 1.
V^haarets, and the Earth; he observes that the Vau prefixed to this word,
ought to be taken like the Phe Raphatum, of the Arabic Language, and that it
is not a servant to the word, but the beginning of the word. That the name of
Elohim is proper to the Judges, to which he adds, that after the word Eloah was
found out, then we understood Elohim to be a Plural, and then calls it (...),
Leshon Tifearath, a word of honor or ornament. He explains the properties and
genuine signification of Tohu, Bohu, and Coshech, and illustrates those by
other places of Scripture, and refutes a nameless person, who believes the word
Coshech to signify the Elementary Fire. He says, that Merachepeth is of the
Dagesh Conjugation or Piel. He expounds the force of this Sentence according to
the Letter, and resolves many difficulties arising as well from the Context, as
from the Exposition of the Interpreters. Upon the word (...), he makes these
Observations, the Letter He in the word Laielah, is merely additional, and
there is the same account to be given of all words ending in He, whose Accent
is Mileel: Where we read in the Latin Interpretation, Let us make man, and in
the Hebrew Text (...), Nagnaseh, who reproves some Interpreters, who thought it
was to be expounded, I will make, as if it were written (...), because in some
places the Letters Ethan, Aleph, Jod, Tau, and Nun, are changed one into
another; which Rule the Carraean does not disapprove, but only here denies it
to have any effect. Upon the word (...), Mechelbehen, Of their Fat, which is
writ with a Tzeri under Beth, he makes this note; this word is marked with a
Tzeri under Beth, because it is in the Plural, to distinguish it from (...),
Chelbam, their Fat, which is written with a Scheva, and it happens to be
without a Jod, which is a sign of the Plural number, as in the words (...),
Becol Phagnalec, In all thy works; and in many other Examples of the same
nature. In the third Chapter of Genesis he observes upon the word (...), Where?
that it is read with a Dagesh between the latter Caph, for ornaments sake.

Now by the quoted Examples, I suppose there is no person but may easily
collect, that the Carraeans observe the Modern Reading of the Hebrew Text, and
depend wholly upon the Masoretick Copies, accurately observing the niceties of
pointed Vowels and Accents. Frequently in this Carraean Author are read these
words, Great Pathach, Little Pathach, Hateph Kamets, Cholem, Sheruc; for so he
writes it, and no Schurec, and many of the like nature, which are the
Inventions of the Jewish Grammarians. Nor does he show himself less experienced
in Philosophy and Theology, than in Grammar. But I pass by these things, as
being far from our purpose; only I will say something concerning their
Theology, lest any should hereafter confound the Carraeans with the Samaritans;
as if both did not acknowledge the Immortality of the Soul. Therefore upon
these words, The Theology of the Carraeans.
Let us make man in our likeness, the Carraean so often already quoted,
observes, That the Soul of man consisted of superior things, but the Body of
the form of inferior things; for which he brings this reason, For that the
Soul of man subsists no otherwise than the Angels; and adds at last, the World
shall be for the sake of the Soul. Much to this purpose was observed by that
Jew, who over-viewed the Constantinopolitan Edition of the Book Juchasin. For
in the first page of that Book, Hence, says he, it appears, thaet the
Carraeans are not the Sadduces of our Age; for they acknowledge Reward,
Punishment, and Resurrection.

Lastly, This Carraean, doing the part of a Learned Interpreter of the
Scripture, reproves exceedingly the method of the Cabbalistick Rabbis, who
follow the mere trifles of Allegories. In the same manner he most sharply
rebukes all those things which are feigned concerning the Tree of Life; Every
one, says he, has taken up that Argument as a Parable; but then proceeding,
know, says he, that all which is there written is literally true. And then as
an Example of their Allegories, he produces what those Cabbalistick Doctors
dream vulgarly concerning the Serpent: They say, says he, That the Serpent was
as big as a Camel, and that Samuel rode upon him. And that God sporting with
the Camel, rode upon him also. They farther tell us, We must not read Tunicas
(...), the Coats of the Skin, but Tunicas (...), the Coats of Light. Which
ridiculous Expositions he utterly exclaims against. They depend upon their
Ancestors for most of those Expositions, and others like to them. And then
cursing those idle Interpreters that abuse their own leisure; Woe be to him
that impudently undertakes such a work. He also does refuse several Readings
which those Doctors of their own brains frivolously intrude into Scripture. To
that purpose he rebukes certain Interpreters, who in the first words of Genesis
for (...), with a Resch, read (...), with a Daleth. There are some, says he,
that change Resch into Daleth, but it is a fiction of their little brains. In
the same manner he girds them severely that divide the word Bohu into two
words, as if it were to be read in the Text Bo Hu. And thus much for the Sect
of the Carraeans: Now let us return to the Jewish Rabbanists, from whom we made
this digression.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Targumim of the Jews, or the Translations of Sacred
Scripture, and first of the Chaldee Paraphrases.
THE Hebrew Language remained so long entire and familiar to the Jews, while
the Prophets abode in Jerusalem, who made their Sermons to the People in the
Hebrew Tongue, which was then understood by all. But being carried Captive to
Babylon, they forgot their own Language, at least all the vulgar people.
Wherefore upon their return to Jerusalem, they could not understand the Law of
Moses, but with the assistance of the Rabbis, who interpreted the same in the
Babylonish or Chaldee Idioms. To which purpose we read in Nehemiah, that Esdras
made him a Pulpit, whence he spoke to the People; and, together with the
Levites, read in the Law of God distinctly, and with a loud voice, to be
understood: And after that, Then spoke Nehemiah and Esdras the Priest, and the
Levites and Scribes interpreting to all the people, as it is most probable, in
the Chaldee Language. Which Custom is still retained by the Jews in our Age
dispersed over the face of the Earth. Thus the Spanish, German, Turkish,
Grecian, Persian, and other Jews, make use of Spanish, German, Turkish,
Grecian, and Persian Interpretations of the Text. And from the same Fountain I
am apt to believe that all the Translations and Paraphrases of the Bible now
found among the Jews deduced their Original. For it is not probable that it
should be the Original of that Translation which goes under the name of the
Seventy Interpreters. For the Jews of Alexandria, who spoke Greek, made for
their own use a Greek Version, which afterward fell into the hands of the
Christians. As for the Chaldee Paraphrases, they were made at Jerusalem, and
other places near adjoining, whence they were transmitted into places farther
remote. Those Chaldee Paraphrases are highly esteemed by the Jews even in these
latter times, especially those which are attributed to Onkelos and Jonathan.
But as to the Authority and Antiquity of those Jews, the Learned are at
variance among themselves; and therefore because no man has handled that point
more accurately than Elias the Levite, a person long versed in the Chaldee
Tongue and Writers, it will not be amiss to translate so much of his words as
shall be necessary for our purpose out of his Preface before his Chaldee
Lexicon.

When the Jews were carried away captive out of their own Land into Babylon,
they forgot their own Language, as the Book of Nehemiah testifies. So that all
the knowledge of the Rabbis and persons skilful in the Law, was chiefly
public in the Babylonish Languages. In that the Babylonish Talmud was
composed. Furthermore, during the time of the second Temple their Language was
for the most part Babylonish; which when Jonathan the Son of Uzziel became
sensible of, he wrote a Chaldee Paraphrase of the eight Prophets for the use of
the People. Onkelos also wrote another of the Law. But the Hagiography was not
translated till long after, in the Language of the Jerusalem Talmud, as I shall
afterward relate. In the mean time let us examine some things that concern the
Paraphrasts themselves. First, why it is said in Gemara, that Jonathan was long
before Onkelos. How Jonathan was one of the Disciples of Hillel, who flourished
about a hundred years before the Destruction of the Temple; but that Onkelos
was the Son of Titus who destroyed the Temple. And if it were so, why Jonathan
first paraphrased the Prophets, and did not begin with the Law. Our Ancestors
of blessed memory have reported indeed, that he intended to have explained the
Hagiographers, but that a voice spoke to him from Heaven, saying, Is it not
enough that thou have laid open the Mysteries of the Prophets? Would thou
proceed to open the Mysteries of the Holy Ghost (that is, of the Books of the
Hagiographers?) For that reason he did not paraphrase upon the Hagiography. But
then another difficulty offers it self, why he did not expound the Law?
especially seeing a Cabbalistick Doctor Rabbi Menahem Rekanatensis has wrote in
the Section Matzorang, that he also translated the Law, where he has these
words, And he sent a live Bird. For these are his words. I found in the Targum
of Jonathan the Son of Vzziel, of happy memory, and he let go a live Bird; nor
does he write otherwise in many other places. If this be true, it is a wonder
how it should be lost in so short a time, and not the least remainder of that
Translation be to be seen. We may also enquire why Onkelos did not translate
the Hagiographers, and why they continued unparaphas'd till the time of a
certain Hierosolymite, who explained them paraphrastically. But who he was, or
what his name was, or when he lived, is not certain. Thus the Hierosolymitan
Interpreter who translated the Law, is to us unknown, whether he be the same
who interpreted the Hagiographers, or whether they were two Interpreters that
lived at two several times. Some say that Aquila the Proselite was the Author
of both Paraphrases; others there are affirm Joseph the Blind to be the Author
of both. And in truth I have found in Bereschith Rabba taken out of the
Hagiographers and Prophets under Aquila's name, as that Verse, Life and Death
are in the power of the Tongue, Prove. 12.
etc. See in the Root Matztar. Also upon these words of Ezechiel; The Brides of
their Adulteries. Aquila's Targum reads, (...), ( that is, (...), the Ancient
Whore.) See the Root (...). Thus Aquila also interprets some of the Garments of
which Isaiah makes mention. But there is no mention of Rabbi Joseph 's
Paraphrase in Bereschith Rabba, for he was not yet alive. But there is mention
of it in Gemara upon certain Verses of the Prophets and Hagiographers, which
are not found in the Verses of the Law. Know however, that the Language of
Onkelos 's Paraphrase differs in nothing from the Language of Jonathans. For
both speak the Babylonish Idiom, as do the Books of Daniel and Esdras; yet
their Language is much more pure and elegant than that of the rest of the
Targums. As for the Hierosolymitan Targum, it differs very much from the
Babylonish, in regard it is composed of several Languages, the Greek, the
Roman, and the Persian. And because so many Languages are found to be in it,
this mixture seems to me to have begun from that time, when those Empires had
the Dominion over Jerusalem. Therefore is that Language called the Jerusalem
Targum; for that in that same mixture Rabbi Jonathan composed the Jerusalem
Targum about 300 years after the destruction of Jerusalem. At what time every
body knows that Jerusalem was subject to those Nations, as we find in the Book
of Josephus Goronidas. But at what time the Jerusalem Targum was composed upon
the Law and the Hagiography, is unknown to us, whether before or after the
Hierosolymitan Targum was finished; I aminduced to believe that the
Hierosolymitan Targum was never extant but only upon Job, the Proverbs, and
Psalms, and not upon the five Volumes; for the style is not the same, although
in these there are many words taken from the Hierosolymitan Author.

Thus far Elias the Levite, who at length confirms his Opinion concerning the
difference of the Targum of Job, the Proverbs, and Psalms, which he calls the
Hierosolymitan, from the Targum of the Five Volumes, by the example of the
double Targum upon the Book of Esther; of which the second bears the name of
the Hierosolymitan. And that he again confirms by the Authority of Rabbi
Solomon, and after a short discourse concludes that the Author of the Targum of
the Five Volumes is no more known than the Author of the Targum of Job, the
Proverbs, and the Psalms. For first, who Onkelos and Jonathan were, is utterly
unknown, or in what Age they lived. Concerning their Antiquity also the
Christians much dispute, while others led by the Testimonies of the Jews,
believe their Paraphrases to have been made about the time that Christ lived
upon Earth: Others think them later than Origin or St. Jerome, because they
neither make mention of them. Yet it might be that in those very times they
were known to the Babylonish Jews, where they seem to have had their Original;
but not being yet reduced into one body, they were not made commonly public:
And thus I have lighted upon some Exememplars of the Pentateuch, to which there
was added to every word of the Hebrew Text an Exposition in French; yet a
French Paraphrase upon the Law of Moses was never yet cited by any of the Jews.
And therefore it is very probable that certain Doctors of the Babylonian
Schools expounded the Hebrew words in Chaldee for the benefit of the people,
out of which in process of time an entire Paraphrase was compiled. And to make
me so believe the purity of the Chaldee Language wherein they are written
induces me. Which is to be understood of the Paraphrase only that goes under
the name of Onkelos upon the Law of Moses; and of that other upon all the
former and latter Prophets, which are attributed to Jonathan: For that same
Jonathan, or whoever else were the Author of the Paraphrase upon the Prophets,
did by no means compose that other, which is published by certain Jews under
Jonathan's name; so different is the style of both; which I wonder was not
taken notice of by Huetius, and other Critics, who confound this same
Pseudo-Jonathan with the True and Ancient Jonathan, as if one and the same
Author had paraphrased upon the Pentateuch and the Prophets. But as for that
story of the Talmudick Doctors of the Voice that spoke from Heaven to deter
Jonathan from explaining the Hagiographers, there is no wise man but takes them
for the dreams of the Jews. But first we are to take notice of what has been
observed concerning the diversity of the Babylonish and Hierosolymitan Dialects
by the same Elias, who seems to set little or no value upon the rest of the
Paraphrases which are extant upon the Hagiographers, because they were written
by men of no name. To which we may add, that their Authors frequently swerve
from the words of the Hebrew Text, foisting in the room of those Talmudick
Fables and Stories of the same nature.

Onkelos and Jonathan stick much closer to the sense of Scripture, and yet
sometimes they are not so very careful to express it verbatim, as Elias the
Levite testifies. But, says he, The Paraphrasts do not always observe the
Rules of Grammar. For sometimes they render the Praeterperfect tence by the
Future, and the Future by the Praeterperfect tence, and sometimes the
Participle by the Praeterperfect tence and Future. Sometimes they interpret a
Verse as they judge most agreeable to the Targumick Language, not so much
minding the Biblick Context. To this Elias adds the Testimon of Solomon Isaac,
whom we erroneously call Jarchi, who observes Onkelos not to be very curious of
the Grammar of Scripture, but to have followed his sense and judgment in many
things; and sometimes those Paraphrasts have omitted not only whole words, but
whole sentences. For indeed it is the common Fate of all Paraphrasters, who
translate Books out of one Language into another, to follow the freest method
of translating. So that if there occur any difference from the Translation, it
is presently to be referred to its Cause and Original; and we are diligently to
enquire, what might have been the Product of the various Readings of the
Codex's, and what might be altered according to the Fancy of the Interpreter.
However, this is chiefly to be taken notice of, that the Writing of the Chaldee
Paraphrases was heretofore very confused and disordered: For there was no
Analogy of Orthography, the Letters Vau and Jod being without any distinction
made use of, and inserted into words without any signification. In like manner,
the Author of the Chaldee pointing observed no method in putting the Titles to
the Chaldee Context, as Elias the Levite plainly testifies, who was the first
that polished the Chaldee Language. Now how difficult it was to frame a Chaldee
Grammar, I rather choose to show from the words of Elias himself, than my own.

Many, says Elias, asked me, whether a Grammar could be framed for these
Targumims; I answered according to my own sentiments, that I could not do it,
in regard the Exemplars varied among themselves, as well in words as in
letters, and altogether in the points, which differed almost beyond all
possibility of reconciliation. And that proceeds from hence, because the
Paraphrasts wrote their Versions without points, which were not yet invented,
as I have truly demonstrated in my Preface to Masoreth Hammasoreth. To this we
may add, that the most Ancient Exemplars are all without points, because the
Authors of the Masora never pointed them as they pointed the rest of the
Scripture. But a long time after they were pointed by one or more persons, tho
of no note, as they thought good. Therefore there is no Analogy observed,
neither can there be any method produced for the making of a Grammar. And
indeed unless it were so, who could imagine that from the time that the Targums
were composed, there should be no persons among the Jews who had Erudition
enough to frame a Grammar, as Rabbi Juda did, who was the In this Elias is
mistaken, in affirming R. Juda to be the first Grammarian among the Jews, when
there was before him Rabbi Saad as, whom he afterward nominates.
first Grammarian of note; whereas before him there was no Hebrew Grammar. But
because he found the Sacred Books of Scripture noted with points and accents,
as also furnished with a Masora by the Masorites, he began to assist the
Israelites, and to enlighten the exiled Jews with his Grammar. Him followed R.
Jona; and after him came R. Saadas Gaon; and after them an innumerable company
of Grammarians. But there was no person who animadverted upon the Targum, to
correct what was amiss; all slighted that business, so that it came forth
perverted, which is only preserved. Therefore I began to think of a way,
whereby every one might be able to make a Targum Grammar in such a manner, that
he might take his foundation out of such things as were wrote in the Books of
Daniel and Esther; and only upon that might build his superstructure, and
deduce his Grammar Rules, if not altogether, yet in part.

Soon after he adds these words in the same Preface; In times past before the
Art of Printing was invented, there was not found above one Targum in the City,
and one in the Country. Therefore there was no man who minded them. But there
were many Exemplars of the Targum of Onkelos found, because they were bound to
read two Sections of Scripture, and one of the Targum every Sunday. Therefore
there were some that made it their business to write something upon it, but it
came to little or nothing. There was also a Masora made upon it, which I never
could see; but there was no man who so much as opened his mouth to explain the
Prophets and Hagiographers. Neither was there any that requi'd it, but all
cried, Let us let that work alone till Elias come.

But when the Chaldee Grammar was once found out, which Elias had deemed so
hard to frame, presently Munster, Mercer, and other Learned men lent their
helping hands to reform the Chaldee Context: Above all the rest John Buxtorf,
who with a daring boldness caused to be published a vast heap of Paraphrases
conformable to the method of the New Grammar.

We have reduced, says Buxtorf, the Chaldee Text, which is called the Targum,
In Praesat. Bibl. Basil.
and is a most noble Commentary upon the Hebrew Text in Moses and the Prophets,
to the Ancient, True and Perpetual Analogy of the Old Chaldee Language, fairly
showed us in the Books of Daniel and Esther, refined from all the idle and
deformed pointing, which is to be seen in the Venetian Editions.

But as it is excellently well observed by Ludovicus de Dieu, there are many
things after all Buxtorfs Emendation, that require a better Reformation. In
perusing certain written Manuscripts of the Sacred Text, I met with a
Pentateuch written in large Letters in a large Parchment Folio, which contained
the Paraphrase of Onkelos in such a manner, that a part of the Paraphrase
followed every Verse of the Text. But in that Exemplar the Chaldee pointing
wonderfully differs from all other that I could ever find as well among the
published as Manuscript Copies. For it resembled the pointing of the Books of
Daniel and Esther far better than the Buxtorfian Edition. However, the first
Edition of reforming the Chaldee pointing, is attributed to the Complutenses,
which being polished by Arias Montanus, was afterward perfected in the Basil
Bibles. But it seems to be much more perfect in the Manuscript which I have
mentioned: Wherefore I am apt to believe, that before Elias the Levite lived,
there were Jews that were both versed in the Chaldee Paraphrases, and skilled
in the Language. But such Exemplars never fell into Elias's hands; and I wonder
the Jews, that overlooked the Paraphrase of Onkelos, made use of no better
Copies. However, I would not advise any one to pin his Faith upon the Modern
Pointing so much by Buxtorf reformed, but where it seems to carry a more proper
sense. But rather to have recourse to the Ancient form of the Chaldee Context,
which had no Points, as being lately invented by the Rabbis, and added without
Art to the Paraphrases. The Chaldee Pointing is not so Authentic as the
Hebrew; for the latter had the Doctors of Tyberias for its Correctors, whose
credit was no less than the repute of the School of Tyberias; the other known
to few, and at this day unknown to most of the Jews.

CHAP. XIV. An Appendix of the other Translations of the Bible in use among the
Jews.
I Doubt not but there are other Paraphrases of the Hebrew Context, besides the
already mentioned, as yet not published; for I find some, in reading the
Rabbis, highly esteemed by them not yet Printed. But these through the Jews
ignorance of the Chaldee have been long since laid aside. Wherefore the
Translation of the Bible into the Mother Tongues was absolutely necessary, few
of the Jews, the Doctors excepted, understanding even the Hebrew; The Arabic
translation of R. Saadias.
this occasioned the so many Translations now in use among them. R Saadias
Gaon, or The Excellent nine hundred years and upwards, Translated the whole
Bible into Arabic, although the Pentateuch only is come to our hands, which the
Jews of Constantinople Printed in Hebrew Characters, and is since Printed in
Arabic Letters in that Excellent English Polyglot Bible. This Interpretation of
R. Saadias is more a Paraphrase than a Translation, for he keeps not so close
to the Context, and sometimes changes proper names, and as he was altogether
unbyassed, so he often gives his own fancy rather than the sense of the Text,
it should therefore be no wonder if any fault have escaped in this Translation
of R. Saadias, seeing the Jews had not then attained any great knowledge in
Grammar, although his Translation has few Hebrewaisms, because Paraphrastical,
yet it is not altogether so much Arabic, but that we may easily know him to be
a Jew from words retaining the Genius of the Hebrew Tongue, this was the cause
that the Latin Interpreter of that Arabic Translation committed many great
mistakes in that he had regard only to the Arabic, because he understood not
the Hebrew Tongue.

Another Arabic translation of the Jews
Erpenius has published another Arabic Translation of the Pentateuch by an
African Jew, which comes much nearer to the Context than that of Saadias, and
the Hebrewisms are therefore the more frequent, yet notwithstanding he keeps
not close to the Text, but that here and there he follows the opinions of his
Country, we may bring into the same class the Persian Translation of the
Petateuch made by James of Taus, from the City where he was born, because it is
much of the same style, and for the Hebrecisms therein, this was first
published by the Jews of Constantinople in the Hebrew Character together with
Saadias Arabian Paraphrase, and since reprinted in the English Polyglot in
Persian Characters.

Translation into Vulgar Greek.
The Jews have also a Translation of the Bible in Vulgar Greek published at
Constantinople of great credit with the Caraitae Jews, especially those whose
Mother Tongue it is, the Pentateuch of this Translation was Printed at
Constantinople, by the Rabbinists or Talmudists in Hebrew Characters with the
Vowel points, I have seen the Book of Job in the same vulgar Greek, Printed at
the same place divided into two Columns; of which the one is in Hebrew, and the
other in the vulgar Language, shows the Greek with this Inscription. Ajob
Beleshon Hakodish Vbeleshon Romaiki, Job in the Holy Language, and in the
Romanic Speech R. Moses the Son of R. Elias Phobian the Author of this
Translation, tells us in his Preface to Job that he translated the Proverbs of
Solomon into the same Tongue; and that the Jews ignorance in the Hebrew, was a
great motive thereunto, the same Jews of Constantinople have joined to this
Spanish Translation of the Pentateuch, Translation into Spanish.
Printed in Hebrew Characters with the Vowel points, the Jews of
Constantinople, Adrianople, Thessalonica, and in other places of the Levant,
whither they fled when expelled Spain were certainly the Authors of this
Translation, the Vulgar Greek and Spanish in these Translations are almost
unintelligible the Hebrecisms are so frequent.

Another Spanish translation.
The Spanish and Italian Jews have a famous Translation of the whole Bible into
Spanish, Printed at Ferrara in the Year 1553. the Translator seems to make it a
point of Conscience to deviate from the Context, the Translation agrees so
exactly word for word with the Hebrew Text, the literal Translation, and the
obsolete words used, no where but in the Synagogues render it very obscure; if
we may give any Credit to the Preface of this Translation, the greatest part of
the Translation is Pagninus's, but I think the Jews therein had a better
opinion of Kimchii, Aben Esra and other Rabbis, whom Pagninus consulted, than
of Pagninus when they openly profess they allowed that they thereby might not
incur the danger of the Inquisition. It is very likely that Abraham Vsque a
Portugal Jew did make use for the perfecting this Translation of some old
Spanish Rabbis, who had long before his time read the Hebrew and Spanish Bible
in their Synagogues. There is this in that Edition of Ferrara worth observing
that the Interpreter was so well convinced of the difficulty of Translating the
Bible, that he has put Asteries where he finds the sense dubious, and could not
be definitive in a thing of so great difficulty, these words are to be found in
the Preface. And it is to be noted that in the place marked with an Asterism,
thus * it is a mark to assist ye in the Exposition of the word, and sometimes of
various Opinions. But the Jews who Printed the Second Edition with Amendment in
the Year 1630. have left out most of the Asteries, whereas there was more need
to augment than diminish that Number; but what profit the Christians can reap
from a Translation which the Jews scarce understand, is not manifest if the
ridiculous affectation of Aquila a contentious Translator, was reprehended by
the Fathers, sure none will approve of this affected Translation, which has
more regard to Grammar than to the sense of the Context. Cassiod. de Rena.
Isaiah 9.6.
Cassiodore de Regna blames his Exposition of these words of the 9. of Esaiah,
Vocabitur nomen ejus admirabilis, consiliarius, Deus fortis, pater futuri
seculi, princeps pacis, as they are in the Vulgar Edition, in that he forcing
the words contrary to the genuin sense, attributes these words, princeps pacis
to the Messia, and all the others to God. But the Translator here and in other
places, is biased by his Countrymen, yet in this he is inexcusable, in that he
has not kept so close to the Rules of Grammar, which he has professed; for he
has prefixed the Article el marravilloso, consejero, and elsewhere, whereas the
Hebrew prefix ha, the same with the Spanish Article el, is not prefixed, in like
manner he errs in other places, whereas he has Translated the first Verse of
the Psalms, Psalm 1. v. 1.
bien avanturado el varon, when according to the Rules of Grammar, it should
have been Translated, bien avanturancas de el varon, as it is in the Hebrew,
but we will pass over these Subtilties.

CHAP. XV. Of the Translations of the Bible of greatest Authority with the
Christians, and first of the Septuagint.
Although the Greek Translation of the 70 Elders, is publicly read by the Jews in
their Synagogues and Schools; Various Opinions of the Greek translation of the
Bible.
yet I think it not amiss to rank it among the Translations used by the
Christians, for the Christians have long since received it from the Jews, and
to this our time is retained by most Churches. But the Disputes about its
Authority and Translators, not yet decided, may be a wonder; for there be some
who deny its Authority, therefore others who highly maintain its Authority in
all, esteeming the Translators as Prophets inspired by the Holy Spirit. Others
again of a middle rank between these two extremes, do highly value this Ancient
and to be honored Translation of Holy Writ, yet in some places they think it
not Authentic. I willingly pass by the History of the Translators as it is in
Philo, Josephus, and in several Greek and Latin Fathers, because known to most.
The Fathers borrowed the greatest part of this History from Aristaeus in his
Book, The judgment of Aristaeus.
of the Translation of the Divine Law, out of the Hebrew into the Greek by the
70 Interpreters: and a part, since invented by the Jews, The learned Critics
have thought Aristaeus's Book in part suppositious, suppose the Book that goes
under Aristaeus's name were not suppositious, I should think them no wiser that
quote him for the Truth of this History, then he that thinks Xenophons
Cyropaedia to be a true History of Cyrus; for as Tully upon the first sight
perceived that Xenophon did not act the Historian, but that in Cyrus he gave a
Model or Pattern of a just Emperor, so it may easiy be seen in the Reading
Aristaeus, that he is more Romantic than a true Historian. We may easily guess
from the Context, that some Hellenist Jew, writ this Book in favourof his
Nation. The Writer of this History, according to the Genius of his Nation,
speaks great things and Miracles: For he relates when King Ptolomy wondering
that the Writers of other Countries, made no mention of that Excellent works,
he bring in Demet^ius answering him thus; Because, says he, it is a Holy Law
given by God; and because that some going about the Translation have been
diverted by being punished by God: and that Theopompus, when he would have
inserted some thing out of that Law not so well translated, was Distracted for
above thirty days, and that during some little intermission of his Distraction,
having prayed to God to let him know the reason of his Distemper, God revealed
to him in a Dream, that what had happened, was because he went about to publish
to the World Sacred things, and that at length, when he had desisted from his
Enterprise, he was freed from his Disease. And he farther tells us, of one
Theodectes a Tragical Poet, who when he had inserted into his Play something of
the Laws of Moses, was struck blind, till he had reflected upon what he had
done, and had entreated God by his Vows.

These truly are more a Romance than a History, and sufficiently show the
Genius of the Jews, which always delighted to invent Miracles; there is such
another Story of a Voice from Heaven which did frighten the Writer of the
Chaldaean Paraphrase from the Interpretation of the Holy Scriptures; moreover
the Supposititious Aristaeus seems to contradict here; for where he speaks of
Theopompus, he tells us, That the Law of Moses was before this translated into
the Greek Tongue; but if it were so why did they so earnestly desire another
Translation; wherefore Baronius and other learned Men with good reason,
rejecting Clemens Alexandrinus's Authority chiefly induced by this reason say,
that the Scriptures were not translated before into Greek, and that there was
no Translation whatsoever before that of the Seventy Elders. Neither can you
say, Joseph Sealig ina^imady. Chron. E^seb. Ger. Voss. lib. 1. The Greek
History.
this first Translation to have been less polite; for suppose it ever so
imperfect, it had been kept in the Kings Library, not altogether unknown to the
King, with thousands of other Books. I pass by other remarks of learned Men,
especially Joseph Scaliger's of this Suppositious Aristaeus which Gerard
Vossius, well versed in this matter, says are very weighty; from whence it may
be conjectured Aristaeus to have writ this History perhaps to the Idaea of a
pious and a good moral'd Prince, and this History ought not to be looked upon
otherwise; wherefore the Author of these Fables mistrusting his Cause, as being
improbable, adds farther, I believe, says he, my Readers will suspect my
credit, but truly as it is not lawful to relate any Untruth, which has been
received; so it would be a Crime to be silent in this Affair, but as they have
been acted, so I have related them, that I might avoid all Untruths, and for
that reason I have endeavored to receive the Truth from those who were privy
to the Kings Affairs. Truly he leaves nothing out that may corroborate his
Testimony which he feared would be suspected by all.

But the Authority of the Fathers and other Writers of good Note and Credit,
who have inserted in their Works the History of Aristaeus as true, does make
for it; and it will be thought rashness to defend the contrary, but we are not
to consider what the Fathers have said, so much as the reasons of their
opinion; for in things purely critical Reasons are of more moment than
Authorities. It is evident the Fathers were moved by the bare Authority of
Aristaus, or Philo and Josephus who writ from him; but they had no reason to
examine critieally the History of Aristaeus whether true? Seeing the Septuagint
Translation, which at that time the Church used against the Jews, who had
recourse to the Hebrew in their Disputations with the Christians, did greatly
support their Cause. The Fathers had been ill advised, if they had laid by that
Translation which the Jews could not totally reject. St. Jerome, Jerome.
a man well versed in all Learning, and had studied this Criticism, for this
reason contrary to the common Opinion of the Fathers did confute the Cells of
the 70. Interpreters. I know not, says he, who first invented the Story of the
70. Cells, and then laughs at Justin Martyr, who affirmed he saw them, and
looks upon him as a simple Man easily induced to believe the Jews Stories. In
like manner he differed in opinion from the Fathers, for from the Authority of
Aristaeus himself and Josephus he asserts the 70. Interpreters to have
conferred and not to have prophesyed; For, says he, it is one thing to be a
Prophet, another to be an Interpreter; the first foretells things to come, the
other from his Knowledge afterward and Eloquence Translates. Neither does he
esteem them more than Tully, who translated with a Rhetorical, not a Prophetic
Spirit Xenophon's Economy, Plato's Protagoras and Demosthenes's Oration for
Ctesiphen, neither was St. Jerome ever of any other Opinion, although he may
sometimes say they were inspired, and that the Learned Man did judge this to be
taken in an Oeconomical Sense, may appear by several Places. For the like
reason although St. Jerome did seem to be of the same Opinion with Aristaeus,
Josephus and the Jews of his time, that the 70. Interpreters did translate
Books of the Law only; yet in his Commentaries upon the other Books of
Scripture, he speaks of them no otherwise than as the Translators of these, and
this because he would not seem to differ from the common Opinion, although in
his Judgment less probable.

But some one will say, if Aristaeus's History of the 70 should be looked upon
as a Fable, what Foundation had it? For certainly the first Author could not
invent it without some ground, when even the Fables of the Poets carry
something of Truth in them. The Original of Aristeus's Book. Heins. Arist. sa.
Exodus 24.
Heinsius thinks this Story of the 70. to have its rise from the xxiv. chap. of
Exodus; where we find, that Moses, Aaron and the 70. Elders went up unto the
Lord, and from the words, which in the Latin Translation are, nec super eos qui
procul recesserant de filiis Israel misit manum suam, the Greek and electorum
Israel neque unus dissensit; Heinsius thinks that number of the Translators and
their miraculous Agreement to have risen hence, but whatever Heinsius thinks, I
am of the Opinion that the Interpretors were rather Jews of Alexandria than
Jerusalem; for there are to this day some Egyptian Words as Abrec, Remphan and
others, and because it was of so great a consequence it is very likely it was
approved of by the Sanhedrim, and there called the Septuagint Translation from
the 70 Elders, or Senators of the Great Council; for which reason the place of
the Talmud otherwise very difficult, where the Greek Translation is ascribed
only to five, may easily be reconciled with the common opinion of 72. by the
same Authority it is made authentic to all the Jews, especially the Hellenists
as the Fathers of the Western Church in the Council of Trent have made their
Translation Authentic; for as the Ignorance of the Christians in the Greek
caused Translations into the other Tongues; and these Translations became
Authentic to the Churches by their use, in like manner the Jews Ignorance of
the Hebrew Tongue did move the Jews of Alexandria to translate the Bible into
Greek for their use, which Translation was afterward read in their Synagogues
and Schools; and because, as very probable it was approved of by the Sanhedrim
at Jerusalem, upon whom at that time the whole Nation of the Jews had a
dependence, it has acquired the Name of the Septuagint.

Yet I think there is no necessity to have recourse to the Senators of the
great Synagogue, that the number of the 72. Interpreters (to whom that
Translation is commonly ascribed) may be the better made out; but we are only
to consider the Form of Speech familiar to the Jews, by which they attribute
every thing of moment to those 70. Senators, that the things thereby may
acquire the greater Authority: For this reason they ascribe the Vowel Points,
Accents, and many other things of the like nature to the Sanhedrim, not so much
from the reality of the thing, as from that Form of Speech; so that it is
difficult to distinguish when they speak plain and when allegorically: This way
of speaking has led many men, and those Learned, into various Errors, when in
reading the Jews Books, they consider more what they write than the manner and
causes of their so writing. We may bring for Example what occur in the Rabbis
about the Title of Holy Writ; the Keris and Cetibs, or various Readings entire,
defective, redundant, and six hundred of the like nature. All these most of the
Jews ascribe either to Moses in Mount Sinai, or to the Synagogue or Senate
assembled under Esdras; all which if not taken Allegorically after the manner
of the Cabbala, as the Jews themselves write, are manifestly false, for the
same reason if we are not as attentive to the words, as to the manner of
writing proper to the Jewish Nation, the History of the 72. Interpreters not
improbably will seem to spring from the same Fountain, whether it really was
approved of by the immediate Authority of the Sanhedrim or whether through
connivance publicly read in their Synagogues it at length by long use became
Authentic, which truly seems more agreeable than what the false Aristaus says
of the Approbation of the Greek Translation in these words, Arist. of the 70.
near the end.
The Translation being finished, Demetrius did first read it to all the Jews
who were assembled in the place where it was perfected, the Translators were
also by, who were complemented and caressed by the Body of the Jews, as Authors
of so great a good, and in like manner they gave Demetrius his due Praise, and
earnestly requested that he would grant a Copy of that Translation to their
Rulers. As soon as that Volumn of the Law was read, the Standers-by, the
Priests, the Interpreters, Elders and Governors of the City, and the Rulers of
the People said thus, because that Interpretation was throughout so exact,
accurate and divine, it is reasonable it should remain so, and that no
alteration be made therein.

But if the Men of Alexandria were as skilful in the Greek as in the Hebrew,
that they could judge from a bare Reading of the goodness and exact Agreement
of the Greek Translation with the Hebrew Context, why did their King so
earnestly desire Strangers when he might have made use of their help? And then
who can believe, that the Hellenist Jews, but indifferently versed in the
Hebrew, could be competent Judges of the Translation from a superficial
reading, when the Learned of our times well skilled in both Tongues, dare not
pretend to it. Wherefore what is commonly quoted out of Josephus, Philo, and
others, in the behalf of the sincerity of the septuagint Translation is of no
Moment, neither can it make against the Hebrew Originals, because there is
nothing of the Greek Translation of the 70. in these Writers, but what was
first taken out of the false Aristeus.

Judgment of the Greek transl.
Although I reject the Story of the 70 Interpreters, which goes under Aristeu^'s
Name, as an Invention of the Hellenist Jews, yet I would not detract from that
Translation, which for a long time has had a Reputation in the Synagogue and
Church; For I know how much the Ancients esteemed this Translation, since it
was praised by the Apostles, and the Christian Religion by no other Testimony
propagated through the whole World, most Churches do to this day retain it,
perhaps the Sea of Rome would use it to this time, if St. Jerome had not made a
new Translation from the Original Hebrew, these and other reasons easily to be
produced, manifestly declare this Translation to be of great moment, but it
does not hence follow, as is the opinion of Isaac Vossius and some others, that
this Translation is the only true and least Corrupted Piece of Scripture, and
to be preferred before the Hebrew Copies. It has been a received opinion among
the Ancient Fathers of the Church, that they could have nothing sound in
Scripture, but what they had had Translated from the LXX because the Church owe
its Birth and Growth to their Translation. Origin dared not Dissent from this
opinion, although he has acknowledged a great difference between the Greck and
Hebrew Copies, and as he has testified of himself, and has exercised his
ingenuity upon all the Editions of the Bibles, and their differences. There is
no need, says he, that I speak of Exodus, Orig. Epist. to African.
where the Appurtenances of the Tabernacle, its Court and Ark, where the
Vestments of the High Priest and Priests are very much altered, insomuch that
the Sense does not seem to be the same, let us take heed therefore, that we do
not imprudently and ignorantly abrogate the Copies which are in many Churches.
In this passage Origon favors the Septuagint Translation more than the Hebrew
Original, for this reason, least he should be thought to bring Novelties and
Corruption into the Church; yet at other times among the Learned, he did more
highly value the Hebrew Verity; neither truly the Ancient Church, which
suspected the Jews sincerity could or ought to have any other opinion of their
Copies: But the Judgment of St. Jer^m, and the Learned Fathers of our times
ought to be preferred; for the Ancient Fathers only skilled in the Greek or
Latin Tongue, could not be positive in things not understood by them, but we in
this Age can compare the Hebrew Originals with the Greek, and pass our
Judgments upon them. Neither can the Authority of the Apostles, who had
recourse only to the Greek and not to the Hebrew, be any Argument to the
contrary. What benefit could the Apostles, who sowed the first Seeds of the
Gospel through the World, reap from the Hebrew Copy, at that time understood
but by a few Jews? But as for the Greek, Cicero for Arch the Poet.
it was become as Cicero does Testify, the Mother Tongue to most Nations. The
Apostles there did not use the Greek, because they were more perfect than the
Hebrew Copies, but with Judgment, because it was adopted to the genius of those
who were to be instructed in the knowledge of the Scriptures, the Authority
therefore which the Greek Translation of the 70. acquired, was extrinsick,
neither was it the more correct because praised by the Apostles in the new
Testament, if it were corrupted before their time. In like manner the Authority
of the Hebrew context it not les^ed, because less familiar to the Apostles and
the first Fathers of the Church, but as the Fathers of the Council of Trent by
their Decree, by which the Ancient vulgar Translation was made Authentic, had
left the Hebrew and Greek Copies untoucht. In like manner the use of the Greek
Translation in the Church time out of mind did not diminish the Credit and
Integrity of the Hebrew. The Septuagint has it faults even from the Infancy of
the Church, many of which Sir Jerome has marked; I do not speak of those which
Jerome, taking too much Liberty in following his own fancy sometimes does not so
well Correct. The Western Church has patronized Jeroms Censure in leaving the
Greek Translation of the 70 so long and so universally used for Jeroms new
Translation from the Hebrew.

Nor were the reasons mean which induced Jerome to this new Translation from the
Hebrew Original, which afterward was deservedly used by the Church, for as he
himself testifies, the many errors in the Greek were not the sole cause of the
undertaking of that work, which many speak of, but that also he had found, from
his exact knowledge in both Tongues, the Greek Interpreters had not fully
expressed the Hebrew Context, whom for this reason he does often reprove in his
Commentaries. I pass by, to avoid prolixity, those mistakes of the 70, many of
which are taken notice of by the Commentators of the Bible, and to make up the
Catalogue, the obscure places of the Greek ought to be compared with the Hebrew
context, for they having not followed chiefly in these places, the sense of the
Original, have variously and at large digressed, I cannot but praise the
industrious and learned Is. Vossius, in that he endeavored to vindicate in all
that Greek Translation in his opinion Divine, Masius prof. to Josb.
but the unbyassed Masius seems far more able to judge of that Translation, a
Man of an acute Wit and sharp Judgment and well known in the Hebrew, Greek and
Syriac Copies. Wherefore what we should judge of the 70 may be, I think far
better learnt from Masius than from Vossius.

The Learned Man gives this Judgment of them, Whosoever, says he, will but
consider the Books of Scripture, will find the Translation of them, the Law of
Moses excepted, ascribed to the 72 Interpreters, that it will not seem
probable, that the 72 Doctors sent to Ptolemy by the High Priest, were so
unapt, so unskilful, so incapable of Translating and absurd, that they could
commit such gross mistakes, for there are not only great verbal errors arising
from literal mistakes, when they Interpret one thing for another, but, and that
not seldom, even in long Periods. Thus this Learned Doctor defends the opinion
of St. Jerome, Jeroms pref. upon the Heb. Transl. Messius.
who thinks that the Translation of the Pentateuch, and of the other Books of
Scripture were not done by the same Hands, the same Masius a little farther
explaining himself more clearly subjoys what is worth observation. Neither
truly do I calculate the above mentioned errors by the Hebrew context now in
use, that the novelty of points, errors, interpoints, and the addition of
Vowels and Accents, which the Authors of the Masoreth are said to have
invented; or the unfaithfulness of some Transcribers whom I do not approve, as
if they had designedly corrupted the Hebrew Context in many places, may not be
any excuse, the very things treated of do often sufficiently manifest the
Absurdity and Incongruity of Words and Phrases, which the Translators have
used, and presently concludes the whole matter thus. If my opinion should be
asked, I must confess that the Translation is Divine, and seems to be penned
rather by Prophets than by their Interpreters in some places, in others silly,
nor at all agreeable to the Learning of so great Doctors, and because I met
with these difficulties not only in the other Books (although in them the errors
are more gross and confounding) but also in Moses Pentateuch as we call it, and
because the Story of Ptolomy and the Intepreters, related by so many, cannot be
without some ground, I am apt to believe their opinion to be most likely, who
say that not only the Law of Moses, but also the other Historical and
Prophetical Books were Translated by those Jews, at the desire of Ptolomy. Thus
far Masius, whose words I have been the longer upon, because they very much
Illustrate the Argument in Hand: At first this Learned man, well read in the
Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriac and Greek, dares not ascribe the Greek Translation, the
Peutateuch excepted, to the LXX; it was so full of gross errors, and because he
has perceived many faults also in the Pentateuch, he has embraced yet
somewhat doubtfully, the common opinion of these 70 Translators: neither does
he spare to call those whom he acknowledges from a prejudice, the chief among
the Jews of that age, absurd, silly and illiterate, and he seems to be
introduced thereunto by the Authority of St. Jerome, and the truth of the thing
it self; afterward as it were correcting himself, he acknowledges some of the
Translation to be Divine and Dictated by Prophets rather than Interpreters, and
what is chiefly to be considered, he declares he did not reprehend the Greek
from the modern Copies of the Jews, which it is evident are degenerated from
the ancient purity in many places, in fine he censures the generality of
Divines, who take upon them Magisteriously to judge of the matter in hand, of
which they are ignorant, and do bring in strange fancies into the Church, as
that the Hebrew context is designedly corrupted by the Jews, as is asserted by
some, that the Greek is to be preferred before the Hebrew, with some others of
the same nature which come from those who have more zeal then knowledge, if the
Learned Masius was now alive, he would wonder that any Protestant and Isaac
Vosius the first, should have the same opinion of the Greek and Hebrew Copies,
with those divines he reprehends.

Masius had been wholly of our Opinion, if he had not given so much credit to
the Story of Aristaeus, which he saw was confirmed by a Cloud of Witnesses, he
should rather have considered Reason than plurality of Voices, neither truly
will he judge otherwise of the Greek Translation, who shall critically Examine
it by the Hebrew Originals. And this is the Opinion of all the Critic
Expositors of the Scripture. For if at any time they have used the Hebrew and
Greek for illustrating the Context, sometimes they scrupie not to Correct the
Hebrew by the Greek, but much more often the Hebrew is preferred before the
Greek. Augustine of Engubio, to pass by others, in his review of the old
Testament to the Hebrew verity, having compared the various Editions, accuses
the Greek Interpreters sometimes of ignorance; This Greek Translation, says he,
whether the 70. Interpreters were perfect Masters of the Greek, whether they
used other Copies, than could be had in St. Jeroms or our time, or whether they
did designedly so Translate, differs very much from the Hebrew verity. Some
places do show a manifest unskilfulness of the Greek, and others a great
ignorance of the Hebrew Tongue. Augustine himself is not always infallible, as
for Example, when he condems them for Traslating in Chap. 19. Genes. place
instead of banquet, but he observes not that in the Greek corrupt Venetian it
is (...) place for (...) banquet, as is truly read in the Roman Edition. The
same Augustine makes himself ridiculous, when he condemns their Translation in
Chap. 27. Genes. of the Hebrew word naphal, by the Latin word manner; whereas
it should have been Translated by the word cadere, fall, whence he takes
occasion to defend the vulgar Translation which has it obiit; but the Greek
Translation of the 70. is the best, the Hebrew ought not to be otherwise
Translated, if we consider the sense, for the death of Ishmael is not there
spoke of, but the Land wherein he dwelt, as appears by what goes before.
Wherefore we are ^ot to ^^^ken to Augustine always when he condemns the Greek
Translators, although he has truly marked many of their Errors.

CHAP. XVI. A more particular Examination of the Greek Septuagint Translation.
Philo 2. Book of the life of Moses.
THat the Greek Translation of the 70. was had in great esteem, and received
with a great deal of joy by all the ancient Jews may appear from Philo, who
reckons them among the Prophets. There is, says he, an annual solemnity in the
Isle of Pharos, to which place not the Jews only, but many others do Ferry
over, honoring the place where this Translation received its birth, and
returning thanks to God for his renewing his wonted mercies to them, after
Prayers and Thanksgiving, some pitching their Tents upon the Shore, others
sitting in the open Air upon the Sands, feast and make merry with their
Relations and Friends; at this time they prefer their Tents and the open Fields
far beyond their sumptuous Palaces. It is evident that this Translation was
received by most Jews in their Synagogues and Schools, The rejection of 70. by
the Jews.
and that many thereby have been Converted to Christianity. But the frequent
disputes between the Christians and Jews about the Explanation of the
Scriptures, caused the Jews to study the Hebrew more than before they had done.
Upon the destruction of the Jews and the Jewish Nation scattered by the Romans,
the Authority of the great Council was almost totally Ecclipsed, but there were
a few Masters left, who taught the Hebrew Tongue in the Schools: Then did the
Jews first, especially they of Palestine, who had still some influence upon the
other Jews, through their hatred to Christianity, cry down the 70, the ample
testimony of the Fathers, and of Justin^ Martyr who complained often of its
rejection, do confirm the Truth of it. The Jews endeavored what they could to
asperse that Interpretation used by all the Christian Churches, hence it was
that they ordered a Fast, and feigned that the Earth was covered with darkness
for three days, because the Law had been Translated into Greek. By this Tale
they would divert the more simple from reading the Greek Translation of the 70,
when they took it ill, that it was read in many Synagogues, especially in the
Synagogues of the Hellenist Jews, principally from this time it was neglected
and disesteemed by the Jews. And if it had not been well received by the
Church, to which it had past from the Synagogue, it had been utterly useless,
but because the Greek of that Translation is not so pure; it has, as I may so
say, many Hebraisms and Syriasms, which I take to be the Reason that it could
not well be preserved in its integrity, whilst every one would under take to
correct what he understood not For the present I say nothing of the Hellenist
commonly thought the Tongue of the 70. Translation, The tongue of the Greek
Translat.
I very much wonder that the Learned should contend so long, whether there be
any other Hellenist Tongue distinct from the Greek, for the Hellenist is no
other then the Greek Tongue which has acquired something of the Hebrew and
Syriac from the Jews, and this has not only happened to the Greek, but to all
the Tongues, which the Jews have made use of in their Translation of the Holy
Scripture. The Arabic, Spanish and Persian Translations are scarce understood
by the Arabians, Spaniards, and Persians unless they also understood the Hebrew
Tongue. We may well call this Tongue of the Jews, the Tongue of the Synagogue
because it has its original thence, and is adapted to it. The Greek of the New
Testament is the very same, for it is taken from the 70. the words of the Old
and New Testament are all of them Greek, a few excepted; but the Jews according
to the occasion do sometimes enlarge, and sometimes restrain their
significations, according to the propriety of their Tongue, for which Reason
the ancient Latin Interpreter, who Translated the Greek into Latin for the
benefit of the Church, very often mistakes; in some places he has not at all
expressed the sense of the 70. As for example, whereas in Chap. 49. Genes. in the
Greek we read, (...) the Author of the Ancient vulgar has translated it
tentatio tentabit eu^, but St. Jerome has much better translated it, from the
Original, Gad, latranculus latrocinabitur eum, Jerome has learnedly Corrected
may Errors of the like nature, in that ancient Translation, and there are many
more yet to be corrected which have escaped him.

The Greek Trans. false.
That Greek Translation was so corrupt in Jeroms time, that the learned Father
had rather make a new Translation from the Original than correct the old One,
the Greek as well as the Latin was so faulty, some are of opinion, that there
are no remains of that old Edition; but the Works of the Greek and Latin
Fathers do prove that it has been preserved to our time, although very
imperfect, and defective, in whose Works we have a great part inserted, as it
is in the Greek Copies, which go under the Name of the LXX. and those who have
no more Hebrew than what they have received from the Modern Grammars and
Lexicons, cannot judge rightly of it: And although I willingly acknowledge with
St. Jerome those Translators to have erred in many places, yet I am of the
opinion that they are very often unjustly censured by him and later
Translators. Pierson in his Preface to the LXX. published at Cambridge 1655
has learnedly shown, that Jerome has often overshot in his Animadversions; I
will bring other examples, by which it will appear that the modern Translators
have not done the LXX. Justice in many places, the 4th Verse of the 109 Psalm
is thus rendered by the LXX. (...), Tu^es sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem
Melchisedec, which Translation Jerome keeps in his Latin Translation of the
Psalter from the Greek. But Grotius and many others think this place very ill
rendered, Grot. upon 109. Psalm.
Our Text (says he) has it, secundum constitutionem meam o Rex mi Just;
Grotius, and the rest are very much to blame, that for so small a cause they
dare dissent from the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, they thought the
Greek Interpreters did not read in their Copies Diorothi with a jod, as it is
in the Modern, but Dioroth without the jod: but there was no need they should
have recourse to the different readings, whereas the Greek Translation might
have been maintained by the Figure Paragoge, which they are forced to admit of
in other places. The Letter jod at the end of this word does express the
ancient Vowel E, or our modern Scheva, which is necessarily pronounced at the
end of every word, as also now at the end of the Imperatives fac, dic, etc.
among the Latins the Letter is hard in the pronunciation which Ennius, Plautus,
and other ancient Authors express.

Whereas we read in the present Text, quis mecum? 2d. of K's 9 Chap. the LXX
have Translated it (...) quis es tu? For the same reason, viz. they regarded
not the jod in the end of the Hebrew word, and for itthi they read atth, what
we have said of the Letter jod holds good at the Letters Aleph and Vau, which
were ancient Vowels, and put in and left out according to the pleasure of the
Transcribers, according to thie Method the LXX, read Aleph in the word Lacen,
Genesis 1.15.
Genesis Chap. 4. as if it were Locen, non sic, the moderns because they read
Lacen without the Aleph, have Translated it, Genesis 30.11.
Qua propter in Genesis Chap. 30. the LXX read ba Gad as two words with Aleph
in the Massoret Copies it is Bagad in one word withou Aleph, 1 Samuel 15.5.
the First of Samuel Chap. 15. We read in the present Hebrew jareu without
Aleph, the LXX without doubt read it with Aleph and have Translated it (...)
insidiatus est, RR David, Kimchi and Aben Mulech confirm this Translation in
their Expositions, for these and many other of the like nature, the modern
Translators for lack of consideration, have censured the LXX where they agree
not with the present reading of the Hebrew, neither is St. Jerome himself
excusable in this, who also frequently condemns them for the same cause. These
different readings and the want of a complete Grammar and sufficient Rules, are
the cause we are not able rightly to judge of the LXX by the Hebrew, but to
render this more plain, we will examine the 22d. Psalm of the LXX with the
Translators from the present Hebrew.

The 22 Psalm, of the Greek edition has this inscription (...), etc. The
Hebrew inscription is Lamnatzeach hal Ajeleth, it is certain St. Jerome read it
so from his Translation of it, we may well suspect that the 70, had not Ajeleth
but Ezelat in their Copies, and therefore no wonder that they have Translated
that (...) auxilium, which Jerome Translates Cervum, as they have also
Translated it (...) in auxilium meum in the 20 Verse, as for the sense the 70
Translators seems to be more intelligible than St. Jeroms and the rest, they
are so obscure and so remote from Sense, yet I am not for their alteration,
because they express the Hebrew as it is reformed by the Massoreth, and every
one knows that most of the Titles of the Psalms are so obscure that they are
scarce intelligible to the Rabbis. In the beginning of the Psalm for the
Hebrew, Eli, Eli, the Greek (...) is more fully expressed, which reading is very
ancient and has been observed by Eusebius that (...) was not in the Hebrew;
but the two Translations of the same words were thrown into one; but that the
pronoun (...) is not repeated in the Greek as is in the Hebrew, is of no
moment, it might have been left out by the Greek Transcriber, as an unnecessary
repetition. At the end of the Verse the 70 seem to read (...) by Metathesis
(...) or (...) or rather looking upon the Aleph insignificant and adventitious
they Translated (...) delictorum me^runs. How could we give true Translation of
(...), whether it ought to be Translated Angelos or Reges, if it were not for
the Letter Aleph: the Jews contend upon the Interpretation of the Hebrew word
(...), Jer^m. 7.8.
Jerome. 7. Some say, the Aleph is defective and left out and ought therefore to
be Translated Opus, as if read with an Aleph, others again, as it is not
defective but that it is the right reading and with Jerome Translate it Regina.

The Hebrew word Dumiah in the 3 Vorse of the same Psalm is better and more
intelligibly Translated Silentium by Jerome and the modern interpreters than
(...) insipientia by the 70, which is scarce sense, the Hebrew word Gol is very
well rendered in the Greek and according to the genuine sense (...) as if you
should say he wholly referred himself, the rest which follows do very well
agree with the Hebrew; but the Hebrew word Cari in the 17 Verse is far better,
and more intelligibly Translated (...) foderunt by the Greek interpreters, than
Coari, sicut Leo, in the present Hebrew Copies and as it is in the Translation
falsely ascribed to Vatablus, Verse 25 they read in their Hebrew Copy Mimmeani a
me for Mimmennu ab eo, Verse 27. they have Translated hanavim (...) Pauperes,
as if it were writ with two Jod's, but this changing of the Letters Vau and Jod
is very frequent in Scripture; for which reason they have Translated Naphso
anima ejus in the 30 Verse, (...) anima mea, as if they had read it Naphsi, the
same various reading is in the Psalm 24.4. and there is a great dispute among
the Rabbis, some of them read Naphso, some Naphsi, as if it were really marked
in the little Massoreth; but the great Massoreth has took no notice of this
difference, and therefore in the Venetian and Basil Edition of the Collection
of the Massoreth, we have these words in Hebrew. 'It is strange that this word
Naphsi was not put in the great 'Mossoreth among the words which end with a
Vau, but are read 'with a jod; as if the Jews of Tiberius had marked all the
various readings. RR. Aben Esra, R. Solomon Isaaki, Joseph Hajon, David Kimchi,
Obadias Siphorno, and many others, who preferred the reading in the Margin
before the context, read Naphsi but the Greek Interpreters and Jerome Naphso, I
did look upon four MSS of good credit, three of them had Naphso, the other
Naphsi but without any mark of the little Massoreth, which of these two
readings in that variety of Copies and Interpreters must we choose?

Moreover in the same Verse the Particle lo following Naphsi, is rendered quite
different by Interpreters, and this happens from an Aleph or Vau, for lo with
Aleph is non, with Vau ei, and Aqu^la Translated it (...) ei; but in the Copies
which Jerome used and in the present Hebrew it is writ with an Aleph: these
various Readings are very ancient and not unknown to Jerome, concerning which he
has these words upon this place of Isaiah, and Israel non congregabitur, which
by the 70 is Translated, ut Congregarem Jacob ad cum, I very much wonder, says
he, how the Vulgar edition (he means the Latin which was Translated from the 70
and at that time called the Vulgar) came to overthrow the strongest Argument of
the Jews unbelief, whereas Theodotion and Symmachus do approve of our
Translation. I do not at all wonder at Aquila who Translating word for word
either dissembled his knowledge in this place or was deceived by the corrupt
and malicious exposition of the Pharisees, that he has Translated, and Israel
ei Congregabitur, viz. Deo. Whereas the Hebrew word lo is not writ by Lamed and
Vau which if it were the signification thereof would be ei or illi, but by
Lamed and Aleph whose proper signification is non. What alteration these
various readings cause sufficiently appears from the context and St. Jerome. Yet
he is a little to severe upon the 70 in urging so strictly the reading of the
Copies he made use of: Seeing he himself in the 63 Chapter of his Commentaries
upon the same Prophet does acknowledge the different readings not asserting one
more than another of the Hebrew Copies in this place to be exceeding various.
In the same Verse the 70 has Translated the Hebrew word Zera, (...), semen
meum, which Pronoun the Greek Interpreters or Transcribers might easily add:
Yet it is probable it was in the Original Hebrew, but, because two Jod's came
together in this manner Zeraj jahabdenna, that the first might be left out.
Lastly, the 70 have joined these words Ladduor jabon, which in the present
Hebrew Copies are thus distinguished, Laduor has a Comma after it and Jabon
begins the next Verse, thus (...), generatio ventura: by understanding the
Pronoun ascher, quae. The Greek Interpreters could not be tied by the
distinctions now cited, because they were not then invented, for at that time
the whole context of sacred Scripture was, as it were one Verse.

We may be these easily conjecture what caused the Septuagint to differ from
latter Translations; because the reading of the Hebrew Context is uncertain.
Wherefore I cannot see what the Interpreters of our Age, who would have us
follow the Massoreth altogether, whereas their Copies are often defective and
imperfective, can say to these and many more Examples I could produce. Who can
deny that all the 13. Verse of Psalm 145 is not wanting, for whereas all the
Verses of this Psalm are disposed in an Alphabetical order, there can be no
reason given why that Verse, which ought to be marked by the Letter Nun, should
be only wanting, which defect is by the 70 restored thus, (...), by the Latin
Interpreter, fidelis Dominus in omnibus verbis suis and sanctus in operibus
suis. Yet we are to take care, that when the 70 express more than is in the
Hebrew Context, we judge it not always defective and gelded, for in some places
their Translation is more a Paraphrase than an Interpretation, and what is
specially to be taken notice of, we have not that Translation entire but very
consused, Thus the 70 have Translated these two Hebrew words Eli, Eli, (...),
Deus meus, Deus meus, respice in mo, St. Jerome has Translated them very well
accoding to the Hebrew Orginal, Deus meus, Deus meus. The Hebrew word (...) may
be Translated Deus meus, if it be read eli, and ad me if elai, both these
Translations have been approved of by those who could not compare the Greek
with the Hebrew, and became one, because the sense by this means did seem more
complete and full. I am of the opinion that (...) respice in me was not in the
true Septuagint Copy, or at least with (...) but once expressed. For the same
reason in the beginning of the 3 Chapter of the Prophet Habacuc, there are two
Translations heaped together in the same Translation, the Hebrew runs thus
Bekerch Shanim, chajeha Bekereb Shanim which is thus Translated by Jerome in
Latin, In medio annorum vivifica illud, in medio annorum notum facies, which
expresses the Hebrew very well, but the 70 have Translated this passage thus
(...), which is thus rendered in medio duorum animalium cognosceris, cum
appropinquaverit anni cognosceris, cum advonerit tempus demonstraberis, be
Kerib Shanim, but twice read in the Hebrew Context, are thrice repeated in the
Greek, and the Hebrew (...) which is but once in the same Context is Translated
thrice in the Greek Version. I pass over the great disagreement which is
between Jerome and the modern Interpreters whose Translation of this, as also of
the places where the Hebrew Text is somewhat obscure is to be preferred before
that of the 70. Although I very much esteem the Version of the Greek Translations
and sometimes so prefer it before St. Jeroms and the modern Translations; yet I
cannot be of the same opinion with Isaac Vossius, who thinks the 70 have better
expressed and rendered the sense of the obscure places of the Scripture, than
Jerome and the other Translators of our Age.

CHAP. XVII. The Opinion of Isaac Vossius concerning the Seventy Interpreters
is examined. The Vindication of St. Jerome.
IN Critica! Learning we are not to observe what has been said by others, but
what is to be said after a due consideration of all that has been written upon
the point; making it our chief business to enquire, not only what every one
speaks, but what is the Opinion of every man, and what the reason of his
Opinion: For most people confirm their own thoughts by the Authority of Others.
And thus we have already shown how grossly Isaac Vossius erred in this
particular, while he Translated into his Treatise concerning the 70
Interpreters, the Testimonies of Justin Martyr and others of the Fathers, much
more invective withal then he need to have been both against the Jews and their
Manuscripts. To this purpose it was excellently well observed by St. Hillary,
all Obstinacy, says he, Hilar. lib. 10. de Trin.
in entertained Opinions is Imm^derate, and thence the Desire of contradiction
arises, when the will is not subjected to the Reason, nor Study upon Learning,
but when we sick for reasons to maintain our Wills, and heap up Reading to
maintain what we Study By reasons such as these the learned Vossius seems to
have been induced to advance the Hebrew Manuscripts of the Jews, and to assert
the Greek examplars of the 70 Interpreters, The Opinion of Isaac Vossius
concerning the 70 Interpreters.
Vossius therefore affirms these 70 Interpreters to have been inspired with the
Holy Ghost, in which Opinion he has all the Fathers of the Primitive Times to
back him except only St. Jerome; who varies from him in his Sentiments as well
concerning the Depravers of the Hebrew Manuscript, as touching the Inspiration
of the 70 Interpretors. And indeed St. Jerome has brought upon him the ill will
of most of the Doctors of his Age, for that forsaking the common road and most
approved by the practice of the Church, he seems to fight under the Jews
Banners, which was the reason that he wanted but little of being thrown out of
the Church as an Innovator. And now in our time Vossius condemns his Version
and calls it Rabbinical. But that most learned Father encountering those
Reprovers, that know how to find fault but could not mend, practiced the
Critical Art, and in his Writings sufficiently satisfied those persons that
made such a noise against him. Nor indeed was it so much to be wond^ed at, that
St. Jerome in some things more seriously considerative, and furnished with a
better stock of Oratory made no scruple to vary from the Ancients. For Justice
never defends manifest Errors. I know indeed that in matters of Faith the
Consent of the Doctors and Fathers of the Church carries something of
Authority: But he is neither generous nor religious who in matters that concern
not Faith, is afraid to depart from the Opinion of the Fathers, and had rather
believe other men's Writings then his own Eyes or Experience. St. Austin of old
thought far otherwise of himself; who wishes that other men would judge of his
Works. I would have no man, Aust. de don. Persev. c. 21.
says he, so devote himself to all my Writings so as to follow me, unless in
those things, wherein he finds me not to Err.

Therefore have we no reason in this particular to agree with Vossius, who
contrary to the Opinion of St. Jerome, would have the 70. Interpreters to be
inspired with the Holy Ghost, and free from all manner of Error. Nay as if he
had been ashamed to have given those Interpreters the Names of Prophets, as if
it were correcting himself, he affirms, the word Prophet among the Ancient
Writers to signify no more than Interpreter, and those to be Prophets
according to the Testimony of the Apostle, who rightly interpret the
Scriptures. But why does Vossius here seek Subterfuges, and retire to profane
Learning, merely to show St. Jeroms Error, where he writes that a Prophet is
one thing, an Interpreter another; as if he had contradicted the Apostle who in
several Places uses the word (...) to signify Interpretari or to interpret?
But St. Jerome is in no Error in this particular, who best knew the Force of
that word, when he observes a Greek Poet to have been called a Prophet by St.
Paul. Hierom. Commeat in Ezech.
But in his answer to the Objections of the late Critica Sacra, Vossius shows
himself a faint Combatant, ever and anon betaking himself to his lurking holes:
But what reason he had to produce the Opinions not only of the Apostles and
Evangelists but of Philo, Festus, Plato and others, Voss. in resp. ad Obj^ct.
Crit. sacr. p. 6.
to make it out that not only they who foretold things to come, were called
Prophets, but they who unfolded either past or present Predictions; we cannot
find, though indeed there was in that matter no cause of difference between him
and the Author of the Critica Sacrae. While St. Jerome denis the 70.
Interpreters to have been Prophets, and asserts them to have been only
Interpreters, in that same place he thought a Prophet to be no other than a
Person inspired with the Holy Ghost, in which Sense all the Fathers had called
those Greek Interpreters Prophets, nor has Vossius made use of that word
Prophet upon any other Account, who has so confidently asserted their (...), or
Divine Inspiration. De sept. interpret. c. 25.
I am not ignorant, says he, that I shall not only incur the reproof, but the
hatred of many; for having such transcending thoughts of this Version, so that
I can hardly forbear to give it the Title of Divinely inspired. And indeed I
desire to know what reason can be imagined, why I should not believe that which
has been believed by all the Christians from the Aposties time; excepting only
some few too much favoring the Jews of later Ages. Among which no question but
he meant St. Jerome. Then he endeavors to prove more at large their (...), or
Divine Inspiration, opposing their Arguments, who affirm they could not be
inspired with the Holy Ghost or the Gift of Prophesy, the Jews affirming, That
during all the time of the Second Temple, the Gift of Prophesy and Inspiration
ceased. Which, says he, is altogether Rabinical and Fictitious: But no less
idle is that which he produces against St. Jerome in these words. Seeing there
the words Prophets and Prophecy were used in so large a Sense, even among the
Hebrews, Ibid. c. 26.
they are not to be admitted who deny the 70. Interpreters to have been
Prophets, as being the Chief Priests of the Jewish People, and not only
Interpreters of things past, but of things likewise to come. As if it had been
the business in question, whether the Title of Prophets might be applicable to
the Interpreters; while the word Prophet signifies no more than an Interpreter;
when he had endeavored to prove in so many words that they were Prophets who
were inspired with a Holy and Prophetic Spirit. In resp. ad Critic. sacr.
Nay he esteems them injurious to St. Jerome, who abuse his Testimonies to
overthrow the Authority of the Seventy Interpreters. When he himself being now
of riper Years, was of opinion that their Errors are not to be imputed to the
Interpreters themselves, who Translated the Holy Scripture by the Inspiration
of the Holy Ghost, but to the Scribes and Amanuenses. But we have already made
appear what was the Sentiment of St. Jerome concerning this present matter,
which Vossius understood not; for now he was arrived at Years of more Maturity,
when he explained his Books by Commentaries. And how often he there corrects,
not only the Scribes but the Interpreters themselves, there is no man can be
ignorant.

Tho I deem the History carried about under the Title of Aristaean to be an
Illegitimate Birth; yet I willingly acknowledge, that the Interpretation which
is attributed to the 70. Interpreters, was made by the Jews of Alexandria, in
the Reign of Ptolemy Philodelphos, and copyed out of the Hebrew Manuscript in
Chaldee or Babylonic Characters; in regard the Jews made no use of any other
Letters for transcribing the Scripture but only those, after their Return out
of Captivity: But as for the other Greek Version, which Vossius believes to
have been made by a Person learned neither in the Greek or Latin Tongue, badly
and negligently copyed from the same Hebrew Exemplar in Samaritan Letters, it
is a mere Fiction taken out of the Pseudo-Aristobulus; who nevertheless speaks
not one Tittle of the Letter; wherein Vossius maintains the same Copy to have
been written; neither did any body besides Vossius ever dream of 'em; so far is
it remote from all probability of Truth. They mistake indeed, as Vossius well
observes, who believe that Version was derived from any Chaldaic or Syriac
Paraphrase, there being no such thing extant at that time, and it being as
certain that Philo takes the Hebrew and the Chaldee Language promiscuously for
the same. However we may have some reason to conjecture, be had some regard to
the Chaldee Language, which was familiar to most of the Jews after their Return
from Captivity. There was at that time neither Chaldee or Syriac Paraphrase;
yet long before that, the Rabbis, as well in their Synagogues as Schools, read
the Scripture Text as often in the Chaldee as the Hebrew Language, whence it
might come to pass, that several words in the Greek Translation were more
adapted to the Idiom of the Chaldee or Syriac Tongue, then the propriety of the
Hebrew Speech.

The same Vossius invented another Fiction, De Sybil orac.
asserting that until the Time when Aquila flourished, there was no other
Scripture read in the Synagogues of the Jews, then the Version of the
Septuagint, in regard the Hebrew Language was so forgotten, that the Rabbis
themselves did not understand it. But the 70 Interpreters, as Vossius will have
it, Vossius's Errors
flourished at what time the Hebrew Language was familiarly spoken. But the
Hebrew Language was no more a Familiar Speech in the time of the 70
Interpreters, then it was when Aquila lived. For that it was abolished after
the Jews were carried Captive into Babylon; and after their return it ceased to
be any longer the Language of the Country. How then could it be, that it should
only continue among the Rabbis, who taught it publicly in the Synagogues and
Schools; or if it be true, that till the Time of Aquila, there was no other
Scripture read in all the Synagogues of the Jews, but the Greek Interpretation
of the 70 Interpreters. How came it to pass that Flavius Josephus expounded the
Law of Moses in the Hebrew Language, as Vossius affirms, and moreover that the
same Josephus, the most learned of all the Hebrews of his Age, set forth his
History of the Jews in the Hebrew Language, before he wrote it in Greek? Yet if
we may believe Vossius, the Hebrew Language was then wholly lost: If it were
so, why does he call it the Country Language of Josephus? He Will never agree with
any who disagrees with Himself. It is manifest also from the Writings of
Josephus, that the Jews of Palestine and the Territories adjacent spoke the
Hebrew Language, which they learnt by practice, without any Grammatical Rules,
which were not invented till after six Hundred, as Vossius would have it, but
not till after nine Hundred Years and more. In which sense, as Vossius relates,
Josephus reports of himself that he excelled in the learning of his Country all
the rest of the Jews; but that he learnt the Greek by Grammatical Instructions.
Now he calls his Country Learning the knowledge of the Hebrew Language and the
Law of Moses, which the Hyerosolymitan Jews read in the Hebrew Language in
their Synagogues. Nevertheless if we believe Vossius, who frequently
contradicts himself, Christ and his Apostles spoke Greek in Judea. Wherever,
says he, from the time of Alexander the Great, the Grecians dilated their
Conquests, there also the Greek Language prevailed, and a little after, as in
Egypt, Asia and the rest of Syria, so also in Judea there was no other Language
spoken, especially in great Towns and Cities. Yes -- there was in Egypt besides
the Greek the Coptick, in Syria the Syriac, in Judea the Judeac, or Chaldee
Syriac. Vossius might have learnt from the Evangelists, that the Language of
the Jews who Inhabited Jerusalem, which ought to be numbered among great Towns
and Cities, was the Chaldee or Syriac, and that Christ did not speak to the
Jews of that City in Greek but in Syriac. Which Language, the Jews who
inhabited that Country afterward retained tho corrupted, as may be proved by
the Example of the Talmud, which is vulgarly called the Hierosolymitan, and the
Language also wherein that Book is written is called the Hierosolymitan. But
among the Babylonian Jews, as at that time, so a great while after, the Chald^e
Language was most Familiar, who have also their Talmud written in the same
Language. For the most Ancient Books of the Jews, except some very few, were
not written in any other Language then the Impure Chalduic. But there is no
reason we should spend any longer time in refelling the Assertions of Vossius,
which have nothing in 'em of Probability. Such as are those things which he
delivers concerning the Jewish Traditions, Voss. de Sybill. Orac.
which he will have to be written in the G^eek. Language before Justinian's
Reign, and of the Book Misua, which was translated about that time out of the
Greek into the Hebrew, because by an Edict of Justinians the Jews were
prohibited to read the Book of Traditions in their Synagogues. Therefore says
Vossius, to elude that command of the Emperor, the Book was Translated into
Hebrew, Risum teneatis Amici.

But if the Learned Gentleman had applied his mind to the Edict of Justinian,
The Hebrew Text read in the Synagogues of the Hellenists. Justin Novel vel
Constitut. 146.
he might have found, that the Hebrew Text was read not only at Jerusalem but
in the Synagogues of the Hellenists. Which is apparently evident from the very
words of the Justinian Law. We are given to understand, That some having only
the knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue, are desirous to make use of that in the
Reading of the Scriptures; that others will also take in the Greek Edition. We
therefore having considered these things, believe them to do best, who make use
of the Greek Translation also in reading the Scriptures, and every other
Language purely which the place makes more convenient and fitter for the
hearers. This Law of Justinian supposes the Jews to be of two sorts, of which
some being wholly addicted to the Hebrew Language, read the Scripture in their
Synagogues in the Hebrew Language only: others because they understood the
Greek, made use of the Greek Translation, likewise. By the Edict of Justinian
they are permitted to read the Scripture not only in Greek, but in any other
Language whatsoever; Therefore all the Hellenist Jews in obedience to the Law
of Moses, never read the Scriptures in their Synagogue in any other then in the
Hebrew Language, to which soon after their Domestic Native Language succeeded.
Nor is this any way contradicted by the Testimonies of the Ancient Jews and
Fathers; from whom it is apparent that the Jews of Alexandria, and all those
other Jews to whom the Greek was familiar, read the Greek Version of the 70.
Interpreters in their Synagogues. In like manner it appears that there were
certain Synagogues in Jerusalem, in which the Law of Moses, and the Prophets
were read in the Greek Language. All these and many other Arguments that might
be here collected together, serve only to prove, that the Reading of the Greek
Interpretation was only added for exposition's sake to the reading of the
Hebrew Text. As now in our days, the Jews according to their ancient. Custom
every Sabbath day, read both in Hebrew and Chaldee; because that in the Ancient
Synagogues, there were both Readers and Expounders; which Gift or Function of
Interpreter or Prophet was Translated out of the Synagogue to the Christian
Assemblies, as appears by the Apostles words in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians Chap. 4. Hence perhaps it came to pass that the Greek
Interpretation of the Septuagint in some places less accurately expresses the
words of the Hebrew Text in regard that they who made it, supplied the office
of Paraphrasters rather then of Interpreters; especially in those places that
were most obscure. But as I have not leisure, so do I neither care to refute at
present all those things which Vossius has at large produced to defend the
Translation of the 70 Elders, and to magnify the Exemplars of the Jews against
all manner of probability. Therefore it will be much more to the purpose, to
compare St. Jeroms Version with the Greek in some places, thence to make
manifest how truly Vossius has averred that St. Jerome never deviated upon right
grounds from the Ancients, Resp. ad Critic
and that he was the first amongst the Christians who compill'd a Rabbinic
Version, and showed others the way to dare as much. Far different was the
Judgment which Austin Eugubinus gave of St. Jeroms Version which is now read in
the Eastern Church; Austin. Eugub. in prefat. lib. de Vulg. Edit.
his words are these: Thus if you compare the Hebrew Text with the Edition of
the Seventy, I might be bold to use this simile, in asserting that you compare
Light with Darkness. Which we shall make out in every part of this Treatise.
Certainly we shall find this to be so unnecessary to the Church, that unless
the Divine Jerome had blessed us with this effect of his Industry, we had
necessarily remained to this day in many Errors.

I shall therefore cull the Examples of this Comparison out of the Prophets,
The Greek Version compared with the Latin of S. J. ro^.
which St. Jerome Translated out of the Hebrew, and illustrated with his
Commentaries, both being extant as well the Old as the New Translation in his
Works. However it is not my purpose to vindicate St. Jerome from all his
slighter mistakes, as Vossius earnestly undertakes to vindicate the 70
Interpreters: In regard that several things have slipped St. Jerome, though
otherwise most learned, while he, too much addicted to the Jews of his Time,
many times too severely corrects the Greek Interpreters. But that the Learned
Father was so many times deceived as he deviated from them, according to
Vossius's judgment, Isa. 2.22.
I utterly deny. In the Second Chapter of his Comment upon Isaiah, upon these
words. Cease from Man, whose breath is in his Nostrils, for wherein is he to be
accounted of; He wonders that the 70 Interpreters omitted to Translate into the
Greek so perspicuous a Prophecy of Christ, as it seems to him to be, and he
condemns the Jews for interpreting the word which in the Hebrew is ambiguous in
the worst sense. Now under the name of the Jews in that place he taxes Aquila
and other Interpreters who of set purpose compill'd a different Translation
from the Septuagint, to which the Jews, forsaking the Ancient Interpretation
had recourse. Now whether this Omission be to be attributed to the Transcribers
or to the 70 themselves, I shall not now enquire, seeing it is certain that
those words were not in the Greek Copies before Origen's Time, the words being
added with a mark of little Asterisms in the Edition of Aquila. Nor do I
dispute of the excellency of St. Jeroms Translation whether it be to be
preferred before that of Aquila. But hence, I infer that St. Jeroms Translation
was erroneously called Rabbinical by Vossius, as if St. Jerome now being old had
given credit to the Jews alone in compiling his Translation of the Hebrew Text.
In the 5 Chapter of the same Prophet 17 Verse, where St. Jerome Translates it,
according to the propriety of the Hebrew words, And the Lambs shall feed after
their manner; he taxes the 70 Interpreters, for that, for what reason he
understood not, they had Translated the words, They shall feed rent in pieces
like Bulls. Understanding Bulls instead of Lambs, and for Strangers
interpreting Lambs. Nevertheless the Hebrew words are not intricate here, and
the sense is open. St. Jerome also reproves the Greek Interpreters for
Translating the Text, Isa. 6.8.
And who will go for us? Because it is Lanu in the Hebrew, and who shall go to
this People, which words are not in the Hebrew. But perhaps instead of Lanu,
the read Laam; or else the same words which follow after, Go to this People,
are here added for Explanations sake; in regard the Pronoun lls signifies
nothing there as in many other places.

But much more worthy Observation are those things which St. Jerome reports upon
these words which he had Translated according to the Hebrew Text, Blind the
heart of this People, and load the Ears of it, when the Greek interpretation
seems much more kindly, wherein it was written, And the heart of this people
became obdurate. But they who understand the Hebrew Language know well, that
this variance might proceed from the different pointing of the Vowels: and the
70 followed the pronunciation most usual in their own time, which was different
from what was practiced when St. Jerome lived, and this is demonstrable from the
Mascretic Exemplar. Both Readings are confirmed by Tradition. But the Greek is
here to be preferred before St. Jeroms, because the Apostle followed it in the
Acts of the Apostles. However St. Jerome answers to these objections, that this
Reading ought to be attributed rather to St. Luke the Evangelist then the
Apostle. Comment. in c. 6. Isa.
The ancient Doctors of the Church, says he, report that St. Luke was a most
skilful Physician, and understood the Greek better then the Hebrew. Wherefore
his Language as well in the Gospel as in the Acts of the Apostles is more
polite, and savours of the Eloquence of the Times, And he makes more use of the
Greek then the Hebrew Testimonies.

Therefore St. Jerome seems to be of that Judgment, that he believed, that St.
Paul, disputing with the Hebrews, did not speak according to the Septuagint but
according to the Hebrew Text. But that S. Luke the Evangelist, who understood
the Greek perfectly and read the Greek Texts made use of Greek Quotations. Like
proofs to these St. Jerome produces in his Hebrew Questions upon Genesis. Where
weighing the Difference between the Greek and Latin Exemplars in numbering up
the Sons of Jacob who journed with him into Egypt, and putting the Question why
Stephen in the Acts adhered rather to the Version of the Septuagint, then to
the Hebrew Text, he thus speaks St. Luke who is the Author of that History,
while he was sending out among the Gentiles a volume of the Acts of the
Apostles, ought not to have Wrote any thing contrary to that Scripture, which
was now divulged among the Gentiles. And in another place. But this is
generally to be observed, that wherever the Apostles or Apostolic men speak to
the People, they make use of those Quotations which were divulged among the
People. Why the Apostles used the Greek Version.
And therefore it is not to be thought that the Apostles made use of the Greek
Version in their Writings, because they thought the Author thereof to be
inspired with a Divine or Prophetic Spirit; or because no other Scripture was
read in the Synagogues but only the Greek Version, as Vossius erroneously
affirms, but because it was vulgarly in use, and by the Testimony of St. Jerome,
because when the Apostles spoke to the People they made use of those Quotations
which were most in use among the Gentiles: Quite otherwise then as they used to
speak to the people of their own Nation, who understood the Hebrew. Vess. Resp.
ad Critic. Sacra.
But, says Vossius, St. Luke must of necessity have told an untruth, had
Stephen expressed any other Sense then what he put down in his Sermon. As if
there were any necessity for him to tell an Untruth, who repeats the substance
of a Speech in the same words, only with some little Alterations of no moment.
Nor does the Learned Gentleman seem to reach the sense of the Author of the
Critica Sacra, as if he thought that Stephen had not preached his last Sermon
in the Greek or vulgar Syriac, but in the Hebrew Language. Were the People,
says Vossius, ignorant of the Hebrew Language in the time of the Apostles? did
the the Evangelist lie? What will remain entire in the Gospel, if we admit such
Fictious as these? But he rather feigns Monsters of his own, for himself to
vanquish afterward. Stephen preached in Syriac not in Greek.
Stephen Preached in Syriac which was then familiar to the Hierosolymitan Jews,
but the Quotations which he cites he could not cite in any other Language then
the Hebrew, because the Hierosolymitan Jews read the Law of Moses in their
Synagogues in the Hebrew, not the Greek Language; and if any other
Interpretation were added it was done in the Syriac Speech, which was the
vulgar Language, as Vossius here freely confesses, not in the Greek, which was
only used in the Schools and Synagogues of the Hellenists.

But in this I confess St. Jerome is to be corrected, Comment in c. 6. Isai.
where he says, that Matthew and John took their Citations from the Hebrew of
the Old Testament, forgetful of that Rule which he sets down in his Hebrew
Traditions upon Genesis, that is, St. Jerome taxed.
that the Apostles and Apostolic Persons made use of the Greek Exemplars, for
no other reason then because they were common among the Gentiles. But as for
the Hebrew Copies, they were kept only in the Synagogues of the Jews, among
whom very few were to be found who understood them. On the other side the Greek
Language was familiar to most Nations. But it is to be observed, that the
Apostles, though they stook to the Greek Copies, yet they did not altogether so
totally depend upon them, but that many times they took more notice of the
sense then the words. Micha. 5.2.
Wherefore S. Jerome expounding this place of Michah, and thou Bethlehem
Ephratah makes this observation; Some observe that in all Quotations taken out
of the Old Testament there is some mistake or other, that either the Order or
the words are changed, and sometimes the very sense it self varies, the
Apostles or Evangelists not looking in the Books, but trusting to their
Memories, that might sometime fail them. These words indeed seem somewhat too
harsh, nor have I quoted them that Vossius should give any Credit to them. And
yet he can hardly forbear at the same time to believe John Calvin, who
commenting upon the same place of Micha, thus observes. What necessity is there
to wrest the words of the Prophet, when it was not the purpose of the
Evangelist to repeat the words of the Prophet, but only to note the Text. In
like manner S. Jerome, speaking his own and not the Opinion of others,
concerning these Quotations which are cited out of the Old Testament into the
New, Com. in 7. cap. Isai.
in many Quotations Says he, which the Evangelists or Apostles have taken out
of the Old Testament, we are to take notice that they do not follow the order
of the words but the sense. But let us now return to our purpose.

The first words of the ninth Chapter of the same Prophecy, are hardly to be
understood in the Greek Version, Isai. 9.1.
when the sense lies open in St. Jeroms Version. St. Jerome produces both in
two distinct Colums after this manner. At first the Lard of Zebulon, and the
Land Naphtali were lightly afflicted. This was St. Jeroms Translation: The
Greek Version runs thus; Drink this first, do it quickly O Region of Zebulon,
and Land of Naphtali. I am apt to believe the word Drink was taken from some
other place, which changes the sense. A little after in the same Chapter, St.
Jerome taxes the 70 Interpreters for that instead of these words, His name shall
be called wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Father of the Age to come,
the Prince of Peace; they affrighted at the Majesty of the Titles, durst not
adventure to say so much of a Child, that he was to be called God, but instead
of these six Titles, they have put that which is not in the Hebrew. Again he
convinces the Grecian Interpreters of a manifest mistake, that not minding the
spelling of the words, they have put Death instead of the Word, God sent Death
into Jacob, whereas it should be the Word, as St. Jerome interpreted it: who
presently adds the Original of the mistake in these words. In the Hebrew
Language the word (...) which is written with three Consonants, according to
the propriety of the places where it is used, if it be read Dabar it signifies
a word or speech, but if Deber, it signifies Pestilence and Death. Not far from
the beginning of the 10th Chapter of the same Prophet upon these words, woe to
Assure, Isai. 10.5.
St. Jerome accuses the Interpreters for not having accurately observed the
Hebrew. Again in the 28. verse of the same Chapter upon these words, He is come
to Ajath, he shows at large how much they differ from the Hebrew, and taxes
them of Falsehood for interpreting it Rama City of Saul for the City of Saul is
called Gallna, as it is in the Hebrew.

Moreover St. Jeroms Opinion concerning the Seventy Interpreters is quite
different from that of Vossius, who believes there is nothing but Greek in it,
and that it is hardly called a Language that had its Original in the Synagogue.
For thus he speaks in his sixth Book of Commentaries. Instead of stranger, that
is (...), the Seventy have Translated (...), which is in Hebrew Ger --
Therefore Georas is no Greek word, but an Hebrew word declined after the Greek
manner: Vossius contrary to S. Jerome in his Judgment concerning the Language
of the Septuagint.
which is certain, notwithstanding the endeavors of a certain person to deduce
the word from a Greek Original, because he has the care of the business of the
Land. For (...) signifies Land, and (...), that is Solicitude or care. Now how
far the Greek Interpreters have deviated from the genuine sense of Scripture,
in the c. 24 ver. 23 of the same Prophet, where we read in the Latin Edition,
The Moon shall be ashamed, and the Sun shall be confounded, St. Jerome truly
observes in these words, Instead of that which we Interpret, The Moon shall be
ashamed, and the Sun shall be confounded, The 70. have Translated the words,
the Brick shall be melted and the Wall shall fall. And by and by he discovers
the reason of the mistake, (...)
because that instead of the Hebrew word Levana which signifies the Moon, they
read Lebena which signifies a Brick, and instead of (...) Chammah which
signifies the Sun, from his heat, they read (...) Chomah which signifies a
Wall. But I stay too long upon these things, in regard that St. Jeromes
Commentaries upon Isaiah may be read by every body; where he frequently taxes
the Greek Interpreters of Mistakes, sometimes deceived by the Ambiguity of
words, sometimes upon other accounts. However sometimes he spares them, as in
the 30th Chapter, where after he had condemned their inconstancy of
Interpretation, by and by as it were correcting himself, he adds, I am apt to
believe they did not err from the beginning, but that they were depraved by the
negligence of the Transcribers. And E. 40. where he notes some things omitted
by the Interpreters, he presently adds, as it were in some doubt, either
omitted by the Septuagint I terpreters, or by the fault of the Transcribers. In
like manner sometimes he corrects the Greek Exemplars according to the Hebrew
Copies, least the mistake should be put upon the Interpreters, as upon these
words, Chap. 45. Thus says the Lord to my Anointed Cyrus, he truly observes,
that most of the Latins as well as the Greeks, did very much mistake in
believing the words to be written, Thus says the Lord to my Lord, For the Text
does not say (...), which signifies Lord, but (...), to Cyrus, who in Hebrew is
called (...) Curosch.

The same things are to be seen in St. Jeromes Commentaries upon Jeremiah,
Ezekiel and other Prophets. And indeed there is nothing more frequent in his
Commentary upon Jeremiah, then his observations of things omitted by the 70, or
at least of passages not to be seen in the Greek Exemplars. For sometimes he
accuses the Interpreters, sometimes the Transcribers. In this Commentary also
upon Ezekiel, where he observes the Omission of the Creek Copies he presently
adds; In divine Scripture it is better to take all in that is said, though thou
understandest not wherefore it is said, than to take away what thou do not
know. Nevertheless in the 5th Chapter of the same Prophet, he scarcely dares
adventure to accuse the Interpreters, where he says, it is much better to
Translate what is written, then to seek to defend a thing ill Translated. Nor
do we say this was done by those to whom Antiquities has given Authority; but
that after many Ages it was depraved through the negligence of the Readers and
Writers, though both Aristeas and Josephus and all the Schools of the Jews,
assert no more than only the five Books of Moses, to have been translated by
the 70 Interpreters. Nor is it only in this place but in many other, that St.
Jerome seems to deny that any other part of Scripture was translated by the 70,
unless the five Books of Moses, as upon the 5th Chap. of Micah, where he has
these expressions. The Interpretation of the 70 ( if were done by the 70, for
Josephus writes, and the Hebrews assert by Tradit on, that only the five Books
of the Law of Moses were Translated by them, and d^livered to King Ptolomy)
vary's so far in the place cited, from the Hebrew Truth, that we can neither
set the Chapters right, nor expound their Sentences together.

But Vossius is of a quite contrary Opinion, who not only seeks every where a
Defense for a place ill translated, to use the words of St. Jerome, but openly
testifies, that he makes no question but that the Prophetical Books were also
translated by the Seventy Interpreters, though formerly he made a doubt of it.
And which seems to be above all belief, if we may credit Vossius, the Greek
Interpreters show themselves most accurate in the more obscure Books of Job and
the Proverbs. But I believe there is no person sikll'd in both Languages, who
will agree with him in this particular, so trivial is the Greek Translation of
those Books in many places. St. Jerome sometimes taxes the Greek Interpreters
without cause.
Yet am I not such a one as to pin my sleeve so passionately upon St. Jerome as
every where to appove his Errors which are very many. Thus not to go farther,
in the 27th Chapter of his Commentaries upon Ezekiel He taxes the Seventy
Interpreters for putting down the Sons of the Rhodians instead of the Sons of
Dedan, deceived perhaps by the likeness of the first Letter, whilst they read
Radan for Dadan. But that this mistake is rather to be attributed to the
Transcribers then the Interpreters those Verses which follow in the same
Chapter plainly demostrate, where the Seventy write Dedan, as in St. Jeromes
Translation.

Again in the 33th Chapter of the same Prophet, where mention is made of Gog,
he observes, that the Greek Interpreters in the 24th of Numbers for Agag in the
Hebrew have made use of the word Gog; But it is a manifest mistake of the
Transcriber. But to omit a thousand thnigs of the same nature, the Observation
of St. Jerome is much better in his 40th. Chapter of the same Commentaries,
almost all the Hebrew words, and many in the Greek and Latin Translation, were
Corrupted by long Antiquity, and depraved through the negligence of the
Transcribers, and while they are Transcribed out of bad Copies into Copies more
corrected, of Hebrew words they are made Sarmatic nay of no Nation at all,
while they cease to be Hebrew and become Foreign. Therefore are those things
most carefully to be distinguished, and according to the Rules of Criticism,
which St. Jerome taxes as ill translated by the 70. For as he has rightly
displayed the most of their Errors, Praef. in l. 7. Com. in Ezech.
So he corrects many things, which deserve not to be found fault with. Nor is
it to be wondered at when St. Jerome himself testifies that he could hardly
complete his Emendations, in regard there was not an hour, scarcely a Moment,
wherein he did not meet with whole troops of the Brethren, and for that being
then old besides the difficulty of dictating, he was not able to look over the
Hebrew Volums by reason of the smalness of the Print. In like manner he
observes, Com. in E 42.
that he could not rightly translate something, while he had not time to
consider for have of dictating. Therefore neither St. Jerome, nor the Seventy
Interpreters being Prophets they must of necessity slip many things, because
they were but Men.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the rest of the Greek Translations of Sacred Scripture, and
the Hexaples of Origin. The Opinion of Isaac Vossius concerning the Disposition
of the Hexaples refuted.
THere was no Person before St. Jeromes time, who durst adventure to frame a
New Translation of the Sacred Scripture from the Hebrew Original, in regard the
Greek Translation of the Septuagint was looked upon over all the Christian
World as Divine, and proceeding from men inspired with a Prophetic Spirit. And
therefore it was thought more proper to recount the rest of the Greek Versions
rather among the Jewish then among the Christians, as being such as were
finished by the Jews or half Jews in hatred of the Christian Religion. But when
Origin inserted them all in his Hexaples, together with the Version of the
Seventy Elders, And that the ancient Fathers of the Church consulted them in
Expounding the Scriptures, and that nothing more frequently occurs then the
names of those Authors in the Writings of St. Jerome, we thought it convenient
to bring them in next after the Interpretation of the Seventy Elders.

^. Aquila's Greek Translation.
First therefore we will take notice of Aquila, whose Greek Version we shall
refer to the Reign of Adrian the Emperor. He having forsaken the Christian
Religion, which he professed before, revolted to the Jews, and at the same time
undertook a new Version of the Biblic Context, in opposition to the Greek,
which at that time was universally received in the Church. And because he found
the 70 Elders to be rather Paraphrasters than Interpreters, he began a new
Translation, which should render the Hebrew words (...), or following the
signification of every word at the Heels; from whence he got the Name of the
Contentious Interpreter, and his depraved affectation, which they called (...),
was condemned: Although St Jerome, according to his custom, seems to have a
better opinion of him, for sometimes he praises him as a Learned and Diligent
Interpreter. Thus writing to Damasus, Aquila, says he, Epist. 125.
who is not Contentious, as he is reported to be, but interprets diligently
word for word. Nevertheless in another place he calls him a contentious and
silly Interpreter, that is to say, having relation to things and places, he
gives a different Judgment of one and the same Interpreter, and taxes him as a
half Christian, calling him withal, Jew and Blasphemer. In like manner
Epiphanius, who detracts from Aquila, as a person that frequently (...) or
speaks Barbarisms, yet calls to his assistance against the Arrians his Version,
forsaking that of the 70 Interpreters. How highly he was esteemed by the Jews,
Origin tells us in these words, So, says he, Epist. ad Afric.
did Aquila subservient to the Hebrew Phrase make his Translation, who among
the Jews is thought to have rendered the Scripture with greater applause, whom
they chiefly make use of who are ignorant of the Hebrew Tongue, as beleiving
him to have attained to the perfection of it.

However the (...) or depraved Affectation of that Interpreter can hardly be
excused, who while he keeps over close to the words of his Text, clouds the
sense and meaning of it. Wherefore he himself not contented with his own
Translation, undertook another, wherein following the same method of
Interpretation, he was the cause himself that those Versions had no other
approvers then the Jews. Nor do Justin and some others of the Fathers seem to
have recourse to them, but only to enforce their Arguments more home upon the
Jews.

The Greek Translation of Symmachus.
Who was the next that after Aquila translated the Scripture out of Hebrew into
the Greek is not certainly known. For some attribute that Version to Symmachus,
others to Theodosion. Symachus the first of the Samaritan Sect, afterward
turned Nazarite Christian, or Ebonite. He is vulgarly reported to have compiled
his Version in hatred of his own Nation, the Samaritans whose Religion he had
forsaken, and that in the Reign of Severus the Emperor. He finding Aquila's
Interpretation to be contemned by most, especially the Christians, because he
interpreted word for word, applied himself, as St. Jerome testifies, rather to
render the sense then the words. Symmachus, says he, uses to follow not only
the (...) of words, but the order of Sense. After that, by the report of the
same St. Jerome, he undertook another Translation: as if the former had not
been sufficiently accurate to his mind.

The third place, among the Greek Interpreters of Sacred Context is yielded to
Theodotion, who nevertheless is thought by most to have lived before Symmachus,
under the Emperor Commodus. He embracing at first the opinion of the
Marcionites, afterward turned Ebionites, and in compiling his Version,
altogether laying Aquila's aside, comes nearest of all to the 70 Interpreters.
Wherefore Origin took out of that, what seems to be wanting in this. And St.
Jerome testifies, that in his time, the Prophecy of Daniel was read in the
Church, according to Theodotio's Translation; nor is it a difficult thing to
prove that he regarded much more the sense then the words of the Text. Thus in
the 4th. Chap. of Genesis. v. 4. where we read in the Septuagint (...), and in
the Vulgar respexit, the Lord had respect, which interpretation exactly agrees
with the Hebrew Text, Theodosio renders it (...), inflammavit, the Lord set it
on fire; wherein he agrees with the Rabbis, who believe that Cain thence
perceived that his Sacrifice was not acceptable to God, because he found his
offering was not consumed by fire.

Other Translations of the Scripture.
Concerning the fourth and fifth Versions of the Bible, which Origin has added
to his Hexaples, nothing of certainty can be affirmed, the Authors of them
being utterly unknown. Yet is it not probable they were compiled by any
Christian Writers, in regard that the Church for a long time after St. Jerome
acknowledged no other Translation of the Holy Scripture, then that which was
read over all the Catholic World under the Title of the Septuagint; Initio
Caten. in Job.
and for that as Olympiodorus testifies, the depraved Interpretations of the
fabulous Hebrews were reckoned superfluous, after the Version of the
Septuagint, all other Interpreters being quoted only for perspicuities sake;
and before these Versions, Irenaus speaking of the Interpretation of the 70, L.
3. adv. Heret. c. 25.
adds these words, They are truly Impudent and Audatious, that will make
Interpretations otherwise. St. Jerome also calls those Interpreters Judaic
Translators, in like manner as he entitles Aquila, Symmachus and Theodotio. But
we are to note that these two Versions which we call the fourth and fifth, in
Origens Hexaples, are extant under the names of the fifth and sixth; the Greek
Interpretation of 70 being reckoned into the Number. But here we only mention
those which were taken from the Hebrew Original, after the Greek Version of the
Septuagint.

Concerning all these Translations and the Genius of the several Translators,
much more might be added, but what remains may be easily drawn from their
fragments which are extant, and which the learned Drusius has caused to be made
public in Print. In like manner the Scholiast may be consulted, whose
Annotations are printed both at Rome and at Paris, together with the Greek
Exemplar of the Septuagint, according to the Vatian Manuscript. But in the
first place St. Jerow's Commentaries upon the sacred Scripture are to be
scanned, where nothing more frequently occurs than the Names of Aquilas,
Symmachus and other Greek Interpreters, whom he sometimes Corrects and
sometimes Commends.

To these some there are who make an addition of other Versions, and attribute
them to Lucian, Hesychius, Origin and Apollinarius; but all these excepting
Apollinarius did no more then examine the Greek Exemplars of the Septuagint with
the Ancient Manuscripts, not being the Authors of any new Translations. In
which sense are to be explained the words of St. Jerome, a most remarkable
Testimony in this case. Alexandria and Egypt in their S^ptu^gints applaud
Hesychius the Author; L. 1. Apol. adv. Ruffin.
Constantinople even as far as Alexandria approve the Copies of Justin Martyr;
the Provinces in the midst of these read the Palestine Manuscripts which
Eusebius and Pamphilus published, being Elaborately viewed by Origin; and the
whole World contends about this threefold Truth. But Apollinarius out of all
composed one Edition, though unsuccessfully being rejected as well by the Jews
as Christians; wherefore St. Jerome gives this Judgment of him. I pass by
Apollinarius, who with great zeal and diligence, but not according to
knowledge, has endeavored out of all the Translations, to make several pieces
of Cloth into one Garment, and to weave the Consequence of Scripture, not
according to the rule of Truth, but according to his own Judgment. But these
things shall be made more manifest, Id. ibid.
when we come to explain the Disposition of Origens Hexaple, which was known to
very few, as we shall prove by what follows.

St. Jerome makes a distinction of two Versions of the Septuagint, especially in
his Epistle to Sunias and Fretela, whom he admonishes, that there is another
Edition of the Septuagint, which all the Grecian Commentators call (...) or
Common, and another which was to be found in the Hexaples of Origin, and which
he testifies to have been faithfully translated into Latin by himself. St.
Jerome adds that there is this difference between the one and the other, that
the (...) or Vulgar was corrupted by the variety of Places and Times, and the
negligence of the Transcribers; but that which was to be found in the Hexaples,
that was the Translation of the 70. which was preserved incorrupt and
immaculate in the Books of the Learned. Which words however are not to be
understood, as if that Greek Edition, which the Exemplars of Origin present to
our view, were the pure Original of the 70 Interpreters free from mistake,
seeing that Origin himself tells us that he had corrected the Vulgar Exemplars
with all the exactness he could, which were most of them corrupt and depraved
in his time. Now who will be so hardy as to affirm that he reformed every
particular Error that was in those Copies? Rather it might happen that under
pretense of Correction, he might obtrude some Errors that were not there before
upon the ancient Exemplars, like that same Critic, who examined the Greek
Edition, which is extant in the Bibles, Printed at Complutum, or Alcana de
Henares in Spain, by the Greek Copies which were ancient and of good repute,
but sometimes also by the Hebrew Originals. Therefore as the Edition of
Complutum is not therefore the more pure because it comes nearest the Hebrew
Original; but for that very reason rather discommended and rejected as corrupt;
so neither is that Edition of Origin, which St Jerome magnifies, because it is
more agreeable to the Hebrew Truth than the Vulgar Greek Edition to be therefore
thought the more pure and without Fault, because it is more agreeable with the
Hebrew Exemplars than the (...), or Common One. I confess indeed that Origin
has made no alteration of set purpose in the Version of the Septuagint which he
inserted into his Hexaples, because he avows it of himself, writing to
Africanus, where he says that he had no intention to frame any thing which
might d^ff^r from the Scripture received in the Catholic Church: But the
reason of his Method, which he has followed in correcting the ancient Greek
Exemplars, plainly demonstrates that in them he has made some Innovations. For
thus he speaks in his Treatise upon Matthew. What Incongruities there were in
the Exemplars of the Old Testament, we were able to reconcile by the assistance
of God, making use of the other Editions: For those things which in the
Septuagint seemed to be dubious, by reason of the Discrepancy of Exemplars,
weighing and considering the other Editions, we made to agree with the Rest.

Therefore Origin, while he lent his healing hand to the Vulgar Exemplars of
the Greek Edition of the Septuagint, consulted Aquila, Symmachus and other
Authors; nay and it is very probable the Hebrew Text it self too. Now who can
presume to affirm him to be so happy in his Emendations, as never to swerve
from the true Reading; nay though he had so exactly examined altogether all the
Editions, as he says himself, and all varieties; that by comparing the
Difference of Translations, he might understand the Septuagint.

Concerning the Editions of Lucian and Hesychius.
Concerning the Emendations of Lucian and Hesychius, who in like manner examined
the Exemplars of the Vulgar Greek Edition with the ancient Exemplars, the same
Judgment may be given of them: For it is very probable they consulted the
Versions of Aquila and others: From whence arose that Diversity of the Greek
Codixes, which now appears, in several Editions of the Greek Translation of the
Septuagint. All which we may reduce principally to three, from whence all the
rest were derived: And these are the Editions of Complutum, which is extant in
the Royal Bibles, or those Printed at Antwerp; Anno 1515. La^e Greek Editions.
1518
in the Parisian Polyglots, and the Bibles that are Printed under the Name of
Vatablus. The Alclin or Venetian Edition, which was afterward Printed at
Strasburgh, Basil Frankford, the Order of the Books being somewhat changed; And
lastly the Roman, Printed from the Vatican Codex, 1587.
which was afterward Printed a Second Time at Paris by the care of John
Morinus, 1628.
with an ancient Latin Version; and is the same with the English transferred
into their Polyglotton, as being the most acurate of all.

The Edition of Complutum was the most full of Faults of any of the rest, as
being examined and mended not only by the Greek, but by the Hebrew Codexes
also; some also attribute to Eusebius and Pamphilus a new Recognition or
Emendation of the Greek Version of the Septuagint; Eusebius'^ Edition.
but if there were any Edition of Eusebius it was little different from that of
Origin: For as St. Jerome reports, Eusebius and Pamphilus divulged the Codex's,
Ap^l. adv. Ruffin.
that were elaborately mended by Origin; Eusebius also recites an Epistle of
Constantine the Emperor to himself, (...), concerning the Preparation of Books
written by divine Inspiration. As indeed at the end of certain Greek Exemplars
the names of Pamphilus and Eusebius are to be found recorded in this manner,
(...), Pamphilus and Eusebius corrected; that is to say, the Exemplars of
Origin, which were inserted into the Hexaples, were afterward transcribed by
Pamphilus and Eusebius for the Churches of Palestine, whence as St. Jerome
relates, they took the Name of the Palestine Manuscripts; as those which were
corrected by Hesychius were called Constantinopolitan; The Palestins,
Constantinopolitan and Alexandrian Editio^^.
and they that were revised by Lucian carried the Name of Alexandrian. And this
Diversity of Editions appears in several Exemplars in our Age; while some
relate to those of Origin, or the Palestinian, others to the Alexandrian. Now
let us inquire what was the Order and Disposition of the Books in Origen's
Hexaples, which is variously controverted among the Learned.

Isaac Vossius promises that he will at one time or other demonstrate that
Origin in putting his Haxaples together took another way then is vulgarly
believed. de Sept. Interpret. l. 29.
Wherefore in his answer to the late Critics, he maintains that the Tetraples
and Hexaples of Origin were not so called from the four or six Columns, but
that they were called Tetraples, because they contained a fourfold Version;
Hexaples because they comprehended six Versions. That the Author of the Critics
errs as to the Octaples, while he follows Epiphanius in his mistakes, because
Origin never wrote any Octables; that the Hebrew Codex was never reckoned into
the Number of Versions, Origens vast undertaking considered.
by reason that Origin calls the first Columns (...), the Foundation of all
Translations. Vossius adds, that in the Tetraples there were six Columns, in
the Pentateuch also seven, as to which the Samaritan Exemplar might be added,
Printed in the Original Hebrew Letters, as they are called by Eusebius and
Africanus; But because that was only done in the Pentateuch, therefore the
Tetraples were said to contain only six Columns by the same reason as in the
Hexaples, though in the Psalm. a seventh Version is also added; and yet the Title
of Hexaples remains, because that seventy Version is wanting in other Books.

Thus far Vossius, who nevertheless cites no other Authors but himself, to show
what that new way was which he promised to demonstrate; yet that we may give
the greater credit to his words he adds, Since there are no exemplar remaining,
or at least, none hitherto to be found of Hexaples or Tetraples, to contend
about these things too profusely would but show the Vanity of a person too
lavishly squandring away his leisure. After this manner Vossius acquits himself
of his pr^mises to display a new and unheard of Disposal of Origens Hexaples.
But since he never saw any Exemplars of them, it will not be amiss to consult
those ancient Fathers of the Church, and first of all Epiphanius, who describe
them as Eye witnesses.

Dionysius Petavius a most learned Jesuit, and no less versed in the Greek and
Hebrew Codex's then Vossius, asserts, that no person ever more accurately
delivered what were the Tetraples, Hexaples and Octaples of Origin, than
Epiphanius. And the same Petavius admires, that they most who took what they
had out of Epiphanius, should be deceived in a place so plain and open to the
understanding; and first he taxes Marianus Victorinus in his Scholiast upon the
Second Book of the Apology against Ruffinus; where he reproves Erasmus, as he
says, upon the Authority of Epiphanius, but very erroneously. The Order
therefore of the several Editions is here set down in this same Scheme out of
Epiphanius himself.

TETRAPLES. Aquila. Symmackus. Sep^u^gint. Theodotion.
HEXAPLE'S Hebrew in Hebrew Letters. Greek in Greek Letters. Aquila Symmachus.
Septuagint. Theodotion.
OCTAPLE'S. Hebrew in Hebrew Letters. Hebrew in Greek Letters. Aquila.
Symmachus. Septuagint. Theodotion. Fifth Edition. Sixth Edition.

But, says Vossius, the Tetraples and Hexaples were not so called from the
four or six Columns, but from the four fold Version, because they comprehended
six Translations: wherein the learned Gentleman is grossly mistaken. For the
name of Tetraples, Hexaples and Octaples was derived from the number of the
Editions. And every Edition took up one Column or Page according to the ancient
Custom of Writing out their Volumes, as the words of Ruffinus plainly evince.
It was the Intention of Origin to show us what was the manner of reading the
Scriptures among the Jews, Ruffin. invect.
and therefore he placed every one of the Editions in their proper Columns or
Pages. The same therefore was the method of Pages and Editions in Origens
Hexaples. Nor are those Arguments of any moment which Vossius deduces from the
word (...), which Title Origin gives to his first Columns, that is to say,
(...) as being the foundation of all Versions. I would fain know what else can
be thence inferred but that Origin had a mind to distinguish by that name the
Hebrew Context from the Versions that were made from it, as being the ground of
all the Translations. In which sense St. Jerome calls the same Context the
Hebrew Truth. Does it less from thence appear that the Context written in the
Hexaples in Hebrew and Greek Characters took up two Columns, from which equally
as from the Versions, each of which was written in it is distinct Pages, the
name of Hexaple was derived? Moreover it is a Fiction of the same Vossius,
which he fains concerning the Samaritan Codex written in the Original Hebrew
Letters, which was added to the Pentateuch. For that was unknown to the ancient
Fathers of the Church Epiphanius, Jerome, Ruffinus, as also to Eusebius and
Africanus whom he endeavors to draw to his party. Neither will ever Vossius be
able to demonstrate by certain Reasons what he so confidently asserts touching
the Samaritan Codex which was in Origen's hands, and vainly he produces for
Witnesses Eusebius, Africanus, Syncellus, nay even Origin himself, who never so
much as dreamed in their sleep of this Samaritan Exemplar, written as he says
in the Original Hebrew Letters. The Samaritans indeed had a Greek Version of
the Pentateuch which was well known to the Fathers, and out of that Africanus,
Eusebius, and Syncellus took several Readings of the Samaritan Exemplar
translated from the Hebrew which they inserted into their Writings. As for
Origin, he studyeth the Hebrew Language under the Instruction of Huillus,
Patriarch of the Jews, and not of the Samaritans; and therefore he did not make
use of the Hebrew Copies of the Samaritans, but of the Jews. In which Sense
those words of Eusebius are to be understood. Eusebius. l. 6. Hist.
So great was the care and diligence which Origin used in his accurate
Examination of the Sacred Writings, that he learnt the Hebrew Language, and
bought up the Originals which were among the Jews, written in the Hebrew
Characters. In Resp. ad Object. Crit.
But Vossius apparently wrests the words of Eusebius to another Sense; and to
accommodate them the more easily to his own Opinion scrupled not to alter the
vulgar Reading without the help of any Manuscript Copy. For thus he reads the
Sentence, (...), whereas it is vulgarly read (...), not (...). And thus he
renders it, That he learnt the Hebrew Language, and purchased to himself those
Scriptures which were written in the Original Hebrew Letters. Now says
Vossius, in Eusebius's Sense, the Original Characters are no other then the
Samaritan, and Eusebius had manifestly contradicted himself, if he had meant
the Vulgar Letters of the Jews, when he had wrote the contrary in his
Chronicle. I cannot, but wonder at the Ingenuity of Vossius to impose upon his
Readers in a thing so plain and obvious to all that have but kissed the
threshold of the Greek Tongue. The Books of Eusebius are in every Bodies hands,
whose intention in the place already cited was no more then to show the
indefatigable pains and unwearied labor of Origin in perusing the Books of
Sacred Scripture and searching out their Sense; which that he might the more
easily attain to, he learnt the Hebrew Language from Jewish Masters, read over
their Books in the Hebrew Characters, and compared them with the Versions of
the Seventy, Aquila, Symmachus, and others. Whether it be to be read (...) or
(...) I will not at present dispute, by reason that though Vossius's Lection,
should hold water, it is certain that by Prototype or Original Letters the
Hebrew Characters are only to be understood. That is to say, the Hebrew Context
in Origen's Hexaples is written in Hebrew and Greek Letters, as has been
already observed. Wherefore Eusebius then bearing in his mind the Hebrew
Exemplars, which were at that time read by those who did not understand Hebrew,
because the Characters were Greek, asserts that Origin purchased an Hebrew
Examplar written in Hebrew Characters. For how could it otherwise be when the
Jews were his Masters and not the Samaritans? I will acknowledge that the
Examplars of the Samaritan Pentateuch written in Characters different from the
Jewish, were not unknown to Eusebius, Origin, and others of the Fathers; but
because most of them did not understand the Hebrew Tongue, where they speak of
the Samaritan Codex, most assuredly they mean the Greek Version of the
Samaritan Pentateuch, which was then vulgarly exposed. Nor do Eusebius's words
in his Chronicle favor Vossius in the least, where Eusebius makes mention of
three Exemplars of Sacred Scripture from whence he drew his own: That is say,
(...), from the 70 Interpreters, (...), from the Hebrew Exemplar of the Jews;
(...) from the Hebrew Exemplar of the Samaritans. For there, by the Hebrew
Exemplar of the Samaritans, of necessity the Greek Version of that Exemplar
must be meant, no otherwise then as by the Hebrew Exemplar of the Jews, most of
the Fathers who were ignorant of the Hebrew Language understood Aquila's
Version, which was Translated Verbatim from the Hebrew. Therefore Eusebius knew
that the Samaritans preserved an Hebrew Copy of the Pentateuch as well as the
Jews; but because he understood not the Hebrew Language, he consulted the Greek
Version which was compill'd by the Samaritans, and which was at that time
usually read by them. As formerly Justin Martyr, disputing against Trypho the
Jew gives the Greek Interpretation of Aquila the Title of the Hebrew Context;
because it was most in use among the Jews at that time. But Vossius never
confider'd these things nor many others of the same Nature. Now then let us
return to the business from whence we made this Digression.

In the Hexaples of Origin, as may be seem by the Scheme already set down, the
Hebrew Text in the Hebrew Letters obtains the first place, the second the same
Text in Greek Characters, in regard that from thence all the first Versions of
Scripture were derived. Then followed the Interpretation of Aquila, which
followed the Hebrew Verbatim, and much closer than any of the rest of the
Translators. The Septuagint was placed in the middle, and not in the first
place, as many thought, as the Test by which all the others were to be
examined. This the Translations of Symmachus and Theodotion accompany on each
side, as not being much unlike it, and because the same method of Translating
was observed in all the three.

Now because that vast Volume, containing so many Translations, as it were
under one line, was of a great price, and to be purchased but by few, insomuch
that St. Jerome complained that the Alexandrian Papers had emptied his purse,
Origin, of a most acute wit and unexhausted knowledge, bethought himself of a
way how he might bring all these Editions as it were into one. And because at
that time there was no other Scripture received in all the Churches, then the
Translation of the 70 Interpreters, he set forth that apart with certain Notes,
by the advantage of which all the rest were put to view; so that what seemed to
be wanting in the Hebrew Context, he supplied out of Theodotion's Version, with
the addition of a mark which the Gramarians call an Asterisk, The Hexaple's
epitomized.
as illustrating those words of the Context, which were too much curtailed, and
as it were abbreviated. But if any thing seemed to abound and to be superfluous
in the Hebrew Context, in those luxuriant places he added another Mark by the
Critic's called a Spit or Obelus, as of what was luxuriant in the Greek Edition
of the Septuagint were to be cut and murdered as extravagant: And the chief
Design of Origin, as Epiphanius testifies, in the Disposition of that work was,
that the Jews might the more easily be convinced by the Christians in their
Disputes. Because they frequently objected that it was otherwise in the Hebrew
Exemplar, than in the Greek Edition. The same is also testified by St. Jerome
and Ruffinus; though St Jerome sometimes gives a reason of those Notes somewhat
different. Origin had added also other marks to this Work in the fashion of a
small Label, concerning the use of which the Critics of our Age do not agree,
and which has been hitherto revealed but by a few; we are to understand, that
Greek Edition of the Septuagint, with all those illustrating and killing Notes
in the Hexaples of Origin, was found together with the Translations of Aquila,
Symmachus and the other Interpreters, as the words of Ruf^inus seem to prove.
O^igen's Intention was to show us what manner of Reading the Scriptures was
observed among the Jews, and wrote the several Editions of them every one in
his proper Columes, and whatever was added or taken away in any of them he
noted with certain marks at the beginning of the Verses, and in that which was
another man's and not his own work, be affixed his own marks only that we might
understand what was wanting or superfluous not in respect of our selves, but of
the Jews that disputed against us.

Moreover the same Origin illustrated that vast work of his Hexaples with
Scholiasts of several sorts, which he placed in the Margent of the Book, that
he might give some Light to that Edition of the Septuagint, which appeared in
the midst between all the rest. For first you might easily apprehend what was
the distinction between the Ancient or Vulgar Edition of the 70, and his own
new Edition, by the benefit of this Mark (...) which stands for 70 in Greek,
that Mark (...) denoting the common Lection. Then in the same Scholiasts, the
Interpretations of Aquila, Symmachus and Theodosion were every one demonstrated
by their proper Letter. A' denoted Aquila, S' Symmachus, and TH Theodotion. The
fifth Edition was marked with E', and the sixth with (...), He also set Notes
in the Margent of his Book for the verbatim exposition of the words of sacred
Scripture, which are Printed in his works, under the Title of Scholiasts. And
more then this, if we will believe Vossius, it is not improbable but that
Origin marked in his Hexaples the various reading of the Samaritan Codex. If
any one will rather choose to believe that Origin did not insert the Samaritan
Exemplar into his Hexaples and Tetraples, but only marked the various Readings,
I will not much dispute the Business. Thus Vossius fickle in his Judgment,
sometimes avers, sometimes denies; and whereas before he had so confidently
asserted that the Exemplar of the Samaritan Pentateuch was extant in the
Hexaples written in the Samaritan Characters, now in a doubt he dares not be
positive in a thing wherein he has so little of certainty to make out. But as
it is no way probable that the Samaritan Exemplar, which was the same with the
Judaick was extant in the Hexaples, so it is very likely that Origin might
transfer into his Scholiast the different reading of the Samaritan from the
Judaic, which he did not take out of the Samaritan Exemplar, written in those
Original Hebrew Letters, but from the Greek Version of the Samaritan Pentateuch
corrected by the Samaritans themselves.

This is the Oeconomie and Disposition of the Hexaples of Origin, which Persons
the most learned could not comprehend, while they do not mind that the Greek
Interpretations of Aquila, Symmachus and Theodosion were twice set down in one
and the same work, that is, entire in the work it self, and part in the
Scholiasts in the Margent, but Origin who was desirous to be beneficial to all
Persons, reduced into a Compendium that vast Pile of the Hexaples, by the help
of Notes and Scholiasts, to the end that they who could not buy the Hexaples
entire, might Transcribe at least the substance of the Text out of the Hexaples
themselves, and by the same art he published the (...) or common Edition of the
Septuagint, together with the new Edition, which because he thought more
corrected, he inserted whole into his Hexaples, adding in the Margent of the
common and the various Sections under the mark (...); wherefore some are grossly
mistaken, who not understanding this disposition of the Hexaples, undertake to
maintain that there is in them a double Edition of the 70 Interpreters, as well
the vulgar as that corrected and pure one, of which Origin and St. Jerome so
often make mention, placed in two distinct Pages, and for that reason that the
Hexaples did not derive their name from the distinct Columns, but the several
Versions, but these things are apparently untrue, and proceed only from the
Ignorance of the order of the Hexaples, to the Margent of which the ancient
reading of the 70 was transferred, and thus both Editions of the Septuagint
appeared in the Hexaples, now because few could purchase those vast volums that
had emptied St. Jerome's Pocket, most persons transcribed that interlin'd
Edition, marked by Origin with Asterisks and Daggers and other notes of
Distinction, from whence arose the greatest confusion in the World in the Greek
Exemplars, and from that time the ancient Interpretation of the 70 was no
longer read in the Churches, but the interlin'd one of Origin, which or another
like to it, was afterward transmitted to the Eastern Church by the Care of St.
Jerome.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Ancient Versions of the Latin Church.
THe most contentions in disputes concerning the Bible, which have disturbed
the Church for these many years, have been hammered in the Shops of certain
Critics and Gramarians, who being bred in the Schools, there is nothing which
they do not call to the bar of Controversy, presuming to prefer their own wit
before the Authority of the Church; and as if their Critic Art could by no
means brook the Ecclesiastical decrees, they presently oppose them with all
their might and main; but questionless without a cause, for that the Church
does by no means disallow of such Critical Observations as are every day made
upon the Scripture, by Persons conspicuous for their Poetry and Learning: nor
if any one more strictly enquire into the reason of the Biblick Context then
another, does she reject their Labors so they do not detract from the Ancient
Editions. And therefore it is lawful for the Protestant Divines in imitation of
the Fathers to have recourse to the Hebrew Originals, and to make new
Translations from them, so that they learn from the same Fathers, That the
Sacred Scripture is the proper possession of the Catholic Church, and that
they have the same sentiments concerning the Church and her Books, which one of
their own belief wrote in these words, against those who neglect the ancient
Versions and long allowed by the practice of the Church. Let the Authority of
our Mother the Church be preserved entire to it self, let the Fathers enjoy the
honor due to them, to whose venerable gray Hairs, if any one refuse to rise
and contradict their decrees, let them not be accounted in the number of their
Sons nor of Brethren to us. Author prefat. in lib. J. Boys. p^o defens. vulg.
That Protestant Writer is afraid, lest his Brethren Innovators should suffer
for the Title which they bear of Reformed, who taking the worst method of
reforming in the World, destroy instead of building up. I could wish therefore
that the Protestants would reconcile themselves to us; seeing that if the
present Matter concerning the Ancient Interpreters were more diligently
considered, they would rather differ in name then in reality from the Divines
of the Church of Rome; and now most of them carry themselves more mildly then
at the beginning of the Schism, since the Critica sacra of the learned
Cappellus has recalled them to a right judgment of the uncertainty of the
Hebrew Context, which is now commonly in the hands of every pretender to
Scholarship; for they found themselves to be deceived by the Inconsiderate
Assertion of certain Grammarians, who judged of those Ancient Interpreters by
the modern Rules of the Hebrew Grammar.

The ancient Translation of the Eastern Church.
Over all the Latin Church almost from the times of the Apostles even to the Age
wherein St. Jerome lived that Interpretation of Scripture was highest in repute,
which by some was called the Italian, perhaps because it was first compiled in
Italy, and thence dispersed to other Nations to which the Latin Tongue was
familiar, by others called the Old Translation by reason of it is Antiquity.
Among the most part it was called by the name of Vulgar and Common, to
distinguish it from those other Versions, which could hardly be numbered. Who
was the Author of that ancient Translation is unknown. However certain it is
that it was taken from the Greek Translation of the Seventy Elders, in regard
that no person till St. Jeroms time would undertake to make a new Version from
the Hebrew. This Edition Flaminius Nobilius, having corrected it with a
Diligence beyond his Ability, caused to be Printed at Rome; 1588. 1628.
which was afterward reprinted at Paris by John Marinus together with the
Vatican Greek Exemlpar; but that this was the pure Version of the Latin Church,
made use of over all the East before St. Jeroms time no skilful Critic will
presume to affirm; For it could not be, that Nobilius could transcribe it
entire and absolutely perfect from the writers of the Fathers, who did not
follow it exactly themselves, and if any one of them were learned in the Greek
Language, they did not think it lawful to make a new Interpretation from the
Greek Septuagint. To which we may add, that St. Jerome repaired that ancient
Version, which he sound in some places not altogether so accurate, but very
much varying from it self, according to the diversity of Countries and
Exemplars, in the reforming of which he made use of the Greek Exemplar which
Origin had inserted into his Hexaples, and which deviates least from the Hebrew
Copies. But by the venerable Fragments which are still remaining at this day,
we may easily perceive that St. Jerome left some faults, as not being able in so
laborious an undertaking, to be intent upon every thing.

St. Jerome imitated the industry of Origin.
The same St. Jerome; to the end he might show himself no less profitable to
those of his own Language then Origin had been to the Greeks, in imitation of
him, published that ancient Version corrected, together with additions from the
Hebrew Text, under the mark of an Asterisk with a Dagger to show what was
superfluous. Of which undertaking St. Jerome himself thus speaks writing to St.
Austin. That Interpretation was the Interpretation of the Seventy Elders, and
wherever there are any marks like Daggers, they denote that the Seventy have
said more then there is in the Hebrew. Where there are any Asterisks or little
Stars, they signify an Addition by Origin out of Theodotion; and there we have
Translated the Greek, here we expressed from the Hebrew what we understood,
observing rather the Truth of Sense, then the Order of the words. This new
Translation of St. Jerome from the Greek Exemplars was joyfully received by most
Churches, as being of singular use in the Explanation of Scripture; and showed
the difference between the Exemplars of the Church and the Synagogue. For which
how Ruffinus has fumed and stormed against that most learned person and so well
deserving of the Church can hardly be expressed. Who, says Ruffinus, would
have dared to unhallow the Instruments left by the Apostles, but a judaic
Spirit? For Ruffinus does not speak of the Version which St. Jerome afterward
made from the Hebrew, but of that which he drew from the Greek Translation of
the Septuagint, with some additions under the mark of the Asterisk, and the
little Dagger; to show what was superfluous. The same Ruffinus adds many other
things for which he condemns St. Jerome, of which more hereafter: And while St.
Jerome, by the example of Origin whom he pretends to have imitated in his
undertaking, defends himself, Ruffinus replies upon him, that never any
Catholic hitherto had presumed to Translate out of the Hebrew into Latin any
thing of Sacred Scripture. Withal he shows that Origens undertaking is far
different of that of St. Jerome; in regard that Origin has introduced no
Alterations into the Ancient and generally received Version by the Church. But
St. Jerome answers most incomparably both to Ruffinus and all other his
Detractors.

But as to that other Version, which that most learned Father Translated in his
Elder years according to the Hebrew Truth, far greater difficulties arise upon
it. For by reason of that, even among his Friends he is taxed as an Innovator.
In so much that St. Austin himself could not brook, that the Greek Translation,
which it is manifest the Apostles had used, should be defamed: as if the
Authors of it had mistak'n.

It will be very hard, says St. Austin writing to St. Jerome, if when thy
Interpretation shall begin to be frequently read in many Churches, that the
Greek and Latin Churches should seem to disagree. Soon after, he confirms the
thing by example in these words. A certain Brother of ours, a Bishop, when he
had determined that they Translation should be read in the Church where he
presides, another person started an Objection, that the Text was by these
otherwise Translated in the Prophet Jonah, then had been inculcated into the
Sense and Memory of all people for so many Ages, upon which there arose such a
Tumult among the people, the Greeks chiefly blaming and clamouring against the
Calumny of the supposed falsehood, that the Bishop was forced to have recourse
to the Testimony of the Jews, For this Version St. Jerome brought upon himself
the Curses of all people, of which he frequently complains even to Irksomness;
nor is it a Treatise so much as an Apology which he every where writes. What
shall I do with my Calumniators, who if I had diminished any thing from the
Translation of the 70 would have clamoured against me, as one Sacrilegious and
not fearing God; especially they, who when they differ in the Truth of Faith
and follow the Errors of the Manichaeans incense the minds of the ignorant; as
if they could show any thing changed from the ancient custom, rather desired to
err, then to learn truth from one whom they Emulate. And after something more
of this Nature, he again adds against Ruffinus and others his followers, who
reviling his Translation, reproach him for a Heretic and an Apostate. Our
Latin, yea envious Christians, and that I may speak more plainly, Hairs of the
Grummian Faction bark against me, why we discourse according to the Hebrew If
they do not believe us, let 'em read those other Editions of Aquila, Symmachus
and Theodotion: let 'em examine the Hebrews not in one place but in several
Provinces, and when they find them all agree with me in my Error or Ignorance,
then let 'em understand themselves to be overwise, and rather desirous to sleep
then learn, and let 'em inhabit in the 70 Cells of Alexandrian Pharos. Lastly,
he does not spare the very Eyebrows of the Bishops, to use his own words, who
endeavors to oppress whomsoever they see powerful in the Church and to Profess
the word of God. But I spend time in vain; his Apologies against Ruffinus being
every where to be had. In which he strenuously defends the reason of his
Version, and shows how much he profited in his Study of the Scriptures under
his Jewish Masters, and how much by the same Instructors, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Eusebius and several others advantaged themselves; who while they dispute about
the Scripture, and endeavor to prove what they say, produce the Jews for
Witnesses and Patrons of their Opinions. And because Ruffinus had objected to
St. Jerome, that while he made his Translation he was not inspired with a
Prophetic but a Judaic Spirit, He answers, Would it not seem tedious, or rather
would it not savor too much of vain Glory, I could show thee what an advantage
it is to wear out the Thresholds of good Masters, and to learn Art from
Artificers. For St. Jerome wrote an Epistle to Pammachius, entitled, concerning
the best manner of Translating, wherein he refuses the Calumnies of one
Palladius, who at the Insligation of Ruffinus had bespattered his Translation.
He there shows by many Examples, that it is not the duty of a good Translator,
to translate his Authors verbatim, when neither the 70 Interpreters nor the
Evangelists followed that Method of Translation. Aquila, says he, a Prosel te
and contentious Interpreter, who endeavored to Translate not only the words
but the Etymologies of words is deservedly rejected by us. Concerning the 70
Interpreters in the same Epistle he has this expression. It is new too long to
enumerate how much the 70 have added of their own, how much they have omitted,
which in the Exemplars belonging to the Church, are distinguished by Lines and
Asterisks. These and many other things of the same Nature he throws together
into the same Epistle, to vindicate his own method or Translation, somewhat
more free and loose then some of the rest, from the Calumnies of his
Adversaries, and to the end his Detractors might understand, That the sense and
not the words were to be considered in Scripture. Let 'em not think, says he,
that the State of the Church is endangered by me, if through have of dictating,
I have omitted some words.

Readily therefore St. Jerome acknowledges that in framing a new Translation of
the Sacred Text, he chiefly consulted the Jews as his Leaders and Instructors;
neither does he question but that many things might slip him as a man; so far
was he from the Opinion of those, who asserted him in that undertaking to be
inspired with the Holy Ghost, whom Mariana egregiously refutes. What avails it,
says that learned Jesuit, after so many Ages, to strain for new Fictions to
set up new Prophets? Shall we call him a Prophet, who in the framing his
Translation follows sometimes the Greek Interpreters, sometimes the Jews of his
Age, upon whom he more frequently depends? Can he be said to be a Prophet, who
frequently but chiefly in his Commentaries upon the Prophets, doubts of the
Genuine Signification of the Hebrew Words? It Is true I knew Pagninus and other
Writers, especially of the Protestant Belief, who denied that Version to be St.
Jeroms, which for many Ages has been read in the Eastern Churches; but if you
except some few Books of that translation, which it is certain were not rendered
by St. Jerome, as they are extant in the Edition, no person truly candid will
deny but that this Interpretation which goes about under the Title of the
Vulgar, was really made by St. Jerome, though there be something in it of the
ancient Latin Version, which before St. Jeroms time was only esteemed in the
Church. So that in some places, which however are very few, there does appear
the reading of the Ancient Version, or else a mixture of both. And clear it is
that that same Translation was made by some native Latinist from the Hebrew
Original. Now who in the whole Latin Church beside St. Jerome at that time
understood both Languages, that is, the Hebrew and the Latin? But they that
desire to know more of these things, let them consult Austin Eugubin, and John
Mariana in their Writings upon this Subject.

Now that we may more perfectly understand the Nature of that Vulgar Edition,
we must take notice that St. Jerome, tho he confesses himself not to have
expressed the Words of his Text verbatim, and like a Grammarian, nevertheless
sometimes he sticks more close to his Words then the 70, or the other
Interpreters, so that he is not always like himself in his Translation. Again
we are to observe, that the modern Lection of the Hebrew Text is not so often
to be corrected from the Translation of St. Jerome, as it disagrees from it; for
thohe make profession to have followed the Hebrew Truth, yet sometimes he
forsakes it to follow the Greek Interpreters. Neither do I think that the
Hebrew Exemplar of his Masters, which he frequently opposes against the 70
Interpreters is to be preferred in all things, seeing that St. Jerome himself
had no Original Exemplar of the Hebrew Text, neither do I think we are to give
Judgment upon the Version of St. Jerome, by the later Translations which
frequently vary from the other, but we must have recourse of necessity to other
Grammar Rules, then those which have been set down by our late Instructors, as
has been at large demonstrated, and which it is no difficult thing to confirm
by many Examples. I shall therefore produce only enough to puzzle the less
skilful.

We find according to the vulgar Edition, in the oath of Zachary ver. 11. these
words, Thou also in the Blood of thy Testament have sent forth thy Prisoners
out of the Pit: but according to the Hebrew Exemplars it ought to be rendered, I
have sent forth thy Prisoners, and the Pronouns Thou, thy, thine, are in the
Feminine Gender, and so make the Sense far different from that of St. Jerome,
which agrees with that of the Seventy Interpreters. Many to defend the vulgar
Edition in this place, reject the J wish Exemplars, as corrupted by them on set
purpose: But it is much more proper to say, that the same Pronoun in the
Feminine Gender is taken sometimes for the same in the Masculine; which the
Masorites of Tyberias allow, who added the pointed Vowels to the modern
Context. And thus they demonstrate the same thing to have happened in three
places of Scripture, which they cite. Wherefore if the same occur in any other
places which the Masorites have omitted, the ancient Translators are not
therefore presently to be accused, because they do not agree with the later. In
the same manner St. Jerome may be vindicated for translating the word, Thou have
sent, when according to the Hebrew he ought to have translated it, I have sent.
For this difference of Translation arose from the Letter Jod, which is noted by
the Mazorites to be often superfluous. The Mazorites themselves reckon up 43
Places marked jather jod, that is, throw away Jod, as redundant. Thus Jer. 32
v. 33. where we read, Thou have taught, in the second Person. The Hebrew word
is written with Jod at the end, as if it should have been rendered in the first
Person. And indeed in the lesser Mazorah it is marked to be read without a Jod,
and in the second Person, as Jerome renders it. But I pass by these things, and
many others, by which it might be made out, that the Latin Interpreter is often
undeservedly reprehended by those that do not understand him, and measure all
things by the Rules of their own Skill.

CHAP. XX. Concerning the Authority of the Ancient Versions of the Latin
Church, and first of the Vulgar. In what Sense it may be said to be Authentic.
The authority of the Ancient Version of the Church
AS it is a thing that seems to be rooted in men by nature to be opiniated in
their own Disputations, and to be so presumptuous as to take sometimes those
things which are false and unjust for Truths; so it chiefly happens in this
present Argument; where the Writers seem to fight for their Lives and
Liberties. Thus the Jewish Rabbys seem to be incited by no other reason to
avouch their Manuscripts to be free even from the slightest Faults and Errors,
but only as they are Jews, and read no other Scripture in their Synagogues than
the Hebrew Text. In like manner the Greek and Latin Fathers in the primitive
Times of the Church, embracing the Greek Version of the 70. Interpreters as
Divine, preferred it before the Hebrew Copies, for that the one were skilled in
the Greek Learning; others preferred the Latin or Vulgar Edition of the Bible,
altogether used by the Latin Church, and Translated from the Septuagint, not
understanding the Greek. Therefore is the wisdom of the Fathers of the Council
of Trent highly to be applauded for this, that they by their Suffrages declared
Authentic that Version, which being publicly received, and made use of in the
Church was in every bodies hands, that is, which was solely esteemed Authentic
among the Latins. Nor does that ancient Lati Edition, which was read for many
Ages in the Eastern Church before Jerome's Translation, less deserve the Name of
Authentic than the modern Vulgar; only there is this difference between the one
and the other, that the other was not declared Authentic by the public Decree
of the General Council. Prologue 10 de vulg.
There Walton is in an Error, who denies this ancient Vulgar Edition to have
been Authentic; as well, says he, for that it was translated from the Greek,
which we have demonstrated not to have been Authentic; nor can the Rivulet
have more Authority than was in the Fountain; nor can any Version be said to be
Authentic, unless the Interpreter wrote it with the same Spirit as the first
Author, which never any man affirmed as to this Version, nor had the Church of
Rome rejected it, and entertained a new one, had she judged it to have been
Authentic. But Walton understood not what was meant in the Decree of the
Council of Trent by the word Authentic, while he confounds Authentic with
Divine and Prophetical; all the while he treats upon the Argument now in hand.
Therefore it is necessary to consider what the Fathers of the Council of Trent
intended should be understood by the word in Controversy.

Vulgarly among the Lawyers the word Authentic signifies the same with (...),
which the French interpret Originale, or Original. And in this Sense the
Exemplification of a Will is distinguished from the Authentic or Original, and
Authentic Tables are said to be those which are first drawn; from whence, as
from the Original, Copies are made. In this Sense the Hebrew Context cannot be
said to be Authentic, because the Originals of the Hebrew Codex are lost, and
there remain no other than Copies. Therefore the word Authentic is taken by
the same Lawyers in another Sense; and so Version in their Books carrys the
Name of Authentic. Thus the Latin Translation of Justins Novels is called
Authentic, because it was rendered out of the Greek verbatim; and so it is
distinguished from another Version, the Author of which is said to be Julian
Patricius, which is only a Latin Epitome of those Constitutions. The first
Exemplar was called Authentic, as much as to say, True and no way maimed, as
Antonius Contius has observed. Now in this Acceptance of the word Authentic
there is nothing which can offend the Protestants. But if we must not derive
the signification of this word from the Lawyers, where it had its rise, the
same word is several times repeated in the Acts of the Fifth General Synod.
Where when the Exemplars which Macarius the Patriarch of Antiochia, and other
Monothelite Bishops offered to the Fathers of the Council were read over again,
presently the Legates of the Apostolic See replied, That the Testimonies of
the Fathers were maimed by Macarius and his Companions. Thereupon they require
the Authentic Copies to be sent for from the venerable Patriarchal Treasury of
the Royal City of Constantinople, and to be compared with the Exemplars
produced by Macarius and the other Monothelite Bishops. There Authentic is no
more than that which is not adulterated, or of suspected Credit. Nor did the
Tridentine Bishops pronounce the Latin Version, which was only read in all the
Eastern Churches, Authentic, in any other Sense. Nor can the Words of their
Constitution be wrested to any other Exposition, if they be but a little more
attentively considered. For they were in Consultation about selecting one out
of many Versions of the Scripture, which were then public in the world; and
because the Authors of most were Persons of suspected credit, it was in
prudence thought fit by those Bishops, that that should only be retained, which
was most Ancient, and long before any Schisms were sprung up in the Church. The
Holy Council considering that no small benefit will accrue to the C^u^ch of
God, if among all the Editions of the Sacred Scriptures, which are public in
the World, it should be declared which should be accounted most Authentic, has
decreed and does pronounce, That this Ancient and Vulgar Edition, which has
been approved by the Use, which has been made of it for so many Ages in public
Readings, Disputations, Sermons and Expositions, shall be accounted Sacred, and
that no Person shall dare to reject it upon any pretense whatsoever. As to the
comparing the Hebrew Context with the Ancient Latin Interpreter, the Tridentine
Fathers never so much as dreamt of it; only out of several Latin Versions then
abroad in the World they decreed the Ancient Version to be preferred before the
rest. In which respect the Decree of the Church appears firm and constant: For
as she formerly perceived the Translations of Aquila, Symmachus and Theodotion
to he false and partial, so now she has embraced one ancient Version, rejecting
the rest which seemed to be made out of a Design of Innovation.

Nor have several Divines, otherwise expounded the word Authentic, which the
Fathers of Trent made use of in this particular, of whom there were some
present in the Council. But having no Design to do what others have done
before, I pass by their Testimonies in silence. To these therefore I will only
add the words of single Genebrard, a most eager Defender of the Vulgar Edition,
out of an Epistle which he wrote to Arias Montanus. Only it compares, says
Genebrard, speaking of the Council of Trent, The Vulgar with the rest, by
reason of the rashness of the late Heretics and other Innovators, who covet
new Versions, loath the Old ones, and cut off their innate Desire of Novelty,
reject the Ancient to embrace the Newest. Those also among the Heterodox, who
have any thing of Learning and Modesty revere the ancient Latin Interpreter,
and sometimes believe it a matter of Conscience to depart from his Sense. From
whence Fagius, a person learned both in the Hebrew and Chaldee Languages, calls
them Persons of little knowledge who foolishly and impudently believe the vulgar
Edition to be rashly contrived. The most learned Drusius also applauds the
prudent design of the Council of Trent, and admires its Wisdom. I pass by
others of the Protestant Belief, among whom it would be no difficult thing to
give a Catalogue of many that had a good opinion of the Decree of the Council
of Trent; Wherefore they only think amiss of the Tridentine constitution,
whereby the old Edition is declared Authentic, who too much addicted to the
Writings of the Rabbis, believe the Jewish Bibles and their own Art to be
utterly at a loss, unless they detract from that same ancient Interpretation.

Buxtorf the Prince of the Hebrew adorers, whose wrath was kindled by the
Critica sacra of Ludovicus Cappellus, reprehends him in these words, as if he
had too severely undertaken the Patronage of the Latin Translator. In Anticrit.
part. 2.
Let the Reader observe this, That there was never a greater Patron of the
vulgar Version, and who affords a stronger Argument to support its authority,
then that same Critic not well in his Wits. And yet this is that Cappellus, to
whom the Learned Hugo Grotius, and the soundest of the Protestant Critics
always aduere. For this the English Protestants are to be commended, especially
the most famous W^lion, who in his Protegonema to the Polyglot Bible, forsaking
Buxtorfs opinion, follows Ludovicus Capellus almost in every thing. Nor have
they a slight esteem of the Latin Interpreter, though they seem not rightly to
have understood the force of the word Authentic; however they are far from the
wild Opinions of some of the Protestants, who vent their Spleen without any
consideration against the Tridentine Bishops. In M^ssellam.
Thus Fuller, through the most haughty Tyranny of the Roman Pontifex it is come
to pass, that all other Translations excluded and exterminated, even the
Prototype of the Hebrew Truth, the vulgar Latin Version has acquired a kind of
Divine Primacy. Nor has Isaac Casaubon, Adaun^l Baron.
a person otherwise very learned, spared the Tridentine Prelates, who affirms
that the Hebrew Truth has lost its Privilege and Authority, since the Greek
and Latin Versions were made Authentic at Trent. But the Protestants
undeservedly complain of the Decree of Trent, because they will not put a kind
Interpretation upon the word Authentic, and deviate from Divines who are of
highest Authority in the Church of Rome. The Tridentine Fathers, when they made
that decree, consulted the Tranquillity of the Churches, and designed only to
obviate those, who out of an Itch of Innovation believed their Doctrines would
gain no small credit, if they detracted from the true Ecclesiastical Version
then in the hands of every Person.

The Imprudent zeal of some Spanish Diviner.
No less was the error committed in this particular by sundry Orthodox Divines,
who maintain the Vulgar Edition to be free from all mistakes; which opinion was
patronized by most of the Spanish Divines in Mariana's time; so that the
learned durst not be of a contrary opinion. For thus he begins his Treatise in
defense of the Vulgar Edition. Maria^ pro Defens. Vulg.
We undertake a Troublesome work and very much perplexed, a dangerous Contest,
then which I know not whither any in these Later Ages, especially among the
Spanish Divines has been maintained with greater Heat and Animosity, and more
Implacable hatred between the parties; so that from Reproaches and Contumelies,
with which they have defamed one another, they have at length cited one another
to Tribunals of Justice, and that party which was most confident of his own
strength, has pursued his adversaries being accused of Heresy, as Impious,
Proud, etc. To which he adds, that Men of great repute for learning, have been
forced to plead their causes in Chains, to the no small hazard of their Health
and Reputation. But Mariana shows at large, That there are many faults in the
Hebrew and Greek Exemplars, many falsehoods in minute things, and that not a
small number of those Errors are extant in our Vulgar Edition. In like manner
Pedro Lopaz, a Spanish Divine, L. 2. Conc. Ed. Madrid.
in the Treatise which he wrote concerning the Harmony between the sacred
Editions of the Hebrew and Greek, asserts the Greek Edition of the Septuagint
with the ancient Vulgar, to be no less Authentic than the Modern Vulgar;
wherein he questions not but that there are many blemishes and failings.
Animad. in A^tiq. Hetruse.
The same Dispute Leo Allasius tells us was started concerning the Decree of
the Council of Trent, which declares the Vulgar Authentic by the Fathers of a
Society, to whose care a certain Academy was committed, and at the same time
declares what the sacred General Consistory thought of this, in whose opinion
it is a crime not to acquiesce, Several Judgments at Rome concerning the L^tin
Interpreter.
in these words taken out of the Library of Cardinal Priscia. The 17th. of
January 576. the general Assembly S. F. L. A. S. Montald. Sixth. Caraf was of
opinion that nothing could be urged that could oppose the vulgar Latin Edition,
that there was not so much as on Period, one Sentence, one Word, one Syllable,
one Iota amiss, and sharply reprehends Vega, because in his Tenth Book of
Justification c. 9. he utters himself so boldly. But that decree of the
College of Cardinals, because it never was promulgated, never obtained the
force of a Law even in Italy, as all those things manifestly prove, which
Cardinal Palavicini urges against Padre Paolo, who has spoken concerning the
Tridentine Prelates, as if they, by approving the Latin Interpreter by their
Decree, had detracted from all the other Editions. But Palavicini shows at
large that the meaning of the Council was far otherwise, and in the Explanation
of the word Authentic he perfectly agrees with us, declaring that the Prelates
of Trent did not purify the Vulgar Edition from all its faults by their
decree; when as it might be still corrected and another Edition much more
accurate be made, neither had Gulielmus Londanus any other Sentiments of the
Vulgar Edition long before that, who has observed many Errors therein, which
he does not lay upon the Transcribers but upon the Interpreter himself. But
above all the rest, Francis Lucas Brugensis is a material Testimony in this
particular, wherein he had expended the studies of his whole Life. He therefore
in his Epistle Dedicatory, before his notes upon the Bible, where he has
diligently observed several differences in sundry Copies, thus expresses
himself. What others object to us, that because the Latin Edition has been
approved and declared Authentic by the Council of Trent, it needs no farther
Correction, is ridiculous. For neither did the Counc^l believe the Exemplars of
this Edition to be void of Errors; neither did they recommend any certain
Exemplar of any Edition, to be followed in General; only preferred that Edition
before any of the Latin which are extant, and adjudged it authe^^ick. With
which agree the Corrections of the vulgar Edition which were made at several
times by the Command of Sextus the V. and Clement the VIII. For Sextus fearing
least we should fall into the former Chaos of Editions of which St. Jerome
speaks, Bulla S. V. Bulla Clem. 8.
declares that he had made choice of Persons skilful in the Scripture,
Theology and many Languages, and for their long experience piercing judgment
and diligence highly eminent, to correct the ancient Latin Edition, according
to the ancient Latin Copies and Expositions of the Fathers; but in such things
wherein they were not sufficiently strengthened by the consent of the Copies
nor of the Fathers, to have recourse to the Hebrew and Greek Exemplars
according to the Counsel of St. Jerome. However Sextus admonishes 'em to do it
cautiously and sparingly, for fear of causing a fluctuation in things which
long use and practice had authorized. And lastly he makes a decree of his own,
that that Edition should be received by all, as being that which the Trid^ntine
Synod had declared Authentic, and recommends the same as True, Lawful and
Unquestionable, and to be received in all public Disputes, Readings, Sermons
and Explanations. Furthermore he forbids any Bibles of the Vulgar Edition to be
published for the future, which not being conformable to his, would but disturb
the peace of the Church; and further decreed, that they should be of no Credit
or Authority which did not agree with his Edition. Thus far Sixtus V. who also
testifies, that to the end the understanding might be more correctly
accomplished, where any thing seemed confused or that might be confounded, he
amended those things with his own Hand. 'Twas the Labor of others, says he,
to consult and advise, but ours to make choice of what was best. So that this
Edition of the Bible not undeservedly bears the Name of Sixtus V.

How ever this was no impediment to Clement VIII. to prevent him from
undertaking an Edition of the Bible different from this, affirming in the
beginning of his Bull. Bull. Clem. VIII.
That the Text of the vulgar Edition of the Sacred Scriptures had with much
toil and watching been corrected by him and purged from many Errors. Prefat. ad
Edit. Clem. 8.
But the Author of the Preface to the same Bibles confesses that it is not so
cleans'd from all faults, but that there are some omissions still remaining. In
this same vulgar Edition, says he, as some things were altered of set purpose,
so other things which se^^^d proper to be changd were purposely left unaltered.
It would be tedious to reckon up all the places which were mended by these
Popes, Sextus V. and Clement VIII. But if any be curious to know what they are,
let him consult the little Book which Thomas Jamesius, Printed in England, in
the envy of his Soul, under the Title, in great Letters, Of the Papal War or
the Discording Concord of Sixtus V. and Clement VIII. concerning the Edition of
Jerome. Where he sometimes compares the Readings of both Editions with that of
Lavain. But for this, those chief Pontiffs are rather to be highly magnified,
then to be scandallz'd, who contributed all their care and industry, that we
might have the ancient Interpreter as accurately revised and corrected
according to the ancient Copies, as it was possible to be. Before whom they who
overview'd the Bibles of Complutum lent their assistance to the same
Correction. We have also the Castigations of Robert Stephens upon the same
vulgar: and the Divines of Lovaine have made no scruple after the Decree of
Trent, to add their own Critical Animadversions upon diverse Readings in the
Margent of the vulgar Codex, which they took care to have Printed. But now the
Emendation of Clement VIII. is preferred before all the rest which the most
famous Walton has inserted into his English Polyglotton.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Translations of Scripture used by the Eastern Church: and
first of the Arabic, Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, etc.
The Eastern Versions thence taken.
AS the first beginning of the Christian Religion passed from the Greeks to
other Nations of the Eastern World. So the Greek Version of the Septuagint was
Translated into the Languages of all those Nations, nor does it appear that
those Nations knew any other then the Scripture of the Septuagint, the Syrians
excepted, concerning whom the Arabian Writer Abul-Pharajius has these
Expressions. Din. 6.
This Version of the Septuagint is that which is received by our Doctors, and
is the same which is made use of by the Greeks and other Sects of the
Christians, except Syrians, especially the wore Easterly. For their exemplar,
which is called the pure Exemplar, agrees with that of the Jews. But the
Western Syrians have two Versions, the pure Version, Translated from the Hebrew
into Syriac after the coming of Christ our Lord, in the time of Addaeas the
Apostle; or as others will have it, before him, in the Time of Solomon the Son
of David and Hiram Prince of Tire: and then the Septuagint Translated out of
Greek a long time time after the coming of Christ. Now though what
Abul-Pharajius speaks concerning the double Version among the Syrians be true,
yet no man will deny, but that what he relates concerning the time of the
Translation out of Hebrew into Syriac is merely fictitious. Moreover because it
was very insipid to attribute some of the Books to the time of King Solomon,
which were not made till long after his Reign, therefore Jehudad Bishop of
Adria, restrained that assertion to the Books of Moses, Joshua, Ruth, Judges,
Samuel, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles and Job: but that the rest of
the Books both of the Old and New Testament were Translated into Syriac by the
care of Thaddaeus, and others of the Apostles in the Reign of Abgar King of
Edissa. Though as the same Jesudad testifies, some were of Opinion, that the
Old Testament was Translated, into the Samaritan Dialect by a certain Samaritan
Priest. But ^hese things are rather Fabulous then Historical: for that they
translated only one Book, the Pentateuch into their Language which little
differs from the Samaritan. Then the Syriac Language which the Apostles made
use of especially in Judea, is far differerent from the Syriac wherein the Old
and New Testament was written. In Ca^al. Script. Chald.
Ebed-Jesu, Metropolitan of Soba, reckons among the Syrian Writers a certain
Person, by name Mar-Aba, or Lord Aba, Surnamed the Great, who Translated the
whole Testament out of Greek into Syriac: But as Alraham Ecchellensis rightly
observes, before this Mar-Aba there was extant another Translation of the Old
Testament from the Greek Septuagint, Not in Ehed. Jesu.
as may be proved from the Commentaries of Jacob Nisivensis, and B. Ephrem. It
is manifest also that the Syrians translated into their Language a Greek
Edition of the Septuagint, with Daggers and Asterisks, out of the Hexaples of
Origin; or else accommodated a Syrian Interpretation to Origen's Exemplar which
before these times was read in the Churches of Syria. The Learned Massius had
several of those Books, which he never made public, In Jos^uah.
except the History of Joshua, set forth by him in Greek with Asterisks and
Streaks and other Grammatical Marks, which Origin had made use of in his
Edition. The Greek and Latin Fathers also make mention of a Syrian Version of
Scripture of which the Christians of Syria made use, wherein they take notice
of several Readings different from the vulgar Exemplars.

That Exemplar of the Syriac Version which was Printed in the Parisian and
English Polyglotts, was taken out of the Hebrew Context, and in some places
corrected according to the Greek Text of the Septuagint; so that is not
absolutely the same ancient Version which the Syrians call the Simple or Pure
Version. This Translation seems to have been made verbatim from the Jewish
Exemplar, so exactly it follows it in most places. But the Syrian Transcribers,
who being ignorant of the Hebrew, could not consult the Hebrew Text from whence
that was derived, committed many mistakes, which nevertheless may be easily
corrected without the help of Manuscripts. However I do not believe the Syrian
Transcribers to be as often under mistakes as they disagree from the Jewish
Copy, seeing that the Jewish Exemplars vary themselves. But I speak of those
Errors at present, which are without Controversy the mere failings of the
Amanuensis. I admire the English in their Bibles took no notice of many which
they let stand.

For to omit several others, who could have slipped this Error in the Syriac
Version in the 14th Chapter of Genesis, where the Hebrew reads Gojim Nations,
the Syriac Geloje, which the Latin Interpreters of the Syriac renders the
People called Gelites. So in the 22 Chapter, where the Hebrew Examplar has it
Moria, the Syriac reads Omouroje, which the Interpreter renders the
Amorrhaeans, as if there were any thing there mentioned of the Amorrhaeans. But
these Errors I attribute partly to the Scribes, partly to those who pointed the
Syriac Version, in regard that points supply the place of Vowels, as well in
the Syriac as Hebrew. In like manner Genesis c. 32. v. 32. the Syerans who
understood not the Hebrew word Nasche or shrunk, have made of the Word Genesio,
which the Latin Interpreter translates the female Sinew, and instead of the
Sinew that shrunk, upon which the word Genesio appears in Ferrarius's Syriac
Lexicon, which nevertheless seems to be some corrupted Hebrew word and not to
be numbered among the Syriac. But I say no more of these nor of six hundred
more. This is only worthy of observation, that the Syrian Scribes have erred in
Writing out the Syrian Exemplars far more frequently, then the Jews who
understood the Hebrew. Thus Jos. 19. in instead of King Basan, the Syriac reads
King Mathnin. Which diversity proceeds from this, that the Syrian Scribe did
not distinguish between B, and M. In like manner for Kiriath Jearim, the Syriac
reads Kiriath Naarin, and the Latin renders it the City of Naarin. So in the
7th Chapter of Judges the Syriac reads Nedubaal for Jerubaal, and Chapter 9.
Neptha, for Jeptha: all which might easily have been mended, with many more of
the same nature. Wherefore as to the Syrian Exemplars that have been set forth
in Print, we may truly affirm, what St. Jerome asserted concerning the Greek
Copies: That some of the words are not only not Hebrew, but Barbarous and
Sarmatic.

I could also enumerate those places where the Syriac Translators, forsaking
the Hebrew, follows the Greek Version of the 70 Elders. Which variety
nevertheless of Interpretation is rather to be laid upon the Scribes who strove
to make the Syriack Translation conformable to those other Exemplars either
Syriac or Arakick which were Translated from the Greek Edition. Thus Genesis 2.
both in the Syriac and Greek we find it, upon the sixth day; whereas in the
Hebrew it is the seventh day, and the Animadversions of Jerome upon this place
prove this Lection of the Hebrew Text to be the most Ancient. In like manner,
Genesis 4. This Clause, let us go into the field, was Translated out of the Greek
Version into the Syriac, while St. Jerome testifies that in his time the same
was not to be sound in the Hebrew Exemplars. Lastly, Genesis 8. Where mention is
made of the Crow which Noah sent out of the Ark, both in the Syriack and Greek
we do not find that ever the Crow returned; but the negative particle is not to
be found in the Hebrew Context, nor was it there in St. Jeroms time, as may be
easily proved from his Writings. From whence we infer that the Version which
the Syrians call Pure; from it is ancient perfection, is much degenerated, and
now to be called rather mixed then Pure. Those variations which arise from the
different marking of the Numbers I pass by; as for example, Judges 16. Where
the Hebrew and the Vulgar read 1100. the Syriac Version numbers 1300. 1 Samuel c.
6. for 50070. in the Hebrew Greek and Latin, the Syriac reckons 5070. But no
man can be ignorant that there are frequent variations of numbers in all Books
of the same nature. There are other Examples of different Readings of more
moment in the Syriac Translation, which altogether alter the Sense, such are,
some in the Book of Joshua, especially in the division of their Allotments to
the several Tribes. Another Alteration there is in the Syriac Exemplar where
all the Inscriptions of the Psalms are left out, on purpose to put others in
their places. The reason of which seems to be, for that anciently the (...) or
Argument of the Psalm was prefixed at the beginning of every Psalm. Whence it
came to pass that the Hebrew Inscriptions of the Psalms which did not explain
the Psalms to the liking of the Syrians were omitted, and others added by the
Syriac Rabbis.

As to the Syriac Language and it is various Dialects, I shall say nothing at
present, in regard that many have already learnedly handled that Subject. We
are only to discourse of those things which concern the Syriac Version.
Therefore what before we have observed touching the Jewish Exemplars, to which
the Rabbis of Tiberias added the Points that supply the place of Vowels, that
is now to be noted as to the Syriac Exemplars, to which the Syrian Doctors have
added the Pointed Vowels which now appear in their Coppies. Therefore Walton is
in an Error, who believes that Gabriel Sionita, the Maronite of Mount Lebanon,
was the first that inserted pointed Vowels into the Syriac Exemplar: He was the
first, says he, speaking of this Gabriel, who pointed it, and added the Latin
Interpretation of the same. For before, all the Manuscripts were either
destitute of points, or if any word or vowel happened to be pointed, in another
it was omitted, one Syllable pointed and another naked, as we see at this day
in the Manuscript Copies. That this is partly true I will not deny, for that
the Syriac written Copies some have more, some have less points at the pleasure
of the Transcribers, who nevertheless seldom omit the Principal. Yet I have met
with Manuscripts that have been exactly pointed. Abraham Ech^llensis, In Ebed.
Jesu.
a Maronite of Mount Lebanon testifies also, that he had by him some Books
written in the Syriac Language above 300 or 400 years before, completely
furnished with all the Points. Then again in most Copies they never omit any
Points, but only such as are of no use in reading, which may be easily supplied
by the Reader. As we find in the Syriac Edition of the New Testament which was
first published by Vuidmanstadius, wherein some Points are omitted, which are
of little use. And therefore the Industry of Gabriel Sionite, a most learned
person, is not so much to be applauded for his adding points to the Copies; but
he is rather to be commended for this, for that with great labor and toil he
corrected the most of the Errors which are extant in those Manuscripts; though
that Edition does not seem to be so absolute and perfect neither.

Of the Arabic Translations.
The Arabic Translations seem to be of much less Authority, which are read at
this day by the Easiern Christians. Nor do they seem to be so ancient as the
Syriac. For the most of them were made public among the Syrians as well
Jacobites and Maronites, as Nestorians, when the Syriac Language ceased to be
familiar, when they were subdued by the Saracens, who introduced the Arabic
among them. The Coptic also, or the Christian's that inhabit Egypt had their
Bibles written in the ancient Coptic Language which they still retain, but
because that Coptic Language was known to very few, there was a necessity to
make new Arabic Versions which might be understood by all. So that the most of
their Books which are made use of in their Churches are written both in Coptic
and Arabic. Therefore it is very probable, that the Syrians Translated the holy
Scripture out of the Syriac into ^^abic, such as were those Arabic Exemplars,
at the end whereof we find the Arabic Version to have been Translated from the
Hebrew; that is from that Syrian Translation, which the Syrian's call unmixt.
By the same reason we might affirm that the Exemplars of the Arabic Versions
which follow the Greek Copies of the 70, were not so much Translated from the
Greek of the 70 Interpreters, as according to the Syriac which was Translated
from the Greek: though it be probable that the Sect of the Melchites took their
Version from the Greek Copies, as they did most of those other Books of which
they make use. But whether there were any Version of the Scriptures before that
time I shall not now enquire, it being certain that most of those Versions now
used by the people that inhabit the Eastern Regions are not now the same which
in former times were made use of in the same Country. And indeed should that
Arabic Version, published in the Parisian and English Polyglots, be thoroughly
examined it would be found very imperfect, full of faults and Errors. Thus the
Arabic Book of Joshuah, though toward the end it may be said to be Translated
out of the Hebrew, yet it appears to be a mixture of Greek and Hebrew or rather
Syriac: Besides the Author of that Translation many times shows himself a
Paraphraser not an Interpreter, and he makes no scruple of altering the Sense
of his Text. In the Book of Chronicles we find the names of Greece, Turkey,
Chorasan, Sclavonia, France, Cyprus and the like. Yet all the Errors of that
Version are not to be imputed to the Arabian Translator, the most without doubt
being committed by the Scribes. Thus Jos. 11. We read in the Arabic Version
Nabin King of Caesarea, whereas in the Hebrew Text and ancient Translations it
is Jabin King of Hasor. In the same Arabic Version Joshua is said to have
assailed the City of Caesarea, which was the Metropolis of several other
Cities: and Judges 3. instead of the Hebrew word Pesilim, which signifies
Idols, the Arabic reads Palestine. Lastly, some Errors have crept into the
Arabic Exemplars through the incertainty of the pointed Vowels. For the points
are no less defective in the Arabic then in the Hebrew and Syriac.

The Coptic Versions.
The Coptic Versions of the Bible, which were anciently made by those Christians
that inhabited Egypt seem to be of more Credit then the Arabic: For they carry
a semblance of more Antiquity. And if we may believe Kircher, who had by him
some Exemplars of those Versions, we may look upon 'em to be as ancient as the
Council of Nice. But not to content about their Antiquity, certain it is, that
they were read in the Churches of Egypt long before the Arabian, which were
taken from them. The word Coptus or Cophtus seems to derive it is Original from
a City of the same Name which was heretofore the Metropolis of Thebais of which
both Strabo and Plutarch make mention. And very probable it is, that that same
Coptic Language was the ancient Language of the Egyptians, not pure, but having
some mixture of the Greek, especially from the time that they were under the
Dominion of the Macedonians; so that they changed the ancient Characters of
their Language, into the Greek, which they partly retain to this day. But in
regard that Language surceas'd by degrees to become familiar and only remained
among those who had something of Learning and Education, the Egyptian Rabbis
added to those Books which were then read in their Churches in the Coptic
Language, the Arabic Explanation, after they became subject to the Saracens.
They have also Lexicons and Grammars for that Coptic Language which Kircher
published in Print, by which we find that the Ancient Coptic Tongue, besides
the Greek words which it had learnt under the Grecian Princes, retained also
something of the Arabic. But no man ought to doubt but that the Coptic Version
was taken from the Greek Translation of the 70 Interpreters, in regard that the
Jews of old, some of the Syrian Churches excepted, always read the Hebrew Text,
or Versions taken from thence.

The Ethiopic Versions.
As to the Ethiopic Version of the Bible written in the Ethiopic Language, we
shall make some few observations. This Version, as all other Books which are
read in the Ethiopic Churches, was Translated out of the Coptic into the
Ethiopic Tongue: Therefore the Ethiopic Bibles are the same with the Coptic,
rendered only into Ethiopic. Neither do the Ethiopians acknowledge any other
Patriarch but only him, who assumes the Title of Patriarch of Alexandria, being
an Egyptian, and the Ceremonies of their Church are borrowed from the Egyptians
or Coptics. But the ancient Ethiopic Language wherein their Bible is written,
has something of mixture both of Hebrew, Arabic and Chaldee: Especially of the
Chaldee; so that the Ethiopians call their Language Chaldaic or Babylonian; as
if it were the same with the pure an ancient Babylonic, from which however it
differs very much. But the modern Ethiopic, now familiar among the Ethiopians,
differs little from it. Nevertheless they do not use any Points, like Hebrews,
Chaldeans, Syrians and Arabians, but every Letter makes a Consonant and a
Vowel; which is peculiar to that Nation.

The Persian Ve^sions.
There seems to be nothing at all at present remaining of that same ancient
Persian Version which beyond all Controversy was taken from the Greek
Translation of the Seventy. The ancient Persian Language also has admitted much
of mixture, by reason of it is being jumbl'd with the Arabic, from whence it has
borrowed all it is terms of Arts and Sciences, together with the Arabic
Characters, the ancient Persian Letters being lost, and no where to be seen but
in some Antique Copies. But as for that same Version of some part of the Sacred
Scripture, published in our Age, it does not seem worthy of any great esteem,
as being but of late years. The Armeni^n Translation.
If we will believe the Armenian Doctors, the Version of the Bible which they
now read in their Churches in the Armenian Language, was not made by John
Chrysostom, as some believe, out of the Greek into the Armenian; but by some
Doctors of their own Nation, who studied the Greek Language, more especially by
one Moses, Sirnam'd the Grammarian, and one David vulgarly called the
Philosopher; and this happened to be much about John Chrysostomes time. The
Armenians also deny that John Chrysostom was the Inventor of the Armenian
Characters, which they attribute to a certain Hermit whose name was Mescop;
who invented them in the City of Balu, not far from Euphrates: who also lived
much about the time that Chrysostom flourished. But because there were hardly
any Exemplars of those Bibles to be found entire, and those very dear to boot,
in our Age Jacob Caractri Patriarch of the Armenians sent into Europe Vschan
Yuschuavanchi, a Bishop, that by his care and industry the Ancient Bible might
be printed. Whereupon the Old and New Testament was Printed in the Armenian
Language and Character at Amsterdam anno 1664. But certain it is, that this
Armenian Translation, and I had it from the mouth of the Bishop himself, was
taken from the Greek Version of the 70 Interpreters.

The Versions of the Muscovites, Georgians and other people.
Lastly, the Muscovites, Iberians, or Georgians, a people inhabiting the Regions
of C^olchis, have also their Translations of the Holy Scripture, and it is not
long since that the Bible was printed in the Muscovitic Language and Character.
But there is no question to be made but that they were all taken from the
Greek, in regard those Nations derived their Christian Faith, and their
Ecclesiastic Ceremonies from the Greeks. And thus much concerning the Bibles
made use of by the Eastern Nations.

CHAP. XXII. Of the later Versions of the Bible, and first of all, of Latin
Versions, done by Catholic Divines.
The Bibles of Cardinal Ximenius.
THOUGH Francis Ximenius of Seneros, Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo, has
given us no other Latin Version of the Hebrew Text, in his Complutensian Bible,
than the vulgar, or that of St. Jerome, yet he may be deservedly ranked amongst
the Catholic Interpreters of the Holy Scriptures: For first of all he published
in that excellent work the Chaldee Paraphrase upon the five Books of Moses,
with a verbal Version into Latin, as also the Seventies Greek Version of all
the Books of the Old Testament, with an interlineary Latin Translation. In the
year 1515.
And because every one has not the perusal of the Complutensian Bibles, it may
not be improper in this place to give some account of the design of that
learned Cardinal in this new Edition of the Bible. He affirms in his proaemium
to Leo the tenth, that every Language has it is peculiar Idioms and Properties
of expression, which the most accurate Translation is not able to render, and
especially the Hebrew, and a little after subjoins these words; In his Prologue
to Leo the tenth.
Moreover wheresoever the Latin Translators differ, or a reading is suspected
to be corrupt, we must have recourse to the Original in which the Scriptures
were writ, as St. Jerome, and Austin, and other Ecclesiastical Writers direct,
so that the sincerity of the Versions of the Old Testament must be examined by
the Hebrew, and the New by the Greek Copies. But who would believe that this
Cardinal who speaks so great things of the Hebrew, should, by and by, in
another Epistle to his Readers, so basely detract from it? so that we have
reason to suspect these passages were foisted in by others. We have placed,
says the Cardinal, The same Cardinal in his Prologue to the Reader.
the Latin Version of St. Jerome betwixt them (i. e. the Hebrew and the
Translation of the 70) as it were betwixt the Synagogue and the Eastern Church,
like two, there is one on each hand, but in the middle is Jesus, i. e. the Roman
Church. For this alone being built upon a strong and lasting Rock stood always
firm in the Truth, when all others deviated from the right understanding of the
Scriptures; a comparison highly unworthy a Cardinal of the Roman Church, which
yet Nicholas Ramus, a Spanish Divine too, and Bishop of Cuba, has transferred
into his Tract of the Vulgar Translation

San. Pignin a Dominican, first published a Version of the holy Scriptures
according to the Hebrew Original in the year MDLXXVII. with two Epistles of the
two Popes, Adrian the Sixth. The Version of Pagnine.
and Clement the Seventh, in the front of the Book, who both strengthen his
Edition of the Bible with their Authority, and before this time Leo the Tenth
had approved Pignine's design of making a New Translation of the Bible
according to the Hebrew Original, it is evident as well from the Epistle which
Franciscus Picus wrote to Pagnin, as from Pagnin himself that he spent at least
thirty years in that Work; insomuch that it had the approbation of all the Jews
of that Age for an accurate piece. Yet some great men amongst the Catholics
have judged otherwise of it: For Genebrard describes it thus; it is not
d^ligently done, it is too ambitious, too curious, too Grammatical, too much
affecting, abbinical niceties, and such as often mars the Truth and Substance
of things with the subtilty of Novel Precepts: Whereupon sometimes it
corresponds not enough with the Doctrine of the ancient Hebrews. And Joannes
Mariana confirms this with instances of his lapses, who endeavors to make it
out, that Pagnin has sometimes overthrown the mysteries of our Religion, by
receding too much from the Version of St. Jerome as in the ninth Chapter of
Job, where Jerome renders it, rursum circundabor pelle mea, I shall be again
clothed with my Skin, and thence proves the resurrection of the Body, Pagnin
Translates it, postquam pellem meam contriverunt, after they have consumed and
worn my Skin: and in the first Edition of his Version had interpreted it more
obscurely, and post pellem meam contritam vermes contriverunt banc carne^, and
after my consumed Skin the Worms have consumed my Flesh, adding words, which
are not extant in the Hebrew, and yet Monsieur Huel gives quite another
Character of Pagnines Version than Genebrard, Mariana, and other very learned
men, whom I forbear to mention. He has given us, says he, an example of almost
a perfect and complete interpretation of the holy Scriptures.

But it is evident that Pagnine erred in many particulars. For first, he
declared that he would keep close to the Latin Interpretation, except in such
places where 'twas absolutely necessary to do otherwise: Notwithstanding which
he often deserted it without any color or shadow of reason, only that he might
follow Kimchi and other latter Ribbins of the Jews. For how came it about, that
for these words in the beginning of Genesis, which in the Vulgar Translation
are, Spiritus Dei ferebatur super aquas, the Spirit of God moved upon the
Waters, he should render, Spiritus Dei superflabat in superficie aquarum, the
Spirit of God breathed upon the Face of the Waters, unless because the Chaldee
Paraphrase, and some Doctors of the Jews had so explained it. Again who could
brook the Version of the same Pagnine in the sixth Chapter of Genesis, who for
these words, which in the Latin Edition, are non permanebit spiritus meus,; my
Spirit shall not always abide, he put non erit ut in vagina speritus meus, my
Spirit shall not be as if 'twere in a Scabbard. He was not content to explain
the Sense of the Hebrew word only, but likewise the Etymology of it just as
Kimchi had done it: Wherefore he showed himself a foolish and quarrelsome
Interpreter. (As Aquila of old had done) in speaking so barbarously. Thus where
the Latin Interpretation has it, in the 1 of Genesis and the 20 verse. producant
aquae reptile, let the Waters bring forth every creeping thing. He Translates,
repere faciant aquae reptile, let the Waters make every creeping thing to
creep, and in another Edition. reptificent, let them creep, etc. Neither does
he always follow the Sense of the Hebrew Text; thus in the 8 Chap, of Nehemiah,
the Latin Interpreter excellently well renders these words from the Hebrew,
legerunt in libro in lege Dei distinct; they read in the Book in the Law of
God distinctly; But Pagnine contrary to all Sense and Reason Translates it so,
legerunt in libro in lege Dei expositi: They read in the Book of the Law of God
Expounded in which place he contradicts himself, for in his Dictionary those
very words are otherwise explained. Other remarks which might be made upon
Pagnine's Version I shall, for brevities sake omit.

Arias Montanus was not the Author of the new Version of the Bible, he was
content to correct Pagnines Translation in some places. But having a more then
ordinary regard to the bare Grammar Rules never minding the Sense, he outwent
Pagnine in his barbarousness. He spent his whole time in expressing the Hebrew
exactly without any respect to the Sense; thus in the 9 of Exodus, where
Pagnine has pretty well rendered novi quia nondum timeatis, I know because ye
will not yet fear, the Corrector Arias Montanus turned, novi quia antequam
timeatis. I know, because ye fear before that. The Hebrew word Terem has
doubtless a different signification, in one place it signifies priusquam,
before that in another nondum not yet: which Arias never minding turned it to
that Sense which comes next to hand. An infinite number almost of such
absurdities may be found in this Translation, which I advisedly forbear to
mention. Who, for Gods sake, can understand Arias's Interpretation of that
Verse of the 110 Psalm, where for these words, which we read in the Vulgar
Edition, tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedec, thou art a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. In Pagnines Version, secundum
morem Melchisedec; thou art a Priest after the manner of Melchisedec. Arias
turns this way, tu es Sacerdos in seculum super verbum meum Melchisedec, thou
art a Priest for ever upon the word of Melchisedec. Monsieur Hewet did indeed
attempt defending him in this, and openly styled him a most faithful
Translator, who keeping close to the Hebrew Text, despised the censures and
calumnies of the unskilful: yet certainly he does not seem to deserve the name
of an Interpreter who does not in some measure express the Sense of the Author
which he Translates. But notwithstanding all this Arias Montanus is very famous
among all Learned men, for that vast and truly Royal Work of the Polyglot
Printed at Antwerp, which Version by the command of Philip the Second, was had
in esteem beyond all others; and was likewise approved of by an unanimous
consent of many Parisian Divines, in the praise of which they spoke as follows,
we saw the holy Bible of Philip the Second set forth in Hebrew, Syriac, Greek,
and Latin after the manner of the Complutensian Bibles formerly Printed in
Spain. We approved of the same, and in a word, thought it fit to be read by all
Catholics in opposition to all false and heretical Translations, with which
men endeavor to impose upon those that have not arrived to the knowledge of the
Tongues. This Work was likewise approved of by two Popes, as Franciscus Luca,
Burgensis relates, and Gregory the 13th. in his Epistle to Philip the Second of
Spain calls it, opus vere aureum, a work truly great. This is farther
corroberated by the Authority of 42 Spanish Divines notwithstanding all which,
Arias Montanus has but an ill repute among many of the Clergy in Spain,
particularly for that he set forth a Chaldee Paraphrase, not only on the
Pentateuch, as Cardinal Ximenius had done, but on all the rest of the Bible
except some few Books. Of this Andrews de Leon Zamorensis, a Minor of the
Regular Clerks, complains in an Epistle which he wrote to those that Printed a
new Polyglot at Paris, where concerning the Chaldee Paraphrase published in the
Royal Bibles, he speaks thus: What shall I say of the Chaldee Paraphrase which
the Rabbis call the Targum? It Is vitiated and extremely corrupted, it is
degenerated from it is ancient purity and candor, full of Talmudical Fables,
and Sacrilegious Impostures. In this all men agree, even Cardinal Ximenius
himself in his Preface to the Complutensis asserts it. Nay Cajetan himself
gives a free account of his method of Translating Hebrew in these words; I
assure you that whilst I was about this work Interpreters would tell me, the
Hebrew word sounds thus, In his Preface to the Psalms.
but the Sense thereof is not evident unless it be changed into this, having
heard all the significations, I answered, do not trouble your selves if the
Sense be not clear, because it is not your Province to explain, but interpret
as the words lay before you, and commit the care of understanding the Sense to
Expositors. The Cardinal confesses ingenuously that though he was ignorant of
the Hebrew yet he Translated the Old Testament into Latin out of the Hebrew,
Cajetan's method in translating the Bible.
and in order thereunto made use of two very learned men in that Tongue, the
one a Jew, and the other a Christian: and gives this as the principal reason
why he did so, because unless the Text be just as in it is Original, the Text is
not expounded but by guess, but the Text is expounded as it is understood by
such or such an Interpreter: And at last wishes the Fathers had had such an
Interpretation, though it be lame and imperfect; because then, says he, we
should have the genuine Text of the Scripture explained, and not a Text of
Interpreters making: But Cajetan who says almost all the Hebrew words are
aequivocal could never arrive at a perfect and complete Interpretation; and yet
I dare affirm that that most learned Cardinal, though an utter Stranger to the
Hebrew Tongue, has been very happy in expressing the words of the Text, and
that there is less barbarism in his Version than that of Arias Montanus.
Gabriel Prateolus, who is very free in bestowing the name of Heretic, ranks the
judgment he has passed of the ancient Interpreters, as being a little too bold,
amongst the Heresies. Nor was Cardinal Palvacino a little dissatisfied
therewith, who animadverts thus upon it; quel grand' intelletto alfre opere
fuam^^mirato, History of the Counsel of Trent, l. 6. c. 17.
in quest^ per la sciaersi egli trasportar dalla guida di ehi meglio intendeva
la^grammatica Hebrea, chi misteri divini resto in glorios^.

Malvenda's method.
I omit the Dominican Thomas Malvenda's Version of some Books of the old
Testament; who so rigidly affects the Grammatical Sense, that it looks like one
entire piece of barbarism, and had been utterly unintelligible, had he not a
little illustrated it by his Notes. Melchior Canus openly declares against
Isidorus Clarius, Melchior Canus of wheol. places. l. 2. c. 13.
whose emendation is nothing but a reprehension of the old Interpreter: For in
the Front of his Works he promises, says the same Melchior, the old Edition
correct, and after he has thus excused himself from the odium of Novelty, he
inserts a great many things, adds some, and changes others, the humor and
Interpretation of Isidorus Clarius, The Bible of Isidorus Clavius.
Monk of Cassinum, who in many places which he corrects in the Latin
Interpreter shows himself ignorant of the Hebrew Tongue, could not be more
oppositely described. But this Edition of the Bible is prohibited at Rome, and
is extant in the Index of prohibited Books under this Title; the Vulgar Edition
of the Old and New Testament, the one whereof is most dilligently corrected
according to the Hebrew, the other according to the Greek Original, so that a
new Edition need not be desired, and yet the old One may here be found in the
year MDXLII.

The Version extant under Vatablus his name.
Lastly, there are several Latin Copies of the Bible extant under Vatablus his
name, which yet all the World acknowledge are not his. Robert Stephens has put
upon the unwary Reader under the name of that learned and most understanding
Professor of the Hebrew Tongue in the University of Paris: For the Edition
which Stephens gave us in the year MDXLV, as if it had been exactly taken from
the Lectures and Notes of Vatablus, affords us only the Version and Annotations
of Leo, Judah, a Zuinglian, which for the most part were borrowed from the
Jews, particularly Rabbi David Kimchi, from John Calvin and other Protestants;
this Interpretation of Leo, Juda, Robert Stephens has preferred before all
others, and especially before that of Santes Pagninus, because 'twas more
clear, and done into purer Latin. Yet the same Stephens in an Edition which he
Published in the year MDXLVII chose Pagnine's Translation before all the rest,
but such as, if we may believe him, was revised and corrected by Pagnine
himself, therefore neither was Vatablus nor Stephens Authors of any Version of
the Bible: Yet both of 'em great Masters of Hebrew Learning.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Latin Translations of the Bible made by Protestants.
THere are yet greater differences betwixt the Protestants in their
Translations of the Bible, than the Catholics. Sebastian Munster, who turned
the Old Testament out of Hebrew into Latin, shows the reasons and method of his
Translation, at the very beginning of it; where he plainly tells us, how that
he followed the Rabbis therein and not the old Interpreters. So that if there
happened to be any faults in it, they were to be imputed to the Jewish Doctors,
who were the first Authors of them. Sextus Senensis gives us his opinion of
this Translation in these words. Munsterus ubique horridus, senticosus and
asper usque adeo Hebraici sermonis horrorem sequutus est, ut cum multa Latinis
auribus molliter accommodare potuisset, omnes tamen Hebraici sermonis
proprietates and phrases adeo servare studuit, ut nec ipsos Hebraicorum nominum
stridores pretermittere voluerit, ingerens Latinis auribus ubique pro Ozia
Uzzijah, pro Ezechiele Jechezohel, etc. But I wonder that Sixtus should be so
nice and critical, seeing he so highly commends Cajetan, Pagnin, Oleaster and
some others, who affected a far more barbarous and unpolite Style. Likewise
Gerebrard treats him with as little candor and moderation, passing a sharp and
severe censure upon him: Munsterus, says he, neglecta vocum propria notatione
sepe Lutheranisabat, and a sue Franscisci institute discedebat. Certainly none
of the Modern (especially Protestant Translators, have more fully and
emphatically expressed the genuine sense of the Hebrew Text) than Munster; who
cannot deservedly be blamed for any thing, but for slighting the ancient
Interpreters of the Holy Scripture, and adhering too closely to the late Jewish
Doctors: neither is he so rough and harsh in his style, abating some proper
names, as Sixtus and some others fancy him to be. Hu^tius, who seems the most
impartial and unbiased in his Judgment, gives him this Character, Sebastianus
Munsterus Bibliorum Interpres sane doctus in Hebraica semper stilum collineans
ad eaque nunquam non se componens. Yet without doubt he had gained greater
applause, if according to the advice of Conradus Pellicanus his Tutor in the
Hebrew Tongue, he had chiefly followed the Rabbis in Grammatical niceties,
consulting in other things, as well the Ancient Interpreters of the sacred
Text, as the modern Jews; and then he had not disagree'd with the Latin
Translators in so many particulars as he did: For what necessity was there,
that for Crescite and multiplicamine, and implete aquas Maris, which we find in
the vulgar Translations; he should put Fructicate and augescite and implete
aquas in fretis, which words carry a far harsher sound with them than the
former.

Likewise Leo Juda, a Zuinglian, Translated the Old Testament, or at least the
greatest part of it, out of the Original Hebrew into Latin, and because he died
before 'twas quite finished, Bibliander and P. Cholinus completed it:
Bibliander turned the eight last Chapters of Ezechiel, and also Daniel, Job,
Ecclesiastes, the Canticles and 48 Psalms out of Hebrew; and Cholinus
translated the books, which the Protestant Divines call the Apocripha, out of
Greek. This Translation was first published at Zurich in the Year 1543. and
afterward in the Year 1545, there came forth a second Edition of it by R.
Stephanus, but without the name of the Author, and with the vulgar Translation
on one side, as we have intimated before. But the Parisian Divines railed and
inveighed bitterly both against the Edition and the Publisher of it; so that
after many hot and wrangling disputes about several things belonging to the
Bible, Stephanus was at lenght forced by the prevailing party, to leave his
Country, and to fly to Geneva for Sanctuary; there he writ his Apology against
the Parisian Divines, and published it both in Latin and French, wherein he
made grievous complaints of them; but in most things he showed himself to be an
Innovator and a rigid follower of Calvin: Yet he was defended in some things
even against the Parisian Divines by P. Castellanus Bishop of Mascon and grand
Almoner of France, who often carried the matters in controversy to the hearing
of the Kings Council; for he had observed how the Parisians, through their
Ignorance of the Tongues, had laid many things falsely to his charge. Neither
did this Translation of Leo Juda escape the Censures of Genebrard; who thereby
got the Favor and Patronage of the Parisian Divines, he himself being one of
the same faculty. But Stephanus was entertained with far more courtesy and
civility by the Spanish Divines; who without any scrupulous enquiry after the
Authors name; or without any regard to the censures of the Parisians, reprinted
this Edition at Salamanca, with some small variation of the notes; and moreover
judged it worthy to be read of all those who were inquisitive after the true
meaning of the Scripture. It Is true that Leo Judae rendered some Hebrew words
less properly than Munster, but be took more care to accommodate them to the
Latin Phrase: So that he cannot justly be accused for any thing, but his
translating by way of Paraphrase, purposely to avoid obscurity.

Sobast. Castal. Interp.
The most famous and generally received Translation of the Bible, is that of
Castalio, of which there are several Impressions: But that is accounted the
best, which was made at Basil in the Year, 1573. Sixtus Senensis giving us his
Judgment of Munster and Castalio, avers that they fall into both Extremes; one
of them being harsh, barbarous and unpolished in his Style, and often inclining
to the Jewish Idiom; the other being as profane as a Heathen, foolishly
affecting the Proprieties of the Languages of the Gentiles, fancying his Latin
could not be pure and elegant, unless it were soft and effeminate. Sixtus gives
several examples of his profane expressions. Castalio, says he, calls God the
Father Jupiter, Divus Armipotens, Gradivus and Caelicola; likewise he calls
Angels, Jovis Genti, Prophets, Vates and fatidici, and holy Men, Heroes.
Genebrard gives an excellent description of him and his Translation in these
words, Versio Castalionis est affectata, Geneb. praef. in op. Orig.
plus habens pompae and phalerarum quam rei and firmitatis, plus ostentationis
quam substantie, plus fuci quam succi, plus hominis quam spiritus plus fumi
quam flam^ae, plus humanarum cogitationum quam divinorum sensuum. But he is
handled more severely by the Geneva Doctors, and especially Theodore Beza, who
upbraids him with ignorance and rashness for his profane imitation of Catulus
in his Translations; for in the Canticles he does not use the plain word
Columba, but mea Columba. Mea Columba, says he, ostende mihi tun^^ vulticulum,
fac ut audiam tuam voculam venustulam: and lepidum vulticulum habes: capite
nobis vulpeculas parvas vinearum vastatriculas; In this Book he plays the Poet
rather than the Interpreter; but every where he assumes the liberty of
connecting the Periods and Verses; that his Translation might appear more
graceful and elegant, as is evident in the first Chapter of Genesis, which
begins thus; Genesis 1.1.
In principio creavit Deus Coelum and Terram: cum autem esset terrarudis q^que
iners, tenebrisque offusum, profundum, and divinus spiritus s^se super aquas
libraret, jussit Deus ut existeret Lux, etc. Beza and some other Geneva Doctors
will only allow him to be a smatterer in the Hebrew Tongue; but with their
leave I dare boldly say, that Geneva never bred a man more profoundly skilled
in Hebrew, Greek and Latin than he. I no not deny, but that sometimes he did
not accurately express the full import of the Hebrew words because he affected
a smooth and delicate style; but he did not this through ignorance, but through
a desire of imitating Cicero and Catellus. Is. Levit. medit. in Lib. Ru^^
Likewise Isaac Levita, a man well versed in Hebrew, who finds fault with
Castalio for not following exactly the Literal and Grammatical meaning of the
Text, takes notice of some other things of small moment and importance: But
it is certain that Castalio proposed to himself this way of translating, that he
might give his Translation the advantage of perspicuity and elegancy. Genebrard
objects that Castalio, as though he favored the Heresy of the Servetans,
rendered the Hebrew word Amar in the beginning of Genesis by Jussit; for which
in the vulgar Translations we have dixit. But it is no hard matter to believe
that he never thought of this; and moreover the word Amar as well in Hebrew as
Arabic, may very well be construed by jussit; which acception of the word
seems not to be altogether improper in this place.

Now it only remains, that we make some short reflections upon Junius and
Tremellius, Junii and Trem. versio.
who were the undoubted Authors of that Translation, which is so highly valued
by the Protestants, especially in England and Geneva, where it is altogether
used in their disputations. About the time when it was published, Drusius a man
of the Protestant persuasion, and Professor of the Hebrew Tongue in an
University in West Friezeland, spared no sharpness and severity in his animad
versions upon it, but made it appear that they had grossly erred in some things;
and a long time after Constantine L'Emperew Professor of the Hebrew Tongue
(which he was a great master of) in the University of Leyden, passed the like
censure upon Junius and Tremellius's Translation in these words, In vertendis
H^braicis a Junio and Tremellio non raro abire debui; Hoc enim in^sta Bibliorum
versione saepe observavi; conceptam Analysin veluti norman statui ad quam in
vertendo respicerctur, cum hoc modo saepe a vero sensu recedatur. Yet Buxtorf
the greatest modern Hebrician had these Interpreters in so great esteem, that
he usually gave them the Title of incomparable men, Buxt. praef. Lex. Hebr.
and in composing his Hebrew Lexicon strictly followed their Translations; and
all the Learning our Critics pretend to, who slight and undervalue all the old
Translators, is gleaned out of this Lexicon. Tremellius, who was a Jew before
he professed Calvinism, seems to have taken abundance of things from the Modern
Jews, and besides his Latin style is unnatural and affected, which without
doubt he learned at Geneva: for it is very usual with the Geneva Doctors to
interland their Sentences with pronoun Relatives, when there does not appear
the least shadow of a Relation; as we read in the Tremellian Version of the
first Chapter of Genesis, Genesis 1.4.
viditque Deus lucem hanc esse bonam, and distinctionem fecit Deus inter Lucem
hanc, etc. again a little after, v. 7.
Fecit ergo Deus hoc expansum quod distinguit inter has aquas quae sunt ab
inferiori istius expansi and aquas illas. Theodore Beza has some things not
much unlike these in his Translation of the New Testament: neither did
Tremellius scruple to insert several words to Illustrate the fence, which quite
alter it; as in the 2d. Chapter of Genesis, where in the vulgar Translation we
read, sed Fons ascendebat e terra, and in some other Translations and vapor,
etc. He Translates it aut Vapor non ascendebat; following the Arabic
Paraphrase of Rabbi Saadias, Surnamed Gaon, or the excellent. Moreover in the
8th. Chapter of Nehemiah, besides these words which are turned verbatim out of
Hebrew, viz. Legerunt in Libro Dei Legis distinct and aperte ad intelligendum,
and intellexcrunt cum legeretur, he adds these of his own, per scripturam
ipsam, which are not in the Hebrew Text, and renders them thus, exponendo
sensum dabant Intelligentiam per Scripturam ipsam; in which thing he did not so
much regard the words of the Hebrew Context, as the Principles of the
Calvinistical Divinity; and he differs very much from Sebastian Munster, Leo
Jude, Castalio and all other Protestant Interpreters, except those of Geneva,
who were wonderfully taken with Tremellius's Translation

We can likewise allow Luc. Osiander a place among the Protestant Interpreters
of the Bible; Bib. Luc. Osi.
for tho he did not design to give us an entire Translation of it, lest he
should in any wise seem to depart from the Ancient received Latin Translators,
yet those places which he thought were not well rendered, he Translated out of
the Hebrew, retaining nevertheless the old Translation in those very places,
that so by comparing them, men might better judge of his and the Ancient
Translation; as for instance, in the first Chapter of Genesis, where we read in
the vulgar, ferebatur; he puts down in another Character, incubabat, as if the
Hebrew word was more fully expressed by the Latin word incubabat than
ferebatur. Indeed Osiander mistakes in a great many things, when upon any
Trivial account he leaves the Latin Translator, whom he did not follow as close
as he should have done, yet he is deservedly commended by the Divines of
Tubinge for this piece of prudence, that in his Edition of the Bible, he gives
us likewise that which was ancient and received for a great many years, by all
the Western Churches. Nor will it be unseasonable here to mention the Judgment
of the Divines of the University of Tubinge, concerning the modern
Interpreters, which we have in these words: Dum illi novas versiones afferunt,
videntur studiosis Theologiae veteram illam and usitatam velle manibus
excutere. Nonnulli in vertendo obscuram diligentiam Hebr^orum and sordidam
(...), quam illorum Grammatici habent sequentes, non modo gratiam, sed fructum
studuii sui propemodum amettunt. Sunt etiam non pauci qui destituti solidiore
cognitione Haebr^ae linguae and ignari proprietatis and elegantiae,
interpretationes in modium afferunt, aut prodig^osas, aut certenon satis
instituto convenientes. In like manner Andrew Osiander the Son of Luke,
following the same way of Translating that his Father did, published the
ancient Latin Translation, together with the corrections of it, retaining still
the old Edition. And no man of sense will ever question, but that this is the
best method of Translating; provided the emendations be not inserted into the
Text of the Latin Translation, but only put down in the Margin as probable
conjectures. Not many years since Cocceius receded from this way of
Translating; who was a man that had great skill in the Hebrew Tongue, and one
that had exercised himself very much in this kind of Study, as it appears from
the Latin Translation of the Old Testament, which he adds to his Comment, and
likewise from his Hebrew Lexicon, which he adapted to the ancient Translations,
which notwithstanding he departed from in his Translation, relying too much
upon his own parts, and catching rather at words and shadows than the
substances of things.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Translations of the Bible into the Vulgar Tongues, and
first of all of th^se made by Catholics.
AFter the rise of new Heretics in the Western Church, who casting aside
Traditions, would acknowledge no other rule and standard of Religion besides
the Scriptures; there were several warm disputes betwixt Divines of all
persuasions about this very thing. The more prudent and moderate Catholics,
did not absolutely condemn the Translations of the Scriptures into the mother
Tongue of every Nation, because it was allowed of by the Fathers: But they
judged it requisite to stop the increase and progress of Heresy, which sprung
from some misinterpreted and perverted Texts of Scripture, to forbid the
promiscuous reading of them in the vulgar languages, by reason of several
inconveniences which attend it, without a due regard to the Persons, Times, and
some other circumstances. Faith according to St. Paul comes by hearing, and
it is certain, far more have been converted to Christianity by hearing of the
Gospel than by reading it. At the first promulgation of the Christian Religion,
there were no Books of the Gospel, from which Men might have learned the
Principles of their Religion, and it is very probable, that if the Apostles had
never write any thing about the Christian Faith, yet our Religion by the help
of Tradition, had been transmitted unto us entire and perfect. This is the
general opinion of the Catholic Doctors, who do not positively forbid these
Translations, if so be all persons in all times and places be not promiscuously
permitted to read them, for it is their Maxim.

Non prosit potius quic quid abesse potest. Now it is easily proved, that almost
all Christians before the rise of the Protestant Innovators, had the liberty to
peruse the Scriptures in their native Tongues. For what other reason should the
Grecians prefer the Septuagint to the Original Hebrew, but that the Greek was
their Mother Tongue. Likewise the People of Italy had the Bible Translated into
Latin, because they naturally spoke it, and for the same reason the Eastern
People had their Syriack, Coptick, Arabic and Armenian Translations, which for
brevity I shall omit. It Is true that some Translations are now read among these
People, which they do not understand, as the Latin is at this day among the
Italians; but this is no convincing argument, that these Translations were
never in the Languages familiarly known and understood by the common People.
Now I pass to the Translations of the Bible into the modern Tongues. Jacobus de
Varagine is highly esteemed among the Italians for his Translation of the
Scriptures into their Tongue: But now there are some other Italian Translations
much in vogue, which carry the names of Nicholas Malermius Abbot of the
Monastry of St. Michael de Lern and Anton. Bucciolus; and in some Editions
there is a Preface, in which the Author discourses at large of the Translations
of the Scriptures into the vulgar Languages, but there is this difference
betwixt Brucciolius and some other Interpreters: He turned the Bible
immediately out of the Original, whereas they only translated it from the Latin
Interpretation, which was usually read in the Western Churches. There are
several Editions of this immediate Translation from the Hebrew, the first of
which the Author dedicates to Francis the First King of France in the Year
1530. afterward there came forth three other Editions in the Years 1539, 40
and 41, but the Edition in the Year 1540 is accounted the best, because there
are several very useful Marginal Notes in it, together with an Epistle of
Antonius Brucciolius to Renata the Wife of Francis Duke of Ferrara in the
defense and commendation of the Translations of the Bible into the Vulgar
Tongues, yet this Italian Interpreter seems to be too weak for the management
of so noble and weighty a design; seeing he sticks not closely enough to the
Hebrew Text, but follows other Translations, especially that of Pagnin, whose
very errors he has copied out, adding some more of his own in some places,
which he did not understand. For in the 8 Chap. of Nehemiah, where Pagnin
perverts the Original by rending it; In lege Dei expositi, he translates it,
Nulla lege d'Iddio dichiarata, differing as much from Pagnin, as the Hebrew
Text: For because he searched not into the Hebrew Copies, he did not take
notice that the word which fignifies Lex is of the Feminine Gender, and that
the Participle passive, which he rendered by Dichiarata was of the Masculine
Gender; and so while he pretends, without consulting the words of the Context,
to correct Pagnin, whom he did not well understand, he falls into a downright
error. I shall forbear to say any thing of the Translation of Jacobus de
Voraign; because I never saw it. Passevinus who had a Copy of it, gives no very
great Character of it; but others highly commend it. But, I think I may
confidently affirm, that very few of those Translations, which are taken out of
Latin Editions, can be accurate and correct; seeing it happens very often, that
the Latin Interpreter cannot be understood without some knowledge of the Hebrew
Tongue: hence it is that Jacobus de Voraigne, Mattermus, and others, who turn
the holy Scriptures out of Latin into another Tongue, are often guilty of gross
mistakes.

There were several Translations of the Bible into French long before Calvin
was heard of: Gall. Verse.
For before the Catholic Religion was reformed, or rather deformed by him, a
French Translation of the Scriptures was read in Geneva and the neighboring
Mountains, which was composed in the year MCCXCIV by one Guiars des Moulins, a
Canon of Aria in Artois, formerly under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Terovenne, a Copy of that Translation is still kept in the public Library at
Geneva, and another at Paris in the study of the Famous Henry Justelle, and I
am of opinion that this is the Translation which is mentioned by Robert
Olivetanus, Rob. Olivet. Praes. in Bibl.
who sent the first Bible in French to Genevah. Likewise there is another
French Translation in some Libraries in France, which is believed to have been
done by Orosmes Canon of Rouen, in the time of Charles the fifth; and Car.
Molinaus gives out that he had some loose Manuscript Pieces of it. Moreover,
it is evident that the Divines of Lovaine were not the first, as is commonly
believed, who Printed the French Translation of the holy Scriptures. We have a
Translation published at Antwerp in the year 1530, by Martin L' Empereur, with
the Privilege of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, but we can have no certainty
of that Edition; because the year of the Impression disagrees with somethings
contained in the Privilege, viz. that the year 1530, was the first year of the
Reign of Charles the Fifth, who was made Emperor in the year 1529. Besides, in
the same Privilege, the Inquisitors and some other Divines are mentioned; who
had the inspexion of that work; but at that time and in these places there was
no Inquisition. To these things may be added another observation drawn from the
third Chapter of Genesis, where we find these words, Ipsa conteret caput tuum,
which occur in the Latin Edition, to be rendered the same way in this
Translation, as the Protestants render them, viz. cette semence brisera ta
test. Moreover in the Preface to this Translation, we have the same division
of the Scriptures, which we find in the Protestant Bibles: for there these
Books are only reckoned to be Canonical, which were writ in the Hebrew Tongue,
and received into the Jewish Canon. But we may give a probable answer to all
these Objections. First, some error may be couched in the Privilege, as we may
gather from some other Editions of this Translation. Secondly, it is very
probable that the true Inquisitors are not mentioned in the Privilege.
Thirdly, it is no wonder that he find cette semence, etc. in the French
Translation, because the Translation tells us, that he followed the old
Interpretation. Lastly, the Author of this Translation, who also Translated the
Edition of St. Jerome, as may be seen in the Title Page, might have imitated St.
Jerome in the division of the Scriptures, at that time there being no Decrees of
the Council of Trent against it: Neither did Cardinal Cajetan, who writ a long
time after, give any other division of them.

I shall not say any thing at present of the Divines of Lovain, whose
Translation is generally read among the Catholics, and which has been several
hundred times Printed and Reprinted, and also accurately corrected: Which work
they did not attempt, upon any other account, but that they might draw the
Common People, and the unlearned from the reading of the Geneva Bibles, which
were then had in great esteem. Likewise those Divines who Translated the Bible
into the English, German, Polish, Hungarian, and some other vulgar Languages,
profess they did it on purpose to divert the Catholics from reading Protestant
Translations. It Is said that a Manuscript Copy of the Bible was found in
Province in the Language of the Country; Translat. Waldens.
which I fancy was made by the Waldenses in their Mother Tongue not the pure
French. John Ledger Hist. des Vall.
John Ledger a Calvinist, who composed the History of that Sect, makes mention
of it, and tell us, that he has likewise a Copy of it.

German Versions.
There were Bibles likewise in Germany in the Dutch Tongue read by Catholics
before the innovations of Luther, as some Writers affirm, who prefer the
Norimbergh and Augustan Editions before the Lutheran's; after this Joannes
Eckius, Dictenbergerus, and others opposed the German Translations to those of
the Protestants; James Wowiezkus, a Jesuit Presbyter, Polenian.
turned the Bible into the Poish Tongue, at the command of Gregory the 13th.
and his Version was afterward approved of by Clement the 8th. We have read
likewise that there were Versions of the Bible in the English Tongue from the
time of Bid; but at this time the English Catholics use an English Version
made by some English Divines, who fled to Rheims in France, and there published
a Version which they mightily opposed to those of the Protestants; a late
Writer attests in these following words, that there were Spanish translations
of the Bible from the time of St. Vincentius, sirnam'd Ferrarius; la Biblia en
lengua Valenciana con licencia de los Inquisidores a cuya translacion assisto,
S. Vincente Ferrer: And affirms that it is published in Folio in Royal Paper, in
folio de papel Real. Socrates and Sozomen praise a much more ancient and Gothic
Version, done by Vulphile a Gothic King. The Version into Arabic, done by a
Bishop of Sevil, when the Spaniards were under the Dominion of the Moors, is
commended by some. I omit Jeroms Version into the Dalmation Tongue, because
it is fictitious, and foisted in by those who understood not that Learned
Fathers words, where he says, he has given the men of his Tongue a translation
of the Scriptures. For, by Men of his Tongue he means those who understood
Latin, than which expression there is nothing more frequent in his Writings,
when he designs the Latin, in opposition to the Greeks who read Origen's
Hexaple's.

CHAP XXV. Of the Bible, done into the Vulgar Tongue, by Heterodox Translators.
IN the days of Pope Innocent the third a French Translation of the Bible, done
by some Heterodox Divines was published at Metensium, whereof that great
Prelate did not a little complain being informed by the Bishop of the
abovenamed place that no small number of the Laity, Men, and Women made it
their business to read a certain French translation of the Bible, that they
frequented secret Conventicles, slighted the public worship, and defying the
Catholic Clergy to the face began to floot at their simplicity. Which aforesaid
translation might probably be borrowed of the Albigenses, people of that time.
Neither did the Wicklevists in England want their Vulgar translation, whereof,
I hear, that something is as yet remaining. Now we may observe that these, and
such like translations were done only out of the Latin; by reason their Authors
were unskilled in the Greek and Hebrew tongues. Martin Luther, a man of a bold,
and refractory Spirit, was the first, who took upon him to do an old Copy out
of the Hebrew and a new one out of the Greek into the Mother tongue; who was a
smatterer only in the Hebrew, when this his impolish'd, and erroneous
translation (a translation afterward rejected by men after his own heart) came
to cope with the Vulgar Latin which for many years before, and that in the
judgment of all Divines was generally received, and approved both in Churches
and Schools. And yet the Gentleman sticks not to be his own Trumpeter, and
applauding himself for a Linguist, boldly asserts, that as for all the
stratagems of Popery, all the tophitical Tyranny of the Schoolmen; yea, and
the whole Kingdom of Antichrist, he had invaded, subdued, and totally
overthrown them. Nay if we may believe him, he tells us, that he and his
Languages were a terror even to Lucifer himself. The Devil, (says he) is not
so much afraid of my Faith, and internal Courage, as of my Tongue, Pen, and
knowledge in the Holy Scriptures.

But this Patriarch of the German Protestants, as not resting very well
satisfied, I suppose, with the first Edition of his Translation, wherein he
presumes to have repulsed the Armies of the Devil, and to have shaken off the
Popes tyrannical Voke, set his Brains a work for a more accurate Version;
though his second attempt was so far from being embraced by the more wise of
his followers, that Sebastian Munster was not afraid to give his Master the
Title of a very Fable Translatour, Munst. praef. on the Bible, and Notes on the
2d. Chap. of Jonah.
and no great Conjurer in the Hebrew. This made Bucer maintain that Luthers
Translation was faulty, and Melchior Zanchius write a whole Book of the Authors
Errata. Hence it was that the Zinglians confided in themselves, and turned the
Hebrew Bible into the German, that sighting Luthers poor endeavors, they cast
themselves upon one Leo Judas; though these proceedings were not well taken by
the above mentioned Translator. Hence it was that the Low Country Protestants,
mighty Adorers of this High-German Translation, together with those of Suecia,
Finland, Denmark, Ireland, and the rest of the Northern People, who had
formerly stuck close to Luthers Errors, openly declare their readinss for a new
Translation of the Bible; being that, That of Luthers was done all in a hurry;
and that, as John Leusden Hebrew Professor in the University of Vtretcht,
testifies, Luthers Works lay under a great many gross mistakes, whereof some
indeed might inveagle themselves in; but that others without dispute arose the
sluggishness of the Author, slumbring over the Low Dutch Translation. And yet,
as Mr. Luesden tells us the Anabaptisis stood up Tooth and Nail for this
Lutheran Translation, resenting it very highly that Johannis Vrtenovis should
take upon him to Correct Martin Luther upon the New Testament. Though the
Protestants of Low-Germany, in the Synod of Dort, as they call it, rejected
Luthers Translation, which with all kindness they had formerly caressed;
looking upon it as spurious and degenerate, an off spring nothing related to
the Mother- Hebrew: wherefore they were delivered of a Translation of their
own, and Christened themselves the Revisors and Interpreters of Dort.

Now it is our Province to enquire what order and method, Martin Luther observed
in his farewell Translation of the Scriptures. Since he publicly asserts, that
the Hebrew is void and ineffectual, that the Jews are not men to be believed;
and that St. Jerome himself in Translating the Scriptures was not inspired with
Christian wisdom; jumping into Ruffinus his opinion, who gave out that the
above named Holy Father was a Jew in heart. For he wonders that any Christian
will concern himself with the ridiculous Comentaries of the Jews; The Jewish
trifles (says the same Luther) argue their Authors to know little or nothing
of Holy-Writ; and yet forsooth these are the Idols of our Modern and Famous
Divines; Divines most dexterous in the Hebrew Tongue, and yet the most apt to
hunt after such like whimsies. He has likewise a touch upon those Rabbys,
whose Talent is most commonly employed, and laid out in Grammatical affairs,
decrying them thus, That they may know perhaps the Nominal and bare
signification, but as for the real, and intrinsic that they are ignorant of it;
and that therefore nothing of soundness and solidity may be expected from them.
Hence it is that he rejects the Hebrew Translators, and their adherents, as a
pack of Fools and Idiots, who would pretend to shelter the Jewish Translations,
within the roof of the Scriptures. And he thought it much better that the more
obscure places of Scripture should be expounded by the Analogy, or Rule of
Christian Faith, than by any Rabinical Books, by reason the once lost Hebrew is
impossible to be retrieved, and that the true signification of a great many
words in that Language is yet unknown, even by the Jews themselves, as well as
by the Christians: The use and knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue (says Martin
Luther) is so much lost and estranged, that it can never be recovered; neither
do the words only (but also the very Phrases and Construction) lie under a most
doubtful, and various obscurity: Hence it comes to pass that we know not the
force, Figures and Emphasis of a great many words and sentences; which if any
Christian may ever sift out, so as to know their meaning, he must necessarily
be one of those men, who with the help of the New Testament has acquired to
himself the full knowledge of the Scriptures.

That several particulars in this Method of Luthers may be hooted at, is past
dispute, more especially those objections which he offered against the
Translators of his Time, in that they depended too much upon Rabbinical Books.
And yet the true reason why he pretended to calumniate these men was, because
they had spoke against the impropriety of his Translation. Luther, I surmize,
was in the fault when he stood dissatisfied not only with the Books of the
modern Jews, but also with St Jerome, and the ancient Interpreters, whom when he
had strangely disrespected, he betook himself (as though all the world were
Fools but his worship), to a certain imaginary rule of Faith, upon the faith of
his own Brain. Moreover being no great Critic in Grammar he was found guilty,
and condemned of several misinterpretations; so that truckling under Prejudice,
and Opinion; he gives us for these words (in the 4th Chapter of Genesis)
Possedi hominem per dominum, I have gotten a man from the Lord. Possedi hominem
Dominum, I have gotten the man Lord. Certainly Luther was no stranger to the
Cabalistical Doctor's Opinion, who out of this place would gladly raise up a
Messia. Besides, Luther in the first Edition of his Translation had rendered
these very same words thus; acquisivi hominem Domini; I have got the man of the
Lord; which Interpretation was much more disconsonant to the Hebrew Text than
the other. For truly it was not possible that such a Novice in the Hebrew
should not sometimes lie under most palpable mistakes. Wherefore his own
Disciples were not afraid to revise, and correct their Masters Translation, a
Translation (I confess) which they allowed some elbow room within the Bible,
and descended so far as to write their own corrections in a different
Character, or to imprison them within two strokes, which you may see in the
Vinariensian Bible, where Luther's Translation, and the abovesaid
Animadversions are exposed to the view of the World, yet how much men of his
own principles esteemed it, we may easily conjecture, since the Corrections
added to it procured it the general applause of the Lutherians, as the most
accurate Edition. Paulus Eberus who calls himself Pastor of the Church at
Wittenberg used the Protestants in the same manner, as Isidorus Clarius did the
Catholics. This man corrected the vulgar Latin, and added thereunto Luthers
German Translation, declaring that in as much as was possible for him, he
followed the ancient Latin Translator, whom notwithstanding you may afterward
find very much ashamed of his Animadversions, having so low thoughts of his
endeavors, that he desired his Bible might not be republished, because that,
being distracted by other business, when he composed it, he had run into some
mistakes.

Now there is extant a German Translation done by the Doctors of Tigurino and
chiefly of Leo Judas, who was most particularly concerned therein, which
Translation openly opposes that of Luther. And yet the same Doctors of Tigurino
forged a new one as though the former Version had not been found and good. The
Authors of this late Translation are (are as I hear) Hottinger, Heideker
Mulerus and others who have translated the Hebrew words almost verbatim.
Piscator a man of great account among the Calvinists, is reported to have done
a Bible into the German tongue, who though he relied upon Junius and Tremelius
their Latin Version, yet he did not hang back, but kept a full pace with the
above named Translators. The low German Translation, which was taken into
consultation at the Synod of Dort, in the year of our Redemption 1618, came
forth in the year 1637; and by orders of the higher Powers was done into
Low Dutch immediately out of the Hebrew, and not from Martin Luthers High Dutch
Translation, was found errouneous. Neither does the Low Dutch Translation want
its faults, arising from a more than ordinary dependence upon the Expositions
of the Modern Jews, who were rashly supposed by them to understand the Hebrew
better then all the World beside. And thereupon this Translation met with brisk
opposition from some of the the Protestant Faction; and Low-Germany, the
Country wherein it was hatched, was quickly marked out with the brand of novelty
and affectation. Mr. Leusden Hebrew Professor in Vtrecht, a man before
commended, taking upon him to argue for the Low Dutch Translation among the
rest of his proofs, produces as arguments the Corrections of the vulgar Latin
by Sixtus Quintus, and Clement Octavus, Popes of Rome. But the true reason why
these two Prelates should Correct the vulgar Latin, was far different from that
of the Low Country Protestants. The former Animadversions, without vain
affectation, desired only to make the vulgar Latin answerable to its ancient
Copies: whilst the latter sort of men, magnifying the Hebrew varities, which
they pretend always to stand by, set out every day, and jump't up new
Translations of the Bible; which as soon as they come a little in vogue, the
Authors of them presently perkt up, show their faces, and ridicule the Old
Translatour, making it their end, and aim to build up their Yesterday Opinions,
upon these new and unheard of Translations: being the sole way they make use of
to thrust their monstrous Doctrines into the Church, and which they do openly
acknowledge saying, That the Sun of the Eastern Languages arising, they betook
themselves to the Hebrew Fountains, the better to find out, and confute the
errors of Popery, the better to establish their Religion.

That the English Protestants was cloyed and overcharged with the numerous
Translations of the Bible, the bare words of the Bishop of London in his
conference at Hampton Court may be of sufficient evidence. If each man (begins
the Bishop) had his peculiar fancy we could never expect an end of Translation;
wherefore the good will and pleasure of his most Excellent Majesty it is, that
some uniform Version be thought upon; adding moreover, that then he had never
met with an English Bible well Translated, and was very well satisfied, that
among the bad ones, that of Geneva was the worst: where he then thought
expedient that the most Learned in both the Universities should confer notes
together and make up a Translation, which being first revised, by the most
Learned Bishops, and Privy Council, should at last be established by the Kings
Authority. The which being done, the Church of England will be confined to one
Translation and no more. We may easily from hence conclude with what noise,
bustle, and dispension the diversities of Bibles came accompanied into England,
under the different Names of T^ndal and Coverdale, The. Matthews, Tonstal and
Hethe, Parker Archbishop of Canturbury and other Bishops, the last named
persons, being the Author of a Bible Entitled the Bishops Translation. Now the
Geneva Translation, which King James will have to be the worst, is the same
with the French Bible, Printed at Geneva, the which was made English, and Read
in Great Britain by some of the Geneva Profession. As for the History of these
and such like Bibles you may have it in Durel and Fuller's State of England.
Most wisely therefore did King James, the first of the Name of the Kings of
England, Establish That, rejecting and making void all other Translations,
which were then used in the Nation, some new, impartial, and unaffected
Translation should be composed. Likewise he made a Law for Interpretation, and
ordered those who had the overseeing of it, to go from the Bishops Translation,
as little as possible, willing that some particular words which were in a
manner Consecrated to the use of the Church should be retained, as the word
Church it self, which signifies a public meeting; and by the Decree, he
reprimanded the Geneva Reformadoes, who had foisted in other Names, commanding,
for these men's sakes that all Marginal Notes, and Annotations, at the beginning
and end of the Bible should be struck out, as things of bad consequence, and
the snares of the common People. These, and a great many more particulars of
the like Nature were ordered by the Kings Royal Authority; and accordingly
effected; so that to this intent there is no Translation made use of in the
Church of England, than the English one only set forth by his Majesty's
especial command. To which Translation truly their Book of Common Prayer may
bear some resemblance, which Book except the Version of the Psalms, has been
so far from the least alteration, that it has been used in their Public
Worship ever since their Reformation, in the Reign of Edward the Sixth. Though
it be a general Opinion that the English had a Translation of the Bible in
English, done by Wiclift; and that before the above named King began his Reign;
which Translation together with that which was abroad in England in the Reign
of King Henry, the Eighth, was done into English out of the vulgar Latin. Also
Cochlaus will tell you that Luther's Translation of the New Testament was made
English. Besides all this, there is a common report that a Bible was published
at London in Welsh; that James Usher the Bishop of Armaugh, turned a new Copy
into Irish, and Mr. William Bed an old one; and that both of them are supposed
to have been burned.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Translations of the Bible, which were writ in the vulgar
Tongue, and their Rise from the Geneva Schools.
WE find not any French Translations of the Holy Scriptures, and done out of
the Hebrew and Greek, which went not to School at Geneva, neither do I omit
that Translation which may seem to be composed by Renatus Benedictus, one of
the Parisian Divines; since the Geneva Translation, and the aforenamed piece
are most nearly related, as I shall hereafter make evident. Robertus
Olivetanus, born in Picardie, and a nigh kinsman of Jo. Calvin's, was the first
that attempted that great work, and at last finished it in the year of our
Redemption 1535, which was the first year of the Reign of that monstrous
Religion, set up at Geneva, by Jo Calvin, since that before that time (as the
above named testifies) some old Copies only of an old French Manuscript were
read in these and such like places, and those without an Author. Now what
method Olivetanus followed in his Translation, we may know by his Preface,
which method truly was not ridiculous had he been fit for the undertaking such
a task. Though in the interim several circumstances sufficiently demonstrate
unto us the Translator's ignorance in the Hebrew and Greek Tongues. As for the
French I dare not say he understood it, being that Jo. Calvin, who looked over
this Translation, leaves this for an Animadversion, That the Author writ false
French. Neither truly in his famous Preface does he show any competent
knowledge he had in the Hebrew, when he tells us a Tale of a Tub, and stories
only fit for three-days-standing- Hebrecians; where he learnedly observes R.
Aben Ezra himself. This Olivetanus therefore did not take the trouble upon him
to do the Hebrew Copy into French, but with much more ease followed some
forerunning Interpreters. Since he tells us of two Italian and three German
Translations of the Bible, at that time extant. And yet in the very beginning
of his work, he protests that he scorned the equipage of a Learned man's
Footman, that he was free from prejudice, and leaving other Translations,
betook himself to the Hebrew; That he had marked the more obscure places of
Scripture with an Asterisk, and put down other men's Comments in the Margent.

The same Olivetanus sets a great value upon the different Readings of the
Bible, more especially upon those, which he had observed out of the Greek
Interpeters and St. Jerome, through the great light which they give to the
Scriptures. Wherefore he openly declares that he values not the help of the
Modern Jews, or the assistance of their Books; neither is he afraid to
maintain that the Hebrew Vowels were first foisted in upon the Bible by the
Doctors of Tiberius; and therefore for his part prized the Septuagint and St.
Jerome much above the common Hebrew Bible. Neither in writing Hebrew will he
imitate the Modern Jewish Doctors; but prefers himself before them, looking
upon the new Jewish Pronunciations as Monstrous, though in the last place he
acknowledges that St. Jerome knew the Hebrew Tongue better than himself.

The gifts of Heterodox Men must certainly shine forth in a miraculous manner,
before they win the applause of the Catholic, though Robertus Oliveranus, I am
fully persuaded, knew, and ^pp^ov^d f^etter things, when he followed the worse,
who in one ba^e year, punctilio of time in comparison, completed a work which
requi^ed fi^ty years study. The Gentleman, I must needs confess, very seldom
takes any notice of the different readings, and scarce at all looks back upon
the Ancient Translatours: Sometimes truly he sticks to a less obvious sense, as
in 1 Chap. of Genesis where for these words which are in the vulgar, and in a
manner all Tra^slations The spirit of God, etc. he will give you these, the
Wind of God, etc. And to the end he would not be called in question concerning
any affected novelty, he produces in open Court as Witnesses of his true
Translation, certain of the Greek Fathers, who were of the same opinion, though
at the end of his Book he inserts a d^fferent Interpretation. Thus Olivetanus
slid into a great many gross mistakes, not only through his Ignorance in the
Hebrew and Greek, but likewise in the Latin. Hence it is that having a greater
respect for the Latin Translator, then the Hebrew Copy, an Ocean of Errors
overwhelm him; an Example whereof we have in the 1 Chap. of Genesis where for cete
grandia in the Latin Translation, he gives us in the French Grandes Baleines.
But how he can make cote agree to Balana; I see no reason; being the word
generally taken denotes Creatures of an oblong, vast and prodigious Bulk. And
which is much more unsufferable Olivetanus in the 25 Chap. of Genesis where the
Latin Translator reads Lampas, he commits a grand mistake, by adhering too
much to a similitude, and sets down Lamp.

Jo. Calvin's Bible.
Jo. Calvin, though he was no greater Critic in the Hebrew than Robertus
Olivetanus, yet he openly declares the Translation not only to be Mungril
French, but that it stood Guilty of a whole Catalogue of Errors. And yet he
had applauded this very same Translation before, and fostered it under his
Authority, wishing that all learned Men would make it their business to study
that immense and laborious work; and then to publish a Translation of their
own, which he would have presented to the more wise, knowing and sober Divines.
Hen Stephens published these Animadversions of Jo. Calvin, in the year of our
Redemption 1535, who being an Acute, Ingenious and very Judicious Man, and no
Novice in the Holy Scriptures, dexterously corrects a great many things in
Olivetanus his Edition, and through his great ability in the French tongue,
cleared it from all the obsolete words. And yet he minded the matter more than
the words, and for perspicuities sake write a Paraphrase in Place of a
Translation. Now and then no great occasion, caling him away, he recedes from
Olivetanus his Translation, tho he keeps to the Gentleman's method, and puts
down several Notes and Expositions in the Margent, tho not so often as
Olivetanus himself. He is much out in presenting us with a sense less proper in
the Context, and a more plausible one at the end of the Book, which mistake
arose from his small acquaintance with the Hebrew Propriety. Olivetanus had
wisely inserted in his Copies some Marginal Notes borrowed from the Ancient
Translatours, which Jo Calvin impudently takes away, as in the 6th. Chap. of
Genesis where you may read both in the Septuagint, and the Vulgar Latin, non
permanebit spiritus meus, he following Olivetanus translates it ne debatra,
spes meus non desceptabit, my Spirit shall not strive, etc. having no regard to
the Old Translatours, which Olivetanus had ranked in his Margent. There were
several Editions put forth of those Animadversions of Jo. Calvin's, which were
diligently perused, even by Orthodox Divines, more especially that Edition in
Folio, published 1357, which came out in pretty handsome Character, and had only
a few particulars in it altered, and the method of it reduced to that of the
Vulgar Latin. Neither is he here unprovided of St. Jerome's Preambles, excellent
Mediums to Cajole the vulgar People.

The Geneva Doctors Bible.
Cornelius Bertramus Hebrew Professor at Geneva, Beza, Fayus, Rotanus,
Jaquemotus, Goulartius and some others took this abovesaid Tran^^ation in hand,
and in the Year of our Incarnation 1588, writ Animadversions upon it. These Men
especially Bartramus, having a Competent skill in the Hebrew, put the old
Geneva Translation to School again to the Hebrew Doctors, yet more particularly
they relied upon Munsterus and Tremellius their aid and assistance. Both
Robertus Olivetanus and Jo. Calvin were most sharply censured by these
Revisers, who taking upon themselves a more than ordinary Liberty of
Animadversion were sometimes very busy, when they had little or nothing to do.
Hereupon, whilst they follow Tremellius in the 8 Chap. of Nehem. rendering that
Text according to the above said Translatour; and they gave the sense of it by
the Scripture it self; they seem rather to express some of their Geneva
sentiments than the words of the Scripture. A like passage we meet with in the
4 Chap. of Genesis, which Text truly Olivetanus and Calvin had very well
according to the Interpreters translated; then they began to call upon the Name
of the Lord, when these Reformado Gentlemen turned it, and that both very
barbarously and obscurely; then they began to read the Name of the Eternal,
imitating herein the depraved Affectation of Aquila. Neither are these same
Gentlemen any Sophisters in the French; since in my own opinion they go very
aukwardly about to translate something concerning Noah's Ark, in the 46.
Chapter of Genesis doing it thus, thou shall chalk it with Pitch within and
without, which certainly Olivetanus and Jo. Calvin had more plausibly rendered,
Thou shall pitch it with Pitch both within and without, as the Latin Translator
has it, bitumine lines intrinsecus and extrinsecus. Besides who can endure to
hear that expression in the 30 Chap. of Genesis He pill'd the white Rind.

But they have ten thousand more expressions of the like nature, which I omit
at present, leaving them to themselves and their ignorance in the French
Particles, whereupon the true sense and meaning of any Text wholly depends.

Since this time there was never published any other Correction of the Geneva
Translation, done by any of those Doctors; only some obsolete words were
cashiered, that the Translation might look more neat and handsome, though
indeed you may stumble upon their Notes upon any dark place of Scripture, which
indeed multiply according to the good will and pleasure of the Geneva, who have
a most admirable faculty in vamping of their frantic notions of Scripture it
self. It Is not long ago since Samuel Desmarets a Calvinistical Minister at
Groningen, jumbled all his notae variorum, Collections out of the Geneva
Doctors, and the several Editions of the Bible into a full Body, whereunto he
adjoined the Geneva Translation, A Book published by Himself: Himself, I mean a
man certainly of no great Judgment, to swell up his Book into a Folio with a
pack of apeless and impertinent Contents. The French Bible also, which was
Translated by Renatus Benedictus, a Parisian Divine may be thrown in among the
Number of the Geneva Merchandise; for when he was reproved by his Brother
Divines for so rash and inconsiderate an attempt: He protested before God and
Man, that his Translation was the same with that of Geneva, which he altered a
little, without ever a Glance upon the Hebrew, which he never understood, and
that he added and subtracted only as his Genius and Fancy led him. The reason
why this Divine turned a Translator, was because that a mere Ignoramus in the
Greek tongue, had took upon him to Translate Aristotle's Logic, and had got
great applause by the endeavor, which he looked upon as a President whereby he
might be kept harmless in going to do the Hebrew and Greek Testaments, out of
their Originals, though he had lived always a Stranger to both those Languages.
Lastly, let us place among the Geneva Bibles the Translation of Johannes
Adeodates a Calvinistical Minister, which was first published in Italian and
then in French, and is in as much Vogue with the Calvinists as the Geneva
Translation it self. So reverendly is a Translator esteemed among his Fellows
in opinion. Neither were the Reasons slender why his Translations should be so
much cried up and applauded, since every passage in it is so plain and easy,
since the Author plays the Parapharist, and tickles the fa^^^ ^f his Brother
Sectaries, as may be made evident by his Notes upon the 6. Chap. of Genesis where
he follows the Emendation of Bertramus, yet avoiding his barbarity, Translates
the place more clearly and elegantly: Then they began to call one part of
Mankind by the name of the Eternal, though he does not cast his eye aside, and
look upon Robertus Olivetanus and Jo. Calvin their true Translations, but only
puts down a Note in the Margent as a Limit of the Scriptural Sense. To alter
or substract a word breaks no squares with this Gentleman, who acting according
to his good will, not much minds the proper sense of the words, so the vulgar
may by any means understand him. Neither is he so much a Critic as an Orator
and Divine, making it his only business to please the Vulgar, and work upon
their passions. His Notes generally are pretty plausible, serviceable to the
Interpretation of several Texts of Scripture, save only when he bustles for his
Religion, enters into Disputations, Preaches, Cants and ridicules himself. For
I question whether Heraclitus could have forborne laughing, suppose he had read
this man's Annotations upon the 2d. Chap. of Genesis Genesis 1 v.
Eve was not formed of the Head, for that Woman ought to be subject to her
Husband; nor of the Feet, for that she ought not to be trampled upon or debased
like a Servant; nor of the First, because it does not become her to thwart him;
nor of the Hinder part, for that she ought not to be despised nor rejected, nor
abandoned in necessity, but of the rib and the middle of the Body, to show the
moderation which the Husband ought to observe in his superiority and the
faithful Society they owe to one another.

I wish those who have a fancy to read Jo. Adeodates his Translation, that they
make use of the Italian Edition, which is much more Elegan than the French; and
I only advise them to read the Contents of the Chapters, whereby they may
attain unto a full Compendium of the Bible.

Castalio's French Translation.
No^e^ suppose may blame us, in giving room to Sebastian Castalio's Translation
of the Bible in Geneva; tho perhaps the poor Author had the bad fortune to meet
with nothing at that place, save taunts and reviling. This Translation was
published at Basil in the Year of our Incarnation 1554, and was dedicated
afterward to Henry the 2d. King of France; which Translation, to make no
farther enquiry about it, was done word by word out of the Latin, a way of
writing proper to Sebastian, who for example in the 49th. Chap. of Genesis
turned the word Schilo in the Latin Translation, Sospitator, into the French
probatim, port bonheur; so that he strictly follows the Latin way of
speaking thus; First God created the Heaven and the Earth, and in regard the
Earth was nothing, formless and darkness covered the abyss, and that the Spirit
of God hovered over the waters, God said let there be Light; doing it word by
word out of the Latin Translation; wherefore Theodore Beza mightily complained
of it, as likewise of the Latin, and inveighs bitterly against the Divines of
Basil, that they should suffer Castalio's French and Latin Bible to be
published at that place, condemning both those Versions as profane, and the
Author himself, as no great Proficient in the Hebrew, which Beza tells you he
Learned from the most Expert Hebricians, tho he himself had no skill in the
Language. And yet Castalio was not so mere a Child in the Hebrew, as not to
outstrip the Geneva Translators, which he did in several places, hundreds
whereof I omit; tho I cannot pass by the Hebrew word Tannanim in the beginning
of Genesis rendered by the Latin cete grandia, and by those of Geneva Grandes
baleines, which this Gentleman translated very well, and most significantly,
grands poissonnars.

The Spanish Translation.
Here I had almost forgot the Bible Translated into Spanish by Cassiodorus de
Reyna, and Cyprianus Valerius, Reformadoes. The one of these men tells you in
his Preface, that he followed Pagninus and the Jews: The other Gentleman
shows Himself not so much a Translator, as an Animadverter upon Cassiodorus
his Endeavors. To speak plainly, neither of these pretending Translators
understood the Hebrew. That there was a Translation of the Bible done in
Italian by the Protestants may be probable; The Italian Translation.
since Robertus Olivetanus speaks of two Bibles in Italian, whereof he was an
Eyewitness: That the Author of the one was Antonius Brucciolus, we have before
observed, tho the Author of the other Translation is not yet known.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Polyglott Bibles.
BIBLES have the appellation of Polyglott from the several Tongues wherein they
are penned. Now the Jews of Constantinople are said to have published two
Copies of Moses his Law, in serveral Languages, the first whereof gives you the
Hebrew Text, the Chaldee paraphrasely Onkelosius, the Targum, or Arabic
Paraphrase by R. Saadius Surnamed Gaon, or the excellent, and the Persian
Version by Tausus: The other presents you with not only the Hebrew Texts and
Chaldee Paraphrase, but a Translation in the vulgar Greek and another in
Spanish, and both of them writ in Hebrew Characters with the Rabbinical points,
which supply the places of so many Vowels. And some points may be found both in
R. Saadias and Tausus his Persic Translation; though it may be worth our while
to observe that the Jews, who pointed R. Saadias his Translation, did therein
have a greater regard to the vulgar Arabic Translation than the true and
Grammatical, which may be seen by the Alcoran, and made apparent from these
first words in Genesis. (...) Compare these with R. Saadias his Copy, which in
the Bible printed in England, is Grammatically pointed, though you may
perchance find it in a new and different Equipage in the Bible, published at
Paris, and you may easily see the difference of the Judaical method of pointing
from the true and Grammatical. And I will give you a small Specimen of the
Vulgar Greek and Spanish Translations, because you cannot meet their true
Copies in any Europaean Libraries, drawing my example from the 6 Version of the
1 Chap. of Deuteron. placing the Hebrew as an unprejudiced impartial Arbitrator
between the Spanish on the on side, and the vulgar Greek on the other.

(...)

The first Polyglott was published by Fran. Ximeniu^ of Sineros, Cardinal and
Archbishop of Toledo, and was vulgarly called the Complutensian Bible. Here you
may take a prospect of the Hebrew Text, the septuagint and a Latin Translation
supposed to be St. Jeroms, together with a Chaldee Paraphrase upon the
Pentateuch. Now the reason of this Illustrious Cardinals attempt is laid down
in his Preface to Pope Leo the 10th. since that every Language has its
proverbial proprieties, whose full energie may not be expressed by the most
complete Interpretation, which more especially happens in the Hebrew Tongue, it
must likewise come to pass that where there is so great variety of Latin Books,
and so many false readings, there must then an appeal be made to the Original
Language, as St. Jerome, St. Austin and other Ecclesiastical Writers are pleased
to tell us: so that the right reading of the Books of the Old Testament, is to
be tried by the Touchstone of the Hebrew-truth, and those of the New Testament
by the Greek Copies, and yet in another of his Prefaces to the Reader, he seems
to deny the Hebrew verity to recriminate the Jewish Books, an useful method,
whereby he might with lesser difficulty bring in vogue, the Old Translations of
the Church; for he declares that when he had placed St. Jeroms. Latin
Translation between the Greek and Hebrew Tongues, he fancied he beheld our
Savior, or the Catholic Church between two Thieves. Certainly a most unworthy
similitude, and not fit to come out of the Lips of so eminent a Cardinal;
touching the Chaldee Paraphrase, He says he only published that part which
related to the Books of Moses, and as for the remainder upon the rest of the
Old Testament, he looked upon it as corrupt, and unworthy to be bound up with
the Holy Scripture.

This is the method observed in the Complutensian Bible, and the Author
Cardinal Ximenius is to be commended, that he did not compose a New Translation
different from St. Jeroms, and yet would certainly have been more applauded if
he had taken notice of the places, where the Translatour follows St. Jerome a
little too hard, and deviates from the Hebrew Text. For truly Critics go about
to remark that St. Jerome's Translation, as we have it now, is not all of a
make, but has some little mixture of the Ancient or Italian. Herein I quote
the most Learned Cardinal, that he rectified the faulty Latin Edition, which
yet he had the happiness to perform in general, namely where he endeavored to
correct the Latin Translator, without the help of Latin Books: neither came he
well off in reforming the Greek Copies with the Hebrew, though he solemly
declares he had nothing to do with the Vulgar surreptitious Copies, but the
most ancient, and least faulty. He published a Book of the words in the New
Testament, and professes that his sole aim herein was to present the Reader
with the bare Letters, only without spirit, or tone. He says 'twas an easy
case to manage, That the ancient Greeks never troubled their heads with such
like punctill^'s. Now, why he did venture upon the Septuagint, after the same
method, he gives this reason, namely, that it was bare Translation, and not
Text, as is the Greek Edition of the New Testament. In fine Cardinal Ximenius
superadded to these his abovementioned works an Hebrew, and Chaldee Dictionary,
which he did not take up upon trust at the Shops of the Rabby's, but had it at
the best hand of the Ancient Interpreters.

Arias Montanus at the expenses, and by the Authority of Philip the 2d. King of
Spain republished the Complutensian Polyglot with no small augmentation, which
in process had the spacious Title of Kings Phillips Bible. A Book, which beside
the Hebrew the Septuagint and St. Jerome's Latin Translation of the
Complutensian Edition gives you a fair prospect of the Chaldee Paraphrase upon
the remainder of those Books in the old Copy, which Cardinal Ximenius gave to
the Library at Complutensian, together with the Syriac Translation of the New
Testament done into Latin. Neither would Arias Montanus influenced by Ximenius
his example suffer his Book to contract acquaintance with any Translation, save
that of St. Jerome's, and yet that a Latin Translation might not be wanting to
render the Hebrew Text verbatim, he inserted in the end of his Book San.
Pagninus his Latin Translation, with his own animadversions, whereby the Hebrew
might be better understood. This grand elaborate, and princely undertaking tho
it was approved of by the Divines of Spain, Lovaenium, and other learned and
pious Men; nay even by the Universal Bishop himself Gregory the 13th. yet it
groaned under the common fate of all Books, was carp'd at, and pinched by the
men of Leeth. These were the detracting sort of People, who objected that Arias
Montanus had put in Execution a most bold, rash, and nefarious attempt in
daring to publish that corrupt, and monstrous Paraphrase, which Ximenius had
ordered to be laid up in the College Library at Complutensia. And there were
some Jews who thinking that the Chaldee Paraphrase was a great Pillar to keep
up the superstitions of their Religions wished all health and happiness to King
Philip the 2d. a Defender (as they supposed) of their Rites and Ceremonies. In
the mean time, one Franciscus Lucus of Bruges, a great Divine, and a man of
vast Learning took up the Cudgels against these impertinent Detractors, and
made an Apology for the Chaldee Paraphrase. Besides Arias Montanus declares
that Cardinal Ximenius himself had thoughts of publishing the same Chaldee
Paraphrase, and that he had thoughts of adding a Latin Translation to it, only
putting out the Fables. Doubtless that princely Work deserves to be had in
estimation with all Divines; though it be defective in some particulars, as
carrying along with it all those deformities, which we took notice of before in
the Conplutensian Bible. For the Greek and Latin Copies are the same that were
published by Cardinal Ximenius. Arias Montanus did not so much reform San.
Pagninus his Latin Version, as he did corrupt and spoil it, for pressing the
Hebrew which too closely he frequently commits toto casu, and making a great
noise about a little Sense, does often miss of the proper import of the words.
Besides Arias caused a better method and more Copious Index to be published (as
containing more Lexicons and Grammars, than that of the Complutensian Bible,
though many unnecessary things might be left out, which make nothing for his
purpose.

The liberal expenses of Cardinal Ximenius and Phillip the Second were far
exceeded by an Eminent Person of this Age, Michael Le Jay of Paris; who
undertaking to Publish the Polyglot Bible at his own charge, spent his whole
Patrimony in Printing of it, before he had finished so great and wonderful a
work.

First then they took care to have all that was already extant in the King's
Bible, reprinted in a fairer Character; and to these he joined the Samaritan
Books ( viz. the Hebrew Samaritan Pentateuch with the Samaritan Translation)
and the Syriack and Arabic Versions of the Old Testament distinguished by
points, with their Latin Interpretation: a thing scarce credible ever to have
been attempted. In this business he was assisted by a very Learned man, Gabriel
of Sion, that came from Mount Libanus in the Holy Land; and in some few
Volumns, by Abraham an Ecchellensian, one of the same Nation. But that part,
which contains the observations of several worthy men upon the various Editions
of the Bible, is wanting in this work: and through the negligence of those that
were entrusted with it, it happened that the Copies of the Greek Translation by
the Seventy Interpreters, and the Latin one by St. Jerome, were both composed
anew the very same with those in the Kings Bible; the Greek Edition after the
Vatican Pattern, though corrected and amended, was omitted, and the Copies of
the common Edition were laid aside, though they had been (by Commissions from
the Popes) strictly examined after the most ancient and best approved Books,
and that by the Hands of several Excellent Persons and judicious Critics.
However I pass by those faults, which occasioned by the Transcribers oversight
in the Syriack and Arabic Books, do yet in great part remain: Besides that the
Latin Expositors not perfectly understanding the Syriack and Arabic words,
have often sailed in expressing the sense.

Lastly, to this vast Work are perfixed certain Prefaces which recommend it is
usefulness. But in this the brave Mr. Le Jay proves his own Enemy: for
depending totally upon such men as were partly biased in their Opinions by
prejudice (especially John Morin, otherwise a man of competent Learning) he
extolls the Jewish Books, and sticks not to prefer them before the ancient
Translations of the Church: but what seems scarce 0 credible, he possitively
asserts, that it ought to be granted as a certain and undoubted truth, that,
that common Edition which passes about in the vulgar Tongue of the Catholic
Church, is the true and genuine Original of Holy Scripture. But the Fathers
themselves at the Council of Trent durst not pass any such decree concerning
the Latin Books. To no purpose has that Liberal Gentleman drained his Purse in
Publishing such voluminous pieces of the Polyglot Bible, if it appear that the
Latin comprehends the proper and Primitive Scripture, and that we must have
recourse to him as the true Fountain. In like manner vindicating the
interpretation of the Seventy Elders, he draws an Argument (solid enough in his
Judgment) from a Mohammedan Author, who, as to matter of Chronology rejected the
Hebrew Books of the Jews and Samaritans, and adhered to the Greek Interpreters:
from whence Mr. Le Jay concludes, that the Seventy Interpreters were in the
highest esteem, not only amongst the Christians but Mahometans too. Indeed it is
very probable that Mr. Le Jay, to credit the antiquity of the Arabic Versions
which he himself first published, would not stick to say that by the help
thereof St. Jerome had restored the seven or eight hundred Verses of Job, which
were lacking in the old Translation: and this his assertion he confirms by St.
Jerome's own Testimony; who before his Translation of the Book of Job had
premised, that in it were missing about seven or eight hundred Verses, and that
in compiling it he had not followed any of the ancient Translators, but had
collected sometimes the words, sometimes the sense, and often both at once, out
of the Hebrew, Arabic and sometimes Syriack Languages. But that St. Jerome
hereby mentioning the Arabic Tongue did not mean the Arabic Version, is a
thing so well known, that it needs no proof, these words of the Learned Father
signify no more, than that the Book of Job, was difficult to be understood,
since the Author thereof had notonly used Hebrew words, but also Syriack and
Arabic. For the better understanding of which he avers, that with a great sum
he ransomed a certain Master called Lydaeus, who was thought to be of great
repute amongst the Hebrecians. Scarce had the Parisian Bibles got abroad, when
in England the famous Walton and other diverse persons begun to think of
committing these same Bibles to the Press again, to be of less bulk, and not so
large a Letter; that this New Edition of the Polyglots might be readier and
more convenient for the use of such as studied the holy Scriptures. This matter
succeeded as happily as was expected; so that these Polyglot Bibles appeared in
public in the year 1657, and are vulgarly called the English Bibles,
containing six Volums. They are indeed much inferior to the Parisian
Heptaglots in the largeness and goodness of the Paper, as also the neatness of
the Character; But they have this advantage chiefly, that every context and
version may be discerned by the Reader in one single glance as it were, and
with little trouble compared one with another, which cannot be done in reading
the Parisian Polyglot, without turning over two vast huge Volumns together.
Again they are to be preferred before that of Paris, in that they contain truer
Copies of the Greek Versions of the Septuagint, and the Latin one by St. Jerome;
the Greek being first borrowed from a Vatican Book at Rome, was afterward
Printed at Paris, the Latin purged from innumerable Errors by the Study and
Authority of Pope Sixtus the Fifth and Clement the Eight. Besides all this you
have the Arabic, and Syriack Translations of Ester, Judith, Tobias, and some
other few Books which are not extant in the Parisian Bible either in Arabic or
Syriack. The English Edition has likewise a threefold Paraphrase, one called
the Hierosolymitan, another that of Pscado Jonathan (both which are writ in
mixed Chaldee,) and a third Tausus his Persian Paraphrase. It has also the four
Gospels in the Persian and a Egyptian Psalter, all which the Parisian Polyglots
want.

In the mean time Monsieur Le Jay having consumed his Estate in publishing the
Paris Bibles complains much of his sad Fortune, and inveighs against the
English men, as Plagiaries, who had taken his Work out of his hands, and had
published nothing (except some few things of very little importance) but what
he had set forth before. Truly the Gentleman ought to be pitied who had
lavishly wasted all his substance in hopes of future gain. But the English men
in publishing such Polyglots, as are more convenient, and better suited to all
necessities do really deserve Commendation; and had deserved it much more if
they had set out the Versions of the Oriental Nations (especially the Arabic)
which lay dorment in their Libraries; and are of better note than those which
were published in the Parisian Bibles. For it had been much better to have set
forth the Copies of the Arabic Pentateuch, with the Obelisks, Asterisks, and
others of Origin his Notes which are reserved in the Library at Oxon, than to
have composed anew that Old patched Paraphrase of R. Saadias, which was extant
before in the Parisian Polyglots. But what seems more strange, is that the
infinite number of faults which the Parisian Edition is stuffed with,
especially in the Syriac and Arabic Versions, as also in their Latin
Interpretations, should yet be found in the English one, nor taken notice in
the critical Animadversions made upon the last To^e. Much more might be
objected against the English Edition which I omit, since nothing can be
absolutely complete, and perfect. But the most notable thing in it is the
Animadversions prefixed to the forefront of the Book, though this Preamble
has it is failings too, for it seems to be composed by several Authors, who
differing in Opinion about the same matter, become contrary Parties: this is
the cause why Walton in whose name this Book first appeared in public,
sometimes talks a little incoherently.

ANIMADVERSIONS Upon a small TREATISE OF Dr. Isaac Vossius's, Concerning the
ORACLES OF THE SYBILLS, AND His Answer to the Objections in a late Treatise
Entitled CRITICA SACRA.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIV.

ANIMADVERIONS UPON A Small Treatise Concerning the ORACLES of the SYBILLS, By
ISAAC VOSSIUS, D.D. And an Answer to the Objections against the late CRITICA
SACRA.
THE Author of the Critica Sacra upon the Old Testament had bespoken Moderation
in Isaac Vossius, whom he looked upon as a Person carried away with too great
an affectation of the Greek Version. But the Learned Gentleman who well
understood that Christ in the Apocalypse had spu'd the Lukewarm out of his
mouth, and that God loves nothing that halts between two Mediums, In Resp. ad
obj. nup. Critic.
fell more obstinately to work when he set himself to write his small Treatise
concering the Oracles of the Sybils, wherein he seems to have argued to that
one thing alone, the advancement of the Greek Interpreters by applauding,
according to his common Custom, the Exemplars of the Jews. For he returns his
answer to Simon in such a manner, as if he had addressed himself in his work
with a Mind prepossessed by the Rabbis, after the Example of St. Jerome, who
was the first of the Christians who framed a Rabbinic Version, and ^ncouraged
others to dare the same. Vossius makes large Protestations that he does not
follow the Rabbis, and that he acquiesces in that Version which Christ himself
approved; and admonishes Simon to forbear from any new Translation of the
Sacred Scripture, in regard a purer and more genuine Version cannot be made,
then that which was recommended to us by Christ and his Apostles. And so far
indeed Vossius does well in attributing very much to the Greek Translators;
though he would have done much better, had he not affirmed them to be
altogether free from all manner of Error, and that they were not to be swerved
from in matters of smallest moment, as they who were to be looked upon as
Prophets rather then Interpreters. I also extol the diligence of that worthy
Person, in vindicating the Translation of the Seventy Interpreters from the
calumnies of most slanderous persons, and for correcting their Manuscripts. But
when he comes to discourse of the Jews and their Books, the Learned Gentleman
discovers a world of ignorance in those things, and frequently endeavors to
impose falsehood for truth. All which shall be made apparent by Examples. To
which purpose I shall select some things out of that famous Persons Treatise
concerning the Oracles of the Sybills, and his answer to the Objections of the
Critica Sacra: from whence it will appear that he has given positive sentence
in matters which he little understood, I will therefore begin from the Epistle
which he has affixed to that little discourse.

At the first dash, in this Epistle Vossius takes several occasions to traduce
the person himself, as learned as he was in the Hebrew Language, for a Fool, a
half Rabbie, and an Egregious Knave, as one that produced the words of St.
Jerome most wickedly dressed and trimmed for his own turn. Genesis 19.33.
The place in dispute is extant in these words in St. Jeroms Hebrew Questions,
upon Genesis. The Hebrews, as to what follows. And he perceived not when she
lay down nor when she rose up, mark the words at the top, as a thing
incredible, and as a thing not to be comprehended in nature how a Man should
lie with a Woman and not understand any thing of it. Vossius attests, that he
has consulted many Manuscript Copies, and that he finds it written in all
Apponunt, not Appungunt; they set over or upon, instead of, they mark with
points at the top. He would have said truer that he never found Apponunt in any
Manuscripts that were of credit or reputation, for what sense could be made of
these words had Apponunt been set in the place of Appungunt. Nor does he tell
us where he found these Manuscripts. But that we may come to the business,
there was no reason for Vossius to pervert the words of the Hebrew Text,
fearing perhaps, least from that word Appungunt, the Antiquity of points might
be made out from St. Jeroms time. For the sounder sort of Critics confess that
those points were much later then the age wherein St. Jerome lived; who
nevertheless acknowledge, that that sort of points, of which St. Jerome here
makes mention, and which are put upon some words of the Hebrew Context, were
done upon the same ground that the Samaritans and the Syrians fix certain cross
strokes over some words which were invented by the Grammarians or Critics. And
the Jews both Ancient and Modern agree with St. Jerome in this particular.
Mention is also made of these points, in the Talmud in Medraschim, or the
Allegorical Comments of the Jews upon Scripture. And they are likewise to be
seen in the Modern Exemplars of the Bibles; and in most, upon the word (...),
Becumah, when she arose, Which is the word at present in dispute, there is
added this note upon the Margent (...) Nakod gnal Vau, a Point upon Vau. An.
1615.
In the small Venetian Bibles set forth by R^ter Bragadinus in the 37th Chap.
of Genesis where the same point is put upon the word (...), there is this note
in the Margent (...) one of the fifteen Points which are in the Law. Now as for
the reasons which are given for these Points by the Jews, who are troubled with
an Itch of vanity, I pass them by in silence, as being very frivolous. It is
enough to have observed that the Jews retain those Points in their Exemplars by
Tradition from their Ancestors.

When Vossius in his Epistle deplores the miserable Estate of the Accademies in
Germany at this day, where Rabbinisme domineers without control, and no
Theology but Rabbinical is admired. The Learned Gentleman does not believe that
human Learning can be taught or studied where Rabbinism raigns, and the
Rabbinical Screitch-Owls bear an ominous sway. Nor do I dissent from Vossius in
this particular. And I would be glad those pedling Priests might be expunged
out of the number of Divines, who contemning the Latin and Greek Learning, will
admit of nothing but the Fictions of the Rabbis. But that Persons eminently
Learned, who after the Example of Origin, Jerome, Chrysostom, Theodoret and
others of the Fathers frequent the Thresholds of the Jews. should be listed in
their Number I can hardly endure. For though generally the greatest part of the
Books of the Jews are full of frivilous Trifles, yet there are not a few of the
Rabbis, who have wonderfully illustrated Sacred Scripture. And this the
Commentaries of St. Jerome alone upon the Peophets aparently make out, who was
not ashamed to consult the most Learned Jews of his Age. But to the nice and
squeamish Mr. Vossius St. Jerome seems contemptible and Prince of the
Semi-Rabbinical Divines. And that Semi-Rabbie as he calls him, though he have
his failings, has far surpassed all the rest of the Fathers of the Church in
expounding the Books of Sacred Scripture. And I could wish also that Vossius
had first conversed with those half Rabbis, before he began to meddle with
their concerns For those half Rabbis can hardly forbear Laughter when they
read in his Epistle before his Treatise of the Oracles of the Sybils, that it
is not above six Centuries since those Vowel points came to be used with which
the Modern Exemplars of the Jews are loaded; That three or four Ages most
fiercely contended together, while these were of Opinion that the Vowels were
thus, others another way to be introduced: And that the Controversy would
never have been at an end, unless Daniel Bomberg had ended the quarrel, having
had some Centuries of the Jews, and so those Vowels crept into the World out of
Bombergs Shop in Venice. That person, it is true, had a Library well furnished
with Rabbinical Books, from whence he gathered most of his Fictions more
Rabbinical. But they who have conversed with Books of the Jews, well know, that
before Bombergs Edition of the Hebrew Bibles, and in other parts of Italy,
especially at Pesaro, the Hebrew Bibles were then Printed with pointed Vowels.
We also meet with Copies of the Bibles in Manuscript written above four hundred
years since, which have the same Points; and Bibles are quoted by the more
ancient Rabbis wherein the same Points are made use of. And it is plain, that
these Points were in use not only for six, but for nine hundred years ago. For
the Rabbie Saadas Gaon wrote a Grammar about the Year DCCC. wherein he disputes
at large about the pointed Vowels, which were in use among the Jews long before
his time. Besides those things are all feigned that Vossius affirms concerning
the soar contention among the Jews, how the Vowels are to be placed upon the
Hebrew Context. And of the same stamp is that which the Learned Gentleman urges
concerning the Editions of Bomberg, which according to the Opinions of the Jews
are full of Faults. And indeed the Jews contemn the first Edition of Bomborgh,
which was overlooked by Felix Patrensis, in regard the Masoretis Notes are very
unskilfully added to the Margent of that Exemplar; but they applaud and
reverence the second and third of Bombergh's Editions.

In the adding the Mazoretic notes to Bomberghs Editions great difficulties
arose; for that there are few among the Jewish Rabbis that truly understand
the Masoretic Art, which however R. Jacob Ben Hajim with incessant toil and
labor overcame, the first restorer of the Masora. But whether he wasted his
Patrimony in maintaining those Centuries that Bombergh hired, as Vossius
eagerly contends, I shall neither sollicitously inquire, neither is it to the
purpose. Much more might be added to what I have already produced, and perhaps
proper enough to the business; but I am afraid least the learned Gentleman
should bring me to the Bar, for a Semi Rabby and a Favourer of the Jews.
Therefore let us come to the Examination of his little Treatise concerning the
Oracles of the Sybills, where he disputes more learnedly of the Jews and their
Books.

At the beginning of his discourse, this Person of an unexhausted Erudition,
produces some things in reference to the Oracles of the Sybills, which the Jews
more especially in Spain made use of against the Christians. And as for those
things which seem to be more remote from Truth then Fiction, he refers them to
p. 19 or 26. where he handles that Argument; but seeing that it has already
been demonstrared, that the Chronology fetched from the Books of the Jews, less
favors the Jews than that which is taken out from the Greek Translators, there
is no reason we should spend any more time in rifling the Inventions of the
most learned Vossius. The qu^cksighted Gentleman had already observed, that the
Jews in the time of Aquila, had for the nonce corrupted the Hebrew Manuscripts,
and had expunged above 2000 Years, that they might make it out, that the
Messiah's time was not yet come. But in this place, more perspicatious then
before, he believes that the space of that Depravation may be Comprehended
within the limits of two and twenty Years at most, and this he gathers from the
words of Ignatius in his Epistle to the Philadelphians. That most Holy Martyr,
according to the report of Vossius; relates that he heard some say, that if
those things which are contained in the Gospels were not to be found in the
Ancient Monuments, he would not believe them. Now, says Vossius, since he
answered and they denied, it is manifest that the Jews had depraved the
Exemplars, or swerved from the Sense of the 70 Interpreters. But how this
Learned Gentleman can wrest the answer of Ignatius, who afferts that Christ
shall be to him instead of the Ancient Monuments, to his opinion of the Jewish
Manuscripts being corrupted about that time, I confess I do not understand.
Neither also are those words to be found in the Genuine Exemplars of Ignatius,
which Vossius himself set forth, Christo velut summo sacerdoti credendum
potius, quam aliis sacerdotibus: Which however the learned Person produces, as
if they belonged to the answer of Ignatius. (...) I have heard some say, that
unless I find the Gospel in the Ancient Monuments, I will not believe. To these
I answer, that Jesus Christ is to me instead of the Ancient Monuments. But
there the discourse is not of the Old Testament compared with the New, as
Vossius believed, but of the Heretics which springing up in the Infancy of the
Church, denied the Faith which the Exemplar of the Gospel set forth. Whence it
came to pass that the Ancient Fathers of the Church. Tertullian, Ireneus and
others of the same rank, did not undertake to refute the Heretics out of the
sacred Scripture, but from certain Tradition, or from the Doctrine of Christ,
propagated by the Apostles and their Successors, Apostolic Persons, in the
Churches of several Nations. In which sense Ignatius asserts that Christ or his
Doctrine was to him in the place of the Ancient Monuments. This, unless I am
very much deceived, is the meaning of Ignatius's words, who commends Unity of
Doctrine in Christ, whose Spirit ought to be preferred before any Ancient
Monuments whatever.

Many other things also Vossius produces in this place, concerning the
Etymology of the word Era, and concurs with them who believe Era and the
Heriga of the Arabians to be the same word; nor is it improbable, but that
which he presently adds of the Arabic, word Hegyra, as if it were to be
deduced from the Hebrew (...) Hagger, a Proselyte or Stranger seems not so very
likely. The Learned Gentleman believes that several Jews of the Sect of the
Herodians, forsaking Herod their Messiah, who was also by them styled (...) the
Stranger, revolted to Mahomet, by them also called Haggar. When the Jews, says
Vossius, believed that their Messiah should be a Stranger. But these things are
little remote from the Fictions of the Rabbis. In the next place, I would fain
know from what Oracle of the Sybills the Learned Gentleman gathered; that the
Messiah of the Jews should be a Proselyte and a Stranger, according to the true
opinion of the Jews; for that this Assertion is contrary to the Prophesies of
the Prophets and all Evangelical History, as all Men well know. Certainly the
Jews expect one Messiah above all the rest, of whom Vossius discourses at
present; but he according to the common consent of all the Jews is expected to
be of the Nation, and one of the Tribes of the Jews. But they expect other
Messias's besides, and for that reason they give that Title to some Kings who
were well affected toward them. And therefore Cyrus is called the Messia of
the Jews, so also Herod and Mahomet might have the Title of Messiah from the
Jews. And in our age they are ready to salute that Prince or King, whoever he
be, with the Title of Messiah, that will but take into his protection their
Affairs and the Ceremonies of their Country. But these things belong nothing at
all to the word Heriga, which most certainly is an Arabic and not an Hebrew
word. Much nearer does that come to the Truth, which after some things thrown
between, the Learned Gentleman adds concerning the Genuine signification of the
word (...), that (...) signifies the same with (...), so that the Apocryphal
Books signify the same with Mysterious Books, and inaccessible to the
understanding. But who can then gather with Vossius, that the Books of the
Apocrypha, that according to his Sentiments, were formerly added by the Ancient
Jews to the Books of the Old Testament, were worthy to be reckoned as Canonical
with the rest of the Prophetic Books, that the Modern Canonical Scripture,
both of the Synagogue and Church, is maimed and lame, while the Books of Enoch,
Elias and some others are left out? Prophets are become very Cheap with
Vossius, who not only numbers the 70 Interpreters among the Prophets, but also
the most famous Impostors, who taking upon them the names of the Patriarchs and
Prophets and other Persons of high same and repute among the Gentiles, have
Printed the Books of Adam, Enoch, Abraham, Moses, Esaiah, Jeremiah, Hystaspes,
Mercurius, Trimegistus, Zoroaster, the Sybils, Orpheus, Phocilldes and several
others. In a short time, if it so please the Heavens, we shall have Vossius
himself in the midst of his Prophetic Chiurme, forging new Prophesies, like
that same famous Imposter William Postellus, who writes that the Chaldaeans had
the true Doctrine revealed to them under the first Monarchy, and that it was
continually renewed like the sacred Doctrine by the ten Sybils, that the world
might be inexcusable before the Spirit of God; and that Christ, the King both
of the Sacred and the Sibelline Doctrines might be known to be the Deity, that
was to be adored by the whole World. Such Stories as these Vossius produces
concerning the Oracles of the Sybills. But Postellus, yet more quicksighted,
asserts this Prophetical Doctrine to have had its Original from a Woman who was
Princess of all the East, and next of kin to Noah. Who would believe that Isaac
Vossius, who spares for no virulent expressions against the Jews and their
Talmud, should introduce a Talmudic Doctor among the Prophets; if it be so, I
wonder he should be in such a fury against a Person, Learned in the Hebrew, who
expounded the Gospel out of the Talmud. Lightfoot.
He seems to me, says Vossius, to commit a less Sin, who explains the Gospel
out of the Alcoran, then by the Talmud. But of these things enough and too
much: Let us now return to the Apocryphal Books.

I call the Apocriphal Books, when we discourse of Byblick concerns, those
which neither the Church nor the Synagogue has received as Canonical. Hence it
came to pass, that of old, St. Jerome personating a Jew, and lately Cajetane
sentenced many Books among the Apocriphal, before they were received for Divine
and Prophetic by the decree of the Church. In this sense St. Jerome affirms,
Hieron. p^aef in Dan.
that Daniel among the Hebrews had not the story of Susanna, nor the Song of
the three Children, nor the fable of the Bell and the Dragon. Which we, says
he, because they are dispierced all over the World preferring the truth, and
withal depressing their Authority, have added however, least we might seem to
have cut of a great part of the Volume. In like manner, after he had produced
the Books of Scripture, which were held Canonical among the Jews, he adds,
Whatever we meet with besides these is to be accounted Apocr^phal. Hieron.
p^aef. in lio. Reg.
That is to say the Wisdom of Solomon, the Book of Jesus the Son of Syrach,
Judith, Tobit and the Preacher induced by this reason. Africanus.
Africanus also believes the Story of Susanna to have been feigned by a Greek
Writer; others feigned two Daniels, one the Author of the Prophecy that goes
under his name, and the other the Writer of the Story of Susanna, which in the
ancient Editions of the Greek Exemplar was placed before the Prophecy of
Daniel. St. Jerome indeed was the first that transposed it at the end of the
same Prophecy, because it was not in the Jewish Exemplar, which he translated.
And St. Jerome confirms his opinion concerning the History of Susanna, by the
Testimony of other Fathers. I wonder, says he, That certain peevish, waspish
persons are in wrath with me, as if I had cut of part of the Book; whereas
Origin, Eusebius, Apollinarius and other Eclesiasticall Persons and Doctors of
Greece confess those Visions not to be found among the Hebrews; not that they
ought to be answerable to Porphyrius for those things which afford no Authority
of sacred Scripture. Gregory Nazianzen, Melito of Sardis, and the Author of the
Synopsis, which goes about under the Name of Athanasius went farther, and put
the Book of Esther among the Apocryphal Books, merely because not understanding
the Hebrew Tongue, they found some pieces added to the Ancient History of
Esther by a Greek Author, for which reason they condemned the whole Work. It
happened, says Sextus Senensis, that by reason of those fragments of
Appendex's inserted here and there, through the rashness of some Writers, that
Book, though written in the Hebrew, did not find reception among the
Christians. Nicholas de Lyra, also Cajetan and some others denied these
Additions likewise to be Canonical, induced as it is most probable by the same
reasons.

These things have been discoursed more at large, that it might appear to all
what Books were reckoned to be Apocriphal in the Judgment of the more Ancient
Fathers. But Vossius abusing the word Apocryphal, introduces suppositious and
Adulterate Books, instead of the Old Apocryphal, and so imposes upon the simple
and unwary. For whereas he endeavors to make it out, that the Books of the
Sybills, and others which he calls Fatidical, were joined with the Books of the
Old Testament, read in the Primitive Church, and recommended by the Apostles,
it is the Fiction of one that has nothing to do but to sit and Romance in
Divinity. For there were no other Books read in the Primitive Church, or added
to the rest of the Books of the Old Testament, in the Greek Exemplars of the
Bible, than those which are mentioned by the Fathers. Though perhaps some of
the Gentiles, that they might press the Jews and the Gentiles more home, have
sometimes quoted the Books of the Sibylls and others of the same stamp, which
nevertheless no ingenious person will reckon among the Apocryphal Books, of
which we are now in discourse. Vossius is very much grieved that the Books of
the Sibylls and other Sooth-sayer's Books, after they were prohibited by
public Edict, were made Apocryphal and forbid to be read by any Person, when
formerly they were openly and religiously made use of by the Jews, like the
rest of the Books of the Old Testament; whence it came to pass that the
Canonical Books were reduced to a more certain Number, and the word Apocryphal
was taken in an evil sense, for spurious and of doubtful and suspected Credit.

In the mean time he never cites the Author from whence he drew these witty
conceits, which are so like the Fables of the Jews; so that I may presume to
ask this Learned Person what the Factious Cardinal Hyppolito d'este demanded of
Areosto Dove hatrovato tante cogloonare. Where did he find out so many juggling
Tricks? But I agree with him in what he writes concerning the Apocriphal Books,
if by them he mean no other then those which passed from the Jews to the
Christians, with the rest of the Books of the Old Testament; for that the
greatest part of them are read in the Romish Church, especially since the
decree of the Council of Trent, as Canonical, for indeed it might be that those
Books which were formerly rejected as Apocriphal, because they were not
approved by the Cannon of the Jews might have had Prophets for their Authors.
Nor is the Authority of Josephus contrary to this opinion, who affirms, that
from the times of Artaxerxes there was no certain Succession of the Prophets,
and therefore that these Books which were reckoned after that, were not to be
accounted Cononical. Nor is it probable that the Function of the Prophets was
altogether taken away at that time from the Jews; for while the State of the
Jews continued, there were public Scribes who committed to writing the Affairs
of the Nation, and they were called Prophets, because they were inspired with
the Holy Ghost, though they did not Prophecy of things to come. However it is
not necessary to believe, that they who wrote the public Affairs of the Nation
at that time, should be Prophets; for that the Senators of the Grand Council,
who as we know were inspired, overlooked their works, but seeing that the
public Authority of the Jewish Senate, never Registered those Books among the
Canonical, it is no wonder that most of the Fathers would not receive them as
Divine, but only as Apocryphal and of suspected credit, especially in respect
of those other Books which were allowed to be of undoubted Reputation. For that
Book which was of suspected Credit, was not the same with them, as that which
was spurious, adulterate, as Vossius seems to think, only under this Title they
distinguish certain from uncertain; otherwise those Books had never been read in
the ancient Ages of our Forefathers, had they apprehended any thing spurious
and adulterate in them. Only they were of less moment then the sacred Books,
and therefore the Fathers called them rather Ecclesiastical than Divine.

They would have them read in the Churches, says the Author of the Exposition
of the Creed attributed to Rufinus, but not to be Cited as Authentic
Confirmations of Faith, and only upon those Grounds it is that the Church of
England reads those Books in their Congregations, yet I do not believe, that
ever any one here except Vossius ever dreamt of introducing the Books of the
Sybills to be read in the Church.

I know indeed, that some of the Fathers have in great Veneration the Book
which is called the Preacher, and that Tertullian endeavored to obtrude the
Book of Enoch as of Divine Authority, and that the Jews also earnestly labored
to remove several Books from the sacred Context, which illustrated the
Christian Religion. To which opinion also Origin seemed to adhere, who in the
Epistle which he wrote to Africanus, concerning the History of Susanna,
asserts, that the Jews had withdrawn several passages out of their Bibles, to
prevent their being read by the common People. But these things and others of
the same Nature, which are owned but by a few, and which are produced rather to
support their own opinions than to maintain the Truth, are not to be looked
upon as the general judgment of the Fathers; For Tertullian himself seems to
confirm that common sentence of the Church, by his own words in this place, The
Book of Enoch is not admitted by some, because it is not admitted into the
Collection of the Jews. Therefore in those days it was adjudg'd Apocryphal,
because it was not admitted among the Canonical Number of the Jews; Origin also
thought otherwise in other places than what he wrote to Affricanus. But in this
place he could not defend the History of Susanna and the other Additions in the
Greek Edition of the 70 Interpreters, by any other means than by having
recourse to the Apocryphal Books, and supposing that the Jews in Transcribing
their Copies, concealed many things from the knowledge of the vulgar sort,
which were set down in those Apocryphal Books. Origin perhaps had learned from
the Jews, with whom he was frequently Conversant, that Esdars and his
Companions did not suffer all the Books which were extant to go abroad, and
hence he presumed it might be inferred, that the Greek Interpreters had taken
those things which are not to be found in the Hebrew Copies. But this opinion
does not agree with the General consent of the Ancient Jews, who have
acknowledged a perfect and acurate Concord of the Hebrew Text in all things.
Neither does it seem to have been invented by Origin and some others for any
other reason, but that the Hebrew Truth might be reconciled to the Greek
Exemplars, of whose Syncerity there was sufficient reason to doubt. To this we
may add, that Origin in this Epistle to Africanus, did not speak so much his
own Sentiments, but only that he might defend the Books which were then read in
the Church.

Moreover the learned Vossius objects, that a person of unexhausted Erudition,
Clemens Alexandrinus writes, that the Apostle Paul referred to the Oracles of
the Sybills, and the Prophesies of Hystaspes, and recommended them to be read.
But if it should be enquired of Vossius, where St. Paul said this, he presently
answers, that it ought to be sufficient for us that Clemens Alexandrinus, a
Holy Person, and Conversant with many Apostolic Persons, affirmed it for
Truth, but if any regard be had to that Answer, of necessity it follows that
all the Ancient Fathers, were free from all Error, then which there is nothing
more absurdly Fictitious. For they know well, who have any knowledge of
Ecclesiastial Affairs, how craftily those Ancient Fathers and Clement of
Alexandria in the first place, disputed with the Jews and Gentiles. Vossius
also earnestly maintains, that the Book of Enoch and other such Books, are not
to be rejected for that reason only, because that many Superstitious and
Magical Fragments are contained in some Fragments that are extant, seeing that
Balaam was a Magician and Inchanter, yet manifestly foretold many future
Mysteries concerning Christ; as if those things which are registered in
Scripture concerning Balaam, could be wrested to the present Argument; or that
it were lawful by this Example to defend and justify those Books which we find
not only to be stuffed with Lies and Superstitious Fables, but to be written by
Impostors, assuming to themselves the Names of famous Men. By the same Art the
Dreams of the Feavourish Jews are maintained in Midras, Zohar and Rabboth to be
inspired by the same Spirit from whence the Gospel proceeded, as William
Postellus declares, De Orig. cap 17.
who did not scruple to affirm that the Gospel was produced from the Doctrine
of Zohar, as that which had its rise from the Holy Ghost and Spiritual Authors.
The Chalans also says the same, Postellus the Syrian, Indian, Caldaean
Magicians, the Egyptian Gymnosophists and Prophets are from the same Original,
from whom the worthy Vossius seems not much to swerve; whom I would advise to
place among the number of Soothsayers, Lib. Zorob.
the Prophecy of Zorobabel, which speaks very plainly concerning the Messiah,
and was published by the Jews in a Prophetic Style, and in none of the meanest
sort of Language. But leaving these things, let us prosecute our intended
Subject.

Besides, what has been hitherto alleged concerning the Apocryphal Books, we
are to observe that the Jews did not only frame to themselves a Canon of
Scripture, but that the Church has also her Canon, who by her own Authority has
restored several Books which the Jews expunged. Thus St. Austin asserts, that
the Book of Maccabees were not received by the Jews but by the Church for
Canonical, Lib. 18. de civit. Dei. c, 36.
which is to be understood only concerning the two first Books of Maccabees;
for the third is rejected as well by the Church as by the Synagogue. To which
opinion St. Jerome seems to adhere; though frequently in his works he shows
himself a most stout defender of the Judaick Canon. For when Ruffinus objects,
Lib. 2. Apoll. adversus Rufus.
that Jerome in his own Edition of the Bible, would allow no Authority of
Scripture to the Story of Susanna, the Song of the three Children, and the
Story of Bell and the Dragon, which he had called Fables; the learned Father
answers, that he did not speak his own Sentiments, but only explained what the
Jews were wont to urge against the Christians, but Jerome had said, that Origin,
Eusebius, Apollinarius and other Doctors of Greece, would make no answer to
Porphyrius for those Visions which had no Authority of Scripture; and the same
Jerome thus writes concerning the Book of Judith. This Book the Synod of Nice is
said to have numbered among the Holy Writings, upon which Erasmus thus observes,
He does not say it was approved in the Synod of Nice, but the Synod is said to
have numbered it; and really St. Jerome in his Preface to the Book of Kings, had
denied both Judith and Tobias to be Canonical. Now the question is whether St.
Jerome do not seem to contradict himself, when he affirms the same Books of
Judith and Tobias to be read by the Hebrews among the Hagiographers, who
nevertheless, both here and in another place had written, that these Books are
not extant in the Canon of the Jews, and therefore to be accounted Apocryphal.
But what those Hagiographers of the Jews that were mentioned by St. Jerome in
these places, Joseph Scaliger confesses he does not understand; because the
Hagiographies were received by the Jews into the Canon of Holy Scripture, long
before St. Jerome lived. But Huetius believes St. Jerome to be deceived in this
particular in that he thought the Jews had no Hagiographies without the pale of
the Canon; and he brings against Scaliger the famous Bath Kol, or the Daughter
of the voice, by whose assistance the Jews set forth their Hagiographies and
their inspired Scripture. But they are the mere dreams of idle triflers, which
the Circumcised Doctors have invented concerning Bath Kol. Then it is certain
that they never received among their Canonical Authors, the Books of Judith and
Tobias. Therefore they are all fictions, which Huetius and others alledg
concerning the twofold sort of Hagiographers among the Jews; and they may be
refuted not only by the Testimonies of Josephus and Jerome, who positively
witness that Tobias, Judith and other Books set forth in Greek now comprehended
within the Canon of the Roman Church were never reckoned by the Jews among the
Prophets or Hagiographers, but also by the Authority of the more Modern Jews,
who when they number up the Sacred Books, make no mention of them at all; but
only cite them as sententious Writings, wherein however they did not believe
there was any thing of Divine Inspiration. If therefore in this our Age, nay in
the ancient Ages of the Church, they were numbered among the Canonical Books,
that is to be attributed to the Judgment of the Church, and not of the
Synagogue. Therefore there is a double Canon to be allowed, that of the Church,
and that of the Synagogue. And by the first Rule, they may not erroneously be
called Ecclesiastic Books, which the Church, taking no notice of the Jewish
Canon, have thought fit to admit into their Canon, and to be read in their
Congregations. For it is certain that even from the very first Infancy of the
Church, these Books were accustomed to be read and sung in the Congregations of
the Faithful, which Erasmus admires to hear so frequently sung and read in
Churches at this day. But that it was so, Eras Schol. in Prefat. Jerome in Dan.
Erasmus might have learnt out of the Invictives of Ruffinus against St. Jerome.

All these things Sixtus Senensis egregiously illustrates at the beginning of
his Bibliotheca where he divides the Books of Holy Scripture into two Classe's.
Sixtus Senens. l. 1. Bibl. S.
In the first he reckons those which he calls Protocanonical, or Canonical of
the first Order. And these are they which are received beyond all Controversy
by the unanimous consent as well of the Jews as Christians. In the other
Classis he places those which he calls Deutero Canonical, or Canonical of the
second Order, which formerly, says he, were called Ecclesiastic. That is to
say, those of which there was for some time a dubious Opinion among the
Catholics, and which came late to the knowledge of the whole Church. Among the
Books of the first sort he only numbers those which the Synagogue admitted into
their Cannon. Into the next Classis he admits those which in the ancient Ages
of the Church, were reckoned by most among the Apocriphal Writers, to which he
adds the Book of Esther, in regard that some of the Fathers were doubtful of
its Authority; the only difficulty arises from the Authority of St. Jerome, who
in contradiction to the belief of all the Jews, and his own Testimony has
written that the Books of Tobias and Judith are extant with the Hebrews among
the Hagiographies. I admire that Scaliger and others so well skilled in Critic
Animadversion, did not observe that in the Prefaces of Jerome upon Tobias and
Judith, we were not to read it, Hagiographa, as it is now read, but Apocripha.
For though I want written Manuscripts to maintain that Lection, yet the words
of St. Jerome himself manifestly make it out. The Book o^ Tobias, says the
Learned Father, which the Hebrews pruning off from the Catalogue of Divine
Scripture, have condemned among those which they call Hagiographa. Who does not
presently apprehend from hence that the word ought to be read Apocripha, not
Hagiographa, since it is apparently manifest that the Jews never cut of the
Hagiography from the Catalogue of Divine Scripture. The same observation is to
be made in the Preface of St. Jerome upon Judith, where instead of Hagiographa
it ought to be read Apocrypha. For thus the words run at this day. Among the
Hebrews the Books of Judith is reckoned among the Hagiographa, whose authority
is not so sufficient to strengthen the convincement of those things which give
occasion of dispute. If the authority of that Book be not sufficient to confirm
our Faith, certainly it can be none of the Hagiographa, which without
Controversy are accounted Canonical and inspired among the Jews; but of the
number of the Apocrypha, which are of dubious and uncertain Credit, as St.
Jerome thought the Books of Judith and Tobias to be. Thus much concerning the
Apocryphal Books, upon which we have insisted longer then the purpose of our
Subject required. But we did not think it a deviation from our Argument to
unfold a Dispute highly intreagu'd by the Contentions of the Disputants.

But now it was not enough for the most Learned Vossius to have feigned new
Prophets much more quick sighted then the ancient ones, but he must now produce
a new Order of the Books of Sacred Scripture hither to unheard of. The Books of
Moses, according to his own Opinion, make five Volums and not one, as the Jews
believe: and to prevent any man from calling this in question, he produces most
convincing reason's for this new Distrubution. For it is manifest; says He,
even out of the Sacred Writings themselves, that as other Nations, so also the
ancient Jews wrote their Books not upon folded Paper, which is a modern
Invention, but in rolls and continued Skins: What reason there was for Vossius
to have recourse to the Ancient Hebrews I do not understand, when even in our
times, the Jews make use of Rolls of the same nature, as to the Books which
they make use of in their Synagogues; yet for all that they do not divide the
Law into five Volums: but comprehend it in one Volum, according to that ancient
Custom, which was observed even in Christ's time. By and by proceeding a little
farther, the Learned Gentleman affirms that in the time of Aquila, whom he
calls a most impertinent Interpreter, the Jews or else Aquila himself invented
a most wicked and idle division of the Sacred Books, in hatred to Daniel's
weeks, and that they perverted the sense and order of Scripture by introducing
a New Distribution, that is to say, of the Law, the Prophets, and the
Hagiographers.

Now whether a new distribution of the Books, so the Books be entire, let the
perspicacious judge. But least I may seem to carp at small things, I say it is
much more probable that Aquila in his Translation of the sacred Writings
observed that order which according to the method of that Age, the Hebrew
Copies set before him, when there appeared no reason for the Charge.

But he did that, says Vossius, in hatred of Daniel's weeks, whom he cast into
the last place, almost among the Hagiographers; as if the Jews did not give the
same Credit to the Prophesies of Daniel concerning the Messiah, as the
Christians. Vossius admires at their simplicity who believe the Rabbis
asserting the Ketuvim, or Books of the Hagiographers to have been written by
the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost. If you consult the Rabbis, says he, they
will l^ugh at ye, as such as cannot choose but know what they mean by the Holy
Ghost. Why has not Vossius, now become a Rabbinist, cited those Rabbis, that
we might understand by them what they mean by the word Ketuvim? I know indeed
the Jews do not agree concerning the genuine signification of that word: though
all believe that the Ketuvim, or the Hagiographers are no less Divine and
Canonical then the rest of the Books of the Old Testament. The most subtle
Abraven^l unfolds this Riddle. They were called Ketuvim, because they were
written by the Holy Ghost, but if it be so, (...) Ramb. in More Nev.
the word Ketuvim was not designed that those Speeches were written in a book,
not received by word of Mouth; but to denote that they were written in the Holy
Spirit; and in that degree, neither was the Divine Spirit with them, but at the
vory time of their Writing in this Language and Wisdom R. David Kimchi affirms,
that Prophecy is divided into several Degrees, of which one exceeds another.
Which Degrees R. Moses Ben Maimon more subtlely explains. Praef. in Psalm.
But leaving these subtleties which were taken from the Philosophy of Aristotle
and Averrhoes, it is certain that the Jews agree with Josephus in this
particular, that all the Books which are extant in their Canon are truly Divine
and Prophetical because they were written by the Prophets. For which reason R.
Don Joseph Ben Jechaia, Praef. in Psalm.
who has illustrated the Psalms with his Commentaries, and reduced them with
his Fathers to the Classes of the Kotuvim or Hagiographers, compares them with
the Law of Moses, and thence infers the chiefest Dignity of the Psalms.
Therefore, says that Rabbi, the greater is the Dignity of that Book because it
follows the Divine Law, and imitates the form and perfection of it. Which is
confirmed by the Authority of the Fathers, who seem to have preferred the
Psalms before the Prophets themselves; while they join them to the Pentateuch
of Moses. Therefore by the Confession of the Rabbys themselves, neither is the
Authority either of David or Daniel lessened, because they are not numbered in
the Classis of the Prophets. For the last quoted Joseph adds these words in the
same place. Nor is it a wonder that the Book of Psalms contains several
Prophecies of the time of the Messiah, seeing that there are several Prophecies
extant in the Holy Spirit, concerning future things. By this means the Jews
will easily be reconciled with the Jews. And which seems to be worthy
observation, the Talmudic Doctors will have the Book of Job to be written by
Moses, which nevertheless they place in the Classis of the Ketubim, or
Hagiographers.

Who would think that Vossius, of a Rabynist, should become a Talmudic Doctor?
He earnestly maintains, That the Jews, by the Confession of the Ancient Rabbys,
expunged many places in the Holy Writings, and altered the Sense and Words,
Interest so persuading. No Man shall find any thing feigned by me, says the
Talmudic Gentleman, whoever he be that Consults the Talmudic Books, wherein he
shall read these words in several places; It is good that a Letter be pulled up
out of the Law, that the Name of God may be sanctified. But it is not for all
Men to have recourse to the Talmudic Books, like the most learned Vossius. I
had thought that decree of the Talmudists might have been rightly explained by
the Words of R. Moses, Ben Maimon, who with most of the Jewish Rabbys, so far
defends the Immutability of the Mosaic Law, that he believes that some of its
Constitutions may be for a time suspended by the Authority of the Grand
Sanhedrim. Ramb. More Nev part 3. c. 41.
That Talmudic Rabby asserts, That God indeed, Deuteronomy. 4. forbad that any one
should add to his Word, or detract from it, but that he gave permission to the
Wise Men of all Ages and Times, or to the Supreme Judicatory, to set bounds to
the Judgments, to be Established by the Law in some things which they desire to
innovate, to preserve the Authority of the Law: Farther, That God gave them
Liberty to take away some Precepts of the Law, and to permit some things
Prohibited upon some certain Occasion and Accident, but not to Perpetuity.
These were taken out of the Latin Edition of the Book More Nevochim, Published
by Buxtorf. After the same manner speaks the Author of the Book, Entitled,
Cozri, set forth also in Hebrew and Latin by Buxtorf. For upon Cozri's
demanding the Question, How that Power of Innovating any thing in the Divine
Law of God could stand with those Words of Deutronomy, Thou shall neither add
to it, nor detract from it? The Jew makes Answer, That those Words were only
spoken in reference to the multitude, that they should not Innovate any thing
of their own Heads, or take upon 'em to be Self-wise, but not in Relation to
the Senators of the Great Sanhedrim: for that it was not for one Moses only to
engross the making of Laws, which was a privilege belonging to other Prophets,
Priests and Judges, who were endu'd with the same Spirit of God. This, unless I
mistake, is the Genuine Sense of the Talmudic Doctrine, which cannot be wrested
to the Extirpation of the Words of the Sacred Context, when the Dispute lies
about taking away a Word, or a Letter: Nay, sometimes a Sentence in the
Explication of the Context, but not of changing or erasing Letters or Words out
of the Sacred Original. Morinus, from whom Vossius has borrowed whatever he has
in his Works that savours of Rabbinism, after he had omitted no sort of Fiction
to prove, That the Sacred Exemplars were onset purpose Corrupted by the Jews,
at length embraces the Opinion of St. Austin, in these Words: We willingly
embrace the Opinion of St. Austin, concerning the Books of the Jews, by
themselves depraved and mutilated of set purpose. Lib. 1. Exercit. 1. c. 6.
From whom however he professes to disagree in this, for that St. Austin
thought it to be an Act not to be believed, in regard it could not be, that a
Nation scattered far and near, should all unanimously Conspire to Corrupt so
many Copies, and so far assunder dispersed. But Morinus, more quick-sighted
then St. Austin, violently maintains the Fact not only to be believed among the
Jews, but also to be by them esteemed another Article of their Faith.

Now, whether that were proved by Morinus by sufficient Argument is not our
business to enquire. It is enough to have shown, that Morinus, upon whom
Vossius depends in most things, could not be induced to believe, that the Jews
corrupted the Text of Scripture on set-purpose, though he were not ignorant of
the Opinion of Talmudists, in taking away a Letter out of the Law upon Occasion.

Now Vossius, having left the Talmudists, comes to the Greek Interpreters, and
makes it his chief business to assert, that all the Hebrew which we have
remaining, we are beholding to the Seventy Interpreters for it; that without
them not so much as one word could be rightly expounded; that no Versions made
by the Jews, or to the liking of the Jews are good, which were not taken from
the Seventy Interpreters: that wherever you desert them, you depart from the
Truth: Lastly, That the Interpretation of the Scripture is to be fetched from
those Jews, who Translated the Scripture when the Hebrew Language flourished,
and was familiarly spoken, and not by those Jews who are Enemies to the
Christian Faith, and who confesses themselves ignorant of their own Tongue. Now
John Morinus produces Arguments almost like to these, to teize the modern
Hebrew Exemplars, and to establish the Authority of the ancient Interpreters:
which in regard they are most solidly refuted by Ludovicus Capellus, a Copious
Testimony in reference to this subject, and not undeservedly applauded by
Vossius himself; I had rather answer Vossius in the words of that most learned
Author, than my own. First, therefore says Capellus concerning Morinus, and we
concerning Vossius, It is easy to sell smoke to the ignorant vulgar, and to
boast of gaudy Trappings to the people. Then coming to the Seventy
Interpreters, Capel. in Apol. advers. Boot.
he says contrary to the sentiments of Vossius, That the Hebrew Language was
natural to them, which was lost in the Captivity of Babylon, after which they
lived above 200 Years. He adds, That they from the near affinity between the
Chaldee, and Syro Chaldaic Languages, which the Jews then made use of, might by
study, labor, and frequent reading of the Scripture, attain to no mean
knowledge of the Tongue, and many things also necessary to the understanding of
that Language, and the Sacred Writings they might gather from the Traditions of
their Ancestors. But (says Capellus) that they saw all things, understood all
things, never erred, or never were deceived, no Man will pretend to say, but
such a one as understands nothing of the Hebrew, and never compared their
Translation with the Hebrew Text, even in those places wherein they read no
otherwise then we do at this day, where it is easy to see their frequent,
childish, and shameful failings; errors frequently from the Genuine
signification of the words and phrases, and the Intent and Scope of the Sacred
Writings. These and many other passages had Capellus inserted into his Sacred
Criticism, which M^rinus took care to have expunged, because they did not
relish his Palate. But we took them out of Capellus's Apology against Bootius.
Now, what Vossius can Answer to these things I do not apprehend, whenas he
himself knows, that Capellus, when he undertook his Critics, was not overmuch
prejudiced against the Rabbis. Nay, those Semi-Rabbins, whom Vossius so often
traduces, have heavily complained of Vossius and his Book. Let us once more
hear the words of that most learned person, and most acurately versed in these
Matters, wherein he gives a Judgment of the Versions which were made out of the
Hebrew after the Seventy Interpreters, plainly contrary to the Opinion of
Vossius. Id. cap. ibid.
Let there be attributed (says Capellus) to every one of those ancient Versions
their particular Praise and Honor, by reason of their Antiquity, and perpetual
use in the Church; nevertheless, where they are manifestly vicious, defective,
and mutilated, let not their imperfection be preferred before the Original
Truth, and Authentic Text: nor through a certain perverse, wicked, wrangling
and contentious envy, or rather damnable ill custom, be advanced before the
much better and more acurate Translations. Therefore in the Opinion of
Capellus, there might be a better and more acurate Translation of the Sacred
Text, then that of the Seventy. To these many other things of the same Nature
might be added, which I omit, for fear of being troublesome. Then again, seeing
that Capellus was not of that Sect of people, whom the most Facetius Vossius
calls, In Epist. ad Andr. Colv.
Asses void of light and understanding, clad with a little Professors Gown,
instead of a Shield carrying the Masoretic Bibles garnished with all their
Points. I would willingly believe that he will be brought to condescend without
any great trouble to the Opinion of so excellent a person, concerning the
Version of the Seventy Interpreters.

Again, Vossius stands very furiously upon it, That all the Jews who preceded
the time wherein Christ was upon the Earth, acknowledged this Version only as
lawful: That till the time of Aquila, no other was read in all the Synagogues
of the Jews, besides the Version of the Seventy Interpreters, not only in
Egypt, Asia, and the rest of Syria, but also in Judea, where from the time of
Alexander the Great, no other Language was heard to be spoken but the Greek,
especially in Cities and great Towns; nay that in Jerusalem it self no other
then the Greek Language was spoken; and that if the Hebrew Scripture were read
first, the Greek Explanation followed. But so many words as Vossius has
published, so many fictions has he spread abroad. For first it is manifest,
that before the Version of the Seventy Interpreters from the time of Esdras,
there was no other Scripture read in the Jewish Synagogues then the Hebrew
Context. For the Jews had not so far forgot their Language in the Jewish
Captivities, but that it remained among the Prophets, Priests and Persons of
Principal Note; as Josephus Albo, a most eminent Jewish Divine informs us; and
that not unwillingly Vossius acknowledges, who believes that the Seventy
interpreted the Bible, at what time the Hebrew Language was in a flourishing
Condition, and familiarly spoken. Then again that the Hebrew Text was read at
least in some Synagogues after the Translation of the Seventy Interpreters,
neither can the Learned Person deny, who writes that Flavius Josephus
Interpreted the Law of Moses in the Hebrew Language, and set forth his History
of the Jewish Wars in Hebrew, before he wrote it in Greek. With which Argument
Vossius had refuted those who objected against him that he knew not his own
Language, nor ever saw an Hebrew Exemplar, against whom he opposes the words of
Josephus, who writes of himself that he excelled the rest of the Hebrews in the
Learning of his Country; but that he had only learnt the Greek Tongue
Grammatically, and wanted an acurate Pronunciation. Therefore according to the
Testimony of Vossius himself, who speaks contradictions, not only the common
People who lived in the Country and in Villages, made use of the Syriac
Dialect; but the Principal persons, among whom was Josephus, who calls the
Hebrew or Syriac his Native Language, the pronunciation of which being a little
harsh and rugged, was the reason that he could hardly pronounce the Greek,
which was much more smooth and Polite. Now then if the Greek Language were so
naturally spoken in Citys and Greek Towns, why did Josephus, who was not bred
up in the Country Villages, learn the Greek Grammatically. I forbear to prove
that Christ and his Apostles spoke Syriac in Jerusalem, as is manifest out of
the Books of the New Testament. Therefore it is a mere Fiction which Vossius
asserts concerning the Hierosolymitan Synagogues, that there was no other
Language used therein then the, Greek. For, says the Learned Gentleman, if the
Hebrew Text were read first, the Greek Interpretation followed, because the
ancient Hebrew was only understood by the Learned. Certainly Vossius is a most
wonderful Argumentator, who from thence, that the Learned only understood the
Hebrew Language concludes that the Greek Interpretation followed. He had spoken
much more truly, had he said in those places where the Syriac Language was
natural to the Inhabitants, that the Syriac Interpretation followed the Hebrew
Text; but where the Greek was more familiar, Greek Interpretation came after.
Thus also at Jerusalem, in the Synagogue of the Alexandrinians who spoke Greek,
I make no question but the Sacred Text was read first in Hebrew, according to
the ancient Custom of the Synagogue, then in Greek by some Interpreter,
according to the ancient use of the Jews, who since their return from the
Babylonish Captivity, after the Hebrew Language ceased to be familiar, had
Interpreters appointed to turn the Hebrew words into the Vulgar Language, that
they might be understood by all the common People. In which sense I should
think the words of Justinian are to be expounded, by which the Learned prove
that in the ancient times, the Greek Version of the Seventy was publicly read
in the Synagogues of the Jews, who are vulgarly called Hellenists. For if the
words of Justinian are but attentively considered, it will be apparent, that in
those Synagogues the Greek Translation was only made use of to assist the
Hebrew Context by way of Interpretation, as at Jerusalem and other more
neighboring places, the Chaldee-Syriac was joined with the Hebrew Lectures for
the same purpose. Nevertheless I willingly acknowledge with Vossius that the
Greek Tongue had in some measure got a great footing in Judea, especially among
the Persons of chief Quality and Magistrates; yet so that the Chaldee-Syriac
which their Ancestors brought from Babylon prevailed. And to believe this, I am
not only induced by the Authority of Josephus, but by many testimonies of the
New Testament, from whence it is plain that Christ and his Apostles spoke
Syriac. But we shall have occasion to speak of these things hereafter again.
There are some other Objections which Vossius has heaped together in his little
Treatise concerning the Oracles of the Sibylls; but because the Learned
Gentleman repeats them again in his answer to the late Critica Sacra, it will
be sufficient to examine them being collected altogether. Let us see therefore
whether he be more successful in that part.

In the first Front Vossius praises the Author of the Critica Sacra, which he
attributes to Simon, Vess. in Resp. ad Object. Nuper Crit.
because the ancient Interpreters, that is, the Seventy, and the Observations
of Capellus please him. He also extols and admires Simon's diligence or rather
patience, in turning over so many Writings of the Rabbis. But because he
believes there may be something of solidity in their Expositions and
Traditions, propagated only by the Ear, and so much that sometimes he scruples
not to prefer them before the Greek Version of the 70, therein Vossius openly
professes that he cannot agree with him: Nor does he believe that any ingenious
person will consent to Simon in that particular. Certainly Capellus, whom
Vossius so much admires may be listed for an ingenious Gentleman, and that
deservedly too. And in this dispute, Simon has not swerved from Capellus, the
least Tittle, who sharply girds Morinus and his Ape Vossius as immoderate
Persons, who out of a perverse and damnable ill custom, prefer the ancient
Translations to others far more acurate. In this moreover Simon displeases
Vossius, for writing that sometimes St. Jerome receded judiciously from the
ancient Interpreters, as if those ancient ones had been free from all Mistake
and Error. Nor does Capellus forsake Simon in this particular. For where
Capellus in the place above cited has observed several Childish Mistakes
frequently taken notice of in the Greek Version of the Seventy Interpreters, he
compares this and that of St. Jerome the other, and prefers that of St. Jerome, as
that which produces better sense: In Apol. adv. Boot.
and lastly he adds these words. Six hundred, yea innumerable, are the places
that might be produced, in which from the same Copy with that in use at this
day, St. Jerome has expressed the sense of Sacred Scripture much otherwise, and
much more happily then the Seventy Interpreters, as being assisted by their
Labors and Translation, as also with the Versions of others, as Aquila,
Symmachus, Theodotian, by which means he was able to discern the failings and
Errors of those men. Nor indeed do any who have any thing of Greek and Hebrew
Learning think otherwise of Jerome, unless it be single Dr. Vossius, who in
imitation of Ruffinus believes that St. Jerome undertook a new Version of the
Hebrew. Text, with a resolution altogether Jewish and pre-engag'd by the
Rabbis. For that same Prophetic Spirit attributed to the Greek Interpreters,
which our Ancestors so much adored, is long since vanished by the Authority of
St. Jerow himself. But let us return to the business in hand.

Vossius furiously maintains that there is nothing of solidity in the
Expositions of the late Rabbys and their Traditions, propagated only by the
Ear, chiefly induced by this Argument; for that Traditions which are propagated
by the Ear, rarely last above two or three Ages. If it be so, how came it to
pass, that the Seventy Interpreters after the Hebrew Language being lost for
two Ages, could make such a Version of the Hebrew Codex, in all things so
absolute, as Vossius feigns it? Questionless, some will say he avers nothing
wonderful as to this particular, while he believes them to be Prophets. But
whom shall we believe, Vossius affirming the Greek Interpreters to have been
Prophets, or Jerome denying it? But you will object, that St. Jerome was half a
Rabby, who durst presume to make a new Translation contrary to the general
consent of the Church: and that Vossius is a Sybillist, who has raised up new
Prophets and Soothsayers, till now unknown, nor ever heard of. That same
Jewish and Rabbinical Version of Jerome has had many Applauders, Conspicuous
for their Piety and Learning. But there is not one in our Age who embraces
Vossius's Judgment for receiving the only Version of the Seventy, excepting
some Disciples of Socinus, who greedily swallowed his Opinion. It will not be
amiss to inspect the Matter a little more narrowly, and to manifest the Nature
of Tradition upon which the reading of the Hebrew Context depends.

I grant that matters of Religion, chiefly which belong to Doctrine more remote
from the Senses, cannot be preserved for many Ages by the help of Tradition,
without the assistance of writing. But as to matter of Discipline and
Ceremonies, there is a quite contrary Judgment to be made, for that those
things happen to be in use every day; And for this sort of Tradition, and
Ancient Fathers of the Church give their suffrages. Now, I say there is the
same Qualification of Languages, which though they become obsolete and cease to
be Natural, yet among the Doctors in the School, preserve their ancient Vigor
and Efficacy: and to this sort of Tradition we refer the Tradition of the
Hebrew Language among the Jews. Hence without doubt it came to pass, that in
these modern times the Samaritans have the same Books of the Law of Moses which
the Jews have, some small matter excepted. And from that Tradition it comes to
pass, that not only the Eastern and Western Jews consent among themselves about
the reading of the Hebrew Context, but also they who bear the Name of Carraim
among them: because that rejecting the Talmud and other uncertain Traditions,
they adhere to the Scripture, and agree with the Jews in all things, as to the
Truth of reading the Sacred Context. And therefore that Tradition is not rashly
to be exploded with the Carraeans, who reject most of the Jewish Traditions,
entirely embraced. Here I could heap together many other things taken out of
the Jewish Books, by which they prove, that their Ancestors ever since the
times of Esdras and Zorobabel, had Schools as well among the Babylonians, as
among the Hierosolymitans. But I forbear to insist upon these things, and many
other of the same Nature, because they do not please the Palate of the most
learned Vossius, who does not by any means relish Rabbinism. I am not ignorant
that many Jews, especially they who are of the Grammarians Form, who believe
that not only the Sacred Books were variously dispersed, and miserably
mutilated, as Kimchi and Effodaeus were of Opinion, but that the Language was
almost lost: and with these those Jews who are of the Sect of the Carraeans
agree. Aaron Ben Joseph, praef. com. in pent.
For thus writes Aaron Ben Joseph upon this Argument. The Israelites were
exiles out of their own in a foreign Land, and Vision and Prophecy were
sealed up, and there wanted but little, but that the Hebrew Language had been
quite lost. Then certain wise Israclites rose up, (...).
to whom God gave his Spirit, and they handed this Scripture to Us, which
contains twenty four Books. From whence it is manifest, that the Hebrew Tongue
was not anciently utterly lost, though after the return of the Jews from
Babylon, it was no longer Natural at Jerus^lem, but only preserved by the
Doctors of the Law. Thus Esdras performing the Office of a most skilful Scribe,
is said to have read the Law from a Pulpit, before a multitude of Men and
Women. And ch^^st^ from that time the Jews deduce their Paraphrasers, Nehem. c.
8.
who were to explain the words of the Law in the Language familiarly spoken,
that they might be understood by all the Auditory. Nor do I believe that the
Greek Version of the Seventy, of which afterward the Jews feigned such
miraculous Stories, had any other Original; whose Idle Dreams Vossius so
greedily followed, as if those Jews were only to be believed by the Christians.
Then again in the Synagogue and Schools belonging to such places, where the
Greek Tongue was natural, there the Greek Translation of the Alexandrinian Jews
was read, which whithin a short space of time reached the rest of the Jews who
spoke the Greek Language, as being the Language of those that were in power.
However, the reading of the Hebrew Text was not left off, in whose assistance
the Greek Translation was only made use of. Neither will Vossius deny that, who
asserts, that both Josephus and Philo, who was an Alexandrinian, were learned
in the Hebrew. When then was the Hebrew Language lost? was it in the time of
Aquila, whom Vossius calls a most impertinent Interpreter? H^wever, he
acknowledges that in the time of Origin, there were famous Hebrew Schools at
Alexandria, and in the time of St. Jerome, at Tyberias. Now, that the Schools of
Tyberias were kept up after St. Jeroms Death, there is no Man but well kn^ws, to
which at length the Family of the Critics called Mazeries was well known: And
they were called Mazorites, because they bounded and regulated the Mazora, or
Tradition of reading the Hebrew Context then received by all the Jews by the
help of certain Marks or Tittles, which served instead of Vowels. This is the
Jewish Tradition to which Simon attributes most credit; but upon which he does
not wholly depend, while he does not put a small value upon the Tradition, or
reading of the Hebrew Context which the Greek Interpreters followed. Nay,
sometimes he does not scruple to prefer it before the Masoretic, because he did
not set himself to write with a mind pre-engag'd by the Greek Interpreters as
Vossius; nor by the Latin, as most of the Divines of the Romish Church, nor by
the Jews, as the Crowd of Protestants.

But, says the most learned Vossius, the Jews are Enemies to the Christians,
and therefore the reading of the Sacred Scripture ought not to be fetched from
them: as if any Art could be better learnt from any other then they who profess
it. But then Vossius urges again, and Confesses that the reading of the
Scripture ought to be fetched from the Jews indeed, but from those ancient
Jews, who preceded the time of Christ, not from the latter Rabbis, who
understood it not at all. And in this also Simon agrees with Vossius, that the
Tradition of the Hebrew reading is to be taken from those ancient Jews; only in
this he differs from him, in saving not only from those, but from Aquila,
Symmachus, Theodotion, Jerome, and all other Interpreters of the Sacred
Scripture; for that no Art can be brought to perfection by one or another, but
by many together. Simon professes himself under the Laws of no Master: he
denies that a perfect knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue can be attained by the
vulgar Rules of the Grammarians, as being confined within too narrow limits.
Furthermore, he believes it necessary to have recourse to the ancient
Interpreters in imitation of St. Jerome, who not only Consulted the Rabbys of
his own Age, but sometimes the Seventy Interpreters, sometimes Aquila,
sometimes Theodotion, or any other, whose Interpretation seemed most to the
Purpose. And we have no reason in our Age, of making another Translation of the
Bible, which may excel all the rest: For it is not true, as Vossius often
inculcates, that only one St. Jerome durst presume to vary from the Septuagint.
For you shall find the rest of the Fathers have frequent recourse to the
Versions of Aquila, Symmachus, or Theodotion, because their sense sometimes
appears to be better. To say Truth, they differ more from Vossius, who
believes, that the Seventy Interpreters being taken away, all the remaining
knowledge of the Hebrew Language is utterly lost, and that without them no one
word can rightly be expounded. That Aquila and other Interpreters, failed
wherever they departed from the Ancient Version; that he was an Idle
Interpreter, who being learned in the Hebrew, did not give the Hebrew words new
significations from the Greek Translation of the Septuagint, but only retained
those significations used by the Greek Interpreters, though in a different
Order, and accommodating other Notions to other places. And yet Origin
frequently commends that same Aquila, whose Version Vossius affirms to be so
full of trivial words: speaking of Aquila, as of a person, who searching out
the Proprieties of words, and dilligently adhering to their significations,
studied to give them the most proper Interpretation; (...) Aquila laboring to
Interpret by words that carried most Authority. But if Aquila applied the same
Notions of the Hebrew Language variously in several and different places, those
places are to be weighed, and Judgment is to be given, whether he have swery'd
truly or falsely from the Interpreters. Certain it is, that St. Jerome sometimes
preferred Aquila before the Seventy Interpreters, because they seemed to favor
the Jews. In like manner Origin thought that Aquila had in several places more
properly expressed the words of the Hebrew Context then the 70.

There it is a fiction of Vossius's, that there was no man among all the
ancient Christians, upon whom a clearer light of Hebrew truth shone, then upon
all the Christian Rabbis and Semi-Rabbies of our Age. For as it was most
excellently observed by Ludovicus Capellus, there is nothing that was ever
begun and perfected both at one time. The Translation of the 70 Interpreters
was corrected by Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotion and Jerome, and as St. Jerow's,
so is that mended every day by persons learned in the Greek and Hebrew
Languages. In this alone the Septuagint excells all the other Versions of
Sacred Scripture, for that it was the first of all the Translations, from which
all the succeeding Interpreters drew many things proper for their purpose. Nor
do I question but that in the time of Philo, there were extant Lexicons of
Hebrew words taken out of the Version of the 70, both at Alexandria and other
places. Nor will I deny but that Aquila might make use of them as great helps
in compiling his Translation. But for me to believe that he who in the Opinions
of Origin, Jerome and other Fathers, did not consult the Jews of his time, is a
thing almost impossible; and why Vossius should think so there seems to be no
other inducement then a pre-engag'd Opinion that the 70 Interpreters are the
only persons, with whom the knowledge of the Hebrew Language was buried. And
indeed whatever Vossius throws upon Aquila, may be said of St. Jerome, though it
be most certain that he consulted the Jewish Doctors of his time, when he was
compiling his Translation; and very often rather chose to depend upon them,
then upon the Greek Interpretation. For he often declares in his works that he
was instructed by the most learned Doctors of his Age. The same is Aquila's
case, whom he calls sometimes contentious Interpreter, because he sticks
sometimes too close to the signification of the words, more eager upon the
force of the word then the Sense of the Sentence. For which reason Jerome
accuses him of depraved affectation, but never of Ignorance; which affectation
Origin ascribes to his too much diligence.

Now Vossius passes to other matters. He denies that the Sense of Scripture can
be plough'd forth of a Mute Codex, which heither any man knows how to read or
understand, as being half maimed, and furnished with no other Vowels then what
the Enemies of the Christian Faith have fixed to it. And thus he thought it not
enough to traduce the Interpreters of Holy Writ, unless he accuse the Books
themselves. Every Foot and even to loathing he objects in his little Treatise,
that the Hebrew Codex is mute; as if it had been less mute in the Age of the 70
Interpreters then in our time. This is the manner of Writing among the
Orientals, to follow Compendium's: Nor is the Hebrew Language more subject to
this vice, than the Arabic, Chaldee and Syriac, whose manner of writing is
Compendious likewise. The Condition of the Exemplars which the 70 Interpreters
made use of was no better. But there was a certain manner of writing confirmed
by Use and Custom amongst the Hebrews and the rest of the Orientals, especially
the Rabbis as now it appears. For after the Invention of points most of the
Oriental Bocks were set forth without 'em; nevertheless they who understand
their Languages read with no less accurateness, then if the points were added.
The Samaritans never burdened their Exemplars with points, nor are they to be
seen in the Exemplars of the Jews or Volums that are publicly used in the
Synagogues. Are therefore those Exemplars mute? The Jews have also their Vowels
that no way depend upon those points, as Vossius himself confesses; but the
Trrnscribers sometime add, sometimes omit them at their own pleasure. Wherefore
the prudent Aben Ezra most excellently observes, that as to that particular the
Mazorites labored to little purpose, who over-carefully marked how many times a
word is written full, how many times defective, that is when it is represented
with its Vowels. The Transcriber, Praef. inpent.
says Eben Ezra sometimes in writing expresses the word full sometimes
defective, and that for Brevities sake. If any one would take the pains to
compare as well the ancient as later Interpreters together, he shall discern
that from that same presence or absence of the Vowels, something of difference
has happened in Translating the Context. Nor do the Jewish Rabbis agree among
themselves in this particular, as F. Simon makes apparent in several Examples,
who therefore does no way detract from the Jewish Exemplars; but lays that
fault, if such a one it be, upon the Nature of the Oriental Languages. By this
means, the Mahumetan Doctors, adding Points of the same Nature, have settled
the reading of the Alcoran, to prevent it is being torn into several Parts at
Liberty of every one. And certainly the Industry of the Jews is to be commended
in this particular, who by the benefit of Points have consulted the Exactness
of reading the Sacred Writings for the good of Posterity. Certain it is, that
in every Age there was some Masora or other, at least among the Doctors of the
Hebrew Language worthy to be seen; because it was always a certain guide for
the reading of the Hebrew Context. Though it varyed sometimes, according to the
Diversity of Ages, as may be discerned by the comparing Variety of
Translations. Wherefore Vossius does not seem to have understood this whole
Matter, who writes that for the defect of Vowels, the miserable Jews were
reduced to that pitch of Ignorance, that they knew not how to read, unless to
the Hebrew words were added the same words expressed in Greek Letters, which
supplied the defect of the Vowels. This manner of writing, says he, received
by the Jews, Origin followed, opposing against the Hebrew and Samaritan, the
same Hebrew and Samaritan Words, expressed in Greek Letters, the Vowels being
only added that they might be conveniently read. Truly both in this Place, as
in many others, the most Learned Vossius has devised wonders. For not to insist
that it is a mere Fiction which he urges concerning the Hebrew Context inserted
in Samaritan Letters in Origen's Hexaples, no man in his wit will believe that
Origin borrowed from the Jews the manner of writing the Hebrew Text in Greek
Letters; but rather that he, for the benefit of his own Countrymen, wrote the
Hebrew words first in the Hebrew Letters, and then in Greek Characters; to the
end that they who understood nothing of the Hebrew, might read the Hebrew. For
to say Truth, the Jews at that time, as they do at this day, easily read their
own Context without Points; and besides this, without any other assistance but
of the Hebrew Letters, they not only read the Books of the Rabbis, but any
other Books upon various Discourses. Thus they have the Greek and Spanish
Versions of the Bibles written not in Greek and Spanish, but in Hebrew
Characters; of which I will here set down some few Examples, that the more
skilful may judge, whether the Jews were so miserable that they could not write
the words of their own Language, but in Foraign Characters; while they write,
and that properly enough the Languages of other Nations in Jewish Letters. Thus
in the Greek Interpretation of the Pentateuch set forth at Constantinople, we
read in Hebrew Letters (...), the Lord. (...), God. (...), to. (...), the Bound
or Limit. (...), she. (...), and. Together with innumerable others of the same
nature to which the Jews add pointed Vowels which seem unprofitable, in regard
the word can hardly be read otherwise without 'em. The same is the nature of
the Spanish Tongue, from whence the Vowels may be absent without any detriment
to the Genuine Reading; after which manner we read, (...), en elmonte, in the
Mountain; (...), Estar, to stand, or be (...), Veedi a delante de vos ala
Fierra, see before ye the Land. (...) El grande Rio, the Great River. (...), a
vuestros Padres, to your Fathers. From hence it is manifest, that the Hebrew
Language does not want its Vowels; and I could here produce other Specimens of
several Languages expressed in Hebrew Characters without any Point-Vowels, yet
are easily and quickly read by the help of the Letters; Especially N, Aleph,
Vau and Jod; which the Jews call the Mothers of reading; But it happens, as has
been already observed, that the Transcribers frequently omit those Vowels; from
whence arose at length no small disagreement between the Manuscript Exemplars,
which is still to be seen in those of best repute, and which was much more
before the Critical Annotations of the Mascreth, according to which they are
now most of them corrected.

The Thing it self may be also illustrated by the Example of other Languages in
affinity with the Hebrew, as the Arabic, Chaldee and Syriac. Of late the
Persians and Turks use no other Letters than the Arabic, which those Nations
have accommodated to their own Use. Hist. ^ers. c. 22.
Of the Persians thus Texeira. Quando los Arabes entraron en Persia, y la
sennorearon, introduxeron en ella sa charactere y modo die escrivir, al qual las
Perses se applicaron y accommodaron, de sort que Olvidaron, y se perdio total
mente el proprio suya. When the Arabians entered into Persia and made
themselves Lords of the Country, they introduced into it their Character and
manner of Writing; to which the Persians applied and accustomed themselves in
such a manner, that they forgot and totally lost their own. But we spend time
in vain upon these things, for no man is ignorant that the Persians and Turks
make use of no other than the Arabian Characters, which as to the Subject of
the present dispute altogether resemble the Hebrew. Nor is that Example any
more to the purpose, which Vossius annexes from the written Works of Homer and
Virgil, had they come to our Hands without Vowels, in regard there is a vast
difference between the Greek, Latin and the Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriac and Arabic
Languages. The Learned Gentleman adds another Fiction, that this manner of
Writing that is in Greek Letters, was in use among the Jews, for almost a
Thousand Years, that is to say to the time of the Masorites, who almost six
Hundred Years before, neglecting this double manner of Writing, imitating the
Arabians and Syrians, introduced Points and Tittles, which they made use of
instead of Vowels. But as to that, it is now eight Hundred Years ago, that R.
Saadias wrote certain little Treatises of Grammar, whence it appears, that
before those times Point-Vowels were added to the Exemplars of the Bible. To
what end does he mention the Mazorites, whom I do not deny to have been the
Inventors of points, when they themselves lived long before R Saadias? But,
says Vossius, that points are a late Invention is manifest from hence, for
that there appears no Book, no Monument of them that is more ancient than five
Hundred Years. By the same reason I might say, that before six Hundred Years
ago, there were no Hebrew Exemplars of the Bible, which are not to be found in
our age, which pretend to a higher Antiquity. But I blush to spend more time in
refuting these things which are so openly false. F. Simon. has produced
Monuments much more Ancient, wherein the Points are to be seen. After this
Vossius violently Assails the Jews, and infers that they have adapted wrong and
depraved Vowels to most words from the proper Names which we frequently meet
with in the Gospels and other Writings of the Ancient Jews. That of necessity,
says the Learned Gentleman, the modern points were added sillily and
injudiciously, or that Christ and all the Apostles and Ancient Jews were
ignorant of the Names of the Prophets and their Forefathers. But the most
excellent Vossius does not observe that those very Names are pronounced and
written at this very day by the Jews of various Nations, after a different
manu^^. The Italians write 'em one way, the Germans another, the Spaniards
another way. The Spaniards come nearest the Ancient manner of Writing and
Pronouncing, because their pronunciation is more pure. But the German Jews are
farther off then all the rest, from the true manner of Writing and Pronouncing,
which is manifest from the Books which they have severally written in the
Itaiian, Spanish and German Languages, wherein the Hebrew words are written
after a quite different manner, and in other Letters. But it is certain that
they did not derive that variety of Writing from the various Lections of the
Hebrew Exemplars. But the fault of Pronunciation which arises from the vulgar
Speech, draws along with it the errors of Spelling and Writing. Whence it
comes to pass, that most of the Hebrecians who learn Hebrew from Buxtorf's
Hebrew Grammar, pronounce the Hebrew words very ill, and after the German
manner. All which has been observed in few words by Leo Modena, who in favor
of his own Nation prefers the Pronunciation of the Italians before all the
rest. Leo Mod. Hist. de Rit. Heb. p. c. 1.
Nella Provincia di essa lingua Hebraea, says that great Master, sono talmonte
poi tra di loro differenti, che a pena sono intesi Tedeschi da gli Italianie
Levantini. Nevi e chi piu chiaro e conform all regole della vera Grammatica
fav^ll^che Italiani. In the Province of the Hebrew Language, they are so
absolutely different from one another, that the Dutch are hardly understood by
the Italians and Easterly People. Nor are there any who speak more clearly and
conformably to the Rules of true Grammar then the Italians. That this was the
chance of all Languages we may learn from the Ancient Grammarians. And this
Argument has Erasmus most excellently handled in his Dialogue concerning the
true Pronunciation of the Greek and Latin Tongues; where he observes that
Maximilian Caesar being congratulated by the Ambassadors of several Nations,
all that heard them believed that not one Oration was pronounced according to
the Latin Pronunciation, but every one according to the vulgar Pronunciation of
the Country. The same Erasmus relates, that the Oration of a Frenchman, no bad
Latin neither, was pronounced so much after the French Mode, that the standers
by believed him rather to speak French then Latin. To which Oration of the
French, a Court Doctor answered so much after the German manner, that no German
could have pronounced his own Mother Tongue more German like: For he began
thus, Cesarea M^ghest as pene caudet fidere for, and horationem festram
lipenter audifit; instead of Cesarea Majestas been gaydet videre vos, and
Orationem vestram libenter audivit. His Caesarean Majesty rejoices much to see
you, and has gladly heard your Oration. Not much unlike to this do the German
Jews pronounce and write the Hebrew Language after the German manner; and
thence has arisen that strange difference in proper Names, which is to be
observed in the Versions of Paginius, Munster and other Interpreters, if they
be compared with the Gospels and other Ancient Writings of the Jews.

But now the Learned Gentleman contends that the Exposition of the Hebrew words
becomes uncertain, by reason of the defect of the Vowels, and believes F. Simon
to be of the same opinion, who also believed, that thence it happened that the
Rabbis affirmed that the Hebrew Codex's had 7^ Faces. True it is indeed that
Simon does attribute in part, the diversity of Interpreters of the Hebrew
Context, to the inconstancy of the Vowels sometimes added, sometimes omitted.
But he explains after a different manner, the 72 Faces, which according to the
opinion of the Jews the Hebrew Codex's seem to wear. Nor is there any reason
that Vossius should so frequently object that Proverb of the Jews, which he
seems not to have understood. For one pure Sense of Scripture is no less
approved by the Jews, then by the most Learned Vossius. But under the Name of
72 Faces are comprehended those Allegorical Senses, which are as many as there
are idle oscitant Rabbis to invent'em. it is a common saying, not only among
the Jews of the Caraean Sect, but among the Rabbinists who have any Learning or
Judgment, (...), The Scripture does not go beyond the Literal Sense; which the
Learned Aben Ezra professes to be that which he always embraces, scorning the
Seventy Two Faces or Allegorical and Cabbalick Senses, which most of the Jews
superstitiously observe that inhabit the Eastern Counties. Therefore to me they
seem more silly than the Jews themselves, who have collected sundry Monsters of
Fables out of the Books of the Rabbis, to bring an Odium upon those
circumcised Doctors: The Talmudic Books and the ancient Medr^schim, or
Allegorical Commentaries, are full of those portentous Stories. In this Sense
the Rabbis say, that Moses did not dye. That while R. Simeon Ben Jochai lived,
and all the Reign of Ezekiah there was no Rainbow, because they were just men.
That when Jonathan began his Chaldee Paraphrase, the Birds that flew over his
Head were burnt in a moment. I pass by six hundred more of the same Stamp,
which the wiser Jews believe to have been spoken in an Allegorical Sense;
hither are all those Fables to be referred, all those Fables which the Rabbis
have invented concerning the LXXII. Faces of Scripture. Let Vossius therefore
forbear to object against them, that there can be no Truth, where the Sense is
so manifold.

After much wrangling in the same place, the Learned Gentleman offer many
things concerning the name of Prophet, which are altogether from the purpose
and of no use: For, as if he were ashamed to have numbered the Greek
Interpreters among the Prophets, he affirms them to be truly Prophets, who
rightly interpret the Scripture, seeing that Prophet is the same with
Interpreter, and (...) to interpret: As if the present Dispute were concerning
this Sort of Prophecy. Vossius was derided by Simon for endeavoring to set a
foot again his stale and rank Opinion of the Prophetship of the LXX.
Interpreters, induced thereto by no other Arguments, than out of a hatred to
those whom they call Semi-Rabbies: But whether those things tend, which the
most acute Gentleman more prolixly faigns, to show that not only among the
Greeks but also among the Egyptians, the Interpreters and Fore-tellers of
Dreams and future things were called Prophets, I am not so Argus Eyed as to
perceive. He also vehemently maintains that God conferred the gift of Prophecy
upon the Worshippers of Idols. But what is all this to the present purpose? He
calls the Greek Version divinely inspired, and labors very hard to prove that
the Authors thereof were inspired with the Holy Ghost, and to make their (...)
or Inspiration out. Simon therefore not impertinently objects against Vossius,
that sort of Prophecy was taken from the 70 Interpreters long ago, even in the
time of St. Jerome. Rather he imposes upon Simon, when he calls him to an
account, as if he believed that Stephen or vulgar Syriac, but in the Hebrew
Language. What will remain entire in the Church, says the Man Religious even
to Superstition, if we admit such Fictions as these? But Vossius is so
accustomed to the framing of Fictions, that he scrupled not to forge new in
this place, to refute them afterward with his own Fictitious Reason. Simon
thought the opinion of St. Jerome very probable, who wrote that it was not
likely, that Stephen in his Sermon to the Hierosolymitan Jews, quoted his Old
Testament Testamonies out of any other then the Hebrew Exemplars. Simon does
not speak of words of the Sermon which it is plain were spoken in the Syriac,
but of the places of Scripture which are cited by Stephen in that Sermon.
Vossius's device is, as if Simon thought that the common People in the time of
the Apostles understood the Ancient Hebrew Language, whereas he rather every
where affirms, that the vulgar of Jerusalem spoke Syriac. In the Hierasolymitan
Synagogues, where the Syriac was altogether natural, the Law was not read in
Greek but Hebrew, to which the Syriac and not the Greek Interpretation was
joined, as Vossius has faign'd.

Again he maliciously objects against Simon, that the Writing of Aristaeus was
by him treasured up among the Fictitious Writings for that reason, because it
was a solemn custom of the Jews to faign and write things Incredible; when as
those things which are contained in Moses and the Prophets, are more
incredible; as if Simon had only proved from the solemn Custom of the Jews to
feign and write Incredibilities, that the History of Aristaeus was Fictitious.
Whereas he produces most solid Reasons taken from the work of Aristaeus
himself, and shows upon the Testimony of Phylo Herennius, which Origin Reports,
that the Jews of that time feigned many things very improbable. But I do not
wonder that Vossius compares such sort of Impostors with Moses and the
Prophets, who had already seated them among the Prophets. Nevertheless in the
same Treatise, whereas for the most part always he speaks those things that
hardly hold Water, the learned Gentleman Writes, that Truth is a Stranger to
the Writings of the Jews, that there is so much Ignorance, so much Barbarity,
such a World of Fictions, that there is nothing more true then that Satirical
Sarcasm.

-- Are minuto
Qualicunque volunt Judei somnia vendunt.
Maliciously also, and quite contrary to the meaning of Simon, Vossius adds
some other things, to which it is needless to answer, seeing that Simon's Book
it self is now every where public both in Latin and French, tho the new French
Edition, and the Latin which is taken out of it, is very full of faults of the
Press. But now Vossius to press Simon the more home, demands from whence
Demetrius Falarius had his story of the Kings of the Jews, if in his time there
were no Greek Version. This also Vossius feigns to fancy himself an Adversary,
For Simon will readily acknowledge, that the History of Demetrius was taken out
of the Greek Version, which is vulgarly attributed to the 70 Elders: Nor does
he ever dispute of the Age wherein the Authors of that Version lived, but of
the Authors themselves, and believes that what is reported by Aristeus
concerning them, to be a Fable. As to the time wherein that Version was began
and finished, Vossius will not find F. Simon differing from the Alexandrian
Jews. But he can hardly be induced to believe so many Fables as are vulgarly
reported concerning them. In the mean time let the most delicate Vossius enjoy
his own judgment, who so greedily catches at dreams more than Rabbinically, and
because the Learned Gentleman, now grown more perspicacious, has entered the
Lifts, he now no longer doubts, that not only the Pentateuch but all the
Historical and Prophetic Books were Translated by the 70 Interpreters, though
he confesses he doubted it before. Nevertheless, the reasons of his doubting
are very ponderous, which are to be fetched from the Testimonies of Josephus,
Jerome and the Ancient Jews, F. Simon had denied that the words of Aristeus were
understood by Vossius; now the Learned Gentleman appeals to all that understand
Greek, to whose determination I think we ought to stand; and I could wish that
the same Judges were to consider what Vossius has transferred out of Eusebius
and other Writers, into his is that incomparable Gentleman in all things, who
again devises new Hexaples of Origin, which were never yet seen. More probable
are those things which he by and by adds concerning Origin, who inserted the
whole Version of the 70 Interpreters faithfully transcribed into his Hexaples;
not altered in some places as Simon suspects. Yet we may suspect with Simon,
that Origin did not so entirely correct the Greek Interpretation, which he
himself acknowledges to have been overrun with Errors and Faults, but that he
altered some places under pretense of Amendment, when as he did not only
examine it by the most approved Copies of that Version, but by the Hebrew
Exemplars and the Translations of Aquilla, Sym^^chus, Theodotion and others.
Which he could hardly attain to, but that had vitiated that Version in many
places before, especially when Origin set a higher value upon the Hebrew Truth,
then Vossius is aware of, if we believe St. Jerome, who well knew the
disposition of the Person. But as for Adamantius, I s^y nothing, who when he
follows the common Edition in his Homilies, which he speaks to the People, in
his Times, that is his larger d^spute, guarded with Hebrew Truth and surrounded
with squad^ons of his own, he sometimes seeks the aid of Foreign Language.
O^igen therefore carried himself one way with Learned Men, another with the
Ignorant Multitude, and as the Proverb is, Wise with a few, spoke those things
which were in common. With this agrees what he writes against Celsus, for after
he has produced some things out of the Book of Exodus, according to the vulgar
Exemplars of the Greek Version, he presently adds the Section of the Hebrew
Text with this Animadversion, (...). But these things which seem to be more
nice, and not so fit for vulgar Ears. Therefore the Learned Gentleman is in an
Error, who believed that Origin approved no other Exemplars but those of the
Septuagint. He is ignorant of the Laws of that management which most of the
Fathers, especially Origin, observed, to the end they might accommodate
themselves to the already received opinions of the People; which prudence of
Origin in our Age, the most Eminent Divines of the Roman Church do imitate, who
granting to the People the use of the Latin Edition, reserve to themselves the
knowledge of the Hebrew Truth. Now because Simon gives no credit to the
Prodigious discourses of Aristaeus, concerning the 70 Interpreters, while he
endeavors to give a reason why it was fixed upon the 70, he confesses that he
adheres to the opinion of those, who believe it to have born that name from the
72 Senators of the Hierosolymitan Sanhedrim, who approved it by their Sufferage
and Authority. Yet he affirms nothing, but only makes a conjecture upon a thing
so obscure and so far remote from our times. But notwithstanding all his
Modesty Vossius falls fiercely upon him, and demands if that Greek Version were
approved by the whole Sanhedrim, how it came to be so full of faults, as if of
necessity the Authority of the Grave Sanhedrim, which Simon suspects to have
allowed that Version to be publicly read in the Synagogues and Schools, had
been sufficient to exempt it from all Error? Certainly it could derive no
greater Authority from the Decree of the Hierosolymitan Senators, then was
ascribed to the Latin Edition, after the Fathers of the Council of Trent had
authorized it by their Constitution. Was the Latin Interpreter therefore purged
from all the faults with which it formerly abounded? No. In this also appears
the greatest equality between both decrees, that as it came to pass in the
Western Church, through Ignorance of the Greek and Hebrew Languages, that the
Bibles were Translated and read in the Latin Tongue, so also the Ignorance of
the Hebrew among the Hellenist Jews, was the reason that the Alexandrian Jews
Translated for their own use the Sacred Writing into Greek, which Greek
Translation afterward grew to be current among all the Jews that understood
Greek, and was perhaps approved by the Hierosolymitan Senators. I say perhaps,
because there is no need to have recourse to their Authority, for the
Exposition of the reason why this Version was attributed to the 70 Elders.

But only we are to observe the form of Speech so familiar among the Jews,
whereby the used to refer all things which seemed to be of any moment (...) To
the Men of the great Synagogue. Which kind of Phrase has lead many Learned Men
into several Errors while they turn over the Books of the Jews with a
Circumspection too remiss; whereas we are to heed not so much what those
Doctors say, as how and for what reason they speak it. So the Rabbis eagerly
maintain, that the Points of the Holy Scripture and such other things derive
their Original from the Men of the Great Synagogue, speaking according to the
Phrase of the Country, not according to the Truth of the Thing. And thus it is
more proper to conjecture that the Greek Version was attributed to the Seventy
Interpreters, than with Vossius to give credit to the Fictions of Aristaeus.

Then again the Learned Gentleman is displeased that Simon endeavored to
restore the Hellenistick Language exploded by the Learned men, and to obtrude
it under the name of the Language most current in the Synagogue; as if among
them there had been any more peculiar Language, which was neither Greek nor
Hebrew, that by that means he might make it out that the Seventy Interpreters
understood neither Greek nor Hebrew. Certainly Simon knew what had been already
written by the Defenders of the Hellenistick Language, but with the good favor
of that Learned Gentleman. I may say, that while he disputed about the shadow
of an Ass, he did but raise Contentions about a Name, Simon does not lay
ignorance to the charge of the Greek Interpreters of the Hebrew and Greek, but
only (...) or a depraved affectation natural to the Jews especially in
Translating the Scriptures, who while they labor to express the Hebrew words
too curiously and literally, turn a little aside from the common and more
received Idiome and to some words give particular and distinct Notions from the
Vulgar. This is to be observed almost in all the Versions of Sacred Scripture
compiled by the Jews, as Simon truly demonstrates: by whom it was also most
excellently observed, that the Greek Interpretation of the Seventy Seniors was
hardly understood by most of the Greek Fathers, because it retained something
of the Idiom of the Syriac or Hebrew Language. And thus the Spanish Translation
set forth at Ferrara, which was done by the Jews, can hardly be read by those
who understand not Hebrew, though well versed in the Spanish. And this was the
reason why the ancient Interpreter of the Greek Version has but ill rendered not
a few Greek words, not having attained the force and propriety of their
signification. Some also, Jerome himself seems not to have understood, though
both Hebrecian and Grecian; while he seems to adhere more to the Greek then
Hebrew whence the Greek were taken. Vossius also objects against Simon that he
understood not what the Hellenists were. I confess that Simon understood not
before what Vossius had feigned contrary to the Opinion of the most Learned
men, who to show his Greek Erudition, expounds the word -- (...), to side with
the Greeks, as (...), fignifie to imitate the Manners and Customs, and side
with the Romans, M^des, Persians and Antigonus. Now considering the present
Argument, where the Dispute with Vossius is about Critical Learning, this is as
much as if I should say, That Vossius is not only a skilful Critic, but a
Canon of Windsor, who quavers forth the English Liturgy most sweetly in the
Chapel. It is certain that the Jews were of two sorts, and (...), the
Scattering of the Greeks, was distinct from those Jews who at that time, both
in Judea, Samaria, Babylon, and other Neighboring Regions spoke the Syriac
Language, and made use of the Hebrew Exemplars. They because they were
dispersed among Nations where the Greek tongue was familiar, spoke Greek; and
read the Scripture in Greek, are called in the Acts of the Apostles(...)
Hellenists. And in reference to them are these words of the Jews to be
expounded in the Gospel of St. John, (...), will he come to the scattering of
the Hellenists? Now Simon, mending his own subject, asserts that the Greek
Interpretation of the Seventy, was chiefly approved by the Hellenist Jews, who
understood Greek: not so by the rest of the Jews, to whom the Greek was not so
familiar, as the Inhabitants of Babylon, Palestine, Syriac and Judea, who all
spoke either Chaldee or Syriac. Nevertheless Simon does not deny but that there
were some Hellenists among them; and so there was a Synagogue of Alexandrians
at Jerusalem, and several Hellenist Jews l^v'd at Antiochia, as appears from
the Acts of the Apostles. So that the dispute being only concerning the Hebrew
Context and the Greek Interpretation of it, therewas no necessity for Vossius
to run out of his way, in imitation of Vossius, to call the Hellenist Jews, who
being of a peaceful disposition readily paid their Tribute, and admonished
others that the Yoke imposed by God was to be born with patience, and therefore
submitted to the Greeks. As if at Jerusalem and in other places where the Jews
did not go by the Name of Hellenists, there were none that carried themselves
peaceably, and readily paid their Taxes. Why therefore were not they called
(...) Hellenists, or (...), Lovers of the Greeks. But let Vossius hug himself
in his conjecture, and give sentence that Hellenism is not to be referred to
Speech alone, so it may be any way referred to his Version, it is enough. Christ
was also a Hellenist, if you will believe Vossius, because he understood the
Greek Language, and because he commanded to give to Caesar that which is
Caesar's. As to what the Learned Gentleman adds concerning the designed
corruption of the Hebrew Chronologies, we shall not need to examine the matter
again, it having been sufficiently demonstrated in the foregoing Treatise that
Vossius was most heavily deceived in this particular; nor to repeat what has
been said before touching the Prophecy of Daniel, already known to the Jews.
We are now to brush off those things which Simon blames, as not so aptly
rendered by the Seventy; and which Vossius as stiffly defends.

Weighing the words of the first Chapter of Genesis, (...), (as we render it)
to rule the day, Simon says that the Exposition to him seems doubtful, because
the word (...) signifies both Dominion, and Beginning. Vossius admires that
Simon did not also find fault with the Hebrew word which has also a double
signification. But it is the part of a diligent Interpreter to avoid
Amphibologie. This place, as being better expressed by Aquila then by the
Seventy was taken notice of by the Learned Origin before Simon's Castigation.
Then Simon had observed upon these words of the third Chapter of Genesis, Genesis
3.14.
(...), cursed art thou above all Cattle, that the Preposition (...) did not
agree with the place or seem to make any Sense: but Vossius much more
perspicacious maintains, that the place could not be better nor more exactly
rendered and that there is no Greek writer that does not so express himself.
True it is, that Simon does not deny but that the words are Greek, and that the
Hebrew Preposition (...) Min, is rightly rendered by the Greek (...): but the
Question is whether in this place, where there is a Comparative in the Case as
the Gramarians call it, that Preposition Min be truly rendr'd by the Greek
(...). A Greek Writer had put (...), where frequently the Seventy and Aquila
(...). Thirdly in the same Chapter Simon conjectures, that instead of (...) he
shall keep, and (...), it ought to be read (...) he shall bruise, and (...),
thou shall bruise. But the nice Vossius objects, that the latter is not Greek,
because the word is not (...) but (...), whence (...) in the future. But the
less squeamish Grotius does not disprove the future (...), as it is also in the
Edition of Complutum: besides some of the Grammarians have noted that from
(...) there is not only (...) but (...) in the future. The rest I omit as being
of little moment, that I may not seem to carp at trifles. Only I cannot pass by
one thing, which the sikful Ship-Carpenter Vossius observes upon these words of
Genesis Chapter 6. ver. 14. (...). Make to thy self an Arch of four square
Wood. He denis in opposition to Simon, that any Ship can be built of Planks or
flat Boards, but of square Trees or Timber, which are most fit for the building
a Ship, as being that which not only affords the Materials of Building, but
also Pitch to Pitch the Vessel. I will not deny but that Cedar, Firr and Pines
which are Vossius's four square Trees may be very proper to Build a Ship, but
why he should deny that Plank or flat Boards are not to be sastned to the Ribbs
of any Vessel I do not apprehend. But let us proceed to somewhat of more
moment. Lastly, that draws toward an end, Vossius out of his malicious spirit
against Simon, endeavors to bring an Odium upon him, while he equals him to
Spinosa the Jew, in those things which he asserts concerning the uncertainty of
the Old Testament. However, by and by, as it were correcting himself, he
confesses ingeniously that Spinosa was deservedly condenm'd by Simon as
unlearned, and with frivolous Arguments denying the received Authors to be the
real Authors of those Books. But they show themselves more unlearned then
Spinosa, who presently think the Books of Scripture new written by the Persons
whose Names they bear. The vile and erroneous part of Spinosa is to be
condemned; but therefore all that he speaks concerning the Sacred Scripture is
not presently to be condemned; because he agrees in some things with men of
conspicuous Piety and Learning. But whereas in this part Simon has not only
distasted the most Learned Vossius, but also some other persons of no less
Note, who have not forbore to Vomit forth their most virulent Poison against
his Critiea Sacra, it will not be amiss to clear the truth of that Argument a
little more plainly.

In the first place, there is nothing that Simon has written concerning the
public Notaries of the Hebrew Nation, but what these Diminitive Saint and nice
Stomack'd Scholiasticks are extremely offended at. For those public Registers,
they together with Eusebius, and some of the Fathers call Prophets, who not
only committed to Writing the Transactions of their own Times, but also took
care of those Books which were written by the former Prophets and were kept in
the public Registries, almost in the same manner as Esdras is said to have
reveiw'd the Sacred Writings after the return of the Jews from Babylon, and to
have put them into that method which is still observed both by the Jews and
Christians. There is nothing in this Assertion of Simon, which has not been
approved by most of the Fathers and them the most Learned amongst the Rest.
Read but the Preface of single Theodoret, one of the most Eminent Divines of
the Eastern Church, to the Book of Kings, where he explains the whole matter,
and freely and without any scruple asserts, that there were several Prophets
among the Hebrews, of which every one was wont to Write the Transactions of his
own Age, and that the greatest part of those Books are now wanting, as is easy
to be found in the History of the Chronicles. He adds that those Books which we
call the Books of Kings were a long time after taken out of those Books with
Theodoretus, Diod. in lib. 1. Sam. Mas. praef. Com. in J^s. Sanct. praef. in
lib. Reg. Perer. praef. in Genesis
Diodorus, Procopius, and others, not a few, consent. To whom I may add the
most Learned Masius whom Pierius, Sanctius, Cornclius a Lapide, and other
Jesuits, long and much conversant in the Sacred Writings have followed, whose
words it is needless here to cite, since their Works are every where to be had.
But to make this matter yet more plain, it may be perhaps from the purpose to
run over the several Books of Sacred Scripture, and to take a short hint from
every one.

The First that appears is Moses, whom the constant Tradition both of Jews and
Christians make to be the Author of the five Books of the Law. But as to him
the Jewish Rabbis seem to be the more religious, who maintain that there is
not so much as one word, nay not so much as one syllable which did not proceed
from God, and was dictated to Moses. Quite otherwise the most part of the
Christians, who affirm that some of the Books of Moses, were added a long time
after; either by Esdras, or some others who had the overveiwing of them.
Neither does St. Jerome presume to attribute to Moses some words of the
Pentateuch, as it is now extant, following in this particular the common
Opinion of the Doctors of the Church, who constantly affirm that the whole Law
was reviewed and corrected by Esdras a most learned Scribe, Whether you will,
says St. Jerome, that Moses was the Author of the Pentateuch, or Esdras the
restorer, I will not gain say. But whether Moses committed to Writing the whole
History which we have under his Name, or in part commanded it to be transcribed
by the Notaries that Registered the public Transactions of his time, is the
Question. However, be it how it will, Moses shall still be thought the Author
and Writer of the whole Law, as has been most excellently observed by Simon,
because those Scribes, if there were any in his time, were wholly at his
Devotion. And indeed we find nothing in the whole Law that does fix the
Authority of those sort of Scribes. And yet had they not been constituted by
Moses from that very time, the Hebrew Commonwealth had been deficient in what
neither the Egyptians nor any other Eastern Nation wanted. Now that there were
Writers of Annals ever since the time of Moses the most Learned Jesuit Sanctius
endeavors to prove in these words. Proleg. 4. in Paralip.
I believe there were in the former Ages the words of Days, Commentaries,
Ephemerides; and that there was diligent and sedulous care, least oblivion of
Time should obscure the Nativities and Posterity of Men considerable, which
seems to me to have been certain from the very time of Moses; I spare the names
of others who have the same Sentiments. And I wonder that a late Writer, of the
Order of the Seraphris, enflamed with a Seraphic Zeal should condemn, in his
Biblic Inquisitions, this Opinion as Impious, and curse the Authors of it. But
as I am informed, that Seraphic Doctor, though he understands neither Latin nor
Greek, is a person of most insolent ignorance and of the Sect of those who
blaspheme what they understand not. Jude 8.
Some are offended, and perhaps the more delicate Vossius, for that Simon in
his Critick's affirms, that some of the Books of Moses were added afterward.
But Simon is no Innovator in this particular, as one that has to back him the
most skilful Interpreters of the Sacred Scripture Masius, and Pererius, who has
transferred all Masius's words into his Preface to Genesis, Bonfrerius,
Cornelius a Lapide and many others. Their Opinion also pleases me, says
Pererius, who believe that the Pentateuch a long time after Moses, was as it
were filled up and rendered more plain by the Interlineation of many words and
sentences, and better methodiz'd for the continuation of the History. In like
manner Bonfrerius considering some words of Genesis which he suspects could not
be written by Moses, Com. in Cap. 36. Genesis v. 31.
has these Expressions. I had rather say that some other Hagiographer added
somethings afterward, then ascribe all things to Moses performing the part of
a Prophet: Not much unlike to this speaks Cornelius a Lapide upon the same
place. Com. in c. 36. Genesis
These words seem to be added after Moses 's time, by some who digested the
Diaries of Moses. Nay Huetius himself in answer to Spinosa objecting that some
things were added to the Books of Moses, Them. Evangel. prop. 4. c. 14.
so replies that he seems not to gainsay. We confess, says he, that Esdras the
Restorer of Scripture, if any places more obscure or difficult then others
occurred, stuffed here and there, into the Sacred Writings, for explanations sake,
some things of his own. Moreover seeing the Sacred Writings are propagated by
so many Disputations, that never so many Exemplars were ever known of any one
Book, no wonder if what has happened upon other occasions to other Books should
happen to this, that some Notes added by Pious and Learned Men in the Margin,
should at length creep into the Text. Lastly, those relations at the end of
Deutronomy concerning the Death and Burial of Moses by Joshua, or rather by the
Senators of the Grand Sanhedrim, of which Joshua was the Chief, are vulgarly
thought to be added to the rest of the Text. For it was the Custom that the
public Transactions should be registered in the public Acts by those who were
appointed for that Employment; in which Sense Moses is said to have written
some things in the Volume of the Law of the Lord, that is, the Covenant which
he had made with the People. To say truth there are many things extant in the
Pentateuch, which plainly declare that the Books of the Law were written by
Moses. Thus we read in Exodus, Moses wrote all the words of the Lord. And in
Deuteronomy; After Moses had writ the words of the Law. Exodus 24. Deuteronomy. 31.
But these and many other passages of the same kind are only to be meant of
some parts of the Law of which mention is made in those places, as Simon has
demonstrated. Whence Jerome Oleaster, Prol. in Pent.
a great Hebrician and perfectly read in Scripture Learning denies that it can
be effectually proved by Scripture, that Moses himself was the Author of the
Law which we have under his Name.

Next to the Pentateuch, is the Book called Joshua, and which the following
words seem to prove to have been written by Joshua. And Joshua wrote all these
words in the Volume of the Law of the Lord. That is, Joshua after Moses's
Decease, Jos. 24.26.
or his Scribes by his Order set down in the public Registers, the
Transactions of that Time; in which Sense they are said to be as it were added
to the Volume of the Law. Nevertheless, it is strange to see how they wrangle
among themselves who handle this Argument; so that even St. Austin himself
durst not possitively affirm Joshua to be the Author of the Book which goes
vulgarly under his Name. Whether that Book, says he, which is called, Jesus
Nave, were written by him, meaning Joshua, or by some other person? Theodoret
affirms, That it was not written by Joshua, but taken out of some later Book;
and among the modern Authors, the learned Massius asserts, That it cannot be
said, that all those things which are now extant in the History of Joshua, Com.
in c. 10. Jos.
proceeded from himself. He also confirms what has been already mentioned
concerning the public Scribes and their Employments, and extends his Arguments
to other Books of the Scripture. The Opinion of the Talmudists is, That Joshua
wrote his own Book, and eight Verses of the Law. But the judicious Rabby Isaac
Abravanel, scrupled not to differ from them, and asserts himself induced so to
believe not only by those words which are added at the end of the Book of
Joshua, And after these things, Joshua the Son of Nun Died: but by reason of
many other passages that frequently occur in the Context it self, of which he
denies that Joshua could be the Author. Of which sort, the first is, that
concerning the twelve stones which he set up in the midst of Jordan, Jos. 4.9.
of which it is said, and they remain there to this Day. To which the Author of
the Book of Joshua presently adds these words: Jos. 6.8.
The Name of that place is called, Galgala to this present Day. I pass by many
other expressions of the Nature frequent in the History of Joshua, and which
Abravanel maintains could not be written by Joshua. Had Joshua, says he, wrote
all these things, would he have said, To this present day? To these things he
adds what we read in the History of Joshua, concerning the Danites taking
Lachish by assault, which nevertheless did not happen till toward the end of
the Judges, and consequently long after Joshua's Death. But these and other
passages of the same Nature, do not serve so much to prove that Joshua, or
rather the Scribes that were under him, Registered the public Transactions of
the time, as to show that other Scribes afterward reviewed those public Acts,
and added several clauses and intervening passages to unite the Sense and
Series of History, and for Explanations sake.

Nor does the Book Entitled, Shoftim or Judges, seem to be written but in the
same manner, as being full of the same Expressions. Wherefore D. Huetius
follows the judgment of Dorotheus in this particular, who affirms, That the
Scribes of that Time Recorded in Commentaries, the Transactions which happened
under the Judges, out of which Saemuel afterward composed the Book of Judges.
Who that Dorotheus was, I do not at present Dispute: it is enough from thence
to infer, that Simon's Opinion was not of Yesterday, by which he constitutes
public Scribes in the Hebrew Nation, who Recorded the public Transactions of
their Times, whose Collections other Scribes or Prophets embodied into those
Histories which go now under the Names of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings;
this opinion is confirmed by the Syrians. For we read at the end of the Syriac
Exemplar, these words added: But for the Book of Judges, Exc^d. Usser. Tom. 6.
Pol, Angl.
though the Name of the Author be not set down, it is known that it was wrote
by some of the Priests of the Sons of Aaron, who in the times of those Judges
officiated in the Priesthood. The last cited Dorotheus, refers the Book of Ruth
also to the same Scribes, which seem much more probable then the Opinions of
those wherein there is nothing of sure Foundation. Concerning both, thus Sixtus
Senensis. It is said that Samuel Collected the Book of Judges, and added the
Story of Ruth the Moabitess; Bib. 8. lib. 3.
Some think that Ezekiel, others that Esdras was the Author of both Books.

As for the Books of Kings, Theodoret has made these Remarks upon them; That
there were many Prophets among the Hebrews, of which every one wrote the
Transactions of his Age, and hence it came to pass, that the first Book of
Kings is called, both by the Hebrews and Syrians, The Prophecy of Samuel: soon
after he adds, They therefore who wrote the Book of Kings, wrote them out of
those writings long after as their leizure served them. And some while after he
thus expresses himself, concerning the Books of the Chronicles. There were some
other Historiographers, who digested those things that were omitted by others,
which Book so written they called, Parah Pomona, the remainders. As to the
first and second Book of Kings, which go under the Name of Samuel, Sixtus
Senensis adds these words: The Book of Samuel is said to be written by the
Prophet Samuel, partly by the Prophets Nathan and Gad. Samuel Collected the
Acts of Eli, Saul, David, and his own, which are related in the first Book of
Kings to his Death. Nathan and Gad wrote the Books of Kings from the Death of
Samuel, to the end of the second Book. What Sixtus Senensis, writes in this
place, though in general, I may not think them remote from Truth, yet if they
be specially weighed, they cannot be sure in every part: for that as to all
those things which are related by Samuel to his Deaeth, many passages declare,
that they could not be written by him. For it is hardly to be believed, that he
writing of the Transactions of his own time, and of which he was an
Eyewitness, should write these words. Therefore neither the Priest of Dagon, 1 Samuel 5.5.
nor any that come into the House of Dagon, tread upon the Threshold of Dagon
to this day. In like manner neither could those things be related by Samuel,
concerning the Ark in the next Chapter, where it is said, and the Stone remains
in the Field of Joshua the Beshemite to this Day. To this we add, That Samuel
could not be the Author of that Clause which we find in his History. Heretofore
to every one spoke that went to take Counsel of God; for he that is at this day
called a Prophet, was then called a Seer. However, notwithstanding all these
Objections, it is probable, that the History which goes under Samuel's Name was
written by himself till the Relation of his Death. And as for those things
which are alleged to the contrary, that there was a review of some Scribe, or
Prophet, perhaps Jeremiah, as some think, who added some things for
Explanations sake; though others choose rather to add these Additions to Esdras
and his Collegiates. The Syrians also affirm, That the first and second Book of
Kings, were called the third and fourth in the Latin Versions, were written by
a certain Priest, whose Name was Johanan.

As for the Book of Chronicles, Sal. Comment. in Paralip. Kimchi praef. in
paralip.
or Parilapomena, by whom they were Collected, there is some reason to
question. Most of the Jews will have Esdras to be the Author of them: which R.
Solomon, and R. David Kimchi, asserts to be the Tradition of their
Forefathers, making also Aggai, Zachary, and Malachi, assistants to Esdras.
Yet not so, that they should be said to write the History anew, but only to
have reformed the Ancient History of the Kings of Israel and Judah, rejecting
those things which did not seem so proper for their purpose, and adding some
things which were omitted in other Books of Sacred Scripture: from whence they
derived the Name of Paralipomena among the Greeks, which word afterward crept
into the Latin. Wherefore St. Jerome not improperly calls the Book of Chronicles
an Epitome of the Old Testament. In Epist. ad Paul.
Nevertheless he reports the Opinion of the Jows concerning this thing, with
whom Grotius also agrees, who believes these Books to have been written by
Esdras, and by the Jews, to have been called, Dibre Hajamin, the words of the
Days, or taken out of the Kings Diaries. As for the Book of Esdras, the
greatest part of it was written by himself, as the Transactions therein
contained do manifestly declare. But Nehemiah confesses himself in the Front of
the Book, to be the Author of the second Book of Esdras.

The Book of Psalms is by the Jews, called Sepher Techillim, or the Book of
Praises, which sometimes St. Austin seems to believe to have been all of
David's composing; nor does he scruple to ascribe those to David, which it is
manifest were written long after his time, because he was both a Musician and a
Prophet. Nor could the Names of Asaph, Jeduthun, and other Musicians, said to
be the Authors of some of the Psalms, beat off St. Austin from that Opinion,
because that David might supply the Matter, which afterward they polished and
set to several Tunes. But St. Jerome is more in the right, who asserts the
Psalms to be theirs, whose Names they bear in the Titles, that is David's,
Asaph's, Jeduthuns, the Sons of Core's, Eman's the Ezrahite, Moses's,
Solomon's, and theirs whom Esdras comprehends in the first Volume: with St.
Jerome also most of the Jews agree. And the Prudent Aben Ezra affirms, That the
Psalms were made by them whose Names are prefixed, Praef. in Psalm.
though there are some who have no Name at all. But in this that Rabby corrects
St. Jerome, because he does not absolutely pronounce the Psalms to be made by
them whose Names are prefixed, but that those which carry the Names of David
and Solomon were either theirs, or composed from them by the Musicians. Yet
Christ seems to attribute the whole Book of Psalms to David, where he says, And
David himself says in the Book of Psalms. But Christ only spoke according to
the common Opinion of the Jews; for they called them generally David's Psalms,
not that they thought them to have been all compiled by him, for the Matter it
self speaks the contrary; but because he was the chiefest of all the Authors,
and for that he is called the most excellent Singer of Israel. Yet the
above cited Aben Ezra writes, that there are some of the Rabbys who attribute
the whole Psalter to David, and acknowledge him to be a Prophet.

The Book which is called the Book of Proverbs, is generally said to be
Solomon's, whose Name it carries at the beginning; though the whole Method of
that Work seems to demonstrate, that it was nothing but a Collection of
Sentences, which being first gathered together by Solomon and others, were
afterward embodied in one Volume; That Solomon composed many Parables those
words prove, which he speaks of himself. Eccles. 12 9.
And because the Preacher was wise he still taught the people knowledge, he
sought out and set in order many Proverbs, which are numbered up to be above
three thousand in the third Book of Kings, of which at this day no more are
extant then what we find in the Holy Writings. C. 4.32.
To the first nine Chapters of that Work the Name of Solomon is prefixed, and
other fifteen Chapters which also bear his Name. And this Aben Ezra believed to
be the second part of his Parables or Sentences.

The third part of the Proverbs begins from these Words of the 25th. Chapter,
v. 2. It is the Glory of God to conceal a thing. Which distinction was made by
them, who reduced the Books of Scripture into that Order which is now observed:
for it is not to be believed, that Solomon fixed his Name to his Proverbs, but
only the Scribes who divided that Work into parts: And so, that Verse which we
read at the beginning of the 25th. Chapter. These are the Proverbs of Solomon,
which the Men of Ezekiah King of Judah Copyed out. Aben Ezra believes to have
been written by Sobna, who was King Ezekia's Scribe. And indeed, I am ready to
believe, that Sobna, and others of King Ezekia's Scribes, did extract out of
the whole Volume those Sentences, of which the first is, the Glory of God, etc.
and this the Word, which the Men of Ezekiah Copied, clearly demonstrate.

The fourth part of the Proverbs of Solomon, begin at the beginning of the
30th. Chapter; where we read in the Latin Edition, the Words of the Assembler,
but in the Hebrew Text, the Words of Agur. But who that Agur and Assembler was,
the Interpreters of Scripture do not agree among themselves. The ancient Jews,
as R. Solomon testifies, will have Solomon so called, as if we should say a
Collector or Assembler of Sentences, for that Agar in Hebrew signifies to
Collect: the Sense of which the Latin Interpreter has rendered in Translating
it, the Words of the Collector or Assembler. The same Opinion R. Levy Ben
Gerson illustrates, where he says, Solomon seems to have given himself the Name
of Agur, in respect of the Sentences which he has Collected in this Book. But
perhaps Aben Ezra, and Grotius following him, with more reason suspects this
Agur, to have been the Theognes or Phocylledes of those Times, out of whose
writings Solomon might Collect some Sentences, which he digested into one
Volume with other Proverbs. Lastly, there is a fifth part of the Proverbs of
Solomon, contained within the 31st. Chapter which is the last, and that under
the Name of King Lemuel; who that Lemuel was is not known. Most of the Jews
believe, that Solomon is meant thereby, as Christ is intended by the word
Immanuel, as Aben Ezra asserts: and the reason of that Appellation he takes
from hence, for that Lemuel signifies God with them because that in the Reign
of Solomon, as Aben Ezra testifies, one God was worshipped among the Hebrews. But
there is no reason we should be sollicitous about the Word Lemuel, especially
when the Seventy say nothing of it, and as they read, so they have Translated
the words of the Context quite after another manner.

As for the Book which in the Hebrew is called, Cobaleth, and by Us
Ecclesiastes, in Latin it is called Concionator, or the Preacher, though most
of the latter Jews will have Cobeleth to signify a person, that Collects,
because that Book contains several Proverbs upon sundry Occasions. Of this
Opinion are R. Solomon and Aben Ezra: and as he says, Solomon in another place
is called Agur, for the same Reason, as David de Pomis speaks. In Lexi. Heb
Titolo del libro nomato Ecclesiastes composito da Salomone, significa
Congregatore, per Congregare^e raccore in quel trattato diverse opinioni de gl'
huomini la Maggior part de quali sono false. The Title of the Book called
Ecclesiastes, composed by Solomon, signifies a Gatherer together, from
Collecting and gathering together in this Volume the opinions of Men, the
greatest part of which are false. But some of the Jews, according to the
Testimony of R Solomon, agree with the 70 in the Interpretation of the word
Cobeleth, believing it to signify a Person that Preaches in some Congregation.
But as to the Author of that Book the Rabbis do not agree among themselves.
For the Talmudic Doctors ascribe it to Ezechia, the later Rabbis to Solomon;
and these are backed by the words of the Text; in which there are some Passages
that cannot well be meant of any other than Solomon; therefore it is most
probable, that the Talmudics only meant that that same Writing was taken out of
Solomon's Works by King Ezekiah, or by Men appointed by him. The Christian
Interpreters also acknowledge no other Author of Ecclesiastes, excepting some
few, among whom is Hugo Grotius, who affirms that Book to be of a later date,
composed under the Name of Solomon; for proof whereof he alleges, that he has
many words collected thence, which are not extant, but only in Daniel, Esdras
and the Chaldee Interpreters. St. Jerome writes, that the ancient Jews had some
thoughts of obliterating this, among the rest of Salomon's Works thrown by,
because he asserts the Creation of God to be vanity; wherein St. Jerome agrees
with the Talmudists and later Jews; Jerome. Com. in 12. Eccles.
but every one knows that it is the Custom of those Doctors to feign many
things of their own Heads.

By who the History was written, that is entitled Esther, is uncertain; but as
to the time when it was written, almost all the Jews and Christians agree: For
whether the Authors of it were the Senators of the Grand Synagogue, as the
Talmudic Doctors believe; or Esdras, which is the Opinion of the Fathers; or
Mordecai, as Aben Ezra more probably believes, and the Book it self seems to
testify, there is no dispute about the time when it was written. Therefore
Hugo Grotius does not conjecture amiss, when he says that Esdras added to his
own, and the Book which Nehemiah wrote, The History of Esther, which happened
in the middle of those Times, of which the Transactions are related in those
Books, and which Grotius also acknowledges to have been written by Mordecai.

That the Song of Songs had no other Author than Solomon, the very Title it
self declares; and it is certain from the third Book of Kings, that the same
Solomon composed both Proverbs and Songs: But this, because it was the best of
Salomon's Songs was therefore called The Song of Songs, that is to say, the
most Excellent Song. Yet some do question, whether it were written by Solomon,
as it is now extant, or whether it were culled out of the whole Volume of his
Songs. However for that Song, wherein Solomon is introduced, discoursing with
the Sunamite, as a Bridegroom with a Bride is very difficult to explain, not
only by reason of the Expressions somewhat over confident, and frequent
Similitudes, which our Customs will by no means endure; but also because the
Names of the Interlocutors are not set done, for besides Solomon and his
Spouse, there are two Chorus's of young Men and Virgins.

But it is a strange thing, how the Rabbis differ among themselves about the
Book of Job. The Talmudics believe it to be no relation of real matter of Fact;
but that it is a Fiction or Parable to set forth a most exact and high Example
of Piety and Patience, and with these some of the Christians agree. Nay there
were some who did not only believe the Argument of the work to be feigned, but
will have the Name of Job to be taken out of those Letters of the first Verse
of the third Chapter of the Book, where we read Jobad Jom, he cursed the day.
For all that went before they looked upon only as a Prologue. But the Testimony
of Ezekiel, who makes mention of Noah, Daniel and Job, demonstrates that the
Name of Job is not fictitious; and the prudent Aben Azra most sharply rebukes
those who are of that Opinion: He also believes him to have been of the
Posterity of Esau, which he gathers from the Name of the Place, Com. in 1 cap.
Job.
where he was born. Besides the Names of Job and his Friends, and other
Circumstances plainly evidence, that the story was really true, according as it
is related, though it contains many things which are much more like Parable
than Truth of History. But as to the Author of it, there is no certainty, some
apply it to Moses, some to Isaiah, others to Job, himself, and his Friends. Nor
do they agree among themselves, who make Moses to be the Author of it; some
believing that it was only a Translation of his into Hebrew, out of some
Foreign Language. But letting these things pass, if we may conjecture in a
matter so obscure, I believe they are nearest the Truth, who fix the
Composition of this Piece in the Time of the Babylonish Captivity. For the
Language is hardly Hebrew, and abounding in Chaldee Phrases, bespeaks a Person,
who by Foreign Converse, had corrupted his Hebrew Speech. In which Sense the
words of St. Jerome are to be explained, when he tells us, That he Translated
Job out of the Hebrew, Arabic and Syriac Language. To which we may add, that
the Jews, whose Affairs were then in a desperate Condition, took great Delight
in reading that Book as the Comfort of their Afflictions. Therefore the Author
relates an Action that lately happed; and because he takes upon him to perform
the part of a Poet, tho the Argument be not fictitious, yet he makes use of
Figures and florid Language, mixing sometimes Probabilities with Truth,
observing only a Decorum between the Interlocutors.

The Prophets by St. Austin are called Pronouncers or Publishers of the word of
God to Men. For they, Quest in ex.
as the Interpreters of the Divine Law, preached to the People, whom they
taught the Law of Moses, confirming his Authority. Then what Threats and
Promises Moses had only in general promulgated, they applied to the several
occasions of their Times, and that after the manner of Orators: which is the
reason that they abound in Comparisons, Metaphors and Hyperboles; and not
content with a plain and bare Relation, they amplify it in many words. For,
says St. Jerome, the History and Order of things is not related barely by the
Prophets, Praef. in Lib. 18 Com. in Isai.
but all places are full of Riddles and Mysteries, one thing is contained in
the words, another in the meaning, that what you would think to run over with a
plain an uninterrupted Sense, you find presently involved in the obscurities of
that which follows. Nor did the Prophets so altogether foretell future things,
but that they frequently repeated things already done; as is evident from the
Prophecy of Zachariah, which is a Relation for the most part of what was past,
or was at that same time transacted. Thus that most dilligent Interpreter of
the Scripture in expounding some words of the Prophet Amos, blames the
Exposition of the Jews maintaining in the same place a Prophecy of the future,
where there is nothing said but of what is past; and s^on after he adds these
words worthy observation. In c. 3. Amos.
We are under a scarcity of Sacred Authors, for we read of many things in the
Prophets which are not to be found in Sacred History. In like manner St. Jerome
attests, that the Prophets in their Relations do not mind the Order of things
as they were Transacted. Among the Prophets, says he, there is no order of
History observed, while we find under the same King those things that were last
transacted, Com. in. c. 25. Jerome.
first related, and those things that were first in action, last recorded. This
preposterous Order Pseudo Dorotheus attributes to the Scribes, De vit. and
mort. Proph.
who committed to Writing the Predictions of the Prophets as they received them
from their own Lips: as if the Prophets had not wont to write down the Sermons
which they made to the People. The same observation Cornelius a Lapide makes
upon the Prophecy of Jeremy, who believe that Baruch, who was the Scribe
belonging to that Prophet collected all his Prophesies which he had preached at
sundry times and embodied them into one Volume, not regarding the Order of time
wherein they were preached. And John Calvin himself confesses that the
Prophesies of the Prophets never came to our hands digested into that order as
they ought to have been: nevertheless he does not believe it any derogation to
their Inspiration, They, Calv. praef. in Isai.
says he, who have diligently and judiciously conversed with the Prophets,
will grant me, that their Sermons were never digested into that method, as they
ought to have been; but as Opportunity offered so the Volume was perfected. He
believes that the Books of the Prophets were preserved by the diligence of the
Priest, whose Duty it was to recommend the Prophesies to Posterity, though the
Priests were professed Enemies to the Prophets. The same Calvin writes also, that
after the Prophets had Preached to the People, they wrote out the Heads of it,
which was affixed to the Doors of the Temple that all people might read them,
which being afterward taken away by the Officers of the Temple, was laid up in
the Treasury for a perpetual Monument and Record of that Sermon, from whence he
conjectures that the Books of the Prophets now extant were Copied. True it is,
that from the words of Isaiah and Habaccuc, whom Calvin produces for his
Witnesses, this one thing seems easy to be proved, that the Prophets wrote
their Sermons plainly and legibly upon Tables, that they might be read by all
the people: But of the Doors of the Temple, to which he believes they were
affixed, they make no mention at all. Then again he Conjectures amiss, that
Summaries of the Sermons were only Copyed out, and not the Sermons at length.
Though there is no skillful Critic who will presume to aver, that the
Prophesies which we have now are entire. The same Calvin and the Divines of
Geneva farther conjecture, that the Inscriptions which declare the Names of the
Prophets, and the Years when the Prophesies were pronounced, were added by the
Priests, whose Duty it was to keep them safe, for the satisfaction of
Posterity. These are their Words: Il semble che ces Tiltres ayent estez
adjoustez aux Revelations des Prophets par les sacrificateurs et Levites, qui
avoit charge de garder les Prophets au Tresor du Temple apres qu' else
avoient este proposees au Peuple, suivant le contume des Prophets. It seems
probable, that the Titles were added to the Revelations of the Prophets by the
Priests and Levites, who had the charge of those Prophesies in the Treasury of
the Temple, after they had been exposed to the people according to the custom
of the Prophets: To which Opinion Hugo Grotius also gives his Vote. There is
only this difference between him and them, that he does not attribute these
Inscriptions to the Priests and Levites, but to the Men of the great Synagogue,
who collected the writings of the Prophets, and set down the time of their
being written. This seems more probable, because it is taken for granted among
all, that the Senate where Esdras presided, did add something to the Sacred
Text by way of Connection and Explication. Thus also Thomas believes that the
Inscriptions fixed to some Psalms were inserted by Esdras, Com. in Psalm. 6.
and were done, partly as things were then acted, partly according to what
happned. Lastly it is is very probable that those Histories which are inserted
in some of the Sermons of the Prophets were added by the same Senators, when
they reviewed the Sacred Books, and formed the Canonical Scripture as now we
have it, which is the reason some believe those words were inserted in the 51.
Jeremie. Thus far the words of Jeremie. Which conclude the Prediction of the
Prophet, in regard the following Chapter is no Prophecy, but a History taken
out of the end of the 4th Book of Kings. And in this the Rabbis agree with
most of the Christian Doctors. For R.D. Kimchi testifies that those words which
run on to the end of the Prophecy of Jeremiah, do not belong to the Prophecy,
only that he who Copied the Book inserted here the story of the Israelites
being carried away Captive, Com. in c. 51. Jer.
as it is in the end of the Book of Kings. On the otherside, Abravanel
conjectures that Esdras or the Senators of the Grand Assembly, were the Authors
of that Supplement, as the History of Ezechia was tranferr'd out of the 2 Book
of Kings, cap. 18. into the Prophecy of Isaiah. From all that has been said,
it may be easily discerned who were accounted Prophets among the Hebrew People,
what was their Office and Function, and what their method of writing. Moreover
this also seems worthy Observation, that the Prophets did not only preach to
the People, and foretell future events, but also digested the Histories of their
times, and wrote them into the public Records. And thus Isaiah who wrote the
Acts of Hosea, bears the Title no less of a Historian then a Prophet, or rather
the name of Prophet among the Hebrews comprehends all those significations. So
that whoever was a revealer of the Divine will, or foretold future Accidents,
or wrote the Translations of his Time, was called a Prophet. From whence
questionless it came to pass that the ancient Jews adorned the Histories of
Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings, with the Titles of Neviion Prophets, because
they were written by Persons who being full of the Holy Spirit, were called
Prophets. In which sense Josephus affirms, that in his Nation, Books were not
written by every one, but by Prophets only. Jonathan also has rightly
understood the force of that word, who instead of the Hebrew word Navi Prophet,
sometimes mixes another word in his Paraphrase which signifies only Scribe; as
if Prophets were the same with Scribes. And thus much concerning the Sacred
Writers. I pass by the Apocriphal Books which the Jews do not admit into their
Canonical Number, because their Authors, as the word Apocryphal signifies, are
uncertain, and hidden in obscurity. Let the Learned Vossius therefore forbear
to bark at the most worthy Simon, a Person so well deserving of the Sacred
Scriptures, who has published nothing concerning the Writers of the Old
Testament, but what has been already approved by Persons most Grave and solid,
and highly Eminent both for their Piety and Learning, Into a wicked Heart
Wisdom shall not enter.

FINIS.

