THE FRIAR: OR An Historical Treatise.

WHEREIN The idle Lives, Vitiousness, Malice, Folly, and Cruelty of the Friars,
is described.

In two PARTS.

Tragical and Comical.

Collected out of sundry Authors, and several Languages, and caused to be
translated into English.

By James Salgado a Spaniard, formerly a Romish Priest.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1680.

To His GRACE JAMES DUKE of Monmouth and Buclough.
My Lord,
THough the lowest Virtue ought not to want its due praise, yet true Religion
(as it deserves) ought to have the highest Encomium, inasmuch as it surpasses
the rest as far as Divine excellencies do excel all things Natural.

The Moral Perfections may be found in a high measure in those who are not
acted by the spirit and vigor of true Religion: But wheresoever she has her
residence, she produces all the Habits of Virtue (who receive their splendor
from her, as Beams from the brightness of the Sun) and from thence diffuses
them on the rest of Mankind, influencing them to aspire at imitation.

And as Religion is in it self praiseworthy in (...) est degree (as that (...)
nobles the Minds of (...) makes them indeed to (...) they were designed (...)
great Creator); so (...) that be religious worthy (...) high commendation; but
(...) specially those who by (...) Rank and Quality are (...) in the highest
Sphere, to be as it were Exemplars to the Vulgar; for though their greatness
makes them not seldom the Objects of Envy, yet they are not only feared by the
bad, but always admired and praised by all good men.

This is that which makes Your Grace so esteemed by all, and by which You
deservedly have the applause of all sorts of men.

I will not here expatiate concerning Your Renowned Exploits abroad, because
they are fitter for a Volume than an Epistle; but will only remember, that
Maestricht (reputed once invincible) has now undeceived the owners of that fond
opinion, by forfeiting her Reputation to the Force of Your Arms; so tha^ you
may say (and with a^ good Reason as the valian^ and renowned Caesar) Veni^vidi,
vici. And who can doubt the truth on it, that considers how so lately, and with
so much facility, you appeased by your appearance the Troubles in Scotland,
which were dissipated as a Mist before the brightness of the Sun.

But passing by Your Natural, Moral, and Military Endowments, as matters
generally known to all; the true Religion (in the profession of which Your
Grace is so eminently conspicuous) has produced such proofs of love in most,
and such arguments of esteem to Your Person in all, that should I go about here
to recite them, I should tire my self with writing, and at last be forced to
quit the task without being able to give a due Description.

For this reason I took the boldness of addressing my self to Your Grace with
this present FRIAR, that I might bring him before Your Graces Tribunal, as
(...) to obtain Your (...) ^^^ction.

True Religion does (...) ^^^ly consist in Worshipping (...) after a right
manner, (...) practicing Holiness and P^^ty; but in the abhorrence (...) all
false Worship, and hatred of Vice and Wickedness: And as Your Grace is eminent
for the first, so you shall here find occasion enough for the second, when you
shall consider the viciousness of their Lives, whose way of Worship you already
detest.

(...) small Trea(...) to Your Graces sensure, desiring again to be sheltred by
Your Graces protection, to whom I most humbly do insinuate my Condition, and
beg perdon for the presumption of,

My Lord, Your Graces most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, JAMES SALGADO, A
Spaniard, and Converted Priest.

THE PREFACE.
Kind Reader,
SEveral there were, and still are, that give their minds to writing of diverse
Sciences and Arts, delighting as well in Contemplation, as in putting their
Conceptions into practice; whereby their Souls are daily polished, as Bodies
are made active and nimble by constant exercise: And every one exercises
himself in that Art or Science which he (...) and knows. It may therefore seem
strange to some, that I should not rather have published a Treatise of
Divinity, than to trouble the World with those Histories of other Men's Actions.
But since I adventured once in this kind before, without discouragement; and
seeing the Labors of other Divines increase after such a manner, that they
almost distract and weary out the Readers, I thought it not impertinent to
divert thee with these Stories of some Friars, I my self having been formerly a
Friar: -- quae sunt Medicorum Promittant Medici, tractent fabrilia fabri.
Notwithstanding, I do not this with any design to defame (...) der them, or any
of them; For (...) did not cemmence these Historie^ my self, but gathered and
collected the same (not without Cost and Labor) out of several Authors of
sundry Nations, who were Roman Catholics themselves. (...) only intent was,
to show the P^^testants the cunning Knavery, m^licious Cruclty, and deluding
wa^ of this sort of People; and to warn the Roman Catholics to have a care how
they hazard themselves in the power of such Persons, lest hoping for comfort,
they meet with harm and damage, both as to their Souls and Bodies. Moreover, it
was intended for Men's Recreation, that the Idle may thereby have Pastime, and
the weary Diversion.

Kind Reader, Be pleased to accept of my small Labors, and wish him well who
means thee no harm.

Farewell.
A Tragical Narration.
The horrible Cruelties of a Spanish Friar, and his miserable and desperate End.
IN Corduba, a principal City in Andalusia, in a Convent among many others,
lived a religious Friar, for Beauty, Parentage, and Behavior, very much
respected by all. It is the fashion in the Monasteries, that the younger Friars
go aside by themselves, and talk of several Matters amongst them. Sometimes
they measure the whole World in a Minute, othertimes they dispose of Kingdoms
and States; now the consideration of the past Roman Empire, another time the
puissance of the Turcian Monarchy, is the Subject of their Discourse. Amongst
the rest, it fell out one day, that they began to talk of Beauty, and every one
gave in their Verdict, according as their Inclinations were bent to; some
praising the Dames of their particular Countries, othersome extolling those
they loved best. There was one amongst them, a young Man of great Prudence and
Modesty, who hearing all their Discourse, said, What do you talk so much of the
beautiful Dames of Madrid or Toledo? All the Perfections which ever mortal
Creature can be capable of, are contained in a Gentlewoman living at Ossuna,
Wife to a Lawyer, who is so abstinent from all other Societies and Companies,
that the very Citizens themselves scarcely know her. He added to it the Lawyers
Name, and some other particularities. The Discourse being ended, every one did
go to his Cell. Now Friar Agilar (so was the Gentleman's Name we are speaking
of) being in his Chamber had time to overweigh the Words of the other Monk, and
by them was so highly inflamed with Love toward the unknown and never-seen
Gentlewoman, that he almost was besides himself, could never be at rest; Eating
and Drinking he did not care for, feeding himself only with the Fancies now of
his Mistresses Beauty. At last not willing to be subject to these his extreme
and tormenting Passions resolved to commit the greatest Villainy as ever could
be invented or thought upon. He had an intimate Friendship and Familiarity with
the Procurer not only of that Convent, but also of the whole Province, who had
in his keeping and custody all the Moneys of the Rents and Tithes belonging to
the Monasteries. Which having very large and rich Foundations, made the
Revenues to be the bigger. It happened then that this Agilar one Winter Night,
went to this Procurer's Chamber, and after they had exchanged many Words in a
familiar Discourse betwixt them, they began to play at Drafts. Agilar on
purpose did always lose, whereby the Procurer being accended (as commonly them
that win are) did protract the Play till two of the clock, after Midnight; and
being the time was so far spent, Agilar said to the Procurer: Being it is so
late, it is impossible for me to go to my Chamber, without being heard, and if
any one should perceive or hear me at this hour of commanded silence, I should
doubtless undergo a great Punishment. The Procurer answered him, Father Agilar,
for that you may escape this danger, there is no need you should go to your
Chamber, stay here with me, and lie with me in my Bed. Friar Agilar answered;
Because the day is approaching I will not undress my self, but lie down so as I
am upon one of your Chests, till it be Day, and then go to my own Chamber. The
Procurer being content with what he said, undrest himself, and lay down in his
naked ^ed. Friar Agilar, seeing the Procurer in a sound Sleep, took a Dagger
(which he had for that purpose made ready) and coming to his Bedside, thrust
the Dagger into his Breast, and so most cruelly murdered him. Afterward taking
the Keys out of his Pocket, went to the Chest wherein the Money was kept, and
opening the same, (not willing to take any Silver Money because of its
heaviness) took two thousand Pieces of Gold. Having done that, he shuts the
Procurer's Door after him, and easily getting over the Convent's Wall, betakes
himself to his Father's House; where after he had knocked at the Door, the
People of the House opening the same, were all amazed at his so untimely and
unseasonable coming, he being a Priest, and bound by the Canons of the Convent,
not to absent himself from his Chamber (being in City) about that time of
Night: So they go to their Master, his Father, and tells him how that his Son
Friar Agilar, was there; Who extremely admiring at his coming, did presently
enquire after the Reason of it. The Friar presently told him, how he had been
at Drafts with the Procurer, and how in the midst of the play they fell into
some quarrel, wherein the Procurer behaved himself so unmannerly, that he
abused him after the saddest rate in the World; which he not being able to
suffer, took a Dagger, and made him speechless by killing of him, whom he could
not make hold his Tongue by civil Admonitions; and that he having locked his
Door, betook himself to him, for to desire him, because he intended to go to
Rome for an Absolution, he might provide immediately all things necessary for
him, for that there was no time for talking or staying any longer. The Father
very sorry, with Tears and Sighs, for that great mischance which happened to
his Son, lamented his Condition, and seeing there was no other Remedy gave him
some Money, and ^ecular Apparel, with a good Horse, to carry him to Rome. Friar
Agilar being thus furnished, did go into a Bush, not far distant from the City,
where he killed his Horse, and having dug a hole, buried his Horse, with
Saddle, Bridle and all. The next Morning after, he being in a Worldly Dress,
returned to the City, and went to one of his intimate Friends, and having
opened unto him the whole Concern, desired that he might stay with him without
fear, and that his Friend in the mean time, should observe all what he heard of
him, and enquire what the Monks intended. But his Friend could never hear any
thing of it, because the Monks either for fear of Scandal, or some other cause,
had buried the Procurer, without having given the least hint of it to any,
besides the Murderers Father, who feigned himself to know nothing of the
business. A Month after, having bought a Horse, and all things convenient, he
went to Ossuna: where being arrived, he asked of his Landlord, what Men was
there to be found which were renowned of Wisdom, Piety, and Learning. The
Landlord telling him of many, amongst the rest he mentioned the Curate of the
City, whom he, as a wise old Man, and in his proceedings very sage, did
recommend above others. Friar Agilar hearing this, immediately goes to the
Curate, and delivers him a Letter, as if it were from his Father (which he
purposely had caused to be written.) The Words of the Letter were these.

SIR,
I Do admire that you have never been pleased to answer me, not the least Word,
to so many Letters of mine unto you directed. Howsoever I present my humble
Service to you, by this present. In the mean time, because Psend my Son to your
University, for the study of Civil Law; I desire you to take care of him,
because he is young, and to show all the kindness you can. Farewell. From Your

Mexico. A. D. Diego Taviria.


The Curate hearing this, with many signs of Admiration, after he had a long
time thought of, and ruminated the business, could not call to memory any such
Person as Diego Taviria; saying to the Friar: Sir, either you or your Father
are mistaken, for I am persuaded I never knew such a Man in all my Life. But
since the Letter is directed to me, and I know no Body here about of that Name;
wherein I am able to serve you, I will do it with all my Heart. Friar Agilar
answered, I do not know how my Father should fall into this Error, how soever
because I deem you to be an honest, sober, and a pious Man: I intend to give
into your Custody, these two thousand pieces of Gold which I have ^rought with
me (pulling them (...) the mean time out) out of which you shall give me as
much ^s I need for Victuals, Drink, and Apparel, for I intend to stay ^ere a
while, and study the Civil Law, at a House of some honest Lawyer, and renowned
for his Practice. The Curate seeing the Money, and hearing his Resolution
(being incited by Covetousness) immediately striking at his Forehead, as if he
had called him to memory, cries out, Oh Lord! I beg Pardon at your Hands, Sir;
Now I have called to memory your good honest Father. How does (Pray) honest
Taviria? how well, how pleasantly, and how friendly we lived one with another
in our Youth, how many tricks had we together? Good Taviria! Pray how many
Children has he got? how does he do? is he well in Health, and what Wealth
has he got at Mexico? Agilar, who only desired to bring this to pass, of the
Curate's professing himself to be acquainted with his Father, having shortly
answered him upon his Demands, and having taken from him a Bond of Security,
delivered up the Money into his Hands, having lest something in his Pocket for
daily Expense. But before he departed from him, he enquired of the Curate, what
Lawyers there were in the City, that were honest pious, prudent, and Learned.
The Curate told him of many, and amongst the rest, of the Husband of that
Gentlewoman which he came for. From thence he went directly to the House of
this Lawyer, and finding him at home, told him his Errand; as likewise how his
Father had written a Letter from Mexico to the Curate, with whom he had been
acquainted in his Youth, and had been his School-fellow: and since the Curate
had told him of his integrity of Life, and dexterity in his Affairs, he was
willing and desirous to live in his House, not willing to be burdensome to him
in any thing, besides in being informed by him in the practice of Law, for
which his pains he would allow him fifty Crowns monthly. The Lawyer being
somewhat jealous (as the Nature of Spaniards is) because of his Wives Beauty,
did view this young Gentleman from top to bottom, and afterward told him; Sir,
there are so many wicked and malicious Men in this Age, that we ought to use
great circumspection, whom we do entertain in our Houses; yet notwithstanding
all this, because the Curate knows you, and you promise me this Reward: We will
go to the Curate together, and in his presence make a Composition of our
Business. So they both went to the Curate, who after the proposition of the
Matter, presently answered, he would engage for him with all he had. This being
done, the Lawyer admits him into his House, and appointed him a Chamber, where
he was obliged to eat always by himself, lest he should come to see his Wife.
This cunning Friar showed always to the ^awyer the greatest respect in ^e
World, and did not only pay ^im punctually what he had a^reed upon: but
moreover, he ^resented him with great Gifts, and made many other extraordinary
expenses: whereof the Lawyer being ashamed, and not willing he should do
himself any harm by so much Charges, said once to him; Sir, there is no need
you should be at such great expenses, I am sufficiently satisfied with your
Civility, neither would I desire that for my sake you should do prejudice to
your self. Notwithstanding all this, Friar Agilar did not leave off his usual
manner. At last it happened once, the Lawyer caused him to be called down to
that Chamber where he dined with his Wife. Friar Agilar, no less astonished,
than merry, goes thither, and entering the Chamber espied the Gentlewoman
(which he had not seen as yet) and perceived that the relation of the other.
Friar was nothing answerable to her exceeding Beauty, and as much short in
comparison, as if the Sun had been drawn by a Coal. The Lawyer in the mean time
says to him: Though my Wife is not used to admit any Body into her Society
besides me, nevertheless because you seem an honest and a discreet Gentleman, I
have determined you should from henceforth Dine and Sup with us. He thanking
him most humbly, dissembled his Love toward her, so that at the Dinner time he
never lifted up his Eyes, but with great Medesty; having done his Din^er, bid
them Farewell. Once it ^ll out, that after Dinner, the ^awyer played at the
Tables with ^is Wife, and that in the mean time a Triend of his came to talk
with him, so that he being forced ^o leave his Game, and being near to winning,
would not give it over, but desired the young Gentleman to take notice in his
absence, lest his Wife should set wrong the men, for her own ^dvantage. After
the Lawyer was gone down, he very often thought to open unto her the
Inclinations he had toward her, but being repressed by fear, did not; until
she, being desirous to win, supposing him to be a good Gamester, demanded of
him, if he could not show her a way whereby she might overcome her Husband: he
thus answered her; Madam, I would show you a way whereby you might over come as
well me as your Husband. There he began to expound to her all the matter, how
he was a Gentleman's Son, had heard of her Celestial Beauty, and not having
seen her, fell in love with her, and how he had contrived to be admitted into
her House; and having looked for many opportunities to disburthen his Thoughts
before her, could never find any besides this, therefore he falling at her
Feet, embraced the same, desiring Mercy and Clemency at her hands. She being
astonished, having not been assaulted in that way any time before: besides,
^eing of a resolution to be faithful to her Husband in Duties of Honesty, fell
into a rage so ex^reme, that she in a fuming way ^egan to speak to him thus: O
thou greatest Villain in the World, and Knave, not worthy whom the Earth should
bear, are you come hither to bereave me of my Honesty, and against all (...)
aws of Nature, defile the Bed of Holy Matrimony; Thou art not a Nobleman, but
some pitiful Rascal, because against all Hospitality and Kindness of my Husband
exhibited to you, you desire to turn my Heart from him; and so speaking some
other Words, she catches up the Tables, and throws them at his Head, making a
great noise; which the Husband hearing, pr^sently runs to the Chambe^ Whereat
the Friar amazed, d^^ not know what in the World t^ say: But the Gentlewoman
no^ willing to do any harm to their Guest, turned the whole matte^ thus. This
Gentleman would have taught me some tric^ whereby I might win and over come
you, and I perceiving is could go on, I was ordering the Men according as I
thought best and in doing so I unawares threw down the Tables (with my Sleeve,
and so came this noise to be. The Lawyer hearing that, was satisfied, laughing
at the whole matter as a thing vile and of no consequence. In the mean time
Friar Agilar, all disturbed, discomforted, and ashamed, not without fear of
being discovered (...) his intentions, repaired to ^^s Chamber, and immediately
^ooned away, falling into such (...) extremity of a dangerous ^^ckness, that
they all gave him ^ver for lost. The Lawyer who ^^eady loved him not only for
^inin, but also for Friendshipand ^amiliarity's sake, was extremely sorry for
him, and not only vi^ited him his own self, but also made him to be attended by
Servants and Nurses; providing for him all things he thought fit and ^ecessary.
Once having a great deal to do, and not having time to wait upon him, desired
his Wife to give him a visit, and to comfort him in his Sickness. She willingly
did it, either out of a will to obey her Husbands Commands, or to have an
opportunity of talking with her Captive Being with him, and overweighing that
he was so dangerously Sick, and looked almost as Death and that for her sake,
she turned Hatred into Love, and began thus to reason with him. Are you a
Gentleman of a noble Blood, and lose your Courage and Stoutness at the first
stroke? do not you know, that not the first assaulting of the Enemy, but the
perseverance in the desire of overcoming, carries away the Victory? Besides,
though Gentlewomen may have a good Inclination at the first sight of their
supposed Lovers, yet they will not let it be seen, for fear that sooner
yielding, should cause a greater contempt of their dexterity. And if I should
have consented to your Demands at your first proposal, surely you had,
notwithstanding your long Patience and long Travels, hated me as much as ever
you loved me before. Cheer up therefore, and take a good Heart, and be careful
of your Health and Recovery, which doing, you will oblige me to yield to your
desires, as soon as ever you shall recover. The desperate Friar being erected
by those hopes began to mend, and in a very short time after, quite recovered
himself. After this the Lawyer's Wife instructed him, how he might come to her
without being seen by any, or without the least suspicion of her Husband. As
namely, that he should fain himself to be somewhat indisposed, and desire the
Lawyer, her Husband, that no Body should come to his Chamber to disturb him;
and then she would look for an opportunity to let him into her Chamber, and
hide him behind the Curtains, till her Husband should fall asleep, and then she
would admit him into her Company: And this she did, because her Husband was so
jealous, that he always locked the Door of his Chamber on the inside, so that
neither she could come out, nor he come in. According to this their Agreement
the business was done. And the Lawyer (as the fashion there is) having locked
all the Doors, and taken the Keys with him, went to Bed, The Echo of this
Friars Sickness, came to the Curates Ears; who either out of Love toward this
Gentleman, or else for the love of the Money he had in his Custody, came that
very same Night to visit him, and knocking hard at the Door made the Lawyer
rise out of his Bed; He coming down, asked him, who it was that knocked so
hard at the Door? The Curate answered it was he, and that he hearing of his
Son's (so he called this Fryer's) indisposition could not forbear but come to
him. The Lawyer answered. He might spare his pains, for that the Gentleman had
desired not to be troubled by any, and he, because of his Civility, was bound
to do him that kindness, as to admit to his Chamber no Body, whatever he might
be. But the Curate insisting much upon it, that he would see him whatsoever
should be come of it, and obliging very much the Lawyer to admit him to the
speech of his Son, he at last had the Door opened to him, and both he and the
Lawyer went to his Chamber Door, which he finding open immediately went in, and
not finding him within, presently suspected something extraordinary, especially
remembering his great courtesies he showed to his Wife, and that noise we spoke
of something higher, he began to be jealous of her, and at last concluded he
must necessarily be with her. Still he dissembled all his suspicion before the
Curate, and said, May be he is gone out for some while, to take the fresh Air,
in this cool Night, and finding him self to be somewhat better than before, he
stays a little longer than ordinary. The Curate being satisfied by these Words,
took his leave of the Lawyer, and went his ways; after whose departure, the
Lawyer (as we told you) perceiving the business, goes immediately toward his
Chamber, and taking his naked Sword in his hand searches for the Traitor; which
the Gentlewoman seeing, out of love to her new Servant, goes toward her
Husband, and puts out the Candle. After this, Friar Agilar, being a lusty stout
young Man, takes hold of the Lawyer, wrings his Sword out of his Hands, and
kills him immediately with his own Weapon. The Servants of the House, as well a
other Neighbors, hearing the great tumult and noise, which those two
Combatants had made did altogether rise, and causing the Door to be broke open,
saw the Lawyer Murdered, and took Friar Agilar Prisoner, the Gentlewoman in
the mean time escaping into a Nunnery. There was the beginning of this doleful
Woman's Tragedy, and a part of the Fryer's innumerable Wickednesses. Now this
Gentlewoman having been a long time in the place of her Refuge, at last would
be in the use of a greater Liberty, and by the means of her Friends, and
Relations was sent to another City a great ways distant from Ossuna. Being
there she bearing a kindness for this wicked and unfortunate Friar, writ to him
a Letter, wherein she explained her great desire she had to see him, and
beseeching him to get out of the Prison by all means he could, told him the
Town and place where she was; praying he should not stay long from her, but
come to the comfort of her, whom he had made miserable by his Affection. (...)
receiving this Letter was extremely affected with it, not knowing how in the
mean time to contrive, that he might get loose, or break out of Prison. At last
he resolved by the first opportunity to kill the Keeper of the Prison, which he
also performed, and by this means got out himself, and let out all the rest of
the Prisoners, and so escaped. Now his only desire was to see hi^ Mistress,
which to obtain he directly goes toward the City where she lived, and having
found her out, immediately went to her, desirous to accomplish his long
passions, to which he was invited by the Gentlewomans own Letter. She either
because of his long absence, or else touchd with the Death of her Dear Husband,
whom she had so untimely lost for his sake, would not yield now to his desire,
but bid him go his ways, and forbear her company. He notwithstanding that did
not cease to give her visits: But not being able to obtain any thing of her, it
happened once they were both by themselves in a Chamber, where he having received
a full denial of her kindness, most cruelly Murders her, and having left her in
her own blood, goes his ways, escaping into Nalentia, where he became a
Captain of the Banditis, (which are a sort of Robbers and Highway-Men.) Which
life he did lead a matter of two or three years, committing such cruelties and
excessess, as Busins or another ^hadamantus had never Committed.

To kill a Man was his only delight, and many a time after he had half killed
them, he tormented them after the most exquisit manner, he ever could invent.
He had a deal of Pleasure to see how the dying Men behaved themselves in their
agonys, as if he had not been contented to kill their Bodies, unless he see the
very separation of their Souls from them, cruelty being of that Nature, that it
Breaths nothing but the utter ruin and Destruction of its Object.

Once he met with a Surgeon, and perceiving what he was, demanded of him
what was best for a heavy obstinated Stomach. The Physician answered him a
Purge should be very good for it. But the Friar answering he could take nothing
in of himself, the Surgeon replied, there was another way of Purging, by a
Glyster, whom the Friar as if he had not known what it was, asked how it might
be, and proceeding, (he telling him it was conveyed to the Intrals by the
Fundament,) the Friar said, I must try that art first upon your own self, to
see what operation it may have in you, and then I will use it. So he commanded
his Men to take hold of him, and having filled a Hunting Horn full with
Gunpowder, caused the same to be stopped into his Breech, and afterward made
the top of the Horn very close, which being done he commanded the Powder should
be kindled, and this being done also, the good Surgeon was rent in pieces,
and so lamentably lost his life.

Another time he meets with a Man and his Wife, whom he takes, and having
abused her most Villanously, by the fulfilling of his abominable Lusts, he
causes her to be bound to a Tree, and makes her (she being big^^ with Child)
After the Neronian^ cruelty to be ripped oqen, to see in what manner and fashion
the Child lay in its Mothers Belly, and having seen all this, commands her
heart to be torn out and to be put into the Embrios Mouth to choke him, for
that the same heart which gave life both to Mother and Child should now be the
cause of their Deaths.

And who can tell all that this most sad and brutal wretch committed, to pain
Men to Death, to cut of Peoples Ears and Noses, privy parts, to put one Eye out
and leave the other half blind, it was his only Pleasure and Recreation. At
last the People complaining so much of this disorder, to the Viceroy he caused
a strong party of Soldiers to go against this Friar Agilar and his Companions,
who being utterly routed, the Friar seeing himself quite undone, betakes
himself to a place (which was a dry pit,) wherein he often in time of extremity
was used to hide himself. whereof the Viceroy being informed, by one of the
Captains of his side, immediately sent a company of Soldiers to take him. They
coming there desired him to come out promising pardon in the Name of his
Majesty of Spain. But neither the hopes of Pardon, nor any other reasons which
the Soldiers used as means to get him, could not prevail with him. Yea, on the
contrary side he most filthily abused them, calling them as many Rogues and
Knaves as (...) himself had committed V^lanies, and if any of the^ ventured to
go down, he ^^ving his Gun charged immediately did shoot at them and kil^ them,
till at last he miserabl^ and desperately died in that hole for want of victuals
and drink Which the Viceroy hearing o^ made him to be drawn out, and having
brought him into the City, he commanded first his Head to be cut off, and
afterward made him to be quartered, the Head being placed upon a High Steeple,
and the quarters at the corners of four Highways, leading toward the City.
This was the Tragical Life of Fryor Agilar, and his miserable and desperate
end. All this came to pass in the Reign of Philip the ^urth of Spain.

^wo Friars Ruffino and Valeno, goes out at nights very often out of their
Covent privately, by a Gate, and Houseth with their Amorous Ladies, at last one
being forced to it by necessity kills the other, and the Murderer is also
killed by his Ladys Husband.
IN Sarragoza, the chief City of the Kingdom of Aragon, was resident a Noble
Person, for his gentile behavior, Riches, and Valor, very much looked upon
and esteemed by all. This Married a young Gentlewoman called Emilia, not less
heatful then Noble. The same Gentlem^^ whom (for some particular re^pects,) We
call will Aurelio, notwithstanding the Beauty and the charms of his new Spouse,
di^ always much divert himself (...) broad, and many a time faining to have
great businesses about the Court, absented himself from home for many days. The
Gentlewoman commonly didgo to Church, to a certain Covent, where Father
Ruffino, her Confessor was resident, and by that opportunity she took an
occasion of complaining before him, a bout the vicious life of her Husband, not
knowing by what means she might reduce him to the sense of his folly as well as
Duty. Friar Ruffino did comfort her as much as he could, and visited her very
often, which no ^ody took ill, for that the most ^etired and close Houses are
(notwithstanding the Natural jealou^e of the Spaniards,) always open ^o the
Friars. Emelia, in profess of time, began to be very ^amiliar with the Friar;
and either out of Love or viciousness, or else out of revenge, she owed there
Husband for his disdain, cherished up her sick heart with the presence and
company of this Godly Father. And this their impudence had so far taken root in
their hearts, that they would not content themselves with their daily
recreations, but would continue the same by ^aight also. In order to that the
Friar came many nights to her, by a private entry of her Garden, to the Door of
which he had Key, and coming into h^ Chamber took possession of h^ Husbands
Bed.

Friar Ruffino had another Friar called Valerio not very much u^ like himself,
to whom as an entire Friend of his, he revealed a^ his secrets about his Love;
an^ entertainment at the Lady House. Valerio again told to hi^ all his amorous
proceeding^ which he had with his Mistre^^ to which he also determin^^ to
reveal all what Ruffino ha^ told him about himself. So these two knowing their
mutual proceedings, and being of a like temper, agreed amongst themselves to go
out every night and day together, when they could obtain the Superiour^
License, who commonly ap^ints companions according to ^s Pleasure. In the
Garden of ^is Covent in a by place, was a ^ate by which the Water disbur^en'd
it self into the Channel, by his these two Friars betwixt two ^ars did always
go out, not without a great deal of difficulty. And because they went to diverse
places and by several Sreets, they made ^n agreement between them, that he who
came first, should ^lay for the Companion. Always when they went out, they were
dressed in a Worldly dress, and well armed, not only with Swords, but also with
pocket Pistols, a kind of Arms, which in that Kingdom is of a General use,
especially in the night time. Friar Valerio being blinded by his love or rather
by his Sin, told to h^ Strumpet all the bunners about Ruffino. It fell out that
one nigh^ either because of jealousy, or for something else, Valerius abuse^
his Mistress most sadly, not only with words, but also with blows and so went
his ways, going directly to the accustomed Gate, for to stay there for his
Fellow Ruffino. Who was already come there; and was in the Garden waiting for
Valerio. He as soon as he came thither began to enter, and, putting his Head
between the ribs of the Gate, strove after the unusal manner to go in, but it
fell so out, that he stuck fast, not being able to go either forwards or
backwards. The miserable Friars were extremely troubled at this, because the
day was aproching, where if they ^oth should remain they should be known and
suffer severely. Friar Valerio being in the lurch, threatened the other, that
if so be he would not help him out, but leave him there, he would discover all
the life and conversation of them both. Friar Ruffino hearing this, and being
on the other side of the Gate, said to him; what profit shall you have of it if
you do ruin me, is not fit enough you should suffer your self, if I could help
you out I would with all my heart, but since I cannot, and you protest you
shall discover me also; I shall find out a remedy for your silence, and drawing
out his Dagger, cut off his Head, and having buried it in a very hidden place
of the Garden, went his ways to his Chamber. The People in the Morni^^ passing
by and seeing him ly^ there, were extremely scanda^^zed. The matter comeing
into the Ears of the Magistrate, they presently commanded him to b^ carried to
the open Market place for that every one might take: view of him, if perhaps by
his cloths or any other Mark or Sign, some should come to know him but no body
could tell any thing of him. Though they mist Friar Valerio in the Covent that
very same day when he was killed, and saw his Cloths and all his Apparel in his
Chamber, yet they either could not be persuaded it was he that was exposed in
the Market to the view of all, or else would not acknowledge him for theirs,
for fear of Scandal and for preserving the credit and existimation of the
Covent. The Murderer not knowing, that his secrets, by the ill conduct of his
Companion in concealing such matters, were made public, and being certain,
that no living Soul had seen him killing Valerio, was in a great quietness of
his perverse mind; and continued to give visits to his Lady Aurelio in the mean
time, when this was acting in Saragoza, and in his own House, he spent his time
at Madrid. The dead Friars Mistress, knew him presently by his Cloths and other
signs, for she had often seen him, but The held her Tongue because of her own
Peril. She Loved him entirely, notwithstanding he had treated her so
unworthily, a^^ therefore to revenge her se^ on this Murderer, was a cau^^ of
many Tragical, and Scand^ lous accidents. She then Wr^^ a Letter to that place
where the Husband of Emilia was tarrying, sending him word of a^ what was done,
and every day passed at his House. Aureli^ hearing this, as if he had awaked
out of a sound, and deep sleep did take Post from Madrid to Saragoza. Being
there incognito, in a House of one of hi^ Friends, he espied the Friar one
night when he had passed by. One night the Friar did enter by the Door of the
Garden, where the Gentleman was watching his coming out, having patience till
then, and not willing to bereave him of his en^terprize. At last Russino came
^ut, whom Valero did follow ^far off. And seeing him throw^^g in his Cloak,
Hat, and Arms, ^^rough the Grate, stayed till ^e had put in his Head between ^he
ribs to creep into the Gar^en, and perceiving he was alrea^y about it, runs
heartily toward him, and having stabbed him in several places, at last he cut
off his Head, and putting his hand through the ribs, threw his Head into the
Garden as far as he could, and his Body was left at the mouth of the Grate.
Afterward Aurelio, returned into the House of his Friend, where he kept
privately for some time. Being there, he caused by the means of his Friend,
that Woman to be Poisoned that ha^ sent him this news, about the business of
his Wife and Ruffin^ the like he did to Emilia his Wife because of her lechery,
and immediately returned to Madri^ where he fell into Malancholy and being
extremely ill, an^ near to his Death, made a Letter to be written to the
Vice-R^ of Saragoza, giving him notic^ of all that had happened, as we^^ touching
his Wife as the other Harlot, together with the manner of the Life of both the
Friars desiring him that he should cause the lives and conversations (...) the
Holy Friars to be looke^ after somewhat narrower.

An abominable Sin of a Knight of Malta, committed by the assist^ance of a
Monk, upon a young Gentleman, and of the ensuing Punishment for it.
A Poland Gentleman (whose Name for some particular Reasons, I will not
mention, but call him here Eranthe) of a Noble House and an Illustrious Family;
being enslam'd with a desire to go for Italy, a Country greatly renowned over
all the World, and especially to Rome, as well to take a view of the old
Monuments, and Antiquities; which in their very Ruins shows as yet the Glory
and the Pomp of that Nation; which made one Monarchy out of the Universe, as to
spend his time (...) all sorts of virtuous exercise^ dresseth his train, and
with a^ honest equipage, arrives at la^^ to Florence. The Beauty of the City,
and the courteous entertainment which he received at the Court of the great
Duke made him to stay longer there then ever he had done at any other place,
since his departing from his own Country. Some times he run a race with a
menaged Horse, whom he kept on purpose, sometimes he went to Chase a Dear with
the Prince, and every where he showed himself so brave and so able, that he was
very acceptable to the best Gentlemen of the City. Moreover his Beauty served
him greatly; he being so prity, that his like was not to be found almost in the
whole World: His Eyes were round and black, his Hair short and curled, his Face
lively and of a good color, being painted with the mixture of Roses and
Lillies, in short he was all handsome and well proportioned. As for the rest,
he had not as yet attained to the nineteenth year of his age. All these his
Qualities. Beauty, Youth, Valor, and Riches, made him so commendable every
where, that he gained the Love of all. Having been there longer than he had
intended, at last being willing to pursue his intended pereg^^ation, took his
leave of all at Florence, and intended for Rome. But falling somewhat
indisposed by the way, sojourned for a day or two in a Villag^ where he had
first taken (...) Lodgings: During that time, (...) Knight of (...) whom we
sha^ call (...), not willing to t^ his proper Name, because o^ the honor which
we ought to have of Illustrious Families, as his was arrived to that same
Lodging where Eranthe was; Flamin^ had seen him at the great Duke* Court, a
cursed and an execrable love toward the beauty of this Gentleman, made so
passionate that he was in the very bonds or Death. He thought of nothing else,
then of getting means for the performing of his infamous delight. A Sin cursed
and detestable, abhorred by God and Nature. This abominable passion made him
stay sometime at Florence, for see if any occasion, whatsoever it might be
should offer it self, that he might accom^lish his desire; but seeing that he
aimed at a thing impossible, he was resolved to lay aside the pursuit.
Afterward, being it fell out, that the young Gentleman was in the same Lodging
where he had arrived, and that he was ready to depart the next Morning to go
for Rome, he found out a trick as subtle and cunning for contriving, as cursed
for the executing of it. He dissembleth as if he had never seen (...), but
having got opportunity to apply himself to one of his Household, he particularly
informs himself of his descent, of the name of his nearest Relations, and of
those Lands and Goods he posiessed in P^la^^ After he had learned more thing
than he ever demanded, whi^^ he set down upon a Paper, the better to remember
it, he departed next Morning after, following always Eranthe, by little and
little, to know where he should lodge, without speaking a Word to him, or
making himself any ways known. So Eranthe took his Lodgings at Rome next to the
Bear, and the Knight just over against him. The Poland Gentleman was no sooner
come to Rome, but he began to spend his time either in the Academies; or else
where any exercises of Virtue were Practiced. His Beauty, and his Dress, joined
with his Free and Courteus Humor, acquired to him the kindness of all the
World. Fla^^nio thought upon all the means he could, to fulfill his Will, either
by E^anthe's consent, or by ^orce, but presently chose the latter before the
former, by reason ^e could not be ignorant that Franthe would never give his
consent to it. At last disputing, how to bring to pass his Design, resolved to
quit Rome, and to go for Naples, as well by staying there to put out of his
Head this ^abominable Fancy which he so secretly kept in his Breast, as because
he had little or no acquaintance at Rome. In the mean time when this Knight was
at his House in Naples, not knowing what might happen for the future. Eranthe
had at Rome the Name of the most accomplished Gentleman, that ever wa^ seen.
Thinking afterward h^ had seen Rome sufficiently, h^ took a fancy to go for
Naple to see that City whose surnam^ is Gentile. In order to that h^ made his
Servants make a^ things ready for their departure But O! miserable and unhappy
Gentleman, whether art tho^ going? The greatest afront, tha^ ever could happen
to any Gentl^^ man of thy Degree and Quality attends thee. Would to G^^ thou
had been still in thy ow^ Country, without ever having a Design to pass the
Alps. ^ranthe arrived thither, during that time, wherein they mad^^ Bon-Fires
for Joy, for they celebrated the Marriage day of the King of Spain. They spoke
no thing but of Triumphs, of Ringrunnings, of Combats upon the Stages, and of
Running of Ra^tes. The Spa^^iards and the I^al^^^^ being inflamed with envy one
against the other did strive to show their Achivity before one another. As the
Poland Gentleman, went one day to the place where they celebrated the ^east,
Flamino did espy him, and knew him presently. The cursed and execrable love,
which by that time he had somewhat extinguished in his Heart, began to be
kindled again more violently than ever before. When he was informed where he
lodged, he stayed one day in the Street by which Eranthe was to pass. As soon
as he saw him, he lighted off from his Horse, and run to embrace him. Eranthe
being (...) stonished at his new Complements, lighted down also excusing
himself because of that small acquaintance he had with him. Ha Sir! quoth the
other* if you do not know me at all, I am not ignorant who you are. Your Father
is called the Earl of Plest, a brave Cavalier as ever was to be found in the
World. He showed his signal Valor in that famous Battle, which the Polanders
won against the Tarters, which has rendered him famous, and the glory of his
Memory everlasting. You have an Uncle whose name is Baron of Anty. I received
of him a deal of kindness in the time of my staying in Poland, where I stayed
almost four years, for some Affairs concerning our Order. In short, I am so
highly obliged to your Blood, that I possess nothing ^n the World which should
not ^^e at any time at your Service. Eranthe being amazed at this Acquaintance,
and believing all to be true what the other said, thanked him for his good
Will, and in exchange of that he offered all whatsoever lay in his Power or
Command. That is not all says the other, I will not suffer by any means you
should use any other Lodging besides mine: You shall be better accomodated, and
attended with a deal of greater Devotion, than where you lodge at present: for I
have received other greater kindnesses of your Relations than this is. The
Poland Gentleman continued to give thanks, ex^^sing himself because of that
(...) he made to him, for going to (...) House, believing he should (...)
troublesome to him. Upon (...) this, the other answered (...) courteously,
pre^ing him so much to do what he denred, that h^^ was constrained, lea^^ he
might be taken for an uncivil and ^ll natured Person, not to condescen^ to his
Demands. So he we^^ with him, and was placed in the bravest Lodgings in his
^^ouse. Flaminio offering himself to treat him after the most magn^^cent way he
could. He also resolved to do him all sorts of Pleasures. He made him frequent
the best Companies, and all the Ra^ities of the City. Having thus entangled
Eranthe by his Artifices, and feigned Kindness; the unfor^unate and detestable
Man, not ^eing able to forbear longer his ^nnatural Love, he had compounded
with a Friar, as un^ucky and detestable as himself. This Resolution being
taken, these unlucky Men put it into execution after this manner; (...) went
one day to condu^^ (...) to his Coach; They went out of the Town, and
afterward riding in the Coach, the Knight of Ma^^a did go directly to the
Covent which we immediately spoke of When they were near to it, he feigned
before the Gentleman, as if he had some business of importance; so that he
commanded his Coach man to stand at the Door. Sir, (quoth he to the Polander)
be pleased to give me leave to go in here, an^ talk a little to a Friar living
here. There is no necessity answers the other, to demand leave about such a
business as this, I will ac^ company you if you please. Flaminio made himself
seem as if he would not trouble him with a denial of his being conveyed by him,
for that he would come again immediately. At last he went out of his Coach and
entered the Covent, being accompanied by the Polander. He betook himself to a
solitary place, where the Monk stayed for him. This Monk being possessed by the
Devil, made them go into a Chamber where a Collation was made ready. He made
them to put off their Hats and their Swords. and afterward made them drink
stoutly. When they were pretty ^^rry, Flaminio approaching to (...), began thus
to speak to (...).

My Lord Eranthe, there is no ^^cess^ty I should use many ^ords to make you
under^nd my Intention; your Beau^^ and good Grace, have so in^med my love
toward you, ^at I must obtain that at your and which I desire; or else, you
^ust die immediately. Choose (...) these two things which you ^ill, either to
satisfy my desire, (...) die. If you make me happy of ^our own accord, you are
secure ^s well of your Life, as of ha^ing a Friend, who shall be bound ^o you
for ever. Resolve to give ^^e satisfaction presently, or else ^o suffer what I
spoke of. Having said this, he held a ^^stol to his Head ready to d^^ charge.
The Friar on the other side, having seized upon h^ Sword, which he held drawn
(...) his Hand, threatened him wit^ Death, if so be he would not yield to their
desires. The poor Gentleman was greatly astonishe^ seeing himself thus surprise
without Sword or Cane. The Image of Death did present (...) self before his
Eyes on the on^ side, and on the other the detestable ^^n which they were going
to commit upon him. Sometime he was resolved to bear the Tre^ pass, sometimes
to suffer Death so he was all this while in a Gallance, betwixt the one thing
an^ the other. Make have says Fi^minio, otherwise you are a Man (...) Death. I
desire you, answer^d the Gentleman, have pity upon me and do not treat me so
unworthily. We have stayed too long ^nswers the Friar, it is necessary he should
die: Having said this, he made as if he would have run him through with his own
Sword, and Flaminio seemed as if he would have discharged the Pistol. Stay
Gentlemen (says the Polander, whom the fear of Death had already besieged)
I Will do all you please, provided you will grant me my Life. Have no fear of Death
says Flaminio, I Will above all this sacrifice my whole Goods and Possessions to
and for you, after you have consented to what I have proposed to you: See how
the fear of Death makes the Polander to permit the Knight of Malta t^ do what
he desired. The Frye^ had his share also. O Heavens (...) where is your fears!
Why do no^ you thunder at these execrable Wretches? After the Achievement of
this pretty Deed, they took a resolution of putting him to Death, thereby the
better to cover their misdemeanour. But Eranthe who was always suspecting their
Design, presently after the unhappy Deed flies to the Knight, falls about his
Neck. kissing and cherishing him after the best manner he could invent. I find
says he, your embracing so sweet, that I beseech you, we may not be separated
one from the other for ever; I know that what you have done to me, did proceed
out of a great love you bore toward me, and as much ^s you love me, believe me
I love ^ou a great deal better. These and the like Discourses, sweet and
flattering, attended by so many charms as was possible to ^e invented; were of
that power as to impeach their resolution, they had of sending him to the other
World. They still drank together, and the Poland Genaleman appeared the most
con^ented Man of the World, for that by this means of flattery, he might escape
the cruelty of their Hands. At last the night being come. Flaminio and Eranthe
took their leave of the Friar, went out of the Covent, entered the Coach, and
returned to their Lodging, where the Knight thought to lie with the Polander.
But he going out of the Coach, feigned as (...) he had gone to the house of
Office, and from thence presenth went to the Post house, when he demanded a
Horse, and paying what was their due, without any Company, besides that of
(...) Postillion, that very same hou^ went for Rome. He made (...) great haste,
that he got to Romans the next Morning betimes. The same day Pope Clement the
VIII gave public audience to all the World. The Poland Gentle man, without
going to the Vatican, enters the Hall, where the Holy Father did sit, and
approaching to him, throws himself down at his Feet; demanding him to do
Justice of an Affront the most horrid and execrable, as ever a mortal Man could
have received. The good Pope, seeing ^ch a brave Gentleman so dole^^ and
crying; was taken with ^^tty, and would be informed ^^mself about the whole
matter (...) touching his evil. Alas! Ho^^ Father, says he, the subject (...)
my Grief is so excerable, that (...) have a horror to rehearse it before you.
Give me leave that another, and not I my self, may open it to your Holiness.
The Pope being amazed at this News, gave orders immediately to his Recorder, to
take a particular information of all the business. He did the same, and after
the Gentleman had opened the whole progress of a most unchristian action, he
reported afterward to the Pope, whatsoever he had told him. The good Father,
having perceived, such a^^ execrable forfeit; was touche^ with so great a
compassion, that a stream of Tears run down hi^ Cheeks. After this he presently
dispatched a Provost, with Soldiers, and with Pattent Letters, to make his
address to the Viceroy, commanding him, under the guilt of Excommunication, to
aid and assist him. The Provost in few days arrived to Naples, and the first
thing he did, was to surprise Flaminio, who had taken a resolution to change
his Lodgings the very same day, foreseeing very well what might in process of
time happen to him. After this he went to the Covent, and entering showed the
Letters of the Pope, and took the Friar a Prisoner. The Viceroy begun ^o make
questions about the taking of Flaminio, because he was of (...) noble Lineage;
but the People was of a mind, that such excesses as these should not escape
unpunished. At last he was taken, with his Accomplice, by the shands of the
Provost who sent them for Rome. He caused them to be made fast at the Tower
called Nonne, where they stayed but a little while. Their process was quickly
brought to an end, and they having confessed the Crime, they were contented to
die. The Knight, should have his Head cut off at the Bridge of Angelo; and his
Body burned. And the Friar, was to be hanged, strangled, and burned. Eranthe
after he had seen them executed, either for Shame or for penitence of his
committed guilt by reason of his assent, went his ways, and was never heard or
seen after.

The horrible Excesses committed by a religious Woman, by the instigation of
the Devil.
IN the Land of Egypt, is an Isle called Meroe, which the renouned River of
Nilus makes famous. A Country very pleasant and fertile, above all the rest of
the Universe. The Inhabitants of the place are all Christians and very devout.
But particularly there was a noble Family called Abila, very much praised for
the continuance in the Catholic Religion. The chief of this House espoused
once (...) handsome and a wise Gentlewoman, of an illustrious Family of Merala.
The Gentleman was called Nicander, and the Gentlewoman Gallicia. Out of their
^awful Bed came forth six Sons, and ten Daughters. The Eldest of them called
Melissa, was endowed with such an excellent Beauty, that she led Captive the
Eyes of all them that saw her. Nature had accomplished her with all outward
Perfections; insomuch, that she had scarce attained to the twelfth year of her
age, but she was courted in order to Marriage, by an infinite number of
Gentlemen, of the best degree of that Country. The Mother gave particular Ear
to the pursuit of a brave Gentleman whose Fame was very much renowned in the
Country, and to him she had a singular Inclination; and he proceeded thus far
that she resolved to give him her Daughter in Marriage. The Wedding was
celebrated with a Pomp fitting Persons of that degree and quality, and the new
married Couple repaired to a House of Pleasure in the Country, which they had
of their Parents. But Fortune, which commonly delights in Inconstancy, would
not permit Melissa should long enjoy the Embraces of her Husband; for he was
killed when he was a hunting, by a mischance so strange, as is not to be
expressed. When Nicander was informed of the death of his Son-in-Law, he took
home again his Daughter, now being but in the thirteenth or fourteenth year of
her age. This young Widow did grow up in Age, and in Beauty, from day to day;
so that in a short time they discoursed of marrying her again: In the mean time
the Father finding himself at a great charge, by reason of his great number of
Children, was of a resolution (that so he might not prejudice the Luster of his
Name and Family) to send her into a Nunnery, with four of her Sisters, and
three of his Sons. He thought he had made a good division amongst his Children,
following the Laws of the Abyssini. The eldest, who was to keep up the Name and
the Arms of the Family, was very glad of this his Fathers Resolution. And these
worldly Arguments, and human^ Considerations, made him constrain the young
Widow to ente^ an Abbey of Dames called Rochperse, which was founded by the
Princess Dorothie, of the House of Sitim, Wife to the valiant Prince of Saba.
This Abbey, if one regard the grandeur of the Building, and the structure of the
Temple, makes one to conclude, that the Foundation and the Revenues do answer
the Manificence of the Founder. The young Widow was not yet fourteen years of
age, when she was carried thither among the Nuns, not without a desire
remaining in her toward the World, and an inclination to the things Earthly
more than to the Celestial. She loved to smug up her self, and to dress her
self sinely; her eyes were loose, and bent every where; and one might judge by
her Countenance, that a Life separated from the company of Men did not at all
please her.

Oftentimes she resolved to quit all Conversation, and to keep her self close
in her Chamber, to practice in the same a strict and austere Life. Being at
last turned a Nun, according to their Formalities, she did nothing but cry and
sigh. She accused the cruelty of her Father and Mother, that had forced her to
a Life so contrary to her mind. After she had spent two or three years, without
endeavoring to learn either to read or to write, see, the most pleasant thing
of the World began to present it self before her eyes, impudent Love was now in
action to intrude it self into her Soul. Her Imaginations were assaulted with
Concupiscence; and if she had had any (...) accomplish her desires, she ha^
done it, without any regard to the House she issued from, or consideration of
her own Honor.

The Devil, who is always in action, and who, like a roaring Lion, does on all
occasions environ us, that he may devour us, seeing her inclined to carnal
desires, kindled in her that desire more and more, insomuch that she, in stead
of saying her Prayers, did think upon nothing else but Love. This Passion still
continuing, and she exercising many filthy Pollutions upon her Body, both
asleep and awake, the Devil appeared once to her, when she was retired all
alone by her self in her Chamber, for the entertaining of her impudent and
lascivious Pleasures. This evil Spirit by the permission of God) did appear in
the shape of an Angel of Life, having on Apparel as white as Snow.

God save you, handsome Melissa, (says the Adversary) It is a long time since
the sense of your Evil did touch me with a great deal of compassion, and that
your. Beauty has ravished my heart. I am come to you with an intention to
satisfy your desire, and to serve you in whatsoever you command, if you will
be pleased to accept me for your Servant.

Melissa being astonished at the very thoughts of this Apparition, was in a
great fear; but being a little come to her self, she demanded of this Spirit,
that had the outward appearance of a Man, who he was. Satan, who cannot hide
himself, when he is demanded to tell his Name, answered her thus; I am the King
of the Air; all that shall fall out to you by my means, cannot be comprehended:
I am more pleasant than ever you can believe. Ask me whatever you please, and I
shall give you sufficient Answers thereto.

This unhappy Gentlewoman giving ear to these Enchantments of that Siren,
suffered her self to be entangled with his Charms; insomuch that after some
Contestations, which I am not willing to write, she agreed with the Devil; and,
amongst the rest, she would be the wifest, and the best spoken of all the
Religious Sisters; and that she might sing the best of them all. So the
malignant Spirit, in that shape we spoke of before, did dwell with her
carnally, and did not omit a day wherein he had not seen her, sometimes in one
form, sometimes in another, often in a Pigs, or other detestable shapes. Her
Companions were greatly astonished, to observe in her a great and wonderful
change. She that could neither read nor write eight or nine days ago, became in
an instant able to read, write, and speak well, about all sorts of Histories.
They admired her Ingenuity, and took her for a Miracle. So that she did every
day paint and dress her self above what their Order did permit.

Her Discourses were full of vanity and worldly matters, and of lascivious
practices. In stead of their Hours (so is their Prayer Book called) she always
had in her hand some Book or other treating of disorderly Love. Some good Nuns
did reprove her, showing her how these things were unworthy of her Profession;
but she did nothing but laugh at them, and mock them. Those that were with her
of her most familiar Friends, heard nothing else coming out of her mouth,
besides vain and dissolute Discourses. She praised her self, to have acquired
within these few days a Gallant, who came to see her every night, and taught
her the Art of Speaking eloquently. They reported this to the Abbess, who not
being able to apprehend the meaning of it, caused immediately all her Actions
to be taken notice of, and made her lie with Company. When she saw her self
kept so close, she made her complaints to her Gallant, who induced her to
revenge her self, and to set the Covent on fire. The Enemy gave her the Fire
his own self, and assisted her to begin at the fairest place of all the
Lodgings in the Abbey. The Fire did take, and before any one could perceive it,
it spread it self from Chamber to Chamber, and destroyed that brave Edifice
from the Court to the Temple, whither all the Nuns repaired, as to a place of a
holy resuge. But O deplorable case! as soon as this incendiary went out of a
corner, -- The flame went on with such a violence, that almost in less then a
moment, that elegant, and magnificent structure, together with the Cloisters.
Chapters, Refertories, and Dormitories, were brought to dust and ashes. The
poor Nuns were glad to save themselves, and leave all the rest to the mercy of
the Hames. Afterward they were dispersed, from one place to another and begged
every where some assistance for the restoration of their edisice, which will
never be so as it was before, unless some Royal hand should extend its
liberality.

After this enraged Gentlewoman had assuaged her desire of ^evenge, her Parents
shut her up ^n another Monastery, full of Piety and Devotion. After her
accustomed insolency, her filthy discourses, and the Lecture she ordinary had
in her lascivious Books, forced some devouter Nunns of that Covent, to reprove
her for her loose behavior. They always set her vanity before her Eyes, and
endeavored to make her sensible of the fear of God, and of due obedience; but
it was only labor lost. Instead of being beholden to them, because of this
good and holy advise, she by the means of Satan that lay with her, made to die
three of the Religious Women, of a sudden death. All the re^^ being amazed at
their death and fearing the same danger, and mischief, presented a Petition to
the Sovereign Prince of Mere^ desiring him most humbly, that they instantly
might be delivered from this plague. The King having understood the deport meant
of that young Woman commanded that they should send her back again to Abila,
that is to her Father and Mother, who could not believe what they reported of
their Daughter; and had a great feeling of sorrow and heaviness in their
hearts. They had her a while always in their Eye, but afterward thinking it
was no action of people fearing God, to make no conscience of keeping in the
world a professed person, they resolved to ^uilt and found in one of their
lands, a little Abbey, to ^ut in there Melissa. His Majesty himself promised to
contribute toward the doing of this Abbey, a thousand pounds, While the Abbey
was a building. My Lord, and my Lady Abila observed their Daughter in a more
strict manner then before. They made her ly in a Chamber next to theirs, and
gave her a Gentlewoman of a good age and behavior to attend her: The
mischievous young Lady, turned her out of her Chamber, with adeal of injury,
saying, it was impossible for her to rest, if she was not by her self. Those
that had their Ears bent to her actions, hearing her talking in th^^ night
time, without knowin^ to who. An inarticulate voi^^ gave her answer, and an
intel^gence of all things she demande^* This was told to her Father an^ Mother,
who could not as ye^ give credit to these reports, bu^ once of a sudden entered
into he^ Chamber for to surprise her. But heinous and most horrible case. They
perceive presently a Pig rolling upon the Belly of their execrable Daughter. My
intentionis not to write at large of it, whether this vision was true, or
illusory. My Lord Abila puts out his hand to catch him, he appeared to run from
one side of Melissa to the other, at last disappeared with the great admiration
of the Beholders, and to the great grief of her bather, but especially of the
Mother, who having abandoned all patience and crying grieviously, began to
speak these sad and pitious words.

O cursed and execrable birth, was it so that a House so illustrious, and so
renouned at all times for its piety, should now be dishonored, by thy horrible
deeds? O good God? is that the instruction, I gave thee in thy tender days,
that you should make your self acquainted with the Enemy of our salvation? When
thou made profession, and was enclosed in the Cloister, did not thou
renounce, the World, Devil and Flesh, and were not thou espoused to him, who
shed his precious bloed, upon the Tree of the Cross, to redeem us from Eternal
Death? And now having broken thy Vows, and not kept the Faith, which thou
gave to thy Bridegroom, made thy s^^ acquainted with the Prince of da^
kness? Will it not be said, that (...) Belly has born a Socerer. Ha^^ death
shall end my days, before should hear any speaking of such scandal. Recommend
thy self to Go^ O thou miserable wretch that the^ art; beseech his goodness,
that he may deliver thee from this evil and go to the holy Sacrament which he
has instituted in his Church take up arms to overcome the Enemy of mankind.
May be the Son of God shall assist thee, and receive thee into his mercy.

Such and the like Complaints and Reproofs, went out of the Mouth of that
virtuous, and never worthily praised -- Madam of Abila; when her abominable
Daughter in the mean time being possessed by the Devil, did nothing but laugh,
and mock at her ^others Words. And what then, (...) swered she, is it such a
great matter to see Satan in love with (...) young Gentlewoman? Is it a thing
to ^are as that it never happened in the World? Does it necessarily follow,
that because I talk with a Spirit, I gave my self over to him. Socrates, who
was the greatest Man of the past A^ges, and who by the testimony of the Oracle
was esteemed the wisest; had not he a Demon to consult withal? was he therefore
a Sorcerer or a Conjurer? I do not know why you make so great a noise, about a
thing so common as this is. And what will you say if I be of those Women, for
the number is infinite, that pays homage to the most a bominable parts of a
stinking and infected Goat. No no, Satan has no power over me. The Spirit that
visits me every Night is a good Demon, who gives me advise in all things I am
to do. If you do vex or provoke him you will quickly feel his Wrath and Vengeance.
The Father and Mother, after they had made Remonstrances, seeing, to their
great Grief, that they but lost their labor, resolved to lock her up in a
Dungeon, if she would not be otherwise, and to make her die miserably.
Moreover, they gave her attendance more then usual, whereat she was tormented
with spite, and gave all bad Language to the Gentlewomen, that were about her,
that in short it was a wonder to be^old ber. In the mean time it (...) out that
the Lord Abila made a ^^yage, because of some Affairs, concerning the
Government, he ^ad of the City of Mavia. He intended but to go and to come
again for that he might give Orders about that evil he lest in his ^ouse. When
he was departed, the good and virtuous Lady, her ^other, was always near her
Daughter. She incessantly represented to her the Justice and the Love of God,
invited her to ^onfess her Sin, and to beg Merry for her Faults, all this time
this Wretch bore with great impatience their holy admonitions, ^ut yet a great
deal worse, the ^uards which were at the night time about her, because they
hindered her from conversing freely with her beloved. At last she not willing
any longer to hea^ those holy discourses of the Lad^ her Mother, endowed with
P^ety and Religion, without regard or respect, which we owe to them who brought
us forth into the World, the detestable Daughter, by the instigation of the
Devil, who already had an entire Possession of her, attempted the most horrid
deed that can be imagined, against which the great Lawgiver Solon, would
discern no Punishment, because he could not persuade himself, that a crime of
that nature could be committed by the hands of Men. It was about eleven a Clock
at Night, when the darkness cloatheth all things with silence, when this
infernal Fury, rose out of her Bed she lay in, and going out of her Chamber
entered into her Mothers Chamber, who was in a fast sleep upon her chaste and
innocent Bed, the youngest Son of the six, of about five or six years of age,
was lying at her side. The Paricide with a great and large Knife, drew near to
the Bed, and so promptly cuts the Throat of her, from whom she had received
Life, that the poor Gentlewoman could not as much as cry out. An old
Gentlewoman lay next to her, who having leaped out of the Bed, runs hastily
toward her Mistress, and finding her weltring in her own Blood, slang open the
Window of her Chamber, and began to cry out for help. The Domestics of the
Castle, came hastily to see what it was, and amongst the rest, the eldest Son
of the House, who perceiving this sad and lamentable Spectacle, immediately
fell down, and swooned away. Having recovered his Spirits, he runs to the next
Chamber, and catches up a Sword, to revenge upon this execrable Woman the Death
of so good a Mother: And he had undoubtedly done it, had he not been prevented
by some that were thereabouts, who laid open to him, That in a matter of such
consequence the common course of Law was to be taken, and not a private Revenge
to be used; and therefore they forced the Sword out of his hand. Nevertheless,
the grief which he conceived at this sad accident, made him vomit out many
reproachful Words against the Murtheress, and put in him so great a desire of
Revenge, that he could not be hindered from beating her with his Fists, and
disfiguring her Face with his Nails; and if they had not drawn her away, he had
certainly strangled her. This Wretch was presently secured by a Safeguard,
expecting the coming of the doleful Father, who came two or three days after.
But who can sufficiently express his grief! to find so sweet a Companion, with
whom he had lived so long in peace and quietness, bereaved of Life by her to
whom she gave it. O Lord (said the sorrowful Gentleman) I must needs have
greatly offended you, for that you permit so many mischiefs to fall out in my
House. I beseech you, O Lord, to appease your wrath, or else to exercise your
vengeance upon my blameworthy head. Alas, my poor wife! How comes it that I had
so little wisdom, to leave you here alone, without advising with my self about
the cruel Designs of this Infernal Fury? If I had been here, peradventure this
execrable Wretch had turned her hands upon me, and my death had been a
safeguard for your life, for the love of which, I would have sacrificed my own
a thousand times. O cruel Viper! what Punishment can one invent, which should
be answerable to thy unnatural deserts? Thus this good Gentleman lamented,
abandoning all patience and moderation, and giving himself wholly over to his
grief. He desembled a just and innocent Job, who, notwithstanding his cruel and
extreme Afflictions, did neither curse his Creator, nor murmur against Heaven.
So the true Servants of God patiently suffer Adversity, ordered for them by
the same Providence by which they receive their Wealth and Prosperity.

Afterward he caused his execrable Daughter to be enclosed betwixt four Walls,
and a true Information to be taken of the horrid Crime by her committed. The
Process being made, he went to the King of Meroe, and to his Privy Council, to
desire they would give Orders to execute Justice. His Majesty, having thoroughly
weighed the whol^ matter, and finding that neither Fire nor Sword, nor any
other Punishment, could expiate the greatness of the Crime, sentenced the young
Woman to die such (...) death as her Father would inflict upon her, giving him
power either to augment or to lessen the Torments according to his pleasure.

As soon as ever she was condemned, the Evil Spirit advertised her that she
should neither eat nor drink any thing, but what they that brought it to her
should taste before hand: And so persisting in her Wickedness, and threatening
to kill her Father and Brother, at last she died miserably, either by Poison,
or by starving her self to death.

An abominable Cruelty of a Friar, committed for the accomplishing of his
detestable Lechery, and the ensuing Punishment for it.
IN the Dominions of the Emperor Maximilanus of Austria, was a Convent of
Friars, of great esteem, near unto which a Gentleman of Quality had his House.
This, had such a great kindness for these Religious Persons, that for their
sake and Service, nothing was so dear to him, but he would have parted with it,
thereby to have a part in their good works, fasting, and chastizings of
themselves. And amongst the rest there was a lusty and well shaped Friar, whom
the Gentleman chose for his Father Confessor. Which had so much Power to
command in the Gentleman's House, as the Gentleman himself. This Friar seeing
the Gentleman's Lady very handsome and wise, so that she had but very few for
her equals, fell in love with her so far, that he could neither eat nor drink,
and was beraved of his natural reason. One day, being determined to execute his
Intention, did go all alone to the Gentleman's House, and not having found him,
asked the Gentlewoman whither he was gone. She answered him that he was gone to
one of his Lands, where he was to stay, two or three days; nevertheless if he
had any business with him, she would send an express to him. He said no, he had
none: And began to walk up and down the House, as one that had some business of
Importance in his head. And after he had departed out of the Chamber, she said
to one of her Maids (there being but two of them.) Go after the good Father,
and see whither he goes, for me thinks he looks as if he was discontented. The
Chambermaid went into the Court, asking him if he would have any thing. Yes,
answered the Friar, and drawing her into a Corner takes out a Poniard, which he
had in his Sleeve, and with that cut her Throat. Just when he had done the
mischief, comes in into the same Court, one of this Gentleman's Servants, on
Horse back, bringing the Tents of a Farm. As soon as he had lighted, the Friar
runns to him, who in Embracing him, cuts his Throat from behind, and shuts the
Door of the Castle after him. The Gentlewoman, seeing her Chambermaid did not
come again, did admire why she staid so long with the Friar; and said to her
other Chambermaid; Go and see what is the matter that your Comerade does not
come again. The Chambermaid goes to him, whom as soon as he perceived, takes
her by the hand, and draws her into a Corner, and does the same to her as he
did to the other, At last, seeing himself to be all alone in the House, he went
to the Gentlewoman, telling her how he a long time ago had been in love with
her, and that the hour was come, wherein she must obey him. She who never
thought such a thing should come to pass, said to him, Good Father, I did not
believe I should have had so bad an Inclination as this, that you would throw
the first stone at me your own self. The Friar told her, go into the Court and
you shall see what I have done. When she saw both her Chambermaids and her Foot
Man dead, she was so highly taken with fear, that she stood like a stock
unmovable. Presently the mischievous Man, that would not have her only for an
hours pleasure, would not take her by force, but said to her, Madam, be not
afraid, you are in the hands of a Man, who loves and esteems you above all
the World. Saying thus, he pulled off his large Habit, underneath the which he
had one a deal lesser, which he presented to the Lady, saying to her, that if
she would not take it, he would put her amongst the number of the Dead, which
she saw before her eyes. The Gentlewoman more dead than alive, resolved to
dissemble that she would obey him to save her life, as well as to gain some
time, by which she hoped her Husband would come again. And by the Commandment
of this aforesaid Fryor began to undress her self as easily as ever she could.
And when she was come to her Hair, the Friar not regarding the beauty it had,
cut it off, very hastily and that being done, he made her to unstrip her self
to the very Smock, and to put on that little habit, which he had brought
underneath his usual one, and as hastily as he could, departed from their
House, carrying along with him, his petty Friar, for whom he had longed so
much. But the Lord, who has Compassion on the Innocent in the day of their
trouble, did look upon the Tears of this dolesul Gentlewoman, in so much that
her Husband having dispatched his business sooner than he thought or told to any,
was returning by the same Path, where his Wife was going over. The Friar
perceiving him a far off, said to the Gentlewoman it is your Husband that I see
a coming there. I know if he should see you, h^^ would take you by force out o^
my hands, therefore go a little before me, and do not turn your head here nor
there; for if you should make the least Sign, or Wink, my Poniard shall be
immediately at your Throat, and there shall be no body able to deliver you out
of my hands. When they were thus talking the Gentleman was nigh to him, and
asked him from whence he came. He answered him, from your House, where I left
the Madam, your Wife, in a good health, waiting for your coming home. The
Gentleman did go on in his way, without any perceiving of his Wife. But the
Servant that was with him, who always used to entertain the Friars Companion,
called Friar John, began ^o talk to his Mistress, thinking ^^e was Friar John.
The poor Gentlewoman, who durst not ^urn her Head toward her Hus ^and,
answered him nothing at all, but the Footman to see the Face, lifted up the
broad ^ape, when the Gentlewoman, speaking not one word to him, made some Signs
with her Eyes, full of Mourning and Tears. The Footman riding behind his
Master, said to him thus; Sir, by lifting up the Cape of the Fathers Comerade,
I perceived it was not Friar John, but was like my Mistress, your Wife, who did
cast a piteous look upon me, with an eye full of Tears. The Gentleman answered
him, he was out of his Wits, and knew not what he said. But the Footman
persisting in his Sayings, desired the Gentleman to give him leave to pursue
them, and to see whether what he saw under the Cape was that he thought to be.
The Gentleman gave his consent to it, and staid there to see what news his
Footman should bring him back. But when the Friar heard some body behind him,
calling, Father John, doubting the Gentlewoman had been known, came toward the
Footman with a great stick set about with Iron, which he had in his hand, and
gave so hard a batt upon his short Ribs, that he struck him off the Horse, down
to the ground. And immediately falling upon him, cut his Throat: The Gentleman
who from far off saw his Man dismoun^ed, thinking he had tumbled down by some
misfortune or other, run presently after him to help him. And as soon as the
Friar saw him, he gave him a like blow with his Stick, as he ^had done to his
Footman, and pulling him down off his Horse, threw himself upon him; but the
Gentleman being a strong and an able Man, took hold of the Friar in that
manner, that he left him no power whereby he might hurt him, and made the
Poniard to fall out of his hand, which the Gentlewoman presently took up, and
gave it to her Husband, and with all her force took the Friar by his hair, her
Husband giving him in the mean time, several Stabs with the Poniard, in so much
that he begged Pardon, and confessed to him all the truth of his Wickedness. The
Gentleman would not kill him; but desired his Wife, to go to their House, and
to look for some of his Servants, and that they might bring thither a Chariot,
which she did. And afterward, having stripped her self of her Habits, run in her
Smock only, to her House. Immediately all the Servants run to assist their
Master, and to see what Prey he had got, and they found him in that same Net
wherein he was caught, and so carried him to the Gentleman's House, who
afterward sent him to the Justice of the Emperor, into Flanders, where he
pleaded Guilty, discovering his Wicked Intention: And it was found out by the
Commissaries about him, and confirmed by his own Confession, that there was
brought into that Monastery (which he was of) a great number of Noble Dames,
and other Beautiful Gentlewomen by that same means, by which this Friar would
have brought in this our Gentlewoman, whom the Lord delivered out of his great
Mercy, who always gives aid and assistance to them that rely upon him. After
this, the Monastery was deprived of all its Ornaments and Revenews, and the
Monks that were within, together with the Gentlewomen, and the Covent, were all
burned to Ashes for perpetual Memory of the committed Crime.

Two Friars, the first Night of (...) Wedding, takes one after the other in the
place of the Bridegroom, and afterward were severely paid for it.
IN a Town of France, in the Country of Perigords, in an Innkeepers House was
a Wedding of a Daughter of theirs, where all their Friends and Relations,
endeavored to give the best Treat that ever they could, During the time of the
Feast, two Friars came thither, to whom the Supper was made ready in their
Chamber, for it is not their Fashion or Duty to be present at Wedding Feasts.
But the principal of these two, who had more authority and cunning, ^^gan to
bethink himself as soon (...) he did rise from the Table, ^ow to be a Partaker
of this ^ew Bride-grooms Bed, and to ^ut a trick upon him. When ^he Evening was
come, and the people began to Dance, one of ^he Friars looked out of the Win^ow
and for a long time beheld ^he Bride, whom he saw to be ^ery Beautiful, and for
his Tooth. And narrowly inquiring of the Chamberlain where the Room was, where
she was to lie, ^ound that it was next to his own, whether he did go in very
easi^y, using the best means in the World for the accomplishing his desire. He
saw the Bride undrest, by some Old Women that were with her, as the custom is
there. And because it was yet pretty early, the Bridegroom would not leave off
his Dancing, but was so merry and Courteous, that he dissembled as if he had
forgotten his new Spouse. The Friar had as yet done nothing, but presently
perceiving that the Young Bride was a sleep, he took off his hairy Apparel, and
went to take the room of her Husband: Howsoever he did not tarry long for fear
of being Surprised, and therefore did presently go out toward the Mouth of an
Entry, where his Fellow Friar was, all that time keeping watch for him, who
gave him Intelligence by some sign or other, that the Bridegroom was a Dancing
still. The Friar who had not as yet quenched his filthy desires retur^ed again
to go to Bed to this ^ew Married Bride, and staid ^ere so long until his
Compani^^ had given him notice, that it ^as time to depart. The Bride-room came
to Bed, whose Wife, ^at had been Tormented so cru^ly by the Friar, that she
desi^^ nothing but rest, could not (...) speaking thus to him; ^e you resolved
not to sleep to ^ight at all, and to do nothing ^t forment me all the while:
^he poor Husband, who was ^t newly come, was greatly ^nazed and perplexed at
her ^ords, and therefore asked her that Displeasure or what Tor^ents he had
done to her, being (...) had not parted from the Dance ^t just now. It is well
Danced, says the poor Young Woman, i^ is the third time you are come to Bed, I
think it should be better for you, for to go to sleep The Husband hearing this
Proposition, was greatly astonished and left off all other things to search out
the bottom of the whole matter. And when she was relating the same to him, h^
smelled out, that it were the Friars that lay there, and rising ou^ of his Bed
immediately, goes to their Chamber, which wa^ next to his. And when he di^ not
find them, he began to cr^ for aid and assistance, so loud tha^ all the Guest
that were Assembled there came running toward him, who after they had
understood the matter, did assist him with Candles, Lanthorns, an^ with all the
Dogs in the Town, ^o find out the Friars. And when they could not find them ^n
the House, they made so great (...) Diligence in searching for them that they
found them in the Vineyard, and Treated them according to what they deserved.
For after they had beaten them fearfully, they cut off their Legs and Arms, and
left them in the Vineyard, under the Protection of God Bacchus, and Goddess
Venus, whose better Disciples they were than of St. Francis their Patriarch.

Three several Murders committe^ in one House, viz. upon the Master, his Wife,
and their Child by the Lust of a Monk.
IN the Country of Perigord in France there was a Gentleman who was so devout
to Saint Francis, that he thought every body who did wear his Habit to be like
him, He did honor so much that Saint, that, the better to show his Devotion
toward him, he kept in his own House Chambers fit to lodge those of that
Order; and by them he governed all his Affairs, thinking to wak surely, as long
as he followed their Advices.

It happened one day, that the Wife of the said Gentleman, who was very handsome,
and both wise and godly, was brought to bed of a fine Boy; at which the said
Gentleman being over joy'd, and to show his kindness and love toward his dear
Wife, sent for his Brother in Law, and some other Friends, and desired them to
come and sup and be merry with him. Whilst they were at Supper, came in a Monk,
his Ghostly Father, (from whom he did hide nothing) of which the Gentleman was
very glad. After several Discourses between his Wife, his Brother, and the rest
of the Company, they sat down to Supper, and when they were eating and
drinking, the Gentleman looking upon his Wife, who was beautiful enough to be
desired, made this Question to his Ghostly Father: Father, says he, is it
true, that a man sins mortally if he lies with his Wife whilst she lies in? The
Ghostly Father, who was bound to return an Answer, said, It is so; and I think
it is one of the greatest sins which is committed in Marriage: and we have for
example the Blessed Virgin, who would not enter into the Temple but after her
Purification, though she had no need of it: And according to that Example you
are to abstain from a small pleasure, seeing the Blessed Virgin, to obey the
Law, did abstain from going to the Temple, where was all her Consolation: And
besides, the Physicians say, That there is great danger for the Children who
are conceived at that time

When the Gentleman heard this, he was sorry at his heart; for he had hopes his
Ghostly Father would have given him leave to lie with her: but he held his
tongue, and said no more. The Ghostly Father, after he had drank a little too
largely, looked upon the Lady, and thought in himself, that if he were her
Husband, he would ask counsel of no body to lie with his Wife: and as Fire
increases by little and little, until it imflames the whole House, so this poor
Friar began to burn within with the Fire of Concupiscence, so that he suddenly
resolved to accomplish the Desire that he had stifled in his heart for three or
four years past. After they rose up from the Table, he took the Gentleman by
the hand, and leading him to the Bed where his Wife was, said thus, Sir,
because I am certain of the great kindness you have for your Wife, and because,
being young, you can hardly keep you from lying with her, therefore I have pity
upon you, and I will tell you a Secret of our Holy Divinity; The Law, which is
very strict toward indiscreet Husbands, will not permit that those who are
godly and innocent, as you are, be deprived of its Intelligence: Therefore,
Sir, I told you publicly the severity of the Law; but from you, who are wise,
I must not hide the sweetness of it. You must know, that as all Women are not
alike, so neither are all Men; you must therefore enquire of your Wife, since
she has been brought to bed these three weeks, whether she is clean from her
Impurity. To which the Lady answered, That certainly she ^as. Then, said the
Friar, I give ^^u leave to lie with her without ^y scruple, provided you
promise ^e two things. Which the Gen^eman did willingly. First, said ^he
Ghostly Father, you shall come ^o her secretly, and speak with no body.
Secondly, you shall not come ^ill after Two in the morning, that the Ladies
Digestion may not be hindered by your Company. Both which the Gentleman did
promise, with such an Oath, that he, who knew him to be more Fool than Liar,
was certain he would keep his promise.

Afterward the Ghostly Father withdrew himself into his Chamber, bidding them
Goodnight: And in going away, he took the Gentleman by the hand. saying,
Without fail, Si^ you will come, and make no longer stay than what you
promised? The Gentleman taking his leave o^ his Wife, and kissing her, said
aloud, My Dear, let the door be left open: (which words the Ghostly Father took
notice of) and so went into his Chamber. But when the Ghostly Father was in his
Chamber, he could not rest for thinking on the Lady; but as soon as they were
all gone to bed, and he heard no noise in the House, he went directly to the
Chamber where the Husband was expected, and finding the door open, went
cunningly to put out the Candle, and so presently to bed to her, without
speaking. The Lady, thinking it was her Husband, said thus; Husband, you have
not been as ^ood as your word; for you did ^romise to our Ghostly Father, not
^o be here before Two in the morn^ng. The Friar being more at^entive to Action
than to Conversation, and fearing to be discovered, thought more upon the
satisfaction of his wicked desire, than to give her any Answer; and as the fury
of his Lust did hinder him from sleeping, so the fear which follows after
wickedness did not permit him to take any rest; but he went presently to the
Porter, and spoke to him thus; Dear friend, your Master bid me to return
immediately into our Covent, to pray for him, for some particular business
known to him only; therefore give me my Horse, and open me the door, and say
nothing to any body, for it must be very certain. The Porter, knowing well that
to obey the Friar, was to render an agreeable Service to his Master, opened him
the doors, and let him go.

About this time did the Gentleman did awake, and seeing the hour was come,
appointed by his Ghostly Father, to go to bed to his Wife, he rose up, and put
on his Nightgown, and went to lie where (without any Man's leave) by the
Ordinance of God he lawfully might. And when his Wife heard him speaking to
her, being ignorant of what happened before, she did so shuch wonder, that she
spoke to him in such terms as these: Is this the promise you made to our
Ghostly, Father, to have such a care of your Health and mine, that you came not
only before the hour appointed, ^ut also you return again? Pray', Sir, think
upon it. The Gentleman was in such a trouble at the hearing of this News, that
he could not hide his grief any longer, and said to her, What is this you tell
me? I know for a certain truth, that these three Weeks past I have not lain
with you, and now you chide me for coming too often; if you continue this
Discourse, you will make me believe that I displease you, and will force me,
against my custom and inclination, to leek for that satisfaction with other
Women that lawfully I ought to have from you. The Lady, who thought he spoke
but in jest, replied, Sir, in thinking to deceive me, do not cheat your self,
for though you spoke not a word, when you came to me, yet I knew very well that
you were here. Than the Gentleman knew that they were both deceived, and took
his Oath that he came not to her before. For which the Lady took such sorrow,
that with abundance of Tears she entreated him to inquire diligently how it
might be, for there was no body in the House but her Brother and the Friar,
immediately the Gentleman suspected the Friar, and went hastily into the
Chamber where he had lodged, the which he sound empty, and to be more assured
of his Flight, sent for the Porter, of whom he demanded if he knew what was
become of the Friar, who told him the whole truth, and the Gentleman being
certain of what had past, returned immediately to his Wifes Chamber, and said
to her. My Dear, he that has lain with you, and done many fine works, is our
Father Confessor. The Lady which all her Life before had kept her Honor, was
^n such a despair, that she begged him on her Knees to Revenge ^his great
injury. The Gentleman ^aking Horse, pursued the Friar, ^he Lady being left
mourning ^ll alone in her Bed, without any ^o comfort, or counsel her, but ^er
little new born Infant; than ^onsidering the horrible conditi^n into which she
was come, without excusing her ignorance, ^hought her self as if she was
guil^y, and the most miserable Crea^ure in the World; and thinking on the love
of her Husband, and the Honor of her Relations, which must need susier, she
esteemed Death more happy than her Life, so that being transported with Fury,
forgetting the knowledge of God, she took her Bed Cord, and with her own hands
strangled her self; and which is worse, being in the Agony of this Cruel death,
struck with her Foot on the Face of the Child, and so killed it; but dying made
such a noise, that a Woman lying in the Chamber, rose up hastily to light a
Candle and seeing her Mistress Strangled with the Bed Cord, and the little
Infant lying dead under her foot, she ran in great have into the Chamber of her
Mistresses Brother, whom she brought to see this sad Spectacle, her Brother
weeping, and very much lamenting this sad Accident, he being one that loved his
Sister dearly, demanded of the Maid, who had Committed this Crime, who answered
she knew not, and that none but her Master had been in the Chamber, who was
just gone out; upon which he went into his Chamber, and not, finding him there
believed surely he had Committed this Horrible and Vilanous Crime, took his
Horse without any other Inquiry to ride after him and hit on the way where he
met his Brother returning from the Pursuit of the Friar, as soon as he saw his
Brother in Law, he spoke thus, Cursed Coward as thou art defend thy self, this
Day I hope God will Revenge me on thee by my Sword; The Gentleman would have
excused himself, but seeing his Brothers Sword drawn, thought it fitter to
defend himself, than to inquire the cause of the difference: Whereupon so many
Blows past between them, that with expense of Blood, they were forced for some
time to part for Respiration, and then the Gentleman began to inquire the cause
of their difference, and what was the cause of this great Combat. But what
occasion had you (answered his Brother in Law) to put to death my dear Sister,
the best Wife that ever Lived, and so Barbarously, that under a color of going
to Bed with her, you Strangled her with the Bed Cord, the Gentleman hearing
these Words, being almost dead with Grief, said to his Brother, is it possible
that you have found your Sister in such a condition? And when his Brother had
assured him of the truth thereof, Pray (quoth the Gentleman) hear the cause
wherefore I left the House, and when he began to tell him the whole Story of
the Friar; Whereupon being very much astonished and extremely Sorry, he had
thus rashly fought his Brother, and humbly begging his Pardon said, I have
wronged you, I beseech your Pardon, the Gentleman Replied, If I have wronged
you, you have sufficiently punished me, for I am so wounded that I believe I
shall hardly escape death, whereupon his Brother helping him upon his Horse,
brought him home, where the next day he died, confessing before all his Kindred
and Friends, that the Friar was the cause of all their Deaths.

The Abomination of a Priest, who got his own Sister with Child, under a color
of Piety, and how they were both punished.
CHarles Earl of Angoulesme, Father of King Francis the first, a very honest
Prince, and fearing God; when he was at Coignac (a small Town in France) some
body told him, that in a Country Town hard by, there was a Virgin, who did live
with so great an Austerity, that she was the Wonder of all People, and
notwithstanding was found big with Child, and did confess it to every Body,
testifying that she never knew any ^an, and could not tell how it ^^me that she
was big with Child, ^nless it were by the operation (...) the Holy Ghost; and
the Peo^^e did believe her, because they ^ought her to be an other bles^d
Virgin Mary: For every Bo^y knew, that she was always (...) modest and wise,
that never ^ppeared in her any sign of Vani^y. She not only did Fast upon ^e
days commanded by the church, but also upon several over Days in the Week,
merely ^r Devotion: and as long as they ^ere praying and singing in the church,
she was there always, therefore she was esteemed so ^odly by the common People,
that every Body came to see her ^s a Miracle, and thought themselves very happy
if they could but touch her Peticoat. He^ Brother was the Curate of the Parish,
being a Man of middle age, who did live according to outward appearance
religiously, and was esteemed by all for a godly Man, and speaking to his
Sister severely, he caused her to be put in Prison: that was soon spread abroad
and came to the Ears of the aforementioned Earl^ who seeing how much every Body
was deceived, desired to discover the truth; therefore he sent two Gentlemen,
who were counted very godly and prudent, to find out the cheat; they went to
the said Curate, and enquired as diligently as they could about that business;
the Curate being weary of this Inquisition, desired them to be present at the
verification he did hope to make for it. The next day early in the morn^ng he
said Mass, where his Sister was present, kneeling down, big with Child, and
when the Mass was finished, the said Curate took ^he Corpus Domini, and before
all ^poke thus to his Sister. Misera^le that thou art, here is he that suffered
Death for thee; and before ^im, I ask thee whither thou art a Virgin, as thou
did tell me always? and she boldly answered that she was so, and how then is
it possible, says he) that thou art big with Child, and still remainest a
Virgin? ^hen she did reply thus. I cannot ^ive any reason for it, except it ^e
by the virtue of the Holy Ghost, who works in me what he ^leaseth: but I cannot
deny the Grace that I have received from God, in keeping me a Virgin, for I
never had a mind to be mar^ed. Then her Brother spoke the to her: Here I give
thee the Bo^^ of the Lord Jesus Christ, which the shall take as thy Damnation,
if it (...) otherwise than thou say: and they Gentlemen, who are here prese^
shall be Witnesses of it: The Gi^^ being about 13 years old too^ this Oath; I
take the Body of t^ Lord here present as my Damnat^ on, before you Gentlemen,
and before you my Brother, if ever any Man had more to do with me tha^ you: and
so speaking she did receiv^ the Body of our Lord. The tw^ aforesaid Gentlemen,
who we^ there present, seeing and hearin^ her speak thus, went away wit^ shame
and wonder, thinking tha^ with such an Oath she could not lie, and so came back
again to the Earl, and told him what both they had seen and heard; and did
their endeavor to make him believe what they did believe. But the Earl being a
wise Man, meditating upon the Words that they related unto him, desired them to
repeat the Oath; and after ^e had reflected upon it: She told you (says he)
that never any Man did meddle with her more than her Brother: Therefore I think
that her Brother (...) other with Child, and is willing to ^ide that Wickeduess
under so great (...) dissimulation: and as for us, who theve that Jesus Christ
is come, we ^re not to expect another. Therefore ^o ye and put the Priest her
Brother (...) Prison, I am consident he will con^ess the Truth: they did obey
him, after they had told him what incon^enience might happen to scandalize
(...) honest a Man as he was reputed. ^ut as soon as the Priest was seized, he
confessed his Wickedness, and how he advised his Sister to speak such Words, to
hide their bad Practice, not only by a small excuse, but also by an
Equivocation, whereby they were honored of all. And when they asked him, why
he was so wicked, to take the Lord's Body to make her swear upon it: he replied,
he had not heen so bold, but that he took Bread not consecrated. The whole
Story and Circumstances of it, being related to the Earl of Angoulesme: he gave
order to the Judges to take notice of it, and to punish them accordingly. They
did stay till his Sister was bronght to Bed; and after she was brought to Bed
of a fine Boy, she and her Brother were burnt publicly, and every Body did
very much wonder at it, because they saw under a Holy Cloak so horrible a
Monster; and to reign so abominable a Vice under the color of a Godly Life.

Here ends the First Part.
THE FRIAR:

The Second PART.

Being A Comical Narration OF Their idle Lives, Vitiousness, Folly and Cruelty
of Friars.

By James Salgado a Spaniard, formerly a Romish Priest.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1680.

A Comical Narration.
The Second Part.
Tryer Robert infermeth a Gentlewoman, how the Angel Gabriel had fallen in Love
with her; under which disguise, he often accompanies her; at last for fear of
her Parents, throws himself out of the Window, and retires into a poor Bodies
House. Who the next day after, carries him to the Market place, in the shape of
a wild man; where the Friar being discovered, was taken by the Monks of his
Order, and Imprisoned.
AT Imola in Italy there was a man of a very lewd and vicious Life and
Conversation; Whose blame worthy deeds, many of Imola thoroughly knew, and
because of that, they so much despised him, and made him so infamous, that none
of them would give credit not only to his Lies, but to the very Truth spoken by
him. He perceiving that stage not to be proper for the acting upon any longer;
a person of his disposition, half desperate, betook himself to Venice, (a gulf
and a receiver of all dissolutness) to act there the remaining part of his
Comedy. And as if he had been touched in his Conscience with a remorse for his
former loose way of living, appeared humble beyond apprehension, and seemed to
every body, to be a holy and a Catholic man, and become a Franciscan Friar,
calling himself, Friar Robert of Im^^a. Being in this habit, he outwardly began
to lead a sharp and a strict life, commending very much repentance and
abstinence, he would neither eat Flesh, nor drink Wine, when he h^d not such as
pleased him. No living Soul could perceive at the least that out of a Thief, a
a Ruffian, a Cheat, and a Murder^r, he so suddenly had been turned into a great
and famous Preacher, without having abandoned his former vices, when he
secretly could put them into effect. Moreover always after the celebration of
the Mass, standing at the Altar, being seen by many, Sung with Tears the
Passion of our Savior, according to the Custom of them to whom Tears does not
cost much, when they have a mind to cry. In short, he by his Tears and
Preaching knew how in this disguise to feed up the Venetians, in so much that
he was an Executor almost of all the peoples Wills, and had in his hands and
custody the moneys of many: He was a Confessor to the bigger part of Men and
Women. So going out of a Wolf he became to be a Shepherd, and the same of his
sanctity in those parts, was greater than ever it was of St. Francis at Ascesia.

It happened once, that one young Gentlewom^n, vain and foolish, called Lisetta,
Wife to a great and rich Merchant, who was gone with Goods into Flanders, went
with the rest of the Gentlewomen to confess to this holy Friar. She standing
upon her Feet, after the Venetian fashion, where they are all delicate, and
having confessed a part of her sins, was demanded by Friar Robert, if she had
not a Gallant. To whom she with a sower Face, replied; How Master Friar, have
you got no Eyes in your Head? Will you compare my beauty with others? I should
have Lovers and Gallants enough, if I but listed, but my beauty is not bent
that way, to love either one or the other. How many have you seen of that
beauty as mine is? Which should be admired in the very Paradise it self. Above
that she spoke so many things about her Beauty, that it was tedious to hear
her, Friar Robert immediately perceived she was light headed, and seeing her to
be of his own current Co^n was suddenly and above measure taken in love with
her. But to show himself at that instant, a pious and a holy M^n, did put off
his flatteries, till a more convenient time, and beg ^^to reprove her, saying
that this was a vain Glory, and a Pride and the like. Wherewith the Gentle
woman being moved ^^^d him he was a Be^st, and did (...) know the difference
betwixt one Beauty and another. Friar Robert not willing, either to trouble
her, or to put her out of conceit: The confession being done, he let her go
with the rest. Some days after, he took with him a trusty Friend of his own,
and went to the House of Madam Lisetta, and having retired into a secret place,
not being seen by any, fell down upon his knees, saying; Madam I desire you,
for Gods sake, to pardon me my fault, which I last Sunday committed in speaking
against your beauty, for which I was so severely chastised, that I could not
rise from bed till this very same day. The foolish Dame replied: And who was it
pray, that chastized you after this rate? Friar Robert answered; I Will tell you
that; I being, that night in my prayers, (as I am always used to do) suddenly
perceived a great light in my Chamber, and no sooner I turned the about to see
what it was, or what it mean'd, but I saw above me, a very beautiful young man,
with a great stick in his hand, who catching me by my habit, threw me down upon
the ground, and gave me such merciless blows, that he almost bruized all the
bones within me. I at last took hold of him, demanding why he had done so by
me, and received this answer; Because you presumed to day to reprove the
Celestial beauty of Madam Lisetta, which, after God, I love above all other
things of the World. And I presently asked him, what are you? To which he
answered; That he was the Angel Gabriel. O Stenior (quoth I) I crave mercy I
crave mercy: And he presently answered: Pardon shall he granted to thee, but
upon such terms, that you go to her by the first opportunity you can, and beg
mercy at her hands, and if she would not sorgive you your fault, I Will ^eturn
hither, and beat you so cruelly that you shall feel the smart of it all the
days of your life! But what he said to me after this, I will not tell you,
before I have obtained forgiveness. She hearing this, was for joy almost out of
her wits, believing all he said to be true, and a little after said, Did not I
tell you so, Father Robert, that my beauty was a heavenly beauty? But for all
that, I take heaven to witness, I am very sorry for you, and to the end he
should do you no more harm; I heartily forgive you, provided you give a
faithful report to me of all, what the Angel spoke afterward to you; Friar
Robert answered, Madam, since you have been pleased to pardon me, I Will
willingly and franckly tell you all the matter; only I beg one thing of you,
that you should take heed, lest you should open the matter to any living Soul
in the world, and in so doing you shall be the most happy Gentlewoman under the
Sun. This Angel, Gabriel, ordered me to tell you, how you pleased him above
measure, and that he had very often desired to come, and stay all the Night
with you, but he did it not for fear of frighting you. At this present he sends
word by me, that he will come to you one of these nights, and tarry a while
with you. But he being an Angel, if he should come in the shape of an Angel,
you could not touch him, he acquaints you with it, that he will come in the
sh^pe of a man, and therefore desires you to appoint him a time, when he should
come, and in whose shape, and as then he will not fail to be here; whereof you
may count your self blessed above all the living Women at this day. This antic
Madam answered how she was greatly affected with joy and pleasure, for being
loved by the Angel Gabriel, and therefore she loved him also, neither should
she see an Image of him, where she should not light a wax Candle before it, and
he might choose what hour he pleased himself to come, and should be very
welcome, and find her all alone in her Chamber, provided he should not leave
her because of the Virgin Mary, whom as she thought he wished well, and was so
obedient to her, that every where, wheresoever she saw the Virgin, she also saw
him kneeling before her, and as then, she left it to himself to come in what
shape he pleased, because she was not at all afraid of him. Friar Robert
presently answered; Madam, you speak very wisely, and I shall order with him
the business, you spoke of, very well; but you could do me a great kindness,
and it should cost you nothing; and it is this, that you may be willing to
permit he should come in this my body. And herein you will show me a great
kindness; He entering into my Body, will take my Soul out of it, and send it
into Paradise, and as long as he stays with you my Soul shall stay there. This
good Madam immediately answers: I am content, and will that you may have this
consolation, in recompense of those stripes which you suffered for my sake.
Friar Robert, thus again, You will order it so, that this very same night, he
may find the Gates (...) your house opened, that he may come in; for he being
in a humane body, in which he will come shall not be able to enter but by the
door. The Gentlewoman answered, she would do it. So the Friar Roberto departed,
and she that was left behind, was so proud and so glorious, that she thought
not her shift good enough to touch her back: That short time, in which she was
to stay for the Angel, seemed to her a thousand years. Friar Robert had got
permission to go with a Commerad to one of his Friends at night. Where he was
very well known. From thence, the time being short, he did go to the
Gentlewomans house, and in the very entering, with those Trincket he had about
him, transformed himself into an Angel, and without being perceived by any,
very easily did go to the Chamber of Lisetta. Who perceiving him going in all
in white, presently fell down upon her knees before him, and the Angel gave her
a blessing, and having boar her up by her hand, made a sign she should go to
Bed: She being willing to obey, did it presently, and the Angel instantly
accompanied his devout Lady. Lying with her, he many things related to her
about matters Celestial. At last the encroaching light of the then rising Sun,
invited him to depart, and he taking his Trumperies, and the rest of the
Apparel with him, bid her farewell. The Gentlewoman after she had Dined with
one of her Companions, went directly to Friar Robert, and told him all the news
about the Angel Gabriel, as likewise, what she had heard of him about the glory
of the life everlasting, and how he was made, adding to it of her own other
wonderful Fables. To which Friar, Robert replied. Madam, I do not know how you
have housed with him; that I know well, that he coming to me that same night,
and I having delivered your Embassy to him, suddenly carried my Soul amongst so
many sweet Flowers and Roses, as I never saw before, and set me in one of the
most delightful places of the World, where it was, till this very morning,
what in the mean time happened to my Body, I do not know: I will not tell you,
said the Gentlewoman; Your body was all night long with the Angel Gabriel in my
Arms. And after many such stories as these she returned home again, whither
Friar Alberto in the apparent form of an Angel, very often repaired, without
receiving the least hurt, or impediment. It fell out once that Madam Lisetta
being with her Gossip; and reasoning amongst them about beauty, for that she
might put hers before all others (as being of a mean wit) said: If you knew
whom my beauty pleases, in verity, you would hold your Tongue ^f the rest. Her
Gossip knowing what she was, desirous to hear the matter, said: Madam you may
speak truth; but because I do not know who your Gallant may be, there is no
need I should be so ^asie of believing you. She presently replied: Gossip, it
^ould not be necessary to tell you of him, but my Gallant is the Angel
Grabriel, who loves me above himself, as a Gentlewoman (as he tells me)
surpassing in beauty (...) the rest of the world. The Gossing was ready to fall
a laughing, bu^ restrained her self from it, t^ make her talk more, and said
God bless me, Madam, is Ange^ Gabriel your Gallant indeed? And if ye say so, it
is very well for you (...) but I did not believe the Angel^ did any such thing.
Oyes (answered L^setta,) and because I seeme^ in his eyes fairer then any Lady
in Heaven, he, enchanted by m^ beauty, comes very often to diver^ himself with
me. The Gossip being departed from Lisetta thought that time to be a hundred
years long, wherein she ha^ not the opportunity of rehearsing the whole matter.
At las^ being invited to a feast, in the ^ompany of many Gentlewoman ^ery
orderly recited the History. ^hese Gentlewomen told it to their Husbands, and
to some other Dames, and they again to others, so that in less then two ^ays
all the City of Venice was ^ill of it. But amongst the rest, unto whose Ears
this History ^ad been brought, were the ^riends of Lisetta, which without
saying any thing to her, de^ermined to find out this An^el, and to know whether
he ^ould fly or no, and in order to that, they many nights stood at ^er Door,
holding watch. It ^apned that this same came to ^ryer Robert's Ears, who one
^ight to reprove the Gentlewoman, went to her, and after he had put off all his
Clothe, Lisetta's Relations that had see^ him going in, shut the Doors o^ her
Chamber after him, for tha^ they might catch him. Which Friar Alberto
perceiving and seeing who they were, run out o^ that Chamber into another, an^
having no other means whereby to escape, opened a Windo^ right over against the
great Channel (all the City of Veni^^ standing upon Water) and from thence
threw himself down into the River. Which being ver^ deep, and he knowing how t^
swim, received no hurt at all and having swum, but on the other side of the
Channel, presently retired to a House, which at that time was open; desiring
the Landlord of the House, th^^ ^e for the love of God would have his Life,
telling him in the ^^ean time some story or other, why he came there, about
that ^our, and naked. The good Man being moved with compassion, and having an
occasion to go out about his business, put him into his own Bed, telling him,
he should be there till his coming again, and after he had locked him up, he
went his ways about his affairs. The Friends of the Gentlewoman entering the
Chamber found, that the Angel Gabriel, having left his wings behind him, was
flown away. Whereby they thinking themselves scorned and affronted, gave to the
Gentlewoman the basest Language they ever could think on, or invent, and at
last having left her comfortless, returned to their own house, with the apparel
of the Angel. In the mean time the break of the day appeared, and his good Land
Lord, being in the Market heard saying how that the Angel Gabriel, had been gone
the nigh^ past to lie with Madam Lisetta^ and being surpised by her Relations,
out of fear flung himself into the Channel, and no body knew what was become of
him, and thereby concluded immediately, that it was the same Person, he had in
his House. Coming home, and having told him all the story, after many other
propositions, said; That if the Friar would not have him to tell to her
Relations he was there, he should make fifty Ducats to come immediately, which
was ^one. After this Friar Robert desiring to depart thence, had this answer
from his Landlord, I have no other means to bring you out but one, which if you
will not admit of, I do not know what to do. To day we are making a great
Feast, in which some will bring a Man divised in a sh^pe of a Bear, and another
will b^i^g one diguised as a Wild Man, so one will do one thing, another
another, and in the Piazza of S. Marco we will make a Chase, which being
finished, the Feast will be done, and after that every one goes with him, whom
he brought thither, whither he pleases. If you will, bebefore they spy out
that you are here, that I conduct and carry you to that place in one of the
disguises, I Will afterward carry you whether you please. Otherwise I do not see
how you can go out without being known, especially the friends of the
Gentlewoman, being for certain persuaded, you are hereabouts, have all over
sent out Guards to catch you. This though it appeared very hard to the Friar,
as to go out in that fashion, yet for fear which he had of Lysetta's Friends,
condescended to it, saying he would be led where it should please the other,
and he might lead him as he thought best himself. He having anointed the Friar
all over with Honey, put some down upon him, and a Chain about his Neck, and a
Mask upon his Head, and gave him a great stick into one of his Hands, and two
great Dogs which he had brought from the Shambles into the other, and sending
some Man he had bespoke into the Market, made him cry if any one had a desire
to see the Angel Gabriel he should repair to the Piazza of S. Marco: This was a
Venetian Loyalty. This having been done, alter he had brought him forth, he
made him to go before him, and so holding him fast by the Chain followed him,
and not without a great noise of many; who asked, Who is this? Who is this?
Conducted him to the Piazza. Where, when they were, some stood from behind, and
some from before of them, that having heard the cry upon the streets, were come
thither, a multitude without number. At last the Landlord carried this Friar to
a place higher then the rest, and bound this his Wildman to a Post, faining
that as he would stay for the time of chase, in the mean time the Flies and
Wasps, he being all anointed with Honey, made him feel the greatest smart
immaginable. Afterward seeing the Piazza to be very full, making as if he
would have unchained his Wild man, took the Mask down from Friar Robert, and
said; because the Wild Boar does not come, the chase cannot be run, that you
may not loose your labor, by coming hither in vain, I do desire you to see
this (...) Gabriel, who to comfort the Venetian Gentlewomen, descended from
Heaven upon Earth. When ever the mask of was took down, Friar Robert was kown
by all, against whom all lifted up their voices, calling him the most horrible
names that ever any Knave deserved, throwing moreover at his Face one foul
thing or another. And they kept him along time in this ^^^nner, till at last
the noise of this Trigedy coming to the Ears of his Brethren the Monks, they
being moved by it came thither, and having thrown a Friars Cap upon his back,
and unchained him, carried him not without a great noise of people behind their
backs into a House; and afterward put him into prison, where (if it may
belived) after a miserable life departed this World.

Master Capelletto, deceives a Holy Father by a false confession and dies,
and having been a most dissolute Man in his Life, was after his death reputed
for a Saint, and called S. Capelletto.
ONE Muscato a Frenchman, from a rich and a great Merchant, being become a
Knight, was bound by the invitation of Pope Bonifacius, and his own promises,
to go for Tuscany in the company of Don Carlo, Brother to the King of France,
and knowing his affairs, (as often times those of Metchants are) to be here and
there extremely intricated, and that he could not extricate himself by lew, or
suddenly, he determinmined to commit the whole matter to some more Persons. And
he found out means for all his Debtors; only he still remained doubtful; unto
whom to give a Plenipotence for the receiving of those Moneys, some few
Burgundians owed him. The reason of this his musing was, for that the
Burgundians are very cunning ill conditioned, and faithless people, and because
of this, none could fall into his mind, whom he thought fit enough to entrust
with his money, and to oppose to the cunning malice of the Burgandians.
Examining and overweighing the matter for a long time at last fell into his
mind Siur ^appaletto, who often times repaired into his House, at Paris. This
Capp letto was of a very bad life. For being a public Notary, he was extremely
ashamed, if any of his Indentures, or Law Instruments were found otherwise then
false. To bear false witness was his greatest delight; whether he was desired
to it, or not, and at that time the Frenchmen gave great credit to Oaths, not
regarding whether they were false or no, he unjustly won as many Trials as upon
Oath he was desired to declare the Truth, he delighted above measure, yea,
studied to breed betwixt friends, relations, or any other people, Mischief,
Envy, Malice, and scandal, and in how much the consequence was the worser, in
so much he took a greater pleasure in it. Being invited to a murder, or any
other criminal exploit; he without denial and willingly went thither, and very
often to strike at a man, and to kill him also, was almost his mean besiness.
He was the greatest blasphemer of God, and for the smallest matter, on Earth,
who was it but he that was outraged beyond measure. He never went to Church,
but with despising and scorning at the Sacraments of the same as things ^il,
and of no Efficency. And as well as he abominably railed against them, so on
the other side, he usu^lly frequented Taverns, and visited the most dishonest
and unlawful places. To in vade on goods, and to rob me^ of all they had, was
done by him with a Conscience as free as ever an honest and a godly Man
distributed some thing to the poor. He was a great Glutton, and an excessive
Drinker, so that he never eat, or drink, but his Stomach turned within him. A
Gamester very expert, and a very famous Hocuspocus, at throwing of false Dice.
But not to use so many digressions he was in short, the basest Wretch that ever
was born. Whose Knavery and wickedness, was for a long time supported by the
riches and the estate of Sir Muscato, for whose sake, as well as by some
private persons with whom he too often played in jurious tricks, as also by the
Court, where he always acted a Knave, was somewhat respected. This same Mr.
Capelleto came into Sir Muscatos mind, who entirely knowing his manner of Life,
thought him the fittest Person, that ever could be ^ound, for his purpose, and
such a one as the malice of the Burgundians required.

And so having made him to be called, spoke to him thus, Mr. Capelleto; you know
that I am going wholly to depart from hence, and having amongst the rest to do
with some Burgundians, a People much addicted to currynning, I do not know unto
whem I may so cenveniently give plenipotence of receiving my own from them, as
to you. And since you at present, have nothing at all to do, if you will attend
this my concern, I Will make you to have the Favor of the Court, and give you a
part of what you recover, according as I shall deem it expedient. Mr.
Capelleto, who see himself in streights, being constrained by necessity,
without deliberation, answered, he would willingly obey his Command. So they
went together, and Mr. Capelleto having received his orders, and Favorable
Letters from the King, departed from Mr. Muscato in his way for Burgundy where
he was known by no Body. There, contrary to his Nature, he with great Modesty
and a deal of Civility began to recover the moneys, and to do that which he was
sent for thither. So doing, he repaired to a House of two Brothers of Florence,
to Lodge there; these were Usurers, and for the Love of Sir Muscate, they
Honored him very much; being there, it happened he fell Sick, to whom these two
Brothers caused presently some Physicians to come, and Nurses to serve him,
there was nothing wanting whatsoever was requisite for the recovery of his
Health. But all this help availed nothing; for the good Gentleman, who was
already old, and had lived very disorderly, grew (according to the saying of
the Physicians.) every day worse and worse, and was already combating with
Death, which these two Brothers were exceeding sorry for And one day being very
near to the Chamber, where Mr. Caselleto lay Sick, began to talk between
themselves, saying one to another, what shall we do with this Man? We have a
very bad business under our hands. For if we put him out of Doors, as he is now
Sick and Weak, a great murmuring of People will arise, neither will it be an
Argumient of great wisdom in us, but a manifest sign of folly, if after we have
first received him courteously, and then made him to be attended, and carefully
to be cured, should now without having received any displeasure at his hands,
so suddenly throw him out of our House, in this weak and deadly condition. On
the otherside, he is a Man so wicked, that he will not yield to go to
confession, neither can be persuaded to receive any of the Sacraments of the
Church, and if he dies without confesion there is not one Church will bury him,
so that he must be thrown into some hole after the manner of a Dog. And if he
should confess, his Sins are so great and horrible that there is none like to
be found, for which sake the Priest that will hear him if he would, shall not
be able to absolve him, and he not being absolved shall nevertheless be thrown
into some Dunghill. And if this should fall out, the People of this Country
seeing this, either because of our calling, which they judge to be unlawful,
and every day speak against it, or else for desire of robbing, should make a
rumor, saying, regard not these Lombardian Dogs which could not be Buried in
the Church, and how can we, or how should we tolerate them any longer, and
consequently should storm, not only at our Houses for to rob them, but also
should assasinate our Persons, wherefore at every side we are in a sad and
pidkeled condition, in case he should dye. Mr. Capelleto, who (as we told you,)
did lie next to that place where they thus discoursed, having a very sharp
hearing, (as we commonly see the Sick have,) did hear all they said of him.
Whom he made to be called, and said to them. I desire you heartily not to doubt
any thing about me. nor to have any fear of receiving any Damage by me. I have
understood what you have spoke together of me, and am assured that things will
not run so as you conceived they should, but they shall run quite contrary
ways. I have done so many injuries to the Almighty in my Life, that if I do
one more in the Hour of my Death, I do not think there shall be one more or
less. Therefore procure the Godliest and the most understanding Friar you can
find to come to me, (if any such can be found.) And leave the rest to me, for I
will so heatly accommodate your business and mine, that your self shall judge
it to be well done, and shall be abundantly satisfied. The two Brothers who had
no hopes of the good snccess of the business, went nevertheless to some
Religious Friars, and asked for a Holy and understanding Man, that should hear
a confession o^ a dying Lombard; and they appointed to them a Godly old Man,
who was respected as well for his Holy Life as for his great Learning in the
Holy Scriptures, for which all the Citizens had a great devotion for him, and
him they brought; He coming into the Chamber where Mr. Capelleto lay Sick, and
having sit down at his side; at the first began to comfort him with a great
deal of kindness, and afterward asked of him, how long it was since the last
time he confessed. To which Mr. Captlleto (who had never been at a confession.)
thus Answered, Father, my ^nly custom is to confess at least ^nce a Week,
excepting those ^easons, in which I confess in a Week more then once, but true
(...) is that since I fell Sick, I have ^ot confessed this eight days, so great
was the tediousness which ^he infirmity had caused within ^^e. The Friar
presently replied My Son you have done very well, and so do for the future, and
being you have confessed so lately, (...) shall have little Labor either ^o
hear you, or ^o ask you Que^tions. Mr. Capelleto answered Master Friar, do not
say so, I ^ave not Confessed so often, but that I always had a desire to
Con^ess all my sins again in general, which I could call to memory from the
first till the last day of my Confession. Therefore I desire you my good
Father, that you may be pleased to ask me puntually of all things, as if I had
never Confessed. Neither do you regard that I am so weak for I have a greater
desire to displease this sinful Flesh of mine, then by flattering of it, commit
such a thing as might cause the perdition and ruin of my Soul, which was
redeemed by the precious blood of our Savor. These words pleased much the good
old man, and gave him reason to think he was pretty well in himself, and after
he had greatly praised, this his custom he began to ask him; if he had not
committed a Sin of luxury. To which Mr. Capelleto sighing Answered; As to this
good Father I am ashamed to ^ell you the truth, fearing less I should become
guilty of vain Glory. To which this Holy Father Answered: Tell securely, ^or
speaking the truth we neither ^in in, nor without the time of Confession.
Presently Mr. Capelleto replied, since you make me ^ure of it, I also will tell
you; I ^m as pure a Virgin as I came from my Mothers Belly; O Blessed be thou
from the Almighty, quoth the Friar, how well have you done, and doing so, you
have Merited by so much the more, by how much you had a greater Liberty to do
the contrary, which we cannot have, ^^r any one else that is bound to the
Obedience of one Rule or other. Then he asked him, if he had not displeased God
in Gluttony. To which Mr. Capelleto sighing vehemently replied, I, and often
too. For says he, besides the Lent Fast and other Fasts voved to the Saints, I
at least Fasting three days every Week in Bread and Water, did drink the Water
with great delight and at petite, especially after I had undergon some Travel,
and was made weary either by long Prayers, or else by Pilgrimage to some Holy
Place, and oftentimes I got a Stomach to have a Sallet of sour herbs to this my
Cheer. To whom Answered the ^ryer; my Son, these sins are Natural, and so
small, that I would ^ot have you to aggravate your Conscience with them, it
happens to every Body, let him be never so Holy, that he thinks it it good
after a long fast to eat and to drink after wearyness. O! quoth Mr. Capelleto
Sir, do not speak thus because for my comfort, for you must understand, that I
know that all our actions belonging to the Service of God, ought to be done
neatly, and without defiling the Soul with the least of oversight, and
whosoever does it otherwise, he commits a Sin. The Friar being very well
satisfied, said; And I also am contented with your good conceit in those
matters, and thy pure Conscience pleases me mightily. But tell me, have you
sinned in Covetuousness, desireing to have more then you had need of, or
keeping that from another which you should not have kept. Mr. Capelleto
Answered to this. Father I would not have you to take notice of it, that I do
lie hear in the House of these Usurers, I have nothing to do with them, but
that I cam^ hither to admonish and to correct them, and to draw them away, from
this abominable gain; and believe me I had done the business, if God had not
thus visited me, for you must know my Father left me a Rich Man, out of whose
goods after his Death, I gave the best part of them for the Glory of God, and
afterward to maintain my self and be helpful to the Poor Members of Christ, I
bought some Marchandizes, and by these to gain some profit, and whatsoever I
gated I always did go halvs with the Poo, converting my moiety for my own
necessary uses, and the other giving to them, for which the Almighty helped me
so far, that I always advanced in my things better and better. You have done
well, said the Friar, but how often have you been angry. O! quoth Mr.
Capelleto, this I say truly, I was very often angry. Neither could I withold my
self seeing the vicious actions of all People in general, which neither did
observe the Commandments of God, nor feared his Judgments. There happened many
Hours in a day, in which I wish my self more dead then alive, seeing the youth
to go after vanity, to swear and forswear, to go to the Taverns, and never
enter the Church, and to follow the ways of this World, more then the ways of
the Lord. The Friar again said, my Son this is a good anger, and as for me I
cannot lay upon thee penalty; but did not sometimes this anger bring you to the
committing of a Murder, or to the Slandering of a Person, or to the doing of
some other injuries to him. To whom Mr. Capelleto said; O Lord, Master Friar!
You appear to me a Man of God, and how do you speak such things, if I had had
the least thoughts of committing any of these Villainies you speak of, do you
think I should believe, that the Almighty had kept me thus long? Such doings
belongs to the wicked and doleful wretches, of which when I espied one, I
always said to him, God convert you. The Fire said immediately. Now my Son, God
lend thee his Blessing, tell me have not you born false witness against your
Neighbor, or spoak any bad thing of him, or took away something from him
without his consent? Answers Capelleto, never did I speak bad of any, but I had
once a Neighbor, who without any reason of the World did nothing else but beat
his Wife, and of him I spoke ill to her Relations, so great compassion I had
for this poor Gentlewoman, when ever he was fuddled did abuse her God knows
how. The Friar said to him again, just now you told me you had been a Merchant,
did not thou cheat any Person according to the custom of Merchants? By my
Faith Answered Mr. Capelleto, Mr. Friar I do not know who it was, but there
was one had paid me my money he owed me for some Cloth he had of me, and I put
it into a Chest without having counted the same, a month after I found there
was four pence above my due, and I not finding the man, after I had kept them a
whole year for to give them again to him, distributed the same to the Poor. The
Friar Answered, that is a small matter, and in doing so, you did well. And after
this the Holy Friar did ask him many other Questions; he upon them all,
Answering at the same rate as before: He was proceeding to the absolution, to
whom Mr. Capelletto, said, Master Friar, I have yet one sin, which I have not
discovered to you, The Friar asking what it was, he Answered, I remember I made
once a Servant of mine to sweep the room on the Lords day and so did not pay
that due reverence I ought to that day, Oh said the Friar that is but a small
thing. No, replyeth Mr. Capelletto, do not say it is a small matter, for the
Lords day ought to be very much honored, for on that day did our Blessed
Savior rise from the dead. The Friar said again, did you commit any thing
else? Master, Answers Capelletto, I once un^wars did spit in the Church. The
Friar smiling a little said, my Son, this thing is not to be heeded, we that
are Religious spit there all day long. whereupon Capelletto imediately said;
And thereby you commit a great Villainy, for nothing ought to be kept so neat,
as the Holy Church in which we render Sacrifices unto the Lord. In short, such
^ryes as these he told many; at last he began to sigh, and afterward to cry
stoutly, as one which could do it very well, when he pleased. The holy Father
said. My Son, what does all you? Cappelletto answered: Ah me, Master Friar,
because one sin is resting, which I never confessed but have the greatest shame
imaginable to disclose it, and whenever I think upon It I always cry, as you
see now at this present, and as for me, I am persuaded, God will never pardon
me this my exorbitance.

The simple Friar presently replied; Out upon you my Son, what do you say? If
all the sins that were committed by all Men, or that shall be committed for the
future, as long as the world stands, should be in one sin^le man, and he (...)
be sorry, for them, and repent, as I see you do, so great is the bounty and
mercy of the Almighty, that he should freely forgive them to the Confitent, and
therefore speak frankly and without fear; Mr. Capelletto answered again, all
the while crying most bitterly. O^ my Father, my sin is too great and I can
hardly believe, I shall obtain pardon for it, from the Almighty, unless you
help me with your Prayers. The Friar said: Tell it freely, for I faithfully
promise, to interceed for thee. Mr. Cappelletto wept further, and said nothing,
and the Priest comforted him, and desired him to tell. Afterward, Mr.
Cappelletto having held the Friar a long while in amaze, made a great sight and
said: Good Father, since you have promised to pray to God for me, I am reso^ve^
to tell you: Know then, when I was a very little B^y, I gave bad language to m^
M^th^r; and having said this beg^^ to (...) again most cruelly. The Friar
^n^^cred^ O my Son, (...) this to be (...) great ^s (...) not some people
^lasphem^ (...) days, and (...) they but truly repent, the freely forgives
them, and do not believe but he will for (...) you this: Do not cry, be
comforted, for truly if you had been of them that crucified our Savior, and
had such a penitent heart as I see you have, you should be pardoned. Mr,
Cappelletto, said again; Oh me! My Father, what do you say, my sweet Mamma,
that boar me nine months in her womb, night and day, and carried me about her
neck, more then a hundred times, should she be abused by me, it is a very great
sin, and if you do not pray God for me, it shall not be forgiven to me. The
Friar seeing there was nothing else left for Mr. Cappelleoto to say, did
immediately absolve him, and gave him his blessing, counting him the holiest
man in the World, as being entirely persuaded it was all truth, Mr. Cappelletto
had confessed; And who should not believe it was so, hearing a Man upon his
death bed speaking so as he did: And after all this the Friar spoke to him: Mr.
Cappelletto, with the help of God, you shall shortly recover. But if it should
happen that God should call your blessed, and well-disposed So^^ to himself,
will you be pleased, that your body may be buried in our Cloister? To which Mr.
Cappelletto answered: Sir, I would not have it be any where else, after I
received a promise, you should pray God for me, for to pass by that, I always
had a particular devotion for your Order. Wherefore I desire you, that as soon
as you come to your Monastery, you may cause to be brought to me the real body
of Christ, such as you do consecrate every morning upon the Altar for that,
(though I be unworthy I may with your good will receive it, and afterward the
holy extreme unction, that so I who have lived as a sinner should at the least
die like a Christian. This holy man replied, that he was very well pleased with
it, and he said, Well, and should I make that it should be brought presently,
and it was done accordingly. The two Brothers doubting Mr. Cappelletto should
cozzen the Friar posted themselves at the partition of that Chamber, in which
he lay and very easily harkening, did hear, and understand, what Mr.
Cappelletto spoke to the Friar, and had many a time so good a mind to laugh,
hearing his confession, that they almost bursted, and betwixt themselves talked
thus; what a man is this, whom neither his old age, nor weakness, neither the
fear of death, which he is near unto, nor the fear of God, before whose
Judgment seat, he in few hours must appear, could remove from (...) base
tricks, neither effect h^ should be unwilling to die so (...) he had lived. But
seeing that a^cording as the Friar had said he should be buried in the Church,
they heeded nothin^ else. Mr. Cappelletto, after h^ had received the Communion
and grew worse and worse, ha^ also the extreme unction adm^nistred unto him,
and some tim^ being past, after his brave confession, he died. After this,
these two Brothers being ordered by himself, did consult how to bu^ry him
honorably, and immediately sent to the Friars Cloister, desiring them to come
tha^ evening, and to watch at hi^ dead Corpse, according to th^^ Custom, and as
for the buria^ they should order all things con^venient for to morrow. The
^holy Friar that had heard his confession, hearing he was departed this life,
was at the Priors of the House, and made the Bell ^ring to the Chapter, where
the Friars crowding in, he opened how that Mr. Cappelletto had been a holy and
Godly man, according to what he had apprehended out of his confession. And
hoping that the Almighty would by his means show many Miracles, persuaded them,
to receive his body with great reverence and devotion. Which the Prior and the
rest of the Friars be^ieving agreed too, and at night went all thither, where
the body of Mr. Cappelletto did ^ly, where they made a great and a solemn
Vigil, and the mo^^ing after, all in their Surplice^ and Robes, with Books in
the hands, and a cross before them went for the Corpse, and with (...) great
Feast and solemnity, c^ried it to their Church, being followed almost by all
the ^tizens, as well Men as Women And after they had set it in the midst of the
Church, the ho^^ Friar, that had been his Co^fessor, went to the Pulpit, an^
began to preach marvello^^ things, about his Life, fasting about his Virginity,
simplieit^ innocence, and holiness. A among the rest, telling the^ what Mr.
Capelletto h^ confessed before him to (...) his greatest sin, and that wi^^
Tears, and how he scarce ^uid persuade him of it, that ^od thould forgive him
the same; ^^ok an occasion to reprove his ^arers, saying, And you accursed
^ople, for the least bit of a ^aw under you feet, do blas^eme God, his Mother,
and (...) the Court of Heaven. And (...) spoke many other things of (...)
loyalty, faithfulness, purity, (...) so much, that with these ^ords (unto which
they ^at were from the Country, gave ^tire credit) he put into the ^eads of the
Auditors a great evotion for the dead man, and (...) ^oon as the Office was
finished, (...) of them with the greatest ^rong in the world, went to ^^s his
hands and feet, and ^ut all the Cloth about him ^inking themselves happy if
they could have a little piece of it, and the Friars thought it convenient, to
let it stand openly all that day, for that he might be seen and visited by all.
The next night after, he was laid into a Coffin of marble, and honorably
buried in a Chapel. The next morning after, as well as the rest following the
people began to repair thither, and to set up lighted Candles before him, to
adore him, and consequently to vow unto him, and to hang at his Grave waxen
Images according to their promise. And so much did this fame of his Sanctity
increase, and of peoples devotion at his grave, that there was almost never a
one, who being in adversity did vow to any other Saint besides to him, and ^ey
called him S. Cappellet^^, affirming that God had ^ewed many Miracles by his
^eans, and shows every day (...) any that devoutly recommends ^^mself to this
Saint. So lived ^ddied Mr. Cappelletto, and be^me a Saint, as you have been
^formed.

A Certain Prior and a great Reformer of Nunns, under the Cloak of Hypocrisy
tries all possible means to beguil and entice a Religious Nunn, but at length
his Wickedness is made manifest.
THere was in the City of Paris a Prior of of St. Mar^^ in the Fields, whose
Life e^^n unto the fiftieth year of his ^^ge, was so very austere, that the
fame of his Sanctity, overspread the whole Kingdom of France, in so much that
there was neither Prince nor Princess, who did not entertain him with singular
respect and Honor, when ever he came to visit them: Neither was there any
Reformation made in any Religion, Monastery or Abbey; but he had always the
chief hand in it, for he was commonly called the Father of true Religion, he
was Elected Visiter of the great Abbey of the Nunns, of Frontinaux the which did
so extremely dread them, that whenever he came into any of their Monasteries
all the Nunns did even tremble for fear, and to the end that they might induce
him to mitigate some what of his Severities he imposed upon them, ^hey did
Treat and Entertain him ^s nobly and splendidly as if he ^ad been the King
himself, which ^umptuous Entertainment he at ^rst did seem absolutely to
refuse, ^ut at last being come to the fif^^ fifth year of his Age, he be^an
very well to relish the Regals and Magnifick Treatments, which ^e had formerly
despised, so that ^e thinking that the public good ^f all Religious Order did
depend ^n his Person, he resolved to be ^ore careful of his Health, than
^eretofore he had been, so that ^though according to the Di^^ates of his Order,
he was to ab^ain from all Flesh Meat, he fairly and freely gave himself a
Dis^ensation, the which he never ^ranted to any other Person, say^^g that the
whole burden of the Regular Order did rely upon him So that he feasted his
Carcass (...) well, that from a lean Monk, h^ in a little time became as fat as
(...) Friar, and having changed h^^ manner of Livning, he soo^ changed his
manners, and began to look and fix his Eyes upon such Faces which his
Conscienc^ did not formerly permit him t^ look upon, in so much that casting
his Eyes upon such Beauties which through Vails a^ magnified and become more
desirable, he began to lust after them, and in order thereunt^ to satisfy his
base lust, he contrived and used the most craft^ ways which lust and malice ca^
suggest, and so disrobing himself of the nature of a true Pastor, h^ puts
on the nature of a Ravenous Wolf, in so much that in ^any considerable Abbys if
he ^und any Nunn simplish, and (...) a pliant nature, he would not ^il to
invegle her, and catch ^er by the Busk. But after that ^e had long continued in
this de^stable course of Life, Gods in^ite bounty Compassionating ^ese poor
wandering Sheep, did ^^t permit him to reign and glo^ in wickedness, as shall
appear (...) this following Narration. ^nce as he was going to visit a ^onvent
hard by Paris called ^^if, it came to pass, that as he ^as hearing all the
Nunns in ^onfession, he observed one a^ongst them, whose name was ^^ary
Herauvet, whose Speech ^as so sweet and so agreeable, ^at he did not question
but that her Face and Heart would corre^^ pond to it, wherefore by only having
heard her, he was seize, with a violent lustful passion, f^exceeding any he had
had toward the other Nunns, so that in speaking to her he stoope^ himself very
low to look o^ her, and having perceived he Coral Lips, he could not contain
himself from lifting up her Vai^ that he might see whether he Eyes did answer
proportionably the fair Symmetry of her Face and having found them so, he wa^
presently possessed with such a surious Passion, that he could neither eat nor
drink, and his Countenance was greatly altered, an^ being returned to his
Priory, (...) could find no rest, but pass. Night and Day restless and fu^^ ^f
ear how he might compass his desire, and deal with her as ^e had done with
many others, ^he which he knew right well was a hard thing to effect, because
^he was a Person of a singular Wisdom and acute Wit, and on ^he other side
knowing himself so difform'd and so old, he resolved with himself not to
solicit her to it, but rather to make her yield by fear, wherefore he soon
after went again to the said Monastery of Gif, at which time and place he
showed himself more severe than ever, being angry at all the Nunns, reproving
this because her Vail was not low enough, and chiding that because she lifted
her head up too high, and checking the other because she did not make her
courtesies as became a Religiou^ Nunn, and in all these P^nctilioes, he did
show himself so sti^^ and severe, that all the Nunn^ dreaded him as much as
Children do their Bug-bears. And he who was troubled with the Gout, did toil so
much in visiting all the places of the Monastery, that about the time of
Evening Prayers (a time appointed by him) he came to the Dormitory. The Abbess
told him, Reverend Father, it is time to sing Evening Song, to whom he replied
and said, go Mother, go to Church and sing it, for my part I am so weary, that
I must stay here, not so much to rest my self as for to give a Check to Sister
Mary Herovet, concerning whom I have heard a very ill fame, for I have been
told that ^he tattles and prattles like any ^ain worldling. The Prioress who
was Aunt to the said Nunns Mother, prayed him to check ^ersmartly, and left her
all alone with him, excepting a young Monk who was come with him, ^s soon as he
perceived himself all alone with Sister Mary, he be^g^n to lift up her Vail,
and to command her she should look upon him, she did answer that according to
the Rules of her Order she was prohibited casting her Eyes upon any Man. Well
said Daughter, replied he, but you must not repute us Religious Persons as Men.
Wherefore the said Sister Mary fearing to Sin against the vow of her Obedience,
did look him in the Face, but she perceived him so ugly and deformed; that she
thought she had undergone a greater Penance, than committed Sin, in looking him
in the Face this Holy Father after that he had displayed the best Flowers of
his Rhetoric in declaring his great respects and Cordial Affections toward
her, he presently clapped his hand upon her Breast, but she according to her duty
thrusted him back, and he being in a great fume Exclaimed against her saying,
What? must a Religious Nunn know that she has Teats, she forthwith replied,
Yea I know that I have them, and also that you, and such as you are ought not
to lay hands on them, for I am not so young nor ignorant, but that I know right
well what is a sin, and what is not; but he well perceiving that he could not
win the place by such Stratagems, he resolved to turn over a new leaf, in
telling her, Alas, dear Sister, I must needs declare to you my great extremity;
and the case is this, I am troubled with a Distemper which all Physicians do
judge incurable, unless I take some pastime with a Woman that I love very well;
as for me I do not esteem my life so much but that I would rather choose to dye
than to commit a mortal sin, but if the business did proceed so far, it is well
known that the simple sin of Fornication is no way to be paralleled with the
sin of Murder; wherefore if you love my life it is in your power to save it,
and together to free your Conscience from an extreme Cruelty. But she,
replying, asked him what kind of Pastime he meant to take; he answered her,
that she might very well repose her Conscience upon his, and that he would do
nothing that could any way turn to the prejudice of either of them, and to show
her a prelude of that pastime he required, he presently embracing her, did
endeavor with all his strength to cast her upon the Bed; but she by this time
perceiving his wicked intent, what by words and what by deeds did defend her
self so well, that notwithstanding all his bustle and chafing he had power to
touch nothing but her Clothes. Now when he saw that all his endeavors and
inventions were but in vain, as an enraged man, and one that had put off all
sense of Conscience and of Natural Reason, clapped his hand under her Coats, and
so f^r as he could touch, scratched her so cruelly, that the poor N^n shrieking
out fell down her full height on the ground in a swoon. Now the Abbess having
heard her outcry, forthwith entered the Dormitory where she was, and remembering
that she had left her Niece all alone with that good Father, and smitten in her
Conscience, did thrust the door which the young Monk held fast. Now this holy
Prior hearing that the Abbess her self was at the door, caused it to be opened,
and showing her her Niece on the ground in a swoon, told her; Certainly, Madam,
you are very much to blame that you never informed me of the dispositions of
Sister Mary, for I being altogether ignorant of the weak disposition of her
body, caused her to stand all the while I was checking of her, and so as you
see she is fallen into a swoon. They did with Vinegar, and other fit things, at
last recover her out of her swoon, and found that by her fall she had got a
hurt in her head. Now being come to her self, the Prior fearing lest she should
declare to the Abbess, who was her Aunt, the Cause of her illness, told her
secretly by her self, Daughter I forbid you upon pain of Disobedience and of
eternal Damnation, from ever speaking or revealing any thing that I have done
to you in this place; for you must know that the extreme affection I have
toward you has constrained me to it, but ^eeing I perceive you are unwil^ing
to grant your consent, I will never mention it any more but this time. I assure
you that in case you be pleased to correspond with my love I shall cause you to
be elected Abbess of one of the most famous Abbeys of this Kingdom. But she
answered him, that she would rather choose to dye in a stinking Dungeon, rather
than take any other Lover besides him who suffered death for her upon the
Cross, with whom she would rather suffer all the indignities and torments which
the World and the Devil could inflict on her, than without him enjoy all
worldly pleasure and treasure: And withal she desired him to forbear
mentioning such discourse any more, or else the would declare all to the
Abbess; but if he did so, she promised she would be silent.

After this manner was this wicked Pastor, or rather ravenous Woolf, defeated
of his prey who notwithstanding that he might longer enjoy the sight of her
whom he lusted after, he in an Hypocri^ical manner went to the Abbets and
prayed her to command her Nanns to sing a Salve Regina, to the honor of that
Virgin, on whom he relied all his h^pes, which was done accordingly, but all
the time of their singing this crafty Ruffian, shed abundance of tears, not out
of any devotion toward the blessed Virgin Mary, but out of regreat and sorrow
that he had conceived, in not having enjoyed his sweet Mary the Nun; as for the
Religious Nuns, thinking he did it for the Love he had for the blessed Virgin
Mary, they had him in great Veneration and esteemed him as a very holy Person,
but as for Sister Mary, who knew his abominable hypocrisy, prayed to GOd in her
heart that he would confound him who made so light of the Pearl of Chastity. So
this execrable Hypocrite, went his way to his Pr^^ry of Saint Martins, in which
place the fire of his base Lust was not extinct, but rather kindled every day
more, and more and he left no stone unturned, that he might compass his wicked
enterprise, and because he chiefly feared the Abbess who was a virtuous Lady;
he contrived a way how he might remove her from that Monastery, and for that
purpose he went toward Madam of Vendosme, who then did live at a place called
La^fere, where she had Erected and founded a Convent of Nuns, by the name of
Mount Olivet, And he as he was the chief Reformer made her understand that the
Abbess of the said Mount Olivet, was not sufficient to Govern so great a
Congregation, upon which words, the good Lady prayed him to name her one who
was more able and more worthy of that Office, but he who required nothing else,
Counseled her to take, and make ^hoice of the Abbess of Gif, she being the
most virtuous and the ^est able in all the Kingdom of France. Madam de
Vendosme, ^id forth with send for her, and ^ommitted to her the Government of
her Monastery of Mount Olivet. This Prior of St. Mar^ins, who could command the
^otes of all the Convent of Gif, ^aused her to be elected Abbess whom he liked
best. Now af^^er this Election, he again went ^o the said Monastery to try once
more, whether he by entreaty could gain the Love of Sister Mary Herovet, but
seeing that ^here was no hope, returned desperate to his priory of St. Mar^in,
in which place, partly ^o compass his end, and partly to revenge himself of her
cruelty, and also least his filthiness should be detected, he c^used the
Relics of the said Convent to be stolen in the night, and char'd the
Confessor of Gist, a very honest old man, as if he had stole them, and for
that sent him to Prison, to S. Martins; in the while he had kept him Prisoner,
he did subourn two Witnesses which ignorantly subscribed to all the Dictates of
the Prior of S. Martins which were these: That in a certain Garden they had
seen the said Confessor with Sister Mary, in an obscene act, the which he
endeavored to make the old Monk to confess: But he who knew right well all the
mad pranks of his Prior, intreaded him he might have the liberty to plead his
cause before a Congregation of all the Monks, and that in the presence of them
all he would declare the long and the short of all he knew, but the Prior well
knowing that the justification of the said Confessor would prove his
Condemnation would by no means condescend to his request; but finding him firm
and stiff in his purpose, did use him so severely and barbariously in Prison,
that some say he died there, others that he forced him to abandon his order,
and totransport himself out of the Kingdom of France; however it be, he never
was seen any more. When this Prior thought he had got such an advantage over
Sister Mary he went to the Monastery, where the Abbess being at his beck, durst
contradict him in no kind of thing, and then he began to exercise his Authority
of Visitour, he therefore caused all the Nunns to be brought before him one
after another, that he might hear their depositions and confessions, but the
turn of Sister Mary being come, who had lost her good Aunt, he began to tell
her, Sister Mary, you know the crime whereof you are accused, and that your
fair pretenses, as i^ you was a singular model o^ Chastity, did avail you
nothing, for it is evident enough, you are far from being that you would be
reputed to be, but Sister Mary, with an undaunted courage answered him, let him
that has accused me be brought before me, and you shall see whither he shall
dare to persist in his accusation, but he presenely replying, said: That there
was no need of any more Testimonies, seeing the Confessor himself had already
been convicted. Sister Mary answered him: I do repute him to be so honest a
man, that I think he would not wrong his Conscience, and the truth so far as to
confess such a wickedness, and lie against me, but suppose the Case it was so,
let him be brought before me, and I do undertake to prove the contraty to his
Face. The Prior perceiving he could no way fright her, told her: I am your
Father, and for this cause I desire to save, your reputation; wherefore I remit
the whole business to your Conscience; but one thing I will ask you, and I
conjure you upon pain of a mortal sin, to tell me ingeniously the truth, my
question is whither you was a Virgin, when you was brought hither at first, she
answered him again Father, when I came hither first, I was but five years of
age, that age is a sufficient Testimony of my Virginity.

Well said Daughter, said he, since that time have you not lost that precious
Jewel? She protested she had not and that she never had any enticement but by
him, but he said that he could not believe her, and that the business must be
put to Trial. What Trial said she are you pleased to make of it? Even the same
Trial that I used upon others said ^he, for I am not constituted a ^isitour of
the Souls only, but of the Bodies also, most of your Abbesses and Prioresses
did fall into my hands, if you be a Virgin indeed, you need not be ashamed of
the Trial of your Virginity, the Trial of the Pudding is by the cut, and
therefore lay your self upon the Bed, and turn all your Clothes over your Face,
but Sister Mary full of passion answered him, you have entertained me with so
many filthy talks concerning the foolish affection you had for me, that I have
reason to believe you rather intend to snatch away the Flower of my Virginity
than to try it; wherefore I will have you know that I will never consent to
your Trial, he then told her, that she was really excommunicated for refusing
such obedience, which she was bound to yield according to the Rules of her
Order, and that unless she would consent, he would disgrace her openly before
the whole Congregation, and declare all the wicked filthiness which had been
committed between her and the Confessor- but she with an undaunted countenance
answered him, He that tries the Reins and and the hearts of his Servants, will
render me more honor before him than you can take away from me before Men,
wherefore seeing your wickedness is come s^ far, I will rather choose you should
satiate your malice against me, than you should fulfill your wicked intent upon
me. For I know full well that God is a just judge, and tha^ he will avenge the
cause of the oppressed in his blessed time. He ^t that very time caused the
Bell to be rung in order to gather together all the Congregation of the
Religious Nuns, and cited her to appear before him, and Sister Mary being come,
was commanded to kneel down before him, to whom he in a wonderful rage and
spite said. Sister Mary, you grieved me in my beart, that all the good
admonitions I have hitherto given you, proved fruitless and to no purpose, so
that against my Nature I am forced to impose a penance upon you, for having
carefully examined your Confessor about some crimes whereof he was lawfully
accused, he has plainly confes^ before me that he had carnally abused your
Person in the same place mentioned by the witnesses, who testified they saw the
crime committed there. Wherefore from that honorable degree wherein I had out
of my good esteem constituted you, from the overseer and Mristress of the
Novices, I ordain that you shall be removed the last of them all, and moreover,
that you shall be fed with Bread and Water on the bare ground before all the
Nunns, until that time your Crimes be expiated by true Repentance, your
contrition may call for favor and mercy.

Now Sister Mary had been forewarned by one of the Nuns, who was her intimate
Friend, and one who understood all the Intrigue, that in case she pleaded for
her self, and should cast out any word that should distaste the said Prior,
that he would presently cause her to be thrown in pace, that is to say, into a
perpetual Dungeon, she therefore patiently suffered this sentence, and lifting
up her hands and eyes to Heaven, earnestly prayed to God the avenger of the
innocent, beseeching him that as he had been her safeguard, and had hitherto
afforded her grace to resist all the allurements unto sin, so he would be
pleased to arm her with a Christian patience in her great tribulation. Moreover
this Worshipful Prior commanded, that she within the term of three years
ensuing, should not be permitted to speak to any of her Parents or Kindred, if
at any time they came to visit her, and that she should write no Letters but
before the whole Congregation of Nuns: So that after this wicked wretch had
fulfilled his rage against this innocent Maid, he went his way, and never came
more there. This poor Nun was left a very long time in the disgrace and
distress above mentioned; but her Mother, who loved her even above all her
other Children, seeing she heard no more of her, was in a great perplexity, and
told one of her Sons, who was a wise and discreet Gentleman, that she believed
her Daughter was dead, and that the Nuns, to the end they might still receive
her yearly Pension, did conceal her death; and withal entreated and commanded
him to try all possible means whereby he might know what was become of his
Sister, who forthwith repaired to the said Convent, and having questioned some
of the Nuns concerning her, he was answered that his Sister was sick, and had
kept her Bed three years, but he being a young man of an acute wit and quick
parts, did not take their excuses for current money, but swore presently, that
if he did not see her, he would forthwith scale the Walls and force his passage
through the Convent, at which words they were much affrighted, and in a peck of
troubles, and therefore thought it their best way to bring her to the Grate,
but the Abbess did accompany her, and stood so near that she could reveal
nothing of her mind to her Brother, but she being wise and discreet had well
foreseen that, and therefore had secretly committed to writing all the passages
before mentioned, and a thousand other stratatagems which the said Prior had
used on purpose to inveigle her, the which because they would be too long and
too tedidious to rehearse, for brevity sake I will omit; but I must not forget
mentioning that whilst her Aunt was yet Abbess, he thinking he had suffered a
repulse because of his deformity, he caused a young and beautiful Monk to
entice this chaste Nunn to wickedness, hoping, that if by Love she should yield
to that young Monk, he could afterward win her by fear: This young Monk,
entertained her with so vile discourses, and so obscene actions, in a Garden
where he was with her, that I think my self obliged to spare chaste Ears, seeing
I cannot relate them without a blush, insomuch, that this honest poor Nun was
forced to jump and run but of the Garden to the Abbess, who was then speaking
with that Prior, and with a great outcry, told her, Dear Mother, they that come
to visit our Convent are Devils under Religious Monks Couls. But then the Prior
fearing lest his Roguery should be discovered, began a ^ew Tale, and smiling,
told the Abbess, Certainly, dear Mother, Sister Marie's complaint is very just
and reasonable, and taking Sister Mary by the hand, told her before the Abbess:
I have long ago been informed that Sister Mary's Clapper was hung exceedingly
well, and that she had her neat speech so much at command, that she was reputed
^ain and worldly; wherefore, for that very reason, I forced my self against my
natural inclination to entertain her with such vain discourses, wherewith
worldlings are wont to entice their Peramours (which discourses I have read in
Books, for by experience I am as ignorant of them, as I was in my Cradle,) and
thinking that my old age together with my deformity did extort from her those
virtuous expressions of hers, I did command my young Monk; he should entertain
her with the same idle and vain discourses; the which notwithstanding she has
as you see, vigorously withstood, and therefore reputing her a very virtuous
and discreet person, it is my will and desire, that henceforth she may enjoy
the first place of Honor after you, and be constituted Mistress over all the
younger Nuns; to the end, that by this encouragment her virtuous disposition
may increase more and more, until it grows to a perfect habit of Virtue. This
act and many other pranks, did that reverend Ghostly Father play, during the
space of three ^ears in which he lusted after his chaste Virgin, the which (as
^s mentioned before) gave her Brother through the Grate, the whole content of
this doleful Narration, but her Brother having delivered it to her Mother, she
being almost distracted, and almost desperate, came to Paris, and went
presently to the Queen of Navar, the Kings only Sister, to whom she showed this
Tragical Narrative, and told her, Madam, repose no more your Trust upon such
vile Hypocrites, I did believe I had placed my Daughter in the way to Heaven,
but now I think I had brought her to the pit of Hell, in the hands of them that
are worse than the worst of Devils that can be there, for the Devils can do no
more than to tempt and entice us into sin, but these will draw us by force, if
peradventure they by allurements cannot Captivate ^ur affections. The Queen of
Navarre was exceedingly troubled, for she reposed her whole trust upon that
Prior of Saint Martins, to whom she had committed the whole charge and
oversight of the Abbesses of Mon^ivillier and of Caules, who were ^isters in
Law. On the other ^^de she detested the vileness of ^he fact with such
aversion, that ^he undertook to vindicate the ^nnocency of that poor distresed
Maid, and upon that account ^eclared the whole business to ^he Kings
Chancellor (who was ^t that time Legate in France) who sent for the said
Prior, who ^eing come could plead nothing ^or himself, but that he was
^hreescore and ten years of age, and addressing himself to the Queen of
Navarre, he earnestly entreated by all the Love she ever had for him, and for a
recompense of all his former services to her, she would be pleased to stop all
the proceedings in Law against him, and that he was ready to confess openly
that Sister Mary Herovet was a pearl of honor, and a singular pattern of
Heroic Chastity. The Queen having heard him, was so amazed that it was not in
her Power to speak a word with him, but went her way and left him, but the
wicked wretch confounded and covered with shame withdrew himself to his
Monastery, where he would be seen of no body, and survived this shame but one
year after.

A Friar fraudulently marries another Friar, his Companion, to a pretty Young
Gentlewoman, and a while after they were both punished.
A French Gentlewoman was once at Padua, in Italy, (...) whom was reported,
that in ^he Bishops, or Chapter-Goal, ^as a Friar imprisoned; and ^quiring
after the reason (for she ^e that every body talked of it, ^r jests and
laughings sake) was ^^ld that this Friar being an el^erly man, was a Confessor
to very honest Gentlewoman, and ^ous. She was a Widow, and ^^d but one
Daughter, whom ^e loved so well, that no pains ^ere so hard, but she did take
them, for that she might give her a Portion, and get her a good honest Husband:
She seeing her Daughter to grow up in years and body, was always desirous to
get her a Husband, who might live with them both, in peace, and quietness, that
is, that he might be a man of a good Conscience, as she deemed her self to be.
And because she heard some sottish Preacher saying: That it was a great deal
better to do bad by the advice of the Doctors, than good against the
inspiration of the holy Ghost, she addresses her self to her Father Confessor,
a man very ancient, and a Doctor in Divinity, for his Life and Conversation
esteemed by all the people of the City, assuring her self, that by his advice
and fervent prayers, she ^^uld not fail of obtaining a reble for her, and her
Daughter. and when she very much pressed upon him, desiring him to choose ^^ch
a Husband for her Daugh^^r, as was known to love God love all, and to support
his honor and good Name, with ^ertuous actions; he answered ^er; that for the
first he will be^^ke himself to implore the ^race and assistance of the Holy
^^irit, by prayers and fastings. and after the Lord would give (...) to his
prayers, he hoped to and that out which she desired. after this the Friar
repaired to place for to contrive the mat^^r. And because he had heard ^f the
Dame, that she had five ^undred Ducats in a lump ready to be given to her
Daughter Husband, and that she would take upon her self the Charge of their
Victuals, of the furniture of the House of all household stuff, and of paying
Customs, he bethought himself; how that he had a young fellow-Fryer, of a
handsome shape, and loving looks, and concluded to give unto him the pretty
Maid, the House, Goods, he being sure of Victuals, and other necessaries, and
to take the five hundred Ducats to himself, for to comfort and quench a little
ardent Covetousness. And after he had spoke to his Companion, and found they
were both of a mind, he returned to the Gentlewoman, and said: I believe
without any doubt that God has sent to me his Angel Raphael, as (...) did to
Tobias, for that I might and as accomplished Husband for ^ur Daughter: For I Will
assure you that I have on my side, the honest^^ young Gentleman that ever ^as
in Italy, who has several ^m^s seen your Daughter, and is (...) highly taken
with her, that to (...) when I was in prayers, God ^^nt him to me, and he
declared (...) me that desire he had of being ^arried with your Daughter: I
^^ow his Family, and his Parents and Relations, as likewise that he (...) of a
notable good life, I have ^omised him to speak to you. It Is ^ue he has one
inconveniency, which only I know of him; which (...). That he willingly to
rescue one (...) his Friends, whom another ^ould have run throw, drew his
Sword, intending to part them but fortune ordered it so that he killed the
other: Therefore he lest he might be taken and imprisoned escaped from thence,
being he was present at his being killed and by the advice of his Friends, and
near Relations, he is retire^ into this City, in a dress of (...) Scholar,
where he keeps himself incognito, until his Friends have compounded the
matter, which he hopes will be shortly done, because of this, it will be most
convenient the Marriage should be done privately, and that you should be
contented, that at day times he may go to the public Lectures, and as for
night he will Sup and lie every night at your House.

Presently the good Woman answered him thus; Sir, I find a great advantage in
what you (...) me, for at least I shall have ^^t near me which I desire above
(...) things in the world. Which ^e Friar did, and conducted him (...) her in
good order, in a brave ^it of Crimson Satin, wherein (...) appeared very
gallant; after ^^ey were come she made some ^ort Complements. A minute as
scarcely over, but the anci^^t Friar began to say the Mass, ^^d that being
done, he Married ^^em; the young Couple went (...) Bed together, and lay till
the ^^ry break of day, when the ^usband said to his Wise, that ^r fear of being
known, he must ^e forced to go into the College. ^aving taken his Crimson
Suite, ^^d his long Gown, not forgeting his black Cap, came to take his leave
of his Wife, who w^^ yet in her Bed, assuring her th^^ he would come every
night (...) sup with her, but as for Di^ners she should not stay for him so he
departed leaving his Wif^ who esteemed her self the happ^ est Woman in the
world, becau^^ she had lighted on such a Husband. The young married Friar
returned to his old Father, t^ whom he brought the five hundred Ducats, there
where the had met together at the first when they were agreeing upon the terms
of the marriage, an^ in the Evening did not fail t^ come to sup with her wh^
thought him to be her husband and he could insinuate himse^^ so well in her and
in his Mothe^ kindness, that they would n^ ^^ve given him for the best ^ince in
the world. This life ^^ntinued for a while; but being (...) goodness of God
takes pity (...) them that are trapanned be^use of their credulity, it hap^^d
that one morning both Mo^er and Daughter took a great ^^sire to go to Mass at
Saint Pran^^, and to visit their Father ^onfessor, by the means of whom ^ey
thought themselves extreme, (...) well provided, one of a beau^ul Son, the other
of a loving ^usband. And by chance not ^^ding their Confessor, nor any ^^dy
else of their acquaintance, ^ere resolved to hear high Mass, which was just
beginning, to see (...) in the mean time he might not ^ome: And amidst that the
^^ung Dame, very earnestly attended the Service, and ove^ weighed the mystery
of it, the Priest turning about to say (...) Dominus Vobiscum, she was qui^^
surprised and astonished, (...) it seemed unto her that it was ^ther her
Husband or one ve^^ like him; but for all this (...) would not make a great
bustle but stayed till he should turn abo^^ once more, and then she too a fuller
view of him, and d^^ not doubt but that it was he Therefore she draws her Moth^
to her, that was in a deep co^templation, and says: Alas, M^dam, what is that I
see? The Mother asked her, what it wa^ It is my Husband, quoth she that says
the Mass, or a person that is the likest to him above any man in the World.

The Mother that had not ta^en great notice of him, said, beseech you, good
Daughter, ^t not such an opinion take place (...) your head. For it is a thing
together impossible, that they ^ho are Men, so holy should ^mmit so great a
trumpery. You Will ^n greatly against God by giving ^edit to such an opinion as
this. ^owever, she resolved to observe (...) features and when he came to ^y
Ita missa est, she verily did see, ^^at never two Brethren of one ^^d the same
Mother could be li^^ yet she was so simple still, that (...) freely said, God
forbid I should ^^eve what I see; but being ve^^ much touched with the love
(...) her Daughter, would not let ^e business be unknown, therefore she
resolved to find out the truth. Evening being com^ when the Husband was to
return who had no way perceived them the Mother said to her Daughte^. If you
will we shall know the truth about your Husband presently; for when he shall be
(...) Bed, I Will come to the Chambe^ and stand behind him very easily without
making him to hear i^ you in the mean time shall tak^ off his Nightcap, and so
w^ shall see if he has such a shave^ Crown as he had that said the Mass: And
as she said, so the^ did: For as soon as the rogui^^ Husband went to bed, the
ol^ Gentlewoman came in, an^ took hold of both his hands her Daughter in the
mean tim^ pulling off his Cap, discovere^ his pretty shaven pate. At which ^he
Mother and Daughter being extremely astonished, insomuch that they were not
able to express it, immediately called their Servants, making them to take and
bind him till morning, not ^egarding his excuses and fair words. The day being
come, ^he Gentlewoman sent for her Father Confessor, feigning as if ^he had to
impart to him some secret matters of great impor^ance. The Father came
presently, whom she made to be taken as well as the young one, ^eproaching him
for cozening ^er so basely. And after this, ^he sent for some Justices, into
^he hands of whom she delivered them both, being of that opinion, that if they
had any Conscience, they would not let them escape unpunished. And according to
their deserts the young est was condemned to a perpetua^ Prison, and the Eldest
suspended of his Office.

A Dean of Fiesola, is in Love wit^ an handsome Widow, and is no^ beloved of
her, and believing himself to lie with her, lyet^ with one of her Servant-Maid^
and the Brethren make him (...) be cacht by the Bishop.
A At Fiesola near Florence next to the Cathedral, lived a Gentlewoman that
was (...) Widow, called Madam Picca^da, in a pretty House, but no^ very large,
she was a Gentle woman very active, and stay^^ ^here the greatest part of the
year, and with her two young Gentlemen her Brothers, very Gallant and
Courteous. It happed, that the Gentlewoman frequenting the Cathedral Church,
and being yet very young, ^eautiful and pleasant, was e^pyed by the Dean, who
imme^iately fell in love with her, in ^o much that she was always before his
Eyes. Afterward, he was at a time in such a burning ^ire, that he himself
discovered and opened his desires to her, be^eeching her that she would be
^ontent of his good inclinations. and love him as well as he did ^er. This Dean
was old in years, ^ut very young in wit and understanding, graceless and
high-spirited, he presumed very much of himself, with his ways an^ customs,
full of dislike and ted^ousness, and so importunate a^^ brutish he was, that
there wa^ not one Person that wished hi^ well, and if there was any tha^ wished
him well, this Gentlewoman was such, that she no^ only meant him not one jo^ o^
good will, but also hated him above the very head ache. Therefore She being a
wise Gennlewoman, answered him thus. Sir because you do love me, I do tak^ it
very kindly, and am bound to love you also, and frankly profess I do like you,
provided that no dishonesty may pass betwixt us. You are my Ghostly Father, and
a Priest, and ar^ drawing very near to old age* wherefore you ought to follow
things honest and chaste; and ^n the other side, I am not a Child, and
therefore these harms of love do not very well ^gree with my condition, I being
a Widow, as you know, ^^ther are you ignorant what ^onesty is required in a
Wid^ow, therefore I desire you t^ ^xcuse me, for at that rate as you ^esire me
to love you, I will ^ever do it, neither do I desire to be loved by you. The
^ean not being able at that time (...) draw any thing more besides that out of
her, did not show himself as a forlorn man, or cast ^t the first Trial, but
set in acti^n his usual pretense, Solliciing her both by Letters and
Messengers, and moreover did ^he same when he see her coming into the Church.
These Darts seeming to the Gentle woman very hard, and ted^^ ous to the be
endured, she thought to free her self from them by such means as the D^an
deserved (since she could not do otherwise.) But she would put nothing to work,
before she had spoke of it to her Brothers, and to to tell them as well what
the Dean did about her, as what she had determined to do. And having obtained
from them a full License of the same, after few days she went to the Church
according to her custom. WHich the Dean seeing, presently did go toward her,
and as he had been used, after the manner of a near Friend or relation, did
enter with her into some talk. The Gentlewoman seeing him com^ing, and looking
at him, showed him a very pleasant counte^ance, and having retired to a place,
after the Dean had spoke ^o her a great many things according to his fashion,
the Gentlewoman, having made a great sigh, said; Master Dean, I have very often
heard there is no Castle so strong, which being besieged and stoutly affualted
should not sometimes be taken, which I see accomplished in my self, for now by
your sweet words, then with your pleasant Countenance, sometimes with one
change, sometimes with another, you have so environed me, that you made me to
break ^^y former resolution, so that I am at this present disposed to be yours
according to your own will and pleasure. The Dean lifted up with joy beyond his
sear, said, madam I rende^ hearty thanks to you, but when and where can we be
together To which the Gentlewoman replied; my sweet Sir, it may be when you
have a mind to, and what hour you will be pleased to appoint, for I having no
Husband, I have no occasion to give an account of my nightly seasons, but I
cannot best think where it may be done. The Dean said, how now, why may it not
be in your House? The Gentlewoman answered, Sir, you know, that I have two
young Brothers, which both day and night come to my House with their Comrades,
moreover my House is but very little, and therefore I do not ^now how you may
be there, ^nless you will be there as one ^hat's dumb, without moving or
^irring, and be in the dark after the fashion of blind Men, if ^ou will do that
you may. For (...) cannot place you in my Cham^er, but they (their Cham^er
being next to mine) may ^ear the least word we speak, ^r stirring we make. The
Dean presently answered, Ma^am, notwithstanding all this ^et us not leave the
sport for a ^ight or two, until I may be^hink my self, where and in what part
we may be with a greater Liberty. The Gentlewoman answered, this I leave to
you, but I beg one thing at your hands, that all this may be secret, and that
no body should know what we speak together. The Dean answered again, Madam do
not doubt of that, and if it be possible agree, that we may be together this
same Evening. The Gentlewoman said; I am satisfied, and she gave him orders,
when and in what manner he should come; so she departed from him and went home.
This Gentlewoman had one of her servants which was not veyoung already, and had
a very ugly look with her, and so disfigured as any Woman in the World; for she
had a Nose as an Eagle and a wrye mouth, broad Lips, the Teeth quite out of
order, and as well big, as black, and her Breath stunk most abominably,
moreover her Eyes were always dropping, and her ^ace was all yellow and green,
and above all this she was crooked, and somewhat lame on her right side, and
her Name was Porca. And as well as she was disfigured as to her Person, so she
was somewhat maliceful, whom the Gentlewoman called to her self and said, hark
you Porca. if you will do me one Service to night, I Will give thee a brave new
Smock, Porca hearing mention made of the Smock, answered, Madam if you give me
a Smock, I will throw my self into the fire, besides any thing else you will be
pleased to command me. Well, says the Gentlewoman, I will have you to lie this
night with a man in my own Bed, and I desire you to coaks him up, but take heed
least you make any stir for fear you should be heard by my Brethren, for you
know they lie next to my room, and then I will give you the Smock. The Porca
answered, What matter is it if I lie with six, not only with one. The Evening
being come, Master Dean came according as he had been appointed, and the two
young Gentlemen according to what they agreed to, were in their own Chamber,
and made a noise, for that they might be heard. Wherefore the Dean very easily
in the dark entered the Gentlewomans Chamber, and as she had told him went to
Bed, and on the other side laid Madam Porca, who was well informed by her
Mistress how to act her Part. Mr. Dean believing he had the Gentlewoman at his
side, kindly embraced Madam Porca. This the Gentlewoman having performed, she
charged her Brothers, to do the Remnant of this Comedy. Who going very quietly
out of their Chamber, went toward the Market, and fortune, in what they had
under hands favored them above their Desires, for it being very hot Weather,
the Bishop had asked for them two young Gentlemen, that so he might go to their
House, and drink with them. But he seeing them come, having obtained his
desire, went directly with them, and entered into a cold Vault of theirs, where
there was a great many Candles burning, and there he drunk a Glass of their
good Wine, with very great fatisfaction. After he had drunk it, the young
Gentlemen said, My Lord, since you have been pleased to show us this kindness,
as to dignifie us with your Presence in this our small Cottage, into which we
was coming to invite you. We desire you, that it may please you, to go to a
little Chamber of ours. which we are ambitious to show you. The Bishop
answered, he would willingly consent to it. Presently one of the young
Gentlemen, taking a lighted Torch into his Hand, and going before him, the
Bishop and all the rest following him, did directly go toward the Chamber,
where Master Dean did lie with Madam Porca. So the young Gentleman entered into
the Chamber, the Bishop after him, and after the Bishop all the Train; to whom
Master Dean with Madam Porca in his Arms was exhibited. Master Dean being
discovered in that nature, and seeing the Candle and all the People about him,
being extremely ashamed, and not less afraid, did put his Head under the
Sheets. To whom the Bishop spoke extreme angrily, calling him a Villain and a
Rogue, and made him to put out his Head from under the Sheets, for that he
might see who he lay withal. The Dean seeing himself to be cozened by the
Gentlewoman; either for that, or else for shame of being chidden (as he thought
it would happen) suddenly grew as sad as can be imagined; and having put his
Clothes on, by the Commandment of the Bishop, was sent to Prison, for to suffer
there a Punishment answerable to his deserts. Afterward the Bishop defired to
know, how this business came about, that he went to lie with Madam Porca. The
young Gentlemen told him all the circumstances of the Matter. Which the Bishop
having heard, praised much the Gentlewoman, and the Gentlemen also, that
without being desirous to defile their Hands in the Blood of the Friar, had
treated him according to what he deserved.

Friar Rinaldo, lies with his Gossip, whom her Husband finds together in the
Chamber, they making him believe, that the Friar had Conjured some Worms out of
their Child's Belley.
AT Siena, there was a young Gentleman, very gallant, and of a good Family,
whose Name was Rinaldo, that fell in Love with a Neighbor of his, a
Gentlewoman of a great Beauty, and a Wife to a very rich Man; Who hoping to
find out a way, to speak to her without any Suspicion; and thereby to obtain
his desire, did not see any other, besides that he might come to be her Gossip,
the Gentlewoman being at that time big with Child, so he made himself
acquainted with her Husband after the best manner he could, and in a very
honest way he told him his Ambition, and the business was dove. Now Rinaldo
being Gossip of Madam Agnetta, and having under this color got a very good
occasion of talking with her, resolved to make her know his Intention by words,
which she a long time ago had perceived out of the motion of his Eyes. But he
effected very little, though it was not unpleasant to the Gentlewoman to hear
him thus talking. Not long after it happened that Rinaldo (whatsoever the
occasion was) became a Friar. And it fell out, that he for some time put his
love a side, which he bore to his Gossip, as likewise some other of his
Vanities; but in process of time, reassumed that same Habit which he never had
put off before, and began to delight in outward Apparel, and to make himself
Suits of the best Cloth, and to be gallant and handsome in all his things, and
to make Songs, Ballads and Sonnets, and to sing the same, with other things of
the like nature, which he was full of. So that at last, his former Apetites
being come again to him, he began oftentimes to visit his Gossip, and his
boldness very much increasing above the first, he also began to Solicit her
for that which he was desirous to obtain from her. The good Gentlewoman being
so much and so often Solicited, and Friar Rinaldo appearing a great deal
handsomer than before, was, above the rest, one day so much saluted by that it
came to pass, she be came willing to do all those things which he demanded of
her, and said; How now Father Rinaldo, does the Eryers do also such things. To
which he Replied, Madam, as soon as ever I pull this Cap down my Back, which I
can do very easily, I l'evappear before you a Man as well as the rest, and no
Friar. The Gentlewoman began to Smile, and said; O sadness! You are my Gossip,
how can you do this? You Will Commit a great Wickedness by it, and I have heard it
is a great Sin, and indeed if that would not be, I would do whatsoever you
should desire. Whereunto Friar Rinaldn answered; You are a Sot, if you leave it
because of that. I do not say it is no Sin, but God forgives greater than this
to them that Repent. But tell me which of us is more a Father to your Son. I
that held him at the Bap^^sm, for your. Husband, that begot him: The
Gentlewoman answered of My Husband is more a Father to him. You say well, quoth
the Friar, and does not your Hus^and lie with you. Sare enough, ^nsmers the
Gentleivoman. Then the Friar says again, And I that ^m the lesser Father of
your Son, which your Husband is not, I may (...) with you as well as he. The
Gentlewoman that understood no Logic, and had but small Difficulties against
it, she either believed or seemed to believe that the Friar spoke truth, and
answered; Who is able to give an auswer to your wise discourse? And after that,
notwithstanding their Gossipship, she gave him leave to do what he pleased.
Neither was it done at the first time, but under a cover of Gossipping having a
better opportunity, the Suspicion being less, they very often me^ together.
Amongst the next it happened once that Friar Rinald^ being come to the
Gentlewomans House, and seeing no body there, besides a Maid of hers very
Pretty and Complaisant, he sent his Companion with the Maid above Stairs, he
going with the Gentlewoman that had her Child in her Arms, into a Chamber, and
having locked themselves up thus within, set down upon a Bed standing there,
and began to talk one with another. They sitting there in that manner, it fell
out the Gossip came home, and without being perceived or heared by any, goes
to the Chamber Door, and knocking at it, calls his Wife, Madam Agnetta (^or
that was the Name of the Gentlewoman) hearing this, said; Now I am gone, for
here is my Husband, now he shall see what the reason is of this our Familiar
Housing. Friar Rinaldo was all undressed, without his Coul and Scapular, only
in his wastcote, who hearing this, said; you say well, if I were dressed we might
find out some way or other to clear the matter, but if you should open to him
now, and he find me thus, we shall have no excuse for it. The Gentlewoman,
being supported by a sudden Invention, said; Dress your self quickly, and after
that, take the Child upon your Arms, and take good heed of what I will say to
him, that so your words may agree with mine, and then leadve the business to
me. The good Man had scarcely left of to knock, but the Woman answered; I am
(...) coming, and having risen, with a good Countenance, runs to the Chamber
Door, and having opened the same, said; Dear Husband I do tell you how our
Gossip Rinaldo is come hither, and I think Go^ sent him hither, for surely if
he had not come hither, we had lost our dear Child this very same day.

When this Jack Adams had heard all this, he all amazed, said, and why so pray?
O Husband, answers the Woman, a sudden fit did fall upon him so extremely, that
I thought he would have dyed; not knowing either what to say or do, in the mean
time comes Father Rinaldo, our Gossip, and having taken him about the neck,
said, Gossip it is Worms he is troubled with all, which coming near the heart,
make him so weak and ill ^uposed, but be not afraid, for I will conjure them,
and make them all to dye, and before I depart from hence you will see the Child
as well as ever you saw him in your life; and because we were to say some
certain Prayers, and our Servant could not find you, I made his Companion to
say them in our Garret, and I with him went in here, and because no body but
the Child's Mother was to be present, for fear others should spoil the business,
we locked our selves in, and as yet he has the Child in his arms, and I believe
he stays for nothing else but that his Companion should finish his Prayers, and
so the business should be at an end, for the Child is quite recovered again.
The good Tom Toast believed all this, the love of the Child constraining him
so, that he did not perceive his Wifes deceitful tricks, but having made a
great sigh, said I will go and see. The Gentlewoman answered; Do not go, for
may be you will spoil what is done; stay here, I Will go and see if you can come
there, and I Will call you. Friar Rinaldo, that had heard all the matter, and had
dressed himself, and was in good posture, having re-taken the Boy into his arms,
and set all things in order, calls; O Gossip, do not I hear our Gossip talking
there? The Simpleton answers, I Sir, I. Presently Father Rinaldo said, Come in
Sir. So the Husband enters; to whom Rinaldo thus said, Take here your Son, by
the grace and mercy of God, fresh and sound; for a little ago I thought you
should not have seen him alive till Evening, and caused to be made a Statue of
Wax about his bigness, for the honor of God, and set it by the Image of S.
Ambrosius, for the merits of whom God has showed you that mercy. The Infant
seeing his Father, ran toward him, and played merrily about him, as little
Infants commonly ^se to do. Who taking him into his arms, cried no less than ^s
if he had newly drawn him out of the Grave, began to embrace and kiss him, and
to render many thanks to his Gossip who had cured him. The Com^ade of Friar
Rinaldo, who in ^he mean time had taught the young Maid more than four
Pater-nosters, and given her a white Purse of Network, which a Nun had given
him, and by this same made her to be devoted to him, hearing this good Coxcomb
talking in the Gentlewomans Chamber, came down very easily to a Corner, where
he could see and hear what they were doing there; and seeing the matter to
stand at very good terms, came quickly in, and entering into the Chamber said
Father Rinaldo, the four Prayers you laid upon me I have said them all. To whom
Friar Rinaldo answered, Brother, you have a very good wind, and have done it
well. As for me, when my Gossip was come, I had not said above two. But it has
pleased God as well for thine as my pains ^o grant that mercy, as to restore
^he Child to his former health. The good Simpleton made good Wines and Comseits
to be brought, and showed a deal of respect to his Gossip and to his Comrade,
who had more need of them things than the other. Afterward they departed, and
commended him to the protection of God, who without any de^^y made an Image of
Wax, and sent it to the Church, for that it might be hung up by the Picture of
Saint Ambrosius, but not of him of Milan.

A Boat-Woman wittily escapes from the hands of two Monks which went about to
ravish her and how their wickedness came to be known to all.
IN port of Coullon, near the City of Nyort, in France, there was a Boat-woman,
wh^ by day, and sometimes by Nigh^ used to carry folks over the River. Now it
came to pass, that two Monks of the said City of Nyort, did pass the River, all
alone, but she and them; and because the passage is one of the longest that be
in France, that they might take off the tediousness of the way, they began to
Court her, to whom she returned such an honest answer as her Duty and good
Conscience required; but they neither tired with their d^y, traveling, nor
cooled by the coldness of the Water, and being also ashamed of the repulse the
woman had given them, resolved both to get her by force, and in case she
repined, to throw her over board into the River: But she being as wise and
witty, as they were foolish and wicked, told them. Sirs, before we proceed
farther, I entreat you to grant me two things, and then you shall perceive that
I have a greater desire to grant your desire than you have to crave it, the
Friars swore by their good Saint Francis, that if she would answer their
request, there was nothing that they were not ready to grant. First and
foremost, said she, I require that you promise and swear that you shall reveal
the matter to no man living, and that they very willingly granted; my other
request (said she) is, that when we enjoy our amorous embraces, there may be
but one of you with me, for I should be too much ashamed if both of you saw me
together in the act; agree therefore betwix^ your selves, which of you must
enjoy me the first, they both thought this also very reasonable and just, and
therefore the youngest being very mannerly gave the right of precedence to to
his Elder, whereupon she be taking her self to her Oars, made toward a little
Island, where being come, she landed the youngest there, and told him, say your
prayers, here until I carry your Companion yonder, into that little Island
over against us, and in case I have well pleased him, when we come back you and
I will Solace our selves in the same place he therefore was contented to tarry
there, expecting the return of his fellow Friar, wh^m the Ferry woman carried
to the other little Island; and when they were come to Land the Ferry Woman
making ^s if she had been tying her Boat, Dear Sir, go first to Land and said
^o^k for a commodious place, where we may seal our mutual affections. This
reverend Ghostly Father jumpt merrily out, that he might sacrifice to his
Goddess Venus, but as soon as she saw him landed, she with her foot kicked
against a Tree, an so in her Boat made twards the River, leaving these two holy
Fathers in the two Islands to cool their heels, to whom also she with as loud a
voice as she could cried out, Gentlemen pray tarry there till some Angel come
down to comfort you, but from me you are not like to receive any more solace.
Now these two wretches perceiving themselves to be so basely gulled, fell on
their knees upon the water side earnestly be seeching her, that she would take
them again, and carry then to the other side of the River they would trouble
her no more with their requests; but she rowed away, telling them that the
scalded Cat dreadeth the cold Water; and she being come to her Town, informed
her Husband of all their mad pranks who having made his compalints to the
Magistrate, who sent his Officers to the pursuit of these two greedy Wolves,
out of whose ravenous jaws this harmless sheep was by the great goodness of the
Almighty, happily escaped. The Officers went away exceeding well acompanied,
which these Ruffians seeing, hid themselves each of them in his own Island,
even as Adam did, when he heard the voice of God his ma^er. So that for shame
of being ^uilty of so foul an act, but chief^^ for fear of condign punish^ent,
they were above half ^ead, but notwithstanding they ^ere taken and let to
prison, the people all the way deriding and ^^ssing at them: Men said, these
^ypocrites make Conscience of ^uching Silver or Gold Coin, ^ut they make no
scruple of fin^ering our Wives middle pieces, others said, they are painted
^epulchers without, but with^^^ are full of rottenness and pu^efaction; and
another cried ^ut, by their fruits one may know them: In short all the places
of ^he holy Scripture, commonly ^uoted against dissembling Hy^ocrites were
applied to these ^^iserable Prisoners, the which by the procurement and intre^t
of their Prior were delivered out of prison, for he coming to the Magistrate in
great haste, did assure him upon his Parole that he would severely punish them
according to the enormity of their Crime, and also that he might give some
satisfaction to the wronged party, he protested that he and his Friars would
say as many prayers and dirges as should be imposed upon them. Wherefore the
Judge granted his request and granted the Prisoners should be delivered to him,
and indeed the Prior being a man of some honesty chect and punished them so
severely, that from that time forth they never durs^ cross the River before
they had blessed themselves with the Sig^ of the Cross, and commende^
themselves to God.

FINIS.
A Friar falls into a Sin deserving great punishment, and wittily intangling
his Abbot into the same Fault, was asquitted.
AT Lunigiana, near Florence, there was a Monastery of Friars, amongst whom was
a young Monk, whose Vigor and Courage neither Fasting could appease, nor
Vigils extinguish. This young Friar once in the midst of the day, when the rest
were all asleep, had a mind to take a walk by himself to his Church, which
stood in a place very solitary. Going thither, by chance he espied a very fair
young Maid (perhaps a Daughter to one of the Laborers in that place) going up
and down the Fields, gathering some certai^ Flowers. At the very first sigh^ of
her he was presently assaulte^ by the Concupiscence of the flesh and therefore
approaching nearer to her, he entered into discourse with her; and falling out
of on^ matter into another, he at las^ agreed with her, and without being
perceived by any, carried he into his own Cell. In the mea^ time, being
transported with exceeding joy, he did not use tha^ quietness which such
matters require. The Abbot being wakened by his noise, and going softly to the
Cell, perceived by hearing them discourse that there was some body with him;
and tha^ that he might the better hea^ what they said, he approached very
quietly to the Door to hearken, where he plainly perceived a Woman to be within
the Chamber. At the first he had a Design to make the Friar open the Door; but
afterward thinking he could order him otherwise, he resolved to return to his
own Chamber, and watch when the Friar should come forth: Who being entertained
with the greatest pleasures and delights by his young Mistress, suspected
nothing: But presently hearing a kind of a rushing in the Dormitory, he peeped
through a little hole, and did plainly see the Abbot stand and hearken. He could
not but conclude for certain, that the Abbot did know the young Maid to be in
his Chamber; and therefore foretasting the ensuing penance for his
misdemeanour, was sorry a bove measure; yet still he would not alter his
countenance before the Maid, but revolving many things in his mind, if perhap^
one of them might serve hi^ turn, he at last found out a ne^ trick, which he
immediately pu^ into execution; for dissembling as if he had staid too long
with this young Woman, he spoke to her in this manner: I will g^ now and see
how you may ge^ out of this place without being seen; therefore hold your peace
until my coming again. So going out, he shut the door after him, and locked it
with his Key, and going directly to the Abbots Chambers, presented the same to
him, according to the custom of the Monks when they went broad: Which having
done, he ^id thus to the Abbot; Mon^ur, I could not make all the Wood (as I had
ordered) to be rought in this Morning; and herefore, with your leave, I Will
(...) my ways and cause the rest to ^e brought. The Abbot, that ^e might be
better satisfied about ^e Fryer's committed Fault, whom he thought not to have
^erceived any thing that he ^new of the matter, was very glad of this occasion;
and wilingly receiving the Key, gave him leave to go. Seeing him gone forth, he
began to consider what was best to do, whether to open the Fryer's Chamber in
the presence of all the Monks, and to make them see his default, so to escape
the danger of being murmured against, in case he should put a condign
puni^hmen^ upon the Friar; or else to get first out of her the circumstances of
the whole business: And bethinking himself, that she might be a Gentlewoman, or
a Virgin^ of that Degree, Quality, or Family, as he would not willingly put
such an affront upon, as to expose her shamelesly to the view of all the
Friars, he determined with himself to see first what she was, and then to let
her go. So he quietly went to the Cell, opened it, entered, and shut the door
after him. The young Maid, seeing the Abbot coming in, all astonished, and
trembling for shame, began to cry. Monsieur Abbot casting his eyes upon her,
and seeing her fair and brisk, notwithstanding his old age, sud^only felt the
same Enchantments ^f the Flesh within him, which ^e thought his young Friar had
^een subject to; and approaching ^ear to the young Maid, he began (...) plain
terms to comfort her, and to beseech her she should not ^ry; and so falling out
of one Discourse into another, he at last ^rrived to the opening of his ardent
Desires.

The young Woman, who had a Heart not of Steel or Diamond, was willing by all
means to please the Abbot. The Monk, who had seign'd himself to have been gone
for Wood, being in the Dormitory, when he saw the Abbot entering into his
Chamber by himself, altogether ravished for joy, judged that his contrivance
would take good effecty whereof he the rather assured himself, because he saw
the Abbot lock the Chamber door on the inside; and leaping out of his hidden
place, he went softly to the Key hole, through which he both saw and heard what
the Abbot did and said. The Abbot thinking at last he had staid long enough
with his young Lady, opened the Cell door, and returned to his Chamber: And by
chance seeing the Friar, and supposing he had been returned from the Wood,
concluded within himself to reprove him sharply, and to send him to Prison, for
that he by that means might only himself be possessor of this newly-gotten
prey. In order to this, he caused him to be called, and having reproved him
severe^^, with a sour look commanded (...) to be carried to Prison. The Friar
very readily gave him this A^^^^er; Mons^ignior, I have not been so long in the
Order of St. B^nnet, as to know all the particular Rules belonging to it; but
as soon as you will be pleased to show me the same, I promise (provided you
pardon me this Fault) never to trespass any thing against it but rather to do
always what I have seen you doing. The Abbot, who was a witty Man, did
presently see, that he had not only perceived something more of him than was
expedient, but that he likewise had seen what he had done: Therefore feeling a
remorse in his own conscience, he would not condemn the Monk for that fault
which he was guilty of himself. So he granted him a pardon, and charged him to
keep Silence, having honestly conveyed the young Maid out of the Cloister, whom
they made often to return again.

An Abbess rises in haste, and goes to surprise a Nun (accused before her) in
Bed with her Lover; and her self being with a Priest, thinking to have put on
her head a Vail, did put on the Breeches of the Priest, which the Arraigned
Gentlewoman seeing, and bidding to unloose them, was acquitted, and granted the
liberty to accompany her Gallant.
THere is in Lombardy, a very Famous Monastery, where amongst other Religious
Gentlewomen, was one not less esteemed for her admirable Beauty, as for her
Noble Parentage. This Isabella (so was the Gentlewomans Name,) came once to one
of her Parents to the Grate, and seeing there a pretty and well shaped
Gentleman with him, instantly fell in Love with him. On the other side she
seeming a most Accomplished and Peerless Dame in his Mind, did convey that Face
into his Heart, which by her Looks, was kindled in his Eyes. These Sparks of
Mutual Inclination, as fruitless, were for a long time on both sides smothered
in their Bosoms. At last, both being extremely sollicitous, how to accomplish
their Desires, it fell out the young Gentleman found out a way, whereby to give
a secret Visit to his Lady. This was very often Practiced, with the greatest
satisfaction imaginable on both sides. In pursuance of those their Visits it
happened one Night, that a Nun of that same House did espy him, without taking
any notice of either of them, both how he entered into and departed out of
Isabella's Chamber, which she made many others privy to, and was the first that
gave counsel of Accusing Isabella before the Abbess. This Madamusinbalda (so
was the Abbesses Name) was a good and a holy Virgin, as well in the Opinion of
the Nuns, as of all her acquaintance. Moreover these aforesaid Nuns, (to the
end nedenial should have any place, concluded to bring them both to the view of
the Abbess. And in order to that, they secretly past by the Watches and Guards,
for to surprise these Lovers. Now Isabella being innocent of their Devices, nor
having any Information of their Plot, it happened one Night, that she appointed
him to come, and her Lover not knowing of any Plot against him, did submit to
what they had agreed to. These two Lovers having been a small while together,
and the Night having past over the greatest part of her silence, the aforesaid
watching Dames, were divided into two parts, one of them betaking themselves to
guard the Door of Madam Isabella's Chamber, the other running to the Cell of
the Abbess, knocked at her Door, (which the Abbess heard) saying; Quickly Madam,
Rise quickly for we have found Isabella, to have a young, Gentleman in her Cell.

That same Night the Abbess had been accompanied by a Priest, whom as often as
she pleased, made him to be brought to her in a Chest. The Abbess hearing that,
and fearing lest the Nuns, either because of her delay, or by their continual
and hard knocking should break open the Door, rises immediately, and at the
best advantage dresseth her self rashly, and believing she had taken a foulded
Vail; which they use to wear on their Heads, and commonly call it a Psalter,
chanced to take the Priests Breeches, and so great was the fear, that without
any heed or earnest attention, instead of a Psalter, she put them on her Head,
and so rushed out of Doors, which she immediately shutting after her, said;
Where is this Wretch, I pray, where is she? The Nuns being accended with an
earnest desire of making the Abbess to find Isabella in her fault, did take no
notice of what she had on her Head, but run to the door of Isabella's Chamber,
and with the help of their Companions forced it open, and entering further,
found these two Lovers in their Naked Bed. They being so suddenly surprised,
were astonished beyond measure, and not knowing what to begin in that case,
resolved to continue steadfast. The young Gentlewoman, was by other Nuns
immediately apprehended, and by the order and command of my Lady Abbess,
carried to the Chapter. The young Gentleman staid there, and having put on his
Clothes, was desirous to see what an end this same business might have, with an
intention^ to play the basest sport with them that ever was done, in case they
should do any mischief to his Beloved, and then to carry her away.

The Abbess afterward set down in the Chapter, in the presence of all the
Nuns, (which had only bent their Eyes upon the Guilty,) and in the mean time
began to lay to Isabella's Charge, such kind of Villainies, as she said, were
never done before, by a Woman of her profes^on and Quality. As namely, ^ow she
by her fordid and blameforthy Deed, had Desiled, and ^^e^lined the Sanctity,
Honesty, and the creditable Name of the Monastery: And that the matter should
appear more ^ainous, these Exprobrations were attended, by many great and
weighty Threatenings. The young Gentlewoman not less Shameful than fearful,
after the rate of the guilty, bereaved almost of all her Senses, did not know
what to answer, but being silent, gave her self over to the Mercy and
Compassion of her Sisters the Nuns. But the Abbess Upbraiding and Amplifying
the matter, it chanced the Gentlewoman lifted up her Eyes, and espied what the
Abbess had upon her Head, as also the Kneestrings of the Breeches hanging down
on both the sides of her Neck, which she well perceiving what they were, all in
a kind of fury, said, God help you Madam, unloose your Vail, and as then talk
to me whatsoever you please. The Abbess which did not understand her meaning,
said; What Vail, you guilty Wretch, what Vail? have you a mind to Jest? You
are not at present upon such a Stage, as to act the Merry Andrew! Your filthy
Actions admit no Joakings! The young Gentlewoman did nevertheless repeat her
former Tale, saying; Madam, I beseech you, you may be pleased to unloose your
Vail, and then say what you list.

Hence many of the Nuns, ^eing envited to turn their Eyes ^owards the Head of
the Abbess, and her self also by putting her ^ands to her Head perceived why
^^abella had spoke thus. The Abbess now seeing as well her self to be in the
very same fault, as that all the Nuns had taken notice of it, did not know
whither to turn, or what to say, but with an exceeding low Voice, and quite in
another manner as before, spoke modestly to them, concluding, that it was
impossible to avoid the Darts of the Flesh. Therefore with a grave and
peaceable Countenance, she said; that every one of them (as heretofore had been
Practiced,) should take advantage of the time when they could. So having freed
the young Gentlewoman, she returned to Bed to her Priest, and Isabella to her
Darling.

A strange and a new way of Penitence, which was to be Inflicled by a Father
Confessor upon a young Gentlewoman.
THat Year when Lady Margaret of Austria went to Cambray, in the behalf of her
Nephew the Emperor, for to capitulate a Peace betwixt him and the Most
Christian King, on whose side was Madam Lovisa of Savoy, there was in the
Company of the said Lady Margaret, the Countess of Aquemont, who brought in her
Company the most Beautiful Damsels of Flanders. The Countess retired for a
while with all her Train, into her own House, and the time of Advent being
come, she sent to a Covent of Friars, demanding a sufficient Preacher, and one
that was of a good Life; as well for Preaching as for Confessing her and all
her Train. The Guardian searched for the best and the most worthy of that
Office, because of the great good they received from the House of Aquemont, and
of Pienne, out of which she was come. They, who amongst all other Religious,
desire to gain a good name, and affection of great Families, sent a Preacher
very much esteemed for Learning above the rest of the Friars, who all the time
of the Advent discharged his duty very well, so that the Countess was very well
satisfied with him. The Night before Christmas, where the Countess would have
received her Creator, she made he^ Confessor come to her, and after she had
Confessed in a Chappe^ very well shut, by reason the Confession was very
secret, she gave place to her Lady of Honor, who after she had done, sends he^
Daughter, to the merciful Absolution of her Father Confessor. And after she had
told him all she knew, the good Father, having heard some of her Secrets, took
a heart and a Courage to appoin^ her such a Penitence which was not usual, and
said to her, My Daughter your Sins are so great, that for the satisfaction of
them I Will inflict upon you that Penance, viz. That you must bear my Cords all
Night long upon your Naked Body. The Gentlewoman, that would not be
disobedient, said to him; Give it me Father, and I will not refuse to wear it.
Not so my Daughter, said the good Father, it will be of no efficacy, if it ^e
done by you. It Is necessary that my own hands, before you receive any
absolution, bind it about you, and afterward you shall be absolved of all your
Sins. The Gentlewoman beginning to cry, said; That she would do it by no
means. How now, says the Friar? Are you a Heretic, for that you refuse the
Penance which God and our Mother the Holy Church, have ordained? I use the
Confession; answers the young Gentlewoman, as the Church has commanded, and
would with all my heart, receive the absolution, and underg the Penance, but I
will permit (...) no means, you should lay your han^ there, and in that manner
I refu^^ your Penance. And before that, done, says the Confessor, I ca^^ grant
you no absolution. The Ge^tlewoman rises from before him, having a Conscience
ver^ much troubled, for she was (...) young, that she was afraid (...) have
Committed a great fault (...) refusing to do that the good F^ther had imposed
her. After she came to the Mass, and the Cou^tess of Egmont had received Co^pus
Domini, the Gentlewoman (...) Honor going after her, asked h^ Daughter, if she
was ready; T^^ which the Daughter crying, R^plied, She was not as yet
Confessed? And what have you done so long with the Priest, quoth the Mother.
Nothing at all, answers the Daughter, because I refused to take the Penance
which he laid upon me, he also refused to give me absolution. The Mother did
not so narrowly inquire after the matter, perceiving it was some strange kind
of Penance which the Friar would have Inflicted upon her, but made her
presently Confess to another, and so went to the Sacrament both together. And
as soon as the Countest was returned from the Church, the Gentlwoman of Honor,
made her Complaints about this Friar, whereat she marvelled, and was very much
astonished, being she had had so good an Opinion of him. But all her
Astonishment could not keep her from Laughing at the hearing of that News about
the Penance. Neither could her Laughing withold from Commanding him to be
Apprehended, and to be beater in the Kitchen: And by the Virtue of Rods to
Confess the Truth, and after that she sen^ him, tied Hands and Feet, to the
Guardian, desiring him, that he another time should give Commission to Men of a
better Life than he was to preack the Gospel.

The vile wickedness of a Monk, together with the shallowness and simplicity of
a Nun.
IN one of the most famous Cities of France, Paris only excepted, there is an
Hospital richly endowed, consisting in a Priory of fifteen or sixteen Nuns, and
in an Appartment before it there is a Priory with seven or eight Monks, which
did every day attend Divine Service; but as for the Nuns, they were only to
say their Pater-nosters and Ave-Maries, because they were bound to attend the
poor sick Folks of the Hospital. Now it came to pass that one of the poor men
of the said Hospital fell very dangerously sick, and the Nuns gathering
themselves together, did administer all possible Remedies in order to his
Recovery; but seeing him very ill, they sent for the Confessor, and perceiving
him to grow weaker and weaker, they gave him the Extreme Unction, after which
he presently became speechless. Now because it was a long while before he could
give up the ghost, and it seemed that he still understood what was said they
did strive to suggest to him the best words and expressions they were capable
of; but it being already very late, and the dead time of the night, they grew
weary, and went one after another to Bed, so that no body remained to bury the
dead Corpse but one of the youngest Nuns, together with the Confessor, whom,
because of his austerity and strictness of Life, she feared even more than the
Prior himself. These two having used great Exclamations, and Repetitions of the
Name of Jesus in the ears of the poor man, and at last perceiving he was quite
gone, they both assisted to bury him; and because they were employed in a good
work of Mercy, this holy Monk began a Discourse about Mercy, the Frailty of
this Life, and the Happiness of the Life to come; so that they passed the best
part of the night entertaining themselves with such Discourses. The poor Nun
did attentively hearken to his Divine Expressions, and looked upon him with
tears in her eyes, in which this holy Father took so much delight, that as he
was speaking of the Life to come, he embraced her as straightly as if he had a
mind to carry her presently to Heaven in his Arms. The poor silly Nun harkening
to his Discourse, durst not put him by, nor refuse his Embraces. This damnable
Hypocrite perceiving her simplicity, did proceed further; and as he was still
speaking to her concerning God, and other spiritual things did commit with her
the most obscene Act of the Flesh; and withal told her, that a secret sin was
not punished before God, and that two single Persons cannot sin in that case,
if there arise no scandal of it; and to avoid that, she should beware of
confessing her self to any but himself. So they parted; but she going her way
the first, and passing by a Chapel dedicated to the Virgin Mary, she went to
give her the Angels Salutation, as she used to do; but looking upon the Image
of the Virgin Mary, and knowing that she had now forfeited the Honor of that
Title and excellent Dignity, and that without any great Allurements, and less
Love, but only by a silly fear and compliance; she then began to weep as
bitterly as if her Heart had been ready to break. The Monk, who though afar
off, heard her deep sighs and groans, suspecting her repentance, and fearing
the loss of his future Pleasure in the enjoyment of her, that he might divert
her, came presently to her, whom he found prostrate at the feet of the said
Image; but he checked her smartly, and told her, That if she was so silly and
scrupulous as to think she had committed a sin in so doing, that then she
should do so no more unless she would, and that he was ready to give her
Absolution. This silly Soul thinking to make satisfaction to God for her sin,
went presently to confess her sin to him, who enjoined her no other Penance,
but only told her, That she had contracted no guilt of sin in loving him, and
that a drop or two of Holy Water would easily wash away so insignificant a
Pecadillo. And she putting more confidence in him than in God himself, did a
while after yield again to his brutal desire, who paid her so home, that her
Belly began to swell; which the took so to heart, that making her Condition
known to the Abbess, she besought her to expel that Monk out of the Monastery,
telling her, That she knew him to be so full of wiles, and so crafty, that she
feared she should not be able to withstand his temptation, who would leave no
stone unturned to inveagle her again. The Abbess and the Priour (who understood
one another, as being partners perhaps in the same guilt) did but laugh at her,
telling her, That she was of an age sufficient to defend her self from the
attempts of one man, and that he whom she accused had always had the repute of
a very sober honest man: At length she being exceedingly tormented with a
violent remorse of a guilty Conscience, craved their leave to go to Rome,
thinking that if she did but confess her sins at the Popes Feet, and kiss his
Toe, she should become as pure a Virgin as ever she had been: And that both the
Priour and the Abbess very willingly granted, and furnished her with Money for
her Journey; for they rather chose she should become a Pilgrim, although it was
against the Rules of her Order, than that she should be a Recluse Nun, and be
so scrupulous; and besides, they were afraid that in detaining her, in a
despairing Passion she should reveal their vile and s^^nish manner of life.

The Canning of a Jesuit, and the Simplicity of a Pryer.
WE have been long enough Expatiaring in the Gardens of several Countries, and
Collected many Flowers (though not altogether well smelling) for our Pastime
and Diversion; now leaving off to transport them any more at present out of
Foreign parts, will see if there be none of our own Plantation here in
England, which may be as delightful as the rest. And indeed it should tend to
the prejudice of Jesuits and Friars, if they should exempt only Eng^and from
their deluding Tricks, a Country so plentiful, and having store of all, to the
very Superfluity. Therefore to free them from such a Scandalous Aspersion, I Will
relate to the kind Reader, a History, which not long since happened here in
England, and above the rest, in the Famous City of London. And it is about two
Priests, the one being a Jesuit, and the other a Carmelitan Friar.

It is not unknown to many, how that a Minister named Travers had two Sons,
which he educated after the best method a Father could bethink himself for the
benefit of his Children. Afterward they not being contented with that
Education they had at home, resolved to go beyond Seas, there to learn Fashions
Languages, as well as to polish their Minds in Arts and Sciences. Amongst the
rest of the Countries they intended to see, Italy was one, where being, and
getting into Familiar Acquaintance of some Friars and Jesuits, at last turned
Roman Catholics. And so crafty was this Priestly Persuasion, that they not
only accepted their Religion, but also would needs be Religious. So both of
them became to be Ghostly Fathers, one a Jesuit, the other a Friar, commonly
called a Carmelite. Being in Orders, and by their Learning and Carriage very
much approving themselves to both the Orders, they gained Credit and Honor
amongst all of their Companies. And since they were Englishmen bred and born,
were judged fit to be sent into Englan^ to be Emissionaries of the Holy Father,
in order to the Conversion of the Souls of Poor, Forlorn Heretics. The
Carmelit was more simple than witty, and his natural Integrity was termed
Holiness. The Jesuit more Cunning, as commonly that sort of Cattle are, but an
Atheist. Yet bearing an outward show of Sanctity, he was counted a very Pious
Man, and for his Prudence and Dexterity in performing of secular matters, was
chosen to be the Procurer General of all the Jesuits Goods in England.
Whatsoever Moneys they had, it was in his Custody, or whom he appointed for it.
Many Lands and Goods he bought for them for to augment their Estates, under his
own Name. In a Word, he was the Totum Fac of all the English Jesuits.
Afterward he once bethought him to beguile all the rest of his Brethren, and
what he had done for their general good, to draw it to his own particular ends
and profit, especially seeing they had not for a long time taken any account of
their Money and Lands in his Custody, as trusting to his Integrity and
Goddness. So he began to spend freely, and to dispose of Goods and Moneys, and
was cried up for the bravest and the most generous Gentleman of the Town. The
Jesuits hearing this, and knowling he had nothing of his own, concluded he must
needs waste their Estates and Moneys: Therefore they met together, calls this
P^ter Travers, and demands mands he should give an account of his Stewardship.
He seeing the business should not smell well if it should be stirred from the
very bottom, answers them (which he all along thought to do, if so be they
should call him to an account) he had no reason to give them any account, for
whatsoever Money he had, it was his own and not theirs, and as to the Lands
they were his by Law, by reason they were all bought under his Name, and no
Bodies else (for the Jesuits for fear of being discovered, make always their
Lands to be bought under one Gentleman's Name.) The Jesuits Astonished and
Surprised at this his talking, knew not what to say, especially living amongst
Protestants (whom they call Heretics) where if they should go to Law under the
name of Priests, they should not only forfeit their Estates, but (according to
the Statute) lose their Lives also, for receiving Orders beyond Sea. After they
had long debated the matter among them, at last they resolved to go to Law,
rather than lose all; and that they might not be discovered as Jesuits, to
plead as Persons Secular, wronged by this now Esquire Travers.

When they had Indicted this holy Father, and came to the Bar, the Pleadings
were so obscure and nonsensical, that the Judges knew not what to say, for want
of clear Evidence in the matter: till at last, as wise and prudent Men,
(especially some of them knowing what Travers was) they perceived they were all
Priests; and so, not without laughter and admiration, throwing the controverted
Bone among them, desired them to agree among themselves, for that the matter
was so obscure, as that it could not be (the things being as they were) decided
at the Bench. The Jesuits were now in a worse condition than before, and knew
not what to do, or what to think in this matter; all the Tenants of the Lands
taking this Travers for their lawful Landlord, and the Moneys being in his
hands and command; so they desired him to come to a Composition. He not
designing to defraud them of all, did agree to it, but still reserving the
greatest part of the Moneys and Lands to his own use, made the rest over to the
Jesuits.

Being now so well furnished with Goods and Lands, he intended to marry, that
so he might have Heirs to whom to leave his Estate: And yet neither would he
turn Protestant, for fear of losing his Reputation; neither could he take a
Wife, being a Roman Catholic in Orders. But at last he found out a way whereby
he might still continue of that Religion, and be no more a Priest, and by that
means have freedom to take a Wife, nemine contradicente.

He therefore comes to his Brother the Carmelite Friar, and with a great
complaint and heaviness of heart tells him, that he was persuaded he was never
baptized: For, says be, in all the Register books of many Parishes, and
particularly in that where I was born, I do not find my Name; whether it was by
the negligence of my Father, or how it happened, I do not know: but sure I am, I
am not baptized.

The good old Friar was extremely amazed at it; and though he could not at the
first be persuaded of any such thing, yet at last, by the great assurance of
the Jesuit, and his forged Reasons and Arguments tending to that purpose, he
believed him. The Jesuit seeing his Business went on so well, desired at last
his Brother would be pleased to do him that charitable deed as to baptize him;
for he was afraid to be damned for ever, because he was not as yet inserted
into the true Church, out of whose Bosom there is no hopes of Salvation. The
old Carmelite did it willingly, and accordingly he was baptized. Now he being
put in Orders, and having made the profession of a Religious Person, emitted
his Vows, and done all the rest of those Trumperies belonging to a Regular
Priest's Life, without being baptized, was not only not bound to continue as
he was, but ipso facto he was counted as Irregular; and if he would be a Person
Ecclesiastic, he was to take Ordes anew upon him, and to make a second
Profession. But so wise he was, that he never returned to the Jesuits, but
continued a Person Secular, living in that same Religion (that they should not
think him to be an Apostate, or to have done that Trick to the Jesuits because
he intended to turn Protestant;) and so married a Wife, which was the only
reason of his rebaptization, and has begot several Children on her. How he now
lives, and what his Condition is, I was not so curious as to inquire. As far
as his Cunning, and his Brothers Simplicity did reach, I have here deposed,
being neither willing to offend the parties, nor to have their Examples
imitated.

FINIS.

