THE ORIGIN OF ATHEISM IN THE Popish and Protestant CHURCHES, SHOWN BY
DOROTHEVS SICVRVS, 1684. Made English, and a Preface added

By E. B. Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1684.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
THE Author of This small Piece is altogether unknown to me, and as to the Name
I suppose it is a made one; because neither the place where it is Printed is
expressed, nor the Printers name. I conjecture the Author of it to be a
Calvinist, by reason of his great kindness for that Religion, as appears in his
Title page, and throughout the Book, calling it every where the Evangelical
Religion. Besides, in the beginning of the Third Section he falls very sharply
upon the Lutherans and Arminians, as if none had been guilty of the Crimes
there charged but they. But be this as it will, I am much better assured the
Book was Printed beyond the Seas and imported into England, both by the Paper,
Print, and Person of whom I had it.

I have taken the pains to turn it as well as I can into English, because I
conceive it may be useful to some of my Country men who cannot read it in the
Original; and if I should happen to be mistaken, the wonder will not be great.

And yet I cannot forbear taking a little more pains with it before I know what
shall be the event of that which I have already undergone, because I conceive
there may be many other Causes of the increase of the abominable and
comprehensive sin of Atheism besides those my Author has mentioned.

It has been observed by many Learned men who have reflected on the tempers of
the several Ages of the World, that the more ignorant times have been strongly
prone to Superstition; whence, I suppose, was taken that common Proverb, that
Ignorance is the mother of Devotion. There being no people so seemingly Devout
as the Superstitious. It would make a man amazed to see what ridiculous things
our Ancestors believed in the dark times of Popery here in England. No man can
read the story of the Monk of Evesham which fills three whole leaves in Matthew.
Anno 1196.
Paris, wherein is a very exact account of all the Pains and Places of
Purgatory. Or that in Gulielmus Newbrigensis concerning the two Green children
that were found at Wolpet in Suffolk, Lib. 1. c. 26.
and came out of St. Martins Land, where the Sun never shines, and where they
never see any greater light than that of a twilight, etc. I say, no man can
read these passages in men of that great capacity that they were of in
comparison of others who lived in the same times, but he must admire the
credulity and ignorance of those Ages: and if the great men and Scholars could
swallow such things, we may from thence conjecture how large the Faith and
Belief of the meaner people was.

On the other side, Quin and videmus tempora ipsa, in Atheismum procliviora
(qualia fuerunt Augusti Caesaris) tranquilla fuisse.
the Age of Augustus (in which times our Savior took upon him our Nature)
were, as Learned, Polite and flourishing times as ever happened since the
Creation of the World; but then they were the most corrupt too in point of
Manners, and the most Atheistical in point of Belief. Bacon de superstitione


That they were Learned will appear to any man that shall read the Works of
Cicero, Livy, Virgil, Horace, Josephus, etc. And we may be assured that all the
more Ancient Greek and Latin Books which are since lost, were all then extant,
and how much the Romans in that Age envied the Grecians the reputation of
Learning will thence appear too, though as Ammianus Marcellinus acquaints us
about three Centuries after they became wholly careless of Books and Learned
men, L. 16. c. 6. p. 27
Bibliothecis in Sepulchrorum ritu in perpetuum clausis, Their Libraries being
like Sepulchers shut up never to be opened more. And a little higher. Pro
Philosopho Cantor; and in locum Oratoris Doctor artium ludicrarum Accitur, They
entertained instead of a Philosopher a Singing man, and instead of an Orator a
Teacher of Ludicrous Arts; but that it was not so in the times I mention, is
apparent from the great number of excellent Books that were then written.

But then the same Books will sufficiently acquaint us with the Universal
corruption of manners that then raged throughout the whole world; and God be
praised, though our times seem to be equal in Learning, they are not yet so bad
as those were, in point of Morality.

Nor did Atheism and her Sister Hypocrisy rage less in that Age than
debauchery. Cicero de fine bon. l. c. 7. Lact. de falsa relig. l. 3. c. 16.
The Philosophy that was then in Vogue was the Epicurean, of which Sect most of
the great men of Rome in those times were, as the Sect of the Sadduces
prevailed upon the great men of the Jewish Nation at the same time which was
not much better than the Epicurean Philosophy being but a sort of disguised
Atheism. Joseph. Ant. L. XVIII. cap. 2.


Nor was the covetous, ambitious, insolent and factious Hypocrisy of the
Pharisees, less odious to God, and mischievous to all true Religion, than the
contrary sin of Atheism; as appears by our Saviors conjoyning them always in
his severe reprehensions and threats: and I doubt not but much of the Impiety
of that age sprung from men's observing the Vanity of these outside Pretenders
to piety, and that in mere abhorrence of their Villainies many run into the
other extreme.

Because it may seem a little strange to most men that these two effects should
spring from such unlikely causes, I will presume to offer something as the
Causes of them, though I shall perhaps please no body but my self by the attempt.

As to the first, Ignorance alone never produced any Devotion in any man. But
because in every Age God has exerted and manifested his Power and Providence;
those times that had least Natural Philosophy in them have attributed to him
not only all those great things which he in reality did to demonstrate his
Power and Care of men, Apud imperitos prodigii loco accipiebatur ipsa aquarum
penuria -- quod in pace sors, seu natura; nunc fatum and Ira Dei vocabatur.
Tact. H. l. 4. c. 26.
but all those Works of Nature too which they could not understand, such as
Eclipses and the like: by which means men became so Credulous that they easily
believed any thing that was told them for want of ability to discern Truth from
Falsehood, and others that were more Crafty did work upon this temper and drive
on the Cheat for their own advantage, Quibus quaestui sunt capti Superstitione
Animi. Live. l. 4.
still more and more deluding the Superstitious and fearful, that they might
increase their own Wealth and Power by their needless Superstition and foolish
fear.

But on the other side in those times in which Natural Philosophy has
flourished, Parum Philosophiae naturalis homines inclinat in Atheismum, at
Altiorem Scientiam eos ad Religionem circumagere.
men being by that enabled to search into the Natural and Second Causes of
things, have many times from their discoveries concluded, that there was no
God, but that all things succeeded in a Regular and Natural course; and if
there happened some things which they could give no account of, Baconis Ser.
fidelis, XVI.
they either disbelieved them, or thought there was a Natural Cause though they
could not for the present find it out.

Again, the strange, and to men unsearchable order of the Divine Providence in
the Government of the World, has to Learned Men and Ages, been very productive
of Atheism; it is observed by Lactantius that the prosperity of the Wicked, De
falsa Sapientia, l 3. c. 17.
and the misery and affliction of the Good and Virtuous was the thing that gave
Epicurus the first hint of setting up his Atheistick Philosophy.

To which if we please to add the pride of men who would be thought to
understand every thing, to have no dependence, no not upon God himself; and to
be under no restraint or aw: It will somewhat mitigate the wonder. St. Paul
observes that Knowledge puffs up. And there is nothing so certain as that
the most Learned and prosperous times which have ever gone together have been
the most proud and insolent, and forgetful of God and all Goodness, despising
all Religion and Virtue; whereas on the contrary, times of great Afflictions,
Wars, Famines, Adversae deinde res admonuerunt Religionum; confugimus in
capitolium ad ^eos, ad sedem Jovis, O. M. Live. l. 5.
Plagues, and the like, teach men their imbecility, make them humble, and show
them how miserable and helpless they are without a God to protect and provide
for them; and I do truly believe that more of the Atheism of this and all
former Ages have sprung from the Pride and Security of men who thought they
stood in need of no God, by reason of their wealth and greatness, than from any
other cause whatsoever.

Prosperity is not only the cause of Pride but of Sensuality and of all other
sorts of debauchery; Nullum crimen abest facinusque libidinis, ex quo Paupertas
Romana perit -- and turpi fregerunt secula Luxu. Diviti^^molles, Juven. Sat. 6.
men that have Wealth at their command, and leisure and liberty to employ it as
they please, do too often make a very bad use of it, and when they have
multiplied their sins against heaven till they can scarce hope for Mercy from
that infinite goodness that dwells there, and debauched and corrupted their
Natures, that they have but little more of a man than the shape and speech
left, they then begin to think it their interest that there should be no God to
punish them: and so endeavor to persuade themselves and others that indeed
there is none. And I am persuaded, God in his Justice gives up many of them to
a mind void of Judgment, so that they become uncurable to all but God; and that
they are almost as miserable as the damned.

To all this give me leave to add one Cause more that seems almost peculiar to
our times, the Factions and Divisions in Religion, and the fierce disputes, and
fearful wars and devastations that have happened thereupon in Christendom,
within little more than a Century of years. Those men that are not very fond of
Religion being in these disputes and quarrels a kind of Lookers on, have
remarked both the great mistakes and foul play of these Contenders, and have
sometimes been able to satisfy themselves that both sides were in the wrong,
and have much oftener suspected they might be so, and have from thence drawn one
general Conclusion, that perhaps all this bustle was about a thing that had no
real being in the world.

And of those that have been engaged in Parties in these horrible Broils, I
doubt not but when they have seen things fall out quite contrary to their
expectation, though some have thereby been weaned from the world, and from thence
have inferred how vain it was to put their trust in man or any thing else on
this side the grave: yet others have turned Atheists, and called in question
both that God and Providence that governs the World, because things did not go
just as they expected they should.

The very difficulty of choosing the true Religion, amidst the various and
contrary pretenses, has made others turn mere Atheists to save themselves the
trouble of examining their several pretenses.

The very weariness and dissatisfaction that others have met with in frequent
changing their Religion have reduced them at last to a perfect indifference for
all, and some have taken sanctuary in downright infidelity and Atheism.

The abominable Hypocrisy of the late times when all the Villainies that men
could be guilty of, were ushered in by Fasts and Sermon upon Sermon from
morning till midnight with a prodigious Zeal, and no less apparent Knavery and
interest at the bottom, have had a very ill effect upon others, and made them
conclude against all Religion for the sakes of these wicked Pretenders to it.

The horrid perjuries and abominable deceptions which have of later years been
practiced by our pretended godly men, have had their share too in this mischief.

When there have at any time happened differences in Religion, they have not
only excited men to use the utmost of their Reasons and Learning against each
other, but Passion and Wit too have found their admission, and the bitter
Sarcasms, biting Jeers, and sharp Scoffs that they have made use of each
against other, have by degrees made all Religion cheap and contemptible, and
exposed both the parties to the scorn of their common Enemy, and especially of
Atheists.

A man that shall reflect seriously on all this, will hardly wonder that there
should be so much Atheism and Impiety as there is, but rather that there is any
thing else to be found amongst us; and certainly if the Notion and Sense of a
God were not woven into the Nature of Mankind, and engraven so deep in his
mind, that it is utterly impossible totally to deface it: And lastly, if God
himself had not interested himself for the preservation of Religion, it would,
it must have been long ere this time totally extirpated.

Religion and Civil Government do mutually support each other, he that has no
Religion, deserves no Faith nor Trust, he that does not fear God truly, will
never honor his King heartily, nor serve him stoutly and faithfully. It has
not been much regarded perhaps, but there is nothing so certain, as that a
Ranting, Debauched, godless Gallant is the worst of Subjects; if it were
possible he could be faithful (which when it shall become his interest to be
otherwise, is not to be expected) yet his Crimes are infectious, and he carries
Gods curse where ever he goes.

I grant he that will rebel against his Prince for Conscience Sake is a
dangerous Subject, but then he that pretends to be Faithful and Loyal without
it, is no better. Now this is another ill effect of our Divisions, that whilst
some are seduced by Ill Principles into disobedience to our Laws, and hatred of
the Government; others have taken the liberty to vent another sort of
Principles that are destructive of Humane Society, Virtue and all Government
both Civil and Ecclesiastical; so that betwixt them both we are fitted for
Ruin.

Now both these insufferable mischiefs have been spread and propagated by the
Liberty of the Press, which has Midwiv'd into the World a number of
Atheistical debauched Books as well as Factious and disloyal pieces; and the
former of these are as destructive to Government as they are to Religion and
good manners, without which no Government can subsist long.

And now to apply all this to my purpose, I say, the worst thing that can
betide a man on this side Hell, is to be given up by God to vile and base
Affections, and that which the Apostle calls (...) Romans 1. 30.
, the hatred of God, which is the forerunner of Atheism, is the worst and
basest, the most devilish affection that can take possession of a man, but yet
is too frequently the effect of Debauchery, Schism, Inconstancy and neglect of
the Service of God, and therefore it is the interest of all those that have any
spark of Goodness or Virtue left, to desert the paths that lead to this
Precipice, to abhor all that company that may lead them insensibly into this
Gulf of eternal Ruin, and destroy all their Reputations and temporal happiness
into the bargain.

2. That it is the interest of all that are exalted to any places of Power and
Profit, Principis est ea maxim curare quae ad Deos pertinent, nam and metuunt
minus ne quid injusti accipiunt a talibus -- and minus insidiantur, ut Deos
habenti Socios, Arist. Polit. l. 5. c. 11.
that have any share in the Government to be as tender of Religion as of the
Apple of their Eye; to discountenance Debauchery and Immorality, and especially
Atheism, Blasphemy, Perjury, common Swearing, etc. to the utmost of their
powers, and however never to employ or trust men of infamous lives or wicked
Principles.

3. That it is the interest of all men to endeavor to put an end to our
Factions in Religion by all the Lawful means that can be thought of.

4. Seeing all these miseries I have expressed have sprung from the abuse of
Liberty and want of the execution of good Laws, Licentia urbium, aliquando
disciplina metuque, nunquam sponte considet. Sen. ep. 97.
and that we see whither a licentious freedom will at last lead us, let us
heartily submit to the necessary restraints of Discipline and Government and
dread no slavery like that of being the bondmen of Lust, and the drudges of the
Devil.

And as to our Dissenters, I desire they would seriously consider the State of
the Churches beyond the Seas, of which this Author has given so exact an
account, and then reflect upon the little good they have got or done by all
their oppositions to that Religion which God by his Providence has established
amongst us, how many horrid sins they have been guilty of under the mask of
Religion, and perhaps more out of ignorant Zeal than intentional Wickedness:
and lastly, how deeply they are concerned in the Guilt of all the Debauchery
and Atheism of the present Age, by weakening the force and abating the
reverence that is due, and in all probability would otherwise have been paid to
our Civil and Ecclesiastical Governors.

And because the very root of all our Divisions is a quarrel about our
Ceremonies, I desire, they would reflect seriously upon the last Section of
this discourse, and if they cannot be satisfied with the proceedings of their
Superiors, yet at least to abate somewhat of their hitherto inflexible
stubbornness.

And because the sense of Foreigners is like to be more prevalent with them,
than that of English men who are suspected to be interested, I will give them
for a Conclusion the sense of a Learned French Protestant in the same case. The
person I mention is the Author of the History of Calvinism and Popery in
Parallel, or, an Apology for the Reformers and Reformation written against Mur
Maimbourg's History of Calvinism, part. 1. chap. 20.

It is fit to be known in the first place that We, (says he) would not enter
into a Schism with a Church, nor make any great controversy for a small number
of Ceremonies: which being of no great use, do yet do no great injury to
Religion; and for this Cause we cannot but be concerned to see a number of good
and devout people beyond the Seas, out of an excessive Zeal for the simplicity
of Worship, divorce themselves from the Religion Established by the Prince and
State, because of a few Ceremonies of small importance, the use of which they
will not endure. Schism is the greatest of all evils; and if it were true that
these Ceremonies did some harm; yet they can never do so much mischief as the
scandal of Separation and Division do. But yet after all this, I believe these
Ceremonies are innocent, and that these men are very imprudently offended at
them.

This Gentleman is no friend to Ceremonies as appears by this, and in what
follows is very importunate with our Governors to lay them aside in favor of
the Dissenters; and yet he cannot but call the Separation made on that account
a Schism, and an imprudent and scandalous one too, and pronounce our Ceremonies
innocent, which is enough to condemn our Dissenters, and make them liable to
answer to God and Man for all the misery, sin and bloodshed that have already
happened in this quarrel or shall hereafter happen.

And if the little Religion that is left in the World do with so much
difficulty maintain it self against the Atheism that grows upon the age, now
that the Established Religion is defended by Laws, made venerable by a few
innocent Ceremonies, and the Countenance of our King and Government; I leave it
to all men to judge what would follow upon the breaking down our Fences, and
exposing it naked and without Authority to all that please to put a helping
hand to the pulling it down.

THE ORIGIN OF ATHEISM Both in the Popish and Reformed CHURCHES, Shown by
DOROTHEVS SICVRVS.
Translated out of Latin.
HE that shall compare the Present Times with those that are Past, shall hardly
fall upon an Age of more solid Learning, excellent discourse, or ingenuous
Arts, than the Present. But then alas we find by experience, that there was
never any thing so great but it left room for its own Ruin: for by how much
the more, Learning and Arts have spread themselves, into so much the narrower
bounds is Piety contracted; so that while the number of Learned men increases,
that of the Pious is daily diminished. Not only the Jesuits, but the Members of
the other Orders, though despised by the former in comparison of themselves, do
abundantly show that the Church of Rome is replenished with many Learned men.
Hence many have admired how it should come to pass that this Religion which is
composed with so strict, superstitious, and artificial a respect to the
well-being and Polity of the Pope and Jesuits should not only abound with
Atheists, but even seem to be the source of Atheism it self. Those famous men,
the Elegant Theophilus Spizelius, the Religious Anthonius Reiserus, the once
most Reverend Joannes Mullerus, the Zealous Gisbertus Voetius, the Learned
Josua Arndius, though they have otherwise at large discoursed of Atheism, yet
they do not touch this business. But to him that rightly considers it, the
thing will not be obscure: for Italy where the Seat of the Popedom is,
produces sublime and active Wits, who when they grow up, accustom themselves
to humane Learning, History, Critics, Politics, and those other studies which
belong to Public affairs and the secrets of State, who in the mean time
despise the studies of Piety, Scripture and Divinity as mean and easy things
which will contribute very little to their Reputations in the world.

And although Petrus Bembus is long since dead, yet there is still some or other
of the number of the holy Cardinals and Bishops who can suggest seasonably to a
young Divine, intent upon the Bible, that those trifles do not become a grave
man. So that these are only Divines in name, while they pursue the aforesaid
sorts of Learning, or any other rather than Theology; esteeming it fitter for
men of small capacity, and their Curates, than for men of those Elevated parts
they are of. The Jesuits whose supreme Law is their Interest, do here
dexterously lead their followers; for being weary of Divinity and in our times
very ignorant and unexpert in it, they are very anxious and careful in the
cultivating the Arts of Administering public affairs to their own Ends; raising
and fomenting Wars, searching into the secrets of State, deceiving the minds of
Princes, in finding out curious things, and such as may best serve to divert
the Court Ladies, and in conveying Gunpowder with a Godly simplicity under
Kings; and in other such like mysteries proper to this most useful sort of men.
They will not like their Predecessors be troublesome to Printers in the
publishing Commentaries and discourses on the Bible, they have their Pererius,
Bonfrerius, Cornelius Alapide, Jansenius, Lorinus, Estius, Justinianus, Masius,
Sanctius, Pintus and Tirinus, and those that take pleasure in them, may make
use of them, and they who having nothing else to do, may write more. The
present life needs other studies, Jeremias Drexelius and Carolus Scrivanius
have written enough for Devotion: Now let the Italians help the Italians, the
books of Nicolas Machiavel, and the discourses of Trajanus Boccalini on
Parnassus are to be now employed. The present Pope sets a good example to the
Universal Church; who that he may seasonably and prudently curb the forces of
the great Turk which hang as a cloud over Italy, the Seat of the Popedom,
spares neither Council, Labor, nor charge, that not only Vienna may be
delivered, but also that the Wars may be continued against the Turks by the
Emperor and his Confederates, and not be hindered by the French King.

But then how the Great men, Kings and Princes should be induced and persuaded
to the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, and the study of Piety and good Works,
and diverted from Adulteries, the too great oppression of their Subjects, from
coveting that which is not their own, from rash and unjust wars; these belong
to others, and not to the Pope, though he be reputed the supreme Bishop. The
Popedom is now upheld by Arms, and all other things are trifles. I grant the
Church of Rome has not had a better or wiser Pope than the present is, in this
last Age. But then all that love the Christian Religion and Christ, cannot
digest this; that he so carelessly connives (that I may represent it smoothly)
at the manifest and apparent sins which strike the eyes of the whole world, of
his most Christian, most Catholic Kings, and the Protectors of the Faith, and
yet this good Pope, if compared with others, does not once frown, but clearly
dissembles at all things, lest he should lose his Authority, his Revenews, and
his very Kingdom; which is not obscurely aimed at by some body. I know not
whether it be the part of a wise man to retain the antiquated custom of sending
Consecrated Clouts and Blankets, with the great peril of his Reputation, and in
the mean time be too Prodigal and careless of the Episcopal Correption and
Admonition to the performance of our duties, the amendment of our Neighbors,
and lastly of all those things which tend to the good of some whole Kingdoms
Some esteem the dela^^ of this Pope in the conferring the Cardinals hats, and
other Ecclesiastical promotions as a principal part of his wisdom; nor do I
deny that there is in this a secret which I can easily conjecture the cause of:
but to dispose of them at the Will and Recommendation of the Lord Protector of
the Faith (which new title is now on the Anvil at Rome, perhaps without the
consent of the King of Poland) the Duke of Lorrain, and the Count of
Starenburg, may seem to the wiser part of mankind too too profane and remote
from the Divine and Apostolical prudence. Alas whither does the Pope fall! how
barefaced does Atheism approach this man! These great men have excellently
played their parts against the common Enemy, and done that which becomes such
persons, and therefore the Pope is bound to prefer their Clients, and those
they recommend, in the most Holy Church redeemed with the very blood and
Torments of Jesus Christ? that so the Body and Spouse of Christ may pay that
debt which the King of Italy owes to these Noble men for preventing the dangers
which threatened his kingdom. But thus our Lords the Popes do always proceed
where they dispose of Ecclesiastical preferments according to the pleasure of
great men, whatever becomes of the Edification and Salvation of the Church and
its Members.

II. The Youth of that Religion in the mean time being seasoned with these
studies and examples (if they have any, and have not forgot and lost all in the
Camp,) is employed as occasion serves in those offices which become void, and
pursues the same course of life; for the Church and Church affairs are either
committed to some Curate, who is for the most part very ignorant, or are
managed by these men so carelessly and negligently that they seem to mind
nothing less. They are wholly taken up with the sublime Speculations of the
Mathematics, Critics, the secrets of Polity, the Rights of Majesty, etc. but
they have either never tasted at all, or lapt like the dogs in the Nile, the
Institutions and Compendiums of Divinity, the methods of Doctrine, and the
Expressions and Phrases of the Bible and approved Classick Authors; in the
interim they are unconcerned for the truth of the Religion of their
forefathers, and never attain the knowledge of the Roman Catechism, in the
course of their whole lives; being oppressed with a multitude of Beautiful
books, which tend more to their Reputation and Advantage, and the burden of
other affairs. I have seen many Libraries where the Catechism was not to be
found. And from thence it proceeds that it is so scarce amongst them that I
could not without much difficulty get a Copy of it for my own use. And thus
they live from time to time till some Calamity, Temptation or disease awake
them, and separate them a little from those vain though sublime studies, and then
in their distresses they seek solid comforts, correspondent to their great
Wits. For as for the Mass, the Invocation of Saints and Angels, Purgatory, the
infallibility of the Pope of Rome, and the rest of those Whimsies they keep
them in View, but like Learned men despise and scorn them, as not built upon so
much as a rational foundation: for without doubt he must be rather an Ass than
a Learned man, that should from his heart believe these fooleries. They either
have not the Works of the Reformed Divines, or the Pope and Inquisition will
not suffer them to read them. For they so severely prohibit the reading of them
especially in Italy and Spain, that they will not suffer their own Answers of
our Books to be publicly sold, lest men should detect the weakness and
falsehood of their Superstition, from the opposite Arguments and their frivolous
Replies; though all our Arguments, according to the custom of these men, are
represented with the utmost disadvantage, being mutilated, lamed, feigned and
falsified; which was observed long since by a Learned man Edwin Sands. These
men, Europae speculum, or a View or survey of the State of Religion in the
Western parts of the World, p. 121.
I say, being overtaken by Temptations, examining the whole frame of the Popish
Religion, as such, with their acquired and experienced Judgment, find at last,
that it is nothing but a pack of mere frauds, introduced of purpose to delude
the silly Rabble, preserve the Majesty of the Pope, and uphold the Monasteries,
and in them especially the Idle, Lazy Jesuits and Monks. Which things being
thus dissected, and surveyed with great care, the sum is easily cast up, and
is no more than this, All Religion is a mere cheat, all seek their own
Advantage, some directly, others obliquely, What if at last in truth, there is
no God? for I am fully convinced, that no man of good Learning and sense, ever
entered the Roman Church for the sake of Religion, and the quieting of his
Conscience without any other bye-ends: for the chiefest parts of Popery are so
contrary not only to the Scriptures, but to common sense almost, that they are
forced to patch up a parcel of Fables and Traditions of all sorts to recommend
them to the most rude and ignorant part of the People, which yet they will
scarce allow to be true; from whence it comes to pass, that they can neither
understand nor teach any thing of more certainty than these false Principles,
which yet is absolutely necessary here, when the Salvation of the Soul is under
consideration, and the business is to be transacted with the most perfect
Rhetorician, that is, with our own Conscience, where there is need of the most
certain maxims to enable us to resist the Devil, when sin or our own Conscience
of it tempts us. For in matters of Faith, we cannot effectually make use of any
other testimonies than those of the Scripture, nor can any invented reasons be
brought, which the Animal man shall not find to be such, except those of God.
Therefore the Scripture, because it only is certain, does most instruct and
confirm the Conscience. If any thing besides this is feigned, because it is
uncertain, it cannot secure and quiet the Conscience. And thus far for the
present of the Popish Religion.

III. I come now to the Protestant Churches, and here if they who call
themselves the Reformed Lutherans and Arminians, did as much abhor and detest
the thing, as they do the name and profession of Epicures and Sadduces, they
would be no less careful of abstaining from Vice, and industrious in the
exercise of Virtue and Piety; than they are now obstinately engaged in the
wickedness and debauchery, and an impious course of life. Nor would they be
less careful of keeping of Commandments of the Best and greatest God; than they
are now fearless of the Deity. But to speak the truth, almost all of us do
rather fear the Envy, and detest the Name, than bear any Aversion in our minds
for the thing, which would otherwise be testified by our Lives, Actions, and
Manners. For what shall I say? as I live, and as I desire Christ should show me
mercy, I am ashamed and grieved to speak how we live. Can they believe the
Immortality of the Soul, who live little better than beasts? or can they be
thoroughly persuaded that there is a reward laid up in Heaven for the Righteous,
a punishment appointed in Hell for the Wicked, who scarce fear to break the
Commandments of God in any thing; as if they thought GOD were an empty and vain
sound, and that their Souls should perish with their Bodies? and although we
should grant that there are some who fear God, and doubt not but he will assign
Rewards and inflict Punishments according as every man has deserved, yet they
are certainly very few, and scarce so many as the gates of Thebes, and the
mouths of the rich Nile: and yet how much less is the number of those whom the
dread of the divine Justice can reclaim from Wickedness and mischief, or
persuade to amend their lives? but what need is there of many words? No man
vigorously pursues heavenly things despising humane, no man is sensible of the
Anger of God against sin, no man changes his Vices for Virtue, no man cures his
offenses committed by the least acts of Charity, no man is recalled from
Baseness by Modesty, or from sin by the fear of God; the lives of all are so
polluted with great and abominable crimes, that I need say nothing of the less
and almost daily faults?

IV. For although if we will judge rightly, Luxury is the fault of every Age, the
over sumptuous expenses in Diet, the excessive magnificence of Dinners and
Suppers, Surfeits, Revellings, Whoredoms, Adulteries, Violence, Injustice,
neglect of good manners, and the like; are charged, as Seneca observes, by the
men of all Ages upon their own times, nor was there ever yet any Generation of
men without faults: and as the same Philosopher goes on, of this our Ancestors
have complained, we do, and our children shall; that the Manners of men are
totally subverted, Villainy reigns, and the affairs of Mankind go on impairing
and descending to all manner of Crimes: yet to speak but the truth, in this Age
of ours, the liberty of committing any Villainy is increased to a prodigious
height: The neglect of all Order and Discipline, the Pest and Corruption of
good manners, and whatever else of Vice, impiety and turpitude can be
conceived, have all of them so prevailed, that Impiety and Atheism do almost
seem to have invaded the lives of men, and to have erected their kingdom in
Christendom; and to conclude, there seems to be but little liberty allowed to
Laws, and the utmost that is possible to Lust. I durst Averr, that in this
corrupted and debauched Age, all sorts of wickedness have prevailed to that
degree, that it is scarce possible to add any thing to it, nor does any
improvement seem possible. For what sort of Wickedness and Villainy is wanting,
which if it were supposed to be thrown in, would make our times worse and
wickeder in any part? seeing we are come to this, that we cannot endure to be
told of our Vices, nor patiently bear the reproof that we have justly deserved,
or if there be some few that can endure it, yet even there, according to the
Proverb, we do but sing and tell stories to the Deaf. Either I am deceived with
the Tragedian, or this is not the way to Heaven. Alas, alas, what is become of
Christian Piety?

V. But omitting unprofitable complaints by which we shall gain nothing, or
very little, having thought very often with my self, from whence this
foolishness, and vast and boundless Calamity could proceed, I resolved at last
to inquire into the causes of it, and why we should go on so inconsiderately,
negligently, and as it were, with our eyes shut, in a thing of that nature,
that only our safety depends upon it; but it may seem to be safety it self. For
the causes of this mischief being once found out and published, it will not,
(as I conceive) be difficult afterward, to find out some remedies for this
evil, which if they prevail not upon the obstinate, what hope is left I know
not, and whether there is any or no, God only knows.

VI. And in the first place, I conceive, the principal and chiefest cause of
this, to proceed from the neglect of Youth and Schools: for in the first place,
and before all other things, Magistrates ought to take care that parents should
educate their children well, and tincture them betimes with Christian Piety,
the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and holy manners. And certainly it is very much
the interest of all Christian Societies, that both the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Governors should take care that the Youth be rightly and devoutly educated,
both by their Parents and Schoolmasters and Tutors in the University, because
in this does almost the total safety of any Community consist, and therefore
they ought to be very diligent to see that these men do their duties in the
Religious instructing of their children, and in the improving their Scholars
and Pupils by an excellent discipline. If this had been done or might yet be
taken care of; certainly, Atheism and Vice had never grown to that height they
now are at, and without this, no Laws will effectually prevail. For whereas
Laws punish Villainies that are already committed, a good Education prevents the
perpetration of those crimes that may deserve a chastisement; and whereas Laws
correct Vices, Education restrains them, from whence we may take our measures
to observe how much greater efficacy is in good Education, than in the best
Laws. That I may not add, that those who are ill brought up, do afterward put
off all fear and reverence of those Laws that are made to punish crimes. And
therefore this was always one of the first cares of prudent Magistrates; not
what penalties they should inflict upon lewd and wicked men, but how they might
prevent their Subjects from doing ill things. And because they thought the most
likely way to effect this, was to accustom their Youth to live Well and
Religiously from their Infancy, and to see that their Parents did Institute and
Educate their children as they ought, they esteemed it no small part of their
duty to take care of it. This, and several other passages make me think the
Author was a Hollander.
But how careless the Dutch parents are of performing this duty, and how
indulgent and remiss they are toward their offspring, is known to every body.
Their children accustom themselves to delights and pleasures from their
tenderest years, neither do they abstain from filthy and obscene discourse, or
impious and blasphemous words against God. They wear Silk and rich clothes of
various colors, Military ornaments, Engraven Breast-plates, foreign habits,
and great sleeves: they do all things fiercely, confidently and impudently, and
nothing with modesty and shamefacedness; they revere not their Parents: for
here, to the amazement of all men, the children have acquired an absolute
dominion over their Parents, and are in possession of a liberty not to
reverence the Ancient, nor bear patiently with their equals; and to conclude,
they do not so much desire as in fact show, that they can do what they list:
they are neither deterred from evil by the reverence of men, nor fear of God,
of which last they scarce ever heard: they take no notice of Religion and
Piety, and less of Virtue and Honesty. And to what purpose are many words?
Parents in our times do so corrupt their Children by their own lewd examples,
that they cannot correct them with any Authority: for he that teaches that in
his own manners which he detesteth in his children, accuses himself of his own
crimes, whilst he chides them for theirs. With what face I beseech you, can a
man blame his child which he has corrupted by his ill example? when yet
notwithstanding a Parent ought to speak nothing before his children, which is
not fit to be spoken, nor to do any thing that is indecent or dishonest to be
done: but should rather live so honestly and religiously, that his children may
propound his way of living as a pattern to be imitated, and by his example, as
in a glass, learn from their Infancy what to pursue and what to avoid. Let
Parents therefore remember that they are under a necessity of living well and
honestly, and to take the utmost care that not the least footstep of disorder
and turpitude may appear in their lives, that they may with the greater
Authority correct the manners of their children, lest those vices they
reprehend in them, should be found in themselves, and so their reproofs lose
their weight, and by their own defaults the Authority of a Parent should become
vile and light with their own children.

VII. And now when children are grown up and fit to be disposed of to Masters,
to be especially then accustomed to all right and honest Actions; and be
instructed in Piety, good manners, and learning: what then? Why I am both
ashamed and unwilling to speak, but yet I will do it, rather because I must,
than because I would; and in the first place, there is hardly any Schools to be
found with us, but then how few good Schools in Curland, Lithuania, Livonia,
Swedeland, Denmark, in the Dukedom and Marquisate of Cleave, and in other
Countries professing the Evangelical Religion, God knows, I found in my
travels? yea, and how few of those which are to be found in Holland, can bear
the scrutiny of Religious and Pious men, who seek the welfare of that
Commonwealth, and of Religion, without any respect of Persons; many besides my
self can be my witnesses. Without doubt our Religion had made a greater
progress, if we had taken care to found more Schools. For, we can never ascribe
the great barbarity and ignorance of the Boors of Livonia and Curland, that I
may not call it their Atheism, to any other cause than the want of Schools. And
the Devil and his Instruments did not in any thing so much contradict the
Eminent Lord John Fisher, Superintendent general of Livonia, as in his
introducing Schools and Catechizing. And the Lord Spencer, and Lord Horly, have
since experienced and perhaps do still experience the like Diabolical
stratagems, these excellent men being the greatest of all Enemies to their
kingdom. The Jesuits have learned more wit at our charge, and our neglects have
afforded them a very plentiful harvest. But that which is yet more wonderful in
this business is this, that those in whose power it is to Erect Schools in the
Villages, although they have children of their own, which for want of Orthodox
Masters they are forced to commit to the Jesuits, If our Laws (...).
and so run upon an apparent and visible mischief; yet these, upon certain
unknown private and domestic interests, hinder the effecting this most
excellent and salutary counsel by all manner of ways, upon certain and
frivolous pretenses. I do very much fear that in the great day of Judgment the
famous and excellent virtues of the Heathens will condemn our base Avarice and
improbity; especially the Charity of Cimon toward the Poor, and the honesty,
justice and fidelity of the two Cato's.

VIII. But even where there are Schools, many Masters (for I speak not this of
all) do but prepare the way for Atheism. For they for the most part that they
may win the love of the children, and not offend the Parents, treat their
Scholars too remissly and softly, and do as it were overmuch loosen the reins
of discipline, neither restraining them from Vice by chastisement, nor reducing
them to Virtue by good advice. The inquiry is not now, what a Master should
desire in his Scholar, but the Scholar would have in the Master: They on the
other side do not ground their Scholars in Christian Piety, instruct them in
the fear of God; nor form them to Modesty and the other Virtues. They think
they have mighty well and faithfully performed their parts; if they have in
some degree instructed them in Learning and Arts; but as for the knowledge of
Piety, the sense of the Catechism, the Articles of Faith, with their
foundations in Scripture, as no body inquires after these things, so no body
delivers them, nor in truth can they; the Masters themselves being very
ignorant of those holy things. I confess some begin and end with Prayers, but
with what fervor and devotion of mind it is not convenient to speak* Nor do
they as they ought, show themselves innocent and affable as Parents, but remiss
and dissolute as companions. And hence it comes to pass that the Scholars
despise their masters, and become fierce and insolent, loathing all that is
good, and of an insufferable stubbornness.

IX. I wish the Ecclesiastical and Civil Governors could well consider the
greatness of this affair, and in choosing Schoolmasters would yield nothing to
their affections, affinity, relations, domestics, servants or maids, nothing
to the recommendations or entreaties of their acquaintances, or even to mercy;
and certainly every body is not to be made a Schoolmaster, upon any bodies
recommendation, seeing the Commonwealth is so much concerned and interested to
have good and Learned masters set up, who may inure the minds of children to
Piety toward God, Humanity toward men, and adorn them with ingenuous manners
and disciplines.

X. And yet it is impossible to represent how careless men now adays are in
this great concern. I remember in my Travels, I visited a fine City belonging
to one of the States of Holland, where I knew a man who by the favor of the
Magistrates, was constituted chief practick Physician of the place, and when
his Pension would not maintain him and his Family, the Magistrates as an
Addition to it, gave him the Government of their School, though he was utterly
incapable of it, and very ignorant of those things that might fit him for that
employment. I speak nothing of the Book de Religione Medici, this is enough for
a wise man. On the other side, the best and most Learned Schoolmasters, who
are of approved Lives, of commendable manners, and of a known diligence in
teaching, scarce find any acceptance any where, the unlearned having so
insinuated themselves in the friendship and acquaintance of the great men, and
prevailed so far upon them, that they think none are so fit to undertake the
care of teaching children as these, when they are not better fitted for it,
than an Ass is to be a Musician. Nor can they teach any thing that is worth one
farthing: so great is their ignorance, and yet they have an excellent faculty
of concealing it. Who knows not of what force kindred, the marriage of a
Kinswoman, or maid servant if it so happen, is in the disposing of these
preferments? and when by reason of their ignorance and want of experience, they
find themselves destitute of that Authority which for the most part attends
Learning: to counterbalance the reputation of the other Schoolmasters who are
in some places numerous, they do not only loosen the reins of discipline, that
they may by that means increase their Schools, but promise marriages to some of
the great men; by which means they arrive at that reputation for Learning and
Orthodoxy, that whereas before they were truly thought the most silly,
wrangling heterodox fellows that could be, in a moment they become most
Learned, Religious and Conformable. So much is the man changed! I will
illustrate this by an example after the School-custom; not long since two
Students were called successively out of the University of Konigsberg to
undertake the Government of the School of one of the principal Cities of
Livonia. The first of these by the marriage of one of the great Church-mens
daughters, was promoted in the Cathedral Church without any difficulty, and
laid down his Schoolmasters place with great reputation. The latter, who
brought with him a wife which he had married at Konigsberg, though he left no
stone unturned, and was perhaps equal to the former in solid Learning, could
never to this day attain the honor of being a member of the Cathedral Church,
and I fear never, etc. Of so much greater value are women than men, that the
husband shines by a light he derives from the wife.

XI. Now when the Schoolmasters suffer the youth committed to their trust, to
be debauched and run headlong into all kinds of Wickedness and Villainy, whose
business it was with all possible care, industry and severity to curb their
boldness and impudence, and correct their fierceness, petulancy and youth,
prone to Luxury by seasonable instruction, admonition and chastisement; what
hope is there when they become men, and come to a greater age, of reforming
them! for when both their Parents and Schoolmasters suffer them in all sorts
of Vices, and let them do what they list, and never take any care to restrain
their exorbitances, what wonder is it if they become unable or hardly able to
live without those Vices which they have been accustomed to from their very
infancy? so does custom become a second nature. Nor is it at all probable, that
he that has lived loosely, and ill in his youth, should become honest and sober
when he arrives at manhood; nor that he that was wickedly brought up, should be
reformed when he is a man. So much is there in the habits that first are taken
up by children, and confirmed by a long use. From whence comes it that there
are so many Adulterers, debauchers of Women, Knaves, Drunkards, desperate and
prodigal Spend-thrifts and Gamesters, so many Citizens contaminated with all
manner of Villainy and Wickedness, but from this one fountain of the ill and
perverse Education and Government of Children? for they that attribute the
debauchery of the Age to the Reformation, do without doubt need Physic. That
loose and impious Education and ill discipline, which is now in use added to
the negligence and dissoluteness of the Magistrates, who are more intent upon
their own private and domestic advantages than the public good; that I may
make no complaints against the Princes of the World, must certainly bear the
blame of all this Wickedness. Thus you have the first and principal cause of
the present Atheism in my opinion.

XII. And now I come to the next, which is the contempt of the Clergy and
Churchmen. I will not at large inquire into the Causes of this, nor whether
many of them have not brought this disesteem upon themselves by their own
faults: though it is not possible that our Clergy should not be vile in the eyes
of men, while they see how basely and poorly they seek Church Functions and
Preferments: how careless they are of their people, and unconcerned for the
Glory of God. Now I say, when men see all this, is it possible that they should
not despise those who seek their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ? And
the very Clergy too, observe at time the small esteem the people have of them,
as appears by their frequent complaints in their Pulpits, though they either know
not, or are pleased to dissemble their knowledge of the Cause, as if they
abhorred the remedy more than the disease, I will only add this, that the
contempt of the Person, for the most part brings with it a contempt of the
Office. Now how deep this is rooted in the minds of the men of this Age, no man
can be ignorant. I remember I heard a person of no mean consideration at
Amsterdam use these words, That he valued his Cat as much as he did his
Minister. Thus did an Evangelical hearer speak of an Evangelical Pastor. If any
that were not of the Established Church had thought a little under valuingly of
them it might have been born, provided it had not been attended with public
scandal, because they have nothing to do with them, as S. Paul bore with the
Athenian Philosophers, Act. XVII. 18.
who called him Babbler, and a setter forth of strange Gods: but when the
Auditors who are committed to his care despise his Admonitions and Doctrine, as
if they were too good and learned in the Scriptures, to be instructed by such a
man, as it does not seldom happen that those who have wealth and power in the
world, will hardly submit themselves to the Church Discipline and instruction:
there I say, the contempt is not to be endured, because attended with the
contempt of the Ministry, and tending to the great damage of the hearers. And
to this purpose is that of the Apostle, Tit. II. 15.
let no man despise thee. For I cannot allow the Exposition of Chrysostom and
others, who think that Titus was admonished to behave himself so, both as to
his Doctrine and Life, as not to deserve to be despised. For although it is most
certain, that integrity of manners does add to the Authority of the Teacher,
and render his Doctrine more acceptable; and that a good life, as Primasius
says, makes the Doctrine of more Authority: yet the very sound and sense of
the words show, that the Apostle here does not prescribe what Titus should do,
but what others should not do. Joh. Crocius upon this place take it, that the
Apostle did not here speak to Titus, but to the whole Church of Crete, and
ordains, that seeing Titus was commanded to encounter with their vices and
errors, and to defend the Truth and Religion, no man should be so prodigal of
his Salvation, as to despise either his Person or his Office, or prefer himself
before him, as better or more worthy. For the word (...) here used as is
observed by S. Hierom. Witteberg. and Fr. Baldwin. Comm. p. 1501. B. signifies
thus much. When any one being confident of himself that he is better than
another, despises him whom he thinks beneath him. And as being above him in
wisdom, thinks the inferior person worthy to be despised. Therefore this is to
be imprinted in the first place, in the minds of all that belong to the Church,
of what Order or Dignity soever they are of, that they ought to be subject to
their Minister, because all are sinners who stand in need of Instruction,
Exhortation, reproof and Consolation, all which are administered by the
Ministers of the Church, by the word of God commended to them, and therefore
they are to be heard of all, [as the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. IV. 1.
and Stewards of the Mysteries of God.] But if there be any that will not hear,
as the greatest part of the men of this Age will not, that they are not to be
connived at, but to be rebuked with all Authority. As the Apostle directs in
the last cited place out of Titus, that they may understand (says the grave
Balduinus) the Authority of the Ministry excells all worthly Power. We have
already the heavy sentence revealed against these despisers, Luke X. 16. Matthew.
X. 40. Joh. XIII. 20. But if there be any Drones and unworthy of the Ministry,
let them be driven out of the Hive. But as to those who teach the true
Doctrine, and Religion, and Catechize in public and in private, and serve
Christ and their people faithfully, without any vain hopes of lucre out of
love: these I say, ought to have obedience, liberality, and reverence shown
toward them; lest if we act otherwise, by the just judgment of GOD we should
be left so far to our selves, as to maintain Seducers, Hypocrites, mercenary
men; those that are covetous of great Revenues, carnal men who are totally
unfit for that spiritual work, idle bellies indeed of the Ministers of Christ,
and such as wallow in the very mire of Pleasures and Riches, which has already
happened, not only to our forefathers, but to some of the most flourishing
Churches of these times, as we see with sorrowful hearts.

XIII. The ill, though frequent way of Preaching gives us the third cause of
Atheism. The first duty of a Preacher, is to set forth the Power and Nature of
Religion, and the second is to persuade men to Faith and good works, as all
agree who know what it is. For it is in vain to exhort those men who are
ignorant of the force and nature of true Positive Divinity and Religion. But a
great sort of our Preachers having only lightly touched, or rather for the most
part totally neglected their Text, fall presently to the exhortation, which
whoever does prosecute without the knowledge of Faith and true Religion, does
but play the Philosopher instead of preaching Christ, as Philip Melancthon has
plainly pronounced in this affair. I would not have the latter omitted, but I
had rather they would much oftener handle the former. For seeing the Gospel
teaches many things above our Reason, it is not possible to know which is the
true Worship of God and Religion, unless we know what the Gospel teaches.
Therefore he will do most good to the Church, though he will not at first be so
acceptable as an English Moralist, who can best set forth the matter of Faith,
which many either totally neglect, contenting themselves with inculcating the
precepts concerning manners, without delivering the sum of the Christian
Religion, or do only lightly touching it, and yet after all we wonder whence it
comes to pass, that those that have so many years frequented our Sermons, being
asked concerning the heads of the Christian Religion can give no account of
them, when yet they never in all their lives heard much, if any thing, of them.
I lament the misery of these poor sheep, but I shall never more wonder at the
multitude of Atheists, and of those that are ignorant of all Religion. But in
short, if the truth may be spoken, the greatest part of the Preachers never
learned the Compendium and form of true Theology; and what more can be
expected from such men? But I know not how it comes to pass, that no Mechanic
shall be suffered to exercise a Trade, who has not spent a great time in
learning of it. But all are suffered to preach without distinction or choice,
nor do I at all regard the Certificates which are usually given to young
beginners in some places; for how, and at what price they are purchased of the
Professors is as clear as the light. But Paul's precept was, 1 Timothy III. 2.
that the Bishop should be apt to teach. And he only will be such who has a
right notion of Religion, and has by the assistance of the Holy Ghost had
experience of the force and power of it in the various events of his life. For
as a builder first forms the whole building in his mind. So the teachers of any
Arts, ought to have the whole Scheme of the Arts they profess to teach in their
minds that they may be able to show the beginning and Series, or order of all
the precepts. But all other Arts, because they may be comprehended by reason
may be more easily apprehended, I cannot assent to my Author in this, viz. that
there is any thing in the Gospel against the judgment of Reason illuminated by
Faith.
whereas the Gospel which contains many things above, and against the judgment
of reason, is not apprehended without difficulty, and therefore the Preacher is
obliged to take the more pains that he may render the most obscure things
plain. And he will then be able to do this, when he has possessed his own mind
with a comprehensive knowledge of all the Doctrine of Religion before he begins
to teach others. Therefore it will never be laborious or difficult to such a
Preacher to invent what he should speak; but rather his prudence is to be
employed in the choosing out of the great variety and plenty, what may seem most
profitable and useful, for the whole Christian Religion is of a Divine
Original, and being delivered to us in writing by the Prophets and Apostles,
those writings are to be followed. Now in this, the first thing is, to
understand rightly those things which he has undertaken to handle: for no man
can clearly teach another that thing which he does not thoroughly understand
himself. That Verse of Horace is very common: Verbaque praevisam rem non invita
sequentur.
For unforced words wait on a well known thing.


Nor does any man attain the knowledge of the holy Scriptures by study only;
but it is necessary that by instruction of the Holy Ghost he should feel the
force of them in his own mind, and so be able by his own Experience and
Practice to interpret them. The next things required in a good Preacher is,
that he have a good way and manner of interpreting or expressing himself; which
is delivered in those precepts by which youth is instructed in Eloquence or
Rhetoric. For no man can ever know the way of teaching well if he be not well
instructed in Eloquence in his youth: and be very much, and a great while
conversant with those Arts, in which the precepts of Rhetoric are contained.
And then an Interpreter ought to know the Genius of the language, for the holy
Scriptures have a certain peculiar Idiom and Phrase, which those that are not
acquainted with it from their youth cannot understand. Nor is it enough to have
some degree of knowledge in the tongues, but to enable a man to judge well,
Logic and Rhetoric are of great use. Lastly, if he be able to draw a sum, or
Compendium of the whole doctrine out of the holy Scriptures, he will then
endeavor that the people also may comprehend the whole Christian Doctrine. The
Primitive Church seems to have aimed at this heretofore, when she took such
care, that the ignorant might be thoroughly instructed before they were admitted
to Baptism, whom she then called (...), If the Rite of Confirmation were duly
put in execution with us; no Church can take a better and more effectual care
for this than ours has done.
Catechumens. For (...), to Catechize, does not signify to teach simply, but
to read to a person, and make him repeat after the Teacher. And I wish the
custom were retained in the Church, of exacting of every man once an account of
the Doctrine; for we do more diligently consider, and deeply look into those
things which we are bound to recite in other words without changing the sense.

The last cause of Atheism, we fetch from the total abolition of all
Ceremonies, for we see that Religion was never more despised than in those
Churches where there is no Ceremonies. For there is an absolute necessity of
some external shows which may recommend and render Religion more August and
Venerable to the common people, who are not able without them, to see into the
greatness and dignity of this thing, and we ought not to undervalue that
improvement which children make while they Sing the Psalms, Read the Bible, and
repeat the Catechism aloud in the Church. For if Ceremonies are not impious,
(as they are, which are instituted by the Papists for Justification,) and if
there be any use of them, such as the recommending Religion to the people, and
children for whose sake they were chiefly instituted, and both which they
retain and preserve in the word, and teach, I see no reason why they should be
abolished. O how earnestly do I desire that those who govern our Church Affairs
would more deeply consider this last cause which at first sight appears so
light and contemptible; and that they would understand what Ecclesiastical
Prudence is. (concerning which we conjecture Nicolaus Videlius will with the
assistance of God publish something in his Elegant book of the Prudence of the
ancient Church) Though ours should at least be so unhappy as leave this thing
very imperfect. It is a most impious thing, to think that all Ceremonies were
instituted by wicked Popes. There ever were some wise and holy men, who
thoroughly understood that the minds of the common people were so stupid and
low, that they could never apprehend the Dignity and Majesty of Religion,
unless their minds were fixed and detained with some outward and visible Rites,
till they might by that means by degrees be more and more lifted up, and so
learn to admire it. And yet I would not have too much haste made here, because
Abraham Scultetus a prudent Divine, otherwise in this very Age left us a
Tragical example of the ill effects that followed at Prague. And thus at length
I have opened this putrid sore; and now if the work might be acceptable, and it
might promote the cure of it, O how great thanks should I give to our God? but
if the evil should happen to be only exasperated, and the attempt should
incense the Patients; I shall comfort my self with the Conscience of my
undertaking, and the usual reward of a Physician.

FINIS.

