To all the Inhabitants of the Town of Youghal, who are under the Teachings of
James Wood, and especially to ye who calls him your Pastor, and are Members of
his Church, I write unto you as I am moved of the Lord, and lay these following
things before you to be read in the fear of God, and seriously consider
thereof, that you may no longer be deceived, but may come to see your own state
and condition truly, and to know it, and the foundation you build upon, and the
rottenness of it; And my heart and soul's desire is, That your eyes may be
opened, that you may see the Deceiver, and how you are deceived, and may see
the way that leads out of Deceit into Truth, which is life to all that know it.

ON the 23 of the sixth Month, 1657. toward the evening, hearing that James
Wood was nigh to the place of my outward being, being come thither (as I was
informed, not long after his new Ordination, and late sending forth) to preach,
as it was manifest by the sending notice of it abroad among the neighbors,
(amongst whom I was neglected) though when any Minister of the Gospel came to
my House I gave notice thereof without respect of persons, (till they refused
to come) and so had not the convenience of speaking to him as I might have had,
had not the day been spent; I sent a few Lines to him and some Queries,
desiring an Answer unto them; which Letter and Queries I have here inserted,
and am willing to leave it to that of God in all your Consciences to judge from
what spirit they proceeded.

The LETTER.
James Wood,
If I had had timely notice of thy being so near this place, I know no other,
but that I should have seen thy face this day, but hearing not of it till this
evening, I have at this time only sent thee a few Queries, here enclosed, which
I desire thee to Answer before thou go out of the Country; or if that time
be too short for thee, take them home with thee, and send the Answers to him
who thinks himself happy, if he be found worthy to receive a Minister of Christ
into his house, called by the name of

James Sicklemore.
Ballinlegane, 23. of the sixth Month, 1657.

The Queries.
1. Query, What is the everlasting Gospel? 2. Qu. Who is a Minister of the
everlasting Gospel? and how is he made a Minister thereof? 3. Qu. Can any preach
the Gospel but he who is made a Minister thereof? 4. Qu. Has any Power and
authority to Preach the Gospel before he is made a Minister thereof, and is
sent, if not, then tell me? 5. Qu. What are those men that have a long time
professed themselves to be Ministers of the Gospel, and have been preaching of it
(as they say) these 5 or 10 years, or more, and yet after all this time, and
Preaching, receives Ordination from men, and by men are chosen and sent forth
to Preach? 6. Qu. Whether those who were chosen and sent forth to Preach the
Gospel, had any certain dwelling place, or did abide 3 or 4 years, or more, in
one place? 7. Qu. Who made Paul a Minister of the Gospel? And who was it that
sent him to Preach? 8. Qu. What was the maintenance of Christ's Ministers, who
by him were sent forth, and what were they to live off? 9 Qu. Has his
Ministers in this age any other maintenance? and when was their maintenance
changed? For the sake of the simple these are given forth, for whose
satisfaction, if thou be a Minister of the Gospel, it will lie upon thee to
Answer them according to the Scriptures, and not to slight it.

J. S.


And although I was willing to give him what time he would desire for the
Answering of those Queries, and not to press it to him before his return, yet
he refused to give me any other Answer than these following Lines, writ and
sent to me in the bottom of my own Letter, and so sent me the Queries and my
Letter again. His Letter follows:

Captain Sicklemore,
I have received the above written, and the enclosed, and give you only this
return, That I know not your Rule for sending abroad your Queries, nor mine to
Answer them, they savouring so much of Contention and Contradiction, I yet
think that I have sufficiently proved my Call to the Ministry before John
Perrot and your Self; if not to you, yet to mine own satisfaction, and of many
else who I trust fear the Lord in simplicity; I sorrow to see your Zeal (if so
it be) so blind: You have read surely Acts 13.1, 2, 3. and yet know Paul had
Preached some years before: But I determine to Answer no more of your Queries
or Demands: either by word of Mouth or Wrighting till both they and you shall
breath out more of the Gospel, This is from a servant of the Lord and his
people in the Gospel,

Ja. Wood.
Sixth Month, 23 day, 1657.

Let not James Wood think it strange, or take it ill, That I direct not my
speech to him in Answer to his Letter, seeing he has told me that he is
determined to Answer no more of my Queries or Demands (though I know not, that
before, I desired any such thing from him) till such and such a time. Yet I
cannot cease either from speaking or writing what the Lord has commanded. And
this Answer is not to beget Contention as he would accuse me in part of his
Letter, but to lay open the deceit of the Deceiver, against whom I am a
witness, that the simple may no longer be ensnared: and this for your sakes
whose simple desires after God are not yet satisfied.

In the beginning of his Letter he tells me, He knows not my Rule for sending
abroad my Queries, nor his to Answer them.

Answ. I do not wonder if James Wood be unacquainted with my Rule for sending
my Queries to him, seeing he is so great an enemy and opposer of him who is my
rule and guide, Christ Jesus, the light of the World, who has enlightened me,
and every one that comes into the World, and him I profess and no other, and
his light which shines in my conscience which checks and condemns for sin do I
love and own to be my rule, that so by it I may be ruled and guided to do the
will of God as it is revealed and manifested in me by his eternal Word and
spirit, by which spirit I was guided when I wrote those Queries: And if J.W.
were a Minister of the Gospel of Christ, then could he not be ignorant of my
rule, for all his Ministers have his spirit which is infallible, by which all
things are seen and tried, and so that which is contrary to it comes to be
known, so that if my sending those Queries were not from the Lord, but from
another spirit, he would quickly have known it, if he had had the same spirit
that all the Ministers of Christ had: and they that have not his spirit are
none of his, and this spirit sees and makes manifest all other spirits, and
tryes them: Here let all the simple-hearted judge by what spirit J.W. is ruled
and guided, which leaves him in such an ignorant state and condition, that if
any one come, and ask, or send so him questions, he is forced to confess he
knows not their rule for so doing, and thinks that this is excuse enough to get
rid of them; but the subtilty deceives him, for hereby he shuts himself out
from having the infallible spirit, which sees, and discerns, and knows all
things, and makes manifest the hidden things of Esau, and reveals, and shows,
yea, and is the good rule, and discovers all other rules that is contrary to
it, and judges them. But seeing J.W knows not his rule for Answering my
Queries, I would desire some of you to enquire of him, (for if I thould ask
him, he would not tell me) What was his rule for Answering John Browns Queries
and sending more to him, Did he well or ill in that? if well, Why may not I
send Queries to him, expecting an Answer, as well as he send Queries to John
Brown, which were Answered: this is not to do as he would be done to. But I.W.
makes his excuse in framing a false thing which he would have pass current for
truth, and that is expressed in his next words of his Letter, (They savoring so
much of Contention and Contradiction.)

Answ. Surely I.W. has lost his savor, if ever he was well seasoned; but it
is not to be expected that he which is wanting of that which does discern and
try truly, can never be a p^essor of that which savors aright; for that which
cannot discern, cannot savor: And there was a generation that did call evil
good, and good evil; and did put darkness for light, and light for darkness;
and there is some such now, and this is because they cannot truly discern: Yet
admit this were true, as I.W. says, it is no excuse for his not answering
them: would he not more have showed himself a Servant of the Lord, and his
people, in laying them open, and making manifest this Spirit of contention and
contradiction, then in holding his peace? for it was the work of the Ministers
of the Gospel to labor to beat down that Spirit wherever they found it, and
to lay open the deceit of it, that the simple may beware of it. But though J.W.
has so judged of them, it does not make them so, they stand upon record to be
examined and tried by the light in every man's conscience, to which I leave them
to be judged, and with it I desire you all to read them over, and see if this
be true or false that J.W. accuses them of.

And although I.W. will not answer my queries, he finding them tending to the
enquiring out of the call of the Ministers of the Gospel, to the preaching of
it, and he professing to be in that work himself, knows that his mustneeds come
to an examination and trial, whether it be according to the Scriptures, even by
the answering of these Queries, if according to the Scriptures; therefore he
must needs say something, (which is indeedas good as nothing) in vindication of
his own Call, as you may perceive in the next words of his Letter, though
neither in my Letter or queries did I inquire of J.W. any thing concerning his
own call to the Ministry in particular, so that he might have spared these
lines: Yet he need not boasts for can he have sufficiently proved his Call to
the Ministry of God, when as yet he is not in that Ministry? The Ministers of
God had the Seals of their Ministry, and they reaped the fruits of their
labors: And Timothy was Paul's Son, and so was Onisimus, and he had babes which
were begotten by him, and little children of whom he traveled till Christ was
formed in them. Now I would ask of you who have been a long time, and are yet
under his Ministry, How many of you, yea, is there any one of you can witness
a begetting into God by him? and can any of you by his labor, say Christ is
formed in you? can you witness such a state? This is a high state, friends,
and is not a talk and a profession, but a possession, and must be witnessed in
deed and truth. Again, The Ministry of God was for the perfecting of the
Saints; and if J.W. has not by his Ministry brought any thus far, he never yet
saw the end of his Ministry, neither shall he ever be able to bring any of
you into that state, who cannot witness such a state himself, neither can
believe that such a state can be attained to in this life, then may not he as
good hold his peace as preach?

But friends, be not deceived, the Ministry of God was and is sent to turn
people from darkness to light; and he that is a Minister of God, is a Minister
of light, and must minister from the light, that so souls may be brought out of
darkness, wherein lies imperfection, unto the light which is perfect, that
they may be children of light, bringing forth the fruits of the light, which
none can that hate the light, and will not bring their deeds to the light, that
they may be made manifest: And friends, when I speak of the light, I speak of
the true light which lights every man that comes into the world, which John
bare witness of, Christ Jesus, which Paul preached, and was a Minister of,
which whosoever follows, comes to have the light of life, and he that hates it
goes into condemnation: And this is in every ones conscience, checking and
reproving him for, and convincing him of evil; and if they would follow it, it
will lead from fin and iniquity, which it condemns in all, into righteousness
and holiness; and though this be in every one, yet every one does not love it,
and follow it; for they who are in sin, and living in it, and in the world, and
are not redeemed from it, but are in the lusts and pleasures of it, and customs
and fashions of it, which are vain, are such who act contrary to the light in
them, which checks them for it: And all who are in pride and covetousness, and
in many words, which are vain and unnecessarie, these are all from the light
turned, which condemns in the conscience for it, whom God will not justify;
and none but those who love the light, and follow it, comes to know redemption
and salvation by Christ Jesus, who is the light, who saves his people from
their sins, and as many as believe in the light of the world, receives power to
become the Sons of God, and none else.

But this light J. W. is so far from being a Minister of, that he cannot own it
to be of God, or from Christ, but has called it natural, even that light
which is in every man's conscience; and so he has made himself manifest to be
an opposer of that which checks and condemns sin in every man's conscience, and
to be out of the ministry of God, who is light; and therefore though he thinks
he has sufficiently proved his Call to this ministry of God, I am sure he is
mistaken, and his thoughts deceive him; for that in his conscience which is of
God, shall testify to his face, that he is a resister of it, and walks contrary
to it, and to all who are come into the true fear of the Lord, he is known; and
I doubt not but to some of you in whom I know there are simple desires after
God, he is partly known and seen, and many of his practices I know you cannot
own; let that of God in your consciences speak. Yet nevertheless J.W. has
little reason to desire that days work to be brought to remembrance; for
though he spent much time to tell a story of his inclinations to, and
qualifications for the work of the ministry from his youth, up, (after such a
manner as he never found any of the ministers of Christ boasting, for they
always denied their former life) which he called his inward call; yet he told
us also of an outward call, which was by man, as being approved of by man; and
for all his inward qualifications, yet he attributed something to his humane
art and learning, of which though he spoke slightly, seemingly, yet he added it
to all the rest as a help in the work; and after all this large Oration which
he made, declaring how he was called to the ministry, I leave it to you all who
were there present, to judge whether or no he did prove that his call to be
according to the Scriptures, and which of the ministers of Christ did he
instance or bring for an example that was so called, though he professed that
that should be the Rule to try both his and John Perrots ministry by.

The Discourse as I very well remember, was much upon Paul's Call, who indeed
was an able minister of Christ; and we find, that although he was a man who was
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, yet in all his speaking of his call to that
work, he never made mention of it any otherwise then declaring it to be his
former life, wherein he was zealous in persecuting the way of God; and in his
preaching also, all that wisdom was laid aside; for when he came to the
Corinthians, he came not with excellency of speech, nor of wisdom, nor with the
enticing words of man's wisdom, which is the worlds wisdom; and if he would have
boasted thereof, he had much to speak of, read Phil. chap. 3. v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
yet all that which was gain to him formerly, he counted it loss for Christ,
and for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, wherein his Ministry
stood; neither would he at any time own his call or sending to be of men, or by
man, but by Jesus Christ, and by the will of God, as you may read, Gal. 1.1.
and in the beginning of most of his Epistles, though J.W. that day did endeavor
to prove it to be by man, by Acts 13.1, 2, 3. which is the place also he quotes
in his Letter to me; who ever can read that place with understanding, will see
it does not contradict Paul's saying He was an Apostle, not by man, though it be
always the Priests work to make the Scriptures clash one against another, that
so they may get money of the people to reconcile them (as they say) by their
moanings and interpretations: But this is deceit, and the Scriptures are true,
and agree in one, being all given forth by one spirit, which does not
contradict it self; and by no other spirit can they be read nor understood, but
to all other spirits are a parable sealed. It is there said, That such and such
who were in the Church, as they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy
Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called
them; here the Holy Ghost had called them, and the Holy Ghost commanded the
separation, and the Holy Ghost sent them away, as you may read in the fourth
verse, that they departed, being sent by the Holy Ghost; and this is one with
what is written in the third verse, but the unlearned wrest it, for the Holy
Ghost gave order for their separation, and also sent them away.

And I Will appeal to you all who were that day present, did I. W. prove his call
^o be thus? did he name any that were in the Church, that were Prophets and
Teachers, that ministered to the Lord and fasted, and as they did so, that the
Holy Ghost said, separate me James Wood for the work whereunto I have called
him; he did not witness any such thing to us then: yea, and I question much
whether his late ordination and sending was according to that of Paul and
Barnabas; some of you perhaps might be present, you can tell whether that day
was spent in fasting and praying, or feasting and praying; and if you can read
with the spirit, I defire you to compare Paul's separation, in Act. 13. with J.
W. his late separation: I would ask whether those men who laid their hands on
J. W. received an immediate command from the Holy Ghost so to do, as those did,
who ministered to the Lord and fasted: And though J. W. tells me, that sure I
know Paul had preached some years before that, and so would fain cover his late
sending forth with this practice, and excuse its not being done sooner, yet the
deceit is seen, for the covering is too short; for though Paul had been
preaching before, yet he was returned from Jerusalem with Barnabas, having
fulfilled their Ministry, Acts 12.25. and that being done, the Holy Ghost sends
them another way to preach; for we shall always find, that when the work was
don in one place they departed to another, and staid not in one place many
years in a settled outward habitation, and they went still as they were sent by
the Holy Ghost, who never suffered them to be idle, no not a day was allowed
them for their recreation, or the exercise of their bodies, for their health;
for this was their daily exercise, to be doing the will of him that sent him,
and Paul's body bore the marks of our Lord Jesus. Now either J. W. must make it
appear, that he has fulfilled his former Ministry, as Paul and Barnabas had,
or else he cannot plead a right to this sending of Paul and Barnabas, in Act.
13. whether he has done that, let that of God in his conscience judge; and
whether he has manifested such a thing to any of you, let that of God in your
consciences speak and declare; Nay, its much to be feared, that instead of
fulfilling his Ministry, he is fallen back from much of it; witness his
sprinkling of infants, which once he could not do, even since he first
pretended a call to the Ministry, and his singing of David's Psalms, which once
he seemingly endeavored to take off people from, and his now declaring it his
judgment, that by the right of Magna Charta, Ministers may receive tithes,
which once he did believe, was not according to the practice of the Ministers
of the Gospel; he might be traced in much more, of which, some of you cannot be
ignorant, as his once pleading against persecution of any for conscience sake,
of which he himself would not be counted guilty; yet if you will examine
strickly, what made him so earnest against Edward Erbery, who was a prisoner
for the witness of a good conscience, when he was called before the Rulers? did
he there plead against that persecution? or was he not very zealous in
agrivating the crime? (so accused to be) which did not so much concern him in
particular, as it did Edward Eyres. And again, that day wherein J. W. thinks he
has sufficiently proved his call to the Ministry, you may remember that after
he had taken up much time in declaring his inward and outward qualifications,
and inward and outward call, which is not according to the Scriptures; there
was some questions asked concerning his practice, which was compared with the
practices of the Ministers of Christ in the Scriptures; whether he proved his
present practice so to be, I Will leave to all the honest hearted there to judge;
as concerning his maintenance, which he could not deny, but was above 100 l.
and salary, which he confessed he went once a quarter to demand and receive at
Cork, though he was confident to affirm, that he took not thought what he
should eat or drink; did he not then contradict himself? and could he find such
an example among all the Ministers of Christ? Friends, there is none; for all
his Ministers obeyed his commands for their maintenance; freely ye have
received, freely give; and into whatsoever house ye enter, and they receive
you, there abide till you depart; but it is in no place said, go to ask for
meat; for they were not to take thought concerning it, but to trust their
Master Christ, which thing when it was asked of J. W. if he could not do it, he
most impudently breaks out, and asked John Perrot, If he would have him to hold
up his mouth, and look for God to drop bread from heaven into it; one of the
vainest expressions that ever I heard come out of a man's mouth, professing a
separation from the world, as he does; and being charged with his feasting,
which he was particularly exercised in that day, he affirmed, that half of the
Creation needed not have been, if men might not eat more then would satisfy
nature; would not this man be wiser then God? or would he not make God the
Author of gluttony and excess, and make this a cloak for it; or does he not
measure the wisdom of God by his own lust? which because he has allowed him
out of the common treasury, near 200 l. per annum, cannot be satisfied without
the spending of it all, of which he might be ashamed to boast; is he not an
evil example to you in this beastly practice? and yet he would cloak it with
the Saints love feasts, which were never made for the rich; I know you that are
simple and honest in any measure, cannot own his practice in that thing, nor
his vanity in his pictures, which is all odious in the sight of God, and stinks
in his nostrils; and what think you of his bowling and kettle-pin playing,
which he that day pleaced for; was that according to the Scriptures? Friends,
seriously consider of all these things, and then see whether J. W. his first
sending, or his last were according to that of ^s, and judge what cause this
man had to boast of that days work, wherein he thinks he did sufficiently
prove his call to the Ministry.

More of his Letter; I sorrow to see your zeal (if so it be) so blind: This
expression is plainly in hypocrisy, for his joy and sorrow stands in one
nature; he calls it my zeal, in writing the Letter and Queries, and he says it
is blind, and yet he questions whether it be my zeal or no; is not this
confusion? but why should this be cause of sorrow to him or any Minister of the
Gospel to meet with such a Letter and Queries; verily I am not ashamed that any
honest heart should see them, yet this man is sorry: when my zeal was hot and
furious in acting sin, and running into vanity, then he was not at all sorry,
or he never expressed it to me, but rather was joyful, as I could perceive,
because he was one with me therein, witness the time we spent together in
bowling and kettle-pin playing, and in needless discourse, wherein our
fellowship then stood; and my zeal was great, yet he never then told me it was
blind, or that he sorrowed for it: But now I being by the power of God redeemed
from those vain practices, and brought to stand as a witness against them, and
am now entering into another state and condition, and seeking a better Kingdom
and its righteousness; now he is sorry and herein he is not unlike all the rest
of his brethren, that are of that profession; for take a man that will run with
them all the week long to feasting, and sporting, and playing, which he calls
recreation of the body for its health; and let him be never so zealous herein,
and be never so much exercised in vain and idle discourse, so it be witty and
pleasant, as all sin is, and yet go to hear them preach one or two days in the
week, and confess all is true that they say, and own them to be sent of God,
and so honor them, and cry them up for good men; these men may live securely
without any reproof from them inparticular, so long as their mouths be filled,
they crypeace, and such a one shall be daubed with untempered mortar, and his
state is counted good enough, tho he die to morrow, he shall be saved by Christ;
and so the poor soul is deceived, and dies in his sins. But if this person
comes ever to be sensible of its sad state that it is in by reason of sin which
daily oppresses the soul, and carries it captive; and by the light of Christ
comes to have his eyes opened, whereby he sees that he has been deceived, by
such who have cried peace to him, when he was daily overcome with sin; and now
comes to see that there is no peace to the wicked, and so begins to make
enquiry after a way to get out of that State, and to be redeemed from it, and
to take heed to the Light, which all along checked him in his former vanity,
and to love it, and follow it, which leads from sin unto righteousness, and
works a change, and brings him to be a witness against his sins, and against
all his former life which he lived in under the teachings of such blind guides,
this man is called by them an Apostate, they are sorry to see this man's zeal
now for God, and they call i^ blind, and say he is deceived and deluded.

Then in the latter end of his Letter he calls himself, A servant of the Lords,
and his people in the Gospel: How far God has owned his service, let the
fruits of his ministry these many years last past in this Town of Youghall
testify, and in this long service let him produce and manifest what fruits
has been brought forth to God, and how many has been brought into the
Vineyard of God, where no unfruitful tree must be, without being out down; and
whatservice he has done for his people; and who J. W. calls the Lords people
would be enquired after; sure, there is not many in the town of Youghall, among
whom he has bin so long preaching, will own him to be their Servant, seeing he
refuses to do what service they desire from him; yet no doubt but they help pay
him his wages, and if we should make a strict enquiry among his own people and
Church, we shall find that though he calls himself their servant, yet most of
them call him Master, so that upon a true search, this will prove but words, and
little less then a bare complement.

Friends and people, At the times of ignorance God wincked, but now he
commands all men every where to repent; Be not deceived, God will not be
mocked. Not every one that cries Lord Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven; but he that does the will of my Father, says Christ: In the fear God,
examine your selves, whose will you are doing daily; if you will do the will of
God, you must deny your own wills in all things, and they that are doing evil
and committing sin, are not doing the will of God: it is not a talk of
Repentance, and forsaking sin will stand you in stead, or give you true peace,
but a forsaking of it indeed and in truth, and a putting off the old man with
his deeds, and a orucifying of the flesh with the affections and Lusts must be
witnessed, before you can say you are Christ's, and witness him in you,
righteousness, and sanctification and redemption; it is not a giving up your
names to be written in J. W. his book, or any other paper that will administer
true comfort to you, but you must come to know your names written in the Lambs
book of life, where nothing that desiles can come; pure Religion stands not in
a separation that is sensual, and in a show only, but in being unspotted with
the world; I judge none of you; Search your selves with the Light that comes
from Jesus, which is nigh you, and it will truly show you your own states and
conditions, and when you see your selves, believe none that will daub you, and
tell you a story contrary to what you see with your eye, which is the Light of
the body: Friends, This Light will show you all that ever you did, and makes
manifest all things that have been, and are done in secret, and judges all that
is evil, and justifies none, but such who to it are obedient: this is Gods
faithful witness in your Consciences, which does either accuse or excuse; if it
accuse, believe not any that would excuse; if it excuse, none can condemn; if
any one sin, it accuses, and brings trouble upon the evil doer, unto whom there
is no peace; Therefore do not live securely; but try your selves, and what the
light of Christ in you shows you to be evil, abstain from it even in its
appearance: Love the light, and bring all your deeds to it, that they may be
made manifest where they are wrought; follow the light of the world wherewith
you are enlightened, that you may come to have the light of life which gives
victory over death, and brings out of its snare, and from under its dominion;
sin is deaths kingdom, and all who are in sin, and by it carried captive are in
its snare, and out of the kingdom of God, into which nothing that defiles can
enter: Friends, look out no longer for a teacher, for the teachers that are
without cause you to err; but the word is nigh you, in your hearts and mouths,
turn in to hear it speak, and it will show you the way you should walk in;
there is a measure of the gift of God committed to you all in particular, and
the grace of God has largely appeared to some of you; it teaches all that
loves it to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live righteously,
ana soberly in this present evil world, this will bring you to the Repentance
not to be repented of, this is that which washes and sprinkleth and purges
the conscience from dead works to serve the living God? Every sin is a dead
work, he that serves sin is free from Righteousness, he that does sin is of the
devil: Friends, Beware I write nothing, but what that of God in your
consciences bears witness to, that's the light; if you love your own souls, love
the light that is in you, that checks you for sin, and follow it; it leads from
sin unto Christ the Savior who saves from sin, Who is in you, except ye be
Reprobates: it leads out of the world all that follow it, into the kingdom of
heaven, which is within you, if you believe in the light who lights every one
that comes into the World, you will com to the faith which purifies, and to
the hope which purifies, Christ in you the hope of glory; this hope will not
fail you, when al other hopes shall perish. So prise your time, and neglect not
this day of Gods visiting you, but come to the light, and try all your
thoughts, words, and ways by it; and all spirits this will discover, all
seducers and deceivers, and the false prophets show you; and it will bring you,
if you it follow, to the true prophet, which whosoever will not hear, shall be
cut off.

And all you who are burdened with sin, and feels the weight of it, and are
weary, and would be eased, and are hungring and thirsting after satisfaction
and rest, and true peace, of which you were never yet made partakers, neither
could you meet with, or obtain in all your profession; I say unto you from the
Lord, cease from looking out for help, and running from one hill to another to
find out the way of the Lord, for your help is nigh unto you, and he is not
afar off; and till you come to turn in your minds, and to take heed unto that
which works the desire in you, you shall never come to be satisfied; for the
desire is not in your selves, or in any thing you can do, but is wrought by
God, and nothing but something from God must satisfy; and what may be known of
him is manifest in you, and the desire is within, and the content also is to be
found there; for this is the cause that you y^ ly down in sorrow, because you
seek to that which is without for help, and art going to Egypt for aid, and
forget him who is near at hand, and so the true desires many times are lost,
and you rest satisfied for a season, till the witness in you arises again, and
shows you your state, then you are more unsatisfied than before; and your
Teachers to whom you seek, endeavors to heal this wound also, and will bid you
believe in Christ, and lay hold upon him [good words] but yet you are ignorant
of him to be in you, and of his life and power you are not partakers, who
washes, and sanctifies, and purifies, and makes clean. Therefore friends mind
the light which is of God, which shows your sinful state and sad condition; and
follow is, that by it you may be led out of that state, and come to witness a
new state and a new birth, which is of God, which sins not, and to find, and
enjoy, and possess the true peace, which passes understanding, which they who
are in the world knows not, nor does not enjoy.

(...) all you who are running into sin with delight, and are drinking iniquity
like water, and have forgotten God, who is not in all your thoughts, and have
set your faces against instruction and reproof, and shuts your eyes, and stops
your ears, least you should see with your eyes, and hear with your ears, and be
converted, but are living in your sins, and in them are secure, and cannot
endure to hear of a (...) of holiness, and righteousness, and purity, but are
opposers of it, and persecuters of (...) who witness it: I say from the Lord,
Gods hand is over you, and his arm is stretched out against you, and an utter
desolation he will make of you except you repent speedily, and turn from the
evil of your ways, and seek the Lord by unfeigned repentance; for the time of
his striving with you is well nigh past, and the day is coming upon you that
sorrow shall take hold uyon you, and trouble shall come upon you as an armed
man, and you shall seek for help, and shall not find it, because you have been
(...), and rebellious, and stiff-necked against the Lord, and would not hearken
when by his light which is in you he called, but from day to day resisted his
spirit, and quenched it in you when it did arise in your consciences to condemn
you for sin, and have slain his witness in you, and are making merry over it;
behold, it shall arise as an evidence against you in the day of Gods pleading
with you, and you shall not be able to stand: Therefore take warning in time
before the evil day comes upon you, lest your days be shortened, and you dye in
your sins, and you become a cursed example to all the workers of iniquity.

All people, let the love and long-sufferings of the Lord God move you and lead
you to repentance.

James Sicklemore.

The End.

