Sir William Waller HIS VINDICATION.

BY A FRIEND That understood his LIFE and CONVERSATION.

Printed in the Year, 1680.

Sir William Waller HIS VINDICATION.
By a Friend that understood his Life and Conversation.
I Have lately heard the doleful loss of your Commission, and have wept as many
tears as you drank dorps of Wine with Mr. Higgy, alias Hicky (your too Costly
aquaintance) sighing, mourning, and lamentations, have been my meat and drink
so long that I am even worn away like the flesh from old Olivers bones; my
Spirits are dejected and my bones that were lately moistened with marrow (when
you were at the height of Ambition) are now as dry as a Constables Staff, my
Legs are scarce able to bring me to a Meeting House, I fret and fume, I pine
and repine, but how a Devil can I help it! Was it not enough that you were a
Justice of Peace to commit, but you must usurp the Power of a King to Release?
What, are you turned Spaniel since I saw you? Do you both fetch and carry too?
What a Plague had you to do with Higgy all night at a Tavern? It had been more
fit you had been in bed with our Parsons Wife all night, in my opinion. Now you
have lost the power of Committing, you may go hang your self for a livelihood:
Time was, when you might have filled every Gaol in Middlesex; had you so done,
you might have had a fair opportunity, under the pretense of burning the Rump,
to have filled the streets with blood, and so we might have Swam to an other
Commonwealth; but now your waxen wings, by which you flew into the Air are
melted, our hopes are blasted, and our and your Interest destroyed. I wonder
you did not call a Council or an Assembly of Divines to assist or instruct you
before so Rash an adventure, viz. the most Reverend T. O. by the Grace of O.
Archsaviour of England, Scotland, and Ireland, that right Reverend W. B.
Metropolitan of Flanders, and port Neufe the Reverend Mr. D. P. M. and B; had
these been at your elbow, they would have taught you a more politic Lesson: Is
this a time to lose ground or give our Enemies advantage, surely the hope of
some bribe did Infatuate your understanding. Well, now you may go sell your
Horses, Pawn your Coach, and Pistol your self, or take up a Resolution to die a
Beggar: The Protestants despise you, supposing you to be of your Fathers
Principles, to fight against the King, and but a pretended Protestant, or a
Papist in Masquerade, by reason you frequented Conventicles: The Papists abhor
you as the Egyptians did their Frogs and Lice, by reason their Gold and Silver
(taken for Papist Trinkets) is not (nor like to be) restored: The Presbyterians
contemn you merely for want of wit, and the Quakers detest you, because of your
long laced borrowed Cloak. You have ruined us and your self too, to all intents
and purposes, and now what may we expect but Destruction of Meeting Houses,
Lampooning of Presbyters, and the Song of Te Deum in France for your unhappy
downfall. Possibly you may expect a Prayer from me, if you do, take it out of
the 109th Psalm from the sixth to the seventeenth Verse, Farewell,

From the Meeting House (...) the Mill-bank in Westminster, Second day after
the fast there kept, for your Will-Wisping, otherwise Called Departing: 1680.
Yours once Jonathan Heading.

POSTSCRIPT,
All the Sisters do Avow, that they will Pawn their Bodkins, and Thimbles (as
they did once to raise a Troop against the King by your Fathers Example) to
bring you to the Meeting House, and your Coach again.

Subscribed thus, To the Honorable by himself Dishonored, Sir William Waller,
(by the Kings Admired Grace and Clemency) Baronet at Alderman De Wit's House in
Amsterdam.

FINIS.

