A NEW HAVEN AT SANDWICH, FOR THE Honor, Advantage, and Safety OF ENGLAND:
Faithfully Discovered in a Letter to the Right Honorable the Earl OF
CLARENDEN Lord High CHANCELLOR OF ENGLAND.

By J.S.

Quid faciendum Princeps consulat cum multis, quid faciet, secum. London
Printed for N. Brooks at the Angel in Cornhil.

A NEW HAVEN AT SANDWICH, FOR THE Honor, advantage, and Safety OF ENGLAND etc.
My Lord,
IT is an eminent instance of Gods Providence in the Conduct of sublunary
States, so to order those whom the Divine pleasure makes choice of as
Instruments of his favor, sometimes for establishing and preservation, other
whiles for regaining and augmentation of Empires; as that he causes their
ability amiably to shine in 'its full brightness of integrity and wisdom amidst
the darkness of corrupted Ages, putting them into credit in the midst of
disorder; raising them in the middle of ingratitude; supporting them in the
throng of envies, Degeneres animos invidia invenit aut facit; emulatio nobiles.
illustrating them among clouds of calumnies; Apud incautos semper aliquid
fortis calumniae haeret, apud prudentes nubecula est, quae cito transibit.

Anglia, tu Romam dnbita vel dona ferentem!


conferring on them (yet) this virtue of honorable wisdom, not for their
honor, though not without it; nor, as to others in an angry smile of
overflowing success, suffering it to become rank ground of ambition and vanity;
but through the gentle breathings of counselling inspiration, and the mellowing
dews of Heaven upon them, making it fruitful for ever-growing occasion, and of
grand Obligation, to employ and improve in transactions of importance both
Virtue and Authority for public Utility: So they (ever holding it fitting,
sometime to give that way in less important transactions, which they would
never do, in the obtaining what is fitting in more principal occurrents,) keep
the Sheat-Anchor for great Tempests, Credit and Authority for eminent
occasions; small ones never detain it; to the end, great ones may meet it in
its full vigor. And after they have thus demonstrated themselves worthy
Cooperators with his providence in so great a work, He for ever conserveth the
memorials of their Names sacred in the embalming and embalmed Monuments of
Royal and Loyal breasts; (each Heroic and generous Heart proving their living
Tomb; each Authorizating and grateful tongue their never dying Epitaph;) and
all to this end, that their Virtue having been so greatly advantageous to the
Age they lived in, their example might be no less beneficial unto Posterity.

My Lord, long before and since you have appeared on the Theater of this now
flourishing Kingdom, your also adaequate deserts have enstalled you among the
wisest of those Ancient Worthyes, your Praedecessours in time, no Antecedents
in the riches from above; and from whom without a boast (so bounteous has
Heaven been unto you) your Loyalty and Wisdom write you lineally descended; it
being a Golden Record in the rolls of Truth, that Whose Virtues or Vices any
one imitates, those be his Praedecessours. The Honorable virtues having gone
before you as well as them, and still accompanying you in your gradations,
undoubtedly are supernally decreed to follow you after death; for since they
marched before you, like Heralds, opening the way for you to nobler designs,
and the tutour'd world beholds them your inseparable convoy's in the wary
administration of those higher trusts belonging to so great a Minister of
State; how can it be, but that (in the reign too of a Second, and more divine,
Augustus) Virtue and Honor, Honor and Virtue must needs prove your
inter-wreathed Crown after your decease.

My Lord, when His Majesty (whose Preservation England beholds a continued
miracle of unmerited mercy, hopes and prays it to be perpetuated) in a filial
condescension of transcendent duty, adventured his most royal Person in a
Pleasure Boat to meet that living martyr The Meek Queen Mother, and report came
of a great danger past; All men (I treat not of Devils) were not more glad of
the wished-true News, then amazedly frighted at the incertainty. The Storm
showed it self, methoughts, a very excellently well bred and convenient
Counselor, so gravely (as it were) advising his most Sacred Majesty to make
to Land-wards; And at landing, right faithfully whispering in his ear, how That
dispute there, was not about The Dominion of the Narrow Seas, indubitably His,
and unanimously against all Invaders; but only a sudden qualme from superfluity
of waterish humors probably provoked through over-vexing: It troubled and
freted them, belike, for the time not a little, to see (not Him, but) Him there
(where yet even Storms and in their greatest tumults, we find, to how many's
shame on Land! to their Sovereign remained loyal) and not at Land; where (when
ever arising) to dispell them by the Majesty of his eye, His Sacred self knew
(better then any other) to be the interest of his presence.

If Storm, my Lord, benot so proper (and in its remembrance, so toothsome) a
Metaphor for a Counselor, (yet wholesome, for Olim haec meminisse juvabit)
will your Honor be pleased to allow Neptune a Petitioner to his Majesty in
behalf of poor England (a very poor Land at that time without Him; and undone,
had not Heaven had pity on that Merchant, whose whole Treasure here and there
floated in one bottom:) 'Twas a Petition and a very lamentable one, pretty well
penned, nothing amiss, freely (without any Feeing) and with very good dispatch
presented unto His Majesty by an ingenious noble Mr. of Requests The Storm
(that Metaphor, I hope, your Lordship may admit:) And, as Petitions use, most
humbly showing in brief how the case stood, and in plain terms beseeching His
Majesty to Land; importuning with-all (as other Petitions, especially at Court)
all possible expedition; concluding too, as all Petitionary custom is (very
handsomely) for His Majesty's long Life and most happy Reign, and soforth.

The wary Mariners (God reward them) approved themselves expert Philosophers in
refusing to adventure into Sandwich Creek, which choked by the Sands, they
knew (experimentally, by a Nil dat quod non habet) could not give harbor to
others, since its own deficiencie and our dishonor it has a long time been,
not to be made one her self. A work so suitable to the royalty of the Crown, to
the dignity of unconquered Kent, to the splendor of the Kings Chamber The
Downs, to the honor, advantage, and safety of the whole Nation, that it had
proved too hard a riddle for so poor an Oedipus as I to resolve, how it
possibly could be moved to King Edward the sixth, Queen Eliz. King James, King
Charles the first, of blessed memory; and yet in none of the Times of those
unparalleld Princes be performed; but that it is conjecturable, there might be
then, and so now as well as then, men, that (rather I hope out of
inconsideration; then, as may be feared, out of mischeivous intention) cared
not (to use the expression of an ancient Beau-clerk) though the Kingdom
publicly suffered in the main, so they could but maintain their own PRIVATE
Fish Ponds.

England, my Lord, has ever been reputed the most famous Island of the whole
world, both for situation, fertility, and riches: which riches have been
principally achieved by Navigation, whereof the Royal Navy is the maintainer,
whose Court of Guard (as well in times of peace as War) was always kept in the
Downs.

The Downs is the Lock and Key of the narrow Seas, and the Dominion of the
narrow Seas is the indubitable right of the Crown, which honor cannot be
maintained but by the Navy; and the Navy, time out of mind has been ever kept
(except occasionally some few at Portsmouth) at Chatham in the river Medway: (
Wolwich and Deepford, both in the river of Thames, I look on as places for
building ships:) from which place (I mean Chatham) no ship, the wind being
Easternly, can be speedily sent forth for defense of the Land in times of
Invasion; which is an unspeakable dis-advantage to the Kingdom, and therefore
no less dishonor to the Nation, in regard it may be remedied, by making a new
Haven betwixt Sandwich Town and the Downs, so capacious as 40 of the Kings
ships (or a greater number) may lie there in a readiness; And (I am very
credibly informed) may be remedied without any cost to his Majesty, if
graciously pleased (in his indubitate great judgment) to grant a Commission out
of his high Court of Admiralty, according to a Petition long since presented to
his Majesty by Sam. Garthwait and W. Fathers Gent. Concerning prize-goods and
wrecks taken since the year, 1642, neither accounted for, nor satisfied, nor
pardoned, but remaining due to the Crown, concealed in diverse able persons
hands, to a greater value then sufficient to defray this royal work for an
Haven near Sandwich; and, being without any illegal prejudice to any person
whatsoever, it cannot (and not otherwise) but be looked upon by the whole Nation
as a most just and very honorable employment in His Majesty's (most
meritorious) Service for the public good.

So far reach the certain Inconveniences, arising from th'incertainty of the
wind, which though not numerous, yet very weighty, because in future times of
necessity may prove most mischievous to the public in its chief concernment,
Safety Primo consulendum de salute, postea de dignitate. Cice.
; (and no less in its honor) and hazardous expense to become fruitless; as
plainly appeared in the year 1639.

In the beginning of September 1639. there came 66. Spanish ships into the
Downs trebble manned, for they had ten thousand Land Soldiers in them. At which
time Sir John Pennington road Admiral in the Downs, with five of his Majesty's
ships, four of his Majesty's Pinnases, and two or three inconsiderable Merchant
ships. When the King heard that there was such a Fleet arrived there, He
presently commanded that twelve great ships should be prepared at London and
Chatham, to be sent unto Sir John Pennington with all possible speed, to
strengthen his Forces. But notwithstanding the Kings command, and much posting,
(the like whereof was never known) the Wind being Easternly, the fight betwixt
the Spaniards and the Dutch was ended three days before they could get those
twelve ships into the Downs. Whites Journal, p. 9.
The conveniences both probable and present, I shall, my Lord, most humbly and
faithfully to the utmost extent of my narrow apprehension (next) present to
your Lordships more fully discerning reflections, and best determinating
judgment.

My Lord, all men know, Dunkirk is lately made stronger then ever; and though
it be yet at least a fair Newter, yet in case in change of Times it should
prove a rash Opponent; Sandwich thus fortified would prove a ready Respondent
for Englands both honor and safeguard, and perhaps prove an happy Medium to
confute it to the Crown again: And then, who might not easily turn Prophet?
that to furnish more orderly our Lent-Messes (provided still, English stomachs
may have more relishing appetite to Fish then of late; otherwise my Lord, no
talk against stomach) the Fishing Trade itself, 'twixt two such strong Nets,
would one time or other be caught swimming in to the bargain.

But (for the Proverbs sake) I leave all these brain-swimming Probabilities;
because 'till reduced into act, they so near resemble the rambling Aquatilia,
which are never valued 'till caught. But these following Commodities are not
probabilities (which yet ought never to be despised) but certainties; and
therefore these Certainties, since commodious to the public and in so high
degree, will be (unless I am mistaken in those I call (under the Rose)
Certainties; for I am not in those I acknowledge under the Throne Judges)
surely embraced.

1. There will be many thousand pounds saved to the King, by mooring a great
part of the Navy there, where they will be in a readiness within two days
warning to be sent to Sea, whereas being at Chatham, it oftentimes proves the
work of many weeks.

2. Another Commodity is, they may be victualled there, the transportation
whereof from London is no small charge to the King.

3. The King may also have in readiness there a Magazine of Anchors, Cables,
Masts of several Sizes, with all other necessaries for service.

Give me leave my Lord, upon this third Commodity or Convenience to make a
short Debate; since (which I heard many years ago in the Universitie from a
wise man, Doctrinally on a Text of Solomon's, Eccles. 1.14.) It is a wise man's
part to consider: However it behooves me, out of the great reverence I bear to
the Eagle-sighted, to be as advisedly wary as possibly I can in my presentiments
to your eye.

I ingenuously confess, some have held, that in a great Estate there might
mischiefs happen by any great provision of Arms in one place; for that he, who
has a Traiterous mind to mutinic, to arm those of his Faction, and to deprive
his Sovereign of the means to make use of such Warlike provision, may make a
design to seize upon the place, where it is kept: But by the same reason, we
must not draw together any Treasure to supply us in any emergent unexpected
necessity, neither fortify any places, lest that coming to lose our money and
our places, our Enemy should grow stronger, and we the weaker.

But wisdom prevents all suchlike inconveniences; the which we must employ to
keep our advantages, and to make use of them, before that the Enemy seize on
them: Yet, if he does seize on them, we may not thereupon conclude, that the
provision ought not to have been made; but, that it is our fault, who made it,
not to be able or rather careful to keep it.

It is certain, that a Sword or a Knife would cut him that knows not how to
handle it; but we may not therefore say, that we must neither make Sword nor
Knife: So in all particulars there may be inconveniences; But, those, which by
foresight may be prevented, should not hinder us from doing that, which may
otherwise very beneficially serve us both for our advantage and safety:

And therefore, my Lord,

4. The place, where the Ships and Stores shall be kept, may be contrived and
made into a strong Garrison, by building so many Forts, as seem requisite
according to the several circumspect and Grave Adviso's of his Majesty's
Council, and of each of which particulars Himself is sole Judge. And

5. As this would be a very high heartning to the Common Guard there in all
times of War; So it will be as deep a discouragement to any Enemy, for daring
with so apparent hazard to arrive there; lest over-eagerly transported into a
ridiculous self-flattering fit of invasion, they find it easier to out-sail
their supposed wits, then their assured overthrow.

My Lord, Forts make a chief part of the Forces of a Kingdom; and they, which
have been of opinion, that they should not build any, have been confuted by
Reason and Use; So as there have been few found, unless they were some petty
popular Estates, that will follow their counsel. The Graecians and Romans (who
had less need during their Empires, then any other Estate, for that all
submitted themselves under their yoke) entertained Cittadels at Corinth,
Tarentum, and Rhegium: And if the Capitol had not been strong, the Empire of
Rome had been smothered in the very Cradle of its own Infantine growth by the
Gauls.

(There be three words very frequent in the Worlds fancy; Observation,
Consideration, Moderation. But, Experience (the Guide of Man's understanding,
Ruler of his Will, Over-ruler of his Opinion; and which renders him real, of
deeper insight then to be carried away with appearances (though double guilt)
but able through the varnished Vizards of disguised Interests to discern
betwixt truth and truths-likeness) discovers those three so frequent Motto's
not hitherto so flowing in most men's tongues and Pens, as ebbing in their
practice. I have not altogether omitted some use of the first in this case of
Forts; and still retaining it, shall thereupon essay a little further by the
second; aiming (as steadily as I can) at Moderata juvant in the beneficial
result of the third.)

The Estates, in which are no strong places, are conquered by one Battle,
England formerly has testified it. And an Ancient Counselor to Henry the
4th. and Lewis the 13th. of France said then, that the Persian relying only on
the number of his men, had lost in one Battle a great extent of his Country,
the which the Turk afterward preserved by Forts. For although Forts alone
cannot much assist an Estate, yet being seconded by Armies, they make it
invincible; and there being no Armies on foot, they give the Sovereign leisure
to raise them; and after a rout, to rally his men together to renew the War.
Yet by this it is not inferred, that that Estate which has most Forts is
strongest; For it is impossible to guard many well; and some being ill-guarded,
they prove more prejudicial to the Estate, then prositable for the defense. A
Kingdom ought therefore to have few, but well-furnished with Men, Victuals and
Ammunition.

My Lord, Whether this near Sandwich ought, or ought not, be one of those few,
may be, if allowed, the Question.

And if your Lordship's command should authorize me freely to speak what I
think; and I should be so lucky in my (though improbably yet possibly
cross-declared) opinion, submittingly to agree with your reserved judgment,
which possibly also may be (for any thing I know) it ought not: as it would be
(then) in me, even because a private person, but the opinion of one Dunce; so
it could be in your Honor but the judgment of one Doctor, though the most
excellent known.

I can assure to your honor those words contain no humorous criticismes of any
Mistical presumptuous sense, but discover only that modest sobriety that ought
to confine all private men's opinions in their rash public censures; which,
when by hap-hazard (though that rarely) true, rove but at random; as having not
obedient humility enough to attend the more safe and judicious conduct of their
better acquainted Guides.

But if (which is more then probable, because of my present writing) I think
this near Sandwich ought to be one of those few; my opinion herein can amount
no higher then to be still opinion; of one, who ought, and does, humbly present
it, not by way of anticipation, but submission.

But if your Lordship also (or rather, only) think it ought, (for then it
matters not, whether a private capacity thought so or not,) that very thought
in you (though it made not opinion in me to be judgment, yet it) makes the
Design a justice due to the Nation; espeyially since all impediments (therein)
of charge to His Majesty be removed: Grant me thereupon, my Lord, so much
gracious allowance, as to remember unto your Honor, that even as those stars
meeting in Conjunction with the Sun, do much avail toward the causing of his
influences to become good and favorable unto us; as the Pleiades, which cause
the light to appear pleasing and gracious unto us at the Springs return,
whereas the Canicular Star makes it scorching in summer: So the Earl of
Clarenden, moving (in this, and like noble Designs) the Royal will and
Authority of so Divine a Prince as our Sovereign Lord the King, concurreth in
the numerous influences of his grace with the Light of our eyes, becoming
thereby (like the harmonious Pleiades) a favorable Organ and Heroic
Instrument of a most fortunate and established Age.

My Lord, Justice tending to the good of others, is as it were an essential
quality to public persons, obliging them both to love and procure the public
good; which not only Laws and Reason teach us, but even Nature it self dictates
unto us; For is it not apparent in all sublunary things, yea in the very
Heavens and in the Angels also, that whatsoever is destinated for the Common
good, operateth not for it self, but imployeth it self for all? Do not those
mighty Courtiers, those confirmed Privado's of the Deity in the Cabinet of the
Beatifick Vision, kept white by the same bounty that created them so; in an
Motus Angelorum fit in tempore imperceptibili, non indivisibili.

Suarez. Non in instanti, quia sunt duo nunc, and est prius and posterius.
Aquinas.


imperceptible (though not indivisible) motion of Time, from their brighter
Mansions make swift-winged Progresses to our dusty Cottages of clay,
promptingly to communicate their illuminative and reductive ministrations of
ad-visements and assistances to diminutive us the busy Ants of this lower
Orb? Yea, do not the very Heavens send forth their influences, the Sun his
beams, the Earth its faecundity, the Trees their fruits, Fountains their
waters, Bees their honey, Silkworms their delicate webs for all? Does not the
Liver distribute blood to all the veins, the Head motion to all the nerves, the
Heart vigor to all the members? Is there any thing in nature which converteth
to its own use what it has received for the common good? See we not in
reasonable creatures a desire, in unreasonable a motion, in insensible things a
kind of inclination toward the general good of the Universe, whereby their
particular good subsisteth? Is it not true that by natural instinct the Hand
casts it self before the body, to recevie the strokes coming upon it, and how
every part is inclinable to preserve the whole, though to its own ruin? Shall
not then knowledge, reason, and justice cause that in Man, which a mere natural
inclination effects in all other things? But is there any thing either more
glorious, or which attracteth the creature nearer to the imitation of God, then
to seek and procure public good? Is there any thing so noble in the world, as
God? in man, as the Soul? in the body, as the Heart? in the tree, as the Root?
All the tree is nourished by the Root, the Heart causes life in the whole
body, the Soul guides the whole man, God governs the whole World. A Fort
near Sandwich, my Lord, were a Public good, if only for the safety of
Sandwich; much more when of Kent also; but how noble a design were both a Fort
and Haven there At the King's landing in the Down's, the Mayor and Jurates of
Sandwich Petitioned his Majesty for A New Haven; to whom His Majesty (in his
accustomary ready apprehension) very judiciously ballancing the great present
charge, with the future far greater advantages to the Nation) most graciously
declared a cheerful readiness of his royal inclination to so magnificent a work;
provided moneys sufficient for so great a work, might (without grievance to any
of his good Subjects) be found to effect it. Sometime after, both the Mayor and
Aldermen of Canterbury, and also the Mayor and Jurates of Sandwich, together
with many eminent Gentlemen of East- Kont, joined all in a grand Petition to
His Majesty, for A New Haven at Sandwich.
when for so great a good, as the safety, honor and advantage of all England?

Since my Argument's quite spent, and I know not how far I my self also may
(ere-aware) have over-gone my self; if we both must sink, we will be smotherd in
roses: For, the Scene's changed to the Asylum of your Honors Bosom.

My Lord, your practicing of virtue in your own particular, is a custom in
you, but yet due ever to your self, and is (as the world always goes) made a
great matter; but whenever (like your self) you nobly extend it to another
good, that Act, as carrying on it the winning face of Bounty (a greater
Conqueror then beauty) in becoming (and therein claiming honors character) the
kindly Fosterer of desert, is certainly much more glorious; to be so munificent
then as to diffuse it abroad toward many, in the man of Honor must needs be
right excellent; but to impart it to all, and in such royal designs as This,
(and whose benefit redounds as well to After Ages) what? what can it be other
in the most Noble Earl of Clarenden, then super-eminent? I am in all my
propensities ever (under the Thrones of God and the King) peculiarly,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble and most Obedient Servant JOHN SLATER.
July 23. 1663.
POSTSCRIPT.
THat Dunkirk was honorably parted with, I have heard to be the judgment of
peaceable and wise men; and whosoever (among the too talkative rabble, ignorant
ever of Reason of State) seem other wise in their opinions, their venting of
them, though never so unseasonably, concerns not me, who quiet under
Government, am nothing moved to credulity by what common Embroylers think. But
I think it concerns every man (as to Salvation) to think and think again, what
they say indirectly against Government; And (as to safety) what Government
directly may say to them. These tongue-Bravado's (possibly) may in their
minorities one time or other have received a smart secret lick, if not open
bang, at the vulgar weapon. Why then, it is mere trifling away of any man's time,
others and his own quiet, after a sound knock on the pate at cudgells, to
venture at sharp, and so wilfully revive disreputation. It needs no second
thoughts to consider, Shortest errors to be the best. And among the Fathers
it is spoke of St. Austin (formerly a Manichee) Though He came the latest, He
went the farthest in Christianity; which I am inclinable to attribute to the
royal mercy of divine grace, in so signally honoring the humility of his
Retractations. I am sure, what is of the God of peace will stand, what is from
passion, will come to naught, but repentance; and then (but perhaps) pardon:
And after -- Moniti meliora -- is a seasonable dish, if stomach will fall too;
if not, Obstinacy laying the Cloth, Confusion will bring in the Voider:
Officij and gratitudinis ergo precemur omnes. Vivat Rex Fidei Defensor (and
corroboretur cor in manu Domini) paena incorrigibilium, praemio bonorum
gloriosus, clementia dignis misericors, indignis severus, omnibus justus:
salvae Reginae: Dux fortis Genti exemplar integritatis: floreat pacifica
vigilantia faelix Parliamentum: pace and veritate beata sit Anglia:
convertantur inimici: dissipentur oculo Regis (tanquam Angelo Domini) invidiae,
subtilitates malitiose indignae, factiones, calumniae, tum murmurationes
Particulares, tum Catholicae perfidiae. Annihiletur recens praxis antiqui
Serpentis. Schismaticis and Haereticis dogmatibus mixta; cujus Amasios omnes
velim memores, ut subtilior reliquis animalibus, ita execrabilior.

Sit gloria Deo in altissimis, pax (and preces Ecclesiae) super Britanniam and
Hiberniam, hominibus bona voluntas.
FINIS.

